A COMMENTARY UPON THE Acts of the Apostles: Chronicall and Critical. The
Difficulties of the Text explained, And the times of the Story cast into
ANNALS. The First Part. From the beginning of the Book, to the end of the
Twelfth CHAPTER. With a brief Survey of the Contemporary Story of the JEWS
and ROMANS. By JOHN LIGHTFOOTE Staffordiens, a Member of the Assembly of
Divines.

London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1645.

TO The Right Honorable the Truly Noble and Renowned ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX,
etc.
Illustrious Sir,
THE inducements that have swayed me to the Compiling of this Tripartite
History, have been, partly, for mine own satisfaction in the survey and
prospect of the times and occurrences of the world, coincident, and
contemporary with those of the Church: partly, for the satisfaction of the
Reader in the same contemplation; and for the mixture of some delight with that
satisfaction, in such a mixture of variety. But chiefly, for both our
observation of the hand of God, good and gracious in the preservation and
propagation of his Church, and just and avengefull in his indignation and
judgments upon those two Nations that persecuted the Church* if they could
have done it, to the death, and that executed to the death the Lord of the
Church, the Lord of Life: For as there were two Thieves that were crucified
with our Savior, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left; so were
there two worse by far that crucified him, the Jew and the Roman: The former of
ignorance, and so shall once obtain mercy; the latter even against the
confession of his innocence, and so shall perish for ever. Both persecutors of
the Church, as well as crucifiers of the Lord of it, the Jews while they
continued to be a Nation, the Romans while the Church shall be a Church. The
consideration of this very thing, does not only warrant, but even challenge a
mixture of study of the Story of these three together, that the footsteps of
providence might be traced the more clearly in those two impressions of Mercy
and Judgment dispensed in the world, in their contrariety, the former to the
Church, and the latter to these two Nations, the enemies and persecutors of
her, and of her Lord. I have therefore taken them up in one discourse from that
very time that th^se two people did undo themselves, by doing violence to the
Lord of Glory; and for how long a process of time the discourse does carry
them on, this volumne will speak for the present; mine intentions aim at a
longer extent, if the Lord permit.

The Story of the Church I have traced in the Acts of the Apostles, and there
have rather set my self to explain and clear what difficulties are in the
Text, then to write out the full History and Occurrences that are there
related; for since the Evangelist has done it with a divine Pen, it was
utterly needless, that I may say no more, to redoe it with mine.

The times of the Stories there, I have been the more curious to search after,
and to settle as near as I can, and to bring into Annals, not only for the
profit that arises to the Reader from the knowledge of them* which is not
little; but also for the bringing and reducing of the Story of the other
Nation, into a parallel and collateral current and coincidency with them. What
difficulty I have met withal in this particular, any one will readily judge
that does but observe how sparing the holy Ghost has been through all that
Book, to express the circumstance of the time with the relation of the
things. And what I have done toward the fixing of the times in this
difficulty, I have tendered under the notion of conjecture, for I could go no
further; yet have I grounded those conjectures upon such reasons, as are much
to m^ne own satisfaction in that matter, and so it may be they will be
something to others.

I have led on the Story in this present piece, but to the end of the Twelfth
Chapter; for thitherto has the Evangelist that wrote the Book, more
especially discoursed the planting of the Church, and the propagation of the
Gospel among the Jews. And as for the rest of the Book, from thence to the
end, that brings the Church and Gospel among the Gentiles, I have reserved it
for another part, if the Lord vouchsa^e life, leisure, and assistance.

The customs and carriage of those Apostolic times in Worship and
Discipline, I have been sparing in discussing; for the Text, for as far as this
present discourse goes, is sparing in offering occasion to fall upon such a
thing: in that part that is behind, where the Epistles of Paul are to be taken
into hand, as they fall in in time, such considerations will be useful, and
they will be inevitable.

The Story of the Jews out of their own Josephus and Philo, Egesippus, and
others, the Reader will generally find to be but a Commentary upon their own
words, His blood be upon us and upon our children, written even in Letters of
their own blood from time to time. For when that perverse and ungodly
generation, had so far refused the Gospel, and their own good, that it had
crucified the Lord that tendered it to them, ex illo fluere: from that time
forward their ruin and decaying is written in all their stories in such
Capital Letters, that he that runs may read it, and he that reads them, reads
them not, if he do not observe it. This short tract of time that this Volume
contains, will tell you of three or four, or more such Anatomy Lectures in
less then twelve years space; of many, and many thousands of that Nation,
that perished and were miserably destroyed in Judea, Alexandria, and Babylonia;
and this but as a Preface and beginning of sorrows and miseries that were to
follow in the destruction of the whole Nation, for despising and destroying of
him that held out life unto them, but they chose his and their own death. Some
of the same Authors that have given us these prologues of their miseries, will
continue the scene with further Tragedies, till their utter extirpation: and we
shall borrow an abridgement thereof from them, in the parts succeeding, if the
Lord carry us on, and prosper us in that work.

And how grateful and excellent a work and pains might it be, if where
Josephus and Egesippus end their Story, and where Jerusalem ended her days,
thence some learned and industrious pen would out of the Jews own Talmud and
Rabbis, and other writers, continue the story of this dispersed and condemned
nation till these later times, for the Illustration of the truth of those
predictions of Scripture that foretell their doom, and for the evidencing of
that justice that has ever since haunted them, for the murder of the righteous
one whom they crucified.

These are the two maine things that I look upon in relating those stories
that this volume does exhibit; if the Reader who has more leisure shall
dilate his meditations upon so sad spectacles to further extent, he has saved
my labor, and it may be not lose his own.

The Roman History, which is the third that we have to deal withal, I must
refer to the Reader to find expressions by which to character and censure it,
for I confess I want them: It is so full of truths so horrid and monstrous,
(if I may epithet so glorious a name as truth with so vile and base
adjectives) that it even gluts the eyes and amazeth the heart of the Reader,
and though he cannot gainsay the truth of the things, yet cannot he tell what
to say to them, they are so hideous: such monsters of bloodshed and cruelty,
prodigies of lust and beastialitie, Gorgons of excess and luxury, and in
brief, the very perfections of all vitiousnesse and impiety, that it were
most unfit to name them with a Christian story, were they not most fit to prove
Gods high displeasure against that Antichristian City: I have taken them up as
I have found them in their own Historians, some here, some there, abridged
them as much as possible to save what labor I might, and laid them in their
proper times according to the d^rection of their own Annalists. Politic or
Ethicall or other observations upon them I refer to others to make, it is a
thing that suited not either with my leisure or my purpose: I only show the
monster, every eye desires to look upon such a beast: let them read upon him
as their judgment leads them: only this let me mind them to observe, that no
small judgments are to be read in so great sins, and that that City is very
unlikely to be the head of the Church, that is so visibly the very tail of the
Devil. Rome had murdered the Lord of holiness at Jerusalem, and Rome wallowes
in such murders and unholinesse at home, and whither she be the likelier to
be owned by Christ for Zion or Babylon, may any one censure.

Now the reason of mine address unto your Honor, most noble Hero, with this
my undertaking as an oblation, you may read it in your own worth and
nobleness, and you may read it in your relation to mine own native Country:
for the one ingageth, the other inboldneth, and both overcome me to owe all
the service I can to so much worth, to evidence this service by all means I can
to so great nobleness, and to hope for acceptance of this what I ^an from that
relation. Sir, this work is a fruit that grew in your own Staffordshire (this
is the only comfort that is now left to that poor Country that we may call
her yours) it grew with your name and memory upon it at its very first
appearing: It has been in devoting to you all the while it has been in
growing, and now it is come to this maturity, it is doubly yours, as a fruit of
your own Country, as a vow of mine own heart: To beg accep^ance were to seem
to doubt it, which suspicion your nobleness cannot suffer to nest in me: This
only let me beg of your expectance: that whereas mine engagement was and your
challenge might be of a work of A second part of the Harmony of the
Evangelists.
another nature, you will be pleased to interpret, that this has not
prevented that that it should not come forth, but only outrun it, that this
might come to do you homage first; that that is not lost though this be found
that is in the womb though this first borne.

And truly I could not but e^cuse, nay I could not but approve the forwardness
of this to outrun his fellow and to get the birthright, when the only aim of
it was that it might be your first homager. And I cannot but hope that your
Nobleness will gently interpret of this error of observance, as an offense of
a most venial nature, when the utmost damage that accrews upon it is but
delay, and not detriment, and when the summa totalis of the payment, namely my
service is the same, though there be some difference in the coin. It has
been the course of my studies in elaborating the Harmony of the four
Evangelists; and this history, to let them grow up and thrive together, for me
thought there was some equality in the division, to part my studies, betwixt
the story of Christ in the Evangelists, and the story of the Church in the Acts
of the Apostles, and to make the history of the other two nations my
recreation. And I cannot but accordingly be affected with the same method of
their production that was of their generation, and allow them their
vicissitudes now as they had them then: Your Nobleness will gently dispense
with these strivings and contendings where the prize and mastery aimed at, is,
which shall first serve you. In your hands I leave this oblation to do you
fealty till his fellow come up to him: and in the hands of the Lord I leave
your Honor, as in the hands of a faithful Creator and Redeemer, to be kept in
weldoing: He bless you with the blessings of the right hand and of his left
hand here, and crown you with his bless^dnesse of his presence, and the joys
at his right hand hereafter: So ever prays

Your Honors most devoted servant, JOHN LIGHTFOOTE.
From my Study, December. 1. 16^5.
TO My DEAR and DEARLY Honored and beloved native Country the County of
STAFFORD.
My dear Mother,
THese following collections came out from you, and they return unto you: they
were made when I lay in your lap, with your other children, you then
prosperous, and we happy in your prosperity. Woe is me my mother, that your
condition is so far altered from those times, and that our happiness is so
far perished in your condition. How has the Lord clouded the mother of my
people in the day of his fierce anger! and how does she now sit in midnight,
that once was clothed with the very Sunshine of the nooneday! Ah my dear
Country, I have much bitterness for thy sake that the hand of the Lord is so
gone out against thee. How is thy plenty turned to pining, and thy flower to
witherednesse! How is thy gold become dim, thy candle darkness, and thy violl
the voice of those that weep! Dear mother, how are you become not your self!
And Staffordshire to be sought in Staffordshire it self, and not to be
found! Her children either fled, or destroyed, or become her destroyers; Her
towns desolate though full of inhabitants and people, her people perished
though alive and healthy, her peace gone, her joy vanished, her comforts none,
her hopes as little: She a mother forsaken, a woman forgotten, left of
friends, tortured by enemies, helpless in her self, hopeless in her helpers.
Woe is me my mother, that thou have borne me a man of these sorrows, that I
have seen thee a woman of these miseries! It is the Lord, we have sinned
against him, we have sinned and he has not spared. I need say no more, I can
say no more: tears take up, and prayers, and patience must make up the rest: I
have spoke thus much that my dearest native country may have a testimony, that
no distance, no condition can make me forget her. Forget my country? let my
tongue forget her art and my pen her profession, if Staffordshire be not ever
in my chiefest thoughts. Put up these tears into that bottle where are the
heartiest drops that are wept for you in those your sorrows, and lay up this
volume amongst those records, that shall speak of the duty, remembrance and
observance of your faithful children to you to future ages; And own dear
mother, amongst that number that most sincerely and entirely love you, honor
you, and moan after you, the heart and affections, prayers and groanings, Ah
poor Staffordshire, poor Staffordshire,

Of Thy most mournful but most faithful son and servant, John Lightfoote.
London, December. 1* 1645.
A Chronicall Table of the chief Stories contained in this Book.
Occurences of the year of Christ XXXIII. Tiberius XVIII. In the Church.
Act. 1.
CHRIST rises from the dead, appears forty days, and ascends, 3, 4, 5.
etc. A Presbytery of 120 Apostles and Elders, 22, 25. This chooses Matthias,
etc. 28. Act. 2.
The gift of tongues on the Lords day, 33, 38, 41. Peter and the eleven preach
and convert 3000.47, 48, etc. Act. 3.
Peter and John heal a Creeple, 52, 53. etc. Preach and convert 5000.61. Act.
4.
Are imprisoned and convented before the Council; 62. Are threatened and
dismissed, etc. 64. Community of Goods, 65. Act. 5.
Ananias and Sapphira struck dead, 675. Peter's shadow, 69. The rest of the
Story of the 5 Chapter, 70.
In the Empire.
Tiberius now Emperor, and in the 18 year of his Reign, 80.81. He now in
Capreae, having forsaken the City, living in all filthiness and cruelty, 83.
Diverse cruelties, 84. Strange accusing, 85. The boldness of Sejanus and
Terentius; 87. Diverse cruelties more, and other occurrences, 88. Tiberius
troubled in mind, 89.
Among the Jews.
A Commotion among them occasioned by Pilate, 92.
Occurrences in the Year of Christ XXXIV. Tiberius XIX. In the Church.
Hellenists murmuring against the Hebrews. Act. 6.
Seven Deacons chosen: 100. And their office 101. Stephen martyred, 104, 105.
etc. Act. 7. Act. 8.
Bitter persecution against the whole Church, 115. Dispersion of the hundred
and eight upon the persecution, 117, 118. Samaria receives the Gospel, 118,
119. Simon Magus, 119. The holy Ghost given by imposition of hands, 121. etc.
The Ethiopian Eunuch converted, 125. Paul converted and baptized, 128. etc.
Act. 9. to ver. 10.

In the Empire.
Velleius Paterculus flourishes, 137. Troubles in Rome about Usury, 141.
Tiberius still most bloodily cruel, 144. Strange accusations among the people,
ibid. Marius and his daughter wrongfully slaughtered, ibid. The miserable end
of Asinius Gallus, and Nerva, 145. The miserable end of Agrippina and Drusus,
146. Other Massacres, 148.
Occurrences in the Year of Christ XXXV. Tiberius XX. In the Church.
No particular occurrence of the Church mentioned this year, 151.
In the Empire.
Tiberius Reign proclaimed for ten years longer, and the Consuls punished for
it, 152. Many cruelties of the Emperor, 152, 153. A feigned Drusus, 154.
Among the Jews.
A commotion and slaughter of them caused by Pilate, 155. Philip the Tetrarch
of Trachonitis dies, 156.
Occurrences in the Year of Christ XXXVI. Tiberius XXI. In the Church.
No particular occurrence mentioned this year.
Among the Jews.
Vitellius governor of Judea, he comes to Jerusalem, is curieous to the
Jews, 159. Caiaphas removed from the high Priesthood, 160.
In the Empire.
A rebellion in Parthia, 161. Tiberius still cruel and shameless, 164.
Occurrences in the year of Christ XXXVII. Tiberius XXII. In the Church.
Act. 9. Verse. 23, etc. to Verse. 32.
Paul comes to Jerusalem, 168. The Disciples afraid of him, 169. Persecution
lasts yet, 170. Paul presented to the Apostoles; preaches boldly, is
persecuted, and goes to Tarsus, 171. etc.
In the Empire.
The Parthian war yet uncomposed, 173. Artabanus restored to his Kingdom,
174. A commotion in Cappadocia, 175. Cruelties at Rome, 175. Mishaps there
through fire and water, 176. The death of Thrasyllus the Astrologer, 183.
Among the Jews.
A commotion in Samaria, 177. Pilate put out of Office, 178. Agrippa his
journey to Rome, 179. His imprisonment there, 181. War betwixt Herod the
Tetrarch, and Are^as King of Arabia, 184.
Occurrences in the year of Christ, XXXVIII. Tiberius, XXIII. Being also the
first year of Caius. No particular Occurrence of the Church specified this year.

In the Empire.
Macro all base, 187. A wicked woman, 189. Tiberius near his end, 192. His
choice of a successor, ibid. Tiberius his death, 194. Caius his successor, 195.
Tiberius in a manner cruel being dead, 196. Caius comes to Rome, 197. His
dissimulation, 198. He begins to show himself in his own colors, 201. His
cruelty, ibid. Young Tiberius brought to a miserable end, 202
Among the Jews.
Preparation of wars against Aretas, 190. An Omen to Agrippa in chains, 191.
Agrippa perplexed and enlarged, 197.
Occurrence in the year of Christ, XXXIX. Caius II. No Occurrence of the Church
mentioned this year.

In the Empire.
Cruelties at Rome, 205. An end of Macro, 206. Caius the Emperor will needs be
a God, 211.
Among the Jews.
Great troubles of the Jews in Alexandria, 207. Agrippa at Alexandria abused,
208. A Pageant of one and more madmen, 209. Sad outrages upon the Jews, 211.
More of their miseries, 213. Agrippa in his own kingdom, 215.
Yet more occurrences in the Empire.
Caius the new God little better then a Devil, 216, 217. etc. Many and many
cruelties of his, 218, 219.
Occurrences in the Year of Christ XL. Caius III. In the Church.
Act. 9. ver. 32.
Peter visiting diverse parts, 223. Yet not at Antioch in this visitation, 224.
Dorcas raised, 227. Act. 10.
Cornelius converted, 228. The keys of the kingdom of Heaven now only used,
237. The holy Ghost given to the Gentiles, 241.
In the Empire.
Caius still cruel, ^42. A most inhumane cruelty, 244. Caius his luxury and
prodigality, 245. His strange bridge of Ships, 246. His covetousness, 248.
Among the Jews.
Herod and Herodias before the Emperor, 251* The Alexandrian Jews still
perplexed, 252. Flaccus his downfall, 253. The Jews still distressed for all
that, 254.
Occurrences in the year of Christ XLI. Caius Caligula IV. In the Church.
Antioch receives the Gospel, 257. Act. 11. ver. 19. to ver. 26.
Barnabas comes thither, 258.
Among the Jews.
Troubles at Jamnia, 259. Caius his image to be set up in the Temple, causing
troubles, 260. Petronius his Letter hereupon to the Emperor, 262. Agrippa his
mediation for the Jews, 263. Flaccus Avilius his end, 265. The Ambassadors of
the Alexandrian Jews before the Emperor, 266 Apion, 297. Philo the Jew, 268.
his writings 26^.
In the Empire.
Caius still foolish and cruel, 273. Caius profane, 274.
Occurrences in the year of Christ, XLII. Caius, V. Claudius, I* In the Empire.
Caius his death contrived, 279. The manner of his death, 281. The sequel,
283. Dissension about the government, 284. Claudius, 285. Caesonia and her
child slain, 287. Claudius made Emperor, 288. His demeanor at the beginning,
289.
In the Church.
The name of Christian first used, 292. Act. 11. Verse. 26.

Among the Jews.
The Therape^^^^, 295. The affairs of the Jews in Alexandria and Babylonia,
298. The rebellion of some Jews, 300.
Occurrences in the year of Christ, XLIII. Claudius, II. In the Church.
A famine in Judea and all the world, 305. Paul rapt into the third heaven^,
305. Act. 11. Verse. 28.
Peter not this year at Rome, 306.
Among the Jews.
Herod Agrippa his coming to Jerusalem, 309. Imperial acts in behalf of the
Jews, 310. Peter not imprisoned this second year of Claudius, 310.
In the Empire.
The Moors subdued, 313. Claudius begins to be cruel, and his Empress
Messallina wicked, 314.
Occurrences of the year of Christ, XLIIII. Claudius, III. In the Church.
The martyrdom of James the great, 317. Concerning the Apostles Creed, 318.
Concerning Traditions, 320. Peter's imprisonment and delivery, 322.
In the Empire.
Some actions of Claudius, 326. Messallina abominably wicked, 327. An
expedition into England, 328.
Among the Jews.
The fatal end of Herod Agrippa, 230.

In Page 48. at line 31. after these words, Verse. 17. ( In the last days) The
days of the Gospel, because there is no way of salvation to be expected
beyond the Gosspell: whereas there was the Gospel beyond the Law, and the Law
beyond the light of the ages before it. Add yet is this most properly to be
understood of those days of the Gospel that were before Jerusalem was
destroyed: And the phrase the last days used here and in diverse other places
is not to be taken for the last days of the world, but for the last days of
Jerusalem: the destruction of which and the rejection of the Jews is reputed
the end of that old world, and the coming in of the Gentiles under the Gospel,
is as a new world, and is accordingly called a new heaven and a new earth.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, OF The Year of Christ 33.
And of Tiberius 18. Being the Year of the World 3960. And of the City of Rome,
785. Consuls Cn. Domitius Aenobarbus. Furius Camillus Scribonianus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

THE Acts of the Apostles:
CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. The former Treatise have I made, etc.
THE Syrian and Arabic render it, The former (...), by which word they render
(...): Mat. 1.1.
book have I written: and so is the Greek word (...) used in Heathen Authors,
not only for an oration by word of mouth, but also for a Treatise or Discourse
that is done in writing; as might be proved by many examples. I shall only
give one as parallel to the phrase that we have in hand; as the Author himself
is unparallel to our Evangelist in matter of truth; and that is, Lucian in his
title of the first book of true History, (...).

Now the Evangelist at his entry into this History, mentions the former
Treatise of his Gospel, because this Treatise of The Acts of the Apostles
takes at that; and as that contained the life and doctrine of our Savior
himself, so does this the like of his Apostles. And therefore the words
immediately following, Of all that Jesus began to do, may not unfitly be
interpreted to such a meaning, that Jesus began, and his Apostles finished:
though it is true indeed, that in Scripture phrase to begin to do, and to do,
do sound to one and the same sense, as Mat. 12.1. compared with Luke 6.1. Mark
6.2. compared with Mat. 13.54. etc.

Now the method that the Evangelist prescribes unto himself, and follows in
this book is plainly this. From the beginning of the Book to the end of the
twelfth Chapter, he discourses the state of the Church and Gospel among the
Jews; and from thence forward to the end of the Book he does the like, of the
same among the Gentiles: and therefore accordingly, although the title of the
book be the Acts of the Apostles, as of the Apostles in general; yet does he
more singularly set himself to follow the story of the two Apostles Peter and
Paul: Peter's to the 13 Chapter, and Paul's after; because that these two were
more peculiarly the fixed Ministers of the circumcision, and of the
uncircumcision, Gal. 2.8. and so does Moses entitle a reckoning of the heads of
the Fathers houses of all the Tribes of Israel in general, Exodus 6.14. and yet
he fixes at the Tribe of Levi, and goes no further; because the subject of
his Story lay especially in that Tribe, in Moses and Aaron.

Sect. Of all that Jesus began to do and to teach.
Not that Luke wrote all things that Jesus did, nor indeed could they be
written, John 21.25. but that, 1. He wrote all those things that were
necessary, and not to be omitted. Theophylact and Calvin. 2. (...) may be
taken for (...), all, for many; as it is frequently done in Scripture. 3. and
chiefly, that he wrote something of all the heads of Christ's actions and
doctrine; for he says not (...), but (...), Camerarius. Or, 4. As the woman of
Samaria says, that Christ had told her all things that ever she did, Joh.
4.29. whereas he told her but some few particulars; but they were such, as
whereby she was convinced he could tell her all: So though Luke did not
specify all and every action and doctrine of Christ that ever he did and
taught; yet did he write of such, as whereby it was most clear that Christ
was the Messiah.

Verse. II. After that he through the holy Ghost had given commandments to the
Apostles whom he had chosen.
There is some diversity in pointing and reading this Verse: some take it in
the order and posture that our English has it; applying the words through the
holy Ghost, to Christ's giving commandments; and read it thus, after he had
given comandements through the holy Ghost* and so does the Vulgar Latin,
Theophylact, Marlorat* and indeed the pointing, in the best Copies. Others, as
the Syrian, Arabic, and Beza with them conjoin it thus, Giving commandments
to the Apostles whom he had chosen by the holy Ghost. Now in the maine thing it
self, there is not so much difference, as to make any great scruple or matter
how the words are pointed; for Christ may as well be said to command his
Disciples by the holy Ghost, as to choose them by the holy Ghost; and so e
contra. But it is material to consider,

First, that it is more proper by far to conceive Christ acting the holy
Ghost upon the Disciples, and that when they were called; then his acting him
in himself in calling them.

Secondly, that there is no mention at all of such an acting of the holy Ghost
in the Disciples choosing; but there is expressly at their receiving their
charge; and therefore not only the pointing of the Text, and the consent of
diverse Copies, Expositors and interpreters that read as our English does; but
even the very thing it self, and truth and evidence of Story require that it
should be so read: Now, why Christ should be said to give commandment through
the holy Ghost; and what commandment this was that was so given to them, is
much in controversy.

There is mention indeed of Christ breathing of the holy Ghost upon them, Ioh.
20.22. and of a commandment or two given them afterward, as To go teach all
Nations, Mat. 28.19. and to abide at Jerusalem till the promise of the Father,
Act. 1.4. And the exposition and interpretation that is commonly given of these
words does sense them thus, Year of Christ 33.
That Christ by the virtue of the holy Ghost in himself did give them these
commands: Whereas it is far more agreeable to the style and phrase of
Scripture, to expound them in another sense; namely, that Christ by the holy
Ghost infused into his Disciples did command them; not by the words of his own
mouth, but by the direction of his Spirit within them: and so the Prophets were
commanded, Zech. 1.6. where the Lxx use the same Greek word.

For, first, else to what purpose did he breath the holy Ghost upon them, and
bid them receive it? Sure they had something besides the Ceremony of breathing,
bestowed upon them; and what can that be conceived to be, if not the holy
Ghost, to inform them of what they yet knew not, and to direct them what he
would have them to do?

Secondly, it is therefore observable, that on Pentecost day they received
(...), Verse. 8. and Luke 24.49. Power and abililities to execute their charge:
for indeed their charge was given them by Christ before. Now Christ was not
with them continually to talk with them and to instruct them, but came by times
among them, and away again: and therefore on the very first night that he
appeared unto them, he distributed the holy Ghost among them, to be their
constant instructor, and injoyner what they were to do, in that calling and
employment to which they were engaged: and the fruit of one of these
instructions and injunctions by the holy Ghost within them, was the choosing of
Matthias.

Verse. III. To whom also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many
infallible proofs.
Sect. The History of the resurrection, and Christ's several apparitions after
it.
On the first day of the week Luke 14.1.
very early in the morning, Man. 28.1.
when it began to dawne Ioh. 20.1.
while it was yet dark, Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary Ioh. 19.25.
the wife of Cleopas, and Luke 24.10. Mark 15.48.
mother of James and Ioses; and Mar. 16.1.
Salome Compare Mat 27.56. and Mark 15.40.
the mother of Zebedees children; and Luke 24.10.
Ioanna the wife of Chusa, Herod's Steward; and other women that were with them
set out to see the Sepulcher, and brought the Spices with them that they had
prepared. And as they went, they Mar. 16.3.
said, Who shall roll the Stone away for us? But when they came to the
Sepulcher Man. 16.2.
the Sun being by this time risen, they found the stone rolled away: Luke 8.3.
For there had been Mat. 28.2.
a great earthquake, and the angel of the Lord had descended from heaven, and
rouled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it: as the Women came unto
the Sepulcher, they saw this Man. 16.5.
angel like a young man, sitting on the right hand of the entry in, in a long
white robe, and they were sore troubled. Mat 28.5. Mark 16 6.
But he said unto them, Fear ye not, I know that ye seek Jesus which was
crucified; he is not here, for he is risen; come see the place where they
laid him. Luke 24.3.
And they entered into the Cave, and found not the Body in the Sepulcher; but
there they see Ioh. 12.12
two angels more in shining garments; the one at the head, and the other at the
feet where the body had lain, Luke 24.5.
who spoke to them, Why seek ye the dead among the living?

ibid. 9 Mar. 16.8.
The Women having seen this, go in haste and tell the Disciples. Ioh. 20.2,
3.4, etc.
Whereupon Peter and John run to the Sepulcher, and see the linen clothes,
but see not the angels. ibid. 10.11. etc.
When they were gone home again, Mary Magdalen, who had again followed them to
the Sepulcher, standing at the door sees the angels again within, and
turning her self she sees Jesus without, whom at first she took for the
Gardener.

So that the first apparition of our Savior being risen was to her alone, Ioh.
20. ver. 11. to 19. 1 Apparition.


The same day he appears to the two men that went to Emmaus, Luke 24.13. the
one of them was Cleopas, 2 Apparition.
verse. 18. the Father of James and Ioses, and husband of the other Mary;
Compare John 19.25. and Matthew. 15.40. and the other was Simon Peter, Luke
24.34. 1 Cor. 15.5.

That night he appears to the twelve, 3 Apparition.
as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 15.5. or to the eleven, and them that were
with them, Luke 24.36, 39.

John 20.19, 20. and shows them his hands and feet, and eats a piece of
broyled fish and an honey-combe with them Luke 24.43.

Eight days after he appears to the Disciples, and convinces Thomas, 4
Apparition.
John 20.26.

5 Apparition.
At the Sea of Tiberias he appears again to seven of his Disciples, and
fore-telleth Peter of his suffering for the Gospel, Ioh. 21. This John calls
his third appearing, verse. 24. namely, which he had made to any number of his
Disciples together, and which John himself had mentioned.

6 Apparition.
On a mountain in Galilee he shows himself to the eleven, Mat. 28.16. and to
five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.6. for so it may be supposed; seeing
Galilee and this mountain was the place of rendevouz that he had appointed,
not only from the time of his resurrection, Mat. 28.7 but even before his
passion, Mat. 26.32. and to this convention seems the word (...) in the next
verse to have reference: of which in its proper place.

7 Apparition.
The Apostle mentions another appearance of his to James, 1 Cor. 15.7. But
neither do any of the Evangelists tell when, or where it was, nor make they
mention of any such thing; nor does Paul determine which James it was.

8 Apparition.
Lastly, he appeared to all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.7. being gathered to
Jerusalem by his appointment, Acts 1.4. and thence he led them forth to
B^thany, and was taken up, Luke 24.50.

Sect. By many infallible Proofs.
(...), By many Signs, say the Syrian and Arabic: Arguments, says the Vulgar
Latin: But the word includes Signs of undoubted truth, and arguments of
undoubted demonstration; and accordingly has our English well expressed it, By
infallible proofs. These were very many, exhibited and showed by Christ, which
evidenced his resurrection: and they may be reduced to these three purposes.

First, to show that he was truly alive again, as his eating, walking,
conferring and conversing with his Disciples.

Secondly, to show that he had a true and real body, as offering himself to
be handled, as Luke 24.39.

Thirdly, to show that it was the same body that suffered, when he shows the
scarres in his hands, feet, and sides, as Ioh. 20.20, 27.

Every apparition that are reckoned before, and are mentioned by the
Evangelists, had one or more of these demonstrations; and yet were there
certain appearances, and diverse such proofs, which are not recorded, Ioh.
20.30.

Sect. Being seen of them forty days.
(...), says Theophylact, not (...): For that Christ was not continually
conversing with his Disciples, but he came among them at certain times; Yet
do the Syrian and Arabicke, translate it in Forty days.

Forty years after this, a year for a day (as Numb. 14.33, 34.) was Jerusalem
destroyed, and the Nation of the Jews rooted out; because they would not
believe in Christ, who had so mightily declared himself to be the Son of God,
by his resurrection from the dead, and who had so plainly declared his
resurrection from the dead, by so many appearings, and infallible proofs for
forty days.

And that the sin might be fully legible in the Judgment, they were besieged
and closed up in Jerusalem, at a Passover, as at a Passover they had slain
and crucified the Lord of life: Now, that this remarkable work of the Lords
Justice upon this Nation, in suiting their judgment thus parallel to their
sin and unbeleefe, in regard of these years, and this time of the year may
be the more conspicuous to the mind of the reader; for the present, it will
not be much amiss to lay down the times of the Roman Emperors from this
time thitherto; for even by their times and stories, this time and truth may
be measured and proved: and in the progress of the discourse to come, the
particulars both for year and time may be cleared more fully.

Now the times of the Roman Emperors, that came between the death of Christ,
and the destruction of Jerusalem, are thus reckoned by the Roman Historians
themselves.

Tiberius began to reign about August the 18.

He reigned 22 years, 7 months, and 7 days. Dion. And dyed in the 23 of his
reign. Suet.

He dyed March 26. Dion. Or the 17 of the Calends of April, Sueton.

Caius Caligula began March 27.

Reigned 3 years, 9 months, 28. days. Dion. Or 3 years, 10 months, 8
days, Sueton.

Dyed January 23, or the 9 of the Calends of February, Sue^.

Claudius began January 24.

Reigned 13 years, 8 months, 20 days. Dion. He dyed in the 14 year of his
reign, Suet.

Dyed October 13. Dion. or the 3 of the Ides of October. Suet

Nero began October. 14.

Reigned 13 years, 8 months, Dion.

Galba reigned 9 months, 13 days. Dion. Dyed in his 7 month, says Suet.

Otho reigned 90 days. Dion. 95 days, Suet.

Vitellius reigned 1 year wanting 10 days, Dion.

Vespasian reigned 10 years wanting six days, Dion.

In his second year Jerusalem is destroyed by his son Titus, Joseph. de Bello
Iudaic. lib. 7. cap. 18.

And now if we cast up the times, from the 18 of Tiberius to the second of
Vespasian; and compare and parallel them with the years of our Savior, we
shall find them running together in this manner, Christ Tiberius Christ
Claudius 33 18 54 13 34 19 55 14 35 20 56 1 Nero. 36 21 57 2 37 22 58 3 38 1
Caius begins in March 27. 59 4 39 2 60 5 40 3 61 6 41 4 62 7 42 1 Claudius
begins 63 8 43 2 January 24. 64 9 44 3 65 10 45 4 66 11 46 5 67 12 47 6 68 13
48 7 69 14 49 8 70 1 Calba and Otho. 50 9 71 1 Vitellius. 51 10 72 1 Vespasian.
52 11 73 2 Jerusalem destroyed. 53 12

Verse. IV. And being assembled together with them.
There is no small difference among Interpreters about rendering this clause
out of the Original. Some read (...), others leave the words (...) out; as
thinking the word (...) sufficient: some render it Eating with them, as the
Syrian, Arabic, Oecumenius, Chrysostom, Vulgar Latin, Deodate, and our
English in the Margin, the Rhemists, and those that follow the Vulgar, which
Valla thinks was mistaken, and read convescens in stead of conversans.
Others, Assembling them, or being assembled with them, as Beza, Camerarius,
Deodate, and our English in the Text; the Tigurine, Spanish, French, Erasmus,
and others; Epiphanius as he is cited by Camerarius, reads it, (...), and
Valla as he is cited by Erasmus says, it is so written in some Greek Copies.
For the settling therefore of the right construction of this place;

First, it is the concurrent agreement of all men, this last excepted; to read
the word (...), and not (...); which word indeed the thing it self will not
bear, for though Christ conversed, and was much among his Disciples after his
resurrection, yet do we not read that he ever lodged with them; which the
word (...) does properly import.

Secondly, In the difference about the translation, whether to render it
eating, or being assembled with them; the current of Greek Authors in the use
of the word, do vote for the latter sense, and not at all for the former, as
Beza and Camerarius do prove at large; and more proofs might be given, were
it needful.

Now this phrase seems to refer to Christ's meeting his Disciples on the
mountain of Galilee, which he himself had appointed for a meeting place, Mat.
28.16. And the words (...) may not be wanting. For in other of his appearings,
it was accidental and unexpected when he came among them; but upon this mount
he was assembled together with them upon appointment. And here it is like were
the five hundred Brethren mentioned by Paul, and spoken of before; for where
was it so likely so many should have the sight of Christ at once; as in that
place where he had promised that he would meet them, and had appointed to
assemble with them.

Sect. Commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem.
Not that they were at Jerusalem when they received this command, but that he
commands them now to Jerusalem, and there to continue. Till they were come
into Galilee, they had no warrant to stay at Jerusalem at all, but command to
the contrary; for he commanded them away from thence into Galilee, Matthew.
28.7.16. because he would appear to all those at once, that had been most
constant Auditors of him; for there had been his greatest converse; and being
there assembled together with them, according to his promise and his
appointment, he then charge them to return to Jerusalem, and not to depart
from thence till the promise of the Father become.

Christ confineth them to Jerusalem, for the receiving of the holy Ghost. 1.
Because of the Prophecy, Esaias 2.3. Out of Zion shall go forth the law, etc. 2.
Because there would be the greatest company to be spectators of that great
work, and to be wrought upon by it, as is proved by the sequel. 3. Because
that this great work of Christ's power, was fittest to be showed there, where
had been his great humiliation: and that those that would not be convinced by
the resurrection, might be convinced by this miraculous gift of the holy Ghost.

Verse. 6. They asked of him, saying, Lord will thou at this time restore again
the Kingdom to Israel?
This was and is the great delusion of that Nation unto this day, and not a few
Christians do side with them in it; supposing that at the Jews conversion,
they shall be brought home to Canaan, there inhabit with Christ visibly among
them, Jerusalem built again; and their peace and prosperity so great, as never
the like; and so constant, as never interrupted. To this tune spoke the
petition of Salome, the wife of Z^bedee, and James and John her two sons,
Mat. 20.20. and the speech of Cleopas, Luke 24.21. And how common this Doctrine
is among the Jewish Authors, it is needless (for it might be endless) to
recite; it is evidence enough, in that we see it the common and general
quaere of all the Disciples met together: Christ since his resurrection had
spoken to them of the things that concerned the kingdom of God, and they find
belike, that he had passed a great Article of their belief unspoken of, about
restoring the kingdom of Israel. Our Savior answers their curiosity with a
check, as he had done Peter, Ioh. 21.22. and diverts their thoughts to the more
needful consideration of the calling that he would set them about, as in the
next verse; and shows that the kingdom of Christ, which they mistook,
should be a spiritual power, which even just now was to begin; and of this
power he tells they should receive and dilate, and carry on his Kingdom.

Sect. Certain Articles or positions tending to the confutation of the Jews in
this point, and the Millenaries that concur in many things with them
1. That the Book of Daniel speaks nothing of the state of the Jews, beyond
the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus.

2. That the Revelation intends not the stories and times that are written in
Daniel, but takes at him and begins where Daniel left, to discourse the
state of the new Jerusalem when the old one was ruined.

3. That the fourth Monarchy in Daniel, is not Rome, nor possibly can be, Dan.
7.11, 12. well weighed together.

4. That the blasphemous horn in Dan. 7.8.25. etc. is not Antichrist, but
Antiochus.

5. That Antichrist shall not be destroyed before the calling of the Jews, but
shall persecute them, when they are converted, as well as he has done the
Church of the Christians: And that the slaying of the two Prophets, Rev. 11.
aims at this very thing, to show that Antichrist shall persecute the Church
of Jews and Gentiles, when toward the end of the world they shall be knit
together in profession of the Gospel.

6. That the calling of the Jews shall be in the places of their residence
among the Christians, and their calling shall not cause them to change place,
but condition.

7. That Ezekiels New Jerusalem is bigger in compass by many hundreds of miles,
then all the land of Canaan ever was in its utmost extent.

8. That the earth was cursed from the beginning, Genesis 3.17. and therefore
Christ's kingdom not to be of the cursed earth, Ioh. 18.36.

9. That the kingdom everlasting that began after the destruction of the
fourth beast, Dan. 2.44. and 7.14.27. was the kingdom of Christ in the Gospel,
and began with the Gospel, preached among the Gentiles.

10. That the binding of Satan for a thousand years, begins from the same
date.

11. That his binding up, is not from persecuting the Church, but from
deceiving the Nations, Rev. 20.3.8.

12. That multitudes of those places of the Old Testament that are applied by
the Jews and Millenaries, to the people of the Jews, and their earthly
prosperity, do purposely intend the Church of the Gentiles, and their
spiritual happiness.

Verse. 8. But ye shall receive power after the holy Ghost is come upon you.
Sect. 1. How many of the Disciples were spectators of Christ's ascension.
It is apparent by this Evangelist, both in this place, and in his Gospel, that
there were diverse others that were spectators of this glorious sight beside the
twelve. For in the 14 verse he has named both the women and the brethren of
Christ; which number of men in ver. 15. he has summed to 120. as we shall see
there: And so likewise in his Gospel, Chap. 24. he has so carried the Story,
as that it appears by him, that the beholders of his first appearing after
his resurrection, were also the beholders of his Ascension: for at ver. 33. he
speaks of the eleven, and them that were with them, and from thence forward
he has applied the story until the ascension indifferently to them all. And
this thing will be one argument for us hereafter to prove that the whole
hundred and twenty mentioned verse. 15. of this Chapter received the Gift of
tongues, and not the eleven only.

Verse. IX. While they beheld, he was taken up.
Sect. 1. The year of Christ at his Ascension.
The time of Christ's conversing upon earth comes into dispute ( viz. whether
it were 32 years and an half, or 33 and an half) mainely, upon the construction
of this clause, Luke 3.23. Jesus began to be about 30 years of age when he was
baptized: For though it be agreed on, that the time of his Ministry, or from
his Baptism to his suffering, was three years and an half; yet is it
controverted upon that Text, whether to begin those from his entering upon his
30 year current, or from finishing that year complete. The Text speaks out
for the former; and in that it says, He began to be thirty; it denies his
being thirty complete; and in that it says, he began to be So (...), Act.
13.20.
(...), thirty after a certain reckoning, or, as it were thirty; it denies his
drawing upon thirty complete likewise: For if he were full thirty, it were
improper to say, he began to be thirty; and if he were drawing on to full
thirty, then were it proper to have said, he began to be thirty indeed; and
not began to be, as it were thirty. Therefore the manner of speech does
clearly teach us to reckon, that Jesus was now nine and twenty years old
complete, and was just entering upon his thirtyeth year when he was baptized:
and so does it follow without any great scruple, that he was crucified, rose
again, and ascended, when he was now thirty two years and an half old
complete, which we must write his thirty third year current.

Sect. 2. The age of the world at our Saviors death, resurrection and
ascension.
We have showed elsewhere, that these great things of our Saviors suffering
and exaltation came to pass in the year of the world 3960. then half passed;
or being about the middle. It will be needless to spend time to prove and
confirm it here. The summing up these several sums which were as so many
linkes of that chain will make it apparent.

From the Creation to the Flood 1656. Genesis 5.6, 7. etc. From the Flood to the
promise to Abraham, Genesis 12. 427. Genesis 11. and 12. From the promise to the
delivery from Egypt. 430. Exo. 12.40. Gal. 3.17 From the coming out of Egypt
to the founding of Solomon's Temple. 480. 1 Kings 6.1. From the founding to the
finishing of the Temple. 7. 1 King. 6.38. From finishing the Temple, to the
revolt of the ten Tribes. 30. 1 Kin. 6.38. and 11.42. compa From the revolt of
the ten Tribes to the burning of the Temple. 390. Ezekiel. 4.5, 6. From the
burning of the Temple, to the return from Babel. 50. Ier. 25.11, 12. and 2 Chronicles. 36.6 From the return from Babel to the death of Christ. 9, 10. 2 Kin. 25
2, 3 presly comp. 490. Dan. 9.24, etc. Total 3960.
And hereupon it does appear, that as the Temple was finished by Solomon, just
Anno Mundi 3000. So that it was fired by Titus, just Anno Mundi 4000. Jerusalem
being destroyed exactly 40 years after Christ's death, as was showed even now.

Verse XII. Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey.
Sect. 1. Why the Evangelist does measure this distance at this time.
This is the first matter of scruple in these words: and it is material to
take notice of it, the rather, because that this same Evangelist has made
mention of the Mount of Olives in his other book, and yet never takes notice
of the distance of it from Jerusalem before, as Luke 19.29.37. and 22.39.

Sect. 2. Why the Evangelist does measure this distance by a Sabbath days
journey, rather then any other measure.
This also is not impertinent to take notice of, because neither the present
time, nor the present action had any reference to the Sabbath day at all: For
had it been either the Jews Sabbath, or the Christian Sabbath, when this thing
was done; it were easy to see why the measure of the distance betwixt these
two places, is by such a standard; but since it was in the middle of the week
when our Savior ascended, and near neither the one sabbath nor the other, it
cannot but breed some just scruple why the Evangelist should mention a Sabbath
days journey here.

But before we can give satisfaction to these two scruples, it is in a kind
necessary to resolve one or two more which are of no less, if not of a greater
difficulty: and those are;

Sect. 3. Whether the Evangelist intend to measure the distance from the Mount
Olivet to Jerusalem, or from the place where our Savior ascended on mount
Olivet, to Jerusalem.
Sect. 4. What space a Sabbath days journey was.
This last, must first fall under determination, and it is not of small
obscurity in regard of the different measures that are made of it, and in
regard of the different glosses that are made upon this Text.

The Syriack reads it thus, Which was from Jerusalem seven furlongs. And this
has bred some difficulty more then was in the next before; for that Josephus
says, Mount Olivet was but five furlongs from Jerusalem, Antiq. lib. 20. cap.
6. And John the Evangelist says, Bethany was 15 furlongs from Jerusalem, Ioh.
11.18. And certain it is that Luke in this place speaks of the distance from
Olivet, or from Bethany, or from both; and yet the Syriack gloss upon him,
has found out a measure that agrees neither with Josephus, nor with John.

There is a like difference between their opinions that come to measure this
space not by furlongs, but by another measure; some holding it to be two
thousand paces, or two miles; others two thousand cubits, or but one mile: This
latter to have been the measure of a Sabbath days journey, namely, two
thousand cubits, is apparent in the Talmud, and it may be confirmed out of
other Writers of the same Nation; for this position is in the Tractate of
Erubbin, Chap. 4. (...) a journey of two thousand middle paces is the bound of
the sabbath: And the Scholiast there says, (...): A middle pace in the way of
a man's walk, namely a cubit. And so the Chaldee paraphrast on the first of
Ruth, (...): We are commanded to keep the Sabbaths and the holy days; so as to
go not above two thousand cubits. And this tradition or custom seems to be
fetched from that place in Josh. 3.4. where, because the people in their march
after, and on either side the Arc, were to keep twenty Cubits distance off it;
it is thereupon concluded, that they pitched at that distance when the Arc and
they were encamped; and so that that was the space that they went from their
Tents to the Tabernacle on the Sabbath day: it is not worth the labor, to
examine the truth of this opinion in this place; because we have not here so
much to deal with it, as with a custom built upon it: and it is not so
material whether that was the distance betwixt their Tents and the Tabernacle
in their encampings in the wilderness (for some of them were double, treble
that distance) as certain it is, that a custom was grown from this opinion of
traveling no further then two thousand Cubits on the Sabbath day; and to this
custom the Evangelist speaks, and that is it that we must look after. Now
if we count these two thousand Cubits for whole yards, then was the space a
mile, and above half a quarter, or somewhat above nine furlongs in all: but if
for half yards, which was the common Cubit, then was it but half so much, and
neither of these sums agree with the Syriacks seven furlongs, nor with John's
fifteen. But the latter agrees very well with Josephus his five, and so do I
understand the measure to be.

For, first, it were easy to prove that the Cubit by which the Tabernacle was
measured at the building of it, both for its own body, and for the ground it
stood upon, and its Court, and all things about it, was but the common Cubit of
half a yard; and it is most likely that those two thousand Cubits that did
distance the people from it in the wilderness, and that measured out a Sabbath
days journey now, were Cubits of the same size.

Secondly, the Text of Luke exactly measures the distance from the Mount of
Olives to Jerusalem, and it is very questionable whether he intend the space
from that place upon the Mount where our Savior ascended, or no. He says in
the last Chapter of his Gospel, that Jesus led the Disciples out, (...), Verse.
50. not toward Bethany, but as far as unto it, as our English, and the
Syriack, the Vulgar, Beza, and others do truly render it: now Bethany was
about fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, Ioh. 11.16. and let us take the two
thousand Cubits how we will, either common or holy Cubit, either half yard, or
yard; or Ezekiels Cubit, of a Cubit and hand breadth: Yet will none of these
measures reach to so many furlongs.

Now howsoever Beza has sought to heal this difference by a supposall that
Bethany was not only the name of a Town, but also a tract or a space of ground
that lay about the Town, as a Lordship or Parish lies about the Village; and
that though the Town it self lay fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, yet that the
grounds and demeanes that carried the same name, reached within half that space
to Jerusalem; the grounds of such a supposall are yet to seek; nay, there is
good ground to the contrary.

For first, it is rare in Scripture to find open fields called by the name of a
Town, when there is no expression that the fields are meant: particularly, if
we should reckon up all the Towns named in the Bible that bear a Beth, in the
beginning of them, as Bethlehem, Bethshemesh, Bethsaida, Bethel, and all the
rest that are of the like beginning, we could never find that they signify
any thing but the very town it self; and why Bethany should be singular, I see
no reason.

Secondly, in all the mentioning of Bethany in other places in the Gospel, it
is past peradventure that the Town is meant; as Ioh. 12.1. Mat. 21.17. Mark
11.11. Matthew. 26.1. etc. and why it should not be so also in Luke 24.50. had
need of cogent reasons to demonstrate.

Thirdly, it is very questionable whether Bethphage lay not betwixt Jerusalem
and Bethany; or if it did not, it lay very little aside the way, as might be
showed out of the story of Christ's riding into Jerusalem, Matthew. 21.1. Luke
19.29. compared with Ioh. 12.1. and therefore that was like to cut off the name
of Bethany, that it should not reach far in the fields toward the City: For
Christ lay in Bethany all night, Ioh. 12.1. and on the morning was gone some
way toward Jerusalem before he met with the Ass on which he rode, which he
had commanded his Disciples to fetch from Bethpage, which was (...) before
them, as the Syrian well renders it; that is, either directly in their way to
Jerusalem, or very little off it; as they were now setting out of Bethany
thither. And this is confirmed by the gloss upon the Gomar^ in Sanhedrin,
porch. 1. where mention being made of Bethphage, in the Text the Scholiast
says, Bethphage was a place before the wall of the City, and governed as
Jerusalem in all things.

It is therefore of the most probability, that Christ when he ascended, led
out his Disciples to Bethany Town, fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, or
thereabout, and that very way that he had riden triumphantly into the City
seven and forty days ago, he goes now again to ride more triumphantly into
heaven. The Text then that we have in hand does not measure the space from the
City to Bethany where Christ ascended, but from the City to the foot of Mount
Clivet, on which Mount, Bethany stood; and the measure he makes of it is two
thousand common Cubits, or about five furlongs. And so we have done with two of
the Quaeries that were proposed. But now why he should measure this space at
this time rather then any other, and why by the title of a Sabbath days
journey, rather then any other measure, remains yet to be inquired after.

This Evangelist has diverse times in his Gospel mentioned this Mount, as was
showed before; but never showed the situation or distance of it from the City
till now, and that may be a reason why he does it here, being the last time
that ever he is to mention it in all his writings; and that one place might
explain another: Namely, that from this Text the several passages done on
Mount Olivet which are mentioned in his Gospel, might receive some
illustration, and it might be known how far they were acted from Jerusalem;
or at the least guessed how far, it being from hence determined, how far
the foot of Olivet was distant from it: It had been indeed as ready to have
said they returned from Bethany, which was from Jerusalem about fifteen
furlongs; but the holy Ghost is not so careful to measure the distance from
the place of Christ's ascension (it may be for the same reason that he
concealed the grave of Moses, for fear of superstition) as to measure from
Olivet where so many, and remarkable occurrences besides Christ's ascension had
passed, and been done by him.

Why he measures it by the title of Sabbath days journey, rather then by any
other measure, as of paces, furlongs, or the like, since this day that was
spoken of is not a Sabbath, we dare not be too curious to determine: Only to
conjecture, it is very probable, that this was the common walk of the people
of Jerusalem on the sabbath day in pleasant weather for their meditations, when
they had done the public duties of the day: For so it is said of Christ, that
he often resorted to a garden of Gethsemani with his Disciples, Ioh. 18.2. and
though it be not certain whether he did on the Sabbath; yet it is certain
that he did on the passover night, after he and his Disciples had done the
work of the day and Ordinance. And that time of the day fell under the same
obligation that the Sabbath did in this particular. For, as was observed even
now out of the Chaldee Paraphrast, not only on the Sabbaths, but also on other
holy days it was not lawful to walk above two thousand Cubits; and this time
that our Savior set thither, was the beginning of such a day: namely, of the
first day in the Passover week, which was to be observed as a Sabbath, Lev.
23.7. and that day was begun at that even when our Savior went out to
Gethsemani to pray. And though Judas slipped from behind his Master after they
were risen from the Table and come out of the House, and when he should have
gone out of the City with him, he stepped aside into the City, and got his cursed
train up to go to apprehend Jesus; yet the Text assures us, Ioh. 18.2. that
Judas knew where to have him, though he went not to observe whither he would
go; because that that was our Saviors common retiring place upon such
occasions. And so may we conceive it was the common haunt of others of the
City, upon such times, and such occasions of prayer and meditation to resort
thither, for the delightsomnesse of the place, and the helpfulnesse of it by
the delight and solitariness to contemplation. And therefore the Evangelist
may be conceived to use this expression for the measure betwixt it and the
City, A Sabbath days journey; because it was most remarkably so; not only
upon obligation, but for delight, and the peoples common Sabbath days walk.

Verse. XIII. They went up into an upper room.
This was not that room in which Christ ordained his last Supper; for that was
(...), Mark 14.15. Luke 22.12. this was (...) and certainly the difference of
words, argues difference of the thing it self: for (...) seems to signify
any room above stairs, be it but the first story, but (...) the highest
room in all the House, as Act. 20.8, 9. which was the third story. Nor is it
probable that this was the House of John Mark, mentioned Act. 12.12. For
though some Disciples were then assembled there, yet were the Apostles in
another place. What place this was, is not worth the labor of searching;
because it is past the possibility of finding out: be it in what house it
would, this was the place where this society of Apostles and Elders kept as it
were their College and Consistory, while they staid at Jerusalem, and till
persecution scattered them. And therefore it is said, (...), they were there
abiding: This was not the meeting place in public Worship for all the
Believers in the City, which ere long, if not at this very time, were several
Congregations: but this was the meeting and sitting place for the Presbytery of
these Elders that took care of all those Congregations.

Sect. Both Peter, and James, and John, etc.
The Syrian reads, Peter, and John, and James; and for Bartholomew and
Matthew, he and the Arabic read Matthew and Batholomew; the reason best known
to themselves.

Sect. James the Son of Alpheus.
The word Son, is not in the Greek, neither here, nor Matthew. 10.3. nor Mark
3.18. nor Luke 6.15. but it is only thus, James of Alpheus, and so reads the
Vulgar. But the Syrian, Arabic, Beza, our English, and diverse others have very
warrantably put in the word Son.

Now this Alpheus and Cleopas, mentioned, Luke 24.18. were but one and the same
man: the Syrian (...) serving indifferently to frame his name into Hebrew, or
into a Greek pronuntiation, Chalphi and Cleophi, as Paul's double name sounded
after these two languages: This Cleopas or Alpheus, was the Husband of Mary,
Ioh. 19.25. and she the mother of James the less, and of Ioses, Matthew. 15.40.
and of Judah and Simon, Mar. 6.3. and from hence is warrant sufficient to call
James the Son of Alpheus; though the Text has not spoken out the word Son.

This James is he, that was commonly called James the less, mentioned Acts
12.7. and 15.3. and 21.18. Gal. 2.9. etc. and so often called by Ancients, the
Bishop of Jerusalem, but upon what misprision shall be conjectured afterward.

Sect. And Simon Zelotes.
He is called Simon the Kanaanite, Matthew. 10.4. Mark 3.18. which in Hebrew
signifies zealous, as is more apparent by the Syriack and Arabic writing of
it, then the Greek: It is like he was so called from Kanah in Galilee, the
place of his abode; and the Evangelist translateth this proper Hebrew name,
into a Greek appellative, as John does Siloam, Ioh. 9.7. This Simon was the
Son of Alpheus also, and so likewise was Judas mentioned instantly after,
Mar. 6.3. And so has Alpheus three sons that were Apostles; and Ioses the
fourth, is in fair choice to be one too, ver. 23.

Verse. XIIII. With the Women.
Some render it, With their Wives, which may indeed be very true; for the
Apostles and Disciples which had Wives, took them with them, 1 Cor. 9.5. but
it is too strait: for doubtless there were some Women with them, that had
either no Husbands at all, or none there; see Luke 8.23. and 23.49. and 24.22.

Sect. And Mary the mother of Jesus.
We have no more mention of her in Scripture: it is like she continued under
the care of John the Evangelist, to whom our Savior had committed her, Joh.
19.26, 27. and at the last in some persecution was taken away by martyrdom, as
Simeon had prophesied of her, Luke 2.35.

Sect. And his Brethren.
That is, his Kinsmen; for by this term does the Scripture use to express
such relations: it is needless to show examples: and to show who these Kinsmen
were, will be more proper for another place.

Verse. 15. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst.
Peter both in this place, and diverse others, and indeed generally through so
much of this book as concerns the Church of Judea and Jerusalem, is ever
brought in as the chief speaker, and chief actor; nay, commonly the sole
speaker and actor upon all occasions: Not that the rest of the Apostles were
either any whit inferior to him, either in authority or in forwardness to
promote the Gospel; but upon these two most singular and peculiar grounds.

First, Peter was designed by a more special deputation and appointment to be
the Minister of the Circumcision, Gal. 2.8. and therefore while the Story
stays among the Circumcised, it still mentions Peter above all the other:
as when it comes to speak of the uncircumcised, then it fixes solely on the
story of Paul.

Secondly, Peter was considerable under a notion that none of the rest of the
twelve had fallen under namely, one that had denied and foresworn his Master:
and therefore it was in some kind necessary that some special evidences of his
perfect recovery again should be given. And whenever he is thus honored by
mention of him, when the rest are not mentioned, it is not for that he
outstript them either in dignity, or zeal; but to show that he had recovered
that ground which he had lost of them in his grievous fall. And these two
considerations do mainely resolve, why you read hardly of any man's speeches,
or any man's actions but only Peter's. He is the speaker in Act. 2. at the first
conversion of the three thousand souls; and he is the speaker in Act. 3. at
the second conversion of five thousand more; not that the rest of the company
did not preach and speak as well as he; as we shall prove for that first Sermon
on Acts 2. and as the holy Ghost it self approves for that second, Acts 4.1.
But because, at these first fruits of the Gospel among the Circumcised, the
Lord more especially holds out the mention of the Minister of the
Circumcision.

And so in this motion for the choice of a new Apostle, and in that doom again
on Ananias and Sapphira, Peter of all other is the Man: for how fully and how
fitly does it show his perfect recovery, when he that of all the rest, had
fallen next to Judas, does censure Judas; and he that had denied his Master
with an oath, does strike those dead for a lie?

Sect. The number of Names together.
Names, is held by diverse in this place, and in Rev. 3.4. and 11.13. to
signify only persons without any distinction of sex: whereas it rather
signifies men distinct from women: and so it seems that the Syriack and
Arabic understand it here; and the latter adds that they were men of name or
repute.

For, first, in Scripture account, most constantly the reckoning is of men; and
women very rarely brought in in the number: nay sometime the reckoning plainly
showed to be contradistinguished to women.

Secondly, the name of a family continues in the males, but is lost in the
females; and therefore in the Hebrew, a male is called Zacar, from remembrance;
and women Nashim, from forgetting; and in the New Test: Greek, men are called
Names upon the like reason.

Sect. Were about an hundred and twenty.
This summeth the men that are spoken of in the verse preceding; the twelve
Apostles, the seventy Disciples, and about thirty eight more, all of Christ's
own kindred, country, or converse.

These one hundred and twenty here spoken of, are not to be reputed or
accounted as the whole number of believers at Jerusalem at this time; but only
those that had followed Christ continually, Verse 21. were of his own
Country, stood in more near relation to him, as being of his own family and
society, and appointed by him for the Ministry.

The Believers at Jerusalem no doubt were many hundreds, if not thousands at
this time; though we read of no converts in this book, till the next Chapter.
For what fruit or account can else be given of all Christ's preaching and pains
bestowed in that City? let but Ioh. 2, 23. and 3.2. and 4.1. and Mar. 3.8. and
Ioh. 7.31. and 8.30. and 11.28, 45. and 12.19.42. and diverse other places be
well weighed, and it will be utterly unimaginable that there should be less
believers in Jerusalem now then many hundreds, much more unimaginable that
these one hundred and twenty were al, who were all Galileans, and no
inhabitants of Jerusalem at all.

This number therefore mentioned by the Evangelist of one hundred and twenty,
is not to be thought all the Church in that City; but only the society and
company that were of Christ's own train and retinue whilst he was upon earth,
that companied with him all the time that he went in and out among his
Disciples, Acts 1.21. And this company though it be mingled and dispersed
among the Congregations in the City for preaching the Word, and administering
the Sacraments, and joining in acts of worship; yet did they keep together as
a more entire and peculiar society, and standing Presbytery, Act. 4.21. and of
the rest durst none join himself unto them, Acts 5.13. and thus they
continued till the persecution at Stephens death dispersed them all but the
Apostles, Acts 3.1.

Ver. XVI. This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled.
I apprehend not what the word [ have] does in this clause, for it had been
both more proper for the sense and more facil for the reader, to have it read,
This Scripture must needs be fulfilled. Now the application of these places so
pertinently and home to Judas, shows the illumination and knowledge that the
breathing and giving of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 20.22. had wrought in the
Disciples.

Verse XVIII. This man purchased a Field with the reward of iniquity.
Not that he himself bought this field, for Matthew resolves the contrary,
Matthew. 27.7. and tells that it was bought by the Chief Priest for his damned
bribe: Nor was any such thing in his intention when he bargained for his money;
but Peter by a bitter irrision shows the fruit and profit of his wretched
covetise; and how he that thought to enlarge his Revenues, and to settle his
habitation by such horrid means, came home by it with the contrary, his
revenues to purchase land for others, his habitation to be desolate, and
himself to come to so sad an end.

Sect. And falling headlong, etc.
Universality, antiquity and consent have so determinately concluded that Judas
hanged himself, that there is no gainsaying: yet has the Greek word (...)
left it so indifferent, whether he hanged himself, or were strangled by the
Devil, that if I were not tied up by the consent of all to the contrary, I
should the rather take it the latter way: And if I durst so interpret it, I
should render (...), to this purpose: that Satan took him away bodily,
strangled him in the air; and then flung him headlong and burst out his
bowels. For (...), Qui vel a seipso vel ab alio praecipitatur, says Stephanus.
And to this purpose may that verse of Matthew. 27.5. be very well interpreted;
And he cast down the silver pieces in the Temple, and departed, and going away
he was strangled: the Devil catching him away and stifling him, and then
casting him headlong, and bursting out of him with the eruption of his
intralls, and this terrible occurrence would soon be noted of all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Acts 1.19.

Verse. XIX. Aceldama.
(...), a field of blood: by a double relation; First, because it was bought
with a price of blood, Matthew. 27.7.

And secondly, because it was sprinkled with his blood that took that price:
for so this verse intimates.

Verse XXI. Wherefore of these men that have companied with us.
Sect. Observations upon the election of Matthias.
First, that there was a necessity the Apostles should be twelve. (...), etc.
and this, that the Founders of the Christian Church might be parallel to the
twelve Tribes, the founders of the Jewish; for now Jews and Christians were to
join together: and this is hinted in the twenty four Elders, the
representative body of the Church so often mentioned in the Revelation; and
spoken out Rev. 21.12.14.

Secondly, that Matthias and Ioses being chosen to be presented to the
Apostles, the election was not the choice of the whole Church, as if every
member of the Church, and believer in Jerusalem, either did or might give his
vote to the choosing of them; but it was only the choice of the whole
Presbytery, or the hundred and eight among themselves: for so is it most
plain, verse. 15. and 21. being compared together. Observe the phrase, Of these
men that have companied with us.

Thirdly, that the Apostles could not ordain an Apostle by imposition of hands,
as they could ordain Elders, but they are forced to use a divine lot, which was
as the immediate hand of Christ imposed on him that was to be ordained: that
opinion took little notice of this circumstance, that has placed Bishops in
the place of the Apostles, by a common and successive ordination.

Verse. 25. Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus.
This seems to be he that is called Ioses, Mark 6.3. and 15.40. the brother
of James the less: and the rather to be so supposed, because he is surnamed
Iustus, as James was. And so says Beza, one old Copy reads Ioses here; and
the Syriack for Ioses, reads Joseph, in Chapter 4.36. so indifferently are
the names used one for another. And from this indifferency, have some
concluded, that Joseph here, and Ioses in that Chapter, are but one and the
same person, the nearness of the sound of Barsabas and Barnabas helping
forward that supposall.

But, first, that Ioses, or Joseph in Chapt. 4.36. was borne in Cyprus; this
Joseph, or Ioses here, was born in Galilee.

Secondly, although the Apostles belike had named these two Joseph's to
distinguish them, the one Barsabas, and the other Barnabas; two names that are
not far asunder in sound and utterance; yet are they in sense, and in the
Apostles intention, if they named the one as they did the other: Barnabas is
interpreted by the Evangelist himself (...), rendered generally the son of
consolation; but the Greek may as well bear, the son of exhortation; for so
it is known well enough the word familiarly signifies. The Syriack uses
indeed (...) for consolation, Luke 6.24. Phil. 2.1. Romans 12.8. 2 Cor. 1.4, 5.
and in the place in hand; and (...) in the place last cited before it: but
whether Barnabas may not equally be deduced from (...) to prophecy, or
instruct, I refer to the Reader: Be it whether it will, certain it is, the
Etymology and notation does very far recede from that of Barsabas. Some
conceive that this signifies the son of an Oath; others the son of
fullness; but the notation to me seems to be the son of wisdom, (...).
And if we would be Critical, we might observe the various qualifications of
a Pastor and Teacher from these two surnames, the one a son of wisdom, and
the other of exhortation; but our intention only is to show that the two
Joseph's in mention, differed in person, for they differed in name.

Sect. And Matthias.
Who, or whence this man was, we cannot determine; certain it is, the sense
of his name is the same with Nathaneel, though not the sound: and I should as
soon fix upon him for the man, as any other, and some probabilities might be
tendered for such a surmisall; but we will not spend time upon such
conjectures.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all together
with one accord in one place.
Sect. 1. The time, and nature of the Feast of Pentecost.
THE expression of the Evangelist has bred some scruple; how it can be said,
(...), the day to be completed, or fulfilled, when it was now but newly
begun: and the sight of this scruple it is like has moved the Syrian
Translater, and the Vulgar Latin, to read it in the plural number, When the
days of Pentecost were fulfilled: Calvin says, compleri is taken for
advenire, to be fulfilled, for to be now come: Beza accounts the fullness of
it to be, for that the night, which is to be reckoned for some part of it, was
now past; and some part of the day also. In which exposition he says something
toward the explanation of the scruple, but not enough.

Luke therefore, in relating a story of the feast of Pentecost, uses an
expression agreeable to that of Moses, in relating the institution of it, Lev.
23.13. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath; from the
day that ye brought the sheafe of the wave-offering; seven Sabbaths shall be
complete: Even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath, shall ye number
fifty days.

It will not be amiss to open th^se words a little, for the better
understanding and fixing the time of Pentecost.

First, the Sabbath that is first mentioned in the Text, in these words, Ye
shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, is to be understood of
the first day of the Passover week, or the fifteenth day of the month Nisan;
the Passover having been slain on the day before. And so is it well
interpreted by the Chaldee Paraphrast, that goes under the name of Jonathan,
and by Rabbi Solomon upon this Chapter, at the 11 verse; And he shall wave the
sheafe before the Lord after the holy day, the first day of the Passover.

And it was called a Sabbath, be it on what day of the week it would, (as it
was on the Friday at our Saviors death) because no servile work was to be
done in it; but an holy convocation to be held unto the Lord, verse. 7. and the
Passover Bullock, Deuteronomy. 16.2, 7. 2 Chronicles. 30.24. and 35.8. to be eaten on it,
John 18.28. as the Lamb had been eaten the night before; and this Bullock was
also called a Passover, and the day the preparation of the Passover, Ioh.
19.14. as well as the Lamb, and the day before had been.

This helps to understand that difficult phrase, Mat. 28.1. about which there
is such difference and difficulty of expounding, (...), In the evening of the
Sabbath, says the Syriack and the Vulgar: And o utinam! for then would the
Lords day be clearly called the Sabbath, the Sabbath of the Jews being ended
before the evening or night of which he speaks, did begin. In the end of the
Sabbath, says Beza, and our English, but the Sabbath was ended at Sunsetting
before. It is therefore to be rendered, after the Sabbaths, for so signifies
(...), Plutarch. post regis tempora. (...), post tempora Trojana. (...), post
noctem, etc.
(...), after, in Greek Writers, as well as the Evening: and the plural number
of (...), is to have its due interpretation, Sabbaths. Now there were two
Sabbaths that fell together in that Passover week in which our Savior
suffered; this Convocationall or Festival Sabbath, the first day of the
Passover week, and the ordinary weekly Sabbath, which was the very next day
after: the former was a Friday, and on that our Savior suffered, the latter a
Saturday, or the Jewish Sabbath, and on that he rested in the grave, and
(...), after these Sabbaths; early in the morning on the first day of the week
he rose again.

Secondly, the morrow after this Sabbath of which we have spoken, or the
sixteenth day of the month Nisan, was the solemn day of waving the sheafe of
the first fruits before the Lord, and the day from which they began to count
their seven weeks to Pentecost, Lev. 23.11. Deuteronomy. 16.9.

This day then being the (...), or second day in the Passover week, and being
the date from whence they counted to Pentecost, all the Sabbaths from hence
thither, were named in relation to this day: as the first Sabbath after it is
called (...), Luke 6.1. Not as it is rendered, the second Sabbath after the
first, but the first Sabbath after this second day: the next Sabbath after was
called (...): the third (...), and so the rest accordingly.

Thirdly, now in their counting from this morrow after the Sabbath, or this day
of their first-fruit sheafe, to Pentecost, seven Sabbaths or Weeks were to be
complete: whereupon R. Solomon does very well observe, that the count must then
begin at an evening; and so this day after the Sabbath was none of the fifty;
but they were begun to be counted at Even when that day was done: so that from
the time of waving the first-fruit sheafe, Pentecost was indeed the one and
fiftyeth day; but counting seven weeks complete, when an evening must begin
the account, it is but the fiftyeth.

Fourthly, to this therefore it is that the phrase of the Evangelist speaks,
(...), which our English has very well uttered, the day of Pentecost was fully
come; thereby giving an exact notice how to fix the day that is now spoken of
from our Saviors death, and to observe that he speaks of the time of the day
indeed, and not of the night which was now over, and the day fully come.

The dependence of Pentecost upon this day of waving the first-fruit sheafe,
was upon this reason; because on this second day of the Passover, barley
harvest began; and from thence forward they might eat parched corn, or corn
in the ear; but by Pentecost their corn was inned and seasoned, and ready to
make bread, and now they offered the first of their bread. This relation had
this feastivall in the common practice, but something more did it bear in it
as a memorial; for it recorded the delivering of the Law at mount Sinai, which
was given at the very same time: And thus the giving of the Law at Sinai, for
the bringing of the Jews into a Church, and the gift of the holy Ghost at Sion
for the like of the Gentiles, did so nearely agree in the manner of their
giving, both in fire, and in the time, both at Pentecost. Only, as the
Christian Sabbath was one day in the week, beyond the Jewish Sabbath; so this
Pentecost when the holy Ghost was given, was one in the month beyond the
Pentecost at the giving of the Law, that being on the sixth day of the month
Sivan, and this on the seventh.

Sect. 2. The Pentecost on which the holy Ghost was given, was the first day of
the week, namely, Sunday, or the Lords day.
As our Savior by rising on the first day of the week had honored and sealed
that day for the Christian Sabbath, instead of the Jewish, which was the day
before; and as is said by the Psalmist, that was the day which the Lord had
made, Psalm. 118.
when the stone refused, was become the head of the corner; so did he again
augment the honor, and set home the authority and dignity of that day, in
pouring out the holy Ghost upon the Disciples, and performing the great promise
of the Father on it. Which that it may be the more clearly seen, it will not
be amiss to lay down the time from our Saviors passion, to this time, in
manner of a Calendar, that the readers eye may be his Judge in this matter.

And let it not be tedious to take in the account of five or six days before
his passion: which though it may be a little Parergon, or besides this
purpose, yet may it not be useless or unprofitable: nay, in some respect it is
almost necessary, since we cannot in reason but begin our Calendar from the
beginning of the month Nisan, though our Savior suffered not till the
fifteenth day of it.

Nisan, or Abib, the first month of the year stilo novo, Exodus 12.2.
I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX This night our Savior suppeth at Bethany, where
Mary anointeth his feet, Saturday, or Jews Sabbath.
and Judas repineth at the expense of the ointment, Joh. 12.1. X The next day
he rides into Jerusalem, etc. Joh. 12.12. Mat. 21.1. to verse. 17. Mark 11.1.
to verse. 11. Luke 19:29. to verse. 45.
At night he goes again into Bethany, Mat. 21.17. Mar. 11.11. Sunday


Nisan, or Abib.
XI Monday
The next pay he goes to Jerusalem again, and curses the Fig Tree, Matthew.
21.18, 19. Mark 11.12, 13, 14. and coming to the Temple casts out buyers and
sellers, Mar. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. Luke 19.45, 46, 47. etc. At Even he goes to
Bethany again, Mar. 11.19. XII. Tuesday
He goes to Jerusalem again, Mar. 11.20. Peter, and the rest of the Disciples
note the withered Fig Tree, Mar. 11.20, 21. etc. Mat. 21* 20. etc. They come to
the Temple, and the Scribes and Pharisees question his authority, Mar. 11.27.
etc. Mat. 21.23. Luke 20.1. which he answers with a question about the
Baptist, Mat. 21.24. etc. Mar. 11.29. etc. Luke 20.3. Propounds the Parable
of the Vineyard, Matthew. 21.28. to the end, Mark 12.1. etc. Luke 20.9. etc. And
he speaks all contained in Matthew 22, and 23 Chapters; and Mark 12. from
verse 13 to the end, and Luke 20. from verse 20 to verse 5 of chap. 21.

At night he goes toward Bethany again; and on Mount Olivet looks on the
Temple, and utters all contained in Matthew. 24, and 25. and Mark 13. and Luke
21. from verse 5 to the end.

The sop given to Judas not at the Passover, nor at Jerusalem, but two days
before the one, and two miles from the other
This night he suppeth in Bethany with Simon the Leper, Matthew. 26.1, 2, 6. Mark
14.1, 2, 3. and has ointment powered on his head: after Supper he rises from
the Table, and washes his Disciples feet, and gives Judas the sop, Ioh.
13.2.26. etc. With the sop the Devil enters into him; and he goes in the
dark from Bethany to Jerusalem, and bargaineth for the betraying of Jesus.

XIII. Christ is still at Bethany, Judas having done his hellish work with the
Chief Priests, Wednesday
is returned to Bethany again. XIV. Thursday
The Passover: Christ eats it this day as well as the Jews, Mark 14.12. Luke
22.7. After the Passover he ordains the Sacrament, Mar. 14.22. Judas
received the Sacrament, Luke 22.14.21. Upon our Saviors hinting of his
treacherousnesse, a question arises among the Disciples about it, and that
breeds another question among them, which of them should be the greatest,
Verse. 23, 24.

That debate Christ appeaseth: tells Peter again of his denial: makes that
divine speech contained in the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth Chapters of
John; sings the 113, or the 114 Psalm, goes into the Mount of Olives, is
apprehended: brought to Annas the head, or chief Judge in the Sanhedrin, by him
bound and sent to Caiaphas, Ioh. 18.13, 14. etc. and there is in examination,
and derision all the night.

XV. The forenoon of this day was the preparation of the Passover Bullock,
Friday
Ioh. 19.14. the afternoon is the preparation of the Sabbath, Luke 23.54. Mar.
15.42. Early in the morning Christ is brought to Pi^ate the Roman-Deputy, Mar.
15.1.

At nine a clock he is delivered to the Soldiers and common Rabble, Mar.
14.25. and brought out to the Jews, Ioh. 19.1. to 13.

At twelve a clock, or high none he is condemned, and presently nailed to his
Cross, John 19.13, 14. the time of the day that our first Parents ate and fell.

Now began the darkness, Luke 23.44. and lasted three hours; the very space
that Adam was under the darkness of sin, without the promise.

At three a clock in the afternoon Christ yields up the Ghost, Mar. 15.34.
the very time when Adam had received the promise of this his passion for his
redemption.

At Even he is buried, Mat. 27, 57.

This day being the first in the Passover week, was called a Sabbath, Lev.
23.11. and a very solemn day it should have been, and no work done in it; but
observe how far, and how vilely the Jews did violate it, and that law at this
time.

XVI. Christ rests in the grave this day, being the Sabbath: Saturday the
Jews Sabbath
But the Jews rest not from their villainy. For on this day they compact with
Pilate to make sure the Sepulcher, Matthew. 27.62. And observe that Matthew does
not there call it the Sabbath, but the day that follows the day of the
preparation: by the very Periphrasis, deriding their hypocrisy, who would be
so observant of the Sabbath, as to have a day of preparation for it before it
came, and yet to be thus villainous on it when it was come.

This was the (...), the famous second day in the Passover week, in which the
first-fruit sheafe was waved before the Lord, Lev. 23.11. and from this day
they began to count their seven weeks to Pentecost; Deuteronomy. 16.9.

XVII 1 Sunday, the Lords day
Christ rises from the dead, and he becomes the first fruit of those that
slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. He appears first to Mary Magdalen, Ioh. 20.15 then to
Peter and Cleopas, or Alpheus, as they go to Emmaus, Luke 24.13, 18, 34. 1
Cor. 15.5. and at night to all the Disciples, Luke 24 33, 36. this is the first
of the fifty to Pentecost. XVIII 2 Monday
XIX 3 Tuesday
XX 4 Wednesday
XXI 5 Thursday
XXII 6 Friday
XXIII 7 Saturday
The Jews Sabbath: this was (...)^ Christ appears again. Thomas is present,
Ioh. 20.26. XXIV 8 Lords day
XXV 9 Monday
XXVI 10 Tuesday
XXVII 11 Wednesday
XXVIII 12 Thursday
XXIX 13 Friday
XXX 14 Saturday
The Jews Sabbath. (...). I 15 Lords day
The Lords day. II 16 Monday
III 17 Tuesday
IV 18 Wednesday
V 19 Thursday
VI 20 Friday
VII 21 Saturday
The Jews Sabbath. (...). VIII 22 Lords day
The Lords day. IX 23 Monday
X 24 Tuesday
XI 25 Wednesday
XII 26 Thursday
XIII 27 Friday
XIV 28 Saturday
Jews Sabbath. (...). XV 29 Lords day
The Lords day. XVI 30 Monday
XVII 31 Tuesday
XVIII 32 Wednesday
XIX 33 Thursday
XX 34 Friday
XXI 35 Saturday
Jews Sabbath. (...). XXII 36 Lords day
The Lords day. XXIII 37 Monday
XXIV 38 Tuesday
XXV 39 Wednesday
XXVI 40 Thursday
Ascension day. XXVII 41 Friday
XXVIII 42 Saturday
Jews Sabbath (...). XXIX 43 Lords day.
The Lords day. I 44 Monday
II 45 Tuesday
III 46 Wednesday
IV 47 Thursday
V 48 Friday
VI 49 Saturday.
Jews Sabbath. (...). VII 50 The Lords day. Pentecost day. The holy Ghost given.
Sect. 3. That many, if not all of the 120 received the holy Ghost, and the
gift of tongues on Pentecost day; and not the twelve only.
For first, diverse, if not all of them, were appointed by Christ to be
Ministers of the Gospel, as well as the Apostles, Luke 10. and for this purpose
had received the power of miracles, as well as they, ver. 17. they had received
the holy Ghost on the resurrection day, as well as they, Ioh. 20.22. compared
with Luke 24.33, 36. had conversed with Christ both before and after his
resurrection as well as they; had received the promise of the Father as well as
they: Nay, they were to preach to people of strange languages as well as they:
and then what possible reason can be given, that they should be denied this
qualification of the gift of tongues, fitting them for that purpose, any more
then the twelve?

That diverse of them were Ministers, if not all, there can be no scruple, what
else was become of the seventy Disciples? And that, if they must preach, they
must preach to some of strange tongues, there can be as little, since
experience shows, Jerusalem it self so full of this variety; and since a few
years will let all the preachers loose to preach to the Gentiles as they met
with occasion. Nay, we shall find this justified by the practice of certain
of them, as we go along.

Secondly, it is true indeed, which is objected by some, that these words, They
were all together, do come so near to the last verse of the former Chapter,
which mentions only the twelve, that it may seem to speak of them only
together at this time: yet does both that verse and this as fully refer to
the 120. in the 15 verse.

For, 1. The Evangelist does lay that number from the very first, as the
subject of his History, though his aim be more especially at the twelve
Apostles: as in his history of the twelve Apostles, his History sixeth chiefly
on Peter and John.

2. What should keep and separate the 108 from the company of the Apostles at
this time above all others? The Text tells us they were (...), and (...),
abiding and continuing together, in one place, and in one society, Chap. 1.13,
14. and so the progress of the story gives us assurance they were till
persecution parted them, Chapt. 8. and it is very strange, that on this day,
above all days, the high day of Pentecost, the holy day of the christian
Sabbath, the likeliest day of expecting the promise of the Father, that on this
day they should be parted from their society.

Thirdly, look but upon the qualifications of the seven Deacons, how they were
full of the holy Ghost, Acts 6.3. how Stephen was full of power, and miracles,
and wisdom, and an irresistible spirit, verse 8.10. and how Philip was of the
like qualifications, Acts 8.6. and when, and where, and how can it be supposed
that these men came by these gifts, if not upon Pentecost day, and jointly with
the twelve Apostles? If it shall be answered, that it may be they received
them from Christ, when he sent them to preach before his passion, as Luke
10.17. then let it be showed how Barnabas came by his variety of languages, to
be able to preach intelligibly wheresoever he came, if not on this day?

It being therefore not to be denied, that there were diverse others besides
the twelve, if not the whole hundred and twenty (which I rather think) that
received the holy Ghost in the gift of tongues at this time, and that they were
Ministers as well as the Apostles: it argues, first, that there were diverse
Congregations in Jerusalem from hence forward, or else how should so many
Ministers there have employment in their calling? And secondly, that those that
went up and down preaching upon the dispersion by persecution, Acts 8.4. and
11.19. were not ordinary members of the Church, or as we have used to call
them, mere laymen, but these men of the Ministerial function, and of Christ's
own designation for that calling.

Sect. 4. The reason of the use of the word (...), so often in this Story.
The intent of this word is the rather to be looked after, by how much the
less it is used in all the New Testament beside, and by how the more
frequently in this Story. It is used in reference to the twelve Apostles alone,
Chap. 1.15. it is used here in reference to the whole hundred and twenty; and
to the whole number of believers, Chap. 2.46.

Now the reason why the Evangelist does so often harp upon this string and
circumstance of (...), or of their conversing together with one accord, may be
either in respect of the twelve, and one hundred and twenty, or in respect of
all the believers.

First, the Apostles had been exceedingly subject in the lifetime of Christ, to
quarelsomnesse and contention about priority, and who should be the chiefest,
as Mar. 9.34. Mark. 20.24. Yea, even at the very Table of the Lords last
Passover and Supper, Luke 22.24. And therefore it has its singular weight and
significancy, and shows a peculiar fruit of Christ's breathing the holy Ghost
upon them, Ioh. 20.22. when it is related that they now so sweetly and
unanimously converse together without emulation, discord, or comparisons.

Secondly, the 108 Disciples were in a subordinate or lower fourm, in regard of
some particulars, to the twelve Apostles; and yet was there no heart-burning,
scorning, or envying, no disdaining, defying, or controlling of any one toward
another; but all their demeanor carried in the unity of the Spirit, and the
bond of peace.

Thirdly, if those two places in Chap. 2.46. and 5.12. be to be applied to
the whole multitude of believers (of the latter there may be some scruple) the
word (...) there does singularly set out the sweet union that the Gospel had
made among them, though they were of several Countries, several conditions,
and several Sects; yet in (...), in singleness of heart, as they did
convenire in the tertio of the Gospel, so did they convenire affectionately
inter se. And this began to be the accomplishment of those prophecies that had
foretold the peacemaking of the Gospel, as Esa. 11.6. and 60.18. and 65.25. and
66.42. Zeph. 3.9. etc. and it was an eminent fruit of Christ's doctrine, Ioh.
15.12. of his prayer, Ioh. 12.17. and of his legacy, Ioh. 14.27.

Ver. 2. Cloven tongues like as of fire. Ver. 3. They began to speak with
other tongues.
Sect. Of the gift of tongues.
The confusion of tongues was the casting off of the Heathen, Genesis 11. For when
they had lost that language in which alone God was spoken of and preached, they
lost the knowledge of God and Religion utterly, and fell to worship the
Creature in stead of the Creator, Romans 1.

Two thousand two hundred and three years had now passed, since that sad and
fatal curse upon the world, the confusion of languages; and millions of souls
had it plunged in Error, Idolatry, and Confusion: And now the Lord in the
fullness of time is providing, by the gifts of tongues at Sion, to repai^e the
knowledge of himself among those Nations that had lost that Jewel, by the
confusion of tongues at Babel.

The manner of exhibiting this gift, was in tongues of fire, that the giving of
the holy Ghost at the initiating of the Christian Church, might answer and
parallel the giving of the Law at the initiating of the Jewish; and so it did
both in time and manner, that being given at Pentecost, and in appearing of
fire; and so likewise this, as was said before.

Verse 5. And there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, etc.
It was indeed the Feast of Pentecost at this time at Jerusalem, but it was not
the feast of Pentecost that drew those Jews from all Nations thither.

First, it was not required by the Law, that these Jews that dwelt dispersed
in other Nations should appear at Jerusalem at these Feasts.

Secondly, it was not possible they should so do, for then must they have done
nothing else but go up thither, and get home again.

Thirdly, these Jews are said to dwell at Jerusalem, and they had taken up
their residence and habitation there: but those that came up to the
Feastivalls, stayed there but a few days, and so departed to their own homes.

The occasion therefore of these men's flocking so unanimously from all the
Nations of the world, was not the Feast of Pentecost, but the general
knowledge and expectation of the whole Nation of the Jews, that this was the
time of Messiah his appearing and coming among them.

This they had learned so fully from the Scriptures of the old Testament,
especially from Dan. 9. that both the Gospel, and their own writers witness,
that this was the expectation of the whole Nation, that the Messiah was now
ready to appear.

In the Scripture, these passages assert this matter, Luke 2.26 38. and 3.15.
and 19 11. and Ioh. 1.20, 21.

In the Hebrews own writings we may find diverse that speak to the same matter,
as that The Son of David shall come about the time when the Romans have
reigned over Israel nine months, from Mic. 5.3. that his appearing shall be
under the second Temple, that it shall be not very long before Jerusalem
should be destroyed; and many such passages; fixing the time of the Messiah
his coming, to the very time that Jesus of Nazaret did appear, and approve
himself to be the Christ, as may be seen in Sanedrin, cap. Heleh. Galat.
lib. 4. Ieronym. a Sancta Fide, Mornaeus de Veritat. Christ, rel. And this so
clearly and undeniably, that when the wretched and blasphemous Jews cannot
tell what to say to their own Doctors, that assert the time so punctually
agreeable to the time of Christ's appearing, they have found out this damnable
and cursed way to suppress that truth, as to curse all those that shall be
industrious to compute these times; for they have this common execration, (...)
Let their spirit burst, or expire, that compute the times.

And to these assertions of the Jews own Authors concerning this opinion of
their Nation; we may add also the testimony of Suetonius, affirming the very
same thing, Percrebuerat Orient toto, says he, vetus and constans opinio,
esse in fatis ut eo tempore Judea profecti rerum potirentur: In Vespas. And so
likewise Tacitus, Pluribus persuasio iner^t, antiquis sacerdotum literis
contineri, eo ipso tempore fore, ut valesceret Oriens, profectique Judea rerum
potirentur, Histor. lib. 5. That is, An old and constant opinion had grown
through the whole East, that it was foretold, that at that time some coming
out of Judea should obtain the rule of things: And many were persuaded, that it
was contained in the old records of the Priests, that at that very time the
East should prevail, and some coming out of Judea should obtain the rule:
which, though the blind Authors apply to Vespasian and Titus their obtaining of
the Empire, yet there can be no Christian eye but will observe, that this
opinion that was so prevalent, regarded matters of an higher nature, namely,
the coming of Christ, and the conquest of the world by the Gospel, which came
forth from Judea, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And to these might be added that Eclogue of Virgill, which is titled Pollio,
in which he does clearly speak of a new world then beginning, of a child to
come from Heaven, of a wondrous repair of the world in point of happiness,
and the like; that it cannot be doubted but this same opinion was got into the
West also, as well as in the East, very many of the Jews being there also, and
raising this expectation, as well as in the other place.

So that this expectation and thought being so general among all the Nations
of the Jews, yea, among other Nations also; that this was the time that the
kingdom of God in the coming of Christ should appear; this was it that
brought such multitudes to Jerusalem about this time out of all Nations under
heaven, to see the accomplishing of those things that they so earnestly and
eargerly longed and looked after: and this made them to take up their dwellings
and residence in Jerusalem, and to resolve to settle there; for that though
they were acquainted with the time of Christ's coming, yet were they not
acquainted with the manner of his Kingdom, but expected that it should be
earthly and pompous, and his Royal seat in Jerusalem, as the Disciples
themselves opinionated; yea, even after long converse with Christ himself, Mat.
20.20. Acts 1 6. And therefore these men make sure to get into Canaan out of
other Countries, and to get houses in Jerusalem, that they might share in this
pomp and prosperity which they expected.

It was not therefore Pentecost that brought them thither, nor were they
flitting Guests there, to be gone home as soon as Pentecost was over, but they
were (...) dwellers and resident there, and when they were converted to the
Christian Faith by thousands, they had their Congregations.

Verse. 9. Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, etc.
The Text speaks of Jews of all Nations under Heaven now dwelling at
Ieru^alem, and yet it reckons but fifteen here, which were not all the
Nations in the World; no, nor all that were in the Roman Empire, by very many*
but to omit the Hyperboles that the Scripture uses very commonly, as Cities
walled up to Heaven, shooti^g at an hair, and not miss, etc. The languages
here spoken of, took up all the Nations where it is imaginable any Jews were
scattered at this time through the world. [If so be they were not also all the
languages that were spoken at Babel:] as to take example of one or two; the
Parthian, Median, Persian, and Mesopotamian, were the tongues that served all
the Eastern dispersion; and all the Jews that had bin Captivated by the two
first Monarchies, Babylonian and Persian, wheresoever they were, in East or
North, spoke some of these languages, throughout the vast space of that their
scattering. For to instance in the Mesopotamian only; how many large and
mighty Countries spoke that one tongue? Assyria, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Syria,
Caelosyria, to inquire no fu^ther; all these spoke that Chaldee language, so
certainly, that there needs not the least pains to prove it. And Judea was
fallen into the same tongue now also; but with so much difference from the
Mesopotamian, Syriack, or Chaldee, that here it is nominated as a language
distinct: And this shows the reason of the Phrase, (...): that he might
distinguish the Syriack of Judea and of Cha^dea asunder: that those that dwelt
in Mesopotamia heard their Syriack, and those that dwelt in Judea heard theirs.
Or if we should instance in the Cretan tongue, that is here intended: the
Island of Crete was but of a small compass, but the language of Crete reached
all over Greece, not to search how far it reached further. And the like might
be observed of other of the tongues that are here mentioned.

So that it is hard to find, if not impossible, any Jews at this time under
heaven, where one or other of these languages here mentioned were not spoken
vulgarly in that Country where they were; and so may we very properly
understand that phrase, there were Jews of all Nations under heaven, now
gathe^ed to Jerusalem.

Now as it was impossible for these to understand one another in the languages
of the Countries where they were born; for it was impossible an Arabian should
understand a Cr^tan, or a Cretan an Arabian, a Parthian a Roman, or a Roman a
Parthian; and so in the most of the rest; so was it impossible they should all
of them understand any one tongue, either Hebrew or Syriack, which are the
likelyest to suppose, or whatsoever else may be supposed.

For first, how easy is it to show how the Hebrew tongue was utterly lost
among them from common use; and how the Syriack which was in common use in
Judea, yet was unknown to them in other Countries, as appears by the
necessity of the Chaldee Turgum, by the most familiar use of the Septuagint, by
the writings of Philo and Josephus, and others of the Jews themselves.

Secondly, if they could have understood any one language, which was as the
common language of the Nation; then was the gift of tongues most utterly
needless: for why should the Apostles speak diverse languages to them that
could have all of them understood one tongue? Tongues indeed were given for a
sign, 1 Cor. 14.22. but this was not the proper end for which they were given,
but for instruction and edification; and as was said before, for acquainting
those Nations with the knowledge of God, which had lost it and him, by the
loss of the Hebrew tongue. And if the Jews had understood all of them one
tongue, this gift had been needless to have been given till the Apostles were
to go to preach to the Heathens.

This then being past all denial, that these Jews of several Nations, could
neither understand one another in the tongue of the Country where they were
borne, nor understand any one language as common to them all; it is past all
denial also, that when they were converted to Christianity, they were severed
into diverse Congregations; for else it was impossible for them to join
together in public worship.

Verse. 13. Others mocking said, these men are full of new wine.
Malice is often sensel^sse and reasonlesse in her accusations, especially,
when it is bent against Religion: Yet can I not hold these men so stupid and
senseless, or so shameless and impudent, as either to think that drunkenness
could make men speak languages which they never understood before: or if they
thought not so, yet to go about to persuade the people so. But their words
proceed from this occasion as I should suppose; these Folks that mocked were
Natives of Jerusalem or Judea, and not understanding the languages of the
Nations there present, they could not tell that the Disciples spoke those
strange languages when they did speak them; but conceived they had babbled
some foolish gibberish, and canting they themselves could make nothing of, as
drunken men are used to do. And this caused their so wretched a construction
of so divine a gift. For the Jews of the strange Nations and languages, that
perceived and understood that the Disciples did speak in their languages; were
amazed, and said one to another, What means this? Ver 12. But these other
Jews, Natives of Jerusalem and Judea, that understood only their own Syriack,
and did not understand that they spoke strange languages indeed, these mocked
and said, These men are full of new, or sweet wine: grounding their accusation
the rather, because that Pentecost was a feasting and rejoicing time, Deuteronomy.
16.11.

And according to this conception it is observable; that Peter begins his
speech, Ye men of Judea.

Ver. 14. But Peter standing up with the eleven said, etc.
Reason it self, if the Text did not, would readily resolve, that it was not
Peter alone that converted the 3000 that are mentioned after; but that the rest
of the Apostles were sharers with him in that work: For if Peter must be held
the only Orator at this time, then must it needs be granted, that either the
3000 which were converted were al of one language; or that the one language
that he spoke, seemed to the hearers to be diverse tongues; or that he
rehearsed the same speech over and over again in diverse languages, any of
which to grant, is senseless and ridiculous; and yet unless we will run
upon some of these absurdities, we may not deny, that the rest of the twelve
preached now as well as Peter.

But the Text, besides this, gives us these arguments to conclude the matter to
be undoubted:

First, it says, Peter stood forth with the eleven, verse. 14. Now, why should
the eleven be mentioned standing forth, as well as Peter, if they spoke not as
well as he? They might as well have sitten still, and Peter's excuse of them
would as well have served the turn. It was not Peter alone that stood forth to
excuse the eleven, but Peter and the eleven that stood forth to excuse the rest
of the hundred and twenty.

Secondly, it is said, They were pricked in their hearts, and said to Peter,
and to the rest of the Apostles, What shall we do? Verse. 37. Why should they
question and ask counsel of the rest of the Apostles as well as Peter, if
they had not preached as well as he?

Thirdly, and it is a confirmation that so they did, in that it is said, Ver.
42. They continued in the Doctrine of the Apostles; of the rest, as well as
Peter.

Fourthly, i^ that were the occasion that we mentioned, why they suspected the
Apostles and the rest drunk; then will it follow, that Peter preached and
spoke in the Syriack tongue, chiefly to those Jews of Judea and Jerusalem that
would not believe, because they could not understand that the Disciples spoke
strange languages, but thought they canted some drunken gibberish: And to give
some probability of this, not only his preface, Ye men of Judea; but also his
^aying flatly the murder of Christ to their charge, Verse 22, 23. do help to
confirm in; and the conclusion of his Sermon, and of the story in the
Evangelist does set it home, that if Peter preached not only to these Natives
of Judea, yet that he only preached not at this time, but that the others did
the like with him, in that it is said, They that gladly received his words were
baptiz^d; and then as speaking of another story, he says, there were added
the same day about 3000 souls.

Now the reason why Peter's Sermon is only recorded, and the story more
singularly fixed on him, we observed before.

Sect. Brief observations upon some passages in Peter's Sermon.
Verse. 15. [ It is but the third hour of the day] And on these solemn
Feastivall days, they used not to eat or drink any thing till high noone; as
Baronius would observe out of Josephus and Acts 10.

Verse 17. [ In the last dayes] The days of the Gospel: because there is no
way of salvation to be expected beyond the Gospel: whereas there was the
Gospel beyond the law; and the law beyond the light of the ages before it.

[ Upon all flesh] Upon the Heathens and Gentiles as well as upon the Jews*
Act. 10.45. contrary to the axiom of the Jewish Schools (...): The divine
Majesty dwells not on any out of the Land of Israel.

Verse. 20. [ Before the great and notable day of the Lord come.] The day of
Ierusalems destruction, which was forty years after this, as was observed
before: so that all these gifts, and all the effusion of the Spirit that were
to be henceforward, were to be within the time, betwixt this Pentecost and
Jerusalem destroyed. And they that from hence would presage prophetic and
miraculous gifts, and visions, and revelations to be toward the end of the
world, might do better to weigh, what the expression, The great and terrible
day of the Lord, means here and elsewhere in the Prophets.

The blood of the Son of God, the fire of the holy Ghosts appearance, the
vapor of the smoke in which Christ ascended, the Sun darkened, and the Moon
made blood at his passion, were all accomplished upon this point of time; and
it were very improper to look for the accomplishment of the rest of the
prophecy I know not how many hundreds or thousands of years after.

Verse. 24. [ Having loosed the pains of death;] or rather, Having dissolved
the pains of death; meaning in reference to the people of God; namely, that
God raised up Christ, and by his resurrection dissolved and destroyed the pangs
and power of death upon his own people.

Verse. 27. [ Thou will not leave my soul.] (...), i. e. Thou will not give my
soul up. And why should not the very same words, My God, my God, (...), be
translated to the same purpose, Why have thou left me, and given me up to such
hands, and shame and tortures; rather then to intricate the sense, with a
surmise of Christ's spiritual desertion?

[ In Hell,] Gr. Hades: the state of souls departed: but their condition
differenced, according to the difference of their qualities; (...). Piphilus
apud. Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.

Verse. 38. [ Be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.] Not that their
Baptism was not administered in the name of the Father and the holy Ghost also;
but that he would specially work them up to the acknowledgement of Christ.
For the Father and the holy Ghost they acknowledged without any scrupling, but
to own Christ for God, whom they had crucified, and to be initiated into
Jesus of Nazaret; was the great work that the Apostles went about to work upon
them: and therefore especially endeavor to enter them into Jesus, and to have
them baptized in his Name.

[ Be baptized and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.] Not that
every one that was baptized, was presently endued with these extraordinary
gifts of tongues and prophecy, for they were bestowed hence-forwa^d by
imposition of the Apostles hands; save only when they first fell from heaven
upon the company of Cornelius, to complete that prophecy which now had its
beginning, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; but Peter inviteth them
into Baptism, and then should they be capable of those gifts; and no doubt
they were bestowed upon some of them by the Apostles hands.

Ver. 42. And in breaking of Bread.
The Syriack expressly understands this of partaking of the Lords Supper, for
he uses the very Greek word Eucharistia here. And so diverse take that to be
the meaning of this phrase, both here, and in some places else in the New
Testament: Yea, even they that suppose that it means partaking of their
common meals and food; yet do they think that they had the Sacrament added to
it, as our Savior added it to the Passover. And indeed the manner of speech
does signify both the one and the other, both ordinary meals, and the
receiving of the Sacrament, as in Luke 24.35. He was known of them (...)
imports the time here, and so the Syriack reads it, (...) As he was breaking
bread.
in breaking of bread; here it means a common Supper in the Inn at Emmaus: 1
Cor. 10.16. The bread which we break is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? Here it betokens the receiving of the Sacrament. But it may be
conceived to intend the Sacrament the rather, and chiefly, if not only.

First, because the phrase of breaking of bread for common eating, is very rare
both in the Old Testament and Jewish Authors; but eating of bread is the
expression that speaks that.

And 2ly, because breaking of the bread in the Sacrament, is a concomitant that
cannot be parted from it, for (...), he blessed and brake, and said, this is
my body which is broken, 1 Cor. 11.24.

Ver. 44. And all that believed were together.
This Greek word (...) is of frequent and of various use in the Septuagint. It
sometimes betokens the meeting of persons in the same company, as Josh. 11.5.
Judge. 6.33. and 19.6, etc. so of Beasts, Deuteronomy. 22.10. Sometimes their
concurring in the same action, though not in the same company or place, as
Psalm. 2.2. and 34.3. and 49.2. and 74.6. and 83.3. etc. Sometimes their
concurring in the same condition, as Psalm. 46.10. and 62.9. Esa. 66.17. Ier.
6.12. And sometimes their knitting together though in several companies, as
Ioabs and Abners men, though they sat at distance, and the poole of Gibeon
between them, yet are they said (...), 2 Samuel 2.13. And in this sense is the
word to be understood in this story: For it is past all imagination or
conceiving, that all those thousands of believers that were now in Jerusalem,
should keep all of one company and knot, and not part asunder, for what house
would hold them? But they kept in several Companies or Congregations,
according as their languages, nations, or other references did knit them
together. And this joining together, because it was apart from those that
believed not, and because it was in the same profession and practice of the
duties of Religion; therefore it is said to be (...), though it were in
several companies and Congregations. And to such a sense does Rabbi Solomon
understand the (...) in Deuteronomy. 25.5. as indeed it must of necessity be
understood, not of brethren dwelling in the very same place, but of brethren
(...) that are united in inheritance; as these believers were now in the
Gospel. And so is the building of the Jews to be understood, Ezra 4.3. (...),
in separation from the Samaritans, and in joining in the action, though they
were of several companies in the building, and those companies far distant one
from another, Neh. 3. per totum. and 4.19.

Verse 46. Continuing daily with one accord in the Temple.
This is not to express, that the Temple was their meeting place, either for
hearing of their Sermons, or administering the Sacraments, for neither of these
would have been endured there, as appears, Chapt. 4.1. but this is to show
that they had not yet shaken off all the Worship of the Temple, nor the
observance of Moses, but resorted thither to the duties of Religion, at the
hours of prayer, as they had done before. For many years after this, the
believing Jews were still tenacious of the Law, and reverentiall of the
Temple, Act. 21.20. which they might lawfully be while the Temple stood, if
their observance of Moses, did not destroy in them the doctrine and application
of their justification by faith in Christ. And hence was it that the Apostles
did so far comply with them both in that place in Acts 21. and also in Acts
15. because Moses was to stand till the Temple fell, those Rites not nullifying
the death of Christ, if rightly used.

ACTS. CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. Peter and John went up together into the Temple.
IT may be this was likewise on Pentecost day; and (...) does signify
identity of time: as it does, 2 Samuel 21.9. and in the Chaldee of Jonathan on
Deuteronomy. 25.5. And the ninth hour mentioned here in reference to the third hour
in preceding story, Chap. 2.15. at nine a clock in the morning was that
conversion of 3000, and at three a clock in the afternoon this of 5000.
Howsoever, whether it were on that day, or no; certainly it was on some solemn
day, either a Sabbath or Festival, as appears by the number that were then
present in the Temple, when so many of them were converted. For ordinarily on
the common days of the week, the company that was in the Temple was very few,
besides the Priests and the Stationary men ((...) as they are called by the
Rabbis) which were a number of men chosen to be constantly there, to
represent the whole Congregation, in laying their hands on the heads of the
Sacrifices in their behalf. This concourse of people on such a solemn day,
was a fit subject and opportunity for these Apostles to work upon; and that in
all probability was the maine induction that brought them into the Temple at
this time. That they should go thither to institute the Canonical hours by
their own example, as Baronius dreameth, is a fancy that far better deserves
laughter, then any answer.

Verse. 2. The gate of the Temple which was called Beautiful.
This was the Gate that entered into the second Court, or out of the Court of
the Gentiles, into the Court of the Jews: And there this Creeple lay, begging
of the Jews that came into the Temple, but disdaining, as it seems, to beg of
the Gentiles. This seems to be that gate that Josephus calls the
Corinthiack Gate, and which he describes to be of so much gorgiousnesse and
bravery, de Bello Iud. lib. 5.14. and which we shall have occasion to describe
in another work, fully and on set purpose.

Verse. 11. The porch called Solomon's.
Not that the very porch built by Solomon was now standing, for that was burnt
and destroyed by the Babylonians, as well as the rest of the Temple, but
because this was built on the very same pile that his was built upon. For the
Temple standing upon an high and steep hill, with a deep and sharp precipice
about it; Solomon to make room for the floor of the mount, which was too
strait, filled up the ditch on the East side with huge stones strongly joynted
together, and he built his porch upon that pile; and because this of Herod's was
erected also upon that very same foundation, it therefore is called Solomon's
porch. It was the first gate or entrance into the mountains of the House; and
not only the very building of the porch, but the Court within bare the same
name, Josephus ubi supra.

Verse. 12. And when Peter saw it, he answered, etc.
Here Peter's Sermon is registered again, but Chapt. 4.1. it is said, As they
spoke, which resolves that John preached as well as he.

Verse. 16. Through faith in his name, etc.
Faith is twice named in this verse, because of the Apostles faith in doing,
and the Creeples faith in receiving the miracle; the former was (...): the
latter (...), or (...).

Verse. 17. Through ignorance ye did it.
So Christ said himself, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. This their ignorance proceeded mainly from mistaking the place
of Christ's birth, for they supposed it had been Nazaret; and from mistaking the
kingdom of the Messiah, for they expected it would have been pompous, and full
of worldly glory; the title on the Cross, Jesus of Nazaret King of the Jews,
spoke out both the ignorances that carried them on to so wretched an act.

Ver. 19. When the times of refreshing shall come.
(...): The Syriack reads it, That your sins may be blotted out, and the
times of refreshing may come. and so the Arabic and Irenaeus, or at least his
interpreter cited by Beza; the Vulgar, ut cum venerint, but concludes not the
clause to make it sense. Beza, postquam venerint, but what sense he would make
of it, I do not well understand. He pleads much to prove that (...) does
signify postquam, and it is not denied him, but he cannot deny withal that
it signifies ut likewise: and so may it best, and most properly be
understood, That your sins may be blotted out, so that the times of
refreshing may come. The Apostle Peter takes his speech from Esa. 28.12. where
the Prophet at once prophecyeth of the gift of tongues, verse. 11. of the
preaching of the Gospel, verse. 12. and the infidelity and obduration of the
Jews, verse. 13. and speaks of these very times and occasions that are now in
hand: And accordingly is the Apostle to be understood that speaks from him,
concerning the present refreshing by the Gospel, and Gods present sending
Christ among them in the power and Ministry of that, and not of a refreshing
at the calling of the Jews which is yet to come; and Gods sending Christ
personally to come and reign among them, as some have dreamed, and it is but a
dream: For let but this Text be seriously weighed in that sense that opinion
would make of it; Rep^nt therefore and b^e converted, that your sins may be
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come: As meaning this, Repent
you now, that your sins may be blotted out, 2000, or I know not how many
hundred years hence, when the calling of the Jews shall come: If this be not
the sense that they make of this Text, that produce it to assert Christ's
personal ^eigne on earth for a thousand years; I know not why they should
then produce it; and if this be the sense, I must confess I see no sense in
it. The words are facil and clear, and have no intricacy at all in them, if
the Scripture may be suffered to go upon its own wheels; and they may be
taken up in this plain and undeniable Paraphrase; Repent ye therefore and be
converted, that your sins may be blotted out; so that the times of
refreshing by the Gospel may come upon you from the presence of the Lord; and
he may send Jesus Christ in the preaching of the Gospel to you, to bless you
in turning away every one of you from his iniquities.

Verse. 20. And he send Jesus Christ.
As Verse. 26. God having raised his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you: Now
this cannot possibly be understood of Christ's personally and visibly coming
among them; for who of this audience ever saw him after his resurrection? But
of his coming among them now in this means and offer of salvation: and in the
same sense is this clause in hand to be understood: and so the 22 verse
interprets it of the sending of Christ as the great Prophet, to whom
whosoever will not hearken must be cut off: Not at the end of the world when he
shall come as a Judge; but in the Gospel which is his voice, and which to
refuse to hearken to, is condemnation. Peter's exhortation therefore is to
repentance, that their sins might be blotted out, so that refreshing times
might come upon them, and Christ in the Gospel might be sent among them,
according as Moses had foretold, that he should be the great instructor of the
people.

Sect. Which before was preached unto you.
The very sense of the place confirms this reading: for though Beza says,
that all the old Greek Copies that ever he saw, as also the Syrian, Arabic,
and Tertullian read it (...), foreordained; yet the very scope and intention
of Peter's speech in this place does clearly show that it is to be read,
(...), which before was preached to you, namely by Moses, or the law, verse. 22.
and by all the Prophets, ver. 24.

Ver. 21. Until the restitution of all things.
Or the accomplishment of all things, and to that sense the Syriack translates
it, until the fullness of the time of all things, etc. And the Arabic not
much different, until the time in which all things shall be perfected, or
finished, etc. The Greek word (...) indeed signifies a restitution to a
former estate, a repairing, or an amending, as might be frequently showed in
Greek Writers, but in Scripture does not so properly signify this, as what the
Rabbis would express by (...), or (...), a fulfilling or accomplishing: and
the Preposition (...) does not so much stand in the force of Re, or again, but
it stands in opposition to (...) privative in (...), which signifies unsettled
or unconfirmed, and so (...) is opposed to (...), Polyb. Hist. lib. 4.
Settlement of a City to tumult. And to take up these two places where this word
is used in the new Testament, Matthew. 17.11. and here. Elias indeed shall first
come, (...): and shall restore all things: what? to their former estate? Nay,
that the Baptist did not, for he brought them into a clean different estate
to their former: or he shall amend all things? That is true indeed, so the
Baptist did, but how will this place in hand bare that sense, which speaks
not of the mending of all things, but of their ending? and how improper would
either of these senses run in this verse, Till the restoring of all things to
their former estate, which God has spoken by the mouth of his Prophets? or
till the amending of all things which God has spoken by his Prophets: But
clear and facil is that sense that is given, Till the accomplishment of all
things that God has spoken by the mouth of his Prophets? The things which God
had spoken by the mouth of his Prophets from the beginning of the world were,
Christ's victory over Satan in the Salvation of all his people; his conquest of
the last enemy, death; the calling of the Jews, the fullness of the Gentiles,
etc. and how can these things be said to be restored, or amended? they may
most fitly be said to be accomplished, perfected, or performed: and so must
the same words be rendered of the Baptist, Elias truly comes and
accomplisheth all things, that are written of him; and so must the son of man
do all things that are written of him, as Mark follows the sense, Mar. 9.12.

Ver. 24. All the Prophets from Samuel.
He is reckoned the first of the Prophets after Moses.

First, because Prophecy from the death of Moses to the rising of Samuel was
very rare, 1 Samuel 3.1, 2.

Secondly, because he was the first Prophet after Moses that wrote his
Prophecy. From the beginning of Samuels rule, to the beginning of the captivity
in Babel, was 490 years, and from the end of that captivity to the death of
Christ, 490 years more, and the 70 years captivity, the midst of years
between, as I have showed elsewhere: But I must advertise the Reader here,
that the beginning of Samuels Propheticknesse in this reckoning, is not from
the death of Eli, but from one and twenty years after. And here let me take up
a verse of as much difficulty, and of as little observing of it, as almost any
in the Old Testament: as that is 1 Samuel 7.2. And it came to pass while the
Arc abode at Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years:
and all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord. Now the Arc was
undeniably above forty years in Kiriath-jearim; namely, all the time from
Elies death, till David fetched it to Jerusalem, which was seven and forty
years, and somewhat above, only that first excepted, in which it was seven
months in the Land of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 6.1. and a little time in
Bethshemesh; what then should be the reason that it is said to be in
Kiriath-jearim only twenty years? Why, the meaning is not that that was all
the time that it was there, but that it was there so long a time, before the
people ever hearkened after it. Their idolatry and corruption of Religion had
so transported them, that they thought not of, nor took regard to the Ark of God for twenty years together: Then all the house of Israel lamented after the
Lord: for so must it be rendered; and not, And all the house of Israel, etc.

And so have we one and twenty years taken up from the Death of Eli till this
time of Isreal's repentance, which yet are counted to Samuels forty, but are not
reckoned in the account of Habakkuk, of the extent of the race of the Prophets.

Upon this place therefore we may take up these pertinent observations.

First, that God did now on a sudden pour a spirit of Reformation generally
upon all the people of Israel after a long time of profaneness and Idolatry.
They had been exceedingly profane in the time of Elies sons: And therefore the
Lord in justice forsook his Tabernacle in Shiloh, the Tent which he had
pitched besides Adam, when Israel passed through Jordan, Josh. 3.16. Psalm.
78.60. and he gave the Arc into the Enemies hand; yet was not Israel humbled
for it. The Arc was restored to them, and was among them twenty years
together, and they continued in their Idolatry still, and never sought after
it, nor took it to heart. At last, upon a sudden, and with a general
conversion, Israel begins to turn to the Lord, and lament after him, and
forsake their Idols.

Secondly, here was a strange and wondrous spirit of conversion poured upon the
people at the beginning of the race of the Prophets, as there was at the end of
it, in these Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles.

Thirdly, as the practice here in the Acts, was to repent and to be baptized;
so was it then with Israel; as that expression may most properly be
interpreted, ver. 6. They drew water and poured it out before the Lord, as
washing or baptizing themselves from their Idolatry.

Ver. 25. Ye are the children of the Prophets.
That is, the Scholars or Disciples of them, as the phrase, The children of the
Prophets, is ordinarily used in the Old Testament, 2 King. 2. etc. and Amos
7.14. I was neither Prophet, nor Prophets son; that is, nor Prophets Scholar.
And Mat. 11.19. Wisdom is justified of her children; that is, of her Disciples.

ACTS. CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1. The Captain of the Temple.
THIS was the Captain of that Guard, or Garrison which was placed in the Tower
of Antonia, for the guard of the Temple. This Tower stood in the North-east
corner of the wall that parted the mountain of the House from the City. It was
built by Hyreanus the Asmonean, the high Priest, and there he himself dwelt,
and there he used to lay up the holy Garments of the Priesthood, whenever
he put them off, having done the service of the Temple, Joseph. Antiq. lib.
18. cap. 6. Herod repaired this Tower, and bestowed much cost upon it, and in
honor of Antony, named it Antonia; and fortified it, that it might be a guard
for the Temple; and as in former times, so still were the holy Robes laid up
there all his time, and all the time of Archelaus his Son: after the removal
of Archelaus, from his kingdom, and the confiscation of his estate, this Tower
came into the Romans hands, and was kept as a Guard or Garrison by them; and the
High Priests garments laid up there under their power, till Vitellius, as we
shall see hereafter, did restore them to the Jews own keeping. Antiq. lib. 15.
cap. 15. So that the Captain here meant, is the Captain that was over the
Company that kept this Castle: a Roman Commander, and he joining with the
Priests and Sadduces to hinder the Gospel, and imprison the Disciples; the Jews
and Romans do again conspire, as they had done against Christ, so now against
his Apostles, Psalm. 2.1, 2.

There was a chief Captain that was Governor of the whole Garrison at
Jerusalem, as Chap. 21.33. and 24.7. and his several Companies lay placed in
several Courts of Guard about the City; among the rest this was one, within
the virge of the Temple, the greatest badge and sign of all other of the Jews
present servitude and subjection, when their very Temple and service had a
heathen bridle put upon it. And thus did the abomination of desolation begin to
creep in, and to stand in the place where it ought not.

Verse. 2. Being grieved that they taught the people.
This grievance of the Priests, Sadduces, and Captain of the Temple, proceeded
from several principles and causes. The Captains distaste was for fear the
business should tend to innovation or tumult: the Sadduces, because they
preached the resurrection of the dead, which they denied, Chap. 23.8. the
Priests, because they being private men, went about to teach the people; and
chiefly, because they preached the resurrection through Jesus.

Through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
Though the whole Nation did so generally assert and hold the resurrection of
the dead (the Sadduces only excepted) that they made the denyers of this point,
one of the three Parties that should never have part in the world to come: as
they speak in the Talmud, in the Tractate of Sanhed. Per^h. Helek. These are
they that have no portion in the world to come, he that says, The
resurrection of the dead is not taught from the Law, and he that says, That
the Law is not from heaven, and Epicures: Yet was this no less then heresy in
their esteem; to teach that the resurrection of the dead was either (...),
proved and experienced in Jesus; or (...), by the power and efficacy of Jesus;
that either Jesus was risen, or that he should be the Author of the
resurrection.

Verse 4. And the number of the men was about five thousand.
The 5000 mentioned here, were the number of Converts, and not of Auditors; and
they were a single number by themselves, and not an addition to the 3000
mentioned before, to make them five thousand.

For, first, the holy Ghost intends in this book to show the power of the
Gospel, rather then the bare preaching of it, and how many it converted, rather
then how many heard it.

Secondly, the juncture of the verse is so close and facil that none can
understand it any otherwise then of the number of believers, unless it be for
very captiousnesse; for the Text says, that many of them that heard the word
believed. And how many was that many? Namely, 5000 men.

For, thirdly, how ridiculous were it to interpret that the holy Ghost should
tell us, that there was an audience in the Temple of 5000 men? Why, Josephus
says, that generally, every course of the Priests contained so many: And it
would be utterly strange, if the holy Ghost, which in all the Bible never
numbered an audience at the Temple, no, not when he was intentionally writing of
the service and assembly there, should do it now when he is purposely upon a
story of men converted to the Gospel.

Again, that this is an entire sum different from the 3000 in the second
Chapter, is plain by the very story in hand.

For, first, it is a discourse concerning a miracle done by Peter and John; and
all the Chapter to the three and twentyeth verse, keeps close to that
relation: and what reason possibly bly can be given, that this clause only
should start from it.

Secondly, it were an uncouth manner of reckoning, and such as the Scripture is
utterly unacquainted with, to number 5000, and to mean but 2000; and never to
give any notice that it so means.

Thirdly, The number of the men were 5000. Of what men? Of those which heard
the word. What word? The word preached by Peter and John, verse. 1. and not the
word preached on Pentecost day by all the Apostles. Thus is the Church become
8000 numerous by two Sermons; besides the multitudes that were believers
before, and those whose conversion is not summed.

Ver. 5. Their Elders, Rulers, and Scribes, etc.
In this Council and Consistory that was now gathered, the Evangelist
exhibiteth variety of members:

First, their Rulers; or the chief Priests, the heads of the twenty four
courses.

Secondly, Scribes: or other Doctors of the Tribe of Levi.

Thirdly Elders: or the Seniors and Senators of the other Tribes.

Fourthly, Annas, the Nasi; or President of the Sanhedrin.

Fifthly, Caiaphas the High Priest, the Abbeth diu, the father of the Court.

Sixthly, John, as it seems, the son of Annas: the Governor of Gophins and
Acrabatena in the time of Nero, Joseph. de bello, lib. 2. cap. 25.

Seventhly, Alexander, called also Lysimachus and Alabarcha, of whom we shall
have occasion to discourse afterward.

Eighthly, As many as were of the High Priests kindred, brethren or Cosens of
that family: so that by this concourse of all these at this time, diverse of
whose employment and residence was at distance, it may be the rather supposed
that this was at some solemn Festival that had brought them all to Jerusalem.

Verse. 7. And when they had set them in the midst.
The Sanhedrin sat in half the flower in a circle, Rambam. Sanhedrin, Pere.
1. Those who had any thing to do in the Court, stood or sat in the midst of
them, Luke 2.46.

Sect. By what name have ye done this.
So did they very foolishly conceit that the very naming some names might do
wonders, as Acts 19.13. and the Talmud in Shab. forgeth that Been Satds (they
have a blasphemous meaning in this expression) wrought miracles, by putting the
unutterable name within the skin of his foot, and there sewing it up.

Verse. 11. This is the stone which was set at naught.
In Psalm. 118.22. which is the place from which this speech is taken, is (...),
the stone refused, and so is it, Mat. 21.42. and that according to the Hebrew
Text: but here the Apostle heightens the expression, that he may set home
their abuse of Christ nearer to their hearts, and may show the humiliation of
Christ the more. The Syriack minds not this, but translates this place, and
Matthew. 21.42. by the same word refused.

The Chaldee interpretation of the Psalm from whence the phrase is taken, is
exceedingly conceited, it runs thus. The youth which the builders refused
among the sons of Jesse, obtained to be set for King and Governor. This was
from the Lord, said the builders, and it is wondrous before us, said the sons
of Jesse. This is the day which the Lord has made, said the builders. Let us
be glad and rejoice in it, said the sons of Jesse. Save us now, said the
builders. Prosper us now, said Jesse and his wife. Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord, said the builders. Let them bless you from the house
of the Lord, says David.

The Lord give us light, said ^he Tribes of the house of Judah.

The the youth for a Festival sacrifice with cords, until ye offer him up,
and pour his blood at the horns of the altar, said Samuel the Prophet, etc.

At which Psalm and place, how far the Chaldee in Bibliis Regiis, and the
Chaldee in Bibliis Buxtorsianis, and Venetis do differ, it is worth the
learneds observation.

Verse. 13. And ignorant men.
Gr. (...): a word exceedingly much taken into use by Jewish writers, and both
in them and in Greeks, it signifies, Private men, or men in no public
employment, and men of inferior rank, and men ignorant or unskilful. Examples
of all these significations might be alleged. Lucian, (...). The common
multitude, whom wise men call Idiotae. Galen. (...) unskilful in Physic.
Aben. Ezr. on Levit. 13. verse. 2. Aaron, that is, the Priest anointed in his
stead, or one of his sons, that is, (...)
(...) Sacerdotes Idiotae, the inferior Prie^ts. Rab. Sol. on Levit. 1.1. To
what purpose served the pausing^? To give Moses space to understand between
division and division, sense and sense (...) much more to a private man that
learneth from a private man.

In all these sense^ may it very well be applied here; and it is more then
probable, all these senses were in the thoughts of the Council concerning
Peter and John at this time; they saw they were unlearned, private, inferior,
ignorant men, and thereupon they could not but wonder at the miracle and cure
that they had wrought.

Verse. 23. They went to their own company.
That is, to the Society of the one hundred and twenty mentioned, Acts 1.15.

Verse. 25. Who by the mouth of thy Servant David, have said, etc.
The second Psalm which ownes not its Author in the Title, the holy Ghost
ascribes here to David: and seems by this very passage to give us close
intimation, that every Psalm that tells not in its title who was the author
and Penman of it, is to be ascribed to David as the Penman. The rule of the
Jews ( that every Psalm that bears not the author of it in the title, is to
be reputed of his making who was last named in a title before) is at a nonplus
at these two first Psalms, and helps us nothing at all to understand who made
them: and thereupon Aben Ezra conceives not that this second Psalm was made
by David, but by some of the Singers. But this passage of the Apostles in their
prayer, does not only own David for the Compiler of this Psalm, but also
teaches us to own him so of every Psalm, whose author is not mentioned in the
title of it; as might be further confirmed if it were ad hic and nunc, from
Psalm 96. and 105. and 107. and 132. compared with 1 Chronicles. 16.7. The ancient
Rabbis, and Doctors of the Jews, interpreted this Psalm concerning Christ,
even as the Apostles do here, as it is confessed by Solomon Iarchi at his
entrance into it, though himself, and some other latter Jews apply it to
David, and it may be in spite to Christ.

Verse 32, and 33.
Sect. Community of goods.
This community of goods, howsoever it sorted and suited with the present state
of the Church at Jerusalem at that time; yet can it not be taken up for an
example or president for the time to come.

For first, the thing was not done by command, but at the free disposal of
whosoever was minded so to do, Acts 5.4.

Secondly, the Lands that were sold, were many of them out of the Land of
Canaan; for the converts were Jews from all Nations, and one instance is given
in the Land of Barnabas in Cyprus; now when these men were resolved to cleave
to the Apostles, and not to return to their own Country; what good would their
Lands in those forain Countries do them?

Thirdly, if these Lands and Houses were in Judea, as it is undoubted many of
them were, it may be supposed that the faithful owners thereof took notice
of the threatened destruction of Jerusalem, spoken of by our Savior, and so
would part with their estates for the benefit of the Church, before they should
be surprised by the enemy.

And fourthly, thus did God provide against persecution to come; that neither
the poor of the Church should fall off through penury, nor the rich start back
through worldy mindedness; but by a competent distribution among them, the one
might have enough, and the other not too much.

And lastly, such was the state of the Church at this time, as never was the
like to be again. It was but newly borne, it was all in one City, the most of
the people far resident from their own houses, all in a possibility to be
scattered by persecution, they could not tell how soon: and therefore that
present administration of the Church in such a case, cannot be any copy for
times to come either to follow as a command, or to imitate as a perfection.

This very year was a Jubilee among the Jews in the very proper sense, it
being the eight and twentyeth that the Land had had since their settling in it:
and these people now converted to the Gospel, are so far from returning to
their possessions, if they had sold or morgaged them, as the Jubilee
privileged them, that they part with their possessions that they had in their
hands; having by this time learned that the earthly Canaan and inheritance, was
not that possession that was to be looked after, and that the Kingdom of the
Messiah should not be earthly.

Verse. 36. Barnabas a Levite, and of the Country of Cyprus, etc.
As Saul a Benjamite of the Country of Tarsus, yet educated and lived at
Jerusalem: so did Barnabas in Canaan, though a Cypriot borne. He had land to
sell though he were a Levite, for the Levites might purchase Lands of their
own, even in the Land of Canaan: much more might they in forain Countries.
Samuel a Levite, was borne upon his Fathers own Land which had been purchased
by his great Grandfather Zuph, 1 Samuel 1.1. and 9.5. Now Barnabas had one motive
more to sell his Land, then other of the common believers had; namely, those
words of our Savior to those Disciples that were to be Preachers, Provide
neither silver nor gold, etc. Matthew. 10.9, 10. and this was the ground of
Peter's answer, Silver and gold have I none, Chap. 3 6.

ACTS. CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. But a certain man named Ananias.
AMong the offerings of others that sold their Lands, there creeps in the
hypocrisy of Ananias and Saphira, a couple that at once would have served God
and Mammon; Vainglory, or Policy, or both, did here strive with covetousness
and distrust, or rather to speak truly indeed, did conspire. They had the
formality to sell their Lands as others did, but they had not the sincerity to
part with the money as others had. Their double dealing both in word and deed,
is fearfully punished with sudden death at this beginning of the Christian
Church (as Nadab Abilou, and the Sabbath-breaker were at the beginning of the
Jewish) that future times might learn from this to beware dissembling with
God, and not to dishonor and shame the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Verse. 3. To lie to the holy Ghost, or rather, to belie the holy Ghost.
It was not the sin only, barely, and simply considered, that provoked and
procured so fearful a Judgment upon him, but the sin, as it was
circumstantiated and aggravated by some respects. For it seems that Ananias
was not a common or ordinary believer, but one of the Ministerial rank, and
one that had received the gift of the holy Ghost, as well as the rest of the
120. And considerable to this purpose are these two things.

First, that as soon as the Evangelist has mentioned the pious and upright
dealing of Barnabas (which was a Preacher) in the sale of his Lands, he
comes to the story of Ananias, as a man of the same function, and relates
his wretchedness in the

Secondly, that though it be said in verse. 4. (...), that he lied to God, yet
is he said in this third verse (...), To belie the holy Ghost. By which Phrase
it seems that he had received the holy Ghost among the rest that did receive
it; and yet for all that excellent gift in himself, and the excellent gift
that he knew in the Apostles; he durst by this base dissembling belie and
shame the gifts that were in himself, and tempt the power of the holy Ghost
that was in Peter.

And thus was Ananias much like Judas, exceedingly qualified and eminently
gifted with the gifts of the Spirit, but like him undone with covetousness,
and for it perished by an exemplary end. There was none among all the twelve so
fit to give sentence upon this fact as Peter: as who might hereby show his own
repentance for his lying and perjury in denying his Master, and that he was
entirely repaired and recovered from it, when he durst pass so heavy a doom
and judgment upon a lie.

Verse. 13. And of the rest none durst join himself unto them.
It is some difficulty to resolve, who these rest were that durst not knit
themselves to the Apostles: the matter may be construed so many ways that it
is hard to fix which is the right.

First, it is understood by Beza of such as were as yet out of the Church, and
yet not strangers to the Kingdom of God, but such as for fear durst not show
themselves, either because of the Jews, or because of the judgment afflicted
on Ananias.

Secondly, it may be understood of those that were within the Church, yet durst
not join themselves in consistory or Presbyteriall society with the 120.
Disciples, but kept their distance in regard of judging, though they knit with
them in communion.

Or thirdly, it may be understood of the 108. Disciples, that were appointed by
Christ to be Ministers, and kept in continual society and consistoriall
association with the Apostles, yet durst not join themselves to them in the
form or dignity of Apostleship, nor durst offer to parallel themselves to
that rank, yet the people magnified them also: And this I take to be the very
meaning of the place, and that upon these grounds.

First, because the word (...) seems to import a residue or the rest of their
own company, and not the people that were out of the Church, for of them it
had been more proper to have said (...) then (...), as the skillful in the
Greek language will readily judge.

Secondly, the joining here spoken of in regard of the object to whom, is to
the Apostles, and not to the Church, as is apparent by the very Grammatical
construction.

Especially, thirdly, the word (...) in verse. 12. being understood not of the
Congregation or whole company of believers, but of the Apostles, as the words
immediately before might argue, or rather of the whole number of the 120. as it
is taken, Chap. 2.1. And so the sense of all redounds to this; that besides
that terrible and dreadful work that was done by Peter upon Ananias and
Sapphira, all the other eleven Apostles did great and wondrous miracles among
the people, and the whole College and Presbytery of the 120. were unanimously
in Solomon's Porch joining together in association and advancing the Gospel, but
the rest of the 120. durst not one of them join themselves to the twelve in
the peculiar office and dignity of Apostleship properly so called, having
seen so lately the dreadful judgment that one of the twelve had brought upon
Ananias one of their own number, and seeing the continual wonders that they
did in an extraordinary manner among the people, howbeit the people magnified
them also, they also having the admirable and wondrous gifts of the Spirit upon
them.

Verse. 15.
Sect. Peter's shadow.
Many miracles were wrought by the Apostles hands, and many as it seems by
Peter's shadow: but* the Text has left it so indifferent, that it is hard to
determine whether it is to be taken in a good sense or a bad, and indeed some
that have taken it the better way have made it the worst of all. Luke says
only thus, They brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid them on
beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might
overshadow some of them. But it neither tells who they were that laid them,
nor a word at all that those were healed that were laid. And it may be thought
they were unbeleeving Jews that laid them as well as otherwise: for believers
might have brought them to the Apostles, or brought the Apostles to them: And
it may possibly be thought that they laid them there either out of a
superstitious blindness, thinking his shadow to be miraculous as well as his
person, or out of a cheating perverseness, thinking to gain by his power
though they would none of his doctrine: and that none of their sick were
healed because there is no mention of any such healing at all. If we should
thus understand the story, surely we should do less wrong to the Text, and
to our own understandings then some have done that have taken it in a better
sense. For be it, that God intending to magnify Peter the minister of the
circumcision in the eyes of the circumcised, did give him a more extraordinary
power of miracles, for their sakes that stood upon miracles so much, so that
not only himself, but his shadow also could heal diseases, yet how
ridiculous and senseless is that which Baronius would infer hereupon, namely,
That Peter therefore was Prince of all the Apostles: and that therefore the
shadows or images of holy men are of holy use and religious worship, and that
the Pope who is Peter's shadow and representation has Peter's power and
qualification?

Verse. 20. All the words of this life.
It has scrupled diverse expositors why the word (...) should be added here to
(...) as seeming to bend the meaning and sense to this present and temporal
life: and thereupon they have concluded that there is an bypallage or change of
construction, and that (...), the words of this life, is in stead of (...),
these words of life, and to this sense is it translated by the Syriack: But the
construction is easy, and the composure of the words will appear most proper,
if the seventeenth Verse be a little seriously considered, it is said there
that it was the Sect of the Sadduces that imprisoned the Apostles, a generation
that denied the resurrection, and the life to come; and to this it is that this
divine revelation refers, when it charge the Apostles, that they should
go again into the Temple where they had been apprehended the day before, and
imprisoned for preaching the resurrection, and that they should not spare to
speak and utter the doctrine of this life which the Sadduces so much denied.

Verse. 21. And they called the Council together, and all the Senate of the
children of Israel.
The Syriack reads, they called their companions and the Elders of Israel:
taking (...) here to mean either their fellows and companions in the same
Sadducean opinion and heresy, or their fellow Priests and Scribes which were
not of the Sanhedrin: But since (...) will very harshly bear either of these
senses, and constantly is used in another for the Sanhedrin or bench of Judges
of the LXX. Elders: I should take it so also in this place; and by (...) all
the Senate, understand the Judges or Elders of the two other Judicatories which
were erected, one in the outer Court gate, or in Solomon's Porch, and the other
in the inner or the beautiful gate of the Temple, consisting of three and
twenty men a piece. Maymonid. in Sanhed. Per. 1. And so did this busy High
Priest call together all the three Courts or Benches of Judges in Jerusalem, an
hundred and seventeene Elders in all if there were a full appearance, the Lord
so disposing it, that all his Apostles and all his chief enemies might deal it
together: And now as that was fulfilled which Christ had spoken of them; They
shall bring you before Councels for my names sake, so was also that which he
had promised unto them, that it should be given them what they should speak,
that their enemies should not be able to gainesay. But the Judges of the earth
would not be wise nor instructed to serve the Lord and to kiss the son,
therefore his anger shortly kindled, and Jerusalem perished in her unbeleefe.

Verse. 24. Now when the High Priest.
So is it to be understood though in the Greek it be only (...) the Priest:
and the reason is because, first, Annas in this meeting was not the president
of the Council, for which he is called the High Priest elsewhere, for this
was not a Sanhedrin, or the usual Court, but an extraordinary and unusual
Convocation: Secondly, mention is made of (...) immediately after: and (...) and
(...) would scarcely have sounded well so near together.

Verse. 34. A Pharisee named Gamaliel, a Doctor of the Law, had in reputation
among all the People.
This was Paul's Tutor, Acts 22.3. the son of Simeon, that took Christ into
his arms, Luke 2. and the Grandchild of famous Hillel. He is called Gamaliel
the Elder, for there were two others of the same name, one his Grandchild, the
other his great Grandchild in the fifth descent; and he is always called
Rabban Gamaliel, and so likewise were those two his Grandchildren entitled.
These being three of the seven, that only carried this title Rabban. A title
which was of the highest eminency and note, of any title among their Doctors,
and that very title shows the great reputation he had among the people. In
the Talmudick Writers there is very frequent mention of Rabban Gamaliel, but
scarcely distinguishing which of the three they mean; yet so much to be
collected out of them, as to confute that forgery of Lucians Epistle (which yet
Baronius has graced with this testimonial: Narrat Lucianus in ea quam toius
Christianus orbis recepit Epistola) that Gamaliel became a most zealous
Christian, and professor of the Gospel; that he received Nicodemus when the
Jews had cast him out; and that he buried the body of Stephen, and held a
solemn mourning for him seventy days.

In Pirke Abheth. Pereh. 1. this saying is ascribed to this Gamaliel, among the
several Adagies of those Doctors (...) Procure thy self a tutor, and get thee
out of doubting, and do not multiply to pay thy tithes by conjecture.

He is held to have died 18. years before the destruction of the City, or
about 22. years after this, and O^kelos the Targumist of the Law is reported
to have burnt threescore and ten pound of Frankincense for him being dead: And
by this it is more then a conjecture, that he died not a Christian, but lived
and died in his Pharisaicall opinions, and profession.

Verse. 36. For before these days rose up Theudas.
There is mention of one Theudas in the Talmud in Sanhedr. Perek Heleh: and he
is called a Physician, Theudas the Physician says, that neither Cow nor Sow
comes from Alexandria: And there is mention of one Theudas a Sorcerer in
Josephus Ant. lib. 20 cap. 2. When F^dus was governor of Judea, says he, a
wizard named Theudas perswad^d a great company to take their goods and to
follow him to the river Jordan, for he said he was a Prophet, and that
dividing the river by a command he would procure them an easy passage: and
thus saying he deceived many. But Fadus suffered them not thus to enjoy their
folly, but sent against them a troop of Horse, which falling upon them
unexpectedly, slew many, took others alive, and catching Theudas himself, cut
off his head and brought it to Jerusalem.

This were a very ready and easy interpretation of these words of Gamaliel, if
this great scruple did not lie in the way: namely, that this Theudas mentioned
by Josephus, was about the fourth or fifth year of Claudius: but this Theudas
mentioned by Gamaliel was before Judas the Galilean, which was in the days of
Augustus: There is a great deal of ado among expositours what to make of
these two stories, so like in substance, but so different in time. Some
conceive that Josephus has missed his chronology, and has set Theudas his
story many years later then it fell out: Others refuse Josephus his story as
not applicable to this Theudas of Gamaliel [though they hold that he has
spoken true in it] because the time is so different, but they think Gamaliels
Theudas was some of those villains that so much infested Judea in the times of
Sabinus and Varus. Joseph. Ant. lib. 17. cap. 12. though Josephus has not
there mentioned him by name.

A third sort conceive that Gamaliels Theudas was not before Judas the
Galilean, who rose about the birth of Christ, but a long while after, namely a
little before Gamaliel speaks these words: And they render (...) in the
strict propriety, namely that it was but a few days before: and (...), not
post eum, after him, but praeter eum, besides him.

In these varieties of opinions and difficulties, it is hard to resolve which
way to take, and it is well that it is a matter of that nature that men may
freely use their conjectures in it, and be excusable.

I cannot but observe and conceive these things upon the stories of Gamaliel
and Josephus laid and compared together.

First, that Gamaliel meets with the double misprision that the present
Council had concerning the Apostles, with a double story. First, they
suspected and censured them for false and erroneous teachers; to this he
applies the story of Theudas. Secondly, they suspected them of innovation, and
of what might tend to mutiny and insurrection, and to this he applies the
story of Judas.

Secondly, that the miscariages of these two men that he instanceth in,
proceeded from two different and dangerous principles; pretense of new lights
and revelations; and pretense of liberty of conscience and of persons. Theudas
was for the former, Judas for the latter.

Thirdly, that Gamaliels counsel was not of any Christianity that was in him,
but of policy, not that he favored the Apostles, but that he feared if any
thing were done to them by violence or injustice, it might incur a Praemunire
or prejudice; and that is apparent, in that all the Council consent and
entertain his counsel.

Fourthly, that Gamaliels Theudas and Josephus his is not all one: their
descriptions indeed are very agreeable, for as Gamaliel says that Theudas
took on him (...) to be some body, of note and eminency, so does the relation
about the Theudas in Josephus. Simon Magus boasted himself (...) to be some
special person, Act. 8.9. and how did he carry on this arrogation? why, by
magic and doing some strange things among the people: and just in the same
kind has Josephus described his Theudas, but yet these two Theudases seem not
to be the same.

Fifthly, for Josephus setting the story of his Theudas so late as in the time
of Claudius, a dozen years or thereabouts after this speech of Gamaliel,
[although it might be said it is no strange thing with Josephus to misplace
stories, and to faulter in point of exact Chronology, as Baronius supposes he
has done in this] yet seems it rather to be upon the very native propriety
of the time of the story: And the matter to be conceived thus, that as Sects
and heresies, though buried, yet do often revive, and though dispersed, yet do
recollect: and being once begun are not suddenly extinguished, but like
quenched fire are ever breaking out in one place or other, that so it was with
this business of Theudas. And so also it may be instanced in the very sect
and opinion of him that Gamaliel speaks of immediately after, namely Judas of
Galilee: He rose up in the days of the tax in the time of Augustus^, as Luke
2. He pleaded against the Jews being subject to the Romans, and dissuaded
them from paying taxes and tribute to them: and maintained they ought to have
no ruler over them but God: and so became the original of a fourth sect among
the Jews, besides the Pharisees, Sadduces and Esseans, as Josephus reports of
him. Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 1. and de Bell. lib. 2. cap. 12. Now though Judas
himself perished in his error, and as many as obeyed him were scattered
abroad, as Gamaliel relates, yet was not his error extinguished with him, but
revived and grew again: So that at the least 40. years after his first
appearing, his two sons James and Simon are crucified for it by Tiberius
Alexander, the successor of Fadus. Ios. Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 3. And many years
after that, Eleazer a branch of the same Judas appears in the same opinion
with a desperate company with him, De bell. lib. 7. cap. 30.

Even so may it be conceived of the Sect of Theudas: that it began before that
of Judas, and that the first author of it took upon him great things, as to
be a Prophet, and to work miracles, and the like, but he was soon slain and
all that obeyed him were scattered abroad and came to naught. But his folly and
fancy perished not with him, but [however at other times] in the time of Fadus
one of the same foolery and name, and probably his son, would be a Prophet
again and divide Jordan and do I know not what, whom Fadus destroyed and
brought his company to ruin. So that Gamaliels and Josephus his Theudas, are
very probably two men, but very likely father and son, or tutor and scholar,
agreeing so jumpe in the same folly and madness that they agreed in the same
name: and that name either given to the latter at such an accidency as Parents
name their children, or assumed by him in imitation of the former Theudas, whom
as he delighted to imitate in his Enthusiastic folly, so delighted he to
follow him in denomination. And I am the rather confirmed in this opinion about
these two men, because that as soon as ever Josephus has told the story of
the destruction of Theudas by Fadus, he tells of the destruction of the
sons of Judas, by Tiberius Alexander, and I cannot but interpret both the
stories in one sense, that as in the latter he speaks of the offspring of
Judas, whose sect had begun many years before, so in the former he speaks of
the offspring of Theudas, whose sect had begun before that of Judas.

Verse. 41. That they were counted worthy.
Or, That they had obtained: (...) seeming to interpret the word (...), so
common among the Rabbis which sounds to that sense: and so is it not only
most easily, but so it must be most commonly rendered in them: And of the very
same sense is the Latin word Mereri [when it is applied to man with reference
to good] generally in the Fathers: As when it is said that the Virgin Mary,
meruit esse matter redemptoris, she obtained to be the mother of the redeemer,
not she deserved: Mary Magdalen, Audire meruit, Fides tua te salvam fecit: she
obtained to hear it said, Thy faith has saved thee; and a thousand such
examples might be given, which too many thousands interpreting by the word
merit, wrest an harmless word to their own destruction.

R. Solomon speaks of (...), Meritum volucrium, the privilege of birds: and
some fathers speaking of our obtaining Gods favor and salvation and the like,
express it, sine merito nostro meruimus, we have obtained it without our
merit.

PART. II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. The state of the City hitherto.
THe City Rome was built by Romulus in the year of the world 3175. in the
fifteenth year of Amaziab King of Judah, and in the first year of Jeroboam
the second, the King of Israel. It had stood from the time of its first
foundation, Vid Ruf. Festum, Dionem, etc.
to this year in which it put the Lord of life to death, seven hundred
fourscore and five years; And had undergone and passed thorough two different
and diverse kinds of government, and was now but lately entered upon a third.

The first was under Kings, for 243. years, and the foundation of this
government as of the City it self was laid in the blood of Remus, shed by his
brother Romulus, who was the founder of the City.

The second was under Consuls, 467. years from the expulsion of Tarquin the
last King, to the Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, which was the year that
Augustus began to rule, with Antony and Lepidus. This change of the government,
was likewise founded in blood as the former had been, namely of Lucrece,
Aruns, and Brutus, and in the extirpation of Tarqui^s house.

A thi^d manner of government, had the City and Empire now begun upon, and had
been under it threescore and two years; namely, a monarchy again, but the
name only changed from a King to an Emperor. And the foundation of this
change was also laid in blood as the other had been, namely in the death of
Julius Caesar, Antony and Cleopatra.

The carriage of Tarquin the last of the Kings had brought the City into an
opinion that monarchy was an enemy to liberty: And the growth and flourishing
of that State under another manner of government had so confirmed this opinion,
that they were sooner put out of their liberty, then out of belief of that
position. Brutus and Collatinus, who were the expellers of Tarquin and of
Monarchy with him, had found out a government likely enough in all humane
judgment to heal all these mischiefs and miscarriages, that monarchical
tyranny did bring upon them, when they appointed two supreme governors in
stead of one, and their power and rule to be but annual in stead of, for
life. The success was agreeable to the policy, and so happily and prosperously
did the State grow under these rulers, [and some others mixed as occasion
urged], that to offer to reduce it to a Monarchy again, was infallibly held to
be, to reduce it to slavery; and Julius Caesar found how deeply grounded this
opinion was in the heart of a Roman, by the loss of his life: they supposing
his affecting the Empire single, aimed at the loss of their liberties.

Augustus his Nephew and adopted son, though he had before his eyes in
Julius his death a clear and convincing Lecture, how dangerous and desperate
an attempt it was, to affect the monarchy, yet did he dare it; but managing
his desires and designs with so much discretion and noiselesnesse, that the
government was gotten into his hands alone, and the Empire slipped into a
monarchical subjection even before it was aware.

Tacitus has described this strange transition to this purpose,

Annal. l. 1.
After that Brutus and Cassius being slain, there was now no public
hostility; Pompey was crushed at Sicily, and Lepidus being stipped of his
power, and Antony slain, there remained now no commander on Julius his party,
but only Caesar, he laying down the name of Triumvir, and bearing himself
as Consul, and as content with the Tribunate, for the defense of the Commons:
when he had won the Soldiers with gifts, the people with provision, and all
men with the sweetness of peace, he began to get up by degrees, and to draw
to himself the power of the Senate, Magistrates and Law, no man gainsaying
him: For the fiercest persons were either dispatched in the armies or by
banishment, the rest of the Nobles, by how much the more they were the readier
for vassallage, by so much the more they were preferred with wealth and
honors: and being thus enriched by these innovations, they desired rather the
safe and present condition, then the ancient and dangerous. Nor did the
provinces refuse this state of things, they having the rule of the Senate and
people in suspicion, because of the quarrelings of the great ones, and the
avarice of the Magistrates, the Laws affording no relief, but themselves
destroyed, by power, prowling or money.

Thus did the very posture of things as it were conspire with the desires of
Augustus, to bring the Roman state into a monarchy, and himself to be the
monarch; the decrees and determination of heaven having so ordered, that here
should begin a fifth Monarchy after the destruction of the four, Dan. 2. and
7. which should equal all the four in power pomp and cruelty, and should be
the continual persecutor of the Church of the Christians, as they had been of
the Church of the Jews: And thus does the Gospel and the State that should
persecute it in a manner arise at once, and Christ and Antichrist after a sort
are borne together.

Sect. II. The qualities of Tiberius the present Emperor: his damnable
dissimulation.
Augustus as he had got the sole government into his hands, by a great deal
of wisdom, and daring, so did he keep it with the same wisdom, and as much
moderation: He sat Emperor for the space of four and forty years, honored
and beloved, and died desired and lamented, though he had thus impropriated,
as it was conceived, the whole liberty of the Empire into his own hand: Now
whether it were the native gentleness and goodness of the Emperor, that kept
him in such a sweetness and moderation; or whether it were some policy mingled
with it, as knowing it not to be safe to be too busy and rigid so near the
change, he so demeaned himself for the benefit of the City, and love of the
people, that as he was the first of all the Emperors, so in a manner was he
the last that showed such mildness, goodness, and nobleness, either to
people or City.

Tyberius succeeded him, his Wives son by nature, and his by adoption; a man as
incomparably evil, unworthy, and cruel, as Augustus had been glorious, noble,
and humane. And if that were true which some supposed and believed, That
Augustus had nominated Tyberius for his Successor, that his own worth might be
the better set off by the others wickedness; and that he might be the better
spoken of, because the other was so odious; this his last action was more to
his dishonor then all his former; and howsoever Tyberius might do him honor
by his miscarriage, yet did he do himself dishonor in Tyberius.

This wretch, whose Story we are now to follow, was, as his own Tutor used to
define him, (...) A lump of clay mingled with blood; and that clay and blood
mingled with as much mischievousnesse, as it was almost possible for humane
nature to contain.

A dissembler he was, beyond all parallels and comparisons, (...), says Dion,
He had a disposition most single to himself: For he never made show to what he
desired; and he never spoke as he thought; what he desired he denied; what he
hated he pretended to: he showed anger where he loved best; he pretended
love where he hated most: he looked sullenly on his friends, cheerfully on
his enemies: was fair spoken to those he meant to punish, was most severe
toward those he thought to pardon; And it was his Maxim, That a Princes
mind must be known to no man; for that by its being known, many evils and
inconveniences do follow; but many conveniences by its being dissembled: Hence
did every man that meddled with him, come into danger; and to understand, or not
understand his mind, was alike perilous. And some have been undone for
agreeing to his words, because they agreed not to his mind: and some have been
undone for agreeing to his mind, because he perceived they had found his mind
out. And it was a thing of extreme difficulty, either to consent to his words
or to gainsay them: when it was his custom to command one thing and to will
another.

This dissimulation he began withal at his very first entrance to the Empire,
pretending great unwillingnesse to take it upon him, and when it was urged on
him past denial, then pret^nding to take two partners with him, as to share in
the burden and honor: but when Asinius Gallus took him at his word, and bad
him choose his part, he took it so ill, that he dogd him for it to the
death. The same dissimulation he took along with him, when he had taken the
Empire on him, carrying it with all mildness and moderation, as if he had
been a second Augustus, whereas indeed the reason was, because Germanicus was
alive, and most dear in the peoples affection, and he feared him lest he
should have been preferred before him.

Yet did his best demeanor bewray what he was within, for all his skill in
dissembling, and at the very best he gave just suspicion that he would prove
but evil.

He began his reign with the murder of Agrippa, a man once in as high favor
with Augustus as himself. He went on with the murder of a poor man for a
piece of wit: For as a corpse was carried to its interring, this man can to it
and whispered in the dead man's ear: and being asked by the standers by what
he meant, he answered, that he desired that dead man when he came into the
other world, to tell Augustus that his Legacies to the people were not yet
paid. This cost the poor man his life, for Tiberius said he should go on that
message himself, and so he slew him, but this got the people their Legacies.

It would be infinite to reckon up the murders, oppressions, and miscreancy
committed by him in the first seventeene years of his reign, or before this
year that we have in hand: The most remarkable were that he raised Sejanus
purposely that he might help to ruin Germanicus and Drusus, though they were
his own adopted sons, and when that was done by Sejanus he ruined Sejanus
and all his friends with him. We shall have mischief enough from him in those
years that we are to follow him in, namely from his eighteenth and forward,
and therefore let the story hasten thither.

Sect. III. The year of Tiberius his reign at our Saviors death.
This year is determined by common consent of Historians to be his
eighteenth: and the matter is past all doubt, if it were as certain that
Christ was Baptized in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, as it is certain that
John began to baptize. For whereas John began to baptize about the vernall
Equinox, and Christ was not baptized till the Autumnall, beginning just then to
enter upon his thirtieth year, and whereas Tiberius began to reign about the
18. day of August, as appears by the Roman Historians, the fifteenth year of
Tiberius in exact accounting was expired some weeks before Christ was
baptized. And therefore though Luke say that in the fifteenth year of Tiberius
John came baptizing, Luke 3.1. yet was it in the 16. year of Tiberius (as it
seems) before Christ came to his baptism: and so should the death of our
Savior fall into Tiberius his 19. year. But it is not safe to hang the
Chronology of all succeeding times upon so small a pin as this: therefore
according to the universal consent and determination of all Christian writers,
we will take the 18 year of Tiberius to have been the year of Christ's
death, resurrection, and ascension, and accordingly compute and reckon the
times of the succeeding Emperors that we have to go through proportionate or
agreeable to this beginning.

The Roman Consuls for this year that we have in hand were Cn. Domitius and
Camillus Scribonianus, as is obvious to any eye that counts, and the year
and Consuls in the time of Tiberius.

Sect. IV. His lusts and beastiality.
He had certain years before this departed out of Rome, resolving never to
return to it again, which indeed he never did, though often taking on him to
come, and drawing very near unto the City. The pretense of his departure,
Sueton. in Tiber. cap. 39.40.
was the grief that he took on him to take for the death of his two sons,
Germanicus and Drusus, and the dedication of a Capitol at Capua and a Temple
at Nola: but the reasons indeed were, partly in disdain of the authority of
his mother Livia, partly to avoid the dangers of the City, Tacit. Annal. lib.
6.
partly to outrun the shame of his evil actions, and partly that in the
retiredness of the Country he might be the more freely wicked as not
restrained by the public shame. This last he made good by his badnesse, if
such a thing may be said to be made good. For having gotten the liberty of
retiredness, says Cap. 42, 43, 44.
Suetonius, and being removed from the eyes of the City, he now let go loose
all the vices that he had so long dissembled. Uncleanness both with Boys and
Girls, ravishing both of wives and maids, new invented arts of letchery, and
trades of lust, obscene bathings and filthy feasts, and such horriblenesse of
beastialitie that the mention thereof is not fit for a Christians hearing, nay
Rome her self had not heard of none such till this very time.

Sect. His cruelty, and how forwarded.
Nor, which is wonderful, did he in all this delicacy and effeminatenesse,
remit or ungive any thing of his bloodinesse and cruelty, but as in his person
he played the Swine in Capreae, so by his letters did he the Lion at Rome. The
cowardice, and fawning of the Senate from which he was run, and which he
sought to destroy, did forward his inhumane disposition exceeding much: for as
this inhumanitie provoked him to do what mischief he could, so did their
compliance show him that he might do what his list, when things were come to
that pass (says Lib. 58.
Dion) that there was no man that could deny, but that he could heartily eat
the Emperors flesh, yet when Cn. Domitius and Camillus Scribonianus were
Consuls (which was the year we have in hand) a thing most ridiculous came to
pass. For whereas it had been decreed long before, that the Senate should not
swear to the acts of the Emperor on the first day of January, man by man, but
that one should take the oath, and the rest should give their consent: this
year they did not so, but of their own offer, and no one constraining, they
were sworn every man in particular.

And there befell also a thing yet more ridiculous then this. For they decreed
that Tiberius should choose out of their order as many as he would: and twenty
of those chosen by lot and weaponed he should have for his guard whenever
he should come into the Senate. Now seeing that without the Senate house all
was well guarded with a band of Soldiers, and that no private man came within,
for whom else would they or could they have this guard added but for
themselves? Tiberius commended their forwardness and gave them thanks for
their good will, but the thing it self h^e declined as a thing unusual: for
he was not so simple, as to put swords into their hands whom he so much
hated, and of whom he was hated so much.

Thus Dion: and thus the Senate, taken in their own net which they had laid
too plain; arming Tiberius with suspicion, hatred, and power, while they
thought to have weaponed themselves. A far milder nature then his, would hardly
have missed to have made a domineering use of such an opportunity, when their
visible hatred had showed him his own danger, and their cowardly flattery had
showed him his power, and how he made advantage of these his notions, did
appear by the sequel.

Sect. V. Diverse cruelties.
Sejanus his high exalted favorite, had been found, or at least suspected by
him to go about to undermine him as he had done Drusus by his setting on, and
he had the last year been put to death upon that certainty, or suspicion;
and now must all his friends, creatures, kindred and adherents, which had been
exceeding many to so great a favorite, come to the same reckoning and ruin
with him. And this advantage had the old Politician by his kennelling in the
solitariness of the Country, that both he might be as impudent as he would
in putting forward his designs, for his letters could not blush, and resolute
enough in following them to their accomplishing, for he was far enough from
the danger of the discontented City.

He began with the confiscation of Sejanus his goods, Taeit. lib. 6. Annal.
Dion ubi sup^a.
and went on with the banishment of Iunius Gallio one of his friends. This
Gallio or Gallenus (as Dion calls him) in a base flattery to Tiberius made
the motion that the Soldiers of his guard should at the shows sit in the
Knights form: A proposal more full of simplicity and fawning then of any
danger or suspicion: and yet is he sharply taken up for it by the Emperors
letters, as for an overture of sedition made by a friend of Sejanus as thinking
to corrupt the minds of the Soldiers by hope of honors: And for no other
fault but this is Gallio banished to Lesbos, but recalled again ere long,
because it was thought by the Emperor that he took delight in the
pleasantness of the Hand, and then he was committed to custody in the
Magistrates houses. The same letters thunderbolt Sestius Paconius, and either
they or the next, do as much for Latiaris the betrayer of Sabinus, and shortly
are the like come for Caecilianus a Senator, Quintus Servaeus once Praetor, and
Minutius Thermus a Knight: and if they came not into the same black bill, yet
did Julius Africanus and Seius Quadratus come into the same danger.

Sect. VI. Strange accusing.
Thus came his packets very frequent to the Senate, and seldom or never but
written in some man's blood or other: he being cankered and crafty enough to
accuse and pretend, and the Senate so officious and serviceable to him, as to
condemn and execute. And happy had the condition of the City been, had he
rested there, to have been accuser only himself, but his subtle policy had
found out a way, and practiced it, and he thought himself happy in it, to set
such division and sow such seeds of accusations among the people, that now they
do nothing, nor affect nothing more, then to accuse, impeach and charge one
another, and to contrive and compass each others death. Cruel and inhumane
that he was thus to divide and imbroile his own people and Subjects to
destroy each other, that the clearer way might be made to his tyranny through
their destruction; and that he cannot think himself an absolute Prince, nor
truly happy, unless his people die at his pleasure or live in misery. Yet can
I not but think of an invisible hand of justice in this deplorate condition of
the City and State wrought and brought upon her by her own Prince, that she
now perishes daily and sadly by her false accusing, and condemning, and
destroying one another; for at this very time, by false accusation and unjust
condemning, she had destroyed and murdered the Lord of life.

Now, says Tacitus, did Tiberius, inciting the chiefest men to mischief,
Tiberius inciting the chiefest men to mischief.
admonish C. Caestius the father, to tell the Senate what he had written to
him: and Caestius took upon to accuse: A bane which those times brought forth,
when the chief men of the Senate would practice most base accusations, some
openly, many secretly; nor could you then discern strangers from kinsmen,
friends from men unknown, nor what was new, nor what was obscure with age: So
surely were men accused of whatsoever they had spoken in the open streets or at
feasts, as others could make have to prevent, and accuse them for guilty: some
for their own refuge, more as infected with contagion and a sickness. So
Tacitus.

De benef. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Seneca also utters his complaint of these doleful times, and alleges one
example of these accusations, which at once shows the baseness of them and
the frequency.

In the times of Tiberius Caesar, says he, there was a frequent and almost
common madness of accusing, which more tormented the gowned City, then all
their civil wars had done before. Now the words of drunkards were catched
at, and the harmelesnesse of jesters. Nothing was safe, every occasion of being
cruel gave content: Nor was there any expecting of what would be the event of
those that were accused, for they had all one and the same. Paulus the
Praetorian was at a certain supper or feast, having the picture of Tiberius
graven in the stone of his Ring, which something stood forth; I should do but
very foolishly, if I should pumpe for words to tell, that he took the
Chamberpot, which thing Maro one of the spies of those times took speedy
notice of. But a servant of his for whom the trap was prepared took off his
Ring when he was drunk. And when Maro took witness of the guests that
Caesar's Image was laid to a filthy base thing, and was ready to subscribe the
charge, the servant showed the Ring upon his own finger.

Exceeding many do the Roman Histories mention and nominate, that came to
fatal ends, or heavy doomes under the bloodinesse of this inquisition, but
many and many omitted, says Tacitus, and not named by the Roman writers,
either because they were cloyed with multitude of examples, or lest, as what
they suffered was much and grievous to themselves, so likewise might it be
unto the Reader.

Sect. VII. Desperate boldness, and discreet.
In these so dangerous times of the City, and raging humors of the Emperor,
it cannot be omitted for the strangeness of it, how two men came off, Marcus
Terentius by a resolute bravery before the Senate, and Lucius Seianus by a
desperate scoff and mocking of the Emperor.

In the sports and feasts of Flora, this Seianus being Praetor, had caused all
things to be performed by baldheaded men, Dion lib. 58.
and by no other, and this he did because Tiberius was baldheaded himself.
And to make up the scorn to the full, at night, when the company was to
depart, A venerable antiquity for shaven crowns*
he caused five thousand boys with their heads shaven bare, to carry Linkes
and Torches to light them away. And yet Tiberius would take no notice of all
this though he knew it well enough, either because he would not second his
own derision, by taking it to heart, or because he intended to revenge this
scorn at some other time, under some other title, or because by this
toleration he would animate more to be saucy with him to their own confusion.

But far more brave, because far more necessary and discreet, was the courage
of Terentius, who had the sober and well guided valor, not to thrust himself
into danger, but to bring him out. He was accused of dependence upon Sejanus,
and of complying with him, and he denied not the accusation, but strengthened
it, and came off better by extremity of confession then others could do with
the utmost of excusing. I loved, said he, and honored Sejanus, because
Tiberius loved him and did him honor: So that if he did well I did not
amiss, and if the Emperor that knows all things exactly, were deceived, it
is no wonder if I were d^ceived with him. It is not for us to regard or search,
for what cause the Emperor promoteth such a man: to him belongs the
property of that judgment, to us the glory of obsequiousness. His treasons
against the commonwealth, and plots against the Emperors life, let them bear
the punishment they have deserved, but as for friendship and observance, the
same end will acqu^t Tiberius and us, etc.

And in this strain and boldness proceeded he on, still driving on his
affections to Sejanus through Sejanus to the Emperor, that he led the
accusation the same way to light upon him also, insomuch that in an instant his
accusers had changed place with him, for they were accused and he discharged.

Sect. VIII. Other Occurrences of this year.
But Tiberius his humor was too strong to be stopped with such Rhetoric, in
behalf of any more, though this prevailed for Terentius himself. For
presently come accusatory letters against Sex. Vestilius, as a libeller against
C. Caesar, who to avoid death, by the hand of some other man, would prevent it
with his own, and so cut his veins: but tying them up again and repenting
his fact he sent a supplicatory petition to the Emperor that he might live:
of which receiving but a comfortless answer, he let them open to bleed
again. Afterward followed the accusation of Annius Pollio, Appius Silanus,
Scaurus Mamercus, Sabinus Calvisius: Vitia the mother of Fusius Geminius late
Consul, put to death for nothing but for bewayling the death of her own
son; Vescularius and Marinus executed in Capre^. And Geminius and Celsus came
to such fatal ends toward the end of the year. In this year there was a
book of the Sibyls offered to the Senate, but he that offered it was sharply
checked by the Emperor for his pains. Some scarsitie of provision oppressed
the City, and plenty of mocks upon the stage jerked the Emperor, but course
was taken ere long for the remedy of both, and for the latter sooner then the
former. Scribonianus his place of Consulship was often changed according to
Tiberius his wavering pleasure, the politician craftily shaking and unsetling
that ancient government, that his new one of Monarchy might sit the faster.
Flaecus Avilius was made Governor of Egypt, an Iberian by birth as may be
collected from Dion, and a future scourge of the Jews, as will appear
hereafter. Rubrius Fabatus when he saw the City in so desperate an estate,
betook himself to fall to the Parthians, but was apprehended by the way, and
yet escaped punishment, being forgotten rather then forgiven.

Sect. IX. Tiberius perplexed.
Among all the troubles of that City (that has been ever the troubler of the
world) that befell her this year, when she slew the Prince of quietness and
peace, it may not be amiss to look a little upon the disquietnesse of him
himself within himself that caused this disquiet to her, and imbrewed her so
often in her own blood: And this we may do by the Anatomy that Tacitus has
read upon his intralls, spying the thoughts of his heart, through the words of
a letter, that he wrote in behalf of Co^ta Messalinus an old favorite of his,
the letter bearing the date of this year, as appears by the same Tacitus,
and the words this tenor, as is attested both by him and Suetonius. Sueton in
Tibe. c. 67.
Quid scribam vobis P. C. aut quomodo scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc
tempore, Dii me, Deaeque peius perdant, quam perire quotidie sentio, si scio.
What I shall write to you O fathers conscript, or how I shall write, or what I
shall not write at all at this time, the gods and goddesses confound me worse
then I feel my self to perish daily, if I can tell. Whereupon Suetonius says
that being weary of himself, he almost confesses the sum of his miseries:
But my other author thus largely. Thus did even his villainies and
flagitiousnesse turn to punishment to himself. Nor was it in vain that the
wisest of men was wont to affirm, that if the minds of Tyrants were but
opened, tortures and stripes might be spied there: seeing that the mind is
butchered with cruelty, lust and evil projects, as the body is with blows.
For, not solitariness, not fortune, could protect Tiberius, but that he
confesses the torments of his breast, and his own punishment.

PART III. The affairs of the Jews.
Sect. I. A commotion of them.
IF the Method of Josephus were Chronicall, and the order of his ranking of
Stories to be presumed for the order of their falling out, at this time or
hereabout should be taken in that Egesip. de excid. Ierus. l. 2. cap. 4.
famosum ludibrium as Egesippus calls it, or villainous abuse of Paulina a
noble chaste and virtuous wife and Lady of Rome, by Mundus a Knight, under
pretext of the god Anubis in the Temple of Isis: for this has Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 18. c. 4.
he mentioned the very next thing after the mention of our Saviors death, and
with this link of connection. About the very same time another grievance
troubled the Jews, and shameful things happened about the Temple of Isis at
Rome, etc. But since the story concerning the troubles of the Jews, that he
relates after, seems to have some near dependence and consequence to this
of the Lady, and that Annal. lib. 2 c
Tacitus has laid that occurrence of the Jews expulsion out of Rome thirteen
years before this, under the consulship of Iunius Silanus and Norbanus Flaccus,
we will omit to meddle with them, and will take in another story of the Jews
which though Josephus has placed a little before Christ's death, yet Eusebius
has set it after, and upon his word shall it be commended to the reader for
its time, and upon the others and Philoes for its truth.

Pilate (as Antiq. lib. 8. cap. 4. and de bello Iud. ^. c. (...).
says Josephus) having secretly brought into Jerusalem by night certain
Images of Caesar and set them up, the people when the matter was known,
repaired to him to Caesarea, begging that they might be taken down: which
when he denied as a thing prejudicial to Caesar; they fell flat upon the
ground, and there lay five days and five nights and stirred not thence. On the
sixth day he pretending to give them an answer from the judgment seat does
suddenly inviron them with armed men, threatening their death if they cease not
their importunity. But they falling upon the ground again and laying their
necks bare, return him this answer. That they would gladly embrace death
rather then transgress the wisdom of their Laws. Whose resolution when
Pilate saw, he caused the Images to be fetched away from Jerusalem to
Caesarea. To this purpose Josephus; but Philo far differently thus. Philo in
legate. ad Cajum.
Pilate, says he, dedicated golden shields in the Palace of Herod in the holy
City, not so much for the honor of Tiberius, as to vex the people of the
Jews; upon them there was neither picture, nor any thing that was forbidden,
but only the inscription showed who had dedicated them, and to whom. Yet when
the multitude had understanding of the thing, and the matter was divulged, they
chose certain of the highest rank among them for their advocates, who
besought him, that the innovation might be taken away, and that their Laws
might not. When he roughly denied, for he was naturally inflexible and
selfe-wilfully sturdy, they make fair before him as if they would petition to
Tiberius. Now that fretted him worst of all, for he was afraid lest they
should do so indeed, and accuse him for his other crimes, his bribery, wrongs,
rapines, injuries, oppressions, murders and horrid cruelties, and yet durst he
not take down again what he had dedicated, nor had he any mind to pleasure
the people. Which when they perceived they sent a most humble petition to
Tiberius: who understanding what Pilate had done and what he had threatened,
rebuked and checked him for his innovating boldness, and commanded him
speedily to take the shields away; and so they were removed from Jerusalem to
Caesarea. Thus Philo, and thus differently these two country men, and that in
a matter which so nearly concerned their own country: and which also befell
so near unto their own times. For Philo was now alive and in his prime, and
so was Josephus less then thirty years after. Be it referred to the readers
choice which of these relations he will take, and when he has made his
choice, another difference falls under his arbitration concerning the time,
betwixt Eusebius which places this occurrence after our Saviors passion, and
Baronius that has set it three years before his baptism. The Cardinal
certainly too forward in bringing it in in the first year of Pilate, for it
appears by Philo that he had done a great multitude of villainies among the
Jews before he did this: and the Father if any whit too backward in ranking
it after our Saviors death, yet excusable for a thing of so pregnant
application, as to show how soon the Jews that had chosen Caesar before
Christ, have now their belly full of their Caesar in his Images.

Sect. II. Of James his being Bishop of Jerusalem.
The two last cited Authors though they differ about the time of the story
forenamed, yet have they agreed unanimously, and many others with them about
this in hand, namely that James was made this year the Bishop of that
Jerusalem. For thus Eusebius: Ecelesiae Hierosolymorii primus Episcopus ab
Apostolis ordinatur Iacobus frater Domini. But Baronius far larger; that he was
ordained Bishop by Peter, that his chair was preserved and reverenced to
posterity, that he wore a plate of gold upon his head like the high Priest in
the Law, from whence he would derive the Miter: that he alone might go into
the Sanctum Sanctorum, that he refrained from wine and flesh, that he was a
Nazarite, that his knees were hardened with continual praying till they were
unsensible, and such like stuff for which he cites his several Authors,
that if common sense were not a better informer then common fame, we should be
made to believe any thing whatsoever. The question indeed whether James were
ever Bishop of Jerusalem at all or no, is very well worth taking into some
consideration, but that will be most proper to handle when we come to those
places in the Acts of the Apostles, where a singular mention of James has
given occasion of this opinion; But as for his prototype of Miters, the peoples
wooden devotion to his chair, and the rest of that legendary invention, he
is little acquainted with the officiousness of superstition, that knows not
out of what mint that comes, and he has little to do that should go about
to examine the truth of it, but he has the least of all to do that should
believe it.

THE CHRISTIAN, JEWISH, AND ROMAN HISTORY OF THE YEAR OF CHRIST XXXIIII. And
of the Emperor Tiberius, XIX. Being the year of the World 3961. Consuls
Sergius Sulpitius Galba. L. Cornelius Sulla.


LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

Sect. An account of the Chronology.
ALthough the proper reckoning of every year of our Savior, be from
September to September, (for at that time of the year he was borne) and so
his three and thirtieth year should have been ended by us, within four
months or little more after the giving of the holy Ghost, yet because it will
not be possible to date the times of things in any of the three stories that
we have in hand, from such a beginning, and because both the Roman Historians
do reckon the years of their City, as also the Christian histories, the
years of Christ from January to January, I have chosen to follow that
computation and manner of accounting, or rather (to speak properly indeed) I
have been enforced to follow it, there being not only various and pregnant
helps both from Romans and Christians to forward us in that manner of
reckoning, but there being also an utter impossibility to reckon or compute
from any other beginning or calculation: now, as for those stories that we are
to follow in the Acts of the Apostles, the holy Ghost has not been so
punctual and exact, to give us the times of the things, as to give us things
themselves; The Chronicle chain of the times indeed is drawn up by the
Scripture from the Creation, to the death of our Savior (which was the
fullness of time) with all care and accuratenesse: but from thence forward not
so strictly or observantly exhibited and held forth, nor indeed was it
requisite that it should so be. To annalize therefore the story of this book
of the Acts, as it cannot but prove a matter of great difficulty, so will it
prove but a matter of conjecture when we have done what we can, and both
these proceed from this ground and reason, because the holy Ghost has been
very sparing, if not utterly silent, in giving account of the times in the new
Testament from the death of Christ forward, that great business in his death
being accomplished and fulfilled, for which alone the succession of times was
reckoned and recorded: we shall therefore in the casting of passages and
occurrences into several years, as we go along present them under their
proper notion of conjecture, yet showing some groundwork and reason of what we
do: and though it may be we may not always hit aright, in fixing every thing
to its proper year, yet hope we to find here and there some such maine pins
as whereon to hang a sum of diverse years joined together, and to settle them
fast, although we cannot so perfectly find a general nail whereby to fasten
the occurrences of every several year by it self.

We may take an instance in the story at which we now are, the choosing of
the seven Deacons: It is not possible, positively to determine at what time
this was done, it may be it was before the three and thirtieth year of our
Savior was expired, namely before September next after his Ascension, it may
be again it was not before September, but betwixt it and January next
following, or it may be it was not before January, but after it, in this year
that we are entering upon: there is a like uncertainty in all these things, if
we should come to try the times of this particular thing by it self, but when
we shall come to examine and take up the time of Paul's conversion, then will
some steadiness of the time of this appear, and the nail that fastneth that,
will so clench up all the stories betwixt that and the descension of the holy
Ghost, or all the stories from the end of the second Chapter to the beginning
of the ninth, that they will not hang altogether loose, but have some
fixednesse to their proper time.

Act. VI.
Verse. 1. There was a murmuring of the Grecians.
IN the Greek it is, Of the Hellenists: which word is also used, Chap. 9.29.
and 11.20. and is of no small controversy for the sense, whether it mean
Greeks that lived among the Jews, or Jews that lived among the Greeks.
Whether Greeks that were converted to the Jewish Religion, or Jews that used
the Greek tongue; but the latter seems to be the proper meaning of it upon
these grounds.

1. Because proselyted Greeks (which some think Hellenistae means) are
expressly called Hellens, Ioh. 12.20. and (...), Joseph. Ant. lib. 18. cap. 4.
And not Hellenistae.

2. Because the very form of the word Hellenista does more properly import a
Jew ingraffed into the Greeks, then a Greek ingraffed into the Jews.

3. Because whereas Iudeus and Hellen distinguish the two nations Jew and
Greek all along in the Scripture, Hebraeus and Hellenista must needs signify
something else here.

4. Because if by Hellenistae had been meant the converted Greeks, it had
been most proper in contradistinction to them to have said (...) and not (...).

5. Because the story from the beginning of this book hither makes the Church
to consist most especially of Jews, as Chapter 2.5.22. and 3.12. and though it
mention proselytes among them, yet seems it most improbable that their number
should be so great as to have seven Deacons chosen for them.

6. Because Nicolas one of the seven, is expressly called a Proselyte of
Antioch, which had been somewhat improper if all the business had only
concerned Proselytes.

By these and some other reasons that might be produced, it is most proper to
apprehend and conceive that these Hellenists were Jews of the Grecian
dispersion and plantations, that lived among the Greeks, and used their
language: and which may be called the western dispersion, not only in regard
of the situation of their dwellings; but chiefly in difference from the
Eastern captivities carried away by the Assyrians and Persians: and also
because they used Western tongues. And to this sense it sounds when it is
said the Hellenists murmured against the Hebrews: namely that both they that
murmured and they that were murmured against were Jews, but the one party
called Hebrews and the other Hellenists in reference to their language and
residence. The Hebrews in Judea or in the countries of the Eastern
dispersion, and the other in the countries and Colonies of the Western. And in
this sense is that easily understood which is spoken of Paul, Chap. 9.29. that
he spoke and questioned with the Hellenists, namely, because he spoke their
language, the Greek tongue, he being borne in Tarsus, where they had Greek
Schools, And that in Chap. 11.19.20. They that were scattered spoke the word
to none but to the Jews only, and yet some spoke to the Hellenists at
Antioch, they that spoke being themselves Hellenists by birth, or Jews borne
in Cyprus and Cyrene, in Greek colonies, and so dealt with them of Antioch
that were of the same native reference that they were.

Sect. Were neglected in the daily ministration.
That is, in the daily distribution of alms, or the stock of the Church, as
the Text and reason i^ self makes it plain enough, though some have
conceived that it is to be taken passively, as if these widows had been
hindered from ministering to the Apostles as women had ministered to our Savior.

Verse. 2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them.
Not the whole multitude of believers, which at this time were grown to very
many thousands: but the whole number of the Presbytery or the 108. of whom
mention has been made before. For 1. how needless was it that eight or ten
thousand people should meet together about this business to choose six or
seven men? And 2. how impossible was it there should be a joint choice, where
the distance and diversities of Countries and Languages had made them so great
strangers one to another; and when some discontents had driven them into
murmurings already? 3. They that chose the seven are bidden to look out among
themselves, men full of the holy Ghost, which among the number of common
believers was very hard, if at all possible to find: for we cannot ever find,
that the holy Ghost had come down upon any but the 120. And whereas they are
required to be of honest report and wisdom, it does not infer that any of
the 108. were otherwise, but because there was difference of eminencies and
excellencies among them.

Verse. 3. Seven men.
This number may seem to refer to the seven nations of the western Jews
who had made the complaint, Cappadocians, Ponticks, Asians, Phrygians,
Pamphilians, Romans, and Cretans.

Sect. The office of Deacons.
1. It was not ministerial or for the preaching of the word, but for providing
for the (...); for as the occasion of their election was complaint of the
poor, so the end of their choice was to provide for their relief. It is true
indeed that these seven men, at the least two of them, Stephen and Philip, were
preachers of the Word as well as overseers of the poor: but this their
ministerial function they had before their Deaconry, and not with it. For it
is not only the opinion of Epiphanius, but even sense and reason do give their
vote with him, that these men were of the number of the Seventy, or at the
least of the 108. that had been Christ's constant followers and disciples: and
so had received their ministerial function from Christ and not from the
Apostles, and it was not an addition to their Deaconry, but their Deaconry to
it: For the Text tells plainly that they were full of the holy Ghost before
they received the imposition of hands, and so had in all probability, yea
indeed past denial, received the holy Ghost when the 120. did, they being some
of that number.

2. Those tables for which the office of Deaconry was ordained, were not holy
Tables but common. For 1. The twelve set an inconsistency between serving
these Tables, and preaching the Word, Ver. 2. which they would never have done,
if serving of Tables had been the attending upon the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. 2. The serving of Tables that they mean, they put over from themselves
to the Deacons, but none can think that they would ever resign or give over
the administering the Sacrament. 3. There were Ministers enough already for the
administration and attending upon the Sacrament, and there needed no new
ordination or office for it.

3. The office of the Deacons was to take care of the poor according to their
several wants; to gather and receive collections for them, to distribute to
them, to oversee them, and to minister to them in their necessities, and
therefore it is no wonder if the Apostles were so circumspect in their
election, and so observant in their ordination. For these seven were to take
this work of the Apostles out of their hands, and to dispose of the stock of
the Church, and upon whose care the support of the poor was to depend, and
their welfare upon their incorruption, and then it is no marvel if they were
chosen men of good report: and they were to converse with variety of languages
and nations, and therefore it was needful they should be full of the holy
Ghost, inabling them to converse with them in their diverse tongues.

Verse. 5. Prochorus.
Sect. The book of the life of John the Evangelist under his name forged.
Of Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon and Parmenas there is no more mention in
Scripture. The book that bears the name of Prochorus, concerning the life,
miracles and assumption of John the Evangelist, does justly bear this brand in
its forehead as it stands in Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 7. Historia haec Apocrypha
est, fabulosa, and indigna prorsus quae legatur. The Author bewrays himself
to be a Romanist, by the sign of the cross and the local descent cap. 3. by
Linus and Domitian disputing about the coming of Christ, and by John
Por^-Latin, cap. 10. and by other visible signs, although he had thought he
had put on a vizor sufficient to have hidden that, when he brings in Peter
calling John the prime Apostle, even in the beginning of his first Chapter. But
that none may lose so much time as to read him over, let him take a pattern of
the rest of his pedlary ware out of the twentieth Chapter, where he brings
in John writing a letter to the devil that possessed a man, and by that letter
casting him out.

Sect. Nicolas a Proselyte of Antioch.
He is held to have been the author and occasion of the sect of the
Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.6.15. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 27. Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 29.
A sect that misconstrued the doctrine of Christian community and Christian
liberty, to all uncleanenesse and licentiousness: but whether it began to be
so misconstrued by Nicolas himself, or by some of his followers, as the
Sadduces abused a good doctrine of Sadoc to a damnable heresy, it is difficult
to determine, and this is not the proper place to examine it.

Verse. 7. A great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith.
I cannot but wonder at the boldness of Beza in this place, and indeed in
hundreds of other places: for he does rather suspect the truth and purity of
this Text, then believe the story that so many Priests should believe: And yet
it seems, among all his Greek copies there was not one that read otherwise.
Truly it is a daring that deserves castigation in him, that when he either
understands not the perfect meaning of a place, or finds difficulty in it,
or has fancied a sense contrary to it, that he should throw dirt into the
face of the Scripture, and deny the purity of the Greek text, before he will
ungive any thing of his own groundless opinion: Honorable is the memory of
that man in the Church of God, and his name as a sweet perfume among us, but I
would this his boldness which he took to himself continually, had not given
so great occasion to Jews and Papists to bark against the purity of the Text
and the truth of the Gospel as it has done.

Verse. 9. The Synagogue of the Libertines.
That is, of Jews that were freeborne, (as Paul Act. 22.28.) viz. the sons
of those Jews that had obtained the Roman freedom: He that from a slave or
servant obtained manumission and liberty, was called libertus, and his child,
borne to him in this freedom, was libertinus.

Verse. 15. His face as the face of an Angel.
Stephen is accused by the students of this Libertine College, of blasphemy
against Moses and the Temple, for preaching of the destruction of his
ceremonies and of that place, whereas he spoke but what Moses and an Angel had
foretold before, Deuteronomy. 28. and 32. Dan. 9. and accordingly his face has the
splendour of an Angel, and shines like the face of Moses.

Acts VII.
Verse. 2. Men, brethren.
THat is, Brethren: for the word men is added only by an Hebrew Elegancy and
custom, as Genesis 13.8. we are Men brethren, which our English has well
rendered, we are brethren, so verse. 26. of this Chapter.

Sect. When he was in Mesopotamia.
For Chaldea was also reckoned to Mesopotamia: and so Pliny accounts it, Lib.
6. Not. Hist. cap. 26. Babylon Chaldaicarum gentium caput diu summam claritatem
obtinuit in toto orb, propter quam reliqua pars Mesopotamiae Assyriaeque
Babylonia appellata est. And afterward, Sunt etiamnum in Mesopotamia
Hipparenum, Chaldaeorum and hoc, sicut Babylon: And presently after, Orchein
quoque tertia Chaldaeorum doctrina, in eodem situ locantur.

Verse. 3. And said unto him, Get thee out of thy Country.
Diverse expositors have intricated themselves into a perplexity, they cannot
well tell how to get out of, by supposing these words, and the words of Moses,
Genesis 12.^. to be the same, and to speak of the same time and thing: whereas
they are visibly and vastly distant and different, and they mean two several
calls of God to Abraham, the one in Chaldea, the other in Charran. In Chaldea
God appears to him, and bids him Get thee out of thy country and from thy
kindred, but makes no mention of leaving his fathers house, for that he took
along with him, Genesis 11.31. The holy Ghost indeed has ascribed the conduct of
this journey to Terah as if he had received the cal^, and had been the chief
mover in the business, but it is only to show his conversion and forsaking of
his native Country and Idolatry, and his readiness to go with Abram when God
calls Abram: but that the call was to Abram, it is not only asserted by
Stephen here, and Joshua, Chap. 24.2. but also confessed by some of the Jews
themselves, as Aben Ezra on Genesis 12.1. The Lord commanded Abram whilst he was
yet in Vr of the Chaldees that he should leave his country. But when God calls
him away from Haran or Charran, he then bids him depart from his fathers house
as well as he had done from his country and kindred before, for now he left
his brother Nahor and all his fathers house behind him. Had this been
observed, there could never so many scruples have risen about Terahs age at
Abraham's birth, nor about Abraham's journey, as there have done; nor would there
be such ambiguitie about translating the word (...) Genesis 12.1. as there has
been: The story in Genesis runs current and in a continuation: and may be
illustrated in this Paraphrase: God in Vr of the Chaldees appeared to Abraham
and said into him, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, but take
thy fathers house with thee and go to a land which I shall show thee: And when
Abram told Terah of this command, Terah condescended and consented; And Terah
took Abram, and Lot and Sarai, and they (Terah and Abram) went with them from
Vr to Haran and dwelt there: And Terah died in Haran; And then God says to
Abram, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy kindred, and from thy Fathers
house also now, and go into Canaan, etc. And to take away all cavils that
might be made against the matter in this respect, in that both Vr and Haran,
are called Abrams country and kindred, Stephen has laid them both in
Mesopotamia, as is noted before.

Verse. 5. Not so much as to set his foot on.
As Deuteronomy. 2.5. Abram was forced to buy a place of burial, though all the land
was given him by promise.

Verse. 6. And entreat them evil four hundred years.
There is a double sum of years mentioned concerning the seed of Abraham,
namely four hundred, and four hundred and thirty, Genesis 15.13. Exodus 12.40.
The four hundred and thirty was from Abrams receiving of the promise, to the
delivery out of Egypt. And the four hundred was from the fifth year of Isaac
to that delivery: Then did Ismael mock and then began affliction to Abraham's
seed, and from thence they were in affliction and sojourning, in a strange land
Canaan and Egypt, four hundred years: See the Seventie at Exodus 12.40.

Verse. 7. And serve me in this place.
This clause is here alleged by Steven as if it had been spoken to Abraham,
whereas it was spoken to Moses four hundred years after, but the holy Ghost
uses to speak short in known stories, as Matthew. 1.12. 1 Chronicles. 1.36. Mark
1.2.3. etc.

Verse. 14. Threescore and fifteen souls.
Whereas Moses says that all the souls of the family of Jacob that went down
into Egypt were but threescore and ten, Genesis 46.27. Exodus 1.5. Deuteronomy. 10.22.
Steven inlargeth the number, and says threescore and fifteen: and herein he
follows the Septuagint who in the two first cited places have that sum: and
they make up the account in Genesis 46. by fetching the names of five children of
Joseph out of the book of Chronicles, which Moses mentioned not, and which
indeed were not borne at their going into Egypt but after, and these are
Machir, Gilead, Shutelah, Tahen, and Eden: and the reason of this their
reckoning I have showed elsewhere, viz. In Harm. of Evang. at Luke 3.36.

Verse. 16. And were carried over into Shechem, etc.
The shortness of the language in this verse has bred some difficulty, and as
Stevens speaking more then Moses in the Verse foregoing, was the cause of some
obscurity there, so is it a cause of more in this verse, for that he has not
spoken so much. Moses has told that Jacob was buried in Hebron, Steven here
speaks as if he had been buried in Sichem. Moses makes Jacob the buyer of
the land of Emor the father of Sichem, Stephen seems to make Abraham the
buyer of it: And in conclusion to make Jacob and his twelve sons to lie in
one Sepulcher, and Abraham's and Jacobs purchase to be but one and the same.
Now Stephen and Moses speak but the same thing, and intend the same meaning,
only Stephen uses shortness of speech in relating a story which was so well
known that a word was enough for a sentence: and he spoke in a language which
had its proprieties and Idioms, which those that heard him, easily understood.

[ And were carried over into Sichem.] The Syriack and Arabic apply this only
to Jacob, for they read it in the singular number, He was translated, directly
cross and contrary to Moses who tells plainly that Jacobs burial was in
Hebron, Genesis 50.13. And in Hebron Josephus would have all the sons of Jacob
buried likewise, Antiq. lib. 2. cap. 4. and by his report they were buried
there before Joseph, for that they were brought thither as they died, but
Joseph's burial was put over, till all the nation came out of Egypt: Now it is
not to be imagined that Stephen, a man so full of the holy Ghost, would ever
have spoken a thing in which every ordinary man, woman or child that heard him,
could so easily have confuted him, as they might have done if the twelve
Patriarks had been buried in Hebron, much less when he spoke to the Council
and to men of learning and understanding, that would readily have tript him, if
he had faltered in so plain and common a story: therefore it is past all
doubting, that Shechem was knownly and generally reputed the place of the
Patriarks burial: For as, although there be mention only of Moses bringing
up the bones of Joseph, Exodus 13.19. yet R. Solomon well observes that we may
learn from that very place that the bones of all the Patriarks were brought up
with him: so though there be mention of the burial of Joseph only in Sichem,
Josh. 24.32. and no record of the burial of the rest of the twelve there: yet
might it very well be supposed had not Stephen asserted it that they were also
buried there with him. For as we may prove the bringing of their bones out of
Egypt, yea though Stephen had not told it;

For, 1. The same cause that moved Joseph to desire burial in the land of
Canaan could not but move the other of the twelve to desire the like: were it
in faith in the promise, or because of the interest in the Land, or in hope of
the resurrection, all the rest had the very same principles to move them to it
that Joseph had.

2. The rest of the Tribes bare the same honor to their Patriarks, that the
Tribe of Joseph did to him, and therefore if they, in honor to Joseph would
preserve his bones (that at their remoovall, they might be taken out of Egypt)
the children of the rest of the Tribes would do so by their Patriarks also.

3. To which might be added the kind of necessity which there was that the
twelve fathers of the Church of Israel, and heirs of the Land of Canaan should
have their interment in that Land, and not be left in the land of bondage.

So likewise may there be arguments sufficient to prove that they were buried
with his bones in Sichem. As 1. There was no reason they should be severed in
the burial who had been united in their removal. 2. Joseph's bones were most
regardable, and the same Sepulcher that served him, would have best befit them.
3. The convocation of all Israel by Joshua was Sichem, and there, upon their
possessing of the land* he makes a covenant betwixt them and God, and it is
incomparably more probable that they should bury the bones of all the Patriarks
there, then in Hebron, where we do not read that Joshua ever came but to
destroy the City.

Now the reason why Stephen speaking of the burials of Jacob and his sons
which were in distant and different places, does yet couch their story so close
together, as if they were all laid together in the same place, is,

1. Because treating of two numbers so unequal, as twelve and one, he first
follows the story of the greater number.

2. He uses the singular number for the plural, Sepulcher for Sepulchers,
which is a thing so common, as that nothing is more common in the Scripture
Language.

3. He uses an Ellipsis or cutting off of the conjunction Vau or And, which
also is exceeding common in the same Language, as 1 Samuel 6.19. Psalm. 133.3. 2
King. 23.8. and diverse other places.

So that though he spoke so very curt and short as he did, yet to them that
were well enough acquainted, both with the story it self, and with such
Hebraismes, his shortness would breed no obscurity, but they would readily
take him in this sense: And Jacob and our fathers died, and were removed to
Sichem, and were laid in Sepulchers, in that which Abraham bought for money,
and in that that was bought from the sons of Emmor, the father of Sichem.

Verse. 20. And was exceeding fair.
Gr. [ Fair to God.] He was a goodly child, supernaturally borne, when his
mother was past the natural course of childbearing.

Verse. 22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians.
This Steven speaks by necessary consequence from his Princely education.

Verse. 23. And when he was full forty years old.
There are that say that Moses was 40. years in Pharaohs Palace, 40. years in
Midian; and 40. years in the wilderness. Tauchuna in Exodus 2.

Verse. 43. Ye took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, etc.
I. In Amos the words lie thus, Chap. 5. Verse. 26. (...): which the Rabbis
Kimchi and Iarchi construe in the future tense, and take it for a threatening of
their punishment as much as an upbraiding of their sin: as if he should have
said unto them, ye would not take up the Commandments of the Lord to bear
them, but you shall bear your Idols into captivity with you, and your enemies
shall lay them upon your shoulders: And this might have been a very plausible
and fair sense, but that Steven has taught us to construe the Verb in the
time past, and not in the time to come, and to read it thus, ye have borne or
taken up, etc.

II. Now the fixing of this time when Israel took up this Idolatry is somewhat
difficult: It is some facilitating of the matter if we can be sure it was not
in the forty years in the Wilderness: And that appears to be so, by the
very scope of Stevens speech: for 1. he tells that they made a golden calfe
in the Verse before: and that God for this Idolatry gave them up to worship all
the host of heaven: whereupon it is evident, that this Idolatry with the calfe,
was neither of these mentioned in this Verse, neither with Moloch nor Remphan:
but as it were a cause of these, for for it the Lord gave them up to these. 2.
He seems to handle this justice of God upon them in giving them up to
Idolatry under these two heads: 1. In neglect of Gods own service in the
wilderness, ye offered me no sacrifice for forty years. And 2. in their
choosing of Idols to worship afterward. So that the two verses seem to run in
this sense, O house of Israel ye were not content to offer me sacrifices for
40. years together in the wilderness, but ye were well content to sacrifice
to Idols and to worship all the host of heaven afterward.

III. The tabernacle of Moloch: In the Hebrew in Amos it is Siccuth Malkekem:
which is rendered by some, Siccuth your King, by others, the tabernacle of your
King: by a third sort, the observance of your King: as if it were derived from
the word (...) Deuteronomy. 27.9. Vid. Ab. Ezr. in loc. and Kimchi in Michol; The
Seventie in the unprickt Bible read it Succoth a tabernacle, which Steven
follows, and they both do not cross but illustrate the sense of the Hebrew.

Now Molech or Moloch, was the Idol of the children of Ammon, 1 King. 11.17.
prohibited to Israel in a singular manner, Lep. 18.21. and 20.2. yet did they
worship him most familiarly, 2 Chronicles. 28.3. Ier. 7.31. And Solomon built an
high place for him, on mount Olivet before Jerusalem, 1 King. 11.7. The Valley
between was called Tophet and the valley of the sons of Hi^^om, 2 King.
23.10, etc. This Idol and Idolatry is thus described by the Rabbis: Our
Rabbis of happy memory say: Although all houses of Idolatry were in Jerusalem,
Molech was without Jerusalem: and the Image was made hollow: set within seven
Chapels: Now whosoever offered flower, they opened to him the first of them:
who so offered Tu^tles or Pigeons, they opened to him the second: whosoever
offered a Lamb, they opened to him the third: whosoever offered a Ram, they
opened to him the fourth: whosoever offered a Calfe, they opened to him the
fifth: whosoever off^red an Ox they opened to him the sixth, but whosoever
offered his son, they opened to him the seventh. Now his face was like a Calfe,
and his hands were stretched out, as a man's that reaches out to receive
something from his neighbor: And they set him over a fire, and the Priests
took the child, and put him between the arms of the Idol, and there the
child gave up the Ghost, D. Kimch. on 2 King. 23.10. He was made of brass and
was heat with fire under till he was glowing hot, and then the Priests put the
child into his arms, and there he was burnt, and the Priests made a noise in
the mean while with Drums that the father might not hea^e the child's cry: And
therefore it was called Tophet from Toph, a Drum or Taber, Vid. R. Sol. on Jer.
7.31.

These seven Chapels (if there be truth in the thing) help us to understand,
what is meant by Molechs Tabernacle, and seem to give some reason why in the
Prophet he is called Siccuth, or the Covert God, because he was retired within
so many Cancelli, (for that word Kimchi uses) before one could come at him.
And so the translation of the Seventy, is but a gloss or exposition of that
phrase in the Prophet, ye took up Siccuth or the Covert God your King, which
they render, according as the nation readily understood the thing, the
Tabernacle of Moloch, that Idol you so highly prize as your chiefest King. Now
Molech or Moloch, or Milchom or Malcham (for all these names are but one and
the same) was also called Baal in a special and distinctive sense, as is
apparent by Ier. 7.31. and 19.5. compared together: and this consideration
helps to understand diverse places where the word Baal is singly used, as 1
King. 16.31 32. and 18.19, etc. And according to this sense should I understand
the matter of Baal-peor in which Israel was joined to him, to have been
sacrificing their children to Molech. And answerably should I interpret that
speech of the Psalmist, They are the sacrifices of the dead, Psalm. 106.28. that
is, sacrifices offered up when they offered up their children to be burnt: And
this was the first time, they committed this horrid idolatry in the very close
of the forty years in the Wilderness, in which 40. years they had not cared
to offer any sacrifices to God: And this abomination with Molech they committed
also presently after they were come into the Land, Psalm. 106.35, 36, 37. Judge.
2.13.

IIII. [ And the Star of your God Remphan.] Here is the maine difficulty of
this Verse, and that not only in regard of the difference of these words of
Stephen from those of Amos, but also in regard of the obscurity of the matter
it self: Amos reads thus: Chijim your Images, the star of your God: Now
the question in the first place is, what is meant by Chijim, and it may be
scrupled whether it be the proper name of an Idol as some think, or a word
appellative, to another sense: I should rather take it the latter way [although
I know generally it is construed for an Idols name, either for Hercules, who
among the Egyptians was called Chon: or for Saturn, who among the Arabians was
called Chevan, as see Aben Ezra on Amos, and Beza on this place.]

For there are two things in this passage of Stephen and Amos very considerable
toward the understanding of this place.

1. That Stephen says, God gave them up to worship all the host of heaven: now
if Chijim betoken but one Idol, or one Planet, this comes very short of the
intent that he aims at, their worshipping of all.

2. That Amos says Chijim ^salmecem, the latter word in the plural number,
and as it seems by the very posture of it, the latter of two substantives,
and not in apposition: For if Chijim were but one Idol, it is somewhat improper
to say Chijim your images, as speaking of more.

I should therefore construe Chijim appellatively for the ordering or disposing
of their Images, as that it means thus, that they had their (...), or
representations as Stephen calls them, of the whole heaven and host of it in
one Series, or in one body: beset with variety of stars and figures,
representing this or that Planet, and this or that constellation: And that Amos
means thus, you took up Siccuth your King, and the frame or disposal of
your Images in one compact piece, the stars of your Gods which you have made
to your selves: showing that when they would worship all the host of heaven in
Images and representations, that they made a fabric and compacture in one
bulk or in one room, representing in several fashions and forms in it, the
several plants and constellations of Heaven: and this he calls Chijim
^salmekem, the ordering or disposing of your Images. See 2 King. 23.4, 5.

V. Now for the word Remphan, in which lies the most obscurity of all, many
conjectures are given upon it. The Seventie have rendered Chijim (...):
mistaking one piece of a letter, as it is conceived by Buxtorfius, and reading
(...) for (...) and (...) for (...) Beza conceives it was purposely done, for
that by (...) which signifies a Giant, is to be understood Hercules: and yet
he scrupleth whether it should not be rather read (...) then (...), as aiming
at the God of the Syrians, 2 King. 5.18. But not to insist upon producing such
variety of conjectures upon this matter, which are to be seen in several
authors: it seems to me, 1. that Stephen does something follow the Seventie
in this word, as well as he does in the rest of the Text: and for the new
Testament to follow them, differently from the Hebrew Text is no wonder, and
needs nothing to be said upon it. 2. That Stephen does add a letter to the
word, or does a little change it from those very syllables that the Septuagint
use, that he might give the sense of the Prophet the more clearly, and speak
out the matter he has in hand the more plainly. And the word Remphan seems
to be compounded either of an Hebrew and a Greek word, or of two Hebrew words
together, and to mean either the high shiner, of (...) and (...), or the high
representation of (...) and (...): and the latter the more probable: For as the
Prophet in the word Chijim expressed the Fabric of the host of heaven, which
the Idolatrous people had wrought and represented in one piece, so would
Stephen speak to the very same sense, and therefore forsakes the word (...)
which he found in the Septuagint, and takes up, or forms it into (...),
which signifies the high face or high representation, or that whole piece that
represented the whole heaven, which he calls their God, because in that they
adored all the stars and hosts of heaven at once, and so, (...) is but one
number put for another, one star for many.

VI. [ I will carry you away beyond Babylon.] Both in the Hebrew of Amos, and
in the Greek of the Septuagint, it is, Beyond Damascus: which Stephen seems
purposely to have changed into beyond Babylon: because that as he had treated
in the beginning of the Chapter of Abraham's coming out of those parts into
that land, he would now show e contra, how they for their Idolatry should be
carried out of that land into those parts again.

Acts VIII.
Verse. 1. And there was a great persecution, etc.
Sect. I. Persecution.
THe spite and cruelty of the adversary was not quenched by the blood of
Stephen, but rather inflamed: confuting and confounding the great scholars of
the Synagogue of the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians and Cilicians, had
bred in them so hateful a disdain of being put to a nonplus; and his cutting
words at his death to all the people, Act. 7.51, 52, 53. had galled them so
sore. And especially his denouncing of ruin to Moses ceremonies, and to the
Temple as they charged him with it, had so exasperated their blind zeal, that
it is not sufficient as they think to have Stephen put to death only, but it
is not fit that others should live who were of the same heresy and blasphemy
with him, for so they construed it: Hence arises a bitter persecution to
destroy the Church at Jerusalem, because it held an opinion that Jerusalem and
the rites there should be destroyed.

In this Tragedy was Saul a chief actor, sparing neither place from search,
Sex from apprehension, nor the apprehended from torture or imprisonment. Such a
testimony does Luke give of him, Act. 8.3. and such a confession does he make
of himself, Act. 22.4. and 26.11. By which the Epistle of Lucianus concerning
the finding out of the body of Stephen may again be challenged for forgery,
when it makes Gamaliel a most zealous convert and professor of the Gospel, and
that at this time, insomuch that he took care for the burial of Stephen, and
received Nicodemus when the Jews had cast him out, which will prove
incredible, in regard of his scholar Saul.

For who can believe either that the scholar should be so great a persecutour
when the master was so great a professor, or that if it were so, Gamaliel of
all other should escape with his life, when his scholar of all other could not
but know where to find him out and how to follow him close? or who can imagine
that Paul when he was answering for his life for being a Christian, should
plead his education under Gamaliel if he were as notorious a Christian as he?
This had been to bring his master into danger and not himself out, and to man
another man's cause not mending his own.

Verse. 1. And they were all scattered abroad except the Apostles.
Sect. II. Dispersion upon the persecution.
Out of the darkness of persecution, the Lord brings forth the light and
the propagation of the Gospel: Providing at once for the safety of some by
their flight, and for the calling home of many more by their dispersion. At
that time, says Luke, there was a great persecution against the Church that*
was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of
Judea and Samaria except the Apostles. Where, as the preservation of the
Apostles in the very center of the tyranny is admirable, so the scattering of
the other into their several places is considerable. For that they travailed
into Judea and Samaria, Damascus, Phenicia, Cyprus and Syria, the text is
plain in this and in other places, but since it mentions none of their
journeyes any further, what is said of them more, is but groundless
conjectures, or rather ridiculous fables. For though it were granted that they
scattered through other countries of the Heathen, yet to bring them as far as
to France and England as some do, is almost as far from reason as these
places are distant from Jerusalem, unless some other cause can be alleged of
this their flight then to avoid the danger. Yes, it it may be said they took
so long a journey to preach the Gospel; but 1. the Text says that the
dispersed preached to the Jews only, of which I believe these countries
afforded a very small number. And 2. the legend says, that Mary Magdalen,
Martha and Joseph of Arimathea and others were the travailers, who where they
had a calling to the ministry is yet to seek.

These persons and others with them are driven by the blast of a common report,
to Marseils in France, Aix in Province, Glasenbury in England, and I know not
whither. It would be sufficient to give the reader but some particulars of the
Legend, and then would he easily judge of the whole, but it is not worth thy
labor. It is more pertinent to consider who they are that the Evangelist
means, and whose story he follows, when he says here they were all
scattered, and in Chap. 11.19. that they travailed as far P^enice, etc.
Certainly it cannot be meant of the whole Church of Jerusalem, or of all the
members of it, which were now many thousands, but of the 108. that were of the
Presbytery or society with the Apostles.

For 1. The Evangelist sets himself to follow the story of the hundred and
twenty, from the very beginning of the book, and he keeps to it still.

2. By instancing so suddenly in Philip he shows what kind of men he means
when he says they were all scattered.

3. He says they went every where preaching, (...) which word is never used
but of Preachers by function.

4. Persecution would far sooner look after the Preachers then the common
members.

5. There were common members at Jerusalem, while Paul stayed there, verse. 3.
and yet the all that the Evangelist means were scattered before.

Verse. 5. To the City of Samaria.
Samaria here and in other places in the new Testament, is not the name of a
City but of the Country. And so is Luke to be understood here, Philip came
down to the City of Samaria: that is, to the Metropolis of that Country,
which indeed was Sychem: and so says Josephus, Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8. (...),
The Samaritans had then Sichem for their Metropolis. And in the same Chapter
he says again (...); which his Latin interpreter has rendered thus, Illis
[Samaritis] dicentibus Hebraeos quidem se esse: sed Sichimitas vocari a
Sodoniis; which translation how true it is, and whether Josephus mean not,
that the Samaritans said that they were indeed Hebrews, but were called
Sidonians that dwelt at Sichem, and whether in that story they call not
themselves so for advantage, let the learned censure: This City John the
Evangelist calls Sychar in stead of Sychem, Ioh. 4.5. not that the text is
there corrupted as some have held, but that the Jews seem to have pronounced
the word so corruptly in derision of the Samaritans to whom they were bitter
enemies. For by this name they reviled them for drunkards, for so the word
signifies, and this taunt seems to have been taken up from Esaias 28.1. woe
to the drunkards of Ephraim, of which Sichem was the chief City.

Verse. 6. And the people gave heed, etc.
Sect. III. Samaria converted.
Our Savior gave it in lesson to his disciples both by precept and his own
example, that they should preach, first in Jerusalem, then in Judea, and then
in Samaria: For so did he himself, Ioh. 1. and 2. and 4. So commanded he them
to do Act. 1.8. and so do they now: Act. 8. Philip one of the seven,
travailing in the common affliction, and in preaching the Gospel as the rest of
the 108. did being backed with this warrant of his master, goes down to
Samaria and preaches there though they were enemies to the Jews. It was but
three years or little more, since Christ had been there among them himself,
Ioh. 4. and whether it were the good remembrance of what he had taught them
then, or the extraordinary hand of God with what was delivered now, or both
together, such effect have Philips doctrine and miracles that the City for the
general does believe and is baptized.

Verse. 13. Simon himself believed.
Sect. IIII. Simon Magus.
He who had long caused the people to wonder at his miraculous delusion is now
himself amazed at Philips real miracles. But conceiving that he had wrought
them by a Magical faculty above his own, and desiring to fish and get the
trick out of him, he insinuates himself the more nearly into his company by
taking on him to believe, so that he is baptized: for any other belief of
Simon Magus is not imaginable.

For when he saw that Peter and John exceeded Philip, as he thought Philip
did exceed himself, (for to Apostles only belonged to bestow the holy Ghost)
the whole venom and mischief of his heart brake forth at once; first, by
offering money for the same Apostolical power, and then in a scornful
entreaty of the Apostles to pray for him, when they advised him to repent and
pray, for so should I understand his words, Verse. 24. Pray ye to the Lord for
me, for an Ironicall taunt, and finally by open Heresy and opposall of the
Gospel.

He had a whore which he led about with him, was called Helena, or as some
will have it, Selene, of Tyrus: Of whom if we understand, Revel. 2.20. which
speaks of Iezabel, that called her self a Prophetess, it would not be
unconsonant, for as Simon like Ahab was of Samaria, so Helena like Iezabel was
of Tire: Nor were their doctrines much different, for the one seduced men to
commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and the other
taught them to do what they would, and not to fear the threats of the Law, for
that they should be saved by the grace of Simon: Many such monsters of
Doctrine and Hydraes of opinion, did this Lerna of Heresy breed, and this
first borne of Satan vomit forth. As these, that in Judea he was the Son of
God, in Samaria, the Father, and in other nations, the Holy Ghost. That Helena
bred Angels, and Angels made the world: That be himself came down from
heaven for his Helena, and that she was the lost sheep mentioned in the
Gospel, and that she was that Helena that occasioned the destruction of Troy:
And a great deal more of such hideous and blasphemous matter, recorded by
Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Augustine, Philastrius and others.

Histories have traced this Magical wretch, from Samaria to Rome, and there
have brought Simon Peter and him contending before Nero in working of miracles,
and Peter bringing him to harm and shame, which shall be tried in its proper
place.

Sect. V. The Holy Ghost given, ver. 17.
The Apostles at Jerusalem hearing the glad tidings of the conversion of
Samaria, send down unto them Peter and John. And why these two rather then any
other of the twelve, is not so easy to resolve, as it is ready to observe that
if in this employment there was any sign of Primacy, John was sharer of it as
well as Peter. Being come, they pray, and lay their hands upon them, and they
receive the Holy Ghost. Here Episcopacy thinks it has an undeniable Argument
for proof of its Hierarchy, and of the strange rite of confirmation. For thus
pleads Baronius for the former. From hence, says he, it may be seen that
the Hierarchicall order was instituted in the Church of God even in this time;
for Philip does so baptize those that believe, that yet he usurpeth not the
Apostolical privilege, namely the imposition of hands granted to the
Apostles. And thus the Rhemists both for it and for the latter in their notes
on Act. 8.17. If this Philip had been an Apostle, says S. Bid, he might
have imposed his hands that they might have received the Holy Ghost, but this
none can do saving Bishops. For though Priests may baptize and anoint the
baptized also with Chrisme consecrated by a Bishop, yet can he not sign his
forehead with the same holy oil, because that belongs only to Bishops, when
they give the holy Ghost to the baptized. And after this testimony of Bid they
subjoyne their own inference. This imposition therefore of hands, together
with the prayers here specified (which no doubt was the very same that the
Church uses to that purpose) was the ministration of the Sacrament of
Confirmation.

Now let the Reader with indifferency and seriousness but ruminate upon these
two Queries, and then judge of those two inferences;

First, whether Apostleship were not an Order for ever, unimitable in the
Church: for besides the Reason given to prove that it was, upon the choosing of
Matthias, others may be added to make it the more clear: As 1. the end of
their Election was peculiar, the like to which was not to be in the Church
again; for they were chosen to be with Christ, Mark 3.14. to be
eyewitnesses of his resurrection, Acts 1.22. and 2.32. and 10.41. as they had
been of his actions and passion, Luke 1.2. And therefore Paul pleading for his
Apostleship, uses this argument from a property necessary for an Apostle, That
he had seen the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.1. and in the relation or story of his
calling, this particular is singularly added, That he saw that just one, and
heard the voice of his mouth, Act. 22.14.

Secondly, the name of Apostles keeps it self unmixed or confounded, with
any other Order. It is true indeed that the significancy of the word would
agree to other Ministers that are sent to preach, but there is a peculiar
propriety in the sense that has confined the title to the twelve and Paul, as
any indifferent eye will judge and censure upon the weighing of it in the New
Testament.

Thirdly, when Paul reckons the several kinds of Ministry that Christ left
in the Church at his ascension, Ephesians. 4.11. and 1 Cor. 12.28. there is none
that can think them all to be perpetuated, or that they should continue
successively in the like order from time to time: For within an hundred years
after our Saviors birth, where were either Prophets or Evangelists, miracles
or healings? And if these extraordinary kinds of ministration were ordained but
for a time and for special occasion, and were not to be imitated in the Church
unto succeeding times; much more, or at the least as much, were the Apostles,
an Order much more, at least, as much extraordinary as they.

Fourthly, the constant and undeniable Parallel which is made betwixt the
twelve Patriarchs the Fathers of the twelve Tribes, and the twelve Apostles,
not only by the number it self, but also by the New Testament in the fou^e
and twenty Elders, Rev. 4.4. and in the gates and foundations of the new
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.12, 14. does argue and prove the latter order, as unimitable
as the first. These things well considered, if there were no more, it will show
how improbable and unconsonant the first inference is, that is alleged, that
because there was such a subordination betwixt the Apostles and Philip; that
therefore the like is to be reputed betwixt Bishops and other Mini^ters, and
that Bishops in the Church, are in the place of the Apostles.

A second Quaere, and very material to the matter in agitation is, wheth^^
imposition of hands were ever used by the Apostles, but for ordination to some
Office in the Church: For whereas their giving of the holy Ghost to Samaritans
in this s^or^, and (...) others elsewhere, is adduced as an example and argument
for that which is now called confirmation, and which has (...) indifferently
given to all (for it is good cheap) that this act of the Apostles aimed not,
nor intended to any such thing, may be reasonably conjectured and guessed at
by these considerations:

First, that the holy Ghost thus given, means not his ordinary work of
sanctification and confirming in Grace, but his extraordinary gifts, of
Tongues, Prophesying, and the like. And this is evident by the meaning of that
Phrase the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, (when it denotes not exactly the
Person of the holy Ghost, or the third Person in the Trinity) For as it is a
Rabbinick expression, very common in the writings of the Jews, and in the use
of the Nation; and evermore in their use and sense means only the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit mentioned: so does it constantly signify in
the Scripture; and it is very hard, if not utterly impossible to find it
signifying any other sense.

Secondly, it is yet more evident by the very historical relation of Luke
concerning the matter in hand; for in Acts 19.6. telling how Paul laid his
hands upon certain men at Ephesus, and they received the holy Ghost, he
instantly explaineth what were the gifts of the holy Ghost that they received,
for they spoke with tongues, says he, and prophesied. And it is not possible
to think but that Simon Magus (when he offered money for this fruit of the
imposition of his hands; that he might give the holy Ghost) saw some visible
apparent sign of the gift by the hands of the Apostles, which if it were only
sanctifying or confirming grace, how could he have seen it? So did they of
the Circumcision perceive when the gifts of the holy Ghost fell upon the
Gentiles, Acts 10.45. For they saw it by their speaking with tongues, and
magnifying God, ver. 46.

Fourthly, it being then thus undeniable that the gifts conferred by the
imposition of hands, were the extraordinary ones of the holy Ghost; it can as
little also be denied that they were imparted only to some singular and
particular persons, and not to all whatsoever without distinction. For
otherwise, 1. It must be granted that Simon Magus received them as well as
others, which I know not who will grant; for by his familiarity with Philip and
the Apostles (he having also been baptized with the rest, and his wickedness
and his villainy not yet broken forth) he might have gotten a precedence in
this gift before others, if it had been general.

2. It would bring Women under imposition of hands, which can hardly be dreamed
of, or ever was of any one. It is true indeed that women might, and did receive
some of these extraordinary gifts, but it was by immediate influence from
Heaven and not by any imposition of hands.

So that now if we look upon this Story, and upon others of the like nature,
through these spectacles, it will appear that this Imposition of the Apostles
hands was not upon all the Samaritans, but upon some selected number, nor upon
those selected ones for their confirmation in grace, but for their ordination
to the Ministry, and with the imposition of hands they received the holy Ghost
to enable them for that work.

Verse. 26. Which is desert.
This is to be applied to the way ^o Gaza, and not to Gaza itself: and so the
Syriack and Arabic apply it expressly and warrantably, seeing the way was
through the wilderness of Judah, and there was but one Gaza.

Verse. 27. A man of Aethiopia.
There is mention of a double Cush or Ethiopia in scripture, for so is it
rendered, the one in Arabia, and the other in Africa; and Homer even in his time
speaks of a twofold Ethiopia, Odys. 1. but it is questionable whether he
mean the same with the Scripture, or no, since he calls them Eastern and
Western; whereas these were East and South. Now this man is held, and that
upon good ground, to be of Ethiopia in Africa, where the name of Candace is
renowned even in Heathen Authors.

Verse. 33. Who shall declare his generation.
This Prophecy of Esaias which the Eunuch was reading, is exceedingly much
mistaken by the Jews, and this clause of the Prophecy is exceedingly
controverted among Christians. The Jews understand it, some of them concerning
Josiah, others concerning the whole people of Israel, but the holy Ghost has
in the place put us out of all doubt of whom it speaks. But as for the sense
of this clause, some Christians understand it concerning the ineffability of
Christ's eternal generation: others concerning the ineffability of his
incarnation, or the generation of his humane nature united to the Godhead:
others concerning the wondrous generation of the Church and faithful; for it
follows, For he was cut off from the Land of the living, and yet the
generation of his faithful ones increased. But it seems to me that the word
(...) and (...) is to be understood of the age and generation in which Christ
lived, rather then of his own generation or descent* and so is it used by the
holy Ghost in other places, as Genesis 6.9. Acts 13.36. etc. and so is it
interpreted here by the Chaldee and other Jewish glossaries: Now the meaning of
the verse and of this clause is to this purpose, He was taken away and hurryed
from Prison, and from Judgment to Execution, and as the Lxx has enlarged the
sense by change of Phrase, In his poor and dejected estate, his Judgment was
utterly taken away, and no right done him; and who can sufficiently speak of
the looseness and wickedn^sse of that generation, (called in the Gospel the
v^perous, adulterous, wicked, untoward generation) which deal^ so unjustly and
wretchedly with him, as to take and cut him off from the land of the living?

Verse. 39. And the Eunuch went (...)
Dorotheus in Synopsi, if he might be believed, will ^ell you what became of
this Eunuch afterward; as that he preached the Gospel in Arabia, in the Isle of
Tapr^b^ne, and all about the red Sea; and that he is reported to have suffered
martyrdom gloriously, and to have been buried there, Bi^li^^h. patr. ^om. 7.
But believe it that list; for this I observe to be the constant and common
officiousness of Superstition, to make any man that is mentioned in the New
Testament with a good report, to become a Preacher, and commonly a Bishop, and
constantly a Martyr.

Acts IX.
Sect. I. Paul converted.
IN this year must be placed the conversion of Paul, and the reasons to prove
the time, shall be given anon. A man, a wonder (for so will Hieron.
some have his name to signify) in whom was showed as much as can be seen in
man, both for want of grace, and for abundance. Inferior to none in
wickedness, but only in this, that it was not final; and inferior to none
in holiness, no not to the greatest Apostles. A scene on which at one time
corrupt Nature showed her cursed vigor; and at another time sanctifying Grace
her sacred power; and both to such an extent, as not many parallels. He was
borne in Tarsus of Cilicia a free City of the Romans, and himself a freeman
of that City. His parents were both Jews; and therefore he calls himself
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, 2 Cor. 11.21. Phil. 3.5. Romans 11.1.
or an Hebrew both by father and mother. His descent was of Benjamin, which
from the general division under Jeroboam the first, had adhered constant to
the tribe of Judah, and so kept Registers of their Genealogies, as that tribe
did. According to his double nation, he also bare a double name, Saul, as he
was an Hebrew by birth, and Paul as he was a Roman by freedom: His education
was in the Schools of Tarsus, where as Strabo rrcordeth were Schoollers no
whit inferior to the Students in Athens. Here he attained the Greek language
and learning, and grew expert in their Philosophy and Poems, his skill wherein
he shows, in alleging Epimenides, Aratus, Tit. 1.12. Act. 17.28. 1 Cor
15.33.
and Menander. From thence he was sent to the Universitie at Jerusalem, for
the study of Divinity and of the Jewish Law. His tutor was Gamaliel a
Pharisee, Act. 22.3.
a man of special note and reverence among the people. His proficiency was
above many of his equals of his own nation, Gal. 1.14.
he being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions of the fathers. Act. 18.3.
From his youth he also learned a handy trade of making Tents, and joined the
working in that by some vicissitudes with his studies: which thing was common
with the Scholars of the Jews, partly for the earning of their maintenance,
and partly for the avoiding of idleness and sin. So Rabbi Judah the great
Cabalist, bare the name and trade of Hhajat a Shoemaker or Tailor.

Yet was the learning of this great Scholar but gorgeous ignorance, and his
forward zeal, but the more excellent impiety. When he thought he followed
holiness, he persecuted it, and when his studies should have overtaken the
truth, then had he lost both them and it and himself and all.

As for Saul, says Luke, he made havoc of the Church, Act. 8.3. and 22.4.
entering into every house, and haling men and women committed them to prison.
He began now to write his positions in blood, and it must be no less then
death or abjuration not to be of his opinion. Acts 26.11.
Neither was this his fury confined within the walls of Jerusalem, or the
compass of Judea, but overflowed also unto foreign Cities: where the Jewish
Synagogues acknowledging subjection to the metropolitan See, submit to her
letters, and are too ready to perform her will. Among the rest he obtains
commission for Damascus, whither a poor Church having but lately overrun,
persecution is ready now to be overrun by it again: But by the way, he is
m^t with by Christ and from a Lion made a Lamb, and he that went to lead
captivity is himself captived.

In the story of this great wonder, the Text and the matter it self calls
upon us to consider these things.

1. That the most notorious persecutor that the Gospel had yet found, is chosen
of all others to be the Doctor of the Gentiles: that even his own example, or
rather the glorious example of Gods mercy in his conversion, might be a
comfortable doctrine to those notorious sinners of the Gentiles as well as his
preaching.

2. That the like divine violence was never used for the converting of a sinner
either before or since: but 1. it was necessary that he should see Christ, as
Verse. 17. because it was a necessary ingredient toward the making of an
Apostle, to have seen the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.1. And 2. it was needful, that the
Lord should appear to him in such daunting power, not only for his own
quelling, but also for the terror of all persecutors for the time to come.

3. This appearance of the Lord unto him, was not so much in his person as in
his glory, nor what he saw of him, besides the light that struck him blind,
was with the eyes of his body but of his spirit.

4. The place was near Damascus from whence had sprung one of the sharpest
persecutors that Israel had groaned under, a King. 11.32. Amos 1.3. compare,
Genesis 14.15.

5. The manner is so plainly set down in the Text, that it is needless to
insist upon it: only these two or three things may not unfitly be touched
upon and taken to thought. 1. That more was spoken from heaven, then Luke has
here related, as appears by Paul's own relation of it, Act. 26.16, 17, 18. but
the holy Ghost frequently uses to speak out stories to the full, some parts
in one place, some in another, challenging the readers pains and study, to
pick them up. 2. That whereas in Chap. 9.7. it is said that those that
travailed with Paul heard the voice, but in Chap. 22 9. that they heard not the
voice, it is to be understood, that they heard the voice of Paul speaking to
Christ, but not Christ's voice to him: or if they heard the voice from heaven,
yet they understood not what it said. 3. Whereas in Chap. 9.7. it is said these
men stood speechless, but in Chap. 26.14. that they fell all to the ground:
the word (...) in Chap. 9.7. stands in opposition to their going forward and
not to their falling to the earth, and means, that their amazedness fixed
them that they could not flee nor stir.

Sect. II. The year of his conversion.
Some have conceived that he was rapt into the third heaven, and learned the
Gospel by revelation, as 2 Cor. 12. in those three days that he was blind
after the sight of this glorious light, and whilst he fasted and prayed, Act.
9.9. And from this conceit has another grown, as a supporter of that that
bred it, namely that he was not converted till seven years after our Saviors
Ascension. This latter opinion was first invented, that his writing of the
second Epistle to the Corinthians might be brought within the compass of
about fourteen years after his conversion; for so long a time and no more
he sets betwixt his rapture and that Epistle, 2 Cor. 12.2. and it was also
originally grounded upon this supposition, that his rapture was in the time of
that his blindness. Two surmises probable and plausible enough to behold at
distance, but approaching nearer to them they will lose of their beauty, and
upon serious weighing they will prove but a shadow. The question how he came
to the knowledge of the Gospel so soon, in so much that he so soon preached
it, very likely gave the first occasion of the first opinion, namely of his
rapture in his three days blindness.

A question to which an answer may be easily given, and yet no such
consequence concluded upon it. 1. It is true indeed, that he received not the
knowledge of the Gospel of man, nor was he taught it but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ, as himself says, Gal. 1.12. yet might he have such a
revelation, without any such rapture: For there were three other special ways
whereby God used to reveal himself and his will to his Prophets and servants,
and those were by dreams, by visions and by a sudden and immediate
suggestion or revelation, which is called telling in the ear, as 1 Samuel
9.15.17. 2 King. 20.4. And as for raptures they were the most extraordinary and
the least familiar of all other: And how easily might Paul be taught the
mystery of the Gospel by some of the other means, especially since the Text
has expressly told that he had his visions? Act. 9.12. 2 Paul himself tells
of an ecstasie or rapture that he was in, as he was praying in the Temple at
Jerusalem, Act. 22.17. Now that that was in the second year of Claudius (as
shall be showed by and by) when he went to carry the alms of the Disciples
to Jerusalem, Act. 11.30. it may be confidently concluded upon, because that
God in that his rapture tells him that he must thence forward go far away
to preach unto the Gentiles, Act. 22.21. and when he returns from Jerusalem
to Antioch, he is sent by the Church upon that employment, by a special charge
of the holy Ghost, Act. 13.2. And that from that time to the time of his
writing the second Epistle to the Corinthians, were about fourteen years as
himself summeth it, we shall evidence by some particulars, before we part
from this subject. Thus then in the first place we see that neither his
rapture was at the time of his conversion, nor that his conversion is to be
cast six or seven years forward that it may be within fourteen of that
Epistle in regard of his rapture. But not to intricate our selves any more in
the variety of opinions, that have fixed some one time, some another to the
conversion of this Apostle, the next, readiest and surest way that I have found
to resolve upon this doubtful question and to determine this scruple, is to
go by these collections and degrees.

I. That the famine prophesied of by Agabus, and which is said to have fallen
out in the time of Claudius the Emperor, Act. 11.28. fell out and came to
pass in his second year: And for this we have the testimony of a Roman
Historian, even Dion Cassius who under the Consulship of Claudius II. and Cajus
Largus which was in the second year of Claudius his reign speaks of (...),
which his translater has rendered fames inge^s, Dion. lib. 60. Now although it
might seem that that famine only referred to the City of Rome, and was caused
there through the unnavigablenesse of the River Tiber, which should have
brought in Provisions; because he says, (...), and^. that Claudius provided
not only for the present famine, but also for future times, by mending the
Haven and clearing the River: yet Suetonius writing the very same story,
ascribes the cause of the famine not to the fault of the River or Haven, but
to a constant sterilitie or barrenness, and so inlargeth the extent of it
further then Rome: Arctiore autem annona ob assiduas sterilitates, etc. In
Claud* cap. 18. Josephus, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 2. speaks of this great famine
in Judea, and relates how Helena the Queen dowager of the Adiabeni, and
Izates her son then reigning, she being at Jerusalem in her own person and
he in his own kingdom, did bring in provisions in an exceeding plenty to the
Jews at Jerusalem for their sustenance in the famine, for they were both
converted to the Jews religion and Izates circumcised. Eusebius hereupon has
set this famine in Claudius his fourth year, and after the death of Herod
Agrippa, because that he found that Josephus had placed it after Agrippaes
death, which was in Claudius his third. But we find not in Josephus any thing
that may fix it to that year, more then the subs^quence of one story to
another, which is an argument of no validity: only this he relates as
concerning the time of Izates, that when he first came to the Crown, and
found his elder brethren imprisoned that he might come to the Throne the more
quietly, he was gri^ved at the matter, and on the one hand accounting it
impiety to kill them or to keep them prisoners, and on the other hand knowing
it unsafe to keep them with him and not imprisoned, he chose a mean between
both, and sent them for hostages to Rome to Claudius Caesar: And after this be
relates, how he hasted upon his coming to the Crown to be Circumcised; and
after his Circumcision, how his mother Helena went to Jerusalem and relieved
it, being much affamished. Now in what year of Claudius any of these things
were done, he has not mentioned, but has left it at large; and therefore we
may as well suppose, that Izates was made King in the first year of Claudius,
and Helena his mother went to Jerusalem in his second, as Eusebius may, that
she went thither in his fourth.

II. That Paul going at that time of the famine to Jerusalem, to bring the
alms and collection to the poor Brethren of Judea, had his trance in the
Temple, Acts 22.17. and in that trance he was rapt into the third Heaven, 2
Cor. 12.2. It may be thought indeed by the juncture of Story that Luke has
made, that this his trance, was at his first journey which he took to
Jerusalem after his conversion, which journey is mentioned, Acts 9.28. and Gal.
1.18. for having from the sixth verse of Acts 2^. and forward, related the
Story of his conversion, and of Ananias coming to him and baptizing him, he
presently subjoyneth this, when I was come again to Jerusalem, and was praying
in the Temple, I was in a trance; as if that had been the very first time,
that ever he came there after he was converted. But besides, that it is very
common with Scripture to make such juncture for times and Stories, as if they
were close together, when oftentimes there is very much space of time betwixt
them, as Mat. 19.1. Luke 4.13, 14. Acts 9.20, 21, 26, 27. ^he proper intent of
the Apostle in that Oration of his Acts 22. is to vindicate himself* from the
accusation laid against him for polluting the Temple; and chiefly to plead his
authority and commission, and why he had to deal among the Gentiles, and
therefore he insists upon two particular Commissions, one to Preach, and the
other to preach to the Gentiles; and this is the reason why he joins his
conversion, and his rapture in the Temple so close together, and not because
they were so in time. Now this scruple being thus removed, and that considered
which was said before, that in this trance in the Temple, God said he was to
send him to the Gentiles, and that accordingly he was dispatched to that work
as soon as he came to Antioch; it cannot but be concluded that his trance in
the Temple was in the second of Claudius, and that this was his rapture into
the third Heaven, since we read not of any rapture or trance that he had, but
this.

III. That this trance or rapture was somewhat above fourteen years before
he wrote his second Epistle to Corinth, 2 Cor. 12.2. Now in that he says it
was (...) before, or above fourteen years ago, he speaks not of an
indefinite time, for then for ought any reason can be given to the contrary,
he might as well have let the mention of the time alone, but that it was but a
little above that space, though it were somewhat above exact fourteen years.

IV. When he wrote that second Epistle to Corinth he was in Macedonia, as is
apparent by very many passages in that Epistle, chap. 1.14. and 2.13. and 7.5.
and 9.2, 4. And thither he went upon the hubbub at Ephesus raised against him,
Act. 20.1. where he had even the sentence of death in himself, 2 Cor. 1.9.

V. Now to count fourteen years complete from the second of Claudius, in
which was Paul's rapture, it will bring us to the second year of Nero. And let
us but cast and compute those shreds of time that we can find hinted in the
Acts of the Apostles, and we shall find them agreeing with this account, and
giving some light unto it. As first, it is said by Paul, that after he had
been at Jerusalem, he must also see Rome, Acts 19.21. Now this does argue the
death of Claudius: for if he had expected all the Jews out of Rome, as it is
averred both by the Scripture, Acts 18.2. and by Suetonius in Claud. chapt. 25.
and never revoked his Edict for ought we can read in any Story; it is very
unlikely, and unreasonable to think, that Paul should think of going thither
if Claudius were alive: for thither could he neither go without evident and
inevitable danger of his own life, nor could he find so much as one person,
of his own Nation in the City when he came there. By this therefore may be
concluded that Claudius was now dead, and Nero was going on his first year,
when Paul publishes his resolution to go for Rome. And the times from hence
to his apprehension at Jerusalem may be cast by these Counters. After this his
declaring his intention for Rome, he stays in Asia for a season, Acts 19.22.
Now that this season was not long, both the preceding and following Verses do
help to confirm; for in the Verse before Paul is in a manner upon his motion
toward Macedonia, and so to Jerusalem already. And it is very likely that the
feast of Tabernacles which was in September induced him thither; but the danger
that he was in at Ephesus before his parting, Act. 19.23, 24. etc.
disappointed him of his journey thither, he being now put off from providing
accommodation for his voyage, and put to shift for life and liberty. About the
middle of October, Neroes first year was out: and Paul by that time it is like
is got to Macedonia, and while he continues there he writes this Epistle; as
the subscription of it in the Greek, Syriack, Arabic, and diverse other
Translations do reasonably well aim it here; howsoever they do it in other
places: Or if we should yield to Baronius, that it was written from Nicopolis,
Tit. 2.12. it makes no difference, as to the thing in hand, or at least very
little, since we are upon the time, and not upon the place; and the time of
difference will not be above a month or two. Paul wintering so little at
Nicopolis, as that he was in motion again about the beginning of January, if
not before, for his three months travail of Greece, brings it up to the
Passover time, or near upon, Acts 20.3.6. And after the Passover week Paul
sets for Jerusalem, as the Story plainly leads him thither; and thence is he
Shipped for Rome, toward the latter end of our September, or about the Fast and
solemn day of humiliation, Acts 27.9. And this was in the second year of
Nero, now almost expiring, or very near unto its end: And to this sense
seems that account in Acts 24.27. to be understood, After two years Portius
Festus came into Felix room. Not after two years of Paul's imprisonment, for
that is utterly without any ground or warrant in the world, nor after two
years of Felix Government, for he had been Governor in Iud^a many years,
Acts 24.10. but after two years of Neroes Empire, or when he had now sitten
Emperor about two years; for that the Scripture sometime reckons from such
unnamed dates, might be showed, from Ezekiel. 1.1. 2 Samuel 15.7. 2 Chronicles. 22.2.
And that it is so to be understood, may be confirmed out of Josephus Antiq.
lib. 20. cap. 7. etc.

So that this time being fixed of Paul's apprehension at Jerusalem, to be in
Neroes second* as Eusebius and others have well held, and his writing the
second Epistle to Corinth proving to be about the beginning of that year; and
so the fourteen years mentioned 2 Cor. 12.2. measured out.

VI. We must now count backward from this time to the Council at Jerusalem,
and as near as we can, cast up what time might be taken up, betwixt those
two periods, in the motions and stations of the Apostle, that the Text has
expressed betwixt the 15 Chapter of the Acts and the twentyeth: Or rather let
us count forward for the more facil and methodicall proceeding, and take up
what may be guessed to be every years work and passage as it comes to
hand.

Paul comes from Jerusalem to Antioch with Judas, Silas and Barnabas, Acts
15.20.

Judas and Silas stay there a space, verse 33.

Paul stays after they be gone away, verse 35.

Some days after he departs, verse 36, 40.

He goes through Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches, verse 41.

To Derbe and Lyst^a, chap. 16.1.

Through the Cities, and delivers the Apostles decrees, ver. 4.

Throughout Phrygia, ver. 6.

Throughout the region of Galatia, verse. 16. To all these journeys we may allow
one year; and certainly if the movings and stayings of the Apostle, and the
distance of the places, and the work he did be considered, there can no less
then a whole year be allowed for all this progress.

After his passage through Galatia, Paul goes to Mysia, Acts 16.7.

To Troas, verse 6.

To Samothrace, Neapolis and Philippi, ver. 11, 12.

At Philippi he continues many days, ver. 13, 16, 18.

Thence he passes through Amphipolis and Apollonia, chap. 17.1.

Comes to Thessalonia, and is there three Sabbath days in quiet, ver. 2.

Afterward is persecuted, ver. 5.

Goes to Berea and converteth very many, verse. 10, 12.

Goes from thence to Athens, ver. 15.

There waits for Silas and Timothy, ver. 16.

From thence goes to Corinth, Acts 18.1. For all these journeys and actions
we will allow him half a year, and I cannot see how they could take so little.

At Corinth he continues a year and an half, Acts 18. verse 11. And this
makes up 3 years since the Council at Jerusalem.

After this long stay at Corinth he is persecuted, yet tarryeth a good while
after, Acts 18.18.

From thence he saileth to Ephesus, but stays little, ver. 19.

Goes thence to Cesarea.

To Jerusalem.

To Antioch, and spends some time there, Acts 18.22, 23.

Goes over all the Country of Galatia,

And Phrygia in order, Acts 18.23. To these passages I suppose there is hardly
any that can allow him less then a whole year, that shall but seriously
consider of the things that are mentioned, and the length of the journeys.

After his passing through Phrygia he comes to Ephesus, Acts 19.1.

And there continues three years, Acts 19.8, 10, 21, 22. and 20.31.

After this he goes into Macedonia, Acts 20.1. from whence he writes that
second Epistle to Corinth in the beginning of the 2 year of Nero. So that
yielding these seven years for the travails of this Apostle, betwixt that time
and the Council of Jerusalem, Acts 15. (and less then seven, it is not
possible to allow, seeing that four years and an half of that space was
taken up in the two Cities of Corinth and Ephesus) and it will result that the
Council at Jerusalem was in the ninth year of Claudius: Now Paul himself
reckons seventeen years from his conversion to this Council, Gal. 1.18. and
2.1, which seventeen counted backward from the ninth of Claudius it falls out
almost past all controversy that Paul's conversion was in the next year after
our Saviors ascension; as may be seen by this ensuing table.

Christ. Tiberius. 33 18 Christ ascends. 34 19 Paul converted. 35 20 Goes
into Arabia. 36 21 Comes up to Jerusalem. 37 22 38 1 Caius. 39 2 40 3 41 4 42
1 Claudius. 43 2 The famine, Act. 11.28. Paul rapt into the third Heaven. 44 3
45 4 46 5 47 6 48 7 49 8 50 9 The Council at Jerusalem. Paul goes to Antioch,
Syria, Cilicia, etc. 51 10 Paul the latter half this year at Corinth, the
former half in Athens, Beraea, Thessalonia, etc. 52 11 Paul all this year at
Corinth. 53 12 Paul in Phrygia, Galatia, Antioch, Ierus. Caesarea, Ephesus,
Corinth. 54 13 Paul at Ephesus. 55 14 Paul at Ephesus. 56 1 Nero. Paul at
Ephesus. 57 2 Paul writes the second Epistle to Corinth.
And now may we in some scantling fix those Stories to their times which hung
loosely before, namely, the choosing of the Deacons, the death of Stephen,
conversion of Samaria and the Eunuch, and conclude that they were about the
beginning of the next year after Christ's ascension.

Part II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Velleius Paterculus.
TIBERIUS keeps himself still in the Country, but not still at Capreae:
Dion sub his co^^.
for this year he draws near unto Rome, and haunteth in some places about
four miles off, but comes not at all unto the City. This seems to be his
first journey toward it, that Suetonius speaks of In Tiber cap. 17
when he came by water to the Gardens beside the Naumachy, or the Poole in
Tiber where they used their sporting sea fights, and returned again, but the
cause not known. The first thing mentioned of him under these Consulls, both
by Tacitus and Dion, is his marrying forth the daughter of Drusus, which they
name not; and Iulia and Drusilla the daughters of Germanicus; Drusilla to L.
Cassius, Iulia to M. Vinicius. This was a son of that M. Vinicius to whom
Paterculus dedicateth his short and sweet Roman History. And the nearenesse of
the time would very nearely persuade that this was that very Vinicius himself,
but that Paterculus shows that his Vinicius was Consul when he wrote his
Book to him; and that (as himself, and Dion agreeing with him shows) An. V.
C. 783, or the next year after our Saviors Baptism^; but this Vinicius,
Tiberius his son in law, (as Tacitus intimates) was only a Knight, but a
Consuls son. Howsoever, in these times shone forth and flourished the excellent
wit, and matchless pen of that Historian, an Author known to all Learned men,
and admired by all that know him: His Original was from the Campanians, as
himself witnesses not very far from the beginning of his second book, when
he comes to speak of the Italian war in the time of Sylla and Marius. No
pen is so fit to draw his pedigree and Character as his own, and therefore
take only his own words; Neque ego verecundia, domestici sanguinis gloriae
dum verum refero sub^raham, etc. Nor will I for modesty derogate any thing from
the honor of mine own blood, so that I speak no more then truth; for much is
to be attributed to the memory of Minatius Magius my great-Grandfathers
Father, a man of Asculum; who being Or Grandchild
Nephew to Decius Magius, a renowned Prince of the Campanians, and a most
faithful man, was so trusty to the Romans in this war, that with a Legi^n
which he had banded, Pompey took Herculaneum, together with T. Didius; when
L. Sulla besieged, and took in Consa. Of whose virtues both others, but
especially and most plainly Q. Hortensius has made relation in his Annals.
Whose Loyalty the people of Rome did fully requite, by enfranchising both him
and his, and making two of his Sons Pretors. His Grandfather was C. Velleius,
Master of the Engineers to Cn. Pompey, M. Bru^us and Tiro; a man, says he,
second to none in Campany, whom I will not defraud of that testimony which I
wou^d give to a stranger: He at the departure of Nero ( Tiberius his father)
out of Naples, whose part he had taken for his singular friendship with him,
being now unweldy with age and bulk of body, when he could not accompany him
any longer, he slew himself. Of his Fathers, and of his own rank and
profession, thus speaks he jointly: At this time (namely, about the time that
Augustus adopted Tiberius) after I had been Field-Marshall, I became a
Soldier of Tiberius; and being sent with him General of the Horse into
Germany, which Office my Father had borne before; for nine whole years
together, I was either a spectator, or to my poor ability a forwarder of his
most celestial designs; being either a Commander, or an Ambassadoir. And a
little after: In this war, (against the Hungarians and Dalmatians, and other
Nations revolted) my meandness had the place of an eminent Officer. For having
end^d my service with the Horse, I was made Qu^stor; and being not yet a
Senator, I was equalled with the Senators. And the tribunes of the people being
now designed, I l^d a part of the Army delivered to me by Augustus, from the
City to his Son. And in my Questorship, the lot of my Province being
remitted, I was sent Ambassador from him to him again. Partner in the like
employments and honors, he had a brother named Magius Celer Velleianus, that
likewise attended Tib^rius in the Dalmatian war, and was honored by him in his
triumph, and afterward were his brother and he made Pretors. When he wrote
that abridgement of the Roman History which we now have extant, he had a
larger work of the same subject in hand, of which he makes mention in diverse
places; which he calls justum opus, and justa volumina, but so far has
time and fortune denied us so promising and so promised a piece; that this his
abstract is come short home and miserably curtailed to our hands. So do
Epitomes too commonly devour the Original, and pretending to ease the toil of
reading larger volumes, they bring them into neglect and loss. In the
unhappines of the loss of the other, it was somewhat happy that so much of
this is preserved as is; a fragment of as excellent compacture, as any is in
the Roman tongue; wherein sweetness and gravity, eloquence and truth,
shortness and variety, are so compacted and compounded together, that it
finds few parallels either Roman or other.

Sect. 2. Troubles in Rome about usury.
This year there was a great disturbance in the City about Usury, the too
common, and the too necessary evil of a Commonwealth. This breed-bate had
several times heretofore disturbed that State, though strict and rigorous
courses were still taken about it. At the first, the interest of money lent,
was proportioned and limited only at the disposal of the lender, a measure
always inconstant, and often unconscionable. Whereupon, it was fixed at the
last by the twelve tables to an ounce in the pound, which is proportionable in
our English coin, to a penny in the shilling. Afterward by a Tribune statute
it was reduced to half an ounce, and at last the trade was quite forbidden.
But such weeds are ever growing again, though weeded out as clean as
possible; and so did this: Partly, through the covetousness of the rich,
making way for their own profit; and partly through the necessities of the
poor, giving way to it for their own supply.

Gracchus now Praetor, and he to whom the complaint was made at this time,
being much perplexed with the matter, refers it to the Senate as perplexed
as himself. He perplexed because of the multitude that were in danger, by
breach of the Law; and they, because they were in danger themselves. Here was a
prize for the greedy appetite of Tiberius, when so many of the best rank and
purses, were fallen into his lurch, and their moneys lent fallen into
forfeiture, because of their unlawful lending. The guilty Senate obtain the
Emperors pardon, and eighteen months are allowed for bringing in of all men's
accounts: In which time the scarcity of money did pinch the more, when every
ones debts did come to rifling: and in the nick of that there followed a great
disturbance about buying Lands, which before was invented for a remedy against
the former complaints. But the Emperor was glad to salve up the matter by
lending great sums of Money to the people gratis for three years.

Sect. 3. Tiberius still cruel.
With this one dram of humanity, he mingled many ounces of cruelty and
bloodshed. For Considius Proculus as he was celebrating his birth day without
fear and with Festivity, is haled out of his own house, brought to the bar
and condemned: and his sister Sancia interdicted fire and water. Pompeia
Macrina banished; and her father and brother condemned, and slew themselves.
But this year there is no reckoning of the slaughtered by name, for now their
number grew numberless. All that were imprisoned and accused for conspiracy
with Sejanus, he causes to be slain every mothers son. Now, says mine
Author, there lay an infinite massacre of all sexes, ages, conditions, noble
and ignoble, either dispersed, or together on heaps. Nor was it permitted to
friends or kindred to comfort, bewail, or behold them any more: but a Guard
set, which for the greater grief abused the putrified bodies till they were
haled into Tiber, and there left to sink or swim, for none was suffered to
touch or bury them. So far was common humanity banished, and pity denied even
after death, revenge being unsatisfied when it had revenged, and cruelty
extended beyond it self. Nor did the accusers speed better then the accused,
for he also caused them to be put to death as well as the other, under that
color of justice and retaliation, satisfying his cruelty both ways to the
greater extent. It were to be admired, and with admiration to be admired, never
to be satisfied (were it not that the avenging hand of God upon the bloody City
is to be acknowledged in it) that ever a people should be so universally bent
one against another, seeking the ruin and destruction one of another, and
furthering their own misery, when they were most miserable already, in him
that sought the ruin of them all. A fitter instrument could not the Tyrant
have desired for such a purpose then themselves; nor when he had them so
pliable to their own mischief, did he neglect the opportunity, or let them
be idle: For as he saw accusations increase, so did he increase his laws to
breed more: insomuch that at the last it grew to be capital, for a servant to
have fallen before, or near the image of Augustus, or for any man to carry
either coin or ring into the Stews, or house of Office, if it bare upon it
the image of Tiberius.

Sect. 3. A wicked accusation.
Who can resolve whether it were more vexation to suffer upon such foolish
accusations, or upon others more solid; but as false as these were foolish?
That was the fortune of Sextus Marius an intimate friend of the Emperors; but
as it proved, not the Emperor so of his: This was a man of great riches and
honor, and in this one action of a strange vainglory and revenge. Having
taken a displeasure at one of his Neighbors, he inviteth him to his house,
and there detained him feasting two days together. And on the first day he
pulls his house down to the ground, and on the next he builds it up far
fairer and larger then before. The honest man when he returned home found what
was done, admired at the speed of the work, rejoiced at the change of his
house, but could not learn who had done the deed. At the last Marius confessed
that he was the agent, and that he had done it with this intent, To show him
that he had power to do him a displeasure, or a pleasure, as he should
deserve it. Ah blinded Marius, and too indulgent to thine own humors! se^st
thou not the same power of Tiberius over thee? and thy fortunes pinned upon his
pleasure, as thy neighbors upon thine. And so it came to pass that fortune
read him the same lecture, that his fancy had done another. For having a young
beautiful Daughter, and such a one, as on whom the Emperor had cast an eye,
and so plainly, that the father spyed it, he removed her to another place, and
kept her there close and at distance, lest she should have been violated by
him, who must have no denial. Tiberius imagined as the thing was indeed, and
when he sees that he cannot enjoy his love, and satisfy his lust, he
turns it to hate and revenge. And causes Marius to be accused of incest with
his daughter whom he kept so close, and both father and daughter are
condemned, and suffer for it both together.

Sect. 5. A miserable life and death.
In these so fearful and horrid times, when nothing was safe, nothing secure,
when silence and innocence were no protection, nor to accuse, no more safeguard
then to be accused, but when all things went at the Emperors will, and that
will always cruel, what course could any man take not to be entangled, and
what way being entangled to extricate himself? The Emperors frowns were
death, and his favors little better; to be accused was condemnation, and to
accuse was often as much; that now very many found no way to escape death but
by dying, nor to avoid the cruelty of others, but by being cruel to
themselves. For though selfe-murder was always held for a Roman valor, yet
now was it become a mere necessity; men choosing that miserable exigent to
avoid a worse, as they supposed, and a present end, to escape future evils. So
did Asinius Gallus at this time for the one, and Nerva for the other. This
Gallus about three years ago, coming to Tiberius upon an Ambassy, was
fairly entertained and royally feasted by him, but in the very interim he
writes letters to the Senate in his accusation. Such was the Tyrant^
friendship; and so sour sauce had poor Asinius to his dainty fare. A thing
both inhumane and unusual, that a man the same day should eat, drink and be
merry with the Emperor, and the same day be condemned in the Senate upon the
Emperors accusation. An Officer is sent to fetch him away a Prisoner; from
whence he had but lately gone Ambassador. The pooreman being thus betrayed,
thought it vain to beg for life; for that he was sure would be denied him,
but he begged that he might presently be put to death, and that was denied
also. For the bloody Emperor delighted not in blood and death only, but in
any thing that would cause other men's misery, though it were their life. So
having once committed one of his friends to a most miserable and intolerable
imprisonment; and being solicited and earnestly sued unto, that he might be
speedily executed and put out of his misery, he flatly denied it, saying, That
he was not grown friends with him yet. Such was the penance that he put
poor Gallus to: a life far worser then a present death; for he ought him
more spite and torture then a sudden execution. The miserable man being
imprisoned and straightly looked to, not so much for fear of his escape by
flight, as of his escape by death, was denied the sight and conference of any
one whosoever, but him only that brought him his pitiful diet, which served
only to prolong his wretched life, and not to comfort it; and he was forced to
take it, for he must by no means be suffered to die. Thus lived (if it may
be called a life) a man that had been of the honourablest rank and office in
the City; lingering and wishing for death, or rather dying for three years
together; and now at last he finds the means to famish himself, and to
finish his miserable bondage with as miserable an end; to the sore displeasure
of the Emperor, for that he had escaped him, and not come to public
execution.

Such an end also chose Nerva one of his near friends and familiars, but not
like the other, because of miseries past or present; but because of fear and
foresight of such to come. His way that he took to dispatch himself of his
life, was by total abstinence and refusal of food; which when Tiberius
perceived was his intent, he sits down by him, desires to know his reason,
and begs with all earnestness of him, that he would desist from such a design:
For what scandal, says he, will it be to me, to have one of my nearest
friends to end his own life, and no cause given why he should so die? But Nerva
satisfied him not either in answer or in act, but persisted in his pining of
himself, and so dyed.

Sect. 6. The miserable ends of Agrippina and Drusus.
To such like ends came also Agrippina and Drusus, the wife and son of
Germanicus, and mother and brother of Caius, the next Emperor that should
succeed. These two, the daughter in law, and Grandchild of Tiberius himself,
had about four years ago been brought into question by his unkind and
inhumane accusation, and into hold and custody until this time. It was the
common opinion that the cursed instigation of Sejanus, whom the Emperor had
raised purposely for the ruin of Germanicus his house had set such an
accusation a foot; and made the man to be so cruel toward his own family;
but when the two accused ones had miserably survived the wicked Sejanus, and
yet nothing was remitted of their prosecution, then opinion learned to lay the
fault where it deserved, even on the cruelty and spite of Tiberius himself.
Drusus is adjudged by him to die by famine, and miserable and woeful wretch
that he was, he sustaineth his life for nine days together, by eating the
flocks out of his bed, being brought to that lamentable and unheard of diet,
through extremity of hunger. Here at last was an end of Drusus his misery, but
so was there not of Tiberius his cruelty toward him; for he denied the dead
body burial in a fitting place; he reviled and disgraced the memory of him
with hideous and feigned scandals and criminations, and shamed not to publish
in the open Senate, what words had passed from the pining man against Tiberius
himself; when in agony through hunger he craved meat, and was denied it. Oh
what a sight and hearing was this to the eyes and ears of the Roman people, to
behold him that was a child of their dar^ing and delight Germanieus, to be thus
barbarously and inhumanely brought to his end, and to hear his own Grandfather
confess the action and not dissemble it!

Agrippina the woeful mother, might dolefully conjecture what would become of
her self, by this fatal and terrible end of the poor Prince her son. And it
was not long, but she tasted of the very same cup, both of the same kind of
death, and of the same kind of disgracing after. For being pined after the same
manner, that it might be colored that she did it of her self (a death very
unfitting the greatest Princess then alive,) she was afterward slandered by
Tiberius for adultery with Gallus that died so lately, and that she caused her
own death for grief of his. She and her son were denied buryall befitting
their degree, but hid in some obscure place where no one knew, which was no
little distaste and coffeehouse to the people. The Tyrant thought it a
special cause of boasting and extolling his own goodness, that she had not
been strangled, nor dyed the death of common base offenders: And since it was
her fortune to die on the very same day that Sejanus had done two years
before, viz. October. 17. it must be recorded as of special observation, and
great thanks given for the matter, and an annual sacrifice instituted to
Jupiter on that day.

Caius her son, and brother to poor Drusus took all this very well, or at
least seemed so to do, partly glad to be shut of any one that was likely to
have any color or likelihood of corrivality with him in his future reign; and
partly being brought up in such a school of dissimulation, and grown so
perfect a Scholar there, that he wanted little of Tiberius. This year he
married Claudia the daughter of M. Silanus, a man that would have advised him
to good, if he would have hearkened; but afterward he matched with a mate and
stock, more fitting his evil nature, Ennia the wife of Macro, but for
advantage resigned by her husband Macro, to the adulterating of Caius, and then
to his marriage.

Sect. 7. Other Massacres.
The death of Agrippina drew on Plancinaes, a woman that never accorded with
her in any thing, but in Tiberius his displeasure, and in a fatal and
miserable end. This Plancina, in the universal mourning of the state for the
loss of Germanicus, rejoiced at it, and made that her sport, which was the
common sorrow of all the State: How poor Agrippina relished this, being
deprived of so rare a husband, can hardly be thought of without joining with
her in her just and mournful indignaon. Tiberius having a spleen at the woman
for some other respect, had now a fair color to hide his revenge under, to
call her to account, and that with some applause. But here his revenge is got
into a strait; for if he should put her to death, it may be it would be some
content to Agrippina: And therefore not to pleasure her so much, he will not
pleasure the other so much neither as with present death, but keeps her in
lingering custody till Agrippina be gone, and then must she follow; but her
resolutenesse preventeth the Executioner, and to escape another, she dies by
her own hand.

Let us make up the heap of the slaughtered this year, in the words of Dion,
Such a number of Senators, to omit others, perished under Tiberius, that the
Governors of Provinces were chosen by lot, and ruled, some three years, some
six, because there were not enough to come in their room.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH and the ROMAN. FOR The Year of Christ 35.
And of Tiberius 20. Being the Year of the World 3962. And of the City of Rome,
787. Consuls Lucius Vitellius. P. Fabius Priscus, or Persicus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

PART I. Affairs of Rome.
Sect. I. Thanklesse officiousness.
OF the state and occurrences of the Church this instant year, there is
neither any particular given by S. Luke, nor any else where to be found in
Scripture, save only what may be collected from the words of Paul concerning
himself, namely that he is this year either in Arabia or Damascus or both
spending one part of it in the one place; and the other in the other. The
Church (now this great persecutor is turned Preacher) enjoyed no doubt a great
deal of ease in the ceasing of the persecution, and benefit by the
earnestness of his ministry. And so let us leave her to her peace and
comfortable times now growing on, and turn our story to the Romans.

Tiberius his reign being now come to the twentieth year, the present Consuls
L. Vitellius, and Fabius Priscus, do prorogate or proclaim his rule for ten
years longer. A ceremony used by Augustus, whenever he came to a tenth year
of his reign, but by Tiberius there was not the like cause. One would have
thought the twenty years past of his inhumane and barbarous reign should have
given the City more then enough of such an Emperor: and have caused her to
have longed rather for his end then to have prolonged his dominion. But she
will make a virtue now or complement rather of necessity, and will get thanks
of him for continuing of that which she cannot shake off, and is willing that
he shall reign still, because she knew he would do so whether she will or no.
It is the forlorn way of currying favor, to please a man in his own humor,
when we dare not cross it. The flattering Consuls received a reward befitting
such unnecessary officiousness, for they kept the feast, says Dion, that was
used upon such occasions, and were punished. Not with death, for the next year
you shall have Vitellius in Judea, but with some other infliction which it may
be was pretended for some other reason, but intended and imposed upon a
profound policy. For while they thus took on them to confirm his rule they did
but shake his title as he conceived, and told him a riddle that he reigned by
their courtesy and not by his own interest: but when he punished them that
would take on them to confirm this superiority he proved it independent, and
not pinned upon their will.

Sect. II. Cruelties.
The vein of the City that was opened so long ago, does bleed still and
still as fresh as ever. For Slaughter says Tacitus was continual, and Dion
adds that none of them that were accused were acquitted, but all condemned:
some upon the letters of Tiberius, others upon the impeachment of Macro (of
whom hereafter,) and the rest only upon suspicion. Some were ended by the
executioner, others ended themselves by their own hands, the Emperor all this
while keeping out of the City, and that, as was thought, lest he should be
ashamed of such doings there. Among those that perished by their own hands was
Pomponius Labeo, and his wife Paxaea, who being accused for corruption in his
government of Maesia, cut his own veins and bled to death, and his wife
accompanied him in the same fatal end. To the like end, but upon different
occasions and accusations came Mamercus Scaurus and his wife Sexitia. He some
years before having escaped narrowly with life upon a charge of treason, is now
involved again in other accusations, as of Adultery with Livilla, magical
practices, and (not the least) for libelling against Tiberius. For having made
a Tragedy which he titled Atreus, and in the same, bringing him in, advising
one of his subjects in the words of Euripides, That he should bear with the
folly of the Prince: Tiberius not so guilty indeed of such a taxation of being
a fool, as ready to take on to be guilty, that he might have the better vie
against the Author, personated the matter to himself, crying out that Scaurus
had made him a bloody Atreus, but that he would make an Ai^x of him again:
which accordingly came to pass: for the Tragedian to prevent the executioner,
acted his own tragedy, and died by his own hand, his wife being both incourager
and companion with him in the same death. But among these lamentable spectacles
so fearful and so frequent, it was some contentment to see the accusers still
involved in the like miseries with those whom they had accused: for that malady
of accusing was grown Epidemicall and infectious, sparing none, and as it were
catching one of another. The tokens hereof appeared in the banishment of
Servilius and Cornelius the accusers of Scaurus, and of Abudius Rufo that had
done the like by Lentulus Getulicus. This Getulicus was then commander of the
Legions in Germany, and being charged with so much intimacy with Seianus, as
that he intended to have married his daughter to Sejanus his son, he
quitted himself by a confident letter to Tiberius. In which he pleads that
his familiarity and alliance to Sejanus had begun by the Emperors own advice
and privacy: and he was so far from crouching, that he profereth terms of
partition to Tiberius, namely that he should enjoy the Empire, and himself
would enjoy the Province where he was: This it was to have arms and armies at
his disposal, for, for all this affront, the Emperor is necessarily calm,
considering partly his own age, partly the hatred of the people, but chiefly,
that he stood in that height and sway and power that he was in rather by the
timorous opinion of others then by any strength or firmness of his own.

This year there arose a feigned Drusus in Greece: a man as it seemed, neither
led by common policy that might have told him, that so great a Prince of Rome
could not possibly have been so long obscured, nor by common opinion which
greatly suspected, that Drusus was made away by the Emperors own consent: He
found a party as inconsiderate as himself, for he was entertained by the
Cities of Greece and Ionia, and furnished with aid, and had like to have come
into Syria and surprised the forces there, had he not been descried, taken and
sent to Tiberius.

To conclude with some other raritie, besides these of cruelty, there was seen
a Phoenix in Egypt this year, as Tacitus has laid it, (but as Dion two years
after) which then exercised the wits of the Philosophical Greeks interpreting
the presage either to the State or to the Emperor as their fancy led them: and
in after times it exercised the pens of Christians, applying it as an Emblem
of the resurrection of Christ.

PART II. The Affairs of the Jews.
Sect. A commotion of the Jews caused by Pilate.
BEsides the tumult mentioned before, caused by Pilate among the Jews about
some images of Caesar, Josephus has also named another raised by the same
Spleen and rancour of his, against that people, which because Eusebius has
placed it at this year, be it recommended to the reader upon his Chronology,
Pilate a constant enemy to the nation of which he was governor, sought and
dogged all occasions whereby to provoke them to displeasure, that the
displeasure might provoke them to do something that would redound to their own
disadvantage. At this time he took in hand a great work of an Aquaeduct, or
watercourse, to Jerusalem, to bring the water thither from a place two hundred
furlongs or five and twenty miles off, (as Josephus reckons it in one place,
but in another he crosses himself, and doubleth the measure to four hundred)
and for this purpose he took the money out of their Corban or holy treasure to
expend upon this his fancy. The people displeased with what was done come
together by multitudes, some crying out against the work, and others plainly
against Pilate. For they of old did know his conditions, that his affection was
not so much to the people or to do them good by his Aquaeduct, as it was to
tyrannize over their consciences which were nailed to their ancient rights and
rites. But he suborning some of his Soldiers in the common garb and garments,
and they hiding clubs under their coats disposed themselves so about the
multitude that they had them within them. And then, when the people continued
still in their outrage and railing, upon a signal given, they fall upon them,
and beat without distinction all before them, both those that were seditious
and those that were not: so that many died in the place and the rest departed
away sore wounded. This is the tenor of th story in Josephus in Antiq. lib.
18. cap. 4. and Bell. Iudaic. lib. 2. cap. 14. In the allegation of which
History by Baronius, to omit his placing of it in the first year of Pilate
about which he shows himself indifferent, I cannot pass these two things
without observing. 1. That he says that Pilate took the head of his
watercourse three hundred furlongs off, whereas in the Greek there is no such
sum in either of the places where the story is related, but in the one, two
hundred and in the other four. 2. That whereas the Greek reads the
transition to the next story, de Bell. Iud. l. 2. cap. 15. (...), etc. At that
time Agrippa the accuser of Herod went to Tiberius, etc. His Latin reads it,
Atque ab hoc accusator Herodis Agrippa, etc. losing both scantling of the time
which the Author has given and Eusebius followed, and seeming to bring Agrippa
to Rome about this matter of Pilate.

In the twentieth year of Tiberius has the same Josephus placed the death of
Philip the Tetrarch, although he has named it after the entrance of Vitellius
upon the government of Syria, which was in the next year; but such
transpositions are no strange things with him. This Philip was Tetrarch of
Trachonitis, Gaulonitis, and Batanaea, he died in the City Iulias and was
interred with a great deal of funeral pomp. His tetrarchy was added to
Syria, but the tributes of it were reserved within it self.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH and the ROMAN. FOR The Year of Christ 36.
And of Tiberius 21. Being the Year of the World 3963. And of the City of Rome,
788. Consuls C. Cestius Gallus. M. Servilius Rufus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

PART I.
Sect. Affairs of the Jews, Vitellius their Friend.
VItellius the last years Consul a^ Rome is sent this year Proconsul into
Syria, to govern that and Judea which was incorporated into that Province. A
man more Honorable abroad then at his own doors, renowned in his youth, but
ignominious in his old age, brave in ruling in forain parts, but base in
officiousness and flattery at Rome. At the time of the Passover, he comes
up to Jerusalem, whether induced by curiosity to see the festival, or by the
opportunity of the concourse, to behold the whole body of his dominion
collected in so small a compass, and to disperse among them his commands, or
for what other cause let him keep it to himself: But so well did he like his
intertainment, and the people that had given it him, that he remitted to all
the inhabitants, the Toll or Impost of all the fruits bought and sold: and he
permitted to the Priests the keeping of the Highpriests garments, which alate
had been in the custody of the Romans. For Hyrcanus the first of that name,
having built a tower near unto the Temple, and living in it himself, and after
him, some of his successors, he laid up there those holy garments, which they
only might wear as in a place most convenient, both where to put them on when
they came into the Temple, and to put them off when they went into the City.
But Herod in after times seizing upon that tower and repairing it, and naming
it Antonia in honor of the great Antony, he seized also upon the custody of
those robes, when he found them there, and so also did Archelaus, his son.
But the Romans deposing of Archelaus and usurping his whole dominion (if
reassuming of that which they had bestowed before, may be called usurpation)
they also as he had done, kept these sacred garments under their hands: Laying
them up in a room under the seals of the Priests, and the keepers of the
treasury: and the keeper of the Tower set up a Candle there every day. Seven
days before any of the feasts, they were delivered out by the same keeper, and
purified because they came out of heathen hands, and used the first day of the
feast, and restored the second, and laid up as before. Vitellius graciously
restored the custody of them to the Priests as had been used of old. But Joseph
who was also called Caiaphas who should have first worn them after, was removed
by him from the high priesthood, and Jonathan the son of Ananus placed in
his stead. And thus is one of the unjust Judges of our Savior judged himself,
and the next year, and by this same Vitellius we shall have the other judged
also.

PART II.
Sect. I. Affairs in the Empire. A rebellion in Parthia, etc.
AT this year has Eusebius in his Chronicle, placed the Spleen of Seianus
against the Jews, which was some years before: and the spleen of Herod
against James and Peter, which was some years after: and In Chron. Mundi l. 8.
Massaeus in his Chronicle, has placed the assumption of the Virgin Mary,
which was no body knownes when. A story first published to the world by
revelation, as the common cry went of it, but invented indeed by superstition,
backed by ease and love of holidays, and grown into credit and intertainment
by credulity and custom. As unconstant to it self for time, as her Sex is of
whom it is divulged, for there is so great difference about the time when this
great wonder was done, that it is no wonder if it be suspected to have been
done at no time at all. We will leave to rake into it, till we come to find it
in its place, and rubric in Eusebius, who is the most likely man to follow:
and for the present we will divert the readers eyes to a matter of far more
truth and likelihood; Phraates a King of Parthia of old, had given Vonones his
eldest son for an Hostage to Augustus: and Augustus upon the request of the
Parthians afterward, had given him again unto them for their King. At the
first he was well accepted and well affected by them and among them, as he had
been desired by them, but afterward he was disliked and displaced by Artabanus
whom they had called in for their King in his stead. This Artabanus having been
kept in awe by Germanicus whilst he lived, and having been a good while ago
quitted and delivered of that awe by Germanicus his death, and having at this
present, a fit opportunity for the seizure of the Kingdom of Armenia, by the
death of Artaxias their King, he takes upon him to place Arsaces his own
eldest son in that throne* demanding withal some treasures that Vonones had
left in Syria and Cilicia, and challenging the royalty of Persia and Macedon,
and the old possessions of Cyrus and Alexander: This was a proud scorn and
defiance to the Romans, and such as was not possible for their victoriousnesse
to digest, nor safe for him to offer, but that he was imboldned to it by
considering the Emperors old age. But Sinnaces and Abdus and other Nobles of
Parthia, not trusting their lives and liberties to the rashness of Artabanus,
come secretly to Rome and commit the matter to Tiberius: He upon their request
and glad of opportunity to correct the insolences of Artabanus gives them
Phraates, another son of Phraates their old King, who also lay for an Hostage
at Rome, and dispatcheth him away for his fathers Throne and the Nobles with
him. And thus is Artabanus in a fair way of an equal retaliation, to lose his
own kingdom as he had usurped another man's. As they were thus travailing
homeward with this design and plot in their minds and hands, Artabanus having
intelligence of the matter counterplotteth again: and fairly inviting Abdus
under pretense of great amity to a banquet, preventeth his future designs by
poison, and stops the haste of Sinna^es by dissimulation and gifts. Phraates
the new elected King, the more to ingratiate himself to his countrymen by
complying with them in their manners, forsakes the Roman garb, customs, and
diet, to which he had been so long inured, and betaketh himself to the
Parthian, which being too uncouth and hard for him, especially upon a change so
sudden, it cost him his life as he was in Syria.

But this unexpected accident, caused not Tiberius to forelet or neglect the
opportunity so fairly begun, but to follow it the more earnestly. For choosing
Tiridates a man of the same blood, and an enemy to Artabanus, he investeth him
in the same right and challenge to the Parthian crown, and sends him away
for it. Writing letters withal to Mithradates the King of Iberia to invade
Armenia, that the distress and strait of Ar^aces there might draw Artabanus
thither to his relief and give Tiridates the more easy access to his
country. For the better securing of Mithradates to this employment, he makes
him and his brother Pharasmenes friends, between whom there had been some feud
before, and inciteth them both to this same service. This they accordingly
perform, and breaking into Armenia, they shortly make the King away by bribing
of his servants, and take the City Artaxata with their Army. Artabanus upon
these tidings sends away Orodes his other son, to relieve and to revenge:
But Pharasmanes having joined the Albanes and Sarmatians to his party, and he
and the Iberians by this union being masters of the passages, they power in
Sarmatians into Armenia by multitudes through the straits of the Caspian
mountains, and deny passage to any that would aid the Parthian. So that
Orodes comes up to Pharasmanes, but can go no further, and they both lie in
the field so close together that Pharasmanes bids him battle at his own
trenches: which being stoutly and strangely fought between so many nations and
so differently barbarous, it fortuned that the two Princes met in the heat of
the light, and Pharasmanes wounded Orodes through the Helmet, but could not
second his blow himself being borne away by his horse beyond his reach, and
the other was suddenly succomed and sheltered by his guard. The rumor of this
wound of the King by dispersion grew to a certain report of his death, and
that, by as certain an apprehension, grew to the loss of the Parthians day.
Nor was the rumor altogether mistaken, for the wound though it were not so
suddenly, yet was it so surely deadly, that it brought him to his end. Now it
is time for Artabanus to look and stir about him when he has lost his two
sons, and when his two kingdoms are near upon losing. He mustereth and
picketh up all the forces his dominions could afford, and those no more neither
(if they were enough) then the present necessity and forlorn estate of
himself and kingdoms did require. What would have been the issue, and where
the storm of this cloud, and shower of these preparations would have lighted,
Vitellius gave not leave and time to be determined, for raising all the legions
of Syria and thereabout, (for Tiberius upon these troubles had made him ruler
of all the East) he pretended an invasion of Mesopotamia. But Artabanus
suspecting whither that war might bend indeed, and his discontented subjects,
upon this conceit of the assistance of the Romans daring to show their revolt
against him, which they durst not before, he was forced to flee with some
forlorn company into Scythia, hoping that his absence might remove the hatred
of the Parthians, which we shall see hereafter came accordingly to pass, and
Vitellius without any blow struck, makes Tiridates King in his stead.

Sect. II. Tiberius still cruel and shameless.
He was now got to Antium, so near the City, that in a day or nights space he
could have, or give a return to any letters: For all his age which the
Parthian King had despised, and for all the troubles that he had caused, yet
remitted he nothing of his wonted rigor and savagenesse. The Seianians were
as eagerly hunted after as ever, and it was no escape nor help to the accused,
though the crimes object^d were either obsolete or feigned. This caused
Fulcinius Trio for that he would not stay for the formal accusations which
he perceived were coming against him, to end himself with his own hand,
having left most bitter and invective taunts and taxations in his last will and
testament, against Tiberius and his darling Macro. The executors durst not
publish nor prove the will for fear of the executioner, but the Emperor, when
he heard of the contents of it, caused it to be openly read and divulged, and
prided himself in those just reproaches. Nor wanted he more of those
reproaches from others also, but he repaid the authors in cruel discontent,
though he seemed to hear his own disgrace with delight. For Sextius
Paconianus was strangled in prison for making Verses against him. It may be
they were those in Suetonius. Asper and Immitis, breviter his omnia dicam?
Dispeream si te matter amare potest, etc.

Granius Martianus, Trebellienus Rufus, and Poppaeus Sabinus, were accused for
some other offenses, and died by their own hands, and Tatius Gratianus that
had once been Praetor was condemned by a Praetorian Law, and escaped his own
hands indeed, he did not escape the executioners.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH and the ROMAN, FOR The Year of Christ 37.
And of Tiberius 22. Being the Year of the World 3964. And of the City of Rome,
789. Consuls Q. Plautius. Sextus Papinius or Papirius.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

ACTS IX.
Verse. 23. And after that many days were fulfilled, etc.
Sect. Account of the Chronology.
THe conversion of Paul we observed ere while, and proved to be in the year
next after our Saviors ascension or Anno Christi 34. Now Paul himself
testifies that three years after his conversion he went up to Jerusalem, Gal.
1.18. That space of time he spent in Damascus, in Arabia and in Damascus
again. For so himself testifies in the verse before. But how long time he
took up in these several abodes in these places, it is not determinable nor
indeed is it material to inquire, since we have the whole time of all his
abodes summed up in that account of three years: Now whereas there is no
mention in Lukes relation of his journey into Arabia, but he makes him (as one
would think) to come up to Jerusalem, at his first departure from Damascus, we
have showed elsewhere that it is no uncouth thing with this and the other
Evangelists, to make such brief transitions, sometimes in stories of a large
distance: and Paul himself plainly shows us in the place alleged, how to
make the brief story of Luke full and complete, and to speak it out: Namely
that Paul upon his coming after his conversion into Damascus, began there to
preach, and increased more and more in strength, and confounded the Jews that
dwelt at Damascus, proving that Jesus was the very Christ: And having preached
a while in Damascus, he goes into Arabia, which country was now under the
same government with Damascus, namely under King Aretas) and after a while he
returned into Damascus again: And then do the Jews there seek to kill him,
and they incense the governor of the City under Aretas against him, so that
he sets a watch to take him, but he escapes over the wall by night in a
Basket, Acts 9.25. 2 Cor. 11.33. We shall see by and by, that there were
preparations for war this year, betwixt Aretas the King of Arabia, and Herod
the Tetrarch, and it is not improbable that the Jews in those times of
commotion did accuse Paul to the governor of Damascus under Aretas for a spy
or for a man that was an enemy to the Kings cause, and so they interest the
governor in a quarrel against him: And this very thing being considered may
help somewhat to confirm this for the year of Paul's coming from Damascus
for fear of his life to Jerusalem, if his own accounting the years did not
make it plain enough.

Verse. 26. And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, etc.
His errand to Jerusalem, as himself testifies, was to see Peter, Gal. 1.18.
(...): not for any homage to his primacy (as is strongly pleaded by the Popish
crew) for he makes no distinction betwixt him and James and John in point of
dignity, Gal. 2.9. nay is so far from homaging him that he rebukes and
reproves him, Gal. 2.11. But his journey to Peter at this time was, that he
might have acquaintance with him and some knowledge of him, for so the word
(...) more properly signifies, and that he desired the rather, because then
Peter was the minister of the Circumcision, as he himself was to be of the
uncircumcision, Gal. 2.8. and because there had been some kind of remarkable
parallel betwixt them in their recovery, the one from denying and forswearing
Christ himself, and the other from persecuting of Christ in his members.

Sect. But they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
Disciple.
This very thing has caused some to conceive that Paul had a journey to
Jerusalem a little after his conversion, and before ever he went into Arabia:
because they cannot conceive how it should be possible, that he should have
been a convert and a Preacher of the Gospel three years together, and yet his
conversion and his present qualities should be unknown to the Church at
Jerusalem: and the rather because he himself says that the wonder of his
conversion was not done in a corner, Acts 26.26.

Answ. But these two or three considerations may help to resolve the scruple.
1. The distance betwixt Damascus and Jerusalem, which was exceeding great. 2.
The quarrels betwixt Herod and Aretas, which were a means to hinder
intercourse betwixt those two places. 3. The persecution that continued still
upon the Church of Judea, which would keep Disciples of Damascus from going
thither. And 4. the just fear that might possess the Disciples at Jerusalem,
in the very time of persecution: For though it was said before, the Church at
Jerusalem and of Iudaea enjoyed a great deal of rest and tranquillity after
the conversion of Paul their great persecutor, in comparison of what they had
done before, yet was not the persecution of the Church utterly extinct to the
very time of Paul's coming up to Jerusalem, but continued still, and therefore
it is the less wonder if the Disciples there, be the more fearful and
cautelous.

Verse. 27. But Barnabas took him, etc.
How Barnabas came acquainted with the certainty of Paul's conversion, better
then the other Disciples, is not easy to resolve: It is like that he being
abroad for fear of the persecution, as the other of the Preachers were, (all
but the Apostles) went in his travailes toward Damascus or Arabia, and so had
heard and learned the certainty of the matter: However it is pregnant to our
observation, that he that was afterward to be fellow traveller and labourer
with Paul in the Gospel to the Gentiles is now made the instrument and means
of his first admission to the society of the Apostles. It is possible that
there had been some acquaintance betwixt these two men in former times, they
being both Grecizing Jews, the one of Cyprus, the other of Ci^icia, and both
in all probability brought up and educated at Jerusalem; but whether it were so
or no the hand of God is to be looked after in this passage, when Paul's future
partner in the ministry to the Gentiles, is now his first intertainer into the
society of the Church at Jerusalem.

Sect. And brought him to the Apostles.
That is, to Peter and James the less: for other of the Apostles, he himself
relates that he saw none, Gal. 1.18. What was become of the rest of the
twelve, is not determinable: it is more then probable they were not now at
Jerusalem, otherwise it is hardly possible for Paul not to have seen them in
fifteen days abode there: It is likely they were preaching and settling
Churches up and down the Country, and Peter and James, the two most peculiar
Ministers of the Circumcision, abode at Jerusalem, to take care of the Church
there: For that these were so, and in what particular, the dispensation of
their Ministry differed, we shall take occasion to show afterward; only here
we cannot omit to take notice of that temper as I may so call it, which the
Text holds out against the Primacy and Prelacy that is held by some to have
been among the Apostles: For whereas some conceive James to have been Bishop of
Jerusalem, this Text sets Peter in the same form and equality with him in
that place: and whereas it is conceived again, that Peter was Prince of the
Apostles, this Text has equalled James with him.

1. And thus that persecution that began about Stephen had lasted till this
very same time of Paul's coming to Jerusalem, for so it is apparent, both by
the fear and suspitiousnesse of the Disciples at Jerusalem, as also by the
very clausure of the Text, Verse. 31. Then had the Churches rest.

2. The length of this persecution by computation of the times as they have
been cast up before, seems to have been about three years and an half, the
renowned number, and time so often mentioned and hinted in Scripture.

3. The company of Disciples or believers continued still at Jerusalem, for all
the persecution, as to the generality of them; as was said before: only the
Ministers or Preachers were scattered abroad, all of them except the twelve
Apostles.

4. Some of those Preachers were by this time returned back again, the heat of
the persecution abating, as it is apparent by Barnabas now being at Jerusalem:
and of some such men, is it properest to understand the word Disciples Verse.
26. Saul assayed to join himself to the Disciples.

5. Therefore the absence of the ten Apostles from Jerusalem was not for fear
of the persecution* but for the dispersion of the Gospel and settling of the
Churches.

Sect. And declared unto them how he had seen the Lord in the way.
This is most properly to be understood of Barnabas, that he declared these
things to the Apostles, though there be, that think it is meant of Paul's
declaring them: and they read it thus, And Barnabas brought him to the
Apostles, and he, that is, Paul, declared unto them.

Verse. 28. And he was with them coming in and going out.
That is, conversing with them, as Beza has well rendered it: A phrase usual
among the Hebrews, as 1 Samuel 18.13. Act. 1.21. etc. And the time of this his
converse, Paul himself has told us to have been fifteen days, Gal. 1.18.
where also he has interpreted this Phrase of coming in and going out, by the
term of abiding with, I abode with him fifteen days.

Verse. 29. And he disputed against the Grecians.
Gr. Against the Hellenists: which very place helps again to confirm the
interpretation and gloss we set upon this word before, namely, that it
means not, Greeks converted to the Jews Religion, but Jews conversing and
cohabiting among the Greek nation. For, 1. there can be none or small reason
given, why converted Greeks should be so furiously Jewish as to go about to
kill Paul for preaching against Judaisme, and we hear not the Jews stirring
against him for it. 2. What reason can be given why Paul should bend his
disputations against converted Greeks more then against Jews? Certainly the
Jews had more need of confutation in their Judaisme then the other had. And 3.
it is very questionable, how converted Greeks, which were strangers and
sojourners at Jerusalem and among the Jews, durst go about to kill a Jew in
the midst of the Jews, and there being not a Jew that had any thing to say
against him. It is therefore more then probable, that these Hellenists were
Jews that had lived among the Greeks, or of the Grecian dispersion, and that
they used the Greek tongue: and that Paul chose to dispute with them, partly
for that they living among the Gentiles, were by a kind of an Antiperistasis
more zealously Jewish, and partly, because of their language, the Greek tongue,
which was the very language Paul had learned from a child.

The times of the stories next succeeding when the Text has done with the
story of Paul, are somewhat unfixed, and uncertain, in what year they came to
pass: namely of Peter's raising of Aeneas from sickness, Dorcas from death,
and bringing in Cornelius to the Gospel: But the best conjecture that can be
given of the times of these stories, is by casting and computing the history
backward: And so we find, 1. That the famine prophesied of by Agabus, was in
the second of Claudius, as was showed before. 2. We may then conceive that
this prophecy of Agabus was in Claudius his first, and that was the year or
some part of the year that Paul and Barnabas spent at Antioch, Act. 11.26. 3.
The last year of Caius we may hold to be the year of Antiochs first
receiving the Gospel, of Barnabas his coming thither, and of his journey to
Tarsus to seek Saul, Act. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And 4. the third year of
Caius which was his last year but one, we may suppose accordingly to have been
the year of Peter's actions with Aeneas, Dorcas and Cornelius, and to that year
shall we refer the handling of the Texts that concern those actions, and
we will carry on the Roman and Jewish Story, as they fall in time, till we
come thither.

Part II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. The Parthian war not yet composed.
TIridates seated in his throne, as was related before, but as it proved,
neither sure in it, nor in the hearts of all his people, (the first of these
being caused by the latter) he takes in, certain Parthian towns, and that
by the Parthians own consent and aid. For his Roman education compared with
the Scythian carriage of Artabanus made the people to hope accordingly of his
demeanor, and to entertain him with present applause and future expectation.
The day of his coronation being appointed, letters from Phraates and Hiero, two
of the chiefest commanders in the State, desire that it might be deferred for a
certain space, which accordingly was done in regard of the greatness of the
men. The King in the mean time goes up to Ctesiphon the Imperial City,
attending the coming of these two Nobles, who when they put it off from day to
day, Surena, in the presence and by the approvall of very many, crowns him on
their country manner. These two Nobles and many others that were absent from
this solemnity, some for fear of the Kings displeasure, some for hatred of
Abdageses, his favorite, and some no doubt upon a plot premeditated, betake
themselves to Artabanus their old King again. Him they find in Hyrcania
hunting in the woods with his bow for his food, rusty and dirty in habit and
attire, and overgrown with filth and neglect of himself. At his first sight of
them it is no wonder if he were stricken with amazement, but their errand being
related, it converted that passion into equal joy. For they complain of
Tiridates his youth, and effeminacy, of the Diadems translation out of the
blood, of the potency of Abdageses, and the loss of their old King, whom they
now are come to desire again. Artabanus believes them and consents, and
raising speedily what Scythians he could, marches away toward his kingdom
again. But his royal apparel he wore not with him, but the poor and rugged
garb of his misery and exile, thereby to move the more to pity: and used all
his wits and policy to make himself a party strong on his side all the way as
he went. But he needed not all this cautelousnesse and preparation, for
Tiridates but hear^ng of his approaching toward Seleucia, under color of
going to raise up forces, departed into Syria, and parted with his new kingdom
with as much facility as he had obtained it.

Sect. 2. Artabanus gives hostages to Rome.
When the power and policy of Tiberius, and his agent Vitellius that had served
to get Artabanus out of his Kingdom, would not serve the turn to keep him
thence; they send to treat of friendship with him, suspecting what trouble such
a spirit might procure, should it bend it self against the Roman Empire. The
King wearyed with the toiles of War, and knowing without a prompter, what it
was to defy the Romans, condescendeth readily to the motion, and Vitellius and
he meeting upon a bridge made over Euphrates for that purpose, each, with a
guard about him; conclude upon Articles of agreement, and Herod the Tetrarch
entertaineth them both, in a pavilion curiously seated in the midst of the
stream. Not long after this Artabanus sends Darius his son for an hostage to
Tiberius; and withal he sends Eleazar a Jew, of seven cubits high, for a
present; and many other gifts.

Sect. 3. A Commotion in Cappadocia.
Whilst matters went thus unquietly in Parthia, the Calite a Nation of
Cappadocia, grew discontented about paying tribute to the Romans, and so
departed into the mountain Taurus, and there fortify, resolving as they never
had used to pay such taxations; so never to learn, nor to use to do so.
Archelaus was now King, but not now King of them; for the strength of the
mountains, and the desperatenes of their resolution, do animate them to
withstand him and to rebel against the Romans. When tidings of this was
brought to Vitellius into Syria, he dispatcheth away M. Trebellius with four
thousand legionary Soldiers, and some other Forces raised otherwise, to bring
the Rebels to obedience or to ruin. Trebellius invironeth with works and
men, two hills, Cadra and Davara, where they were the most strongly trenched,
and those that were so hardy as to come forth, he subdueth with the sword, and
the rest with famishing.

Sect. IIII. Bloodshed at Rome.
These diseases of the Roman body were far from the heart, and yet was the
heart, the City it self but little the better; for though some veins were
opened in these wars which one would have thought should have turned the
blood another way, yet did the City through the cruelty of the Emperor bleed
inwardly still. For L. Aruleius and some others died by the hand of the
Executioner, and C. Galba, two of the Blesii, and the Lady Aemylia Lepida by
their own hands. But the example of the greatest terror was Vibulenus Agrippa
a Knight, who being at the bar, when he had heard what his accusers could say
against him, and despairing to escape he took poison out of his bosom in the
face of the Court ( Dion says he sucked it out of his Ring) and swallowed it
and sank down and was ready to die, yet was he haled away to prison and there
strangled.

Sect. V. Mishaps.
Besides this deluge of blood, which overflowed the City continually, there
was also this year a deluge of water. For Tiber rose so high and violently into
the town, that many streets became navigable, and where men had walked lately
on their feet, they might have passed now up and down in ships. And a greater
misfortune happened this year likewise by the contrary element: for a terrible
fire consumed the buildings of the mount Aventine and that part of the Circus
that lay betwixt that and the Palace; For the repair of all which again,
Tiberius out of his own treasure gave a great sum of money: Tacitus says
Millies Sestertium, which according to the value and reckoning of our English
coin amounted to eight hundred thousand pounds, within nineteen thousand. A
sum not strange in an Emperors coffer at Rome, where the vastness of the
Empire brought in vast revenues, but somewhat strange out of the purse of
Tiberius for so good a purpose, whose covetousness was larger then those whole
revenues. And therefore as I cannot but observe the difference of Dion about
this liberality of the Emperor from Tacitus, and the difference of his
translator from his Text; so can I not but conceive his computation and account
to be the more probable in regard of the niggardise of the Emperor. For
whereas the sum of Tacitus is eight hundred thousand within nineteen, he
has so far come short of such a reckoning, that he makes nineteen thousand
pounds to be the whole account. For Tiberius says he gave (...), two thousand
and five hundred thousand, meaning ^600. sestertia, and each sestertium
containing a thousand Sestertios, this accreweth to about the sum last named,
of 19000 l. and yet has his translator forsaken his Greek, and followed
Tacitus Latin, to so vast a difference.

PART III. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. A commotion in Samaria. Pilate out of office.
A Great space of time is past since we heard any news of Pontius Pilate, and
news it is indeed that his malicious and stirring spirit has not entertained
us with some bloody tragedy or other, of all this while. His government draws
now near its expiration, for he is going upon the tenth year of it, and it is
a kind of miracle if so mischievous an agent, should part withour acting some
mischief before his exit, and this at last he did which put him out of
office. There was a certain impostor among the Samaritans ( Simon Magus as like
as any) that would persuade the people, that in mount Gerizim he could show
them, Joseph. Ant. l. 1^ c. 5. See how Egesippus relates this story, De excid.
Hieros. l. 1. c. 5.
holy vessels which Moses had hid and laid up there with his own hand. The
credulous vulgar meet by multitudes at a certain Village called Tira^haba
intending when their company was full, to go see these sacred relics. But
Pilate beforehand takes the passages with his Horse and Foot, and falling upon
those that were thus assembled, some he slew, others he took captive and the
rest fled. Of those that he captived, he caused the noblest and most
principal to be put to death. For this fact the chief men of Samaria, accuse
him to Vitellius, who commands him to Rome, there to answer before the Emperor
what should be objected against him; and in his stead he made Marcellus a
friend of his own, the Governor of Judea: but before Pilate came to Rome,
Tiberius was dead. Yet has Eusebius put off the testimony that Pilate is said
to have given to Tiberius concerning the death and resurrection of Christ, and
concerning the wonders wrought by him, till the next year following. A
relation doubtful in it self, but more then doubtful in the issue. For
first, though it be granted that Pilate bare witness to the works and wonders
done by Christ, and gave testimony to his resurrection, which yet to believe
requires a better evidence then I can find any: Yet secondly, the Epistle that
is pretended for this his certificate by In Anacephal. in biblioth. Patr. tom. 7
Hegesippus, cannot be that original one that Tertullian, and out of him
Eusebius do mention, because it is indorsed to Claudius, and not to Tiberius.
Thirdly, though both these were confessed and agreed unto, that Pilate wrote a
Letter to Tiberius to such a purpose, and that this was the Letter, or some
other that Tertullian had seen; yet can I never find the Emperor of so good a
nature, and respective a disposition, as to give the desert of goodness its
due, be it never so eminent and conspicuous, or be it in what kind soever.
Fourthly, and lastly, that which makes all the rest of the story to be
doubted of, and which may justly hinder the entertainment of it, is, what is
added in the common relation of the story. That Tiberius referring this matter
to the Senate, with his vote, that Christ should be numbered among the Gods,
and Christianity among their holy things; the Senate crossed him in it with
flat contrariety, because Pilate had written of it to him, and not to them. Now
in the Stories that have been related before concerning the state and affairs
of Rome, and by other stories that might be produced in other years, it is
but too miserably evident, that the Senate was in too great a fear and slavery
to the Tyrant, then to dare to affront him so palpably and plainly. Pilate
after this, as Chron. ad annum. chr. 41.
Eusebius alleges out of the Roman Historians, falling into many miseries,
ended himself with his own hand, the common and desperate Roman remedy against
distress. In Chron.
Cassiodorus has placed his death under the Consulship of Publicola and Nerva:
And the common report has given it in, that the place was Vienna.

Sect. 2. Agrippa his journey to Rome.
This Agrippa was the son of Aristobulus (who dyed by the cruelty of his
father Herod) and he was a man that had sufficiently tried the vicissitudes of
fortune heretofore, but never so much as he is about to do now. A good while
ago he had lived in Rome, and in the familiarity of Drusus the son of
Tiberius: That great acquaintance caused great expenses; partly in his own port
and pomp, and partly in gifts and beneficence bestowed upon others. When
Drusus dyed, then Agrippaes estate is not only dead, but his hopes also: so
that he is forced to flee from Rome into Judea for debt and poverty; and
thence into a certain Tower in Idumea for shame and discontent. His wife
Cyprus by solicitation and suing to Herodias, obtains Herod's favor so
far, that he was removed to Tiberias, made a chief Governor or Officer of
the City, and allowance given him for his Diet. But this lasted not long ere
Herod and he fell out; whereupon he removed away, and betook himself to
Flaccus the then Governor of Syria, who had been his old acquaintance at Rome:
Long he had not continued there neither, but Aristobulus his brother wrought
him out of his favor and abode there. From thence he went to Ptolomais,
intending to have set from thence for Italy, but was forced to stay till he
had borrowed some moneys before: Being now furnished and shipped, he was
again stopped by Herennius Capito, the Governor of Iamnia, for some money
that he ought to the Treasury of Tiberius. And what must he do now? He must
not go till he have paid the sum, and when he has paid it, then he
cannot go for want of more. He takes on him to obey the arrest while it was
day, but at night he cut cables, and set away for Alexandria: There he
renews his borrowing again of Alexander Alabarcha and obtains of him five
talents for his viaticum: and now this year (namely as Josephus notes it, the
year before Tiberius his death) he sets away for Italy again. This
Alabarcha is not the proper name of any man, but the title of men that bare
Rule over the Jews in Alexandria. For I observe that as Josephus in one place,
calls it Alabarcha, and Alabarchus, so in another he calls it (...) and
(...), fixing it thereby as a title rather to any man that bare such an Office,
then as a proper name to any man at all. And if conjecture may read its
denotation and Etymology, it seems to be compounded of the Arabic Article
Al, which they fix before all their nownes, and the Egyptian word Abrec^, which
in that language imports dignity and honor (as we have observed elsewhere)
as may be collected from the proclamation before Joseph, Genesis 41.43.

Agrippa being arrived at Puteoli, sends to the Emperor to Capre^ to
certify him of his coming, and of his desire to wait upon him there. Tiberius
gives him admi^sion and entertainment according to his mind: till Letters from
Herennius Capi^o spoiled that cheer: For the Emperor understanding by them
how he had slipped the collar at Iamnia, from his Officer, and from his own
debt, he does flatly forbid him any more access unto him till the money be
paid. Now is Agrippa in a worse case then ever: for there is no paltering with
Tiberius, though there were with Capito; and no shifting from Capreae, though
he had found such an opportunity at Iamnia. Nor is there any such thought to
be entertained. For now his life and fortunes, and all lay in the hand of
Tiberius; and when he finds him inclinable to use him kindly, there is no
loosing that favor, for want of paying such a sum: Of Antonia the mother of
Germanicus, and the old friend and favourer of Bernice the mother of Agrippa,
he borrows the money, and getting out of the Emperors debt, he gets into
his favor again. Insomuch that he commends him to the converse,
acquaintance, and attendance of Caius his Grandchild that was to succeed him.

Sect. 3. His Imprisonment.
Happy might now Agrippa think himself, if he can but hold so: For he has
obtained the inward friendship of Caius, and with it retained the outward
favor of Tiberius. Antonia and Claudius a future Emperor and all favor him,
but he becomes an enemy to himself. Whether it were in love or flattery to
Caius, or to himself and his own hopes, he casts himself into a present
danger upon a future expectation. For Caius and he being very intimate and
private together, whether more affectionately, or undiscreetly, he himself
best felt; he brake out into this dangerous wish, That Tiberius might soon
die, and Caius as soon come to rule in his stead. These words were heard by
Eutychus his servant, and a while concealed; but when Agrippa prosecuted him
for stealing some of his clothes, which he had stolen indeed, he then brake
forth and revealed all: for fleeing for his theft, and caught and brought
before Piso the Sheriff of the City, and demanded the reason of his flight,
he answered that he had a great secret to impart to Caesar, which concerned his
life. Piso therefore sent him bound to Tiberius, who also kept him bound and
unexamined a certain season: Now began Agrippa to hasten and spur on his own
misery and vexation: Whether having forgotten the words that he had spoken, or
not remembering the presence of his servant, at the speech; or not suspecting
that his tale to Caesar would be against himself; or which was likelyest,
thinking to make his cause the better by his confidence, he solliciteth his old
friend Antonia, to urge the Emperor for a trial of his servant. Tiberius
declineth it, though he suspected the matter; not so much belike for Agrippaes
sake, as for Caius sake, whom the familiarity that was betwixt them made him
suspect to be accessory, if any thing should prove otherwise then well. But
being still importuned by Antonia, at last when he had uttered these words,
Let the Gods witness O Antonia, that what I shall do, I do not of my own
mind, but by thy solicitation: He commanded Eutychus to be brought forth, who
being examined, confessed readily that such words were spoken by Agrippa to
Caius, himself being present, adding others no less dangerous, that were
spoken about young Tiberius. The Emperor as readily believed the matter; and
presently called out to Macro to bind him. Macro not understanding that he
meant Agrippa, prepared to bind Eutychus more strictly for examination: but
Tiberius having walked about the place, and coming to Agrippa, it is this man
says he, that I commanded to be bound. And when Macro asked him again who?
Why, says he, Agrippa. Then did Agrippa begin to find how he had forwarded
his own mishap, but it was too late. And then did he begin to pray him now,
whom he lately prayed against, but that was too late also. For Tiberius was
not half so averse to have tried his servant, as he is now to forgive the
Master: and he cannot be much blamed, for he had wished his mischie^, and
procured his own. Well, Agrippa is tied in bands, and led away to prison as he
was, in his purple robes, a garment very incompatible with chains, unless of
Gold. Being exceeding thirsty with heat and sorrow, as he went toward the
prison, he spyed one Thaumastus a servant of Caius, carrying a Tankard of
water, and he desired some to drink; which when the servant freely and
readily gave him, If ever, says he, I escape and get out of these bonds, I
will not fail to obtain thy freedom, who have not refused to minister to me
in my misery and chains, as well as thou did in my prosperity and pomp. And
this his promise he afterward performed.

Sect. IIII. The death of Thrasyllus the Mathematician.
This man Thrasyllus had indeared himself to Tiberius, by his skill in
Astrology long ago, even while he lived in Rhodes, before the death of
Augustus, but with the imminent hazard and peril of his own life. For
Tiberius being very much given to those Chaldean and curious arts, and having
got leisure and retiredness in Rhodes for the learning and practice of them,
he partly called, and partly had offered to him, those that professed to be
skillful in that trade and mystery. His way to try their skill was desperate
and terrible, but such a one as best befitted such as would take upon them to
foresee things to come, and it was this: when he consulted of any business,
says Tacitus, he used the top of his house, and the privacy of one only
servant, a man utterly unlearned, and of a strong bulk of body: when he had a
mind to try any man's skill, this Lubber was to go before him over craggy,
steep and dangerous Rocks that hung over the Sea, and over which his house
stood: and as they returned again, if there were any suspicion that the
Prognosticator had given an answer fraudulent or lying, he flung him into the
Sea, lest he should reaveale the secret that he had been questioned upon.
Thrasyllus at his first coming, being brought to this dangerous trial, and
having presaged Tiberius should be Emperor, and having foretold other things
to come, he was asked by him whether he could calculate his own nativitie;
which when he went about to do, and had set a figure, upon the sight and
study upon it, he was first in a muse and then in a fear, and the more he
viewed it, the more he feared: and at last cried out that some strange and
sudden danger was near and ready to seize upon him. Then Tiberius embracing
him commended his skill, secured him against the danger, and retained him ever
after for his intimate familiar. This year (as Dion does place it) befell this
great Wizzards death, and as it proved, a forerunner of the Emperors: With
whom he did more good with one lie, near his latter end, then he had done
with all his Astrologicall truths (if he ever told any) all his life long. For
assuring him by his skill, that he should yet live ten years longer, though in
his heart he thought no such thing, he caused him to be slack and remiss in
putting diverse men to death, whose end he had hastened, had he known the
haste of his own, and so they escaped.

Sect. V. War betwix^ Aretas and Herod.
There had been a long grudge betwixt Aretas the King of Arabia Petraea, and
Herod the Tetrarch, and a field had been fought between them before this. For
Herod having put away his wife which was Aretas daughter, and having taken
Herodias (the wife of his own brother Philip and he yet living) in her stead,
it is no wonder if Aretas dogged him for revenge for this indignity to his
Daughter and himself. Wherefore he begins to quarrel with him and to seek
occasion of war, by challenge of a territory controvertible, and they come to
a pitched battle, in which Herod's Army is utterly overthrown, by means of
some treachery wrought by some fugitives from his brother Philips Tetrarchy
which had taken up Arms to fight under his colors: And here, as Josephus has
observed. It was the observation of diverse that this his Army utterly perished
through Gods just punishment upon him for the murder of John the Baptist. And
it is worth the marking, that this overthrow took beginning from men of that
country whence Herodias the causer of that murder, and of the present
disquietnesse had come. Herod upon this defeat, doubtful of better success at
another time, for it may be his conscience told him this was but deserved,
betaketh himself by letters to Tiberius, certifying him of the accident, and
it is likely, not without much aggravation. The Emperor either displeased at
the fortune of Aretas in his victory, or at his audaciousnesse in stirring so
within the Empire, or at both together, sends angry letters to Vitellius the
Governor of Syria, charging him to undertake the war, and either to bring
the rebellious King prisoner alive, or to send his head to Rome. But before the
design came to maturity, Tiberius that had thus threatened another man's life
had lost his own, as will appear hereafter: when this first battle was that
was so fatal to Herod, it shall not be insisted on to question, but that this
brewing toward a new war, befell in this year, is apparent sufficiently by
the sequel.

THE ROMAN, and JEWISH STORY, FOR The Year of Christ 38. And of Tiberius 23.
The first year also of Cajus Caligula. Being the Year of the World 3965. And
of the City of Rome, 790. Consuls Cu. Proculus Acerronius. C. Pontius Nigrinus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

PART I. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Macro, all base.
THis man had been mischievous ever since he had power to be so, but now was
he so most of all, that he might keep that power of his afoot, or might raise
it more and more. He was used by Tiberius as an instrument to bring down
Seianus, the one bad, and the other worse; and after he had done that, none
must stand by his good will, that was likely to stand in his way: He was made
master of the Praetorian Soldiers in Seianus his stead, and as he possessed
his place, so did he his favor with the Emperor, and the crookedness of his
conditions: as if all the honors, fortune, and wickedness of Seianus had been
intailed upon Macro. An agent as fit for Tiberius as could be required, and a
successor as fit for Seianus. A man as bloody as the Tyrant could desire him,
and sometimes more then he set him on work. He was the continual Alguazil
and Inquisitor for the friends and accomplices of the late ruined Favorite, and
under color of that pursuit, he took out of the way, whosoever would not
friend and comply with him. Of that number were Cn. Domitius, and Vibius
Marsus, accused with Albucilla the wife of Satrius secundus, for Adultery, but
all three together for conspiracy against the Emperor, yet was there no hand
of the Emperors showed for the prosecution of the matter, which showed the
only spleen and machination of the Blood-hound Macro. Albucilla, whether
guilty indeed or knowing that his malice and power would make her so, stabbed
her self, thinking to have died by her own hand, but the wound not being
deadly, she was taken away to prison. Grasidius and Fregellanus the pretended
Pandars of her adulteries were punished the one with banishment, and the other
with degradation, and the same penalty was inflicted upon Laelius Balbus: A
man, but justly, paid in his own coin, to the rejoicing and content of
diverse, for he had been a strong and violent accuser of many innocents.
Domitius and Marsus (it may be) as guilty as the woman, but more discreet,
traversed the indictment, and saved their own lives, partly by the shortness
of the Emperors life, and partly by the feigned prediction of Thrasyllus, that
promised that it should be long. But too sullen was the indignation of L.
Arruntius against Macro, and too desperate his ill conceit of Caius who was to
succeed in the Empire, for when he was inwrapt in the same accusation with the
two last named, and might have escaped the same escape that they did, yet
despised he so to outlive the cruelty of Tiberius and Macro, as to come under
the greater cruelty of Macro and Caius. No, says he, I have lived long
enough, and (to my sorrow) too long. Nor does any thing repent me more, then
that thus I have endured an old age under the scorns, dangers and hate, first
of Selanus, now of Macro, and always of one great one or another, and that for
no other fault then for detesting their flagitiousnesse. It is true indeed that
I may survive the old age and weakness of Tiberius, but what hopes to do so
by the youth of Caius, and wickedness of Macro? Can Caius a youth do well
being led by Macro, who so corrupted Tiberius in his age? No, I see more
tyranny like to come then has been yet: And therefore will I deliver my self
from the present misery, and that to come: And with these words and resolution,
he cut his own veins, and so bled to death: and spent a blood and a spirit,
what pity it was that they should have been so lost? As Macro thus divided his
pains in cruelty, betwixt the satisfying of Tiberius his mind and his own
malice, so also did he, his affections shall I say? or flattery rather, and
own-end observances betwixt Tiberius and Caius. For as he sought to please the
one that now ruled, for his own present security, so did he, to indear the
other that was to succeed, for his future safety: Hereupon he omitted not any
opportunity nor occasion, that he might skrew Caius further and further into
Tiberius his favor, and to keep him there, that he might do as much for
himself into the favor of Caius. One raritie and non-parallel of
obsequiousness he showed to the young Prince, worth recording to his shame,
for he caused his own wife Ennia Thrasylla to entangle the youthfulness of
Caius into her love and adultery, and then parted he with her and gave her to
him in marriage. The old Emperor could not but observe this monster of
pretended friendship, nor were his old eyes so blind, but he perceived his
flattery plain in other carriages, in so much that he brake out to him in
these plain words: Well, thou forsakest the setting Sun, and only look
upon the rising.

Sect. II. A wicked woman.
With the wife of Macro, that made her own prostitution to become her husbands
promotion, may not unfitly be yoaked, the mother of Sex. Papinius that made
her own lust her sons overthrow: Whether this were the Papinius that was the
last years Consul, or his son, or some other of the same name and family, it
is no great matter worth inquiring, but whosoever he was, unfortunate he was
in his mother: for she caused his end, as she had given him his beginning.
She being lately divorced from her husband, betook herself unto her son,
whom with flattery and looseness she brought to perpetrate such a thing, that
he could find no remedy for it, when it was done but his own death. The
consequent argues that the fault was incest, for when he had cast himself
from an high place, and so ended his life, his mother being accused for the
occasion was banished the City for ten years, till the danger of the
slipperinesse of her other sons youth was past and over.

Part II. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. Preparations of war against Aretas.
THe terrible and bitter message of the Emperor to Vitellius against King
Aretas, must be obeyed, though more of necessity then of any zeal of
Vitellius in Herod's quarrel. He therefore raising what forces he accounted
fitting for his own safety in the Emperors favor, and for his safety with
the enemy, marches toward the seat of the war, intending to lead his Army
through Judea: But he was diverted from this intention, by the humble
supplication of the Jews to the contrary, who took on how contrary it was to
their ancient Laws and customs to have any Images and pictures brought into
their Country, whereof there was great store in the Romans Arms and Banners.
The gentleness of the General was easily overtreated, and commanding his Army
another way, he himself with Herod and his friends went up to Jerusalem,
where he offered sacrifice, and removed Jonathan from the High Priesthood, and
placed Th^ophilus his brother in his stead. This was, says Josephus, at a
feast of the Jews, but he named not which; and Vitellius having stayed there
three days, on the fourth receives letters concerning Tiberius his death. I
leave it to be weighed by the reader whether this festival were the Passover
or Pentecost. For on the one hand since Tiberius died about the middle of March
as the Roman Historians do generally agree, it is s^arse possible that the
Governor of Syria and the nations of the East should be unacquainted with it,
till Pentecost which was eight or nine weeks after: For all the Empire must as
soon as possible ^ee sworn unto the new Prince, as Vitellius upon the tidings
did swear Judea, and so long a time might have bred some unconvenience. And
yet on the contrary it is very strange, that the intelligence of his death
should be so quick as to get from Rome to Jerusalem between the middle of
March and the middle of the passover week.

Vitellius upon the tidings recalleth his Army again, and disposes and
billeteth them in the several places where they had wintered, for he knew not
whether Caius would be of the same mind with Tiberius about the matter of
Aretas and Herod: you may guess how this news was brooked by the Arabian King,
and yet was it no other then what he looked for, if he believed what he
himself spoke. For hearing of the preparations of Vitellius against him, and
consulting with Wizards and Augury; This Army, says he, shall not come into
Arabia, for some of the Commanders shall die; Either he that commands the
war, or he that undertaketh it, or he for whom it is undertaken: meaning
either Tiberius, Vitellius, or Herod.

Sect. II. An Omen to Agrippa in chains.
Such another wizardly presage of the Emperors death, had Agrippa at Rome as
Josephus also relates, who relates the former. For as he stood bound before
the palace, leaning dejectedly upon a tree, among many others that were
prisoners with him, an Owl came and sat in that tree, to which he leaned,
which a Germane seeing, being one of those that stood there bound, he asked
who he was that was in the purple, and leaned there: and understanding who he
was: he told him of his enlargement, promotion to honor, and prosperity, and
that when he should see that bird again, he should die within five days
after. And thus will the credulity of superstition have the very birds to
foretell Tiberius his end, from the Phoenix to the Owl.

The Roman Story again.
Sect. I. Tiberius near his end.
TWice only did Tiberius proffer to retrne to the City after his departure
from it, but returned never. The later time was not very long before his end:
For being come within the sight of the City upon the Appian rode, this prodigy
(as he took it) affrighted him back. He had a tame Serpent, which coming to
feed as he used to do with his own hand, he found him eaten up by Pismires:
upon which ominous accident being advised not to trust himself among the
multitude, he suddenly retired back to Campany, and at Astura he fell sick.
From thence he removed to Circeii, and thence to Misenum, carrying out his
infirmity so well, that he abated not a whit of his former sports, banquets
and voluptuousness: whether for dissimulation, or for habitual intemperance,
or upon Thrasyllus his prediction, let who will determine. He used to mock at
Physic, and to scoff at those, that being thirty years of age, yet would
ask other men's counsel, what was good or hurtful for their own bodies.

Sect. II. His choice of a successor.
But weakness at the last gave him warning of his end, and put him in mind to
think of his successor: and when he did so, perplexity met with such a
thought. For whom should he choose* The son of Drusus was too young, the
son of Germanicus was too well beloved, and Claudius was too soft; should he
choose the first or the last, it might help to disgrace his judgment, should
he choose the middle, he might chance to disgrace his own memory among the
people, and for him to look elsewhere was to disgrace the family of the
Caesar's. Thus did he pretend a great deal of care and seriousness for the
good of the common wealth, whereas his maine aim and respect was, at his own
credit and his families honor. Well: something he must pretend to give
countenance and credit to his care of the common good. In sine his great
deliberation concluded in this easy issue, namely in a prayer to the Gods to
design his successor, and in an auspicium of his own hatching, that he
should be his successor that should come first in to him upon the next
morning, which proved to be Caius. It showed no great reality nor earnestness
for the common good in him at all, when so small a thing as this must sway his
judgment, and such a trifle be the casting voice in a matter of so great a
moment. His affection was more to young Tiberius, his nephew, but his policy
reflected more upon Caius: he had rather Tiberius might have had the rule
alone, and yet he was unwilling that Caius should go without it, seeming to
divide his affections betwixt the two, whereas his chief thoughts and respects
were to his own self. But Caius whom the Gods had cast upon it (as his
foolish auspicium persuaded him) must be the man, though he read in his
nature the very bane of the Empire: and yet for affections sake too must young
Tiberius be joint heir with him, though he foresaw and foretold that Caius
should murder him. A monstrous policy: to lay his own grandchild for a bait,
for those jaws that he knew would devour him: and this was that by that
present cruelty of Caius his own cruelties that were past might be forgotten,
and the talk of that might not give room to talk of old Tiberius. This was
that pretended care that he had of the Commonwealth, to be sure to leave one
behind him that should be worse then himself, that by his greater wickedness
his own might be lessened, and that himself might seem to be less vicious,
by the others vitiousnesse above him. Yet gives he counsel to Caius inciting
him to goodness which he himself could never follow, and exhorting him to
tenderness toward young Tiberius, which in his heart he was reasonable
indifferent whether he followed or no.

Sect. III. His death.
Charicles the Doctor gave notice of his death approaching, to Caius and Macro,
though he stole this judgment and conjecture but by a slight. For sitting
with the Emperor at a Banquet, and taking on him some earnest and speedy
occasion to be gone to some other place, he rose from the Table, and
pretending to take the Emperors hand to kiss, he closely and stealingly
tried his Pulse, which Tiberius perceiving, but not expressing so much, caused
him to take his place again, and the Banquet to be renewed, and him to sit
out the meal. But when the Doctor was got loose from the Table, and was come
to Caius and Macro, and the rest of the adorers of that imperial Sun that
was now waiting when he should rise, he resolved them that his end drew on
apace, and was not many days off: And then was all preparation for the new
Emperor when the last gasp should remove the old. But he that had used so
much dissimulation all his life dissembled even in his dying. For fainting and
swooning so very sore, that all conceived he was departed, and Caius and all
his favorites were gone forth to take possession of his new Empire: suddenly
the tune is turned, and news comes forth that Tiberius is revived and calls
for meat: Macro that had often been his instrument of cruelty upon others,
(...) the faculty now upon himself, and in stead of meat stopped his mouth
with a pillow, or with heaping clothes upon his face and so he died. There are
indeed diversities of opinion about the manner of his death, some saying it was
thus as is mentioned, others that it was by poison, others that it was by being
denied meat in the intermission of his fits, others that he rose out of his
bed and fell on the floor, nobody being near him: all which are mentioned by
Suetonius. It is not much material what his end was, that that is first named
is most entertained, and certainly it suiteth very well with his deservings,
and it is some wonder that he came to such an end no sooner. He died the
seventeenth of the Calends of April or the sixteenth of March, or if Dion may
have his will the seventh, and so the rest of that year is accounted the first
of Caius.

SECT. IIII. CAIUS.
AN evil Emperor is gone, but a worse is to succeed him. Caius the son of
Germanicus, a bad child of a good father, inheriting the love and favor of the
people for his fathers sake, till he forfeited it, by his reserving the
qualities of Tiberius. He was surnamed Caligula, from a garb that he wore in
the Camp, in which he was bred and educated: from whence he had the love of
the Soldiers, till his barbarous nature lost it. It may seem incredible, that
a worse disposition should ever be found then that of Tiberius, but the old
Politician saw that this was so much beyond it, that it would do him credit:
some impute the fault to his bloody Nurse one Pressilla a Campanian, the
custom of which country it was, that the women when they were to give their
children suck, they first anointed the Nipple with the blood of an Hedg-hog, to
the end their children might be the more fierce and cruel. This woman was as
savage above the rest of the nation, as they were above other women, for her
breasts were all hairy over, like the beards of men, and her activitie and
strength in martial exercises inferior to few of the infantry of Rome. One
day as she was giving Caligula the Pap, being angry at a young child that
stood by her, she took it and tore it in pieces, and with the blood thereof
anointed her breasts and so set her nursling Caius to suck both blood and
milk. But had not his infancy been educated* in such a butchery, the school
of his youth had been enough to have habituated him to mischief. For being
brought up in the sight, and at the elbow of Tiberius, it would have served to
have corrupted the best nature that could be; but this of his was either never
good, or at least was spoiled long before. Yet had he reasonably well learned
his Tutors art of dissimulation, so that he hid those Serpentine conditions,
not only before Tiberius his death, but also a while after he had obtained
the Empire. Only he that had taught him to weave this mantle of dissembling
could spy through it, insomuch that he would profess, That Caius lived for
the destruction of him and all others. And that he hatched up a snake for the
Roman Empire, and a Phaeton for all the world. And it proved so both to him and
them. For when Tiberius lay a gasping stifled with a pillow pressed upon him, he
also throtled him with his hand, and crucified one of his servants that cried
out upon the hideousness of the fact. And as for his demeanor toward the
State, a little time will give too lamentable witness.

Sect. V. Tiberius in a manner cruel being dead.
How welcome news, the tidings of Tiberius death were at Rome, may be easily
conjectured, by any that has observed his cruelties before. Some cried out,
Tiberius into Tiber, some to the hurdle and Tyburne, some to one thing, some to
another, using the more liberty of their tongues against the tyrant now, by how
much they had been tied up the straiter whilst he lived. Nor did the
remembrance of his former cruelties only cause them to rejoice for his death,
but a present cruelty, (as if he were bloody being dead) made him the more
odious to them, then alive. For certain men that were but lately condemned, and
their execution day falling upon the very day when tidings of his death came to
the City (for the Senate did ever allow ten days for the condemned persons
after their sentence, before their end) the poor men emplored the aid and
comfort of every one they met, because Caius to whom they should have sued was
not in the City, but they were haled away by the Executioners and strangled.

Sect. VI. Agrippa in a perplexity, and enlarged.
Agrippa was partaker of the common joy, but withal of some mixture of misery,
for such variety of fortune had he tasted ever, and now must he have a
farewell to such vicissitudes. Marsy^^ his freeman hearing the rumor in the
City, runs with all speed to certify his master; and finding him with some
company in the ways toward the Bath, he beckeneth to him with this speech in
the Hebrew tongue, The Lion is dead. With which tidings Agrippa was so
transported with joy, that the Centurion his Keeper perceived it, and enquiring
the reason, and being told it by Agrippa, he rejoiced with him for the news,
and loses him from his Bonds. But as they were at Supper, there comes a
contrary report that Tiberius was alive, and would ere long be in the City.
What now think you is become of the heart and mettle of Agrippa and his
Centurion? Both had done enough by this their present joy, to procure their
endless sorrow, and his Keeper the worse of the two; but Agrippa must smart
for all for the present. He therefore casts him into irons again, and
commits him to a surer Guard then before: And thus, as his too much
eagerness of Tiberius his death had imprisoned him before, even so does it
now: but the next morning puts him into life again, for the rumor of the old
Emperors death, is confirmed by Letters from the ne^^; and a special Warrant
comes from him for the enlarging of Agrippa out of Prison, to the house where
he had used to live before.

Sect. VII. Caius comes to Rome.
The Corpse of the dead Tyrant is carried by the Soldiers into the City, Caius
himself in mourning apparel following the Hearse; and there he makes his
Funeral Oration, and performs his Obsequies with great pomp and solemnity.
And on the very day of his coming to town he had enlarged Agrippa, but that
the advice of Antonia persuaded him to hold a while, lest the people should
suspect that he was glad of the death of Tiberius, if he should so suddenly
set free one that he had committed for an enemy. But within a few days he is
enlarged, and sent for home unto him. And there is he trimmed, his garments
changed, and he crowned King of the Tetrarchies of Philip and Lysanias, and
his chain of iron, and of his bondage, changed for a chain of Gold of the same
weight. This is that King Agrippa that slew James, and imprisoned Peter, and is
called Herod, Acts 2.

Sect. VIII. Caius his dissembling.
Caius his beginnings were plausible and popular, dissembling his cursed
dispositions under such crafty colors, that the people were transported with
so happy a change (as they supposed) and 160000 Sacrifices were slain for
gratulation in his three first months. His tears for Tiberius, his piety to
his dead mother and brother, his respect to his living Sisters, his fair words
to the Senate, and as fair carriage to the people, his paying of Legacies, his
enlarging of Prisoners, his remitting of offenses, his reviving of good Laws,
etc. made the people to forget either in what school of dissimulation he had
been brought up, or how soon so great advancement corrupts men of little
education,; and it made them vainly to hope that they had a Germanicus,
because they had his son; and that a good Prince could be bequeathed to them
by Tiberius.

Yet could he not hide the illness of his disposition under all these cloakes
and coverts of dissembling; for presently upon his coming to the City, he
disanulled the will of Tiberius that he might nullify the authority of his
partner of the same name in the rule and Empire: And yet did he pay all the
Legacies of old Tiberius with bountiful additions of his own, which showed
tha^ he disliked the will, only because of partnership of Tiberius the
younger. Having thus the whole sway and dominion devolved upon himself, by the
outing of his poor Cousin (for the Senate was made and packed by Macro for
such a purpose) he was received with as much joy and applause, as was possible
to express, upon the old memory of his father, and the present expectation of
himself. Nor was this jocundnesse confined in the narrow bonds of Rome and
Italy, but dilated it self through all the Empire, in every corner where the
hoped benefit, and happy fruit of so great an expectation would have come, had
it proved right. Every Country, City and Town was poured forth into exultation
and festivity, with a common joy in this common hope. Now could you have seen
nothing but Altars, Offerings, Sacrifices, Feasts, Revels, Bankets, Plays,
Dancings, merry Faces, crowned Heads, singing Tongues and joyful Hearts, that
the World seemed to be ravished besides it self, and all misery to be
banished out of it, and all the thoughts of a changing fortune utterly forgot.
Had Tiberius but spyed this work out of his Coffin, how would he have laughed
for company, to behold this deludednesse of the people, and dissimulation of
the Prince? And thus lasted this music and masking for his first seven
months, in which the new Emperor behaved himself with that moderation and
bravery, as if virtue it self had been come among them.

In the eighth month a grievous sickness seized upon him, and then was all
this mirth and melody turned to mourning and lamentation: each man sorrowful,
and women bemoaning, as if all the world had been sick as well as he. Now
were their songs turned into tears, their revelling into prayers, and their
festivalls to Vows for his recovery. Nay, so far did some strain the
expression of their affections, that they vowed their heads and lives for his
restoring. Nor could the people be so much blamed for this their sorrow, as
pityed for being thus deceived, nor could it so much be wondered at that they
were deceived, as it was wonderful that he could so deceive. For who could
have chose but have erred their error, that had seen what they beheld; and w^o
could have brought them into such an error, but such a one as he, who was both
a Caius and a scholar of Tiberius? When he paid the Legacies of Tiberius,) he
also discharged those of Iulia which Tiberius had stopped, and added a
considerable sum of his own bounty: He gathered the ashes of his mother and
brother, and committed them to their Urne with his own hands, choosing a
tempestuous season purposely when he travailed about that business, that his
piety might be blown about the more; and he instituted annual festivalls
for them. Nor must his father Germanicus be forgotten, nor indeed could he, nor
did he deserve it, for his memory therefore would he have the month
September to be called by his name, placing him in the Calendar next Augustus.
His Grandmother Antonia he also dignified and deified equally with Livia; and
that by the consent and decree of the Senate. His Uncle Claudius he honored
with partnership with him in the Consulship; and his brother and partner
Tiberius, with adoption to put him in future hopes now he had lost his present
ones; and he titled him The Prince of the Youth, to stop his mouth belike,
when he had put him beside his being the Prince of Men. But as for his
Sisters, the sequel showed that it was more doting and lust then pure brotherly
affection, that caused him to show these expressions: that in all oaths that
were administered to any, this must be one clause to which they must swear,
That they neither accounted themselves nor their children, dearer then Caius
and his Sisters: and this in all the Records of the Consuls, Which be for the
happiness of Caius and his Sisters, etc. The like popularity used he likewise
to the people, releasing the condemned, and recalling the banished; condemning
on the contrary all enormities in Judicature, and banishing all incentives to
evil manners. Forgiving his own private grievances, and satisfying for
injuries done by his Predecessors; that it was no marvel if the whole State
were sick in the sickness of such a Prince.

Sect. IX. Caius beginning to show himself in his own colors.
Not to insist longer upon the vizor of this dissembler, but to take him as he
was, and not as he seemed, his nature began more evidently to show it self
after his recovery of his sickness mentioned, and then the State began by
degrees to be sick indeed. His beginnings were in lightness, sports, and
lavishing of money; but his proceedings were in bestiality, cruelty and
effusion of blood. His Banquets, Plays, Swordfights, Fightings of Beasts (as
400 Bears, and as many other African wild Beasts at one time) his Music,
Shows, strictness that none should be absent from them, and expensivenesse in
all (insomuch that he spent above twenty millions in such vanities in less
then three years) may be thought as virtues in him, in comparison of that
that followed, and of the mischiefs that he mingled between.

Sect. X. Caius cruel.
The recovery of the Emperor Caius, from that disease under which we left him
ere while, proved the sickness of the whole State, and the death of diverse.
For now he began to show himself in his own colors, and to lay open the
inside of his barbarous nature, which hitherto he had hid under strange
dissimulation. P. Afranius Petitus a Plebeian, and Atanius Secundus a Knight,
had bound themselves by oath, in the Emperors sickness, partly in flattery,
partly in hope of reward, the one that he would die on condition the Prince
might recover; and the other that he would venture his life in combat on the
same condition. Caius understanding of this obligation, and pretending that he
would have neither of them perjured, seeing he was now well again, constrained
them both to perform their vows, and brought them to repent their flattery
with repentance too late and vain, and to a reward clean contrary to their
expectation. Nor was his cruelty any whit less, though for very shame it must
be better dissembled, to his Father in Law the noble Silanus. A man hated of
him for the two maine things that in humane society are the eyes of love,
virtue, and alliance, and so indignly used him, that he found no way to regain
his love, nor any better to avoid his hate then to murder himself with his own
hands. Claudia the daughter of Silanus was his wife, but he divorced her from
him, and took Cornelia Orestilla, from her husband Calpurnius Piso, on their
very wedding day, where he was present at the solemnization, and he kept her
not two months, but sent her to her Piso again.

Sect. XI. Young Tiberius brought to a miserable end.
These entries being made for the fleshing as it were the Tyrant in bloodinesse
and cruelty, he is now made ready and fit to execute a more horrible design
upon his poor brother, partner and son by adoption, the young and innocent
Tiberius. He poor Prince having been thrust by him out of his right and
patrimony, by the nullifying of old Tiberius his will, must now also be
deprived of life. This was it that the old Testator did presage, and yet would
leave him for a prey to his inhumanity. The pretenses against this young Prince
were, that either he had been a means to cause his sickness, or at least had
rejoiced in it, and desired his death. A sleighty accusation to bring such a
Person to death; yet might he only have dyed, it might have seemed more
tolerable, but the manner of it made the cruelty double. He is commanded to
die by his own hand, though Tribunes, Centurions, and men of war fitter far
to have done such an execution stood by and would have done it. He desired but
this mercy, that he might have been slain by some of them, but that was denied
him upon a point of Honor and Justice forsooth, because it was not fit that
such a Prince should dye by inferior hands. The poor Prince offered his neck
to every one that stood near, but they durst not strike for fear of their
own: The only favor that he could obtain was this, that they might teach
him where to wound himself for his soonest dispatch, and so he did. And thus
is the Tyrant delivered as he thinks from all fear and danger of
compartnership and corrivality in the Empire: next will he take a course with
those that any way may cross him in, or advise him against his headlong
humors, and of them we shall hear in their course. The last six months of
this year he had taken the Consulship upon himself, and had chosen his Uncle
Claudius for his colleague, but we have reserved the names of the old till
now, to avoid confusion.

THE ROMAN, and JEWISH STORY, FOR The Year of Christ 39. And of Caius Caligula
2. Being the Year of the World 3966. And of the City of Rome, 791. Consuls M.
Aquila Iulianus. P. Nonius Asprenas.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

PART I. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Cruelties at Rome.
THis year began at Rome with a fatal Omen. For on the first of January,
Machaon a servant went up to the shrine of Jupiter Capitolinus, and there
having presaged and Prophesied many fearful and terrible things, first he
slew a whelpe that he had with him, and then he slew himself.

These beginnings had answerable sequels, for Caius addicted himself wholly to
bloodinesse, sometimes for his sports, sometimes in cruel earnest: He
commanded sword plays to be made, in which he set not man to man, but
multitudes to multitudes to slaughter each other: He slew in the same manner
six and twenty Roman Knights, with great contentment taken by him in the
effusion of their blood: He set also another Knight to the same terrible
sports, and when he came off victorious, he caused him, and his father to be
slain, and diverse others with them enclosing them in a strong Chest or Press:
When once there were not ^now of poor condemned wretches to cast to the wild
beasts, he caused diverse that stood upon the Scaffolds for spectators to be
cast unto them, causing their tongues first to be cut out, that they might not
cry or complain: yet did he with these cruelties mingle some plausible
actions tending to popularitie, as creating of Knights, priviledging the
commons, and lavishing in gifts, that strengthening himself with these
courtesies in the hearts of some men, he might with the more confidence be
cruel to other.

Sect. I. An end of Macro.
It cannot be expected that he should come to a good end himself, that had
brought so many to a bad. His course is now come to taste of the same sauce that
he had provided for so many others, and it would half move the spectator to
some kind of pity to see him slaughtered for such a cause as he was
slaughtered for. How he had been a means to curry Caius favor with Tiberius,
and to skrew him into the Empire and himself into his good opinion, even by
the prostitution of his own wife, we have heard before, and this his
extraordinary officiousness, he did not forelet or slacken, when he had
brought him where he desired to have him, to the Empire. But now he turned
his observance a better way, and what he had done before by baseness,
flattery, and senseless obsequiousness to bring him to the rule, he changes
into good counsel to keep him well in it. For when he saw him fall asleep at
Banquets amongst his cups, he would freely check him for it, as being neither
for his credit nor for his safety. The like would he do when he saw him
misbehave himself by lightness, profuse laughter, and ridiculous gestures in
the theater, and in beholding of plays: In brief, so round and plain was he
with him when he saw just cause, that in fine the uncounselable humorist
became his enemy, and at last his death. His end is reported to have been the
same with young Tiberius, forced to slay himself, and Ennia his wife, or the
wife of Caius whether you will, to have been constrained to the same extremity
and end with him. An end well befitting and well deserved of them both, but
from all men living least deserved from Caius. Philo after the death of Macro
places the death of M. Silanus, which upon the warrant of Dion we have set
before, and in things so indifferent will not spend labor to examine.

Part II. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. Troubles of the Jews in Alexandria.
FLaccus Avilius was now Governor of Egypt, and had been so for some years
before: A man that ruled well while Tiberius lived, but after his death, could
not govern himself. For when he heard of the death of the old Emperor and
the succession of the new, sorrow for the one, and fear of the other did so
transport him besides himself, that forgetting the bravery and glory wherewith
he had governed hitherto, he let loose the reins of himself to these two
passions, and the reins of the government to desperate carelessness and
neglect. He did nothing but weep for the loss of old Tiberius, to whom he
had been very intimate and dear, and he might well weep the more, because he
could meet hardly with any that would bear any part and share in that sorrow
with him. This his grief was augmented by the fear that he had of Caius and
of his displeasure, and that by the intelligence that his conscience gave him
that he had deserved it: partly for his propensitie to young Tiberius and
siding with him, but chiefly because he had had some hand or at least some
consent and inclination to the death of Agrippina, Caius his mother. Both these
his miserable passions were brought to their height when he heard of the death
of young Tiberius and of his old friend Macro. The thought of these two was the
only comfort he had against his dejectedness and discontent, for all his
hope was, that these two might make his peace with Caius, whose displeasure he
so much doubted: But what must he do now, when they cannot make their own
peace? He yields himself therefore wholly to his discontented mood, and
neglects utterly both himself and the State. His old friends he grows
jealous of and rejects: his professed enemies he receives to his favor and
to his counsels: These rule him that should have ruled Egypt, and he had done
it worthily, but now is drawn any whither, that ill advise, sullenness and
melancholy does direct him. These his wicked counselors invent a course to
procure his peace and the Emperors favor, a course indeed bloody, barbarous,
and inhumane, but such as suited with their own malice, and (as it proved)
took place with the Governors desperateness and cowardice, if so be he may
be called a Governor still. Caius the Emperor, say they, is an enemy to the
Jews, and a friend to the Alexandrians: Let this be the opportunity whereby
to work thy reconciliation, to suffer the city to rise against the Jews and
to commit outrage upon them, and thou can not perform an act more acceptable
to the Prince, nor more profitable for thy self. The wretched Flaccus that
took to heart no man's misery but his own, and cared not who suffered, so he
might escape, gave ear to this damnable and devilish counsel, and put it in
practice, first plotting mischief against the Jews in secret, then oppressing
them in judgment and in their suites openly, and at the last professing and
publishing himself their r^solved enemy.

Sect. II. Agrippa at Alexandria an unexpected and unwilling occasion of
further troubles.
Those incendiaries that had kindled this fire will be sure to lose no blast
that may make it flame and keep it burning: Agrippa that had not long ago
depaited from Alexandria a poor private man, returns now thither in
prosperity and a King. Caius that had promoted him to his kingdom, did
lovingly direct him by Alexandria, as the safest way to it. Thither he came
with as great privacy as such as personage could do, and yet was he espied by
the jealous eyes of these rare counselors, and his coming misconstrued,
through their malice to the Jews. They persuade Flaccus that his coming
thither was an affront to him in his own Province, that his Pomp and Train
was more sumptuous then his, that the eyes of all men were upon the new King
Agrippa, and in short that his presence there, was his present disgrace and
would prove his future disadvantage. The ill governed Governor was ready
enough to hearken to such buzzings as these, and to yield them impression in
his mind, yet durst he not put any thing in execution against the King for
fear of him that sent him. He therefore thought it best to carry a fai^e
outside to Agrippa, and to his face he speaks fair and pretends
friendship, but behind his back, he did not only descry his hate and revile
him in secret, but also connived at those that did so openly: so that within a
little while, the King that neither thought nor came for any hurt is made the
public scoff and scorn throughout the City, and on their stages, in their
plays, ballads, speeches, houses, streets, there is no language so common nor
so current, as the abusive of Agrippa.

Sect. III. A Pageant of one and more madmen.
This connivence of the Governor shall I call it, or his toleration, or his
setting on, or his folly, or what you will, you may well presume that it added
boldness and impudency enough to the outrageous multitude, which commonly in
such mischievousnesse need small encouragement: Their madness among other
things showed it self in this Pageant, whether more senseless or spleenatick,
if not both alike, let the Reader judge. There was a poor mad man or
distracted wretch in the City whose name was Charabas, that used to walk up
and down stark naked night and day, heat and cold, the common fool as it
were of boys and young men, with whom they used to make sport. The riotous
rout (now set on mischief) bring this silly wretch to one of their public
meeting places, and there setting him on high in a seat above all the people
that he might be seen of all, they put a Diadem of Paper about his head,
and mat of sedge about his body in stead of his robes, and a piece of ^^eed for
a Scepter in his hand: and thus have they solemnly and suddenly made him a
King, and one indeed that had been fit enough for themselves; and one that was
indeed but a fit Emblem of their Governor Flaccus, that suffered such a thing.
Their mimicall King being thus accoutred with his robes and royalty, they
bring him forth in a solemn state: Before and about him went youths with poles
upon their shoulders for his guard, by the way as he went some come to do him
homage, others to petition for justice, others to advise him concerning
affairs of State, and at last they all of them All hail him with the title of
Mare, (...)
which in the Syrian tongue, the language of the country of Agrippa, (whom by
this very word they showed that they mocked) betokens Lord and Master. And
now let the Reader but look upon this rout of Alexandrians, and let him judge
who was the madder, the poor Lunatic that was so used, or they that so used
him. For was it not mere madness in them thus to taunt and revile so great a
King, so greatly respected by the Roman Senate, and so great a favorite of
their Lord and Emperor? But Flaccus the maddest of all that beheld all this,
and yet did permit it. And on the other hand let him look upon the Jews to
whom this sportfull mummery is the preface to misery in good earnest, and if
this mockage of their first King with a Crown, Robe^, and Scepter of derision,
put not the Reader in mind of their scorning and usage of their true King and
Savior in the very same manner, he cannot but remember Barabbas upon the
naming of Charabas by the very same sound and rhyme.

Sect. IIII. More outrage.
The Alexandrians thus countenanced by Flaccus in the derision of the new King
of the Jews, grow to a bou^dlesse outrage against their God. For now they
begin to assail their Synagogues, and there they desire to set up Images: a
thing as odious to that nation, as beloved among the Alexandrians. For in them
is fulfilled that prophecy of Hosea Chap. 3.4. where they neither are as yet
to God, nor as yet to any other, but on the one hand detesting false Gods, and
yet on the other hand not embracing the true: hating the Images of any creature
for adoration, but withal hating him that is the very Image and Character of
the living God, the Creator.

This interprise of profaning and defiling the Synagogues and houses of prayer
of the Jews was not a fearful and terrible vexation to those of that City
only, but what hurt may such an example do, think you, both through Egypt
and indeed through all the other Cities of the Empire: What fruits these
beginnings brought forth in the same City, and elsewhere, we shall see ere
long.

Sect. V. Caius will be a God.
A special encouragement to this insolency at Alexandria was Caius the
Emperors demeanor at Rome: A man not fit to be ranked in the rank of men,
and yet no way with him now but he will be a God. The senseless groundworke
of this his impious fancy, he took from this damnable Logic and devilish
argumentation. That seeing shepherds and heards-men that are masters of sheep
and cattle, are in a degree far above their beasts and cattle: So he that
was the Lord of all men, was not to be ranked in the degree of men, but of the
Gods: This his opinion founded upon impiety, backed with flattery, and
strengthened by his uncontrouled power, he followed with such vehemence and
vigor, that now no Deity must be thought on but the God Caius, and all the
Gods as he pleased were engrossed into himself. He changed his Godship when
he thought good, and that with no more ado then with change of his ga^be. To
day he would wear a Lions skin and a golden Club, and then he was Hercules,
to morrow a Kids skin, and an Alepole, and then he was Bacchus; when he laid
that by it may be he would put on his curious Bonnet, and then he was Castor
or Pollux: He would but lay that by and put on a beamy golden crown, and take
bow and Arrows in his hands, and he was Apollo, a Cuduceus made him Mercury,
and sword, ^^^met and gantlet made him Mars: But the terror that attended him
when he would be this God last named, walking in his armor, with his drawn
sword in his hand, and a band of cutthroats about him, showed to the people
but little of any divine qualities, or celestial intentions, but terrified
them with expectation of devilish cruelty and murders: Sometimes would he sit
betwixt the two statues of Castor and Pollux and endure to be saluted by the
name of the Italian Jupiter; sometimes would he sit betwixt the two statues of
Castor and Pollux and endure to be saluted by the name of the Italian Jupiter:
Sometimes would he sit by Jupiter himself and whisper with him, and threaten
to banish him out of Italy into Greece: And indeed it had been but an equal
change had he done so, for he got the most curious pieces of the Gods of that
country, and struck off their heads, and on the trunk he set the
representation of his own. He had a standing statue of gold erected for him,
to represent his walking Deity, which was clothed with the same garb that he
wore himself every day, and to this were offered daily sacrifices as rare and
new found out as was his Deity it self, Peacocks, Pheasants, and other birds
of the greatest raritie and value. So vain a thing is man deserted and left
unto himself, that he will be a God when he is in the next form unto a
Devil. The plain and rustic Gaul hit him right, and spoke but the truth,
when seeing him in these his postures of his foolish deity, and laughing, and
being asked by Caius what he thought of him that he laughed, he answered
boldly and escaped with it, That he seemed to him to be a great folly.

Sect. VI. The miseries of the Alexandrian Jews.
How these manners of the Prince might redound to the calamity of the Jews
who would worship no God but their own, it is easy to guess by the common
advantages that are always taken in the like cases, by men that are armed with
power and weaponed with malice. As this humor of the Emperor was blown up
with flattery and blasphemous clawing at home, so was it soon blazoned and
divulged abroad, and they that delighted in many Gods, it was good contentment,
to have them all met in the Center of the new God, all-God, their Prince. But
what will become of the Jews, the only opposers of such impiety, and what
especially of the Alexandrian Jews, whose tragedy was begun already? This
opportunity suited with the spiteful desires of their adversaries, as their
adversaries themselves could have desired. For now thinks Flaccus, he may
ingratiate himself to Caesar indeed by being ungracious to the Jews, and now
have the Alexandrians a double forwarding beside their own malice, their
Governor and their Prince.

First Flaccus deprived the Jews of their Synagogues, Oratories and houses of
prayer, and therewith as much as in him lay of their religion, then of the
benefit of the City and Country Laws, proclaiming them stangers and
forreiners, and at last gave free and open liberty to the Alexandrians to use
their wills upon them, in what manner and measure their malice thought meet.
And now their Tragedy begins.

The Jews in the City were above two parts of five; the Alexandrians driving
them out of their own houses, and ransacking the houses as they went, they
force into a strait place of the City, where they had not room to stir one
for another, much less to make any orderly ha^talia for defense of themselves,
or for resistance. In this strait both of place and fortune, it is no wonder if
they speedily suffered famine who had nothing of their sustenance left them,
unless they would have devoured one another. Here are many mouths and no meat,
and great complaining but no relief. Plenty enough there was in the City, but
none for them, and abundance of every thing necessary, but pity. The poor
crowded, starved, and distressed people, those that had any hope or courage to
shift for themselves, streake abroad and steal forth of their enclosure, for
food and fresh air; some to the shore, some into the City, some one way, some
another, but the misery of them also was no less then theirs that staid
impounded, but that it was not so lingering. For wheresoever they were caught,
as no where could they go but descried, they were either stoned, clubbed, or
burned to death, yea often man, wife, children and whole families so murdered
all of a heap. Some they smoaked and choked to death in a fire where they
wanted fuel to burn them out, some they haled with ropes tied about their
ankles, up and down the streets till they were dead, and then neither spared
they the dead bodies, but mangled them in pieces. Their Synagogues they all
burnt down, with the loss also of some of the Alexandrians houses adjoining,
their houses they defaced, and their lives they took away, when and
wheresoever they could catch them. Flaccus in this bloodinesse, had done enough
by connivence and toleration, but he is not content with this passive tyranny
unless he be an actor himself in the Scene, and be not behind other in this
mischief, as he was before them in authority. Eight and thirty of their
Judges and Counselors (for a Senate of their own was tolerated by Augustus
and allowed them) he sends for by his officers, and binding their hands
behind them causes them thus to be led along the streets for a derision, and
then caused them to be publicly scourged, some to death, some to the lingering
out of a miserable life. He caused also a pretended search to be made
throughout all the Jews houses for armor, pretending a suspicion of their
insurrection, but intending thereby to give the Soldiers the more advantage
for their pillaging and oppression. He spared neither age nor sex against whom
he could take an occasion or find cavil, nor reverenced he any festival for
their execution, nor omitted any kind of cruelty for their torture. Here is the
first smarting blow to count of that this nation felt, since they called for
the blood of the just one upon themselves and upon their children, and some of
this City were nimble agents for the compassing of the death of his first
martyr Steven, Act. 6.9.

Sect. VII. Agrippa in his own kingdom.
You may well presume that the stay of Agrippa would not be long at
Alexandria, where his intertainment was so foul, and his invitation to his
own home was so faite and good* His welcome thither was not so full of scorn
and disgrace, as in the other place, but as full of unkindnesse, because the
unkindnesse was from his own sister. Herodias, the incestuous wife of Herod
the Tetrarch, and once some comfort to this her brother whilst he was in
distress, grows now, the bitter envier of his prosperity. A woman ever active
to the mischief of others, but now beginning to twine a whip for her own
back. It grieveth her to see the unlooked for pomp of the new King Agrippa: A
man that had so lately been (...) the hatches of fortune, and in her bilboes,
debt and danger, that had but the other day fled from his wife, country, and
friends for poverty and shame, unable to pay the moneys that he ought, and
which was worse, as unable to borrow more, and now he is returned again with
a Kingdom, a Crown, and with pomp and train^ agreeable to both: Oh how this
grated her haughty and emulative spirit, though he were her brother! Well,
whether it were in spite to his promotion, or in disdain to her degree that
was now below him, which is the more like, the shower and storms of her
discontents do shower upon her husband. She lays in his dish the present
spectacle of Agrippaes glory, and his own inferioritie. Taxes him with
dullness and sleepiness, that would not seek for a higher dignity, which
might be had for a journey to Rome; twitteth him for being an underling when
he might prevent it, persuades him to spare no cost nor travail for that
prevention, and in fine works so with him by uncessant clamours, that though
he could well have been contentented to have sitten quiet at home, yet he is
induced or driven to travail, and she with him to Rome to Caius. Agrippa was
not unacquainted with her discontents and with both their designs, and will
not be far behind in reciprocal requital of such intentions, but their
meeting, pleading and success at Rome must be reserved to another year.

PART III. The Roman Story again.
Sect. Caius the new God, little better then a Devil.
AFter the sight of the goodly Godship of the Empeperour showed in little a
little before, let us take him now as he is indeed, little better then a
Devil. A man, the shame and confusion of men, if he may be called a man, and
so far beyond the vices of any that had gone before, that he seemed to live to
no other purpose then to show, what the utmost extent of vitiousnesse could do
in the utmost height of power and liberty. You would wonder, but that his
defiance of the Gods does lessen that wonder, how scornefully and despitefully
he used the memory and persons of his ancestors, sisters, kindred and best
friends: He charged Augustus with incest, Livia with base birth, Tiberius but
with what he deserved, his own mother with bastardize, and whosoever was most
near and most honor to him, with some ignominy and reproach or other. But
such words were courtesies in comparison of his actions. All his sisters he
first deflowred, and then prostituted them to others being so deflowred. But
his darling sister Drusilla, sped somewhat better, if that better were not as
bad. To her he continued his affection, of love or lust whether you will,
while she continued in life, and when she was dead, he made her the means
of his profit as he had done before of his pleasure; she was the wife of M.
Lapidus, but still the whore of her brother Caius, and after her death he made
her a Goddess, whom all her life long he had made his harlot. Altars,
statues, vows, festivals were ordained for her, and Livius Geminius played the
knight o'th post, and swore devoutly that he saw her ascend to heaven, and
conversing with the Gods. Such a Deity had the Romans never known before, but
only her brother, and she troubled them as much in her heaven, as he did on
the earth. For now was it impossible for any man so to behave himself, but he
was intrapped on the one hand or the other, about this new found Goddess. To
mourn for her death, it was criminal, because she was a Deity; and to
rejoice for her Deity was capital, because she was dead, so that betwixt this
Dilemma, of piety, tears and devotion, that man was very wary indeed that
suffered not inhumanity and violence. For to laugh, feast, bath, sing or dance
was mortal, because the Emperors sister and darling was dead, and yet to
mourn, or sorrow for her death was as deadly, because she was immortal. This
last stale did he make of this his deceased sister, when she would now serve
him for no other use, that both sorrow for her mortality, and joy for her
being immortal did alike bring in money to his treasures, (which were now
almost drained of his many millions) either by bribes for the saving of the
life of some, or by confiscation upon the Death of others.

But how must he do now for another Paramour after his dear Drusilla? Why,
that needs not to breed any great difficulty, when his unbridled lust is not
very curious of his choice, and his as unbridled power might choose as it list.
He first married Lollia Paullina the wife of C. Memmius, sending for her from
another country where her husband was General of the Army, and all the reason
of this his choice was, because he was told that her grandmother was an
exceeding great beauty; but he soon put her away again, and forbad that any
should touch her for ever after him. Next came Caeso^ia into his affections,
and there continued; a mother of three children, and of more age then beauty,
but of a lasciviousness and beastiality so well befitting his, that now he
had met with his match, and it was pity they should have missed meeting: He
would sometimes, show her to the Soldiers, in armor, and sometimes to his
friends stark naked, transforming her by these vicissitudes into two extremes
equally unbefitting her sex, to a man and to a beast. By her he had a daughter
whom he named Iulia Drusilla, and whom he brought to the shrines of all the
Goddesses in Rome, and at last committed to the lap of Minerva for her tutorage
and education. But this his behavior is nothing in comparison of that which
followed. He slew diverse of the Senate, and yet afterward cited them to
appear as if they had been alive, and in the end pretended that they had died
by their own hands, others came off with a scourging, and so they escaped with
life, but he caused the Soldiers to tread on them as they lay, and as they
whipped them that they might have them at the more command: And thus he used
some of all ranks and (...) Being disturbed at midnight one night by the noise
of same that were getting places in the Circus against the next day, he fell
upon them with Clubs and slew twenty kn^ghts, as many matrons, and an infinite
company of the (...) people. He threw a great multitude of old men and
decrepit householders to the wild beasts, that he might (...) such
unserviceable men, as he thought them, out of the way, and he caused the
granaries to be often shut up, that they that had escaped the wild beasts,
might perish with famine* He used to fatten the beasts that he desired to
have fed with the inhumane diet of humane bodies yet alive, that thereby he
might save other charges: Many men he first m^ngled and maimed, and then
condemned to the mines, or to the wild beasts, or to little-ease-prison^, and
some he caused to be sawed in sunder. He forced parents to be present at the
execution of their children: and for one that could not come to such a
miserable spectacle he sent a letter; and another he invited to a feast,
after he had caused him to be a spectator of the execution of his own son.
One of the masters of his games that had offended him, he kept in chains, and
caused him to be beaten every day before his face, till the offensivenesse and
stench of his wounded brain obtained his death: A Roman Knight being cast by
him to the wild beasts, and crying out of the injustice done to him, he caused
to be taken out again, and his tongue to be cut out, and then he cast him
to them again. He caused all the banished men that were in the Islands about
Italy to be slain at once, because having asked one that was banished in the
time of Tiberius, what he did all the time of his exile, and he answered,
that he prayed continually for the death of Tiberius and the succession of
Caius, he thought that all the present exiles prayed for his death likewise.
Every tenth day he caused an execution to be had of those that were
condemned, boasting and vaunting that he scoured the prisons: And ever as any
one came to suffer, he commanded the executioners to end him with such
deliberate tortures, as that he should be sure to feel himself to die:
involving many deaths in one, and causing men that were to die, to live even in
death, that they might die with the more pain.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, FOR The Year of Christ 40.
And of Caius Caligula 3. Being the Year of the World 3967. And of the City of
Rome, 792. Consuls Caius Caesar II. L. Apronius, Celianus or Cestianus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

ACTS.
Chap. 9. Verse. 32. And it came to pass as Peter passed through all quarters.
THe occasion of Peter's travail at this time, may be well apprehended to be
for the settling and confirming of those Churches that were now begun by the
Ministry of the dispersed Preachers: One thing was most necessary for these
new founded Churches, which the Preachers themselves could not provide for
them, and that was Ministers or Pastors, unless they would have stayed there
themselves, which in all places they could not do and in many places they did
not, if in any place at all they did longer then for a little space, the
necessity of dispersing the Gospel calling them from place to place:
Therefore it was needful that the Apostles themselves should go after them to
ordain Ministers by the imposition of their hands, with which they did not
only install or institute into the office of the ministry, but also bestowed
the holy Ghost, for the inabling of those that they did ordain, for the
performance of that office, which gift the other Disciples could not bestow,
and this may be conceived one reason why ten of the twelve Apostles were
absent from Jerusalem at Paul's coming there, as was observed before, namely
because they were dispersed abroad over the new planted Churches for this
purpose* And this was one cause why Peter travailes thus at this time, the
plantations of the Churches still increasing: and his comforting, confirming
and settling the Churches was another.

Through all quarters.
This refers to those places mentioned in the verse preceding, Judea,
Galilee and Samaria: only whereas that verse speaks of the places
themselves, this Verse in the word (...), a word of the masculine gender,
refers to the people of the places, and this is all the difference: And
therefore Baronius is besides the Cushion, who upon this very place and out of
this very word would conclude that Peter in this his peregrination did found
the Episcopacy at Antioch. His words are these.

Luke, says he, being intent (as it appears) to commend to memory the more
remarkable miracles wrought by Peter, has omitted in silence the rest of his
actions performed in this visitation of the province, and among other things,
the institution of the Church of Antioch: which that it was erected by him in
this very year, we shall easily show by the testimony of the ancients.
Eusebius may be alleged as one of these ancients, and one for all, who
speaks much to the same purpose, and somewhat further, but only with this
difference that he has set down this matter a little before the death of
Tiberius. Peter the Apostle, says he, founded the Church of Antioch, and
having there gotten his chair be sat five and twenty years. Thus Eusebius ad
annum Christ. 38. Parisiis, 1511. Now to take up this position and story in its
several particulars, almost every parcel will prove a stumbling block, and
before belief can be given to it, it must pass through, and overcome these
difficulties.

1. Whereas his journey to Antioch is laid in this visitation: it is strained
beyond the letter, and beyond the Spirit and meaning of the Text. For that
speaks only of the Churches of Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, and then how
came in Antioch in another country? And those words through all quarters run at
a very uncertain random if they be uncircumscribed by the Verse before.

2. It is past all peradventure that as yet there was no Church at Antioch at
all, much more that there was no Episcopal Chair and See there. For it is a
year yet to come before there be any mention of a Church there, Act. 11. and
that that story of the first beginning of that Church lies in its proper place
and time without any transposition or Hysteron-proteron is so plain to him
that will but view it that it needs no proof.

3. How is it consistent with Peter's imprisonment at Jerusalem, Chap. 12. to
sit Bishop in another country? Much more is it inconsistent, or rather to speak
plainly, impossible that he should fit five and twenty years at Antioch and as
many at Rome, and yet go thither in the second of Claudius as he is held to
have done. Now Baronius has espied these two stumbling blocks, and laboreth to
remove them: but in his striving about the one, he throws dirt into Eusebius
his best Authors face, for he says he is corrupted; and indeed he does
little less about the other: For whereas Eusebius says in plain terms, ibi
sedit, Peter there sat, this his Paraphrast glosseth, that it sufficed though
he never came there; For with him Peter was as a Creator of Churches and
Bishoprics; for if dixit factum est if he but spoke the word, be he where
he would, there was a Metropolis or an Episcopacy created in any place
whatsoever. But not to spend much labor where we are sure but of little
profit, let it suffice the reader to have but a Catalogue and particular of his
arguments, and let him censure them according to his own judgment.

Argum. 1. It was Peter's office to oversee and take care of the whole stock,
and for this he visited all the Churches that lay round about Jerusalem, page
306. But that draws on another question, which will be harder to prove then
this, and it makes Paul but an intruder, that took upon him such a care.

Arg. 2. Peter taking opportunity of the Churches tranquillity, page 306.
visited all (the Christians which were in Syria) page 309. But here he is
besides his warrant of the Text, and makes a History of his own head.

Arg. 3. Peter wheresoever he was might raise an Episcopal or metropoliticall
See at any place distant where he pleased, by the Authority wherewith he was
indewed, page 309. When this is proved, we may believe the other that he
would prove.

Arg. 4. The number of Eusebius, of his sitting 25. years at Antioch, is an
error crept into the Text, but the number of his 25. years at Rome, in him is
right, page 306. but if he be at liberty to suspect the one, sure we may
have the like liberty to suspect the other.

Arg. 5. The Hierarchicall order seems not to endure, that the prime Church
that had been as yet instituted, should be governed by any but the prime
Apostle, page 309.330. It will be some work to prove any Hierarchicall order
at all, or Peter Prime Apostle, or Antioch, a chief Church above others more
then by humane preferring, or Antioch yet a Church; and were all these proved,
which never will be, yet is the inference or argumentation thereupon but of
small value and validity.

6. His last Argument is from Authorities, which at last he gathers into the
Center of a Council at Rome, page 332. But Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles,
magis amica veritas.

As for his answers to Eusebius that calls Evodius the first Bishop of
Antioch, his answer to Ignatius that says he was placed there by the
Apostles, more then one, and to Onuphrius, that makes Peter Bishop of Rome
before he was Bishop of Antioch, be they referred to the perusal in his own
Text, for the matter is not worth the labor of examining them.

Verse. 32. Lydda.
This seems to be the same with Lod, 1 Chronicles. 8.12* A City in the Tribe of
Benjamin, mentioned, Ezra 2.33.

Verse. 35. Saron.
Heb. Sharon: A fertile valley famous in Scripture, as 1 Chronicles. 27.29. Esa.
33.9. Cant. 2.1, etc. where the Targum renders it, the garden of Eden, and the
Seventie (...) a field or p^aine, the masculine Article shows, it is not the
name of a City: And so do the Seventie article it, Esa. 33.9. There is men^ion
of a Sharon beyond Jordan, 1 Chronicles. 5.16. inhabited about by Gileadites: by
which it seems that it was a common name for plain champion grounds
wheresoever.

Verse. 36. Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas.
Tabitha the Syriack, and Dorcas the Greek, do both signify a Hind, or Do,
Capream as Beza renders it. Now the reason why Luke does thus render the one
into the other, seems to be because Tabitha was a Grecizing Jewesse, and so
was commonly called by these two names, by the Syrian among the Hebrews, and by
the Greek among the Greeks.

Verse. 37. Whom when they had washed.
Whether it were a common custom among the Jews to wash all their dead bodies
before they buried them, as is concluded by many upon this place, we will not
insist to question; nor whether it were in token of the resurrection, or no, as
some apply it; only the other application that they make hereupon, I cannot
pass over untoucht: which is, that Paul spoke in reference to this custom,
and to that intention is this custom, when he says, (...), etc. 1 Cor.
15.29. Else what shall they do, which are baptized for the dead, etc. as our
English reads it: as if the Apostle produced this custom as an argument for
the resurrection, as meaning to what purpose should dead bodies be washed, if
not to betoken this: thus he is conceived to argue: whereas, by the juncture
of the 30. verse to this, it seems that he intends a clean contrary, or
different thing, by being baptized (...), namely, being baptized so as baptism
signifies death by martyrdom, or suffering for the truth, as Matthew. 20.22,
23. Luke 12.50. And his arguing is to this sense, If the dead rise not again,
what will become of those that are baptized with a martyriall baptism, or that
do suffer death for the profession of the truth? why are they then baptized
for dead? yea, and why stand we in jeopardy every hour of such a baptism and
martyrdom also? Why do they suffer, and why are we daily in danger to suffer
for the truth, if there be no resurrection? And so the word (...) to signify,
not vice, or supra, but pro, that is, in such a sense; and (...) to mean, In
such a sense as baptized, means, dead or martyred: As (...) is taken in this
clause, (...). Fabius delivered the power, or Army to Minucius, under this
intent and meaning, or condition, that he should not fight, Plut. in Fab.

Sect. They laid her in an upper chamber.
This probably was the public meeting room for the believers of that Town;
Dorcas being a woman of some good rank, as may be conjectured by her
plenteousnesse of good works and almsdeeds. Now they purposely disposing of
the dead corpse, that Peter if he would come, might exercise a miracle upon it,
they lay it in that public room, that the company might be spectators of the
wonder; but Peter would not suffer them so to be for some singular reason,
ver. 40.

Acts X.
Sect. Some things remarkable about the calling in of Cornelius.
First, the Gospel had now dilated it self to the very utmost bounds of the
Jews territories in Canaan, Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, had been preached to,
and through, and now is it got to the very walls of their dominions round
about: And there wants nothing but laying the partition wall flat, that the
Gospel may get out unto the Gentiles: and that is done in this Chapter; where
the great partition and distance that was betwixt Jew and Gentile is utterly
removed and taken away by God himself, who had first pitched and set it
betwixt them.

Secondly, the two first and mainest stones of interposition that were laid in
this wall, were circumcision and diet: the one in the time of Abraham, Genesis 17.
the other in the time of Jacob, Genesis 32.32. And in reference to these two it
is, that they of the Circumcision contend with Peter, upon his return to
Jerusalem, for they are grieved that he went in to men uncircumcised, and ate
with them, chap. 11.3. These were the proper distinguishers betwixt Israel and
other Nations; for all their other Ceremonies were not so much to distinguish
them from other people, as to compose them among themselves and toward God,
they being first distinguished from others by these.

Of these two, singularity of Diet, or Prohibition of certain meats, was the
more proper differencer, and the more strict distinctive: For all the seed of
Abraham was circumcised, and so in regard of that Ceremony, there was no
difference betwixt an Ismaelite and a Jew: But abstaining from such and such
meats, was a proprium quarto modo, a singularity that differenced an Israelite
from all the world besides.

Thirdly, therefore it was most proper, and of most divine reason, that the
liberty of eating any meats, did denote and show a liberty of conversing with
any nation, and that the enlarging of the one, is the enlarging of the other.

Fourthly, the first fruits of this enlargement, and entertainment beyond the
partition wall is Cornelius, a Convert, but not a Proselyte: a man that was
already come into God, but not come in to the Church of Israel: a man as far
contrarily qualified for such a business, in all humane appearance, as what
could be most contrary, as being a Roman, a Soldier, a Centurion; and yet he
of all men chosen to be the first fruits of the Gentiles, that God herein
might be the more plainly showed to be no respecter of persons.

Fifthly, it had been now 2210 years since the Heathen were cast off at the
confusion of Babel, and had lain so long in darkness, sin, superstition and
idolatry, strangers to God, and aliens from the congregation of Israel;
bondslaves of Satan, and under his dominion, and even all the world ( Israel
only excepted) become the kingdom of hell and the Devil.

Sixthly, Satan had by this very time brought his kingdom among these heathens
to the very Apex and perfection, when he had gotten one into the throne of the
Roman Empire, (which was now over all the world) who by the very sword and
power will force the people to adore him for a God, and had the sword and power
in his own hand to force them to adore him: as we saw by Caius even now. And
here I cannot but look back from Caius as he sat in his throne as an
ungodly Deity when the Gentiles began to be called in, to the first Idol that
they proposed and set up for themselves to adore at Babel, as he is described
by the Jerusalem Targum at their first casting off: For thus does it Paraphrase
those Rebels plot and conspiracy, for the building of that Idolatrous City,
Genesis 11.3. And they said, Come let us build a City and a tower, whose top may
reach to heaven, and in the midst of it, let us build a Chapel, and an Idol
in the head of it with a sword in his hand to fight for us that we be not
scattered.

Nor can I but look forward also from the same Caius Deifying himself, and
that in the Temple of God as we shall see ere long, to the succeeding times of
the Gentile Church, which is now beginning: wherein a man of sin, the
successor of Caius Caligula a thousand fold more likely, then the successor of
Simon Peter, has set up himself to be adored, and exalts himself above every
thing that is called God.

Seventhly, the instrument of the first introducing of the Gentiles, by the
bringing in of Cornelius, was Peter: not for any Primacy or universal
Bishopship that he was invested withal, but rather because he was the most
singular minister of the Circumcision: for his bringing in of the Gentiles
would stop the mouth of the Judaizing believers the more.

Eighthly, and for this thing he had a special engagement and deputation from
our Savior a good while ago as he himself speaks, Act. 15.7. And that
was, when Christ gives him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 16.19.
that is, puts into his hand, the peculiar privilege to open the door of
faith and the Gospel to the Gentiles, and gives him power withal to bind and
to loose, the use of Moses Law among the Heathens when he brought the Gospel
among them, some of it to fall and some to stand, according as the Spirit
should direct him, and accordingly it should be ratified in heaven. And that
this is the genuine, proper and only meaning of that so much disputed place,
will be undeniable to him that shall consider what is the proper meaning of
the kingdom of heaven in Scripture, and of binding and loosing ^n Jewish
authors from whom that Phrase is taken.

Verse. 1. In Caesarea.
Called of old Turris Stratonis, Stratons Tower; but new built by Herod the
great, and named Caesarea in honor of Augustus. It lay upon the Sea shore
betwixt Ioppa Dor.
and Dorae says Josephus, Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 13. where he describes it at
large.

Sect. The Italian band.
Not to spend time in inquiring what Italian band this was, whether Ferrata, or
Dives, or Voluntariorii, or the like, it seems to me that the consideration
of the place it self where Cornelius was, will help ^o understand what Luke
intends by it. For Caesarea was the place where the Roman Governor or
Proconsull resided: as appears, Act. 23.23, 24. and 24.6. and that partly for
the bravery of the City, and chiefly for the commodiousnesse of the haven: Now
this Italian band may very properly be understood of that band that attended
the Governors person, or were his lifeguard, and which had come out of Italy
for this purpose to be his defense and the defense of the City where he lay.

Verse. 2. A devout man, etc.
(...), A man that worshipped the true God, and followed not Idolatry: And a
man that feared Good indeed, as well as he worshipped him in profession.

Sect. Which gave much alms to the people.
To the Jews, to whom alms was not unclean though given by a heathen; to
which thing our Savior seems to allude in that speech, Luke 11.41. But
rather give alms of such things as ye have, and behold all things are clean
unto you. And upon this respect it is like that alms are called (...)
Righteousness, so commonly among the Jewish authors, and used by the Syriack
and Arabic here, because they lost not their nature or quality of cleanness
or purity and righteousness, though they came even from an unclean, yea a
heathen person.

Sect. And prayed to God always.
Beza has made this clause the beginning of the next verse, and that, as he
says, with the warrant of one copy. The Arabic does the like: They think
they mend the sense with it, in which they mistake because they mind not the
scope: For it is the intent of the holy Ghost to show the constant carriage of
Cornelius in his devoutnesse, as Verse. 4. and not his devoutnesse as occasion
of his vision.

Verse. 3. He saw in a vision evidently.
The word evidently, or (...), is added to show that he saw it waking, and with
his bodily eyes, for there were visions in dreams, as Genesis 20.3. and 28.12.
Job 4.13.

Sect. About the ninth hour.
The hour of the evening sacrifice, three a clock after noone: compare Dan.
5.21. Cornelius though he were not yet proselyted by circumcision to the
Jewish Church, yet followed he their manner and form of worship.

Verse. 9. To pray, about the sixth hour.
About twelve a clock or high noone, and this was the time of the Mincha
gedolah as the Jews called it, or the very beginning of it: And so do they
expound, Dan. 6.10. and Psalm. 55.17. accordingly. Daniel prayed three times a
day, that is, say R. Saadias and R. Solomon, Morning, Evening, and at the
Minchah. And Evening and Morning, and at noone will I pray, R. Sol. Evening,
Morning and at Minchah, the three times of prayer: Now this Minchah time is
described by their Doctors thus, Minchah gedolah, is the beginning of the time
of the daily sacrifice between the two evenings, when the Sun begins to
decline: which is from the sixth hour and forward until night, some say, from
the sixth hour and an half, which was according to our phrase in hand about
the sixth hour: Now this their accounting was not for that they always began
to fall about their evening sacrifice at twelve a clock, or half an hour
after, but because that it was lawful then to begin to fall about it; for when
there were additionall sacrifices besides the daily, as the Passover, or the
like, then it was necessary for them to begin to prepare the sacrifices from
that time, that it was lawful to begin about them; which from that time of the
day it was, all the time from thence forward till night being (...) between the
evenings, according to the letter of the Law, Exodus 12.6. Numb. 28.4. And to
this sense speaks the Text 1 King. 18.29. When noonetide was passed, and they
had now prophesied till the offering of the Minchah: not till the very time of
the firing of the sacrifice, for that the verses following deny: but to the
time of the Minchah in that sense that we have in hand: and to this purpose
the difference of the words (...) here and (...) Verse. 36. is very remarkable.

So that Peter in this practice of praying about the sixth hour imitated the
custom of the Jews, and though he had so long been a Convert to the Gospel,
yet does he not forsake their manner of worship: no more did the other
Disciples, as has been showed elsewhere.

(...). An ecstasy fell upon him, and so Chap. 22.17. (...), I was in an
ecstasy: This was the highest and excellentest way of all other, of
revelations; when a man was rapt even from himself into heaven: for so Paul
calls it, 2 Cor. 12.2. and was wholly in the spirit, for so John calls it, Rev.
^.10. being for the time as it were out of the body, and in the very next
degree to souls departed, enjoying God. Seven manner of extraordinary ways
did God use to reveal himself and his will to his people in ancient times. 1.
By dreams. 2. By apparitions when they were awake. 3. By visions when they
were asleep. 4. By voice from heaven. 5. By Vrim. 6. By inspiration, or
revealing of the ear. 7. By rapture or ecstasy: and this last the
excellentest, as to him that did enjoy it. And of this should I understand that
deep sleep that fell upon Adam, Genesis 2.21.

Verse. 12. Fourfooted beasts and wild beasts.
(...) and (...) Beasts tame and wild, for so does the Scripture most
frequently distinguish them.

Verse. 15. That call not thou common.
Gr. (...): Do not thou pollute, that is, do not thou call or account polluted,
Verse. 28. For so is the use of Scripture very frequently, to speak as in an
effective or active sense, and to intend only a declarative, as Genesis 41.13. Me
he restored to my office, but him he hanged, Ezekiel. 43.3. When I came to
destroy the City: The Priest did make clean, or make unclean the Leper, Lev.
13.6.8. etc. which was only pronouncing clean or unclean, as our English
has well rendered it: or teaching what was clean and what unclean, as Chap.
14.57. And in the very same sense is the binding and loosing to be understood,
Matthew. 16.19. and 18.18. for teaching what is bound and what loose, what (...)
and what (...) as the Jews speak, or what lawful, what unlawful.

Verse. 28. Ye know how that it is a^ unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew
to keep company, etc.
(...). By which words is not to be understood as if a Jew might have no
dealing at all with a Gentile, for they might walk, and talk, and traffic
with them, and it was within a little of impossible to do otherwise, they
living exceeding many of them in heathen Cities: And Gentiles came continually
in way of trade to Jerusalem, Neh. 13.16. But the unlawfulness of their
conversing with the Gentiles, was conversing in near and more close society,
as the word (...) signifies, and that especially in these two things, not to
eat with them, and not to go into their houses: And this is that for which
they of the Circumcision excepted at Peter upon his return. Thou wentest in to
men uncircumcised, and did eat with them, Chap. 11.3.

Sect. But God has showed me, that I should not call any man common, or
unclean.
This vision that Peter had, when this satisfaction was given him, to learn to
call nothing common, was only of beasts and fowls and creeping things, yet
might he learn that the lesson was also to be understood of men, because the
distinction between men and men in regard of common and unclean was first made
and most strictly made by the difference betwixt meats and meats. For the very
first distinguisher that ever began to enclose Israel for a peculiar from other
people, was the not eating of the smew that shrank, Genesis 32. Circumcision
distinguished the seed of Abraham from other people, but this began to
distinguish Israel from the other seed of Abraham. And it is observable, that
that ceremony or distinctive rite was first taken up, when Jacob first received
the name of Israel.

Now it is true indeed that their forbearing to eat the smew that shranke, was
not as if they accounted it common or unclean, but it was in regard of the
honorable memorial that they read upon it, yet was that ceremony the first and
proper distinguisher of an Israelite from all other people under heaven some
hundreds of years, till more distinctive rites came in, and more things were
prohibited to be eaten, for the surer distinction.

There was distinction of clean and unclean beasts before the flood, as
appears, Genesis 7.8. but this was in reference to sacrifice only, and not in
reference to diet at all: for till the flood they ate nothing but the fruits of
the ground, till God gave Noah liberty to eat flesh, and to eat any thing
that was wholesome for diet. And in this liberty did the world continue till
the Law given at Sinai, save only an Israelites not eating the smew that
shranke: And this liberty some Jews themselves confess shall be in the days
of Messiah, which now first takes place at this vision of Peter and forward.
And here does Peter begin to put in use and ure that power of binding and
loosing which Christ had put into his hands, when he put into his hands the
keys of the kingdom of heaven: And this very place does so clearly expound
and interpret that speech of our Savior to him, that it is a wonder that ever
there should be such scruple and controversy about it.

For, 1. Here begins the kingdom of heaven: when the Gentiles are received
to savor and to the Gospel, who had been so long cast off, and lain in
ignorance and idolatry, and when no difference is made betwixt them and the
Jews any longer, but of every nation, they that fear God and work
righteousness are accepted of him as well as Israel. This is the very first
beginning or dawning to the kingdom of heaven; and so it grew on more and
more, till Jerusalem was destroyed, and then was the perfect day, when the
Gentiles only were become the Church of Christ, and no Church or Commonwealth
of Israel to be had at all, but they destroyed and ruined.

Secondly, here Peter has the keys of the Kingdom, and unlocketh the door
for the Gentiles to come in to the faith and Gospel, which till now had bin
shut and they kept out. And Peter only had the keys, and none of the Apostles
or Disciples but he: for though they from hence forward brought in Gentiles
daily in to the Kingdom of Heaven, by converting them to the Gospel; yet it
was he that first and only opened the door, and the door being once opened,
was never shut, nor ever shall be till the end of the world. And this was all
the priority that Peter had before the other Apostles, if it were any priority;
and how little this concerns Rome, or the Papacy, as to be any foundation of
it, a child may observe.

3. Peter here loses the greatest strictness, and what was the straitest
bound up of any thing that was in all the policy of Moses and customs of the
Jews, and that was, the difference of clean and unclean in the legal sense.
And this he loses on earth, and it is loosed in heaven, for from heaven had
he an immediate warrant to dissolve it: And this he does, first
declaratively, showing that nothing henceforward is to be called common or
unclean, and showing his authority for this doctrine, and then practically
conforming himself to this doctrine that he taught, by going in unto the
uncircumcised, and eating with them: Binding and loosing in our Saviors sense,
and in the Jews sense from whose use he takes the phrase, is of things and
not of persons, for Christ says to Peter (...), and (...) and not (...),
whatsoever thou bindest and not whomsoever, and to the other Apostles (...),
Matthew. 18.18! and (...) and not (...), whatsoever things, and not whatsoever
persons, so that though it be true indeed that Jews and Gentiles are loosed
henceforward one to the communion of another, yet the proper object of this
loosing that is loosed by Peter, was that Law or doctrine that tied them up:
and so concerning the eating of those things that had been prohibited, it is
true indeed that the Jews were let loose henceforward to the use of them in
diet and to eat what they thought good, but this loosing was not so properly
of the men, as the loosing of that prohibition that had bound them before. And
this could be no way but doctrinally by teaching that Christian liberty that
was given by the Gospel.

Now though Peter only, and none but he had the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, yet had all the Apostles the power of binding and loosing as well as
he: and so have all the Ministers of the Gospel as well as they, and all in
the lame sense, namely, doctrinally to teach what is bound and loose, or
lawful and unlawful, but not in the same kind: for the Apostles having the
constant and unerring assistance of the holy Ghost, did nullify by their
doctrine, some part of Moses Law, as to the use of it, as Circumcision,
Sacrifices, Pu^ifyings, and other legal Rites, which could not have been done
by men that had not had such a spirit, for there must be the same spirit of
Prophecy to abrogate a Law, which had set it in force.

This matter therefore of Cornelius his calling in, as the first fruits of the
Gentiles, is a thing that deserves very high regard and consideration; as in
which are included and involved so many things of note as have been mentioned,
and diverse others that might be added thereunto; and in the consideration of
the matter, the time of it is not to be neglected, which to the serious and
considerate Reader and weigher of things in the balance of judgment, will
appear to be in this year in which we have laid it; especially, that being
concluded upon, which before we proved undeniable, that the Famine was in the
second year of Claudius. And this time is the rather to be looked upon,
because that some do foolishly misconstrue a clause in Daniel 9.27. by missing
of the right time of this occurrence of Cornelius. For looking no further into
the text then in our English translation, which there has not spoken the mind
of the Original, they conceive that Christ dyed in the midst of the last seven
years of the seventy sevens, namely, when three years and an half of the
seven were gone, and that at the end of the other three and an half Cornelius
was converted: and so they will make those seventies to end in that his
conversion, and not in Christ's death: which were scarcely worth answering,
though we had time and season to do it: seeing it rises from a mistake in
the Text, and sets in a mistake of the time.

Ver. 30. Four days ago I was fasting, etc.
The Greek has it, From the fourth day until this hour I was or have been
fasting: by which it seems that Cornelius had now been fasting four days
together, as Paul was three days at his conversion, Chap. 9.9. But it is not
much material whether we understand it so, or as it is commonly understood of
his fasting four days since, till such an hour of that day, as it was now of
this day when he is speaking to Peter, unless we will make any thing of it,
that the Jews especially upon their solemn days used to taste nothing till
noone, and Cornelius herein follows their custom: and that it was about noone
when Peter comes to Cornelius, as it was about noone when Cornelius messengers
came to Peter: And so the distance betwixt Caesarea to be a days journey and
an half.

Verse. 36. The Word which God sent.
Bez^ supposes that this* verse ought to be referred and joined to the verse
that went before, and they two together to be construed to this sense, Now I
know that God is no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that fears
him, and works righteousness, is accepted of him; which is the very doctrine
which God sent among the children of Israel by Moses and the Prophets,
preaching peace by them by Jesus Christ. And one maine induction that he has
to this construction is, because otherwise it would be improper for Peter to
say, Cornelius and his friends knew this word, when it was Peter's very errand
to instruct them in it, and teach it to them. But the words are to be read and
taken in the sense that our English has well made of them; namely, as following
the word ye know: For all the Country knew that Jesus preached, and preached
peace and the like; and thousands though they knew that he preached, and what
he preached, yet did they not believe that he was the Messiah, nor that he
was risen from the dead: and these two last things it was that Peter came to
teach Cornelius, and not to tell him that Jesus of Nazareth had preached, for,
that he and all his friends knew.

Ver. 44. The holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word.
This was a second confirmation of the entertainment of the Gentiles to the
Gospel, or a miracle added by God, to the doctrine preached by Peter, that
nothing now was to be accounted common or unclean: for when God had powered the
holy Ghost upon the uncircumcision as well as upon the circumcised, it was
evidence sufficient that now God made no difference betwixt them: How these
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit had been confined hitherto only to the
Nation of the Jews, it is not only clear by scripture, but it is upon that
cleerenesse thought by the Jews that it must be confined thither ever, and
that neither any Gentile at all, nor hardly any Jew out of the Land of Canaan
could be capable of them; and therefore when they here see the same measure and
fullness and freeness of the Spirit upon the Gentiles, as had been upon the
Jews; they cannot but conclude that the difference was in vanishing, and that
God was setting up a Church among them, when he bestowed the spirit of
Prophecy upon them.

Ver. 47. Can any man forbid water, etc.
Peter's thoughts in these words, look back to those words of our Savior, Go
teach all Nations, and baptize them, Mat. 28.19. where he means not, that
none should be baptized but those that are capable of teaching, but his
meaning is this, that whereas his Disciples had hitherto been limited and
confined only to preach to the Jews, and to go to none but to the lost sheep
of Israel; now had the Jews by the murdering of Christ showed themselves
unworthy, and had forfeited the benefit of the Gospel; and therefore Christ now
inlargeth his Apostles and Disciples, to go now and to teach all Nations, and
to baptize them, to preach to the Heathens, and to bring them in by baptism,
since the Jews had despised the Gospel, and crucified the Lord of life that
preached it: To this it is that Peter here looks, at this first conversion of
the Gentiles; and when he sees the very same gifts bestowed on them from
Heaven, that were upon the Jews, he concluded that none could object against
their being baptized; and accordingly he commands that they should be
baptized: either by some of those that came with him from Ioppa, they being
more then probably Ministers; or he commanded that provision should be made
for their baptizing by himself.

Acts XI.
That part of this Chapter which falls under this year that we have in hand,
viz. to ver. 19. is but a rehearsal of this Story in the tenth Chapter, and
therefore it is not necessary to insist upon it.

PART II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Caius still cruel.
THe beginning of this year Caius was Consul, but held that place only for a
month or thereabouts, and then resigned for six months more to his partner
Apronius, and after those six months Sabinius Maximus took the place. A policy
above his reach, howsoever he came to it, to shake the chief Magistracy by so
often changes, that his own power might stand the surer. Both in his
Consulship, and after it, he behaved himself after his wonted manner of
barbarousnesse and cruelty, but that now he began to add one vice more to his
cruelty in bloodinesse, namely intolerable covetousness and oppression. Now,
says Dion, was nothing but slaughter: For many of the Nobles were condemned,
many perished by the Sword-playes, and many imprisoned by the late Emperor
Tiberius, were drawn to execution. Now did he bend himself to cross the
people, and the people being thoroughly incensed began to cross him. The maine
causes of this his displeasure (guess how weighty) were such as these: Because
they came not to the Plays and Shows so constantly, and at such constant
times as he had appointed: because sometimes when they came, they liked such
sports as he liked not, and contra: And because they once extolling him,
called him by the title of young Augustus. For such occasions as these (behold
the madness of a man self-willed) he brake out into all cruelty, slaying many
at the Theater for the one fault, and many as they went home for the other, and
many at their own homes, or otherwhere for a third. And now was his rage grown
so high, that he wished that all the City had but one head, that he might
strike it off at one blow; and bewailed his times, for that they had not been
enfamoused with some notable misery of the Roman State, as was the Reign of
Augustus with the overthrow of Varus and his Army in Germany; and the Reign of
Tiberius with the slaughter of above twenty thousand men by the fall of an
Amphitheater at Fidenae. And that we may take a full view of his cruel words
and actions here together, (the Reader I hope will not be punctual in
expecting an exact order of time in this disorder of conditions) his common
resolution against the people always was, Let them hate me and spare not, so
that they fear me. But what was his anger think you, when his very feasts and
embraces of his minions were mixed with cruelty? he used to have men tortured
in his presence as he sat at meat, mingling his sauce as it were with
innocents blood. At a great feast to which he had invited the two Consuls, he
suddenly fell out into an extreme laughter, and upon demand of his reason, his
answer was, Because he had power to take away their two heads whenever he
pleased. And whenever he was kissing the neck of his wife or paramour, he
would constantly add these words, but cruelly amorous, This neck, as fair as
it is, when I command shall be cut off. Such was his jesting; and as for his
earnest, I suppose you will easily believe, that it was proportionable. Whereas
hitherto, he had been very free and lavish of his tongue in dispraising
Tiberius, and not only had not checked, but also countenanced, and taken
delight in those that spoke ill of him, as well as he; he now turns his
tune, and breaks out as fluently into his commendations: pleading that he
himself had liberty to say what he list, but accusing those that had assumed
the like liberty, when as no such thing belonged to them. Then did he cause a
list or catalogue to be read of those that had been executed and put to death
under Tiberius; laying withal the death of the most of them to the charge of
the Senate, and accused some for accusing them, others for witnessing against
them, and all, for condemning them. These things he alleged out of those
books which in the beginning of his reign and in the time of his seeming
goodness, he professed that he had burnt: and after a most bitter and
terrible speech now made among them in the Senate, and reviving an act of
treason for speaking against the Prince, he suddenly departed out of the
Senate and the City. In what case the Senate and the people were, that were
guilty of either words or actions, that he had charged them withal, it is
readily guessed, but how they shall come off, and what they shall do to
escape, is not easily to be resolved. Their presentest help is to fawn and
speak fair, and that course they take, praising him infinitely at their next
meeting, for his justice and piousnesse, and giving him as infinite thanks
that he suffered them to live, and decreeing that sacrifices should be offered
annually to his clemency on that very day that those charges were published
against so many, seeking to appease his senseless and foolish anger by as
senseless and foolish a pacification. But how little they could sacrifice, or
pray or praise him into any better mind then he has been in hitherto, you
shall see by the sequel.

Sect. II. An inhumane cruelty.
Among the many cruelties of this monster, the murder of Esius Proculus may
bear some bell, because he slew him for nothing but only for this, for that
he was such a one as God had made him. This man was the goodliest man of
person and shape in all the City, insomuch that he was commonly called
Colosseros, for his extraordinary propernesse and stature: One day as he sat
a spectator upon the scaffolds, of the bloody sports below, Caius commanded him
suddenly to be put down among the combatants, and there to fight for his
life. When he had had a trial with two several men and came off victorious,
the inhumane tyrant caused him speedily to be bound, and arraied in tatters
and rags to be led about the City, showed to the women, and then slain. So
much of beast had this monster in him that he could not endure the goodlinesse
of a man.

Sect. III. Caius his luxury* lavishnesse and prodigality.
Thus bestiall was he toward men, and no less was he in another kind
toward women. This appeared in the deflouring of his own sisters, and
adulterating the most of the noble Ladies of the City. He was his own Pimpe,
and purveyer for his lust, with this open and hideous way of brothelry. He
would invite the great men and their Ladies to supper, and as the women passed
by him in way of salutation he would earnestly and leasurely view them,
mercantium more, says my author, as they do that are to buy any thing, and if
any matron for modesty held down her head, he would lift it up, that he
might have his full survey: she that pleased him, he took into a retiring
room and adulterated: and presently would he bring her forth again, and tell
openly whether she had given him content or no. Nor was he content with this
choice and variety of women neither, but that he might be beastly in every
kind, he abstained not from the abomination of Sodomie with men. But let us
stay no longer upon him in this his filthiness, but trace him a little in his
own tolerable vices of fantasticknesse and prodigality. He seemed to affect
a singularity in these three things, sinning, working and spending, according
to the uncontrolednesse of his will, the vastness of his command, and the
hugeness of his revenue. He invented new manner of bathings, and prodigious
kinds of meats and feasts; he would dissolve most rich and precious Jewels in
Vinegar, and then drink them off. And because he doubted, as it seems, that
he could not waste his treasure fast enough with such tricks as these, he
would stand upon a Tower diverse days together, and fling great sums of money
among the people. To all which ways of lavishing, and expensivenesse, joined
monstrous works and machinations, which showed at once, his folly in their
undertaking, and the vastness of his power in their performance: As levelling
mountains to even the plain, and in other places filling up the plain to
equal mountains; sometimes causing rocks of flint to be cut thorough, to make
a passage* and sometimes foundations of houses or walls to be laid in the
bottom of the Sea, bringing soil and rubbish to fill up the place and to make
it firm ground: ambitious to bring to pass seeming impossibilities, and
cruelly hasty in the accomplishing of what he undertook, punishing the
slacking of the work with certain death.

Sect. IIII. His strange Bridge and Ships.
In the list of these his vanities, and ungodly ways of spending, let his
bridge between Puteoli and Bauli, come in the first place, or else you do it
some injury. These two places were about three miles and a half distant, an
arm of the Sea of that breadth, severing them, and lying between. The ambition
of the vain Emperor was to ride on horseback and in his chariot between
these two places: What his fancy or Phrenzy rather, was, that stirred up such a
humor in him, is diversely related, and it is no great matter to inquire after
it. Some say it was, that he might terrify Germany and Britain against whom
he intended hostility, with the very rumor of so great a work: others, that
he might imitate, or rather excel Xerxes, who made a bridge of ships over the
Hellespont. But the rumor of it at Court, where his mind was likeliest to be
best known, was, that he did it in confutation of a prediction of Thrasyllus,
who had told Tiberius that Caius should no more rule then ride over the bay of
Baiae on horseback. Dion guesseth this to have been his reason, that whereas
the Senate upon their fear and fawning mentioned before had decreed an Ovation
for him, or a kind of triumphant riding on horseback, he thought it too poor
a thing to ride so by land, and therefore invented this trick of his own
vain head, to ride so by Sea. For this purpose, all the ships that could be
got were sent for in, and when they were not enough, others were made and so they
all were set two and two linked together till they made a bridge of that three
miles and a half long: Then caused he an infinite number of workmen to carry
on earth, and make a causey like the Appian road over all those ships from the
continent to the Island. (If this were not a Pontifex Romanus with a witness,
let all men judge.) When his dear bought way was thus prepared, he prepares
for it and for his Fantastic journey over it: His garb in which he would
ride was this: He put a brestplate on, which he said had been Alexanders, and
over that a rich purple robe, then his sword and buckler, and an oken garland
about his head: and having sacrificed to Neptune and to the other Gods, and
even to the Deity Envy, lest the bridge should miscarry, he sets forth on
horseback with a great troop of armen men attending him, and takes his
strange and idle voyage. When he had riden thus one day on horseback, he
returns the next day in his Chariot, with an infinite train of his friends in
Coaches, of soldiers in arms, and of the common people lookers on, and among
others of state Darius an hostage of Parthia attended his Chariot; when he had
done this great exploit, of walking, riding and coaching so many miles upon the
Sea, he gets up into a Desk which was made upon this newfound bridge on
purpose, and there makes a solemn speech in commendation of this his great
attempt, and of the soldiers and workmens pains and care about it; And when
he had done he bestowed a large munificence among them. And the rest of that
day and the night that followed, he spent in feasting and banqueting in
banqueting houses that he had made purposely upon his bridge, because he
would make the Sea a perfect road. Into these houses he had brought fresh
water in Pipes from the shore to serve the occasions of this nights feast, if
he will suffer one to call it night. For he that had turned the Sea into a
Coach-way, way, was ambitious also to turn night into day; that in him might
be showed at once both how foolish he may prove that has once let go the
reins of reason, and how boundless that folly is when it is backed with
power. The ships that made the bridge were set in manner of a crescent, and so
went the rode: upon it he caused a great number of fires to be made, and so
upon the mountains all about, that what had been his Coach-way by day was now
at night become his Amphitheater. But is is strange that we hear of no murder
of all this while among all this madness, for if Caius be not cruel he is
not Caligula. After this his intertainment of his friends and of the company,
he suddenly cast a great multitude of them into the Sea, and when they laid
hold of rudders or any thing that might succor and save their lives, he
caused them to be thrust away and so they perished.

Answerable to the vanities of this his bridge, had he also Ships and Frigots
to sail in for his own recreation, in which were baths, vineyards and
orchards that sailed with him, that as upon his bridge he went over the Sea by
land, so in his ships when he went by Sea, the land went with him.

Sect. V. His Covetousness.
It is not so much wonder that these courses wasted the Emperors treasures, as
it is how they have held out so long: And now that all his wealth is emptied
and gone, he can find as strange and unheard of means to fetch in more as he
had found out to consume the old. He now began to accuse, condemn and execute
apace, that he might be dealing with their goods in confiscation. So died
Calvisius Sabinus, Titius Rufus, and Iunius Priscus, for no other real fault
but only for being rich. But why should I reckon them by one and one, when at
one clap he condemned forty men together, and when he came into his Chamber
he bragged to Caesonia his darling Lemman, Behold how much I have done in the
time that thou art taking a nap at noone but this feate of condemning would not
bring in money fast enough, therefore as there were more ways of spending then
one, so must there also be of getting. He inventeth new taxes and payments,
strange exactions and imposts, suffering nothing to pass in common use, but it
must bring some tribute unto his treasures. He set a rate to be paid him out
of all meat that was eaten, a rate out of every suit or action for debt, a rate
out of the porters gains, nay a rate out of the whores hire. He made men that
were already free of the City to buy their freedom again, and many that had
named him for their heir when they should die, he poisoned, that he might
inherit their estate sooner: And these his exploits he used not only in Rome,
but when money was scarce there, he went into France and Spain and set up the
same trade of polling there: He sold the Jewels, the goods, and the very
servants of his condemned sisters; nay the very Jewels of the Crown, as the
royal robes and ornaments of Antony, Augustus, Iulia, Antonia, and others of
the princely blood. And to conclude all in one, he set up a stews in his own
Palace, and had women there of all sorts and sizes, and his panders went about
to fetch in whoremaster customers: and all this was done, because it was for
the Emperors profit. He also made the Palace a common dicing house, and
himself was the master gaimster; cogging, cheating, lying, forswearing, and
doing any thing to make himself a gainer. Having once left another to play his
game, and being gone down into the court of the palace, he saw two rich
knights passing by, and caused them suddenly to be apprehended, and their
goods to be confiscated, and returned to his game again, bragging that he
had had an exceeding good throw. Another time at play, wanting money to
maintain his stake, he went down and caused diverse rich Nobles to be
slain, and returned presently again, saying, You sit here playing for a few
pence, and I since I went, have gotten six hundred thousand sesterces.

As he thus cruelly murdered many, only for their goods so also did he many
others upon other spleene^: as Len^^lus Getulieus, because he was beloved of
the Soldiers: Lepidus, because he had adulterated his sisters* when he had
done with them himself, and he caused Agrippina one of them to carry his
bones in an urne in her bosom to Rome. A poor serving-man for filching a
silver plate off the cubbord, he caused to have his hands cut off, and hung
about his neck, and to be led up and down with a Crier before him
proclaiming his offense. Seneca was condemned by him for being too eloquent, or
more eloquent then himself, (for that he could not endure in any) but he
escaped through the entreaty of one of Caius his Lemmans. But Domitius Aser
deserved to escape indeed who overcame him with silence, and mastered the tyrant
by being mastered. For being a man of renowned and incomparable eloquence, and
now under accusation, Caius had strained the utmost of his own Rhetoric to
frame a speech to confound him, both in his cause and in his Oratory. Domitius
(when the Emperor looked that he would have answered him with the same height
of Rhetoric again, and had he done so, it had cost him his life) sat mute,
and took upon him to be amazed at so admirable and infinite fluency, and in
stead of pleading his own cause, he rehearsed his Oration word by word,
seeming to be so ravished with that eloquence that he forgot and neglected
his own life. And then cast he himself at the tyrants feet, and begged for
mercy, avowing that he dreaded him more as an Orator then as Caesar. The Lion
grows mild upon this fawning, and turns his malice and spleen into pride and
vaineglory, rejoicing that he had so overcome Domitius in eloquence, whereas
Domitius had more cause to rejoice that he had so overcome him by silence.

PART III. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. Herod and Herodias before the Emperor.
We are now to present to Caius as bloody a woman as he was a man; Herodias,
that has committed as much murder in taking away but one man's life, John the
Baptist, as he has done in all his: And when these two are met together, the
two Princes of cruelty and bloudinesse that either sex could then afford, are
met together. You may remember that not long since we left Her and her Herod
(for husband I may not call him) shipped for Rome to purchase, if possible, the
Emperors good respect, and with that, an augmentation of their dignity and
dominion. Agrippa, knowing of this their journey, and suspecting that as it
began in envy and emulation to him, so would it terminate, if they could
compass it, to his disadvantage, he sends his servant Fortunatus after them
with letters to the Emperor, either because himself was not yet at leisure to
come, or in policy trying how his letters would speed and be entertained
before he ventured his own person. At Baiae they all met before Caesar, and
Agrippaes complaint by writing meets theirs by word of mouth. He lays to
Herod's charge, confederacy with Seianus at Rome and with Artabanus in Parthia,
and an armory and magazine at his own home, sufficient to furnish 7000. men,
all which laid together could not but breed a just suspicion of his revolting.
Herod not being able upon questioning, to deny the last thing that he was
charged withal about his arms, gave Caius presumption to conclude the truth
of all the other: whereupon he adjudgeth him to Perpetual banishment to Lions
in France: and thus (thank Herodias) by his looking for a greater dignity and
honor, he lost that which he had already.

Herodias, Caesar would have spared Herodias for Agrippaes sake as being his
sister, but she refused the courtesy, and chose to suffer the same fortune
with her husband; and but very justly neither, for she had brought him to it.
And she could not in civility refuse to take part with him in his misery, as
he had done with her in her folly, that had caused it; both their estates,
dignities and dominions Caius bestows upon Agrippa to their greater vexation;
and so we leave them going to Lions, there to think, and repent too late, how
wholesome the counsel was that was given them by the Baptist and that they
took it not.

Sect. II. The Alexandrian Jews still perplexed.
And now let us return from Rome to Alexandria, where the last year we left
the Jews in so extreme misery and distress, and now it is to be suspected we
shall find them in the same still. Being so oppressed, plundered and massacred
by Flaccus as we have heard, their utmost refuge is to petition to the
Emperor, but a miserable refuge you must needs think it will prove when they
cannot do it but by Flaccus his permission and assistance. When they made this
motion and request to him (foolish men to expect such courtesy from their
greatest enemy) he takes on him to approve of their intention, promises to
speed their petition the best he could, but when he had it, pretending to have
sent it away, he keeps and suppresseth it, and answered neither his promise
nor their expectation, either in haste or in assisting. Thus do the poor Jews
lie waiting in uncertain hopes but in certain misery, looking for some
comfortable answer from Rome to their petition, which is still at Alexandria.
But at last comes their old friend and countreyman Agrippa to Rome with the old
grudge in his bosom against Flaccus for his base usage of him at his last
being there, and he promotes their cause to Caesar with the best excuses he
can make for them, and with some bitter accusing of their enemy the Governor.

Sect. III. Flaccus his downfall.
Whether it were the prevalency of Agrippaes letters with the Emperor, or the
divine vengeance upon this unjust and murderous governor, or both, or some
other conjoined, Caius ere long sent Bassus a Centurion, with his band into
Alexandria, to apprehend Faccus: He stole in by night into the City, lest his
approach (had it been detected) should have bred commotion, and meeting with a
Soldier in the dark, and inquiring for the chief Captain, that he might
acquaint him with the cause of his coming, and obtain his assistance with his
Soldiers if there should be any resistance, he was informed that Flaccus and
he were both at supper with Stephanio one of the freemen of Tiberius. Thither
he gets with all secrecy, and scouting before the house, he sends in one
of his Soldiers habited in the garb of a Servingman, that he might the more
safely thrust in among the servitors to see what store of company was there,
and when he heard by him that it was but small, he bursteth in with his men
and apprehends him. I leave to the reader to imagine the contrary operation
that this sudden action had with Flaccus and with the Jews. It was now the
time of the feast of Tabernacles with them, but the feast was intermitted
because of their common misery, but now somewhat solaced by the event of this
feast of Flaccus. He is hurried away to Rome in the beginning of winter, and
there tried, and condemned to perpetual banishment in the I Will of Andros, where
what became of him you shall hear the next year.

Sect. IIII. The Jews of Alexandria still distressed.
Flaccus the Jews enemy at Alexandria, they are thus happily rid of, but a
worse, if worse may be, springs, as it were out of his corruption at Rome.
Helicon a Servant of Tiberius whilst he lived, and now of Caius, a fit man for
such a master, the more to ingratiate himself into the Princes favor (yet had
he it already in no ordinary measure) bends himself with the utmost of his
Rhetoric and eloquence, skill and flattery to traduce the people and religion
of the Jews, and to make them odious, and himself the more acceptable to the
Emperor. The envious Alexandrians having by their Ambassadors espied this
advantage, do spur him forward who needed no incitation: with great presents
and greater promises they urge him on to prosecute that malicious accusation
that he had begun: which he performed accordingly, with a renewed
impetuousnesse, added to his present spleen by his future expectation, and
present fee. The miserable Jews thus betrayed, lie under distress and under
the Emperors displeasure for a season, and could not learn from whence it
proceeded: But at last they address a number of petitioners to Rome to make
their peace with Helicon, if possible, and to make an humble remonstrance to
the Emperor of their state and grievances, and a petition for some remedy and
redress. Their Legation and Ambassy they indeed presented not to the Prince
till the next year, yet since Philo says that they took their voyage in the
very depth and middle of winter, it was not unproper to mention their
preparation and setting forth, this year, and you shall hear of their
business, and the success of it, when the next year comes in.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, FOR The Year of Christ 41.
And of Caius Caligula 4. Being the Year of the World 3968. And of the City of
Rome, 793. Consuls Caius Caesar III. solus.

London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

ACTS. Chap. XI.
Verse. 9. Now they which were scattered abroad, etc.
IN this fourth year of Caius, and forty first of our Savior, we conjecture
these occurrences to have been in the Church: namely Antiochs receiving the
Gospel: Barnabas his being sent from Jerusalem, and preaching there to the
conversion of many: his going to Tarsus to hearken out Saul: and his bringing
him thither: and there did they two spend a whole year in preaching, which
whole year may very probably be concluded to have been the next year after
this that we have in hand, or in the first of Claudius, in which year Aga^us
prophesied of the great famine which was to come, which befell in the second of
Claudius, as we observed and proved before. So that we may hence take up the
time of these Ministers dispersion and preaching up and down, which were
scattered at the death of Stephen; namely, that they had been in this
employment and travail for the space of six whole years or thereabouts: And in
this time they had gone over Judea, Samaria, and Galilee, and were now got out
of the Land of Canaan into Phaenicia, Cyprus, and Syria, and yet preached the
Gospel to none but Jews only.

Ver. 20. Men of Cyprus and Cyreno.
Men of these places by Original, but of Jerusalem, on some other part of
Canaan by education and residence, as Simon, Alexander, and Rufus were. Mark
15.21, and Barnaba^, Acts 4.36.

Sect. They spoke unto the Grecians.
Gr. To the Hellenists: This word is not opposed to the word Jews in the
preceding verse, but it is a part of the same story: for that tells of their
preaching to the Jews in Phenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch; and this tells of the
fruit of their Ministry to the Jews in Antioch, that it was to the conversion
of many of them. That shows that they came to Antioch, and preached to Jews
only, this shows who they were that came to Antioch, and how they preached
to the Hellenists, which must be understood in the same sense with the former.
But he calls them Hellenists, because they were Jewe^ of the Corporation or
enfranchisement of the City, for Antioch was a Syr^grecian City.

Ver. 22. They sent forth Barnabas.
He himself was an Hellenist, being a man of Cyprus; and he was to be a
fellow helper to the Apostle of the Gentiles for their conversion. and
therefore he a very fit man to go to this Gentile City, who coming thither
and seeing a great conversion of all sorts of people, Gentiles as well as Jews,
he goes over to Tarsus to seek the Doctor of the Gentiles, to bring him over
thither to a work agreeable to that his function, to preach to the Gentiles.

Part II. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. Troubles at Iamnia.
THe troubles and miseries of the Jews are now drawing to the heart of their
State, and this year are got into their own Land, and drawing near Jerusalem
it self. And the poor Alexandrian Jews Commissioners, that the last year
set forward for Rome, and in the beginning of this year are gotten thither, to
petition for redress of their own calamities, do there receive tidings of
worse miseries coming toward all their Nation. The original and occasion was
from Capito a gatherer of Tribute for the Romans in Judea. This man coming
into that Office and Country a very poor man: and (as no other can be expected
from men of so base and mean quality put into so high places) having pilled
and polled all before him, to raise and to mend his fortunes; and being now
grown rich, and being afraid to be accused of the Jews to Caesar, for his
injustice and oppression, he thinks it the safest way to prevent that, to get
some occasion against them, that he might accuse them, and cry thief first.
In Iamnia therefore where he resided, there was mixture of Inhabitants, very
many Jews, and not a few Strangers, or Gentiles. Hereupon Capito secretly
contriveth, That these strangers should set up an Altar in the City to Caius,
who as they heard, would be worshipped for a God. This both he and they knew
that the Jews would never endure, as being a most notorious violation of their
Law; but would oppose the matter, and so should he have cause and accusation
enough against them to Caesar, for despising of his majesty, and contemning his
Godhead. Accordingly did the cursed plot take effect: for suddenly and
unexpectedly an Altar is built and erected in the City, the Jews as soon as
they hear and see the business, they rise generally and pull it down. Their
enemies that had built it, run to Capito, who indeed had had the chief hand
in the design, and complain of the indignity: He not thinking it enough to
take recognisance of the business himself, by Letters acquaints the Emperor
with the affront, for so he sets it forth; and well he knew the Emperor
would be ready enough to second him to do mischief to the Jews according to
his desire.

Sect. II. Troubles at Jerusalem and elsewhere throughout Judea. Caius his
Image to be set up in the Temple to be Worshipped.
Caius having received this intelligence from Capito, which he had mingled
with all kind of gall and vinegar of exasperation and evil language against
the Jews, and being himself already irreconciliably incensed and bent against
them; partly through mischievous incendiaries and accusations, and chiefly
because they only were cross to his deifying and impious Worship; he now
determines a course against them, which should strike at the very root, and
bring them either to bend or break. He dispatcheth therefore a message to
Petronius the Governor of Judea; Josephus relates this story far different
from Philo: For he says that Caius sent away Petronius for this purpose; but
Philo that he was in Judea already: Josephus that the notice of the message
came in time of seednesse; Philo in time of harvest: Josephus that the Jews
came to Petronius at P^olemais and Tiberias; Philo in Phoenicia; and the like:
which the Raeder will readily see if he compare the two Authors together, and
his judgment subscribe to Philo as the more probable, he being at the
Emperors Court when these things were done; but only that he has flourished
the truth with Rhetoric more then needful.
that in stead of the Altar of stone which the Jews had pulled down at
Iamnia, he should without fail set up a Golden Colosse or an Image of the
Emperor in the Temple at Jerusalem: and that this design might receive no
hindrance by opposition, he charged that he should send for part of the Army
from Euphrates that lay there for the guard of the East; that if the Jews
would quietly receive the statue it was well, and if they would not, they must
be forced to it, whether they would or no. What must the Jews do now at such
a pinch? Nay, what must Petronius? If he disobey what he is commanded, he
hazardeth his own ruin; if he perform it, he ruineth a whole Nation: The
Jews will be ready to dye before they will admit of such an Idol; and
Petronius is not like to escape, if he bring them not to admit of it. In this
strait between affection to himself, and to a whole people, he uses the best
accommodation that the present necessity would afford: namely, not to decline
the injunction for his own safety, but to delay it as much as may be for the
safety of the Jews: that in the space while the image was leasurely making the
one party might possibly be brought to comply, either the Emperor upon
consideration to lay his resolution down, or the Jews upon persuasion to lay
down their resolutenesse. He appoints the Image to be wrought at Zidon,
whence on the one hand, less offense might accrue to the Jews, and on the
other some satisfaction might come to the Emperor, he hearing by Passengers
that the work was in hand, and they seeing the gentleness of Petronius that
would not work it in their own Country.

Tidings of this lamentable and heavy design could not be long kept from the
Jews, nor they upon the tidings long from Petronius. To him they come into
Phenicia, men and women, young and old, of all sorts and conditions an
innumerable multitude, with tears in their eyes, and bitter cries in their
mouths, that either he would surcease the enterprise that was in hand, or take
their lives before they saw the performance of such abomination. Petronius
threatens, speaks fair, urges, persuades, but all to no purpose, they
tendering their necks rather to the execution, then enduring to hear of such
violation of their Religion. In the end they obtain this favor of the gentle
Governor, that he will not proceed in this impious work, till he or they,
or both have sued to Caesar, by petition to surcease the design, and to remit
of his resolution. And so return the Jews to their home and harvest, with
some contentment in speeding so well at the present, and in some hope to speed
better for the future. Josephus here tells a story of a miraculous and
sudden shower that fell as Petronius and the Jews were thus parlying
together, whereas there had been no rain of a long time before, and no sign at
all of any rain instantly before this fell: God (as he would have it)
seconding this their request with this wonder, and using this argument for the
moving of Petronius to back theirs.

Sect. III. Petronius his Letter to the Emperor.
The gentle Governor failed not of his promise, nor of the trust the Jews had
reposed in him, but though it may breed his own smart, he addresseth a
message to the Emperor in their behalf, and uses the utmost of his
persuasive skill and faculty in it. He lays before him that the prosecution
of his commanded and intended enterprise, would be the destruction of a whole
Nation, the loss of a fair and goodly Tribute and Revenue, the impairing of
the Roman strength and honor, the prejudice of his Majesty's journey into
Alexandria, which he intended ere long to take: That they were already grown
desperate, and began to neglect their harvest and occasions, whereby a certain
famine would follow upon the Land, and a disadvantage to the Countries round
about: with other Arguments of the same nature, sensible, strong, and
persuasive, had not the Emperor been wedded to his own senseless will, and
bewitched and led away with destructive counsel. Two caitives he had about
him, that continually suggested evil to him against the Jews, as if for
either ear one, Helicon an Egyptian mentioned before, and Apelles an
Ascalonite, such another as he. These were ever adding spurs to his malice
against that nation, which was in its full carreare already, and blowing those
coals which it was impossible to quench. Wretched men that they were, that
sought to rear their fortunes upon others ruins, and to cement estates with
others men blood. Such instruments it pleased God to use for the scourging of
that ungracious and condemned nation, and having done the work by them that he
had appointed, he cast these rods into the fire, Apelles being tortured by
Caius, whom he had indoctrinated to cruelty, and Helicon slain by Claudius,
the Emperor that succeeded in Caius his room.

Sect. IV. Agrippa his mediation for the Jews.
King Agrippa the Jews old friend and Advocate is now at Rome, and ready in
affection, as well as in place, upon these heavy tidings to intercede for his
people, and to do them good, if it be possible for any good to be done.
Josephus and Philo do again differ about the relation of this his undertaking
of a mediation, as they do almost in every thing that they relate jointly, in
one circumstance or other. Iosesephus says that Agrippa hearing of this misery
of his people, invited Caius to a most sumptuous and extraordinary banquet;
using to his cost, such a preparative to his fairer and better aggresse and
accoasting the Tyrant upon a matter of so great import: That Caius at the
banqu^ offered him a boon, whatsoever he should desire, expecting he would
desire some great Revenue: but that Agrippa requested nothing but the liberty
of his people in their Religion, and the removal of that fear that now lay
upon them by the (...) preparing. That Caius, overcome by so honest and
unexpected a petition condescended to his desire, and was well (...) and
pacified, till Petronius his Letter came to him after this, and then was he
all of a fury and ragednesse again. But (...) thus, That the intelligence from
Petronius was come to him before Agrippa began to mediate: That Agrippa coming
as at other times to attend the Emperor, was so cast down and daunted at the
terror of his looks, and thunder of his words against the Jews, that he fell
down in a swoone, in which he lay till the next day. Then he addresseth a
Letter to him in his peoples behalf, so powerful and pithy, that Caius
betwixt anger and calmness* betwixt commending Agrippa, and being displeased
with him, at the last grants it to Agrippa as a special boon, that the
dedication of his Image should not go forward: and to such a purpose he
writes to Petronius; but withal mingling mischief with this his mitigation,
he gives order that if any one would set up his Image, or dedicate his statue
in any town or City of Judea, (Jerusalem excepted) it should not be opposed,
but the opposer should be suddenly and severely punished. A politic and a
deadly plot to involve the Nation in an insurrection and rebellion: For the
enemies of the Jews would be ready to be erecting such offenses; not so much
for the honor of Caesar, as for spite of the Jews, and the Jews would be as
ready to oppose them to the hazard of their lives, because they abhorred Idols
for themselves, and not for the place; and the tyrant would be as ready as
either to take this opportunity of their insurrection, to entangle them in a
destructive War. But the time of their final desolation was not yet come,
and so it pleased God that none of their enemies were active at this time in
this kind; nor when he set a work a Colosse to be made for him in Rome,
intending from thence to convey it secretly into the Temple at Jerusalem, it
took effect according to his impious design and desire, but came to nothing
and the intention quashed, either by his death, which fell out the beginning of
the next year, or by some other stop and hinderance.

Sect. V. Flaccus Avilius in banishment, and his end.
The last year we brought Flaccus to the Isle of Andros, and now let us land
him there. When he came within kenne of Land, he burst out into tears and
lamentation, comparing that place in his pensive thoughts with Italy and Egypt,
and his deplorable condition of life upon which he was now to enter, with the
pomp and prosperity in which he had lived in those two places of his
education and Authority. Being landed, his pensiveness increased the more, by
how much he was now nearer to that misery which his thoughts presaged. His
demeanor in this his banishment; if Philo have not set it forth with more
Rhetoric then truth, was full of horror and amazedness: avoiding the
society of men, running up and down the woods, tearing his hair, tormenting
himself, and sometimes rising out of his sleep at midnight, and running
abroad, and he would look up toward Heaven and cry out in a lamentable note.
(...). O King of Gods and men, thou art not therefore careless of the Nation
of the Jews.

Thus did he spin out a miserable life for certain months, till Caesar cut
his woeful thread in two. For the tyrant lying awake one night and could not
sleep, among other thoughts that came into his mischievous mind, he
considered how happily retired those men lived that were banished: they wanting
nothing, and enjoying all things in enjoying themselves. The cruel caitife
from these thoughts of their estate, began to envy it, and accounting their
banishment rather a pleasure then a punishment, he gave charge the next
morning that they should all be slain. Under this doom fell Flaccus, one of
the first in the Tyrants thoughts, because one of the first in his displeasure.
Executioners are sent for his dispatch, whose errand he knew as soon as he
saw them, and from them he flies as soon as he knew them. But it is in vain
to flee, and it is too late, for they and vengeance have soon over taken him,
and with many wounds have put him to death.

Sect. VI. The Ambassadors of the Alexandrian Jews before the Emperor.
The miseries of the Alexandrian Jews could find no remedy, while the source
from whence they flowed, was not stopped, but overflowed them continually. The
wellhead of this their mischief was double* The spiteful counsel that was
given the Emperor against them by others; and the endless rancour that he bare
to them himself. To stop the current, and inundation of the calamity that
overwhelmed them continually from these to puddle springs, they can find no
better, or more feasible means and way then to send some men of their own
Nation to Rome, to atone, intercede and mediate for them. We left them upon
their journey the last year, three in number, as says Josephus, but five, as
Philo, who was one of them himself: and now let us trace them to Rome, and see
how they speed.

Their first sight of the Emperor was in Campus Martius, who saluted them
friendly, and promised to give them hearing with a great deal of speed, and it
was hoped by the most of them with a great deal of favor, but it proved far
otherwise. For he shortly went out of the City down to Puteoli by the sea, and
they follow him thither. There they first hear the tidings of the state of
Judea under Petronius, and of Cesars Image that was preparing. From Puteoli
they follow him to Rome again, and there being admitted to audience, he with
a terrible and grinning countenance first asked them; What? are you that people
that of all others scorn my Deity, but had rather worship your namelesse God?
and then scornfully lifting his hands up to Heaven, he named the name Jehovah.
At this all the company of the malignant party rejoiced, as accounting they had
got the day. But when the Jews began to excuse and answer for themselves, he
flung away, and fisked from room to room, they following him all this while: At
last, after some chiding at somewhat that he disliked in the rooms, and
appointing how he would have it mended; he asked them, How comes it to pass
that you forbear to eat Swines flesh? Here the company laughed out again:
and as the Jews began to answer, he angerly interposed thus, I would feign
know what are those privileges of your City, that you challenge? When they
began to speak, he fisked away into another room. Shortly he comes to
them again in a milder manner: And now, says he, what say you? And when they
began to lay open their matter to him, away flings he into another room
again. At last, coming again more mildly still, These men seem to me,
says he, not so evil, as miserable, which cannot be persuaded that I am a
God; And so he bad them to depart. And thus concluded this great scene of
expectation, for ought that we can find further in Philo. But whether this was
the very end of the matter, or it proceeded further, but that the relation of
it is failing in Philo, is hard to decide. It seems by him that this was the
end of their conference with the Tyrant, but it appears withal, that they
presented him with some Palinodia, or recantation, which is perished and gone.
Eusebius speaks of five Books written by Philo, Eccles. Hist. l. ^^ c. 5.
about the calamities of the Jews, and the madness of Caius, whereof we have
but two extant at this time, that against Flaccus, and that about the Ambassy
to Caius, and the other three seem to be the Palinodia, or it to be some
part of them.

Sect. VII. Apion.
Among the five, or three Ambassadors of a side, (as Josephus and Philo differ
in their number) the most renowned in their contrary and differing kinds were
Apion the Greek, and Philo the Jew; the others are wholly namelesse, and their
memory exstinct, but these two have left a perpetuation of theirs behind them
by their writings.

Apion was an Egyptian, born in the utmost borders thereof in a place called
Oasis, but fained himself for an Alexandrian. A man given to the Grecian
studies of Philosophy, but with more vainglory then solidity. He not
contented, to have been a personal accuser of the Jews to Caius in that their
Ambassy, wrote also bitterly against them in his Egyptian History, to disgrace
them to posterity. Of which Josephus that wrote two books in answer of him
gives this censure. That some things that he had written were like to what
others had written before, other things very cold, some c^lumnious, and some
very unlearned. And the end and death of this black-mouthed railer he
describes thus To me it seems, that he was justly punished for his
blasphemies, even against his own Country laws, for he was circumcised of
necessity, having an ulcer about his privities, and being nothing helped by the
cutting or circumcising, but putrefying with miserable pains, he dyed, Contr.
Apion. lib. 2.

Sect. VIII. Philo the Jew.
Philo was a Jew by Nation, an Alexandrian by birth: by line, of the kindred of
the Priests; and by family, the brother of Alexander Alabarcha. His education
was in learning, and that mixed, according to his original and residence, of
the Jews, and of the Greeks: his proof was according to his education,
versed in the learning of both the Nations, and not inferior to the most
learned in either: From this mixture of his knowledge, proceeded the
quaintness of his style and writing; explaining Divinity by Philosophy, or
rather forcing Philosophy out of Divinity, that he spoiled the one, and did
not much mend the other. Hence his Allegories which did not only ob^cure the
clear Text, but also much soil the Theology of succeeding times. His
language is sweet, smooth, and easy, and Athens it self is not more elegant
and Athenian. For attaining to the Greek in Alexandria, partly naturally,
(that being a Grecian City) and partly by study, (as not native Grecians used
to do) he by a mixture of these two together, came to the very Apex and
perfection of the language, in copiousnesse of words, and in choice. His style
is always fluent, and indeed often to superfluity, dilating his expressions
sometimes so copious, that he is rather prodigal of words, then liberal, and
shows what he could say if the cause required, by saying so much, when there
is little or no cause at all. And to give him his character for this, in short,
He is more a Philosopher then a scripture man in heart, and more a Rhetorician
then a Philosopher in tongue. His manner of writing is more ingenious then
solid, and seems rather to draw the subject whereon he writes whither his
fancy pleases, then to follow it whither the nature and inclination of it does
incline. Hence his allegorizing of whatsoever comes to his hand, and his
peremptory confidence in whatsoever he does allegorize, insomuch that
sometimes he persuades himself that he speaks mysteries, as page 89. and
sometimes he checketh the Scripture, if it speak not as he would have it, as
page 100.

How too many of the Fathers in the primitive Church followed him in this his
vein, it is too well known, to the loss of too much time, both in their
writing and in our reading. Whether it were because he was the first that
wrote upon the Bible, or rather because he was the first that wrote in this
strain, whose writings came unto their hands, that brought him into credit
with Christian Writers, he was so far followed by too many, that while they
would explain Scripture, they did but intricate it, and hazarded to lose the
truth of the story, under the cloud of the Allegory. The Jews have a strain
of writing upon the Scripture, that flies in a higher region then the writings
of Christians, as is apparent to him that shall read their Authors. Now Philo
being a Jew, and naturally affecting like them to soar in a high place, and
being by his education in the Grecian wisdom more Philosophical then the Jews
usually were, and by inclination much affected with that learning, he soareth
the Jewish pitch with his Grecian wings, and attaineth to a place in which none
had flowne in before (unless the Therapeutae, of whom hereafter) writing in a
strain that none had used before, and which too many, or at least many too
much used after; of his many strange and mysterious matters that he finds
out in his vein of allegorizing, let the Reader taste but some.

As see what he says of the invisible Word of God, page 5. and page 24. and
169. and 152.

How he is a Pythagorean for numbers, page 8. and page 15, 16, 31. where he
is even bewitched with the number Seven; and page 32, 33. as the Therapeutae
were 695. from whom he seems to have sucked in his Divinity.

Page 9. He accounts the Stars to presage future things; whom in page 12.
he almost calls intelligible Creatures, page 168. and immortal Spirits,
page 222.

Page 12. He seems to think that God had some Coadjutors in man's Creation.

Page 15. God honored the seventh day, and called it holy; for it is festival
not to one people or region only, but to all: which is worthy to be called
the festivity of the people, and the nativity of the world.

Page 43. He distinguishes betwixt Adam formed and made, earthly and heavenly.

Page 57. He teaches strange Doctrine, which follows more copiously, page
61. about two natures created in man, good and bad.

Page 68. Observe his temperance when his list.

Page 86. He believes that his soul had sometime her raptures, and taught him
strange, profound, and unknown speculations, as there she does concerning the
Trinity, and in page 89. He thinks he talks mysteries.

Page 94. Faith the most acceptable Sacrifice; an unexpected confession from a
Jew.

Page 100. He checketh Joseph the Patriarch for impropriety of speech, and he
will teach him how to speak.

Page 102. Speaking of the death of Moses, he says, (...), etc. He is not
gathered, or added, fainting or failing, as men had done before, for he
admitted not either of addition or defection, but he is translated or passes
away by the Authority of that efficient word by which the universe was made.

Page 122. He is again very unmannerly and uncivil with Joseph, and so is
he again in page 152. he had rather lose his friend then his jest, and
censure so great a Patriarch then miss his Allegory.

That Aaron used imposition of hands upon Moses, page 126.

Page 127. That Abel slain yet lives, as Heb. 11.

Page 152. God like a Shepherd and King governs all things in the world by
right and equity, (...): Setting over them his upright word, which is his first
begotten Son, who takes the care of this sacred heard, like the Deputy of some
great King.

Page 161. He shows his learning is the great Encyclica.

Page 168. He calls Angels Genii and Heroes, according to the Greeks, and
holds that they were created in the air, but in the superior part of it
near the Sky, and fly up and down there, page 221, 222.

Page 170. His Allegories make him impious, and he counts the story of
Paradise to be but foolery, if it be taken literal.

Page 180. He talks a Rabinall tale about the invention of music.

He constantly follows the Lxx, as appears, page 160, 179, 218, 245, 255.

Page 190. He makes God and his wisdom, as it were father and mother, of whom
the world was generate, but not humano more.

Ibid. He reads that place, Prove. 8.22. The Lord created me the first of his
works. For says he, it was necessary that all things that came to
generation, should be younger then the mother and nurse of all things.

Page 191. He is very uncivil with Iethro.

Page 205. He holds Lots wife to have been turned into a stone.

Page 206. He was in the Theater at a play.

Page 213. He holds Isaac weaned at seven years old. And mentions
certain Dialogues made by himself, personating Isaac and Ismael. He calls
cap. 32. of Deuteronomie (...), Canticum majus, according to the Rabbis
phrase: so likewise page 179.

Page 214. Jacob praying for Joseph says, (...). It is very questionable where
this speech is to be found.

Page 223. The spirit of God is an immortal knowledge.

Page 232. He treats de Primogenito, and secundogenito Dei: that is, of his
Word and the World.

Page 234. He holds freewill, but it is in comparison of the actions of men
with the effects of Plants and Brutes.

Page 241. He is fallen out with Joseph again.

Page 251. He tells a fable, how all Birds and Beasts spoke the same
language, and understood one another; but that their tongue was confounded
because they petitioned that they might never grow old, but renew their youth
as the Serpent does, who is the basest of them.

But this is more then enough for a taste: we shall conclude his Character
with that Apophthegme that came from him when Caius was in a rage against him
and his fellow-Commissioners, How ought we to cheer up, says he, though
Caius be angry at us in words, seeing in his deeds he even opposes God?
Josephus relates it, Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 10.

Part III. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Caius still foolish and cruel.
THis year did Caius make an expedition to the Ocean, as if he would have
passed over into Britain: but the greatest exploit that he did was, that
first he went a little upon the Sea, and then returning, he gave a signal to
his Soldiers that they should fall to battle, which was nothing else but
that they should gather cockles and shells upon the shore, and so he returned
with these goodly spoils, and brought them to Rome in a foolish triumph, as if
he had conquered the Ocean: being come into the City he had like to have
slain all the Senate, because they had not decreed divine honors and worship
to him: But he became reconciled to them again upon this occasion: Protogenes
his bloodhound (that used to carry his two Books, or Black-bills, the one
whereof he called a Sword, and the other a Dagger; in which Books he enrolled
whom he destined to death or punishment) he coming one day into the Court,
and being saluted and fawned upon by all the Senate, was among them all saluted
by Scribonius Proculus. Upon whom looking with a grim and displeased
countenance, What, says he, do thou salute me, that hate so deadly the
Emperor my Master? Whereupon the rest of the Senators arose, came upon him and
pulled him in pieces. With this piece of service so well suiting with the
Tyrants humor, he was so well pleased, that he said they had now regained
his favor again. Under his cruelty this year perished by name, Ptolomy the
son of King Iuba, because he was rich: Cassius Becillinus for no crime at
all: and Capito his father, because he could not endure to look upon his
sons death. Flattery delivered L. Vitellius our late Governor of Syria; and
it was much to appease such a Lion, but that it was a flattery without parallel.

Sect. II. Caius profane.
The blasphemous Atheist continued still in his detestable Deity, being what
God he would when he would, and changing his Godship with the change of his
cloths: sometimes a male Diety, sometime a female, sometime a God of one
fashion, sometime of another. Sometime he was Jupiter, sometime Juno, sometimes
Mars, sometimes Venus, sometime Neptune, or Apollo, or Hercules, and sometimes
Diana: and thus whilst he would be any thing, he was nothing, and under the
garb of so many Gods he was indeed nothing but Devil: He built a Temple for
himself in Rome, and made himself a room in the Capitol, that he might (as
he said) converse with Jupiter. But it seems Jupiter and he fell out, for he
removed his own mansion, and built himself a Temple in the Palace, because he
thought that if Jupiter and he shared in the same Temple, Jupiter would have
the upper hand, and the more repute. Therefore that his own Deity might have
room enough, he built this new Temple; and that he might be sure to get
equal worship with Jupiter, he intended to set up the statue of Jupiter
Olympius there, but pictured directly after his own Image; so that it must have
been Jupiters statue, but Caius his picture; Jupiters trunk, but Caius his
head and face; but this fine design came to nothing, and was clean spoiled,
for the Ship that went for this statue was spoiled with li^htning; and there
was a great laughing always heard, whenever any one went about to meddle
with the picture, to forward the bunnesse; and truly it was as fit an Omen, as
likely could have been invented for it. When this invention thus failed him,
he found out a new trick, to get part of the Temple of Castor and Pollux for
himself, and joined it to the Palace; and he so contrived the matter, that his
entrance was just in the middle between those two Gods: and therefore he
called them his Porters, and himself he styled the Dialis: and his dear
Caesonia, and his uncle Claudius, and diverse of the richer sort he ordained to
be his Priests, and got a good sum of money of every one of them for their
Office; nay he would be a Priest unto himself, and which best suited with him
in such a function, he admitted his Horse to be fellow Priest with him; and
because he would be a right Jupiter indeed, he would have his tricks to
imitate thunder and lightning, and he would ever be defying Jupiter in Homers
speech, Either take me away, or I will take thee. And thus was his Palace
parted into a senseless contrariety, one part to be a Temple, and another
part a common Stews; in one, Caius to be adored as a God, in another, Caius to
play the Beast, deflowring Virgins, violating Boys, adulterating Matrons,
exacting and extracting money from all; and using to tumble himself in heaps
of Money which he had so gotten.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, OF The Year of Christ 42.
And of Caius Caligula 5. Claudius 1.
Being the Year of the World 3969. And of the City of Rome, 794. Consuls Caius
Caesar IV. Cn. Sentius Saturninus.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

PART II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Caius his death contrived.
THis madness of Caius could not last long, it was so mad and it was so
violent, and he could not expect a dry and timely death himself, which had
brought an untimely and bloody to so many hundreds. He began a Consulship this
year with Cn. Sentius, but it was soon out of date, as he was himself, but
he not so soon as the people desired, as he had deserved, and some had
compassed, had their plot but taken effect. One or two conspiracies had been
contrived against him before this, but had failed in the success, and he
escaped to do more mischief still. But now a design is in undertaking, that
will run the business to the full, and men are entered into the combination,
that have mettle, and want not fortune. These were Cassius Chaereas and
Cornelius Sabinus that contrived in chief, and they entertained many others
into the conspiracy with them, as Callistus and Eparchus, Regulus and
Minutianus. While the plot was in hatching, Caius gave an extraordinary offense
and disgust unto the people, which basined and ripened it the more, upon his
own head. There were solemn sp^rts kept now in the City, at which time it
was (...) that if the people asked a boon, the Emperor ^id (...) grant it.
Now therefore they begg^d that he^ ^ould ea^e (...) taxes, and release somewhat
of the grievous (...) under which they groaned. But (...) was so far from
(...)* that he caused many of the petitioners to be slain, hastening his own
death by theirs, and condemning himself by their condemnation. For what now
remains thought the conspirators but a speedy course, when neither his own
reason, nor their petitions, nor their countries custom can any whit move him
to goodness, nor divert him from his cruelties? Besides this general quarrel
of their country, some of them had their peculiar heart-burnings against him
for particular abuses: As Minutianus for the death of his friend Lepidus and
for fear of his own life: but Cassius Chereas for diverse affronts and
disgraces, which the Tyrant not only used but loved to put upon him above
other men. He was Tribune of the Praetorian band, or as it were Captain of the
guard, and a man as valiant, as that place required or any whatsoever. Yet was
it the senseless and inconsiderate tyrants delight and continual custom, to
geere him with the taunts of cowardice or effeminacy. Whenever he came to
him to ask of him a word or ticket for the Watch, he would give him Venus or
Priapus: when he offered him his hand to kiss, he would frame it into an
obscene form, and so hold it to him: And that which might make him odious to
others, he caused him to be the wracker and tormentor of delinquents, himself
standing by, that he might use no mercy for fear; and yet when he had
cruelly and miserably torn and rent the poor wretches, would the spiteful
Prince speak pitifully to them, bemoane the extremity, condole their
condition, and sometimes give them rewards, thus turning the detestation of all
the cruelty upon the head of Chereas only: such things as these set the abused
man all of a fire for revenge, that was hot enough already for the common
cause, and he wants nothing to end his own disgrace and his countries
misery, but partners and opportunity. He therefore first assaieth Clemens the
chief commander of the soldiery, and Papinius the chief Querry or Squire of
the Emperors body, with feeling words and forcible arguments to draw them into
the same design with himself of freeing the Common wealth from the common
misery, and themselves from the common guilt that lay upon them, not only for
not redressing, but also for promoting it. For Caius, says he, indeed
commands such cruelties, but we are the men that execute them, he guilty in
word only, but we in action. Whi^st we obey his bloodinesse we encourage
it, and the weapons that our offices have put into our hands, for our country,
we use only against it: forwarding that cruelty which when it wants
further objects will not stop to fall upon our own selves. Come let us at the
last right our Country and our own consciences: and give an end to those
butcheries which we promote by our obedience, and of which we are doubly
guilty, because we execute them, and because we avenge them not. With these
or such expressions as these, did Chereas easily bend these men to his opinion,
who were in the same guilt, danger and misery with him: But Clemens, whether
for cowardice or variableness of his disposition, fell suddenly off again,
and persisted not either in resolution or in secrecy, but began to divulge the
conspiracy all abroad: Now therefore was it time for Chereas to hasten his
enterprise, or it would be too late: such undertakings as these will not brook
long delays, especially when any one of the faction begins to run out,
and leake. He therefore speedily addresseth himself to Sabinus, and to
Minutianus, though a kinsman to Caius, and prevails with them both, to be of
the same mind and action with him: and all of them having men ready for this
exploit do but wait for an opportunity to bring it to effect.

Sect. II. The manner of his death.
Chereas afraid to lose any time, thought several times to have thrown the
tyrant headlong from an high place which he used to stand in in the Capitol,
to throw and scatter money to the people, but he was withheld partly by his
own judgment, which doubted whether the fall would kill him or no, and partly
by the advice of his friends, which persuaded him to hold till a solemn
festival which was now coming on, in which they might have better access in
a mixed crowd and multitude.

This time was come, and three days of the festival, and of the shows were
past before opportunity would serve their turn: On the fourth and last of the
solemnity which must be the day or none, and this was the ninth of the Calends
of February or January the three and twenty, Chereas provideth his confederates
for the expedition both for mettle and weapons. In the morning betime, people
of all conditions flock to the place of the shows and solemnity to get them
places, disposing of themselves where they could, so that men and women, bond
and free, noble and base sat mixedly together, and happy was he that could
get a place no matter where. At last comes Caius, way forced for him through
the crowd, all eyes upon him, but theirs especially that meant him mischief.
His first beginning of that days solemnity was with sacrifice, with the blood
whereof when the clothes of Asprenas a Senator were accidentally bedawbed, it
afforded matter of laughter to the Emperor, but it proved a fatal omen to
himself. After his sacrifice he took his place with the Nobles about him,
and the plays began: one of them was a Mimick acting that part which
Neoptolemus did at the slaughter of King Priamus: Another, of one or more
actors that seemed to vomit blood, so that the stage was even bloody over; and
his sports read his destiny, himself being presently to substantiate in his
own person, what these did but personate and represent of others. Having
fitten a spectator of these his own Omens till toward one a clock, and
indifferent whether to go to dinner or no, his stomach being undisposed
through his yesterdayes gluttony, Asprenas a partner in the plot, sitting near
him persuaded him for his refreshment to go to the bath, and so to dinner, and
then to the plays and shows again. Caius giving notice of his rising, the
company bussles to make him room, the conspirators pretending officiousness,
helped to keep off the crowde and people; when he was come from among the
multitude, he took not the open and ordinary way to the Palace, but a back
and by way toward the Bath: There was he met and accoasted by Chereas, who came
to him as the custom was to demand the word: which when he gave him with his
accustomed scorn, and disgracefulnesse, Chereas drew and flew upon him, with
these words, Hoc age, and smote him sore into the collar bone: upon the wound
Caesar neither cried out nor resisted, but sought to have slipped away. Then was
he entertained by Sabinus with the like courtesy of a blow or Stabbe* so that
by this time the great Lion is gotten down, and then the rest of the
confederacy fly all in upon him, every one with his slash, that there he
lies mangled with few or no less then thirty wounds.

Sect. III. The sequel.
A pleasant spectacle was this to the overpressed commonwealth, but there must
be some more trouble before she can enjoy the pleasure. Such storms as
these, though they come suddenly, and without expectation, yet are they not so
suddenly, passed and calmed again.

The German Soldiers were the first that had notice of the Princes death, and
they are the only men that will avenge it* Men not only conditioned like
himself, in barbarousnesse and headlong cruelty, but also in love with those
conditions, because they found acceptance and reward with him. These men upon
the report, rise up in revenge, and in searching for the murderers of Caesar,
you must expect some innocence will be murdered. They first light upon
Asprenas, a man that indeed had a singer in the business, but it is like it is
more then they knew, yet howsoever he must pay for it because he comes in
their way, and so the shedding of his own blood answers the Omen that he
had but even now by the blood of the sacrifice. Next comes Barbarus Norhanus
to handling because next to hand, and after him Anteius whose curiosity was
his destiny, for coming to look upon the corpse of the slain tyrant he was
made a corpse himself: When the rumor of what had passed came into the
Treater, it moved different passions according to their different affections.
Some could not believe the news it was so good, others would not, because it
was displeasing, hoping better, then that they had lost so great a patron of
their unrulinesse and sporting. But when the Soldiers came in thither after
the rumor, with the heads of Asprenas, Norbanus and Auteius in their hands,
then imagine what case they were all in there, expecting to be all involved in
the same fatal end, by the same fatal fury, though they were not of the same
opinion and affection to the fact that had lately passed. But this fear and
fury was with as much speed as wit, and indeed were both finely calmed and
removed by one Aruntius, for coming in among them in a mourning weed, as if
for Caius, he plainly, and dolefully, and assuredly averred that he was dead.
One would have thought that this should have increased the raging of the
Soldiers far more then before, but it had the clean contrary effect, as his
policy had wittily foreseen. For when they knew certainly that he was dead,
of whom they expected a reward for this their outrage in his quarrel, and when
they considered what the people might do now he was dead, who so hated him
while he was alive, they sheathed their swords and their fury together, and
withdrew themselves from the Theater, and the peoples fear from the people
fairly* and quietly both at once. By a carriage of as much valor as this was
of ingenuitie, did Valerius Asiaticus calm the tumult of the people in the
market place, for when there was no other language, but, who is it, and who is
it that has killed Caesar? he steppeth into some place above the people, and
boldly cried I would it had been I, and with his boldness daunted the mutiny,
and amazed their anger.

Sect. IIII. Dissension about the government.
The hearts of the people were pretty well settled about the death of the
Prince, but their minds not so well about the manner of the future government.
The Senate being assembled in the Capitol were divided about this great
matter, whether the commonwealth should return to its old Democracy, or to its
later Monarchy again; some remembering the tyrannies used by the two latter
monarchs, abhorred the thought of that government any longer: Others
considering that it were better to be under one tyrant, then under many, were
as much against democracy; and yet if they might have a Monarch, which they
desired, they were yet to seek who should be he. Sentius the Consul was
vehement for the former choice, and might have well been suspected for
affecting some kind of monarchy for the present himself, for he was chief
governor alone, but that his earnestness to reduce the state to its former
rule stopped the mouth of any such prejudice. Thus rose the Court without any
determination, and no less was the City divided in opinion. And indeed it was
a very hard task that they had in hand, to resolve for futuritie what might
prove the best, being to take a gentle medium betwixt their too much liberty
and too little.

Sect. V. Claudius.
Whilst they were thus in doubt and agitation, and better able to resolve what
they would not have, then what they would, fortune seemed to offer them an
umpirage and determination, winding an acceptance of a Monarch into their
hearts before they were aware. Claudius an uncle of the Tyrant that now lay
dead, hearing the tumult and hubbub that the palace was in, and how the matter
went with Caligula, he crept into an obscure hole to hide himself, not much
guilty indeed of any other cause of such fear, but only because he was so
near allied to the man so hated and now slain. When lo Gratus a common
Soldier searching about, whether for a prey or for a conspirator, spyeth his
feet lying out of his skulking hole, and draws him out to see who it was; here
might a stander by have laughed to have seen the different passions of
Claudius and the Soldier meet together in one like and uniforme action.
Claudius, ready to kneel to the Soldier to beg for his life, and the Soldier
already kneeling to Claudius to reverence his person. For being drawn out and
brought into the light, and his face known by him and who he was, he
presently shows him all reverence and homage, and cries out An Emperor, an
Emperor; with this cry they bring him out to some more of their fellows, who
getting him on their shoulders bring him into their Ga^rison, the people as he
went pitying him, as going unto execution. There he lodged that night, and you
may suppose that he slept out little, being so divided betwixt hope and fear.
The Consul and Senate the next day hearing what was done, send to him to
advise him to submit to their government, and not to disturb the State with a
monarchy again, which had been so burdensome and tedious to it so long: which
if he should go about to do they would oppose him to their utmost strength,
and doubted not the assistance of the Gods in this their vindication of their
liberty. Verrannius and Brachus, their two Legates upon this message, delivered
their errand with as much moving Rhetoric and entreaty as they could invent,
beseeching him with all the vehemence they could, not to distemper the
Republike again by affecting and aspiring the Monarchy, which was now in a
hopeful possibility of settling her tranquillity and liberty to her own
content. But the sight of the strength and forwardness of the Soldiers that
were about him, made them to strain their Oratory one key higher then it may
be they had either commission for at their coming forth, or any thanks for
at their return. For they besought him that if he would needs have the
Empire, that he would rather receive it from the hands of the Senate then of
the Soldiers, and make an entry to his government by consent and approvall and
not by violence.

Claudius, howsoever his mind stood, gave a gentle answer, either dissembling
till he could be sure to have his own party good, or indeed rather forced
upon this pursuit then propense, and though affecting the majesty of the
Empire, yet not patient of the trouble.

Sect. VI. Caesonia and her child slain.
There let us leave him to study, as far as his fear and the Soldiers
tumult would suffer him, what to resolve upon as best to be done, or if he
were resolved already, then how to do it: And let us a little step aside to
the corpse of Caius, and there we shall see some partners with him in his
death, which had better relation to it then Asprenas and the other that we saw
slain before: Chereas not thinking it enough for the common safety, and the
accomplishment of his design, that Caius was dead alone, unless so much also
of him were cut off with him, as was in Caesonia his wife and her and his
little child, he sends one Lupus one of the tribunes upon this execution,
that nothing might remain of Caligula, but his putrified memory. Some were of
opinion that Caesonia had been his persuasive and provocation to his
mischiefs either by charms, or exhortations, or both; others thought, that
she used her utmost endeavors to have reduced him to a better mind, but could
not prevail: But were it the one or the other, were she good or bad, it is
all one to Chereas, she was Caius his wife, and so must needs die for the
desert of her actions, if she were naught, and though she were otherwise, yet
for the due of her relation. Lupus finds her tumbling upon the ground with
the corpse, all besmeared with his blood and her own tears: She conceiving
his errand by his very person, boldly invites him to accomplish what he came
about, which he did accordingly, and withal slew the little child upon the
heap: And so there lies the greatest Prince and Princess under heaven, a
spectacle of misery and majesty tied up together, and to be lamented in
regard of these two, howsoever but justly rewarded in regard of their deserts.

Sect. VII. Claudius made Emperor.
That rule and Monarchy that the Soldiers would have tumbled upon Claudius
they cared not how, Agrippa the King of whom we had mention a good while ago
folded it as it were upon him fairly and smoothly, that it both lay more easy
for him himself, and less wrinckled and rugged to the eyes of others. For
first coming privately to Claudius whilst he somewhat fluctuated in opinion,
and was ready to have yielded to the Senates propositions, he settled him in a
contrary resolution, persuading him by no means to forsake or relinquish that
fair apprehension and seizure of the dominion that was offered him. Then
comes he as craftily into the Senate as if he had been a mere stranger to
what was in hand, and there asks how the matter went between them and
Claudius; when they ingenuously laid all the business before him, and demanded
his counsel and advise in those affairs: He subtle enough for his own ends,
and neither regarding their liberty, nor Claudius his Monarchy so much in the
matter as his own security in his kingdom, makes fair weather to them, and
professes with all solemnity to serve them in their designs to the utmost of
his power. But when it came to the vote what must be done, and the resolution
was that they must take up arms, and arm their servants, and compass that
with the sword that they could not do with persuasions; then Agrippa thought
it was time to work or never. He therefore puts them in mind of the strength
of the Soldiers that had proclaimed Claudius, and of their forces but weak,
few, and utterly unexpert: that to hazard a war was to hazard their State,
and therefore he would advise them to tender to Claudius propositions of
accommodation, and if they were so pleased, he himself would be the agent.
It is agreed upon, and he sent upon this employment, which how he would
perform it is easy to guess, by looking upon his own condition in which he
now stood. For in the life of Caius it was conceived that his evil counsel
had very much forwarded the others cruelty and mischievousnesse, and therefore
if the Senate be masters of their desires, he can little expect to be master
any more of his Kingdom, but if with all his officiousness and trotting up
and down he can help Claudius to the Monarchy, he is sure he has then
helped himself to the royalty. It was therefore not an oversight in that grave
and discreet great Council that they employed such a man as this in their
occasions, who, a far dimmercie of judgment then any of theirs would easily
perceive, would be against them: but it was their descreet evasion with their
honor, when finding themselves too weak to deal it out by force of Arms,
they came to a noble reference, by the motion and mediation of so great a
Prince. When Agrippa comes to Claudius he is now more urgent then before,
that he stand to his challenge, because he had now groped the mind and
strength of the Senate: and he prevails with him so far that the Soldiers
go to the Senate house, and there demand a confirmation of their choice. It
was now come to it in the Council, that they were resolved to choose one
Monarch, for they saw the Soldiers would so have it, but now the question was
who that must be; some were for one, some for another, but the conspirators
against Caius were against Claudius howsoever: This division had like to have
caused another tumult, but the end of all was, that the power and fear of the
Soldiers prevailed, and the Senate was glad to accept him for their Prince
whom they durst not refuse.

Sect. VIII. His demeanor at his beginning.
Agrippa had persuaded him to deal gently with the Senate, but he either
persuaded not or prevailed not with him for the like toward the conspirors of
his nephews death. Chereas and Sabinus the slaiers of Caius, and Lupus the
executioner of Caesonia and her child were not like the Senate, either
persuaded by reasons, or affrighted by forces to accept of Claudius or to owe
him homage, but they boldly and resolutely gainesay his election even to the
death. Claudius therefore causes Chereas to be slain and Lupus with him,
which doom they underwent with different demeanors, Chereas stoutly, but Lupus
weeping, Chereas at one blow, for he met death half the way, but Lupus at
many, for he shrunk it all he could. But Sabinus, foolehardy as he was, when
Claudius had granted him his pardon, and not only so but also restored him to
his former honors, he disdaining to be singled from his fellow conspirators
in their end any more then in their design, fell upon his own sword and died.
Such a beginning did the new made Emperor make into his Empire, mingling
severitie and clemency together in the censure of offenders of the same knot,
that he might also mingle fear and love in the hearts of the people. This
Claudius was the son of Drusus the son of Livia, a man dull and diseased
even from his childhood, and for that brought up most in the converse with
women or nurses: hence his effeminacy and luxuriousness at all times, and his
readiness to be led away by the counsel of women at some. He was now about
fifty years of age when he began to reign, at the very ripeness of all the
discretion he had, but that it was often blasted with fearefulnes, drunkenness
and wicked counsel. When he was set quietly in the Throne, the first thing he
did was to get the two days in which the agitation was about the change of the
government, quite out of memory, and for that end he made an act of oblivion
of all things that had passed either in words or actions of all that time: yet
had he not wrought his own security so far, but that he caused all that
came near him to be searched for weapons, and while he sat at any meal,
he had a strong guard about him. For the motion that had been so lately and
so strongly carried for the abolition of monarchy, and the other which proposed
others thereto when Monarchy was agreed upon, and would have excluded him, had
taken such an impression upon him, that he reputed no safety in his holding of
the royalty, but by that strong hand and power by which he had gotten it. Yet
tried he fair and gentle dealing though he durst not trust it: Those from
whom he had received any affront, in the days of Tiberius and Caligula (for
sometimes in those days to abuse Claudius, was to curry favor) he freely
pardoned if he found them guilty of no other crime, but if he did he paid
them then for all together. The unjust fines of Caius he remitted, his
illegal decrees he revoked, his innocents imprisoned he released, and his
causeless banished he called home.

The poisons which he had prepared for the Nobles, and a list of their names
for whom they were prepared, being found in the Palace, though Caius had
pretended to have burnt them, he showed publicly to the Senate and then burnt
them indeed. He forbad any one to adore him or to sacrifice to him, he
restrained the great and loud acclamations that were used to be made to the
Emperor, and carried himself with such sweetness and moderation, that happy
had the Republique been in the continuance of the Monarchy, had he been so
happy as to have continued in this his first demeanure. But his wicked Empress
Messallina, and her wicked consorts first provoked him to mischief, and his too
much delight in the bloody sports did by degrees habituate him unto cruelty.
He had recalled Iulia and Agrippina the two sisters of Caius out of
banishment, whither they had been sent by their own brother after he had
defloured them, and he restored them to their estates and revenues again. But
Messallina stomacking that Iulia did her not honor and homage enough, and
envying her beauty, and being jealous of her privacy with Claudius, she caused
her to be banished again, and in a short time she compassed her death.

These were but ominous beginnings, when Caesar's love to his own niece was
cause enough to work her ruin, but was not strong enough to stand between
her and the fury of his own wife: And it did but fatally presage what
mischief her wretched counsels would work the cowardice and indiscretion of
her husband to, when their first effect was upon one so near allied: Nor did
cruelty and bloodinesse enter thus only in at his ears, by the suggestion of
his cursed wife, but the like it did also at his eyes, by his frequent and
delightsome beholding of the bloody sports: that growing by degrees to be his
delight to act, which had grown by degrees also to be his delight to see.
Sometimes beasts with beasts, as twelve Camels and Horses at one time, and 300.
Bears, and 300. African wild beasts at the same: sometimes beasts with men,
and sometimes men with men, and at all times hideous bloodshed, that he that
can look upon such barbarousnesse and slaughter with content, it may be
suspected that he in time will grow to act the like with the same delight.

PART II. ACTS XI.
Verse. 26. And the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.
Sect. I. The name of Christian.
THe Jews and Gentiles being now since the calling of Cornelius knit up
together into one Church they are this year tied up into the rofie and
glorious knot of the same name, and Epithet the name of Christian: A new name
which the Lord himself did give them, as we may well understand that
prophecy, Esa. 65.15. that the two distinguishing names of Jews and Heathen
might no more continue the ancient distance that was betwixt them, but that
that and all differences arising there from might be buried under this sweet
and lovely denomination given equally to them both. The current of the story
hitherto has fairly and plainly led this occurrence to this year, as the
reader himself will confess upon the trace of the history, and he will be
confirmed in it, when he sees the next year following to be the year of the
famine, which next follows in relation in St. Luke to this that we have in
hand, Act. 11.26, 27, 28.

By what names the Professors of the Gospel were called before this time, it is
plain in Scripture. Among themselves they were called Act. 4.15.
Disciples, Cap. 5.14. and 6.1. and 9.1.
Believers, Act. 8.1.
The Church, Act. 8.2.
Devout men, Act. 11.29. 1 Cor. 15.6.
Brethren; But among the unbeleeving Jews, by this sole common and scornful
title of Act. 24.5.
The sect of the Nazarites. Epiphanius has found out a strange name for them
not to be found elsewhere, nor to be warranted any where, and that is the name
of Iessaeans.

Before they were called Christians Lib. 1. advers. Nazarae^^. page 120.
(says he) they were called Iessaei; either from Iesse the father of David,
from whom the Virgin Mary and Christ by her descended, or from Jesus the proper
name of our Savior. Which thou shall find in the books of Philo, namely in
that which he wrote (...): In which treating of their Policy, Praises and
monasteries which are about the Marish Marian (commonly called Mareotis) he
speaks of none others then of Christians. Of the same opinion in regard of
the men themselves, are diverse others, both the Fathers, and later writers,
though they differ in regard of the name. No Romanist but he takes it for
granted, that Philo in that book (that is meant by Epiphanius, though he
either title it not right, or else couch two books under one title,) speaks
of Christian Monks, and from thence who of them does not plead the antiquity
of a Monastic life, so confidently, that he shall be but laughed to scorn
among them that shall deny it? They build indeed upon the Ipse Dixit of some of
the Fathers to the same purpose, besides the likeness of those men in Philo to
the Romish Monks, that such a thing as this is not altogether to be passed
over, but something to be examined, since it seems to carry in it self so
great antiquity and weightinesse.

Eusebius therefore in his Lib. 2. c. 15.
Ecclesiastical History delivers such a matter as tradition. They say (says
he) that Mark being first sent into Egypt, preached the Gospel there which
he also penned, and first founded the Churches of Alexandria, where so great a
multitude of believing men and women grew up, (...) in a most Philosophical
and strict course, that Philo himself vouchsafed to write of their converse,
meetings, feastings, and all their demeanor: And for this his writing of them,
He is reckoned by us (says De Scriptorib. Eccles. ^om. 1. page 102.
Jerome) amongst the Ecclesiastical writers, because writing concerning the
first Church of Mark the Evangelist, he breaks out into the praises of our
men: relating that they are not only there but also in many other provinces,
and calling their dwellings Monasteries. Of the same mind with these fathers,
are Cedrenus Lib. 2. cap. 16.17.
Nicephorus, Bibl. Sanct. l. in voce. Philo.
Sixtus Senensis, Lib. 2. cap. 1. de Monach.
Bellarmine, Apparat. Sacer. in voce Philo.
Possevine and others; which last cited Jesuit is not contented to be
satisfied with this opinion himself, but he revileth the Magdeburgenses, and
all others with them, that are not of the same opinion with him. For the
examining of which, before we do believe it, we may part their position into
these two quaeres. First, whether Mark the Evangelist had founded the Church
at Alexandria before Philo wrote that book. And secondly whether those men
about Alexandria reported of by Philo, were Christians at all yea or no.

First then look upon Philo and upon his age, and you shall find that the
last year when he was in Ambassy at Rome, he was ancient, and older then any
of the other Commissioners that were joined with him, for so he says of
himself: Caesar speaking affably to them when they first came before him, the
standers by thought their matter would go well with them, In legate. ad Cai^^n.
But I (says he) that seemed to outstrip the others in years and judgment,
etc. and then from him look at the time when Mark is brought by the
Ecclesiastical Historians first into Egypt and Alexandria. In Chronico.
Eusebius, (for we will content our selves with him only) has placed this at
the third of Claudius, in these words, Marcus Evangelista interpres Petri,
Aegypto and Alexandriae Christum annunciat. And then is Philo four years older
then before. To both which add what time would be taken up after Marks
preaching before his converts could be disposed into so settled a form of
buildings, constitutions and exercises, and then let indifferency censure,
whether Philo that was so old so long before, should write his two books of the
Esseni, and the Therapeutae after all this. But because we will not build upon
this alone, let us for the resolution of our second Quaere, character out these
men that are so highly esteemed for the patterns of all Monasticks, and that
in Philoes own words and description.

Part III. The Jewish History.
Sect. I. The Therapeutae.
THey are called Therapeutae and Therapeutrides (says Philo) either because
they profess a Physic better then that professed in Cities, for that heals
bodies only, but this diseased souls. -- Or because they have learned from
nature, and the holy Laws to serve him that is -- Those that betake themselves
to this course, do it not out of fashion, (...).
or upon any ones exhortation, but ravished with a heavenly love, (even as the
Bac^bantes and Corybantes have their raptures) until they behold what they
desire. (...).
Then through the desire of an immortal and blessed life, reputing themselves
to die to this mortal life, they leave their estates to sons or daughters or
to other kindred, voluntarily making them their heirs, and to their friends
and familiars if they have no kindred. -- When they are thus parted from their
goods, being taken now by no bait, they fly irrevocably, leaving breathren,
children, wives, parents, numerous kindreds, societies and countries, where
they were borne and bred -- they flit, not into other Cities -- but they make
their abode without the walls in gardens or solitary Villages, affecting the
wilderness not for any hatred of men, but because of being mixed with men of
different conditions, which thing they know is unprofitable and hurtful. This
kind of people are in many parts of the world, -- but it abounds in Egypt
through every one of those places that are called Nomi, especially about
Alexandria. Now out of all places the chief or best of the Therapeutae are
sent into a Colony (as it were into their Country) into a most convenient
region, besides the lake Maria, upon a low gentle rising bank, very fit, both
for safety and the wholesome air. -- The houses of the company are very
mean, affording shelter in two most necessary respects, against the heat of
the Sun, and the coldness of the air. Nor are they near together like
houses in a City, for such vicinity is trouble and displeasing to such as love
and affect solitude. Nor yet far asunder, because of that communion which
they embrace, and that they may help one another if there be any incursion of
thieves. Every one of them has a holy house which is called a (...).
Chapel and Monastery, in which they (...).
being solitary do perform the mysteries of a religious life: bringing in
thither neither drink nor meat, nor any other necessaries for the use of the
body, but the Law and the Oracles given by the Prophets, and hymns and other
things whereby knowledge and religion are increased and perfected. Therefore
thy have God perpetually in their mind, insomuch that in their dreams, they
see nothing but the beauty of the Divine powers, and there are some of them who
by dreaming do vent excellent matters of Philosophy. They use to pray twice
every day, morning and evening, at Sun rising and Sun setting, and all the
time between they meditate and study the Scripture allegorizing them, because
they believe that mystical things are hid under the plain letter: they have
also many commentaries of their predecessors of this sect to this purpose. They
also made Psalms, and Hymns to the praise of God. Thus spend they the six
days of the week every one in his Cell, not so much a^ looking out of it. But
on the seventh day they meet together and sit down according to their age
demurely, with their hands within their coats, the right hand betwixt their
breast and their skin, and the left on their side. Then steps forth one of the
gravest and skilfullest in their profession and preaches to them, and the rest
hearken with all silence, only nodding their heads, or moving their eyes: (...)
their place of worship is parted into two rooms, one for the men and the
other for the women: All the week long they never taste meat nor drink any
day before Sun setting, because they think the ^^udy of wisdom to be fit
for the light, and the taking ease of their bodies for the dark: some hardly
eat above once in 3. days, some in 6. on the 7th day after they have taken
care of the soul, they refresh the body. Their diet is only bread and salt,
and some add a little hyssop. Their drink spring water. Their cloths mean and
only fit to keep out heat and cold* At the end of every seven weeks they
feast together, honoring much the number seven: Old women are present at their
feasts, but they are such as are virgins upon devotion. When they first meet
together, they first stand and pray that the feast may be blessed to them,
then sit they down the men on one side and the women on the other, some of
their young Scholars wait on them: their diet is but as at other times, bread
and salt for their meat, hyssop for sauce, and water for drink: there is
general silence all the meal, save that one or other asks or resolves
questions, the rest holding their peace; and they show by their several
gestures that they understand, or approve or doubt. Their interpretations of
Scripture are all allegories; when the president has satisfied the things
proposed, they give a general applause, and then he sings a Psalm either
of his own making or of some of the ancients: And thus do the rest in their
course, when all have done, the young men take away the table: and then they
rise and fall to a dance, the men apart and the women apart for a while, but
at last they join and dance all together: and this is in representation of the
dance upon the shore of the red Sea. Thus spend they the night, when Sun
rises they all turn their faces that way, and pray for a happy day, and for
truth and understanding, and so they depart every one to their Cells.

To this purpose does Philo describe these Therapeutae of his times: which
howsoever they are taken for Christians by diverse as was said before, yet is it
so plain by diverse passages in Philoes Charactering of them that they were no
Christians, but Jewish sectaries, that it is even needless to determinate it:
let the reader but consider that it is a Jew that commends their devotion, that
he himself imitates their manner of expounding the Scriptures by allegories,
that he says they had many commentaries of their predecessors to that tenor,
that they were superstitious about the number seven, as he himself is not a
little, and if there were no other arguments to prove that they were only a
sect of the Jews, these were enough.

Sact. II. The affairs of the Jews in Alexandria, and Babylonia.
The death of Caius was an allay to the troubles of the Jews both in Judea and
Alexandria, and the proclamation of Claudius which we shall hear of the next
year, was their utter cessation for the present, but so it was not in
Babylonia. The terror and trouble that had seized Judea, about the statue of
Caesar, was removed, and extinct with the removal, and extinction of Caesar
himself, so were the pressures of them in Alexandria mitigated much from what
they were before, though their commotions and troubling continued still in an
equal measure. For whereas before the displeasure of the Emperor lay so heavy
upon them that they neither could nor durst stand out in their own defense,
when that burden is now removed they gather heart and metal, and now though
the Greeks and they be continually at daggers drawn, yet now it is upon equal
terms, and they dare strike as well as the other. But in Babylonia and
thereabouts, their miseries is but now a brewing, and an equal strait is
preparing for them, as had been to either of the other, though it began with
some smiling of a seeming happiness, and the sunshine of present prosperity.
The bloodhound of vengeance was to hunt this nation, and not to be taken off
till it was destroyed: and therefore when it gives off the quest in one place,
it takes it in another, and leaves not their footing till it had left them no
footing at all.

Those Jews whose Tragedy we have seen acted already found their own misery
though they sought it not, and how much more shall they that we are now to
bring upon the scene that sought and wooed it with their utmost pains.

Sect. I. The rebellion of some Jews.
There were in Nea^daa (the residence and Universitie of the Jews in Babylona)
two brethren named Asinaeus and Anilaeus, or in their proper language Chasinai,
and Chanilai. These two their mother (their father being dead) had put to a
trade and to a master, for the making of sails or other tackle for ships. The
sturdy youths having one day given their master some offense, and he them some
blows, did take the matter in such high scorn and disdain, that they resolve
not only to overrun their master, but indeed to run over all mastership
whatsoever. They therefore getting away all the Arms their masters house would
afford, betake themselves to a strong place in an Island of Euphrates, and there
publish and proclaim their rebellious resolution. Young men flock in to them
apace, men of the same desperate minds and fortunes, and after building some
Castles in the air of future expectations, they begin to build a Fort in the
I Will for their present security and rendevouz. They then command the neighbor
towns to pay them tribute, which the numerousnesse and resolution of the
Commanders made them that they durst not disobey. The governor of Babylonia
thinking to quell this growing evil before it should be too strong, comes
secretly upon them on the Sabbath day, thinking to involve them in their own
superstition into the trap that he had prepared for them: But the furious
youths were not so over-religious as to be killed in devotion, nor did they
prize the Sabbath above their own lives, but for all it was that day they are
resolved to fight, and they fight resolvedly, and kill and rout and foil the
forces that made no other account but of victory.

Artabanus King of Parthia hearing of the power of this newborn army, and the
resolution of those upstart Captains, and considering how advantageous it
might be for his own affairs, to have them sure and firm unto himself, he
sends for the two brethren with assurance of their safety: whereupon they
come to him, and are royally and bravely entertained by him: and when Abdagasis
the General of his army would have slain Asinaeus treacherously, the King
forbad him, sent Asinaeus home with rich gifts and the government of Babylonia
committed to him: There he grew greater and greater in power and honor: and
stood in high repute both with the Babylonians and the Parthians, and had all
Mesopotamia at his command. And thus continued these brethren in pomp and
height for 15. years together: till a miscarriage of Anilaeus began to cloud
and eclipse their prosperity: For Anilaeus having slain a Parthian Peer that
he might enjoy his Lady, and she when she was now his wife, using her ancient
idolatry as in her first husbands days, this became a double offense to his
chiefest friends, namely, for that he had married an heathen, and for that
she continued still in her Idolatry: They seriously admonish Anilaeus of the
matter, but he slew one of the chiefest of them for his home-reproofe and
admonition. Therefore the rest address themselves to Asinaeus, and demand the
vindication of their native Laws and Religion: he rebukes his brother
Anilaeus, and is therefore poisoned by the Parthian Lady, because that her
husband might be from under rebuke, and might be commander of all. He being
now so indeed, first invadeth the country of Mithridates, son in Law to
Artabanus, and forrageth that, and by a surpizall gets Mithridates prisoner,
yet sends him home again to his own possessions, having hardly delivered him
from his soldiers fury that they did not kill him: Mithridates sensible of the
disgrace of his usage (for they had set him naked upon an Ass,) and instigated
by the haughty and revengefull spirit of his wife, raises what force he can
get, and gives Anilaeus battle and routeth him. But Anilaeus himself
escaping, and recruting an army of dissolute and resolute fellows again, he
begins to spoil some towns of the Babylonians, but the Babylonians finding
a fit opportunity, fall upon Anilaeus and his troop, and slew many of them,
and Anilaeus himself among the rest: This bridle and curb of the Jews, which
had lain so long and so heavy upon the Babylonians being now taken off, they
begin now to rise up and to curb and oppress the Jews: who for their safety
flee to Seleucia: and there they reside quietly for the space of five years,
but in the sixth year, a hot plague driving the rest of them that had stayed
behind at Babylon, into Seleucia also, providence did as it were bring them all
thither together to execution: for a quarrel being first between the Greeks
and Syrians that dwelt in that City, and the Syrians getting the better
through the help of the Jews, at last Greeks and Syrians join both together
against the Jews, and destroy fifty thousand of them: And this was a second
notable vengeance that has overtaken that nation since the murder of the Lord
of life.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, OF The Year of Christ 43.
And of the Emperor Claudius 2. Being the Year of the World 3970. And of the
City of Rome, 795. Consuls C. Largus. Claudius II.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

ACTS. Chap. XI.
Verse. 28. Great dearth throughout all the World; which came to pass in the
days of Claudius Caesar.
THat this famine was in the second of Claudius, we have showed before, not
only out of Dion the Roman Historian, but even by necessary collection from
other things. Now whether it proceeded from want of Rain, or from what other
cause, it is not determinable: it appears by Sutton, that it came to this
height through a continued sterility of the ground, which it seems had been
some years together. This year was Helena the Queen of the Adiabeni, present
at Jerusalem, and her presence there was a happiness to the City, for from
Cyprus and Alexandria, she sent for Provisions, and distributed them among the
people, when diverse had perished of famine before.

Verse. 30. Sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
Sect. Paul's rapture into the third Heaven.
Although it be not mentioned in this Chapter that Paul went up to Jerusalem,
but was sent only with provisions to the poor brethren in Judea: yet have we
also proved before, that at this journey he had his trance in the Temple, Acts
22.17. and in that trance he was rapt up into the third Heaven. The story of
which he himself relates, 2. Cor. 12.2. I knew a man in Christ above
fourteen years ago, whether in the body I cannot tell, etc. And there he
relates also the story of the messenger of Satan, buffeting him, and himself
praying, and God giving him a gracious answer: all which we shall explain, by
Gods permission, in another place.

In this trance God bids him get out of Jerusalem, and gives him commission to
go preach among the Gentile^, Acts 22.18, 21. And so he returns from
Jerusalem to Antioch, where we shall have him the next year.

Sect. II. Peter not this year at Rome.
This year the Romanists have brought Peter to Rome, and made this the first
year or beginning of his Episcopacy there. For thus Baronius, That Peter came
to Rome this second year of Claudius the Emperor, it is the common Opinion of
all men. And to this purpose he alleges Eusebius his Chronicle, and Jerome de
scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, and concludes that others have written the same
things concerning the time, that there can be no doubt left of it.

It may be tolerated to insist a little the more largely upon the examination
of this opinion, not for that it is of any such great import in its own
nature, as for that it is made of so great by them for their own advantage.
For were it granted that Peter was Bishop of Rome, and that he went thither in
this year, yet what great matter were there in this, in common sense and
reason? But because unreasonable men have from hence, or upon this foundation
built the supremacy of the Pope, the great delusion of the world, let the same
common sense and reason equally and impartially judge of the probability or
improbability of this thing, in these two parts into which this tenet does fall
of it self.

1. Whether it be probable that Peter was Bishop of Rome at all.

2. Whether it be possible that he could come thither this year according as
they themselves have laid his progress, and that he should set up an
Episcopacy there.

Weigh the first by these;

First, Peter was Minister of the Circumcision, why then should he go settle
himself to live and dye among the uncircumcised? He might indeed have
preached to the uncircumcised as he travailed up and down, as Paul did to the
circumcised, being the Minister of the uncircumcision, but to take up his abode
and residence, and thereto settle, to live and die among them; was a thing
neither probable in the eyes of other men, nor justifiable in him himself.

Secondly, if Peter were at Rome in the sense and extent that the Romanists
will have it, then has the Scripture omitted one of the greatest points of
salvation that belongs to Christianity: For how many maine points of faith
has Popery drawn out of this one conclusion, that Peter was Bishop of Rome;
as the Primacy of the Pope, the infallibility of his Chair, his absolute power
of binding and loosing, no salvation out of the Church of Rome, and diverse
other things, which all hang upon the Pin forenamed: And it is utterly
incredible; 1. That the holy Ghost that wrote the Scriptures for man's
salvation, should not express or mention a thing that contains so many
points of salvation. 2. That Luke that undertook to write the Acts of the
Apostles, should omit this one act of Peter, which is made of more consequence
then all the actions of all the Apostles beside. It is above all belief, that
he that would tell of Philips being at Az^tus, and going to Caesarea, chap.
8.40. Saul's going to Tarsus, chapter 9.30. And Barnabas his going thither to him,
and diverse other things of small import, in comparison, should omit the greatest
and most matteriall, and of the infinitest import that ever mortal man's
journey was (for to that height is the journey of Peter to Rome now come) if
there had ever been such a thing at all.

Thirdly, it is as incredible, that Paul sending salutation^ to so many in
Rome, and again from so many there, should omit to have named Peter at one
time or other if he had been there. What was become of Peter in these
reciprocal kindnesses and salutations of the Saints one to another; was he a
sleep, or was he sullen, or what shall we make of him, or was he not indeed
at Rome at all?

But not to insist upon this question whether Peter were at Rome at all, which
has been proved negatively by many Authors, and by many undeniable Arguments;
let us look a little upon this foundation of his being there, which has been
laid, namely, his coming thither this year, which is the second thing to be
taken into consideration.

And about this point, there have been diverse simple Ignoramusses in former
time, who so they held this first Article of the Roman Creed, That Peter was
Bishop of Rome five and twenty years, and dyed in the last year of Nero, and so
believed as the Church believed, they never cared to bring the head and heels
together, or to observe how the times agreed, but have easily swallowed this
camel of senseless computation, that Peter went from the Council of
Jerusalem, Acts 15. to Rome, and there sat Bishop five and twenty years,
which expired in the last of Nero; whereas, betwixt the Council at Jerusalem,
and the last of Nero there were but twenty years in all, if there were so
many: But nimbler wits, that cannot be caught in so plain and apparent a trap
as this, have found out a quainter and more curious date from which to begin
the Chair of Peter at Rome then this, and that is from the Story in the
twelfth of the Acts of the Apostles. Where Peter being apprehended by Herod
after his murder of James the great, and being delivered by an Angel, and
having acquainted the Disciples with his delivery, they being together in John
Marks house, he is said, to depart to another place: which they say, (and you
must believe it, or they will take it very ill) was to Rome, and this was (say
they) the second year of Claudius. A long journey believe it, to run to Rome,
to avoid danger at Jerusalem: and Rome but a mad place to set up an Episcopacy
in at this time, as has been plain in the preceding, and will be also in the
subsequent story of it. But that we may see, if not the impossibility, yet the
utter improbability of that his journey in this second of Claudius, if that
were the journey in the twelfth of the Acts, it will not be impertinent to
insert a story out of Josephus concerning Agrippaes return from Rome to
Jerusalem, where he slew James, and imprisoned Peter.

PART II. The Jewish Story.
Sect. Herod Agrippa his coming to Jerusalem.
Claudius the Emperor having attained the Empire as we have seen, the more
easily and readily by the mediation and agitating of Agrippa, he would requite
him like an Emperor for that his service: and therefore he confirmed to him
by Charter, that Kingdom in which he had been inthroned by Caius, adding also
Judea and Samaria, which had belonged to his Grandfather Herod (from hence it
may seem that he took that name) and Abilene, and the region near it, and
appertaining to it in Lebanon, which had belonged to Lysanias. He caused also
the Articles of a League betwixt himself and the King, to be cut in brass,
and to be set up in the midst of the Forum.

There was now some sedition and civil hostility in Alexandria; for the Jews
having been suppressed and oppressed by the Greeks, all the time of Caius, began
after his death to stand in their own defense, and to rise up against those
that had opposed them. Claudius by Letter commands the Governor of Egypt to
quell the tumult* and at the request of Agrippa, and of Herod King of Chalcis,
he sends forth an Edict into Syria and Alexandria in behalf and favor of
the Jews. And another Decree he sent also through the rest of the Roman
Empire, to the same tenor, and for the benefit of the same people, beginning
with these his Titles, Tiberius Claudius Caesar, Augustus, Germanicus, Pont.
Maximus. Trib. Pleb. or Tribunitia Potestatis Consul designatus II. or second
time Consul, and so it goes on.

By these decrees (says Josephus) being thus sent to Alexandria, and through
the whole Empire; Claudius declared what opinion he had of the Jews: And
presently he sent away Agrippa to manage his Kingdom, with enlarged Honors,
and wrote to the Governors of the Provinces, and to the Magistrates to favor
him. And he, as it befitted a man that had had happy success, returned with
speed. And coming to Jerusalem, he performed or offered Thankes-Offerings,
omitting nothing that was enjoined by the Law: Wherefore he caused many
Nazarites to be shaven; and the golden Chain which was given him by Caius,
weighing equally with the iron chain that had bound his royal hands, he hung
up (...) within the enclosures.
in the consecrate Court over the Treasury, for a memorial of his adversity,
and for a witness of his better fortune. Thus Agrippa having performed rightly
this his service to God, he removed Theophilus the son of Ananus from the
High Priesthood, and conferred the honor upon Simon the son of Boethus, whose
name was also Cantheras, thus Josephus Antiq. l. 19. c. 4.

Sect. Peter not imprisoned in the second year of Claudius.
To which let us join some of St. Lukes text in the twelfth of the Acts, and
then let us make use of both together. Now about that time (says he) Herod
the King stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church; and he
killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased
the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter; then were the days of unleavened
bread.

Now let the Reader observe in either story one special circumstance of time,
as in Josephus, That Claudius was now second time Consul: and in St. Luke, that
James was slain before Easter; and then let him cast whether it were possible,
at the least probable, that so many things should be done and intercede
between the beginning of January, when Claudius entered his Consulship, and
Easter, as in these Stories must intercede, if Peter were imprisoned at the
Easter of this year; yea though it fell the latest or furthest in the year
that ever Easter yet fell. For, for Claudius to make his decree, and disperse
it: for Agrippa to provide for his journey, and part from his friends in Rome:
for him to travail from Rome to Jerusalem, to perform his Sacrifices and
Ceremonies there, to seek to lay hold upon certain of the Church, to light
upon James, and to kill him, and then to apprehend and Imprison Peter, and all
this betwixt Claudius his entry of his Consulship in January, and Easter, is a
thing so incredible (especially to him that considers how slowly great bodies
move, as Kings and Emperors in their actions) as that it seems next
impossible. For it cannot be imagined that this decree for the Jews was the
first thing that Claudius did after he was made Consul, or that he fell upon
that work in the very beginning of January; for matters of the City and of
Italy one would think should take up the first thoughts of the Consuls, when
they entered into that Office, and not of Jerusalem and Alexandria, so many
hundred of miles distant: and matters of the Romans themselves, and not of the
Jews a despised Nation: But grant that on the very first day he set pen to
paper for that decree, on the second dispersed it, and on the third dismissed
Agrippa, yet must so great a Prince have some preparation for so great a
journey, he must have some time to part with so great acquaintance; it was
strange if he waited not some time for a convenient wind, and he must take up
some reasonable time after he is shipped, before he land in Judea. After his
landing some time was required for such a King in his own Kingdom to prepare
for his journey by Land to Jerusalem, some for his settling there; some for his
Sacrifices, and performance of the Rites of the Law mentioned; and all these
before the apprehension of James, and that no man knows how long before
Easter. Let indifferency judge, whether all these things were possible to be
done in that space of time; and then let it censure of the matter in hand.

To the eviction of this opinion, that Peter went to Rome, and there began his
Episcopacy the second year of Claudius, Romanists themselves may be produced
that do gainsay it; as Salmeron on the twelfth of the Acts, who holds that he
went thither in Claudius his fourth, and he produces Comestor, Nuaclerus, and
Petrus de natalibus of the same opinion with him.

So likewise Simeon the Metaphrast, though he bring Peter from Jerusalem this
year for fear of Herod, and lead him through many places ordaining Churches
and making Bishops, yet in conclusion he mentions not one word of Rome, but
brings him to Jerusalem again at Passover next. Hereupon Surius, or at least
his Marginist, and Baronius are ready to give him the lie; and though they both
allege him, and applaud him while he serves their own humor, yet here they
fly in his face, and tell him he is beside the cushion, because he is beside
their opinion, and says not what they would have him say.

Upon consideration of what has been said before, we have put over the death
of James to the year next following, as not seeing it possible to have fallen
out this year before Easter, all circumstances being well considered: and
accordingly have we referred thither, as the order requires, the imprisonment
of Peter, and his fleeing for his life, or retiring for some other cause, which
the Romanists will have to have bin to Rome; and there will we take it into
some examination again.

Part III. The Roman History.
THE Moors rebelling, are beaten by Suetonius Paulinus, and after him by C^.
Sidius Geta, who following them far into the Sands, fell into an extreme
want of water for his Army: But by the wicked advice and furtherance of a
renegado Moore, he obtains an extraordinary great rain by Magic, to the
sufficient refreshing of his Army, and to the terror and subduing of the enemy.
And now did Claudius divide Mauritania into Tingitana and Caesariensis.

Claudius is exceedingly delighted with and given to the cruelty of the
Sword-playes, in which he swept away a world of Servants and Freemen that had
been accusers of their Masters in the time of Caius. And which was most
ridiculous, he caused the statue of Augustus to be removed out of the place,
because it should not behold such bloody work; being inhumanely himself
delighted in that butchery, which he thought too barbarous for a br^zen statue
to look upon.

These bloody spectacles brought him to an habit of cruelty; which was
augmented and hardened in him by the damnable counsels of his Empress
Messalina, a woman wicked above parallel or expression, and by the spurrings on
of other sycophants C. Appius Silanus is put to death because he refused to
incestuate Messalina when she desired him, for he had married her mother; but
because Claudius must not hear of this beastly cause of her displeasure,
Narcissus a freeman of the Emperor accused him for this, that in a dream he
had seen Appius slay the Emperor.

Upon his death the people began to expect no more goodness from Claudius at
all, but gave him up for a Tyrant like the two that had gone before him:
whereupon, Annius Vin^ianus, and Futius Camillus Scribonianus and others
conspired against him; but being deserted of their soldiers in the enterprise,
they are glad to end their lives by their own hands, that they might escape
the executioners.

Messalinae and Narcissus and others of their faction using the stupid folly of
the Emperor to the compassing of their own wills involve in false accusations
and in miserable, deaths, an infinite multitude of men and women, honorable
and inferior, of all qualities and conditions, according as the spleen of any
of them moved or was provoked. Among them that thus perished Arria the wife of
Caecinna is upon record for her Roman valor: for when her husband trembled and
was afraid to slay himself, she took the sword out of his hand, and fell upon
it, and gave it him again, reeking with her blood, with these words, Behold
boy how I feel no pain: And now, says my Author, were matters come to such a
pass, that nothing was reputed a greater virtue then to die valiantly and like
a Roman. To such a cruelty had custom and evil counsel brought him, that of
himself was of a reasonable gentle nature, but wanted constancy and discretion
to manage it.

THE CHRISTIAN HISTORY, THE JEWISH, and the ROMAN, OF The Year of Christ 44.
And of the Emperor Claudius 3. Being the Year of the World 3971. And of the
City of Rome, 796. Consuls Claudius Caesar III. L. Vitellius.


London, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook, 1645.

ACTS. Chap. XII.
Verse. 2. And he killed James.
Sect. I. The martyrdom of James the great.
WE are now come to the time of Great James his death. For Agrippa coming the
last year into Judea, as we saw from Josephus, and it not being probable that
he should do this exploit before Easter, as the circumstances told us; we
may justly take this year for its proper time and place. Now about that time
(says St. Luke) Herod the King (the Syriack adds who is called Agrippa)
stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Jews; and he killed James
the brother of John with the sword. The first words, About that time, relate to
what went before in the preceding Chapter, verse. 28. and means in the days
of Claudius Caesar. Now what should be the incentive of the spleen of Agrippa
against the Church, it is not specified: it may well be supposed it proceeded
from that his Ceremoniousnesse and strict observance of Mosaic Rites, which is
mentioned by Josephus: Concerning the Martyrdom of James under this his
spleen, we will content our selves with the words of the Text, He killed
James the brother of John with the sword; accounting all other additionall
circumstances which may be found in officious Authors to be nothing else but
gilded legends, and fond inventions: As that mentioned by Eusebius out of
Clemens his Hypotypose^n, concerning his accuser, that seeing his constancy to
the death, confessed the faith, and was martyred with him. That by Epiphanius
that he lived and dyed a virgin: and that by Tom. 2. Iulii 25.
Surius (who is the bell-weather for old winter tales, that tells, That his
body after his martyrdom was shipped by Ctesiphon and his fellow-Bishops for
Spain; that the Ship in six days was directed thither without Pilot or
Compass, but only by the influence of the Corpse that it carried. That at the
landing the body was taken up into the air, and carried near the place of its
burial, twelve miles off. That Ctesiphon and his fellows were led to it by an
Angel: And more such trash, that it is but labor lost, either to read or
mention.

Sect. II. The Apostles Creed.
The Creed was made upon this occasion (says De Insti^^. Cleric. l. 2. cap.
56. extat in Au^tari^ ad Bibli^th. Patrum. ecl. 620.
Rabanus Maurus) as our Ancestors have delivered unto Us. The Disciples after
the Ascension of our Savior being inflamed with the holy Ghost, etc. And being
changed by the Lord to go to all Nations for the preaching of the Gospel, when
they are to part one from another, they first make a common platform among
themselves for their future preaching. Lest being severed in place, diverse and
different things should be preached to those that were invited to the faith of
Christ. Being therefore together in one place, and filled with the holy Ghost,
they compose a short platform for their preaching, conferring together what
they thought. And this they appoint to be given to them that believe, and to
be called Symbolum, and. Thus he, and very many others with him, conceiving
that the Apostles supplied not only the matter of the Doctrine contained in
the Creed, but the very form and words also.

For Peter said, say they, I believe in God the Father Almighty.

John, The maker of Heaven and Earth.

James, And I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

Andrew, Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

Philip, Suffered under Pontius-Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried.

Thomas, He descended into hell: the third day he rose again from the dead.

Bartholomew, He ascended into heaven: sits at the right hand of God the
father Almighty.

Matthew, From thence shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead.

James the son of Alpheus, I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic
Church.

Simon Zelotes, The communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins.

Judas the brother of James, The resurrection of the flesh.

Matthias, The life everl^sting. Amen.

Thus the hundred and fifteenth Sermon de Tempore, that goes under the name of
Tom. 10. col. 849.
Austen: but apparent that it is no^ his, by this, that here is ^eckoned the
descent into hell, which in his book Tom. 3. p. 143.
de F^de and Symbolo is quite omitted.

Now were this tradition as true as it is punctual, it would readily plead for
its own place in Chronology, namely, about this time at which we now are,
before James his death, for he gave in his symbolum (according to this
tradition) among the rest. But that this opinion of the Apostles casting in
every one his parcel, is of no validity, but a presumptuous and false surmise,
may be evinced by these Arguments.

First, Mr. Perk* on the Creed.
Because the titl^ of The Catholic Church, is neither used in any of the
Apostles writings, nor is it likely that it came into use till after the
Apostles days, when the Church was dispersed into all parts of the earth.

Secondly, because the Article He descended into hell, is not owned or
acknowledged at all by the Nicene Creed, nor by any of the ancientest Fathers
next the Apostles times, in their reckoning up of the Articles of the Creed, as
see instances in abundance in Page 410.
Polanus his Syntagma, lib. 6. cap. 21.

Thirdly, if the matter and words of the Creed had been from the Apostles
themselves, why is it not then Canonical Scripture as well as any of the
sacred Writ?

Fourthly, in the giving in of their several symbols or parcell^, after the
manner opinionated before, there is so great disproportion and inequality, some
giving so much, and some so little, that it makes the contribution it self to
be very suspicious.

Fifthly, the Summary Collection of the points of Christian religion taught by
the Apostles, and delivered by them to others to teach by, consists of two
heads, faith and love, 2 Timothy 1.13. But the Creed consisted of faith only, I
rather think therefore, says Mr. Perkins, that it is called the Apostles
Creed, because it does summarily contain the chief and principal points of
Religion, handled and propounded in the doctrine of the Apostles; and because
the points of the Creed are conformable and agreeable to their Doctrine and
writings.

Sect. III. Traditions.
With their framing of the Creed before their parting, has Baronius joined
al^o their delivery of Traditions. Sicut symbolo, says he, ita etiam aliis
absque Scriptura traditionibus Ecclesiae impertitis, diviserunt sibi ad quas
singuli proficiscerentur orbis terrae provincias. Having thus imparted the
Creed, and also traditions without Scripture to the Church, they parted among
themselves what Country every one of them should go unto.

These Traditions the Sess. 4. de^ret. 1. exta^ tom. 4 Concili^rum part 2.
Council of Trent divides into those which were received by the Apostles from
the mouth of Christ; or delivered from hand to hand, from the Apostles to our
times; the holy Ghost dictating them unto them. And these those Fathers hold of
equal authority with the Scriptures, and the Council curses them that shall
willingly and knowingly contemn them. And well do they deserve it, if they did
but certainly and assuredly kn^w that they came from such hands. Bellarmine
Lib. 4 de verbo non script. c. 2. extat tom. 1. page 166.
has stretched the name and piece o^ traditions to one tainterhook higher. For
Traditions, says he, are Divine, Apostolical and Ecclesiastical. Divine, are
those which were received from Christ himself teaching his Apostles, and yet
are not to be found in the Scriptures; such are those which concern the
matter and form of the Sacraments. Apostolical are those which were
instituted by the Apostles, not without the assistance of the holy Ghost, and
yet are not to be found in their Epistles. Ecclesiastical traditions are
properly called certain old customs, began either by Prelates, or by people,
which by little and little by the tacit consent of the people obtained the
power of a Law. Under these heads, especially under the two first, has he
placed these particulars Ibid. cap. 9.
The perpetual Virginity of Mary, the number of the Canonical books,
Baptizing of Infants, blessing the water before, bidding them renounce Satan
and his works, signing them with the sign of the cross, anointing them with
oil, not re-baptizing after Heretics, Lent, Ember week, inferior Orders in
the Church, worshipping of Images, etc. To which Vid. Whitaker de S. Scrip^*
con^rov. 1. q. 6. c. 5.
others add, The oblation of the Sacrament of the Altar, Invocation of Saints,
Prayer for the dead, the Primacy, Confirmation, Orders, Matrimony, Penance,
extreme Unction, Merits, necessity of satisfaction, auricular confession, etc.
Into which controversy not to enter, concerning the thing it self, which so
many grave and learned pens have handled sufficiently, reckoned by Bellarmine,
though with small good will, in his entry upon this question, let but reason
and indifferency censure, concerning that which is more proper to this
discourse, namely, the time of delivering these Traditions, whether this or any
other: And here in the first place let the Reader but consider that at this
time, there was no more of the New Testament written, then the Gospels of
Matthew and Mark, if so be that those also were written at this time. And
then let him judge how senseless a thing it is to speak of delivering
unwritten Traditions to the Church, when almost all the New Testament was yet
to be written. Or take it at the Council at Jerusalem, which was diverse
years hence, when all the Apostles were all together, and giving rules to the
Church, or take it at Paul's apprehension at Jerusalem, when imagine all the
Apostles to be together again, and even even at either of those times, will
the same absurdity follow still for no more of the New Testament was written,
or very little more then now. And then how ridiculous does it appear, That the
Apostles should offer to give rules to the Church by unwritten tradition, when
they had all their Epistles for rules of the Church yet to write: If they would
leave the Church to be regulated by unwritten traditions, why should they
write after? And if they would have her regulated by their writings, why should
they give her unwritten traditions before? A quick wit will nimbly answer, that
they left her such traditions as were not to be expressed in their writings,
but let an honest conscience and an unprejudicate judgment censure whether
this will abide the test, yea or no. For is it within any compass of
likelihood that these Apostles did know what things Paul would not write of in
his Epistles, that they should deliver such things beforehand for tradition,
when as yet they hardly knew whether he was to be an Apostle of the Gentiles
or no, when they did not know whether he would write any Epistles or no, much
less did they know what Epistles he would write? Appello conscientiam, and so
much for traditions.

Verse. 3. He proceeded to take Peter also, etc.
Sect. Peter's imprisonment and delivery.
James his death was seconded by Peter's imprisonment, but his time for
martyrdom was not yet come as was the others. Agrippa having laid hold upon
him, deferred his execution till after the Passover, Sanctius in Act. 12.
either because he would not defile that holy feast with effusion of humane
blood, or because he would afflict Peter the more, and give the Jews the
greater content by his long restraint and strait imprisonment, or rather
because he feared a tumult if he should have slain him in that concourse of
people as was there at Passover time. Thus lay he guarded, with four
quaternions, or (as the Syriack has it) with sixteen Soldiers, which as it
seems watched him by course, for the four watches of the night, two close by
him and two at the gate. Besides these two and two successive jaylors, he was
bound with two chains, and if Sanct. ubi supra ex Chrysostom.
some say true, his two keepers were tied for the more surenesse in the same
chains with him. Happy men were they sure, that had so great interest in these
happy chains, which if you dare believe Augusti. ^. cap. 18.19.20.
Surius, had the virtue to work miracles, to diffuse grace, to procure
holiness, to heal diseases, to affright the Devil and to defend Christians.
They were preserved, says he, by some of Herod's servants that believed, and
in process of time laid up for a sacred relic at Constantinople, and there
either he or they lie.

That very night that preceded Peter's intended execution, he being fast
asleep between his keepers, is waked, loosed and delivered by an Angel. Ann^.
a^ ann.
Baronius makes a great matter of it that the whole Church prayed for Peter
whilst he was in prison, and since the like is not related to have been done
by them for any other, he will needs from hence infer his primacy, the whole
flock praying for her universal Pastor, whereas the reasons of this expression
are apparent to be only these two. First, to show that the Church was praying
for him whilst he was sleeping, for alter he had taken a part of his first
sleep, this night he comes to the house of John Mark, and they are there
still out of their beds and at prayer. Secondly, because the fruit of their
prayers were showed in his delivery. There is no doubt but constant prayers
were made for James by the whole Church whilst he was in prison as well as for
Peter, but so much is not expressed, because the story could not answer that
relation with relation of his delivery: And Atheism and profaneness would
have been ready to have scoffed, that the whole Church should have prayed in
vain.

The Angel, and Peter (thus loosed) pass two watches, and then come to the
iron gate; there are some that hold these watches to be two prisons, and the
word (...) to be taken as it were passively for places where men are kept, and
that Peter was in a G^ole within these two, as in the worst, basest and surest
place, and that all were closed with a gate of Iron. But Vid. Baron.
others hold these watches to be guards of men, and that the prison was
without the City, between or within the two outmost walls, but in these things
it is not material to insist for determination. The latter is far the more
probable, both in regard of the signification of the Greek word, and that
Josephus mentions three walls about Jerusalem, and diverse towers in every
wall, as also in regard of the greater hightning of the miracle, in that Peter
escapes, not only his own sixteen men's watch, at the prison door, but also
two watches more at the two walls gates, and the second which was the Iron gate
gave them free passage of its own r^cord.

Peter being cleared of the danger, and left of the Angel, betaketh himself to
the house of Mary the mother of John Mark, where when Rhoda upon his knocking
and speech averred constantly it was Peter, the whole company there assembled
conclude that it was his Angel. Here is some ambiguitie about their thus
concluding. Chrysostom. i^ loc. hom. 27.
Some understand it of his tutelar Angel, and from hence would strongly plead
the opinion that every man has his proper and allotted Angel to attend him.

But first, we sometimes read of one Angel attending many men.

Secondly, sometimes of many Angels attending one man.

But thirdly, if the matter may be agitated by reason, if a singular Angel
be destined to the attendance of every singular man, what does that Angel do
till his man be borne, especially what did all the Angels but Adams and Eves
and a few more for many hundreds of years, till the world was full? Vid.
Salmeron in locu^.
Others therefore understand it of a messenger, which the Disciples supposed
Peter had sent to them upon some errand. But this opinion is easily confuted by
Rhoda's owning of Peter's voice. Atetius in loc.
There is yet a third opinion as much unwarrantable as either of these; That
the Disciples concluded that an Angel by this knocking and voice came to give
them notice of Peter's death to be near at hand, and that therefore they call
him his Angel, and that it was sometimes so used that one Saint should know of
another death by such revelations. The Jews indeed in their writings make
frequent mention of Samael the Angel of death, but they call him so for
inflicting it, and not for foretelling it: And we have some examples indeed in
the Ecclesiastical history of one man knowing of another death by such
revelations and apparitions as these: but because those stories are very
dubitable in themselves, and that the Scripture is utterly without any such
precedent, this interpretation is but utterly groundless and unwarrantable.
The most proper and most easy meaning therefore of those words of the
Disciples, It is his Angel, seems to be, that they took it for some Angel
that had assumed Peter's shape or stood at the gate in his resemblance.

Verse. 17. He departed and went to another place.
The place whither he went is not to be known, because not revealed by
Scripture. As for his going to Rome, which is the gloss that Papists see upon
this place, it is a thing senseless and ridiculous, as was touched before, and
might be showed at large were it worth the labor. I should as soon nominate
Antioch for the place whither he went at this time, as any other place at a
far distance: For I cannot imagine any time when he and Paul should meet at
Antioch, and Paul reprove him, Gal. 2.11. so likely as this time: for it is
most probable that Peter being put to flee for his life, would get out of the
territories of Herod for his safety: now there was no place more likely for
his safety then in Antioch, where not only the distance of place might
preserve him, but the newborn Church would seek to secure him.

Verse. 21. And upon a day Herod arraied in royal apparel.
The acts of this Herod Agrippa after his coming from Rome to Jerusalem and
the manner of his death are largely described by Josephus, and therefore we
will trace them in him in our Jewish Story.

PART II. The Roman Story.
Sect. I. Some Acts of Claudius this year.
THe Roman year was now taken almost wholly up with sacrifices and holy days,
even as it is at this day, to the great hinderance of the people in their
employments and occasions, therefore Claudius being now Consul abrogated
abundance of these days and solemnities, and contracted those that he let
remain into as narrow compass as was possible: Many things that Caius had
foolishly given away he remanded, and many again that he had wickedly
wronged he repaired: He brought Lycia under servitude, because in a tumult
they had slain some Romans; and he joined it to Pamphylia: and disfranchised
a Lyciam Ambassador that came to treat about the business, because he could
not speak Latin, saying, that it was not fit that he should be a Roman that
understood not the Roman tongue: and many others he disfranchased for other
causes, yet on the contrary was he most lavish, he, Messallina and his and her
favorites in conferring the Roman freedom and other offices for money,
insomuch that he was glad to give an account of it in an oration in Campus
Martius. He exhibited some sword plays this year in the Camp.

Sect. II. The abominable whoredoms and actions of Messallina the Empress.
She lived in continual lust and uncleanness: and was not content to do so
her self, but she forced diverse other women to the same course: Nay she
caused some women to commit adultery even in the very sight of their own
husbands: And those that consented to her villainy she honored and rewarded,
and those that did not, she hated and sought to destroy: These her detestable
carriages she kept long unknown from Claudius, providing him lasses for his
bed, while she took whom she thought good to hers: and killing and taking
out of the way, whomsoever she suspected likely to tell Claudius. So slew she
Catonius Iustus, to prevent his telling of tales: and the two Iulia's upon
other occasions.

A Roman Knight was also this year executed as for some conspiracy against the
Emperor.

Sect. III. An expedition into England.
This year did Aulus Plautius with much ado lead an Army into Britain: For
one Bericus, who had been expelled thence for sedition, had persuaded Claudius
to send an Army over: But hardly would the Soldiers be gotten out of Gaul
over thither, they being incensed and taking it ill that they should go fight
even out of the world: Narcissus being sent by Claudius to the Army, made a
speech to them which exasperated them the more, in so much that they made the
outcry of Io Saturnalia: or All masters, and were ready to make head, but at
last they willingly followed Plautius: He parted his army into three parts,
because that if they were repelled and opposed in one place, they might land in
another: They had some trouble in their passage, through cross winds, but they
took heart and bare it out, and the rather because a bright light or flame ran
from the east toward the west even that way that they were to go: they entered
the Island without opposition: for the Britains suspected not their coming* but
when they were now entered and they not ready to withstand them, they ran into
the woods and bogs, hoping to weary out the Romans with following and seeking
them, and so to cause them to return without doing any more.

It cost Plautius a great deal of toil accordingly to find them out, which at
last he did, and overcame first Cataratacus and then Togodumnus the two sons
of Cynobellinus, who himself was but lately dead.

These fleeing, he took into homage part of the Glocestershire and
Oxfordshire.
Boduni, who were subject to the Buckinghamshire and Hartfordshire. See Camdens
Bi^an
Catuellani, for the Britains were now subject to diverse Kings. He leaving a
Garrison the^e, marched on till he came to a river, which the Britains thought
he could not have passed without a bridge, and therefore they encamped
carelessely on the other side: But Plautius sent over some (...).
Germane Soldiers, who were accustomed to swim over Rivers, and they suddenly
assault the enemy, but wounded not the men, but only their horses that should
have drawn their Chariots, and so spoiled and undid the Riders. Then sent he
over Flavius Vespasian, who was afterward Emperor, and Sabinus his brother,
who passing the River slew many of the enemies on a sudden: yet did not the
rest flee but gave battle the next day, and the fortune of the fight was
doubtful till C. Sidius Geta, being in danger to be taken, did so stoutly
behave himself, that he got the victory, and triumphall honors though he
were not Consul.

Then did the Britains betake themselves to the Thames toward the place where
it falls into the Sea and flows high, and they easily get over, knowing the
convenientest places: but the Romans following them were in danger: when the
Germans had again swum the River, and others had passed at a bridge above,
they fell upon the Britains on all parts, and made a great slaughter: but in
pursuit of them they fell into some marshes, and so lost many of their men.

Upon this mishap, and because the Britains were exceedingly exasperated for
the death of Togodumnus, and made still greater preparations for war,
Plautius proceeded no further, but garrisoning those places that he had gotten
he sends for Claudius: for so he had been commanded to do if he came to a
pinch.

Claudius receiving the tidings, prepares for the expedition, and among many
other things bring diverse Elephants along with him, and coming to his army at
the Thames, and passing the River he fights a pitched battle and obtaines the
victory, and takes in Mald^n.
Camalodunum the (...). Regiam*
chief City of Cynobellinus; disarmes the Britains, leaves them that were
conquered to be governed, and the rest to be conquered by Plautius, and so
goes for Rome, where the Senate gives him the title of Britannicus, appoints
triumphs and Statues for him, and honour^ for Messallina.

Sect. III. A Whorish trick of Messallina.
Little did she deserve either honor or respect, but fear and flattery
regard not desert. Among her various and continual adulteries, she cast her
eyes of lust upon one Mnester, an Actor or Player, a man that had been very
intimate with Caius, and never the better to be thought of for that. This man
she sollicites to her bed, with words, promises and gifts, but prevails not
with him, not for any honesty that was in the man, but for fear of the
displeasure of Claudius: When the shameless strumpet could not prevail with
all her solicitations, she goes to Claudius, and desires him to command
Mnester to do what she would have him: which Claudius did, not knowing what
he commanded. And then did Mnester adulterate the Empress so freely from fear
of Claudius, that he thought it had been the Emperors express mind he should
so do. And by diverse other men did Messallina practice the very same project.
And to that impudency did she grow in her whoredom with this Mnester, that
when the Senate had commanded that all the brass coin that bare Caius his
Image should be melted, and this in detestation of Caius, she caused pictures
of Mnester to be made of it.

Part III. The Jewish Story.
Sect. I. Agippa his actions at Jerusalem after his return from Rome.
Agrippa returned the last year to Jerusalem, where as we observed and saw
before, he performed much ceremoniousnesse, and changed the High priest, slew
James and imprisoned Peter. Besides these things he remitted a tribute to the
men of Jerusalem, for their kindness in entertaining of him: he obtained the
letters of Petronius to the men of Dor for the removal of Caesar's statue,
which some seditious men had set up in their Synagogue: He removed Cantharas
from the high priesthood again, and placed Matthias in his stead. He
imprisoned Silas the master of his horse for his free discourse concerning his
service done to him in the time of his calamity and poverty, but on his birth
day festival he enlarged him again, where he continuing still in the same
freedom of speech, he imprisoned him again. He began to fortify Jerusalem,
and to make it exceeding strong, but Marsus (the present governor of Syria in
stead of Petronius) got letters from Claudius to stop his work, as suspicious
toward innovation. He was exceedingly observant of his Countries Laws, and
much care and cost he bestowed on sacrifices, yet was he challenged by one It
may be this story aymeth something at Simon Peter.
Simon that took on him to be a teacher, for an unholy man and one unfit to
come into the Temple: which Simon he sent for to Caesarea, where he
questioned with him about the words, and dissuaded him without punishment but
with a reward.

He built sumptuous things in Berytus, as a Theater, Amphitheater, baths,
porches, and such like magnificences, and set 700. and 700. condemned men to
fight together for pastime, and so destroyed them. From thence he went to
Tib^rius of Galilee whither diverse Kings came to him to visit: And so did
Marsus also the Governor of Syria; but he seeing so many Kings together with
him (for they were five) he suspected the matter as tending to innovation, and
therefore he commanded them home. Herod after this went down to Caesarea, and
there he made sports and shows in honor of Caesar; and on the second day
being most gorgeously apparelled, and the Sun shining very bright upon his
bright clothing, his flatterers saluted him for a god, and cried out to him;
Be merciful unto us, hitherto have we feared thee as a man, hi^ henceforward
we will acknowledge thee to be of a nature more excellent then mortal
frail^ie can attain unto. The wretched King reproved not this abominable
flattery, but did digest it: And not long after he espied his Owl which the
Germane had foretold to be the Omen of his death. And suddenly he was seized
with miserable gripings in his belly, which came upon him with vehement
extremity, whereupon turning himself toward his friends, Lo, says he, he
whom ye esteem for a God is doomed to die; and destiny shall evidently
confute you in those flattering and false speeches which you lately used
concerning me. For I who have been adored by you as one immortal, am now
under the hands of death: And so his griefs and torments increasing, his death
drew on a pace: whereupon he was removed into the palace, and all the people
put on sackcloth and lay on the ground praying for him, which he beholding
could not refrain from tears: And so after five days he gave up the Ghost
being now 54. years old, and having reigned 7. years, 4. years in the time of
Caius and 3. under Claudius: He left a son behind him of 17. years old named
also Agrippa, and three daughters, Bernice, Mariamme and Drusilla. Before his
death was published, his brother Herod the Prince of Chalcis, and Chelchias the
Kings Lieutenant, caused Silas to be put to death.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 13. lin. la^t, for eleven, 1. twelve, p. 16. l 26. for next, ^. text* p.
17. l. 9 for (...) r. (...), l. 12. for (...), r. (...), l 20. for twenty, r.
two thousand, p. 19. l. 21. for pereb, r. pe^^k, ^ so in several other places,
p. 22. l. penul. r. Canaite. p. 34 l. 1. for pay, r. day, p. 4^. l penul. for
Heleb, r. Helek, so p. 43. p. 43. l. 7. r. (...) for (...) p. 49. l. 1. r.
(...) and (...), l. 34. ^. Diphilus. p. 53. l. ult. for mountains, r.
mountain, p. 56. l. 3. r. (...), p. 57. l* 8. for bare, r. bear, p. 62. l.
24* r. Gophins, p* 67. l. ult. r. his w^etchednesse in the sale of his, p* 69.
l 2. r. residue, p. 78. l. 34. for stopped, r. stripped, p. 81. l. 27. for can
to it, r. came to it, p. 82. l. ult. r. that counts the years and Consuls,
p. 86. l. 23. r. took upon him to accuse, p 93. l. 22. r. Bishop of Jerusalem,
p. 99. l. 10. for Hellen^, r. (...), p. 109. l. 23 r. was to Sichem, p. 113. l.
22. for Chijun, r. Chijun, so l. 23. and elsewhere, p. 114. l. 9. after these
words, in one Series, or in one body, add ( as see Ezekiel. 8.10) p. 115. l.
penult. r. Stevens confuting, p. 118. for thy labor, r. the labor, p. 125. l.
18. r. has in this place, p. 134. l* ^. for expected, r. expelled, p. 140,
141. and so in other places, the Title is mistaken by the Prin^ers and A
Commentary upon the Acts of the Apostles set, instead of The Roman Story; such
lapses the Reader will pardon and correct, p. 144. l. ult. leave out these
words to be admired, p. 164. l. ult. r. but he did not, p. 165. l. 27. for
then, r. that, p. 192. l. 3. r. return, p. 198. l. 12. r. Act. 12. p. 212, the
14 and 15 line are superfluous, p. 213. l. 27. r. they force them, p. 216. l.
1. r. contented, p. 232. l. 1. for good, r. God, l. 8. r. (...), p. 237. l. 34.
leave and out after Man. 18.18. p. 339. l. 15. r. between Caesarea and Ioppa,
p. 245. l. 23. for own tolerable, r. more tolerable, p. 247* l. 17. r. armed,
p. 2^7. l. 1. for ver. 9. r. ver. 1^


