TRUTH prevailing against the fiercest Opposition, OR, An Answer to Mr. John
Goodwins Water-dipping no firm footing for Church Communion.

Wherein the invalidity of his twenty three Considerations against withdrawing
from those Societies that want Baptism by the bodies burial in water is
manifested; and the separation from such Societies justified by the Word of God.

Together with the discovery of his great mistakes in the exposition of eight
chief Scriptures, wherewith he fights to overthrow Mr. Allens Answer to his
forty Queries about Church Communion.

By THOMAS LAMB Merchant, once belonging to the Congregation whereof Mr. JOHN
GOODWIN is Pastor, now a Servant to the Church of CHRIST meeting in Loathbury.

It was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you, that you should
EARNESTLY CONTEND for the Faith which was ONCE delivered to the Saints, Jude
the third. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, SO walk ye in him, rooted
and built up in him. Col. 2.8. Beware (...) any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, and NOT AFTER CHRIST,
Col. 2.8. I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after my own heart, which
shall fulfill ALL my will, Acts 13.22. Hebron therefore became the Inheritance
of Caleb, because he WHOLLY followed the Lord God of Israel, Josh 14.14.
London, Printed by G. Dawson, and are to be sold by Francis Smith, at his Shop
in Flying-horse-Court in Fleet Street, near Chancery Lane end. 1655.

TO THE READER
GOOD READER,
GOD knows with what regret of spirit I publish this answer to Mr. Goodwins
Book, called, (Water-dipping no firm footing for Church Communion) as pure
conscience at first separated me from that Society, of whom he is Pastor, so
now compels me to make answer to that Book (written for our reproof) not
only to defend the truth therein opposed, but also to vindicate my self with
some others from the heavy charge therein given to the whole world against us,
of Faith and Trust betrayers, Promise breakers, sacrilegious Church breakers,
etc. 2. To make the world Judges, whether we are as Mr. Goodwin represents
us, persons of a misused and ^^stempered fancy, of stupefied judgments, to
whose understanding common sense is a mystery inaccessible, with abundance more
to the same purpose. 3. To let the world see, that our Baptism has not
metamorphosed us from Lambs to Wolves, Tigers, or Serpents, which strange
insinuations uttered in his have, we hope confute themselves in the eyes of all
rational unprejudiced men, that know us; but since books for the most part live
longer than men, I thought it my duty, to make our Vindication as public as
Mr. Goodwins Aspersion, except he had prevented us, and truly not for our own
name sake, but for Christ's sake, whose cause we plead, and least the blessed
truth of the New Testament, sealed in Christ's heart blood should suffer by our
total silence.


Had not the truth been dearer to me than any man, I had rather chose to loose
my right hand, than set it to a book that frowneth on him, whose credit always
was, and still is, right dear and precious in my sight, so unhappy a thing it
is for good men to be yoked with error in the things of Christ, that it makes
the most intimate friends, by opposition, look like bitter adversaries for the
truth sake. Thus did Paul in respect of Peter, 2 Call. 11. when before the whole
Church of Antioch he withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed; he
who spotteth the beautiful face of truth (though ignorantly) must expect a
stain in his own credit, and be content to suffer so much as to make the truth
whole: And he that contendeth FOR the truth, must be like to Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
Who said unto his Father, and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither did
he acknowlegde his brethren, nor knew his own children, that he might observe
Gods Word and keep his Covenant. To acknowledge the good received from
Instruments agrees both to grace and nature, but to baulk pleading the truth
because thereof, argues a distemper in the affections. The same person
deserving at the same time both thanks and reproofs, to return the one is a
point of gratitude, to administer the other in love, and in the majesty of Gods
Word, a point of faithfulness. And if in this contest thou find any passages
on my part savouring of too much sharpness, though in answer to Mr. Goodwins
highest provocations, look upon me as disowning them, and mind only the reason
of the place; Christ's counsel is, not to resist evil, Math. 5 39.
But whosoever shall smite me on the right cheek, to turn the other to him. But
besides, it becomes me to bear much evil from that hand, by which I have
received so much good. And so I commend thee to the serious consideration of
the ensuing discourse, praying with all my soul the Father of lights to
vouchsafe thee the spirit of discerning, that what therein is of God may be
obvious to thy understanding, and readily embraced by thy will, and what is not
of God (if yet there be any thing) may utterly perish from thy soul: this is
the prayer of,

Thy faithful Friend to serve thee to my power, THO: LAMB.

To my Worthy Friends and Brethren, of like precious faith, walking with Mr.
John Goodwin in the right Faith, though not in the right order of the GOSPEL.
Holy and Beloved,
I Have been long your debtor, it is fit I should now pay you your own with
interest, which here I present you, by answering the substance of Mr. Goodwins
Waterdipping no firm footing for Church Communion, which if you will in the
fear of God, and without prejudice consider.

I make little question, but the riddle of my departure from you, whose Society
I prized (not a little) will be unfolded. That strange action of our Saviors
(so contrary to his natural genius) mentioned John 2.15. mightily affected the
Disciples, and made them to cast about to find a ground for it: perhaps it may
be so with some of you, in respect of me, because of my sudden breaking off
from your Society, wherein you know I took much delight, I can say more, than
in Corn, Wine and Oil, and where I had no want, but a surplusage of respects,
above what I was able to merit at your hand. In a word, where my content was so
great that it made departing from you more grievous to me than death it self
would have been.

And how contrary it is to my Spirit to make trouble or cause breaches I need
not tell you, I take it for granted, that it is upon all your hearts, how much
I abhor it: So that I conclude it cannot lightly but be a matter of some
wonder to you, that I should thus break off from you, as well as Christ's
strange action in the Temple was to the Disciples.

Now whilst they were casting about to find a ground for this astonishing
action of our Savior, and searching in the right place, namely the Scriptures,
at last they met with it, John 2.17. And they remembered that it was written,
namely in the 69 Psalm 9. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up.

In like manner, Do you wonder? and are you casting about for a ground to fix
my departure upon, then take the Disciples course, judge not according to
appearance, but judge righteous judgment: do as they did, plough with the
heifer of the Scriptures, and you will easily understand this riddle; hearken
not to Satan, the great enemy of all righteousness, who will suggest unto you
some ignoble root or other to fix it upon: it was his way of old, when Christ
cast out devils, the devil suggesteth he did it not by the power of God, but of
Beelzebub the Prince of devils.

The Apostle Paul himself, notwithstanding all his zeal, and faithfulness, and
unparalleled self-denial, yet there was some even in the Church of Corinth, who
he so dearly loved, who judged him as a man walking according to the flesh in
all, 2 Corinthians. 10.2. I think to be bold against some which THINK of us, says
he, as if we walked according to the flesh. Heavenly John, that bundle of love,
met with a proud, hungerstarved, close fisted Diotrephes prating against him
with malicious words, 3 Epistle John 10. It Is an old trick of the Devil to
bespeak the rejection of the truth, by working an ill opinion of them that
maintain it. If this has been the portion of such green trees, it is not for me
to complain that am comparatively dry; my weaknesses are many, and no doubt but
has afforded many appearances of evil to you, but these heavenly souls were
judged where there was neither evil nor appearance of any; the consideration
whereof is no small consolation to me under all your mis-judgings.

But for the matter it self of my departing from you, as my record is on high,
that no worldly thing should have separated me from the Church, so I have the
witness within my self, that no carnal consideration whatsoever has
contributed to it, to the value of the least hair of my head: and how comes
any body to dream any such thing? When men's business lies in the East, do men
use to set out full West? or do men use to take up means in full contestation
to their end? Alas, alas, I considered beforehand, that this way is every
where spoken against, and the generality of the Professors of it of small
esteem, for learning, parts, or any thing that commends men to the world:
their garb and cast that of the Disciples, Luke 6.20. Blessed be ye poor: Now,
that they were exclaimed on by the learned in their writings, and frequently in
Pulpits at this day, their name cast out as evil, and hated in a manner of all
men, that if times of persecution for conscience come, they are like to be the
first sufferers: So that I had many struglings and wrestlings with the flesh,
before I could get the victory to submit to it; nay, the truth is, had not the
truth concerning it struck my conscience, and the light shone into my judgment
with that clearness, that I could by no means avoid it with peace, I had never
forsaken my old standing, which was more honorable, easy, and every way more
acceptable to the outward man.

Now what those Considerations are that command my judgment to that point,
whereat it now stands in the business of Baptism, which is that only thing
which separated between me and you, you have scattered up and down in this my
Answer to Mr. Goodwin: But yet I think good to give you the sum thereof under a
few heads.

1. I considered the excellency of Jesus Christ above Moses, Hebr. 1. Heb. 3.3.
Heb. 1.3.
from thence argued to the ungodliness, and danger of slighting him in any of
his Commands.

2. I found Baptism with Water to be one of his Commands, Mat. 28 19. Acts
2.37.
and joined with Teaching by name in the Commission of Christ, and the same
presence of Christ promised jointly as well to Baptism as Teaching, to the end
of the world, Mar. 16.16
and serving the grand interest of Remission of sins and salvation (in some
sense) and commanded by Christ to be done upon all discipled persons, Mat.
28.19. Mar. 16.16.
and that with huge solemnity, In the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit, and
that too amongst the last words he spoke on earth.

3. I found that he intended not the reiteration of it by the same person, and
that therefore there ought to be all due care of practicing it without
corruption.

4. I found the design of Christ in the Ordinance it self to be exceeding rich
and spiritual, namely, amongst many other ends. 1. To oblige the Disciples unto
Christ, that as Circumcision bound men to keep the Law of Moses, so does
Baptism to keep the Gospel of Christ, therefore the Spirit borrows the word
Baptism, which respects Christ to express the obligation of the Jews to the
Law of Moses, 1 Corinthians. 10.2. And were all baptized unto Moses. Further, the
design of Christ is to affect the heart by the will of God seen in the
Ordinance of Baptism, as well as heard in the Word preached, therefore to
present in a figure the substance of the Gospel to the eye, as the Word
preached does to the ear, namely, the washing away of sin by the blood of
Christ, the death, Acts 22.16 Col. 2.12. Rom 6.34.
burial and resurrection of Christ for sinners, and the sinners death to sin,
suffering with Christ, resurrection to all newness of life here and glory
hereafter.

5. This being the plain design of Christ in the Ordinance, I considered
Infant-sprinkling, which ordinarily goes for Baptism, and found the great
design of Christ in a manner frustrate by it, because there is no sign or
figure of any such thing as death, burial and resurrection, and consequently
not that Sermon of the Gospel, which Christ intended to make by it, as is most
evident by the Scriptures, which palpably discovers it to be a humane
invention.

6. I found, that as Baptism was by Christ instituted, and the Apostles
practiced, namely, upon discipled persons, made so by Teaching, as the Acts of
the Apostles abundantly prove.

The form being by burying the body in water, which Calvin and others honestly
confess to be the old way.

The worthy design of Christ therein is excellently served.

The party being a Beleiver is capable of fellowship with God in the Ordinance,
and voluntarily submitting thereto, out of conscience of duty, and knowledge of
the intent of Christ in it, is like to feel their obligation to Christ by it,
into whose Name they themselves desired to be baptized; whereas Infants are
neither capable of desiring it, knowledge of the meaning of it, faith about it,
or any such thing as fellowship with God in it, and when grown up, can only
tell by hearsay, that ever any such thing was done at all upon them, most
unlike therefore to feel the like obligation to Christ by it.

Then for the form, it being by burying the body in water, and raising it out
again thereof, there is a most exact representation between sign and thing
signified, which Christ intended in (this) sign, as appears by the Scriptures
(though not in all signs) which heavenly projects of the Lord Jesus, Col.
2.12. Romans 6.4.
in the Ordinance, are totally frustrate in childrens sprinkling.

7. I find the Scriptures in all expressnese of letter are in many places for
Beleivers Baptism, whereas there is not one such Text for Childrens, nor any
instance of the Baptism of so much as one Child in all the new Testament,
though the firmament of the Scriptures are filled with the stars of Beleivers
Baptism, so that many learned men have acknowledged Infant Baptism is not in
Gods Word, and those who go about to found it on Scripture, build all on
consequences (ifs, may bees, and why nots) which Argument Mr. Goodwin has
often used to confirm the doctrine of general Redemption, and to draw the
contrary opinion under the suspicion of error.

8. I found the unregenerate world, naturally falling in with Childrens
baptism, which is a shroad sign it is a device of her own, The world loves
her own, John 15.19. And on the contrary, hating Beleivers Baptism with an
inveterate hate, as she does every Ordinance of Christ, administered in the
naked plainness and simplicity of it.

9. Infant Baptism disagreeth to the spiritual state of the Church under the
new Testament, because Baptism being the initiating Ordinance into the Church,
it lets in a sort of members which the new Testament knows not, namely,
such as cannot worship God in Spirit, whereas the Scripture says, John 4 23.
That God (now) seeks SUCH, (meaning only such) because he makes the
Churches growth unto an holy Temple to be by the means of the building, its
being fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2.21. and again, he makes the increase of
the body unto its edification, and its growth up into the head to be, partly at
least by the means of the WHOLE body its being FITLY joined together and
compact, and (mark) according to the effectual working in the measure of EVERY
part, whereas Infants are altogether incapable of such effectual working, or of
any fit conjunction with Beleivers: And though children might be Church members
under the old Testament, when also wicked persons might, if Abraham's carnal
seed, not so under the New; it is plain from the Scripture, that Christ will
have the matter (thereof) be the spiritual seed of Abraham manifested by
repentance and faith, Math. 3.9. Therefore, 1 Corinthians. 1.1. gives the matter
of the Church by due constitution to be (called) Saints, and commands, that
if any prove themselves otherwise by disorderly walking to withdraw from them,
2 These. 3.6, 14.

10. I find the sharpest adversaries this way has even in their writings on
purpose to disgrace it, and to magnify the contrary, namely Infant Baptism,
God makes them to let fall such expressions as justify it, and condemn their
own. As for instance, Mr. Rich. Baxster, speaking of the full and proper ends
why God instituted the Ordinance of Baptism, he says, they are rather to be
fetched from the Aged than Infants, and that because, MARK, The Aged: 1. They
are the most FVLLY CAPABLE SVBJECTS. 2. THE MOST EXCELLENT SVBJECTS. 3. THE
MOST EMINENT SVBJECTS. 4. OF WHOM SCRIPTVRE FVLLY SPEAKS. 5. THE GREATER PART
OF THE WORLD WHEN BAPTISM WAS INSTITVTED, who were to be partakers of it.


But on the contrary, as for Infant Baptism, he acknowledges in the same
place, P. 301. Of plain Scripture Proof.
that the Scripture speaks darkly of it, yea, that it is SO dark in the
Scripture, that the controversy is thereby become not only hard, but SO hard,
etc. as he says he finds it.

Now if this learned and holy man, has not in a few words said more for our
way, than in his whole book against it, and that upon pure principles of reason
and Religion, let the world judge, for if Infants baptism be dark in the
Scripture, and so dark as he complains.

1. How does this agree with the Title of the Book, and the superscription of
every page, Plain Scripture proof for Infants, etc. Does not plain Scripture
proof, and dark Scripture proof directly oppose? And however Mr. Baxster
thinks he sees such a thing, though it lie darkly, he knows many learned
quick-sighted men, that profess they cannot see it there at all no more than
we. But if the case be indeed thus, as it is by Mr. Baxsters own confession,
that of Infants Baptism the Scripture speaks darkly, but of Beleivers or the
Aged, that the Scripture fully speaks, and besides, that they are the most
capable, eminent, and excellent Subjects, with what conscience, either of duty
to God, or comfort to the soul, can any Christian man cleave to
Infant Baptism, and despise Beleivers? If Infant Baptism be a dark way, and
so hard to find, is he a wise man that chooses that way, when he may walk in
the light? Does any honest man, in his right mind, choose untroden paths, when
the beaten rode lies just before him? and does not Christ say, he that walks
in the dark stumbleth, John 11.10? or does it become the people of God to be so
indifferent in matters of Religion, as not to care whether they walk in the
light or in the dark? or can any man think to please God by choosing a dark way,
hard to find, when a lightsome path, beaten by the feet of Christ and the
Saints, looks him full in the face: Or where is that man in all the world,
that will give as much for land that the title too is dark, as for that which
is clear and unquestionable? Does not every one say, of Titles not clear, I Will
not meddle? Has not Mr. Baxster said to Mr. Bedford, it is good going the
surer side of the hedge, p. 303. of Plain Scripture proof? and is not Beleivers
Baptism the surer by his own confession? Or does it become men to be more
solicitous about their temporal estates than their spiritual? Or can leaving
the light, and walking in the dark, be thought the way to the Saints
everlasting rest?

11. It agrees not to the wisdom and goodness of Christ, that Baptism should
be so dark in the Scripture as Mr. Baxster says it is; not to his wisdom,
because it is appointed for babes, and because he expects obedience, who that
expects obedience will leave their Laws hard to find? Not to his goodness,
because he has put the Disciples under a sore penalty in case of disobedience
to whatsoever he has commanded.

Now the way of Baptism after faith is clear and manifest, as Mr. Baxster
acknowledges, most like therefore to be the Statute of Christ for his Babes to
submit too, and not that which is dark. Besides, would it not be a good excuse
at Judgment, for the neglect of any Law of Christ's, if men could say, the
Command was dark, and so hard to find.

12. As Beleivers Baptism agrees to particular Churches, gathered out of the
world by the Word, so does Infant Baptism agree to the National Church, and
Communion therein, which you have renounced, because by Baptism they are
immembred into the Church, and so capable of Church Communion; yea, ('it is their
right) if their Baptism be reckoned valid, because according to Scripture,
Acts 2.42. All baptized persons were added to the Church, and continued in the
Apostles fellowship, breaking bread and prayer: by what rule then can the
Parishes be withdrawn from, when they are esteemed duly baptized persons, till
legally proceeded against for disorderly walking: If then you will reject their
Church state as good, as you do, by withdrawing from them, you must not allow
their Baptism, because their Baptism, if good, gives right to it, Indepency
then rejects the fruit, but lets the tree stand that bears it.

If it be objected, that some (though not all of the Independents) disallow the
Baptism of some children, namely, such whose Parents believe not.

It Is true in words, but not deeds: where is there one man in all the
Independent Churches, the truth of whose Baptism was ever called in question?

13. Infant Baptism agrees to the carnal interest of those men, who take up
preaching for filthy lucre, whereas Beleivers Baptism altogether frowneth on
it.

Infant Baptism taking in high and low, rich and poor, into the Church, makes
both more and richer Customers to the Minister, Beleivers both fewer and
poorer, because they are but few that believe, comparitively, and for the most
part of the poorer sort; so that which way soever I looked on Infant Baptism,
I found the signs of a plant which the heavenly Father never planted; and on
the contrary, Beleivers Baptism every way answering the breathings of the
Spirit of God in Scripture, and consequently, that it became me, as a friend to
Truth, and for the honor of Jesus Christ, not only to obey Christ by
submitting to the Ordinance my self, but to strive the restoring it to its
primitive puritity, to which I take my self obliged.

1. By the Scripture, Jude 3. It was needful for me to write unto you, and
exhort you, that you should earnestly contend for the faith ONCE delivered to
the Saints.

2. By the example of holy men of old, that when they set upon reformation in
the worship of God, Neh. 10.19 2 Kings 23 25. Jer. 6.16. Mal. 4.4. 2 Ch^on.
33.8.
had respect to ALL the Law in reforming, both before and after the Captivity,
which also was according to the express Command of God.

3. By Gods high approbation of such his Servants, who did accordingly, as you
may see in the instance of Josiah, 2 Kings 27.25. David is called, a man after
Gods own heart, Acts 13.22. because a fulfiller of all his will: and Caleb so
highly dignified, Josh. 14. from 8. to the 14.
because he fully followed the Lord his God. Solomon is disparaged by this, 1
Kings 11.6. That he went not FVLLY after the Lord, as did David his Father.

4. By the Covenant that the whole Church entered into with the rest of the
Nation, to reform both in doctrine and discipline according to the Word of God.

But you cannot think Baptism any part of Christ's Law, and so the practice
rather a piece of will worship, than fully following of Christ.

To which I answer: When the doctrine of universal Redemption first sounded in
your ear, it was as hard to bear as Beleivers Baptism is now, and as far
from your thoughts to be the mind of Christ, but that which was hard then is
easy now, that which was darkness then is light now, and that which was wood,
hay and stubble then, is gold, and silver, and precious stones now; yea those
doctrines, that when time was, in your have, you were ready to say, he deserved
to loose his eyes that preached them, now for your joy could almost be content
to pluck out your own eyes in gratitude to him that brought them: (Is it not
true.)

And again, concerning the Church way, mind Mr. Goodwins words to Mr. Thomas
Goodwin when he was in Holland, Your authority, graces, learning, parts,
judgment and example, have made the stone of separation amongst us so massy
and heavy, that we are constrained to be at double pains and labor in
removing and rouling it from the consciences of men. A great part of our
employment is to stanch the issue of that fountain of blood, which you have
opened in the womb of our Churches here.

But yet since Mr. Goodwin has found cause to build up that which then he
threw down with so much zeal and industry, and I verily believe, if a man
should have said to Mr. Goodwin at that time, Sir, the time may come when you
may find cause to separate from the national Church, and gather a particular,
he would have said, Am I a Dog, that I should do this great thing? Oh how he
sweat at it then to roll that heavy stone of separation from the consciences of
men, at last found it too heavy to be done at all, and so thought fit, rather
to lie under the weight of it, than heave any longer at it. I write not these
things to shame Mr. Goodwin, it is no shame to a man, that he knows but in
part, and that he is not Master of all knowledge at one and the same time; The
path of the just, being as the shining light, Prove. 4 18.
which shines more and more to the perfect day. If more spiritual light shine
not into the judgment, if it not a sore sign, that the path of such men is not
the path of the just? And if when it is come into the judgment, if it shall
not appear in practice, then it is a sign of a heart glued to some carnal
worldly interest or other, which causes the person to withhold the truth in
unrighteousness. It Is not changing simply that the Scriptures find fault with,
but being GIVEN to change. Changing, as the case may be, is so far from being
a fault, Prove. 24.21.
that it is a sign of a growing soul in grace, of walking after the Spirit, of
a self denying upright soul, that lies naked before the truth, unmarried to
any secular interest. Truths faithful friend, that so truth may get up, cares
not though it self go down.

This therefore is the glory, not the sha^e of Mr. Goodwin, that when the truth
came into his judgment, as it is in Jesus, he consulted not with flesh and
blood, but with Paul, preaches the faith which once he destroyed, for which
many glorified God in him.

I beseech you therefore let no man mis-judge me in the ground of t^is
relation, as if I intended hereby to cast the least disparagement upon him,
whom (for the good I have received from God by his hand) I am bound above many
to love and honor.

But if you ask, wherefore then serves this story? I answer, that you should
not think of him above that which is meet; to let you see that Mr. Goodwin is
but a man, and subject to like mistakes that others are and therefore his
present superabounding confidence, though it rise to that height, as to think
all others little better than mad, that is not of his opinion, is no
demonstration that he is in the truth, it is so far from that, that if a man may
judge what is like now to be, by what has been, now is the time that
Anabaptisme should arise, life up it self, and be exalted in Mr. Goodwins
judgment, because heretofore (in other cases) not long after such high
expressions of confidence, he gave up the bucklers, and the truth took
possession of his heart, which it never could get before. I cannot therefore be
out of all hope, that Mr. Goodwin may one day fall down at the foot of that
truth, which he now trampleth on without mercy. And though our Arguments seem
weak and frothy to him for the present, and the fruit of a distempered fancy,
it does not follow that they are so; but this only, that Mr. Goodwin is fully
persuaded in his own mind, which he is wont to be, as well when he is out of
the truth as well as in it.

The scope hereof is threefold. 1 To show, that though you are not now of our
mind, it does not follow you never will be. 2. To prevent rash and hasty
judging. 3. To admonish you against having, not only Mr. Goodwins, but any
man's person in admiration.
The snare of admiring men is great, both to the admirers and admired.

To the admirers. 1. It makes them swallow what the admired say without due
chewing, and so their faith will stand more in the wisdom and judgment of such
men, who they deifie, than in the power of God.

2. It issues an under esteem of, and scornful slighting of others, 1 Cor.
1.12 compared with 1 Cor 4.6.
who yet are worthy instruments in the Lords work, this was the case of many in
the Church of Corinth.

To the admired, the snare is great upon them also, even to puff them up, and
make them swell against their brethren, and so also to procure the displeasure
of God against them, Acts 12.22. Oh what care therefore does Paul take to keep
both the World and the Church from undue attributions to him, Acts 14.11. upon
his cure of the Creeple, The people lift up their voices saying, The GODS are
come down in the likeness of men, and much ado they had to keep the people from
sacrificing to them, which made the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul, rend their
clothes, run in among the people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye th^se
things? we are men of like passions with you; much after this manner is it with
persons that God uses in converting and edefying souls, Gal. 4.15. especially
when also found able in the wars of Christ for truth; so that if such men do
not run in upon the people, and disown all undue reverence, they will have much
ado to keep within the bounds of those respects, due to Instruments. They will
be more apt to say what such a man says, than what Christ says, or Paul, or
Peter, or James, or John, says, nay in a manner to believe what such a man
beleiveth in every thing.

Now indeed we read of eminent persons, great benefactors, and that withal
have served in wars to conquest, the people have made them judges in civils.
But this is too much to give to any mortal man in spirituals: There the Command
is express, Math. 23.9, 10. Call no man Master, or Father, not in the besotted
Quakers sense (by denying such titles to men) but Christ's sense, which is by
accepting men for lords over our faith, which Paul disowneth as to himself in
respect of the Churches, in the 2 Corinthians 1.24. Nor for that we have DOMINION
over YOUR FAITH, and that which Paul took such great to prevent in the
Churches, 1 Corinthians. 2.5. That their faith should not stand in his wisdom;
though he does own being their Father, 1 Cer. 4.15. in a sense, and Master too,
2 These. 3.12, 14. in subordination to Christ.

But I fear I shall be too tedious in my Epistle, my heart being greatly
enlarged toward you, I have much ado to stop the progress of my pen; but least
my Epistle prove to o bulky, I shall here break off, though abruptly, assuring
you, that its not the want of love to you, but the conscience of duty to
Christ, who loved me, and gave himself for me, that separateth between you and
me.

As for your hard thoughts and speeches concerning my departure, as on the one
hand I am provided against the dint of them, by the conscience of my own
perfect innocence and integrity in that matter, and who is he that can make my
glorying void? On the other hand my prayer is, they may never work to disaffect
me to you, but to the doubling of my requests to God, to enlighten your
judgments in the truth, and so make way for our meeting again never to part
more.

Yours unfeignedly, in the right way of the Gospel to serve you faithfully,
according to my measure in the things of Jesus Christ, THO: LAMB.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 12. leave out the word not. p. 33. line 10. read^ my for which.
p. 33. line 20. read or for besides. p. 39. l. 2. before p. 135. add yet. p.
39. line 7. for Psalm read Isaiah. p. 40 line 30. and 32. for duly read duty.
p. 41. line 31. leave out the words, hard to find. p. 50. line 21. for employ
read imply. p. 64. line 18. beginning of the line add the word But. p. 113.
line 11. read Ordinance for Ordinances. p. 113. line 24. read institution for
instituting.

An Answer to Mr. John Goodwins Considerations, against forsaking the embodied
Societies of Beleivers: Notwithstanding the want of true Baptism.
His first Consideration for substance this: THat the Moral Law has a
superintendency over the Law of Institutions; so that whilst the positive Law
of Christ cannot be practiced without breaking the Morrall Law; In such case,
the Law of Institutions must give place: which he proves by many Scriptures.
This Doctrine is true, but ill applied as to us, in our case, because our
separating is no breach of any part of the Morral Law; Mr. Goodwin indeed
supposes it is, and that by so doing we are guilty of promise breaking,
covenant breaking, etc.

To which I answer, That we ^^^^ised to walk together with Mr. Goodwin, and
that Society, in the worship of God, according to the light given, we deny not.

But that our withdrawing from that Society, is any sinful breach of promise or
Covenant, that we utterly deny, yea, so far from any such thing, that it is
indeed and in truth the performance of a most solemn Vow and Covenant, which
Mr. Goodwin, At the time of the Nations cutring into the solemn League and
Covenant.
with my self and diverse of the Church, entered into, with hands lift up to the
most high God, wherein we vowed to go one before another in the work of
reformation, mark well, TO GO ONE BEFORE ANOTHER, not to stay one for another
till all were satisfied, and that both in doctrine and discipline, according to
the Word of God. Now that it was Mr. Goodwins own sense, as well as ours, that
every man was to judge for himself, what was according to the Word of God, and
not another for him, appears by his own practice upon it, shortly after; for
notwithstanding all the obligations of love and friendship which the Parish of
Coleman-street had put upon him, to continue fellowship with them in that old
way, and notwithstanding all the promises of service, on his part made to them,
upon their fetching him from Norfolk to Coleman street, yet because of this
solemn Vow to the most high God, (with other reasons in conjunction) he thought
himself bound in conscience to withdraw from them, and actually did so, and
made this solemn Vow and Covenant, one argument that induced him thereunto.

And did this solemn Oath, before the most High, justify him in the like
practice, and will it fail us?

Or will Mr. Goodwin be so monstrously disingenious, as to construe any after
promise, to walk with the Church in contradiction to this solemn Oath? And yet
thus he deals with us, (for which God forgive him) that we may look like
normous transgressors.

Our after promise to walk with the Church in the way we then was, must either
be understood conditionally (that we found not the Word of God reproving it) or
else we supposed to make promises that should disable us from performing the
matter of our solemn Vow, attended with so many dreadful circumstances, which a
very little before we entered into, which surely no ingenious man that
considers will ever imagine, either that we did so, or that it was the sense
of the body we should do so.

And how unreasonable a thing it is, and destructive to the honor and glory of
God, that any such engagement should be understood absolutely, appears by the
gross absurdities that follow upon it, for then Men should be locked up from
any further progress in the work of reformation, let the light shine never so
bright, and the call of the Scriptures be never so loud, and that upon the
penalty of promise breaking.

Nay, if Mr. Goodwin himself has not at another time said enough, and more
than enough, to justify our practice, and condemn himself in this rash and
hasty charge of us, let the world judge.

In his fifth caution for Reformation, according to the Word of God, he has
this passage; They who would have this golden Motto, written as well in the
heart as in the face of their Reformation, must be FREE from all collateral
engagements unto other patterus, besides the Word of God.

Mark, Mr. Goodwin says, they must be free, and yet calls us, faith
breakers, trust betrayers, promise breakers, because we use our liberty against
a collateral engament to another pattern.

He adds further in these words:

They meaning hearty reformers, must not incline not so much as a dust in the
balance amounts unto, to any Reformation of any Church whatsoever, further
than they are reformed according to the same Word. Further thus:

Doubtless no man ever covenanted, to reform according to the example of any
Church whatsoever, in opposition to the Word of God, or if they did, they have
cause to abhor themselves in dust and ashes for it: Why then do you force
upon us such a sense of promising, which stands in such direct opposition to
it.

Nay, in the Margin thus: To violate an abominable and accursed Oath, out of
conscience to God, (as surely that would be, that kept persons from following
Christ fully, and held them in a half reformation) is a holy and blessed
perjury.

Good Reader, this is Mr. Goodwins Text; I leave thee to make the
interpretation, and give judgment, whether we, by his own principles, deserve
to bear the heavy burden of faith and trust betrayers, which he loadeth us
with, not only in the beginning of his book, but very frequently almost to the
end thereof, as if he took a kind of secret delight to mention us with
dishonor.

Or whether Mr. Goodwin by making the charge, proves not himself inexcusable
altogether, both in the sight of God and Men and guilty to a high degree, of
breaking the royal Law of love to his Neighbor, yea, his friends and
brethren, of like precious faith, that ever had him in double honor, and
sought his good and comfort as their own, and that too, while he passionately
complains of us for breaking the morrall Law.

His second Consideration for substance this: THat supposing our way to be the
sole Baptism Ordinance of Christ, the Churches which are not actually baptized
with our very Baptism, are yet according to the estimate of God, baptized our
way with our very Baptism, and ought so to be esteemed by us, because they have
a willing mind so to be.
To which I answer. First, it is a great and clear mistake, that the Churches,
which are not actually baptized with our Baptism, are yet notwithstanding
esteemed to have been so baptized by God, upon the account of a willing mind so
to be.

Does the righteous God of heaven and earth judge contrary to the truth? does
he judge men to have actually done that which they never did? It Is one thing
for God to deal graciously by men, as if they had been obedient, because of a
willing mind, another thing for him to judge them actual obeyers of that
command which they never did obey, because thereof. Though God accept the will
(in some cases) for the deed, where does he judge the will to be the deed.

In the 2 Corinthians. 8.12. It is indeed thus written, as Mr. Goodwin alleges:
If there be first a willing mind, a man is accepted according to that he has,
and not according to that he has not: But what then? Does Gods accepting a man
according to that he has, prove him judging a man to have actually done that
which he never did? which yet is the conclusion Mr. Goodwin makes to follow
these premises.

For his other instance, Math. 5.12. where he says, Who so looks upon a
woman to lust after her, has committed adultery. Christ says, it is only in
his heart, that is desire. Yet because there wants nothing but opportunities
for actual adultery, the demerit of that sin may be imputed to him, but the sin
of actual adultery in a formal proper sense is not imputed to him.

In the Phil. 2 11. he says, God works in you both to will and to do,
therefore to will is one thing, and to do is another, and are they two things
in themselves, and does God esteem them to be but one.

But secondly, Though it should be granted, that a through desire to obey a
Command, which yet is not obeyed (for want of conviction that it is a duty)
will render men judged obeyers of that command by God, yet will not any such
desire to obey, when yet obedience is not performed, justify MEN in any such
judgment; because Christ has no where given to the Church any such rule to
judge by. Besides, except men could try the reins and the heart, as well as
God, and know who wills sincerely and who not, as God does, it is
unreasonable to conceive that men's willing things should be any rule for men's
judgment, though it should be conceived a rule for Gods judgment. And
further, the heart of man being deceitful above all things, it is not so easy
as it may be some think, to know themselves, whether they will sincerely or no:
the obedience of such commands, which they cannot but see, takes them off the
chair of public esteem, and sets them upon the dunghill of disgrace and
scorn, and whether obedience to Gospel-baptism does not so, let the world
judge, by your cruel mocking them that submit to it, and bitter insinuations
against them: To which we shall speak fully in the due place.

But thirdly and lastly, if we ought to judge you to be actually baptized our
way, because you have a willing mind so to be, though indeed and in truth you
are not. Why then, surely by the same rule you ought to judge us still walking
with you, every one in his place, though indeed and in truth we are separated
from you, because we also have a willing mind, upon Christian terms, to walk
with you. And have you not as much reason to judge us sincere in our profession
of willingness, as we have to judge you so. I am certain you have much more
reason so to judge, because your submission to baptism in Christ's way, and
Paul's way, which is our way, would be a pure piece of self denial to you, As
Peter and John was by the High Priest and Elders, Act. 4.13. Ignorant and
unlearned men. And John 7.49.
and that in many respects, you would be numbered amongst those poor brethren of
the dip, which want releif; that petty handful of less knowing and less
considerate men, as you call them, those ignorant Creatures, the generallity of
whom know not what the word (...) signifies, that for ought they know (upon
their own account) it may signify, to ride, or to run, or to build, as well as
to dip, which are your scornful expressions concerning them. Every man can find
a will to seek the face of the Ruler, Pro. 29.26.
but who finds will to seek the face of the poor.

But for us to have continued still in fellowship with you in that way, was,
and would be again (if we returned to it) matter both of honor and ease in
comparison, whereas now with Christ and the holy Apostles, we are sooles for
Christ's sake, then we should be wise in Christ, now weak, 1 Cor. 4.10.
then strong, now despised, then honorable.

So that we have more cause by far to doubt your wills of COMING DOWN to us,
though you should say never so much, how much you willed it, then you have to
doubt our wills of GOING Up to you, if we did but whisper it. And yet you have
declared us no Members of your Body, and pour contempt upon us, for Church
breakers, and Church deserters, and trust betrayers, and what ever you think
may bring our persons and Christ's holy way, which we profess, into dis-repute,
because we have separated from you, though we have often affirmed, what trouble
and sorrow it was to us, to withdraw from you, and our own conscience is as a
thousand witnesses, how careful we were to make it as little offensive to you,
as we could devise how to do, our obligation to you, as an instrument of much
spiritual good to our soul, being always before our face.

How untrue therefore have you been to your own principles, in thus dealing
with us? Romans 14.12
Happy is the man that condemns not himself in the thing which he allows.

Your third Consideration for substance this: THat by faith Men become the Sons
of God, That Christ owneth all true Beleivers for brethren: Therefore such of
the Beleivers, who are in the right order of the Gospel, ought to receive them
into the full Communion of the Church, upon that account simply.
That Men become the Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, is plain in the
Scriptures, as you say, but that any ones faith would have passed with the
Churches in the primitive times for the faith of Gods elect, that should have
been found sticking at obedience to any of the commands of Christ, appears
not in the Scripture, but much to the contrary, James 2.10. For whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and offend in one point, he is guilty of all. John 15.12.
Ye are my friends if you do WHATSOEVER, I command you. Why call you me Lord,
Lord, and DO not the thing that I say. Luke 6.46. What does it profit, my
brethren, though a man say he has faith, and has not works: Can faith save
him.

And although now in these days we have an honorable opinion of the faith of
very many persons, that are unbaptised, yet it is much to be feared, that far
the greater part of those that are so, (pretending want of conviction that it
is a duty) do not neglect it upon that ground, but the foolishness of the act
it self, which to the earnal eye (that discerns not the holy design of Christ
in it) makes it as offensive to them now, as the Gospel was at first to the
Greeks, 1 Cor. 1.23. In conjunction with that disgrace that attends it.

And ought not every one to be jealous over their own hearts, whether something
of this nature do not bribe the judgment, that it is not at liberty to give
sentence according to the merit of the cause, or at least, whether it does not
indispose the soul to the impartial weighing those grounds, which serve to
evince it to be a duty. That in disposition to things hinders the true genuine
working of the intellectual senses, appears by Christ's words to the
pharisees, John 8.43. Why do ye not understand my speech? Christ answers
himself in the next words, EVEN because you cannot hear my words. So that their
disability to obey, (which is the sense of the word hear in this place)
indisposed them to understand Christ's words, in the 30. Deuteronomy. 17. But if thine
heart turn away, so that thou will not hear. If the heart be against a thing,
no wonder if the ear turn away from all the means of proving it to be the mind
and will of God; and we are the rather induced to believe, that this is the
true ground of the non-conviction of many that are unconvinced of the duty of
baptism, because we find by experience, that all the persons that are of any
degree of eminency in worldly respects, either for learning, parts or estate,
that God has persuaded to own the truth, do acknowledge their indisposition to
the obedience of it, made them indulge every weak argument to the contrary, and
that they were never able to submit to the truth of Christ in the naked
simplicity of it, till God gave them the command of their own spirits: Pro.
25.28. Isai. 28.9. 1 Cor. 3.18 Ioh. 5.44.
till they became like Children weaned from the breast: In a word, till they
were able to become fools for Christ's sake, and resolve to delight their souls
with that honor that comes from God only.

But whether the fault of non-obedience be chargeable upon the wills of men, or
the want of conviction, notwithstanding all good means used to come at it,
that God only knows, as also the truth and falsehood of men's faith; but
however the Church is not without ground to fear the truth of that faith, that
boggleth at obedience to Christ in those commands, which distinguishes the
Disciples of Christ from Moses his Disciples; it is not obedience to the morral
Law does that, that God is to be worshipped, was Moses his Doctrine as well as
Christ's, That men should be merciful and just, (which is the substance of the
second Table) was as well the Doctrine of Moses as Christ, so that by obedience
to the Law morral, a man may as well be said to be Moses his Disciple, as
Christ's, because they are both one in that: But by obedience to the iustituted
Law of Christ, given for the ordering us in his worship, a man is truly said to
be Christ's Disciple, in distinction from Moses, whose Ordinances were far
different (provided it follow repentance from dead works, and faith toward
God, without which I confess it signifies nothing;) in which respect,
doubtless, both Jews and Gentiles are said in baptism to put on Christ. Gal.
3.27.

But more especially has the Church cause to suspect the truth of that faith
that sticks at obedience to the positive Law of Christ, because it is that
chiefly that puts men to shame, and casts out their name as evil. It Is
not the simple worshipping of God, that brings men disgrace (no not with
carnal men, that have not sinned away their first principles of conscience) but
honor rather, because every man by those principles is prompted to some
worship, but that which offends, is the worshipping of God after his own way,
which the world cannot bear; if men could be content with the Religion of
Christ it self, corrupted, they might live at Rome and be applauded.

So for the other part of the morral Law, which consists in Justice and
Mercy. Mercy and Justice offends not the generallity of men (but only some
particulars, where their own interest is struck at by it) and the reason clear,
because the morral Law is written in every man's heart, so that he that lives
up to that, lives to the conscience of every individual soul, and consequently
compels revereate, from all men that have not sinned away the light of
nature.

But for the Law of institutions, they being foreign to the hearts of men,
found only in the written word, and in themselves of a despicable complexion,
and withal crossing the desires of the flesh, and consequently contrary to the
religion of the world, which is formed by her worldly wise men, according to
her carnallity, and to fit their own worldly interests.

It comes to pass unavoidably, that whosoever will follow Christ in the way
of worship which he has set up, in the naked plainness and simplicity of it,
he shall be put to shame, scorned, contemned, disgraced, persecuted (at least
by tongue and pen) especially by the learned, whose interest is struck at, by
an effectual following the Lamb in his own way.

But suppose the faith of those that refuse Baptism to be as good as the best,
yet I utterly deny, that it gives them an immediate right to full communion
with the Church, simply upon that account.

The reason this, because Jesus Christ himself, who is the God of Order, has
appointed the Communion of the Disciples to be orderly, so that though persons
be Disciples by faith, and so have a remote right to all privileges of Church
Communion, yet have not an immediate right thereto, till they desire it in that
way which Christ has appointed.

That Christ has established order for regulating the communion of the
Disciples, is evident, from the Coloss. 2.5. where the Apostle has these
words, Joying and beholding your ORDER, and the stedfastness of your faith in
Christ: As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him, or after him, as the Preposition in is expounded at the 8. verse: And not
after Christ: now that by in him, or after him, he means, after his
teachings, appears by the 7. verse: Rooted and built up in him, and
stablish'd in the faith as you have been taught.

And that the teachings of Christ respected their order in worship, as well as
their faith, appears by the 8. verse* where he opposes the Jewish
Ordinances, which he calls the rudiments of the world, to Christ's: and in the
12. verse mentions Baptism by name, where in he affirms, they were buried
with Christ.

Again, that Christ has established order for the regulation of the Disciples
Communion, appears by the 1 Cor. 11. where the Apostle blames the Church for
disorder in their eating the Lords Supper, and that their sin of disorderly
walking might appear the more heinous to them, he tells them at the 23.
verse, That which he d^livered them, that is, those rules which he had
delivered them to order themselves by, in their communion, which they had
sinfully transgressed, he received from the Lord.

And in the 1 Cor. 14 40. exhorts them that all things in the Church be done
decently and in order; and that matter of order is a thing strictly to be
minded, appears by Titus 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Creet; that thou
should set in order.

Now if it be asked, how it appears a disorderly practice, for persons to be
admitted into the Church, and sit down with them in full communion without
Baptism?

I shall first enforce some of my brother Allens Arguments, and take off Mr.
Goodwins exceptions against them; and then add one or two more.

The substance of his first Argument is this.

If Baptisin was the next thing immediately to be done by the order of Christ
after being discipled, P. 17, Of his Answer to Master Goodwins 40. Queries
about Communion.
then to sit down with the Church in full communion before it, is a disorderly
practice.

But Baptism was the next thing immediately to be done by the order of Christ.

That Baptism was the next thing immediately to be done, appears by the
Commission, Math. 28.19. Go teach or Disciple all Nations, baptizing them;
where we see Baptism is the next thing to be done after discipling, and
accordingly the Apostles practiced it: Act. 2.41. Act. 8.12.
(which puts the matter out of all doubt to all ingenious men) as all the
instances of the Acts of the Apostles proves. Act. 18.8.


If you could show any (says Mr. Baxster) that did delay Baptism (he means
to Disciples) since Christ's Command, P. 24. Of plain Scripture proofs.
Math. 28.19 it would appear to have been sinful, as through ignorance or
negligence.

Again, That it is Christ's rule, that persons shall be baptized without delay,
when they are first made Disciples, P. 126. Of Scripture proof.
I have fully proved already, both from the Commission for baptising, and from
Scripture example, explaining that Commission, and from the end and use of
Baptism.

If any should be so impudent as to say, it is not the meaning of Christ, that
baptizing should immediately follow discipling, they are confuted by the
constant example of Scripture.

So that I dare say this will be out of doubt with all rational, P. 127.
considerate, impartial Christians.

If this be so clear a truth, as every one with half an eye cannot lightly but
see it, then is it not a plain case, that they that shall attempt to sit down
with Church-bodies before Baptism, or those Churches that shall admit
unbaptised Disciples into full communion, that they all depart from the rule of
Christ, and walk by a rule of their own devising, and instead of Law-obeyers,
take the boldness to be Lawmakers.

Mr. Goodwin objecteth p. 64. of his water-dipping, that His proof, meaning my
Brother Allens, is built upon a clear mistake of the word Teach in the
Commission, Math. 28.19. for to teach, does not signify to teach men, so as to
make them wiling to obey, which is my Brother Allens sense, but to do that
which is apt to make Disciples, whether any he actually made Disciples or no.

That this sense of the word Teach is a part of the truth, I deny not, but that
it is all that is contained in the word Teach, that I deny, for these reasons
following.

1. Because then all persons whatsoever, to whom the Gospel was at any time
preached by the Apostles, were upon their bare hearing of it, whether they
believed or blasphemed, to have been baptized by them: For you say, the word
Teach, does not imply an actually discipled person to Christ, but only the
having instructions proper to make men so. If that were all the sense, then the
Apostles were bound by their Commission, to baptize in the Name of the Father,
Son and Spirit, all they preached the Gospel unto, though they knew neither
Father, Son, nor Spirit, or believed a word they said, yea, those that
commanded them to teach no more in that Name, and beat them for it, and
imprisoned them, being filled with indignation, Acts 5.18.

Secondly, To show, that this sense of yours has not all the truth in it, it
appears by the 2. Acts 41 which says, not that all that heard the Word were
baptized, but they that gladly RECEIVED the Word, which shows clearly enough
what is meant by the word teach in the Commission, namely, such whereby persons
became glad receivers of the Word, why else did he not baptize every body that
heard him.

Sir, you say truly, it is a loud untruth to say, there is not one example of a
person baptized barely upon his hearing of the Gospel preached unto him: but I
pray Sir, whose cause do you plead by saying so, your own or ours; and here I
heartily desire the Reader to consider, whether you have not in a few words
destroyed your own sense of the word Teach, and established my Brother Allens;
for if there be not one example throught the Acts, of a person baptized barely
upon his hearing the Gospel, but all examples speak of their being Beleivers or
Disciples first.

Why then, surely the Apostles understood by the word Teach, the making them
actual Disciples, which is our sense, and not only the saying such things to
them, which were proper to make them so, which is Mr. Goodwins: or else they
practiced contrary to their own judgment.

But thirdly, that by teaching is meant actual discipling, is the judgment of
our Adversaries; Mr. Baxter gives this for the sense of the word Teach in the
Commission very frequently, in his plain Scripture proof, p. 15. Go ye teach,
is go make me Disciples, in which exposition of the verb (...) Mr. Baxter
confesses to agree with Mr- Tombs, I say as he, says Mr. Baxter, that the
verb signifies, make ye Disciples.

Vrsinus upon these words, Go teach all Nations baptising them, The word which
Christ uses, says he, properly signifies, make Disciples; thus it is
expounded, says he, by John, Note well.
John 4.2. The Pharisees heard, that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples
than John; and what Vrsinus means by Disciples, appears plainly p. 414. of
his Catechism, Teach all Nations baptising them, that is, all who by your
doctrine come unto me: and p. 420. That unto the use of baptism faith is
required; and in p. 415. these discipled persons he calls, converted persons.
So that in this learned man's judgment, by teaching in the Commission, is meant
discipling, by Disciples Beleivers, comers unto Christ, converted persons, and
not as Mr. Goodwin, that to teach signifies not to make them actual Disciples,
but only the saying such things to them, which are apt to make them so.

But fourthly and lastly, the reason Mr. Goodwin gives, why by the word teach
must be meant as he says, and not according to the common consent of
Interpreters, I humbly apprehend to be invalid, his reason is this, because if
we understand the word Teach of actual discipling, these absurdities will
follow.

First, He must be conceived to commissionate them to do that which was not in
their own power to do. Secondly, It would follow, that though they preached
never so faithfully, yet they had falsified trust, and acted short of their
Commission, if they had not at all times made those, to whom they preached,
actual Beleivers.
To which I answer: This Argument stands upon an unsound bottom, which is
this, That it is an absurd thing to conceive, that God should put more into a
Commission given to Men, then is in the Creatures own power to do. What is more
frequent in Scripture, than to put that into the Commission both of Prophets
and Apostles, which was not in their own power to effect, Isaiah 6.9, 10. Ge
make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, least, etc. is not here more put into the Prophets Commission than was in
his own power to do? could he make their hearts fat, or make their ears heavy,
or shut their eyes? Nay, are not these effects attributed to God, though put in
the Prophets Commission? John 12.40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes; yea, these effects are
attributed to themselves in Math. 13.15. Their eyes they have closed least they
should, etc. So that though these effects are put in the Prophets Commission,
yet altogether out of his own power to do, without the joint concurrence both
of God and the Creature.

So also in the new Testament, Acts 26.17, 18. Delivering thee from the people,
and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, to open their eyes, and turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

Is not here much more put into Paul's Commission than he was able without God
to do? or will any body say, that Paul acted short of his Commission, or
falsified his trust, if he did not actually open all the eyes of the Gentiles,
and turn them from the power of Satan to God.

But Sir, to convince you that there is more included in the Commission than
was in the Apostles power to effect, supposing the word Teach should signify
only what you apprehend, namely, the speaking such things which are proper to
make Disciples.

Consider this, They are charged to baptize all they taught, and was that in
their power? could they baptize any more than were willing to be baptized? or
should they have been judged falsifiers of their trust, or acting short of
their Commission, for not baptising all those that should take horses, and ride
away from them when they had heard the Word. It appears therefore undeniably,
that the very principle whereupon you found the absurdity is not good, and
consequently no force in your argument, but this being all you have levied
against my Brother Allens Argument, built upon the Text, and being found weak,
his conclusion lifts up its head, and that is, that it is disorderly for
persons to hold Church Communion before Baptism, because Baptism by Christ's
order was the next thing to be done after discipling, and that immediately.

Secondly, A second Argument to prove it a disorderly Practice, for the
Disciples to hold Church Communion before Baptism, is this.

If the Scripture makes Baptism the gate or entrance into the visible Church
or Body of Christ.

Then is it a most disorderly practice for persons to sit down in
Church-society without it.

But the Scripture makes Baptism the gate or entrance into the visible Church
or Body of Christ.

Mr. Goodwin den^eth now (in effect) that Baptism is the Ordinance of entrance
into the visible Body of Christ; yea, he is so far from thinking so, P. 61: Of
his Water dipping.
that he thinks the injunction of it, is but after the manner of the
free will offerings under the Law; so that men may either obey, or not obey,
without sin; yea, P: 48: Water dipping.
that a Church may be of as sound and worthy a constitution without Baptism,
as with it.

Now before I make particular answer to Mr. Goodwins Exception to the
interpretation of the Scripture alleged to prove it, I desire to make one
observation, which I would commend to the serious consideration of the Reader,
which is this.

That notwithstanding the vast variety of differences in the judgment of
Professors, about other matters of Christian Religion (both learned and
unlearned) in so much, that setting aside some few famous fundamentals, it is a
hard matter to find two men universally agreeing

Yet for this opinion, that Baptism is the Sacrament of entrance into the
visible Church of Christ, all the Professors of Christian Religion has met in
it as one man, as far as I ever yet heard or read of, whether Papal,
Prelatical, Presbiterial, or Independent, or Anabaptist, except some few
persons lately, the most whereof are given to Seekerisme.

And is not that opinion justly to be suspected for an error, that crosses the
judgment of almost all the world reputed Christian, as well those that are
under no temptation (by worldly respects) to baulk the naked truth, as those
that are.

This Argument I confess amounts not to a demonstration, but it justly
provokes an eye of jealousy over that opinion, that singleth a man out from
all his brethren of like precious faith, and renders him like the Widow Paul
speaks of, desolate.

I shall now proceed to establish this truth, by showing the invalidity of your
great exception to the interpretation of the 1 Corinthians. 12.13. which Text my
Brother Allen insisteth on to prove it; the words these, By one Spirit we are
all baptized into one Body: my Brother Allen understands with Mr. Baxster,
and the generally reputed Orthodox, the word baptized properly of water
Baptism. P. 342. Of plain Scripture.
Mr. Goodwin will needs understand it just now of Spirit Baptism; but why, P.
68, 72. Of his water dip.
because the Text says, By one Spirit we are baptized, and as for water, it is
not mentioned.

To which I answer. 1. The not mentioning of water is no Argument, that the
Text is not to be understood of water Baptism, because the word water is not
mentioned in the Commission it self for baptising, which yet notwithstanding is
plainly enough interpreted by the Apostles, to be meant of water Baptism,
because of their practicing it, by virtue of their Commission.

So also in the 1 Corinthians 1.13, 14, 15. the word water is not set down, but no
body in their right wits will understand the words otherwise, Were you baptized
in the Nume of Paul, I thank God I baptized none of you*

But you say the Text speaks of another Element, P. 342. Of Insants
Ch^rch-Membership
namely, the Spirit; It Is true, it does mention the Spirit as a concurrent
cause, says learned Baxsten, but the Text speaks of real Baptism.

2. How frequently are effects attributed to the Spirit in Scripture, in this
sense? Is not Baptism the Doctrine of the Spirit as well as other duties? Acts
1.2. Acts 2.38. Act. 8.29.38. Act. 1.48.
and that which the Spirit exciteth to amongst other acts of obedience? did not
the Spirit send Phillip to the Eunuch, as well to baptize him with water as
preach to him? and did not the Spirit inspire Peter to command Cornelius to be
baptized? and is not the proper office of the Spirit, to excite men to, and
guide men in the performance of all duty? why then may not real Baptism with
water, being an act of obedience, be attributed to the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22.
as well as any other acts of obedience whatsoever.

3. To understand these words (By the Spirit) as a working cause, and Baptism
as the effect, agrees to the context, from the first verse to the 12.

At the first verse, No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost; and is not that by the agency and working of the Spirit upon the heart,
persuading it to think so honorably of Christ, as to call him Lord. The
Spirits work is to raise the esteem of Christ in the soul. The souls calling
him Lord is the effect of that work.

In the like sense (I humbly apprehend) all the gifts spoken of to the 12.
verse, are attributed to the Spirit, namely, as so many effects of his
operation, as the cause producing them.

Which having treated on at large, he comes in the 13. verse to tell them,
that by the same Spirit, which enriched them with those gifts mentioned, they
became enabled to stoop to the yoke of Chtist, and put him on by Baptism, by
which both Jews and Gentiles, receiving the Gospel, became incorporated into
the mystical body of Christ, and so though many members, yet became now but one
body: As with persons in civil Corporations, who of many individuals become one
body, by solemnizing the rite of entrance, without which no man is counted a
Member.

But now not to understand the words, By one Spirit, and Baptized, the one as
the cause, the other as the effect, would be to sense these words (By the
Spirit) differently, from the sense of the same words diverse times in the
preceding verses, and enforce a metaphorical use of the word Baptized, without
any necessity,

But fourthly, to make it clear, that by Baptism here, he means it, not of
the baptism of the Spirit, it appears by that which is attributed to it,
namely, the entering of all persons into the mystical body of Christ, he says,
it is UNTO ONE BODY, and we are ALL baptized into one body. So that it is the
means sanctified by God, for all the members entrance into that body.

It cannot therefore be meant of the baptism of the Spirit, because then
working of miracles, and speaking with tongues, and prophesying, extraordinary
(which the Scripture means only by the baptism of the Spirit) should be the
initiating Ordinance into the body of Christ for all Church members, which I
suppose every one will say is absurd to imagine.

I have only to prove (for the making good this Argument) that when the
Scripture speaks of the Baptism of the Spirit, it would always be
understood of working miracles, speaking with tongues, and the like, and not of
common and ordinary gifts, as faith and love, etc.

It appears thus. 1. In that the holy Spirit never gives to faith, or love,
or any common gifts of the Spirit, the name of baptism, for men to do so is
unscripturall.

2. Because Christ's speaking to his Apostles, who had a good degree of faith
and love, yet he did not deem them for the present baptized with the holy
Spirit, but only tells them, Acts 1.4, 5. they should be so baptized, and
advises them to wait at Jerusalem for it; whereupon they were baptized with it
accordingly, upon the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.3, 4.

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat. And
they began to speak with other tongues, etc. Now in the 11. Acts 16. Peter
calls Cornelius his speaking with tongues, the baptism of the holy Ghost,
which Christ promised. Then remembered I the word of the Lord (meaning when he
heard them speak with tongues, Acts 10 46) John indeed baptized with water, but
ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost

So that the meaning of John the Baptist, Math. 3.11. and Christ, Acts 1.4,
where they speak of the baptism of the Spirit, must needs be of such a being
filled with the Spirit, and pouring forth of the Spirit, as whereby persons do
speak with tongues, and the like, because the Scriptures so interprets it,
and to judge otherwise, were to be wise, not only above, but against that
which is written.

But thirdly and lastly, to put it out of doubt, you shall find the Scriptures
putting abroad difference between that enjoyment of the Spirit, which the
Scripture calls the Baptism of the Spirit, and that by which persons come to
abound with faith, love, joy, peace, etc. as to the ways of attaining the one
and the other.

To attain ordinary fillings of the Spirit, in respect of these common fruits,
we are exhorted to the use of means to get them, and blamed if we have them
not, Ephesians. 5:18.
Luke 24.25.

So that the largeness of the possession of them depends ordinarily upon the
Creatures industry, and in that way attained, and according to men's industry or
sloth, they ordinarily have more or less of the Spirit

But as for the Baptism of the Spirit, it is immediately conferred by way of
extraordinary gift.

Consult the Scriptures, where the Baptism of the Spirit is mentioned, and you
shall find it so.

The first place is the 2 of Acts 2, 3, 4. verse, and suddenly there came a
sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house
where they were sitting: And there APPEARED unto them cloven tongues like as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the holy
Ghost, and began to speak with tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance,

Now the Apostle Peter ^^lleth ^his ^he (...) of the Spirit, Acts 11.15, 16.
and also expresses their attaining it by the falling of the boly Ghost upon
them; As I ^eg^^ ^o speak the holy Ghost FELL on them, as on us at the
beginning.

So also in the 8. of Acts 16. Who when they were come down, prayed for them,
that they night receive the holy Ghost: (meaning principally) the holy Ghost in
that way which they had not before, for they had the holy Ghost to enable them
to believe, as appears at the 12. verse, but they had not the Baptism of the
Spirit, which now Peter and John came to be instruments in by prayer for them,
with laying on of hands (though not exclusive of a further presence of the
Spirit in a common way.)

But now how does the Spirit express this kind of attaining the Spirit? Mark at
the 16. verse, For as yet he was FALLEN upon none of them, only they were
baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.

So in the 19. of Acts 6. And when Paul had laid his hands on them, the holy
Ghost CAME upon them, and they spoke with tongues and prophesied.

Does the Sun shine clearer at noonday than this truth, that the common fruits
of the Spirit are one thing, and the baptism of the Spirit another, namely,
the gifts of speaking with tongues, extraordinary prophesying, and working
miracles, and if that be granted, and who can with reason deny it: It follows
then unavoidably, that the 1 Corinthians. 12.13. speaks not of the Baptism of
the Spirit, because then speaking with tongues, and working miracles, should be
the Ordinance of entrance into the visible Church of Christ, for ALL
Church Members, for it is plain, (whatever is meant by Baptism in that Text)
that is the use of it we are all baptized INTO ONE BODY.

Fifthly and lastly, to prove, that by the word baptized, in the 1 Cor. 12.13.
is meant, real baptsme, and not, the baptism of the Spirit. The scope and
drift of the Apostle in mentioning it, says a good say to it.

Which is to make an argument of it, 1 Cor. 1^. from 1^.10 25.
to persuade to Christian love, care and tenderness one of another, as one may
easily see that will consult the place.

Now for proper real Baptism, we find the Apostle make use of that often to
the same purpose. Once before in the beginning of this Epistle, 1 Cor. 1.10,
and 15. so in the 4. of the Ephesians. 4, 5. and to the Colossians also.

But we never read of working miracles, or speaking with tongues, made any
Argument of union*

I hope then enough, and more than enough, is said to satisfy any indifferent
man, that the word baptized in the forementioned place, is to be understood
properly even of water Baptism, and consequently the Argument from that Text,
to prove Baptism the door of entrance into the visible Church of Christ*
unanswerable.

But besides this, 1 Cor. 12.13. to prove Baptism the door of the visible
Church, the 6 of the Romans 3. speaks the same language, Know ye not, that so
many of us, as were BAPTIZED INTO Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death,
etc.

Now to prove, that by Baptism in the first clause; he means it not of
mortification (which some conceive the Baptism of the Spirit) it appears
thus: If the Baptism of the Text be used as an Argument to persuade to perfect
mortification, and a new life, then is it not the thing it self. But it is used
as an Argument to persuade to perfect the work of mortification, and a new life.

In the 2 verse* How shall we ^^^t are dead to sin live any longer therein? Now
they were not already dead to sin in a proper sense, they were not already
actually mortified, though the work was begun in them, for then there would be
little fear of longer continuing in sin, to which they were dead, from which he
now dehorteth them.

But in the 3. verse he mentions their Baptism, and uses it argument wise,
to persuade not to live any longer in sin. Know ye not, that so many of us, as
w^^e baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? And at the 4.
verse, Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we aslo
should walk in newness of life.

So that his doctrine (in my apprehension is plainly this) that though for the
present they were not attained to the perfect state of actual mortification,
yet by their baptism they were under an effectual obligation to use all
possible means to attain thereto, and if this be not the true sense of the
place, I have lost my taste, good Reader judge.

Now to come home to the point, to prove Baptism the entering Ordinance into
the visible body of Christ. The Text says plainly of Baptism, that it was
INTO JESUS CHRIST: Now how into Christ, but into the mystical body of Christ
the Church? which in the 1 Corin. 12.12. is called Christ, for as the body is
one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body being many,
are one body SO ALSO IS CHRIST: meaning in respect of the Church, which is his
mistical body, where though there be many members, yet all make but one body,
as 1 Cor 12.13. says, the gate and entrance whereinto is by the door of
Baptism.

But in this point having the judgment of almost all the learned on our side,
I need say the less; I shall therefore conclude, as to this, with offering the
words of Vrsinus, and Mr. Baxsters Argument, with a word from the non-repeating
it, as to the same person.

Vrsinus in his Catechism, Baptism is a Sacrament of entrance into the
Church, P* 421*
whence it comes, that the Supper is presented to none, except first baptized.

As a Soldier before listing, and a King before crowning and taking his Oath,
Plain Scriture proof. P. 24.
so are we (he puts in infants too) Church members before Baptism. But as
every one that must be admitted solemnly, into the Army, must be admitted by
listing, as the solemn engaging sign, SO EVERY ONE THAT HAS RIGHT TO BE
SOLEMNLY ADMITTED INTO THE VISIBLE CHURCH, must ordinarily be admitted by
Baptism.

I prove it thus.

If we have neither precept nor example in Scripture since Christ ordained
Baptism, of any other way of admitting visible Members, but only by Baptism;
then all that must be admitted visible Members, must ordinarily be baptized.

But since Baptism was instituted, we have no precept or example, of admitting
visible Members any other way, but constant precept and example for admitting
this way.

Therefore all that must be admitted visible Members, MUST be baptized.

I know not what, in any show of reason can be said to this, by those that
RENOUNCE not Scripture. Mark well, Mr. Baxster thinks they that bold men may be
visible members without Baptism, renounce the Word of God for their rule.


For what man dare go in a way that has neither precept nor example to warrant
it, from a way that has a full current of both. Yet they that will admit
Members into the Church without Baptism do so.

And what can any man in reason imagine to be the ground, why Baptism is but
once practiced, whereas prayer, and hearing, and breaking bread frequent? but
only this, that God in the Ordinance of Baptism has in some respect a
different design (though in many other respects the very same, as I shall show
hereafter) and wherein can any one conceive that difference to lie, but here,
that it is the Rite of entrance into the body of Christ, and consequently no
need of reiterating it, no more than there is of being twice made free of the
City, or twice listed into an Army? Some I find make a question, whether
Baptism should not be repeated, in respect of the same person, which is
strange, considering, that though Christ in the Commission orders the
Apostles to Teach the Disciples again, there is not a word of baptising again,
Math. 18.20
neither did the Apostles ever baptize any into the Name of Christ twice, that
we find in Scripture, and surely they both knew and practiced the mind of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1 Phil. 3 17.
and we are charged to follow their example, and to mark those which walk
contrary to avoid them.

From these premises it is clear enough, that Baptism is, in the wisdom of
Christ, the Ordinance of entrance into the visible Church, or Body of Christ,
and consequently, there can be no regular enjoying the privileges due to the
body before it.

The truth is, to admit unbaptised persons to all the privileges of Church
communion, is as irregular and disorderly, as to admit the Mayor to the grand
privileges of the chair, before he has been sworn to the faithful service of
the City.

3. To prove baptized persons, sitting down in Church bodies with unbaptised,
disorderly.

I prove it thus:

That practice which brings down the esteem of Baptism, and makes it
slighted, is against the Order of Christ.

But for Disciples that are baptized, to walk together in a Church body, with
unbaptised, brings down the esteem of Baptism, and makes it slighted.

That it is against the Order of Christ, that any thing should be practiced to
prejudice the primitive esteem of Baptism, appears: 1. By Christ's joining it
with Teaching in the Commission, without the least hint of parting them, Math.
28. 2. By promising the same presence, to the end of the world, as well to
Baptising as Teaching. 3. By the singular use of Baptism to all Beleivers in
all ages (of which more hereafter) which I suppose makes Mr. Baxster call
Baptism a great Ordinance. P. 302. Of plain Scripture.



But for persons that are baptized, to sit down in a Church body with
unbaptised, will make Baptism slighted.

I prove thus:

If unbaptised Disciples enjoy all the self same privileges of the Church that
baptized persons do, which they do, if they sit down together in a Church body,
then must the reputation of Baptism needs be in danger.

1. Because it admiteth to no privilege of the Church, but what may be had
without it. 2. Because the act of Baptism is irksome to the flesh, which if
not balanced by some considerable advantage, will upon that account suffer: if
this be not reason, set them to judge that are least esteemed in the Church.
4 That practice which consulteth the loss and spiritual damage of the
Disciples, can never be an orderly practice.

But for baptized Disciples to admit of unbaptised into full communion, is to
consult their loss, and spiritual damage. That to admit Disciples to full
Communion before baptism, is to consult their loss, I prove thus.

If they are not baptized before joining, in probability they are not like to
be after, because such confused joining secretly whispereth a low esteem of the
Ordinance, even by the baptized themselves, otherwise they would not hold their
communion without it, having no such president in the Word. 2. Because the act
is unpleasing to the flesh. 3. because they are in possession of the
privileges of the Church without it, and consequently one great Argument of
considering the grounds of it, is as it were over, so that it is a rare thing
if ever they be brought to submit.


Now not to obey every Ordinance of Christ, must needs be a loss to the
Creature, because in their institution, as well as in the creation, In wisdom
he ordained them all, aiming as well at the Creatures good, as his own glory:
Therefore the Pharisees, that reject Baptism, Luke 7.30.
are said to reject the Counsel of God AGAINST themselves.

5. That practice in the worship of God, which in reason, is like to lay the
foundation of j^rrs, discentions and discords in the Church, can never be of
Christ's ordering, because jarrs and discentions in the Church stands in
direct enmity to his interest, wherefore he would not have the Church only be
at peace amongst themselves, but as much as in them lies live peaceably with
ALL men.

But for persons that are baptized, to sit down in Church bodies with
unbaptised, in all reason will breed jarrs.

Can two walk together except they be agreed?

I suppose he means, that they cannot walk comfortably together, for
otherwise they may walk together after a fashion, besides such Interrogations
in Scripture, affirm with Emphasis the matter Interrogated.

So that when he says, CAN two walk together, he would insinuate, not only
some degrees of improbability, but that it is next to an impossibility, that
they should maintain sweet communion; but those words (except they be agreed,
must be understood warily, not of every light difference in opinion (for then
there would be little sweet communion in the Church at all, there being few
that agree in every thing.

But in matters of moment (as this will easily be apprehended to be, by any
indifferent person that weighs it) it cannot lightly be, but there must be
jarrs, discentions, to the embittering their fellowship.

That difference about meats and days, what trouble did it work in the Church
at Rome, Roman. 14.3. Let not him that eats DESPISE him that eats not, and
let not him which eats not JVDGE him that eats: yea, at the 10. verse, Why
do thou judge thy Brother? why do thou set at NOVGHT thy Brother? So that
despising, judging and setting at naught, followed that poor difference about
meats and days.

What difference then in reason would this about Baptism work, when that one
party, namely, the unbaptised, shall look upon the other as practicing
will worship, and making their Religion ridiculous, and adhering to a
generation of men scarce worthy to live, as now Mr. Goodwin thinks of them.

And on the other hand, the baptized they shall look upon their brethren
sprinkling childrens faces, presuming to call that the Ordinance of Baptism,
which in their judgments is a mere mockery, and doing it too, in the Name of
the Father, Son and holy Spirit, which in their apprehensions is little less
than blasphemy.

How should these two parties of Beleivers walk together without sore
differences; and the more, by how much the more zealous they are for the pure
worship of God, a lukewarm Spirit will best befit Churches of that
constitution: this is so plain a case, that I think I need not proceed further
in the demonstration.

6. That practice which in the worship of God is not only beside the custom
of the first Churches, which was settled by the Apostles, but directly
contrary, can never be an orderly practice.

1. Because they did what they did therein by special Commission, 1 Cor. 11.23.
2 Cor, 10.8. 2. We have no reason to doubt the faithfulness of the Apostles in
excuting it, for though they had frailties as other men, yet in what they did
in settling the religion of Christ, they did by special direction and
extraordinary assistance, Math. 28.19. and so their example is as Laws to us.
Excellent is Mr. Baxster to this point.

Moses being appointed to the forming of the old Church and Commonwealth of
the Jews, Saints Rest 212.
to the building of the Tabernacle his precepts and examples in these works
(though we could not find his particular direction) are to be taken as divine,
so also the Apostles having commission to form and order the Gospel Churches,
their doctrine and examples therein are by their general Commission warranted,
and their practice in stablishing the Lords day, in settling the Officers and
Orders of Churches, are to us as Laws ( still binding with those limitations,
as positives only which give way to greater.)

The ground of this position is, because it is inconsistent with the wisdom of
God, and faithfulness too, to set men to a work and promise to be with them,
and yet to forsake them, and suffer them to err in the building of that house
which must endure to the end of the world.

That practice then in the worship of God, which is directly contrary to
Apostolical custom, can never be orderly

And Sir, (if I mistake not very much) you have heretofore said as much to this
point, as any man in the world can say, for you have these words in your fourth
Caution for Reformation.

The best patterns and examples under heaven are but seducers in what they
fall short of or besides the Word of God: the injunction from heaven is very
particular and express; See that thou make all things according to the pattern
showed thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.5.

And Ezekiel. 43 10. Thou Son of Man show the house to the house of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquity, and let them measure the pattern, viz.
to build, say you (mark) with ALL POSSIBLE EXACTNESS according to it.

Now whether the Disciples, sitting down in Church bodies before Baptism, be
not directly contrary to the pattern and consequently a disorderly practice,
let the world judge.

1. By the Scriptures, where we have Christ commanding baptism presently upon
discipling, Math. 18.19 which we see the Apostles practiced with much
faithfulness, in the whole story of the Acts, to which we have spoken already.
2. Where we find the erection of the first famous Gospel Church, the manner is
thus reported, Acts 2.41. 1. They gladly received the Word. 2. Were baptized:
And 3. They continued in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and breaking
bread, and prayer: but first you see, they were baptized, behold then the
pattern in the Mount; and must not he be next to willingly ignorant that does
not see this, that is so plainly written, that he that runs may read it.

Why then, if all other patterns be but seducers, and that our duty is, to
build with all possible exactness according to the first pattern, have you not
justified our separation from you, for resusing to build according to this
pattern.

2. Let the judgment of the learned, Mr. Baxster Saints rest, p 179: from
Doctor Preston.
touching the primitive practice, be taken. This food we call the Eucharist,
(says Justin Martyr, one of the most ancient Fathers, from the practice of the
primitive Church) to which ^o man is admitted, but only he that beleiveth the
truth of our doctrine; being washed in the laver of Regeneration, for remission
of sin^, which washing he expresses thus; Then (meaning after faith and
prayer) they are brought to the Water, and are BORN AGAIN OR BAPTIZED, in the
same way as we our selves were born again, for they are washed with water, In
the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit. But that which is home to my point is,
that no Disciple touched the Eucharist, as he calls it, till first baptized
indeed, after Baptism, then he sits down with the body in full communion,
but not before.

3. As we have the Scriptures of our side, and the judgment of the learned on
our side, that this was the Primitive practice, so we had you your self on our
side at this point, when you writ your letter to Mr. Tho. Goodwin, p, 7.
Covenanting is not lawful before Baptism, is is evident, because it is not
lawful for a Church to receive the unbaptised into fellowship with them, as
Members of that body; neither is there example or APPEARANCE of warrant in
Scripture, for such a thing: And at that time you were as confident, as
Confidence it self could make you, Page 1.
of what you then wrote, as you there affirm, or if you were not of other
things, yet of this, because you say, and that according to truth, That there
is neither example nor appearance of warrant in Scripture for such a thing:
Yea, in that letter p. 5. Evident it is, that those that were added to the
Church, were baptized, before this is affirmed of them.

So that upon Principles of your own (which is that we ought to build with all
possible exactness according to the pattern) you are condemned. 1. By the
Scriptures. 2. By the learned. 3. Out of your own mouth, all which speak
Baptism to go before Church Fellowship, and consequently, to walk otherwise a
disorderly practice; answer who can: And the truth is, if we are not to follow
the customs of the Primitive Churches in worship, in every thing, that we can
follow them in, with this limitation, (Positive giving way to Morral) which
they did under the Law, how are they a pattern to us, how shall we understand
where to follow them, and wherein to leave them.


Upon the whole matter then I conclude, that though by faith men become the
Sons of God, and that Christ owneth all true Beleivers for brethren; yet they
have not thereby a present immediate right to full communion with the Church,
simply upon that account, because the same God, that ordained faith, the means
of adoption, has ordained Baptism to go before visible membership into the
Church of Christ, much more before a constant sitting down in full Church
Communion, they then that walk otherwise cast off the Rule, and so reproach the
wisdom of Christ, complain of the Rule as imperfect, and become Judges of the
Law.

Your fourth Consideration being of one heart and soul with the third, I shall
have the less to say to it, it is for substance this: THat persons that have
fellowship and Communion with God, are thereby immediately fittted for
communion with the Church, without Baptism, otherwise it is not against us.
This Proposition Mr. Goodwin supposes proved by the 14. Romans 1, 2, 3. Him
that is weak in the faith receive you. Again, let not him that eats despise
him that eats not; the reason, why he must be received and not despised, is,
For God has accepted him.

But how Mr. Goodwin, or any man else, can make this follow from thence, that
therefore all persons that have fellowship with God, have a present right to
Church communion without Baptism, I understand not.

For 1. The weak in faith, that this Text speaks of, were baptized persons,
which appears by the sixth chapter, where he uses their Baptism as an
argument to mortification, and a new life. That the words in the third verse
(So many of us) is not partitive of the Disciples amongst themselves, which
Brother Allen has proved unanswerably from the scope, to which Mr. Goodwin
has made no reply; and to the further clearing whereof I shall speak something
in due place.

2. Mr. Goodwin supposes, that the object of receiving is into Church
communion, (when the Text says, Him that is weak in the faith receive you)
which I humbly apprehend, is an ungrounded conjecture, because the Apostle
writes to an established Church, whereof those weak ones were a part, which by
virtue of their membership were already in full communion with the Church.

Besides, is it a reasonable thing to imagine, that such a thought would enter
into the heart of the Church, to cast brethren out of fellowship with the
Church of Christ, that was regularly immembred, because they were more self
denying than others, by eating herbs, which they did unto the Lord, Romans 14.6.
Surely the Church wanted no exhortation to that, so that this caution therefore
serves some other design, as I humbly apprehend, namely, the common respect of
Christians, which strong ones can hardly vouchsafe to the weak, for as the weak
are apt to judge the strong, so the strong to slight and despise the weak,
which is the words of the Text, Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats DESPISE him
that eats not.

But by despising them, to understand, the rejection of them from Church
communion, the Scripture says no such thing, and for you to say it, it is to
be guilty of that which you charge us with, namely, to take a half for a whole,
and to indulge a light appearance, and to let it pass for an evident
demonstration.

But 3. Suppose the word (receive) should respect the Communion of the Church,
and the Argument this. That God having received the weak into communion with
himself, it is the Churches duty to receive them into her communion: Does it
follow from thence, that it would be her duty to receive them, disorderly, into
her communion? To come a little closer, Cornelius, the person you instance in,
from Acts 10.25 being a fearer of God, and worker of righteousness, was
ACCEPTED of God; yet when God had a purpose to add him to the visible Church
of Christ, he sends him to a Minister of Christ, and inspireth him, to
command Cornelius to be baptized, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 10.48.
Neither does Peter, notwithstanding he was convinced of his being a person
accepted of God, hold any Church communion with him before it, what ever he did
after.

4. If fellowship with God give immediate right to full communion with the
Church, simply, upon that account, then not only the godly of the
Presbyterians have such a right, but the Episcopal party too, nay, it is
probable, a many in the darkness of Popery (for I suppose no body can be so
uncharitable, as to think there are no persons there upright) nay, to show the
unreasonableness of this opinion, I could go further and say, Pagans debt and
Dowry, p. 14.
many amongst the Heathen, which in your judgment may be in the state of
grace; These and all these have a present actual, immediate right to Church
communion.

In a word, as this principle was contrary to your judgment heretofore, so
also has your practice been ever since you took up the Church way; I remember
not one man, that ever sat down with the Church, in the constant fellowship
thereof, but was orderly joined, according to the Independent principles. Nor
one man that ever occasionally broak bread with the Church, but it was matter
of offense to some, except they were members of some Church or other.

Who then may not see, whose eyes are not too heavy to open, what a strait your
opposing us brings you too, namely, to turn head upon the principles of the
way you walk in, and your own constant practice (and what man is he, who does
not glory in men, whose faith and practice stands not in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 3.21 1 Cor. 2.5. James 2.1.
and that has not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons)
but must conceive with jealousies as strong as death, that that cause which you
now plead is not right, which puts so learned a man as your self to so
desperate a loss.

Your fifth Consideration for substance this: THat learned men are not agreed
about the exact signification of the word BAPTIZO, whether it be to dip or not,
therefore not fit for any, much less such illiterate ones, to determine it, and
build so great a matter upon it.
To which I answer. 1. What considerable advantage would it be to us, to know
the original at this point, it seems all the knowledge of the learned works
not union in judgment about it, you confess they are not agreed for all that.

But 2. Whether learned men can agree about the signification of the word
BAPTIZO or no, it is of little consideration to us in this case, because the
Spirit of God has interpreted it to our hand, in the holy Scripture elsewhere,
namely, in the 6. of Romans 4. and Colos. 2.12. Therefore we are BURIED with
him by Baptism. Again, being BURIED with him in Baptism, wherein also we are
risen with him, besides many other places: So that if these Scriptures speak of
water Baptism (which is but few men's question, That one of them does. I have
proved already, and would the other if need required it) there must be a
burial of the body in water, where the Baptism of the Gospel of Christ is
rightly administered, otherwise it is none of the Baptism of Christ, and the
Apostles, and Primitive Churches. The late Annotators are much to be commended
for their honest and upright dealing with the Scripture herein, upon this 4
verse of the 6. Romans, these words, Buried with him by Baptism, in this
phrase, say they, the Apostle seems to allude to the ancient manner of
Baptism, which was to dip the parties baptized, and as it were to bury them
under the water for a while, and then to draw them out of it, and lift them up,
to represent the burial of our old Man, and our Resurrection to newness of
life. Again, upon the 8. of Acts 38. these words, They both went down into the
water, and he baptized him: They were wont, say they, to go^ down into the
water, and dip the whole body: As in the 3. Math. 16. So that their judgment
of the Text there also; And Jesus when he was baptized went up straight way out
of the water. I say, their judgment is, that his body was dipped by John in
Jordan, and who can think otherwise with reason, for to what purpose should he
go to the River to be baptized, but because there would be a want of much
water? And how clear is this apprehension to an unprejudiced mind, since that
the abundance of water is given for the reason of John's baptising at Enon. John
3.23. And John also was baptising in Enon, near to Salim, because there was
MVCH WATER there.

But besides, the 3. Math. 16. says of Jesus, that when he was baptized he
went Up straitway OUT of the water. And so Mark 1.9, 10. and how could he be
said to go up out of the water, except he first went down into it? As the
Scripture says expressly of Phillip and the Eunuch, I say as expressly as they
can speak, read else Acts 8.38 And Phillip and the Eunuch went both DOWN INTO
the water, and he baptized him, and when they were come Up OUT of the water:
And can any body with any show of reason conceive, that they went down into the
water to be sprinkled of the face. Justin Martyr therefore tells us, that in
their Baptism they were BORN of water, which he propounds as their practice
from the Primitive custom. Mr. Baxster Saints Rest p. 179.
Now the whole man its coming out of the womb of the water, has a perfect
Analogy to a natural birth, to which he does allude; but in the sprinkling of
the face there is no likeness at all to any such thing as a birth. Calvin
himself, as much a friend as he was to Infant-sprinkling, yet was so honest, as
to affirm, its practice was not from the Word of God, but the CHURCH HER TAKING
TO HER SELF THE LIBERTY, meaning, to vary from the Apostolic practice, which
was by plunging the body into the water, and this he acknowledges from Acts
8.38. Phillip and the Eunuch going down into the water, and coming up out of
it; Com. upon the Acts p. 208.
and did not Calvin understand the original? And does he not further plainly
say, this practice was taken up since the beginning, for of old the rite was to
put all the body into the water.

Or what if so be, that the words translated INTO and OUT OF, may from the
Original be rendered UNTO and FROM, does it follow, that they must needs be so
rendered in this place, or was they ever so translated by any one, since the new
Testament was put into English? and indeed how can it be with any reason
thought they should be so, since it is plain, they were come unto the water
before this is affirmed of them, that they went down into it, by v. 36. which
says, they came unto a certain water, and the Eunuch said, lo here is water.

But 2. Suppose the words should be so translated here, would that force us to
believe they went but to the water side, and not into the water, and that they
came but from the water side, and not UP out of the Element of water; besides,
the cry of the Scriptures, lately mentioned, and the judgments of learned men
upon them, which Mr. Baxster well knows; surely every body that goes into
the water goes unto it first.

Mr. Baxster allows the custom of the Primitive times are patterns to us,
(with the limitation formerly spoken of) p. 135. of his plain Scripture proof,
arguing against the necessity of dipping, says:

1. It is not yet proved by any, that dipping was the Primitive practice, which
is strange, since he himself gives us the judgment of Justin Martyr as
orthodox, who relating their way of baptising from the Primitive times, p. 129.
of Saints Rest, says, That they are brought to the water, and are BORN again,
or baptized, does not that imply their dipping? how else is there the least
resemblance between an ordinary birth and their baptism? and is not an Analogy
therein aimed at? but I refer the Reader to what has been said to this point
already: but I cannot but much wonder, that Mr. Baxster should say, that the
Jaylour was baptized in his house, does the Scripture say so? read Acts 16.33.
And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was
baptized he and all his strait way; but where he was baptized is not set down.

But the next words rather give us, that it was not in the house, because
presently after the mention of his baptism the Text says, He brought them
into the house, so that though this Text speaks clearly, only to his being
baptized presently upon beleiving, not to the place where, or the manner how,
yet it gives more ground to believe it was done out of doors than in the house.

But what need we grope in the dark? does not the light shine bright from other
Scriptures, why should we think the Jaylors baptism to differ from all other
men's.

But Mr. Baxster objecteth further, that the River Enon (where the Text says
was MUCH water, which also is given for the reason why John baptized there)
Travelers say, is a small brook that a man may almost step over.

Whatever Travelers say, I hope Mr. Baxster, that has written so much to
prove the Scriptures truth, will believe the plain Word of God, namely, that
there was much water there then, when John baptized there, whatever there may
be when the Traveller was there. There might be much water there when John
baptized there, as doubtless there was, or the Scripture would not say so, and
yet little enough when the Traveller passed that way that Mr Baxster speaks
of.

Does not the Scriptures say, Psalm 107.33, 34. He turns Rivers into a
wilderness, and the water springs into dry ground, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein? Nay, does he not threaten the Jews, Psalm 42.15. That he
would dry up their pooles, and promise, when he restores them, that he will
make their thirsty lands springs? Isaiah 35 7. Their present dryness then is no
argument that there was not much water in John's days.

But honest Reader, is not this an ugly suggestion, infinitely disparaging the
Scriptures? Is the report of Travelers any thing to us, against the express
Word of God, and does not Mr. Baxster urge the report of Travelers as
considerable to the contrary, of what is written in the Word? I offer not this
as any Argument, that Mr. Baxster has not a due esteem of the Scripture, No,
no, I pray God strengthen my faith in them, and make it equal to his; he is a
person that my soul honors, for his edge Godward; but to show the Reader
what cause he has to suspect that cause, that puts such learned men, as Mr.
Goodwin and Mr. Baxster is, upon such strange adventures to make it good. In
the mean time, thou can not lightly but see, that we have the plain words of
Scripture on our side, that their mouth is open, and their heart enlarged, to
justify our practice, but they will neither be courted nor forced to speak
against us.

But Mr. Baxster further objecteth against the necessity of dipping, thus, P.
135. of plain Scripture.
The thing signified is set forth by the phrase of washing or sprinkling, and
the sign need not exceed the thing signified: I confess the sign need not
exceed the thing signified; but it is far from the truth, that sprinkling, or
any washing that is not by dipping can be any sign of all the holy thing
signified in baptism, which is plainly set down in the 6. Roman. 4 and Colos.
2.12. Being buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him:
If the Baptism of the New Testament, sealed in Christ's hears blood, be the
sign of Death, Burial and Resurrection, then is not sprinkling, or any washing
that is not by dipping, sufficient to signify it, but the Baptism of the New
Testament is a sign of Death, Burial and Resurrection, it is plain in the Text;
Mr. Baxster acknowledges both these Scriptures to be meant of water Baptism,
p. 342. Of his Scripture proof.

As for those Scriptures, namely, 1 Corrinth. 6.11. Titus 3.5. with some
others, P. 135. Of Scripture proof.
which Mr. Baxster instanceth in, as hinting the spiritual good things
signified by Baptism; I acknowledge they respect a part of the good things
signified by baptism, namely, the souls cleansing from sin by Christ's blood,
but not all, nor indeed half what he intended to signify by Baptism.

But what should the reason be, that Mr. Baxsters design being to enumerate the
Scriptures, speaking of the holy thing signified in baptism, should leave out
the two grand capital Scriptures to the point, namely, Colos. 2.12. Roman.
6.34. Is it not, because his opinion cannot look them in the face without
blushing? there being no sign of Death, Burial or Resurrection, or any such
like thing in sprinkling.

Oh that Mr. Baxster would lay to heart this one consideration, and consider
once again the high and holy design of Christ in Baptism, which considered
evinceth against all contradiction, that the form can be no other, but by
dipping, or burying the body in water: his design, what is it, but to make the
Gospel word, and the Gospel figure to answer one another, as face answers
face in the water, and to be brother Preachers of the same doctrine, 1 Cor. 15
3 Romans 4.25. Compared with Romans 6.2, 3, 4. Col. 2.12. Col. 3.1.
namely, the death of Christ for sinners, and the sinners duly to die to sin,
and to suffer for and with Christ? Christ's resurrection for the sinners
justification, the sinners duly to rise to Christ's life here, because of the
blessed assurance of a glorious resu^rection to eternal bliss with Christ
hereafter; all which holy doctrine, which is the substance of the Gospel, is
preached in baptism, P. 177. Cases of Conscience.
as well as the Word, which makes Mr. Perkins say thus, The preaching of the
Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, are all one in substance, for
in the one the will of God is SEEN, and in the other HEARD.

Now where is the will of God touching Christ's Death, Burial and Resurrection,
and our death, burial and resurrection with him, seen in the sprinkling of
childrens faces? Oh that we had an impartial Judge!

The Apostle affirms of the Gospel, 2 Cori^^h. 3.18 That we all with open
face behold, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord. And does not the Apostle
chiefly intend the Sacraments of the Gospel by the metaphor of a glass, because
they respect the eye as a glass does, whereas the Word preached respects the
care? And if we do but consider why Christ would have the Gospel preached
(namely, to affect the hearts and souls of men with the goodness thereof) It
will easily appear, that the form of baptism can be no other but by dipping,
because in any other way the sign will no way answer the thing signified, and
so the glass being defaced, the heart is not affected by the eye for want of a
resemblance, whereas otherwise the Ordinances being administered, according to
the last will of Christ, where there is a full correspondence between sign and
thing signified, they go hand in hand with the Word, excellently aiding and
assisting the holy design of the Word preached, when administered upon the right
Gospel subject, namely; a converted Disciple to Christ, which Mr. Baxster, p.
301. of plain Scripture proof, calls, the most fully capab^e subjects, the
most eminent subjects, the most excellent subjects, and of whom the Scripture
fully speaks: In the same place complains of Infant baptism, as dark in
Scripture, and hard to find, notwithstanding his flourish of plain Scripture
proof for it.

Be astonished therefore oh ye heavens, and horribly afraid oh earth, that such
a silly Worm as Man is, such a thimble full of dust, should dare to change
Christ's Ordinances, and deface that glass, which represents Christ's glory,
and blurre the last will of him before whose judgment seat they must all
appear to be judged, 2 Cor. 5.10
and receive according to all the deeds done in the body: Are ye stronger than
he?

Your sixth Consideration being the very self same in substance with the first,
I refer the Reader to my Answer to that, in which thou shall find the Answer
to this also, only there is a remarkable passage in the beginning of it, which
I shall have occasion to speak to, when I come to answer the 18th Consideration.

Your seventh Consideration for substance this: THat in the 6. of Hebr. 2. the
word Baptismes, which is there reckoned amongst the foundations, or beginning
doctrines of Christ, being in the plural number, it is not easy to determine,
whether by it be not meant variety of forms in baptising, or a variety of
subjects of Baptism, rather than a variety of Baptismes.
To which I answer, why should that be hard to you or any man else which the
Scripture has made easy?

As for variety of subjects the Scripture is silent, we read of no subjects,
but discipled persons, made so by teaching. For variety of forms of baptising
Disciples, where is there any such thing so much as whispered? But as for
variety of Baptismes, that the Scripture speaks fully too, though but one
proper real Baptism, namely, that with water, Math. 3.11. Luke 12.5^
which is the Ordinance of the Church, the other, namely, that of the Spirit
and afflictions, being metaphorical, and by way of Analogy, to that which is
real and proper, is called Baptism; yet Dr. Lus^ington upon the place says,
that the Siriac Translation renders the word Baptism in the singular number:
but be it otherwise, why should we take hedge and ditch, when the Kings
highway lies just before us.

Your eighth Consideration for substance this: THat withdrawing upon this
account, is a schismatical practice, and a sin of a high nature.
I confess with all my heart, that Scripture Schism is a sin of a high nature,
and of deep demerit, and that for the reason you give: but that ours is that
which the Scripture condemns, I utterly deny.

Where ever Schism is there is separation, but it does not follow, where ever
separation is that there is Schism, 2 Corinthians. 6.17. Come out from amongst
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord God, and I will be a Father unto you;
No body will say this separation of the Text, is sinful Schism.

Sinful separation cannot be but from a body regularly united according to the
direction of Christ, and the example of the Primitive Churches, because we have
a positive Command to withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly in
the Church, 2 These. 3.6.
much more every Society that is not built upon the principles of the doctrine
of Christ, I mean those, which (by Christ's order) concern orderly joining, but
yours is such a one, and therefore separation can be no schism, which only
respects Churches of a regular constitution, such as the Church of Corinth
was, and the rest of the Churches mentioned in Scripture.

Sir, when you can show us a rule from Christ to gather Churches without
Baptism, in all the new Testament, then what you say corcerning us will come
home to us, and we shall be found guilty of that heinous sin: But Sir, if no
such rule appear from Christ, nor any such Church appear in all the Word of
God, then will not our separation from you be found that which the Scripture
calls Schism, but a conscientious withdrawing to perfect the work of
reformation, according to our solemn vow to the most High, which yet would have
been our duty, whether we had vowed it or no.

But 2. Why should our separating from you be counted Schism, more than your
separating from the Parish Churches? is not our ground the very self same which
yours then was? And what can you say to Mr. Baxster, who charge you with
Schism for withdrawing from the National Church, P. 193. Of his Scripture
proof.
which we cannot answer you with: He calls you Church-Renter, as you do us,
and an undone person, amongst others upon that account, that are as pillars of
Salt in his eye. And is it not strange, that Mr. Goodwin should be so busy
with the word Schism, schismatic and schismatical, as to use them eight times
in 30. lines, against his friends, for doing that which himself has given them
an example in upon the same ground.

But 3. and lastly, As the fatal Apostasy from the pure Ordinances of Christ,
and the example of the Primitive Churches in worship, was graduall, so has the
recovery of primitive purity been; now a little and then a little, as it has
pleased God to communicate light to his upright ones, that he has used in the
reformation, but it has been won, as it were by inches, and still been made
costly to the Names at least of the Instruments, they all bear this burden
which now Mr. Goodwin charge us with, of schism.

The Pope cries Schism and Heresy after the Church of England, for
renouncing communion with the Church of Rome. The Pishops cry Schism after
some of the Pres byterians. The Presbyterians cry Schism after Mr. Goodwin,
and all Separatists from the National Church, which withdrawings have been so
many steps toward primitive purity: Now Mr. Goodwin cries Schism (pretty
liberally too) after us, who have gone a few steps farther in the same path
(which as yet his heart serves him not to proceed in) that we may reach the
things we have heard from the beginning, Which Rule Calvin confesses the
Church took liberty to depart from.
1 John 2.24. That we may stand complete in ALL the will of God, Colos. 4.12.
And walk in ALL the Ordinances and Commandments of God blameless, as Zachary
and Elizabeth did, Luke 1.6. And keep the Ordinances as they were delivered to
the Churches of old, by the Apostles from Christ, which was matter of praise to
the Church of Corinth, as long as they so kept them, 1 Cor. 11.2.

Which that we may do, we find the same cause to renounce the National
Baptism, which Mr. Goodwin has done to renounce the National Church, which is
the very basis and foundation of it, and that without which it is not easy to
conceive, how it could come to pass at first, or how it should stand long.

Well Sir, its not long ere your work and ours will be tried, you have judged
early, but our comfort is, that this is but man's day; Christ is not far off,
whose cause we plead, 1 Cor. 4.3.
and then not he that commends himself is approved, but he whom God
commends, then shall every man have praise of God, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, 1 Cor, 4.5.

Your ninth Consideration is: THat it is but a carnal Ceremony, and so
acknowledged by Mr. Lawrence, now Lord President, whom you style one of the
gravest Authors of the Antipaed^ baptisticall faith.
But Sir, though Mr Lawrence has styled Baptism a carnal Ceremony, I pray
Sir, where has the holy Spirit called any of the Ordinances of the New
Testament carnal Ordinances? It Is true; the Ordinances of Moses are called
carnal Ordinances, by the holy Spirit, Hebr 9.10. which lasted until the time
of reformation, says the Text, or Christ's time, wherein the Church has new
Ordinances given by Christ himself, whereof Baptism is one, and given by
Christ, as a Reformer of what was carnal* therefore to call Christ's Ordinances
carnal, I humbly conceive, agrees not to the form of wholesome words, and the
rather, because beginning with the Gospel, as the Galatians did, who believed
it, and put on Christ in Baptism, they are said to begin in the Spirit, Galat.
3.3. unto which the carnal Ordinances of the Law are opposed under the word
flesh, Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect
by the flesh?

But 2. When Mr. Lawrence calls it a carnal Ceremony, it is only in regard
of the outward act, which respects the flesh or outward man, abstract from
the spiritual design of Christ in it, but otherwise in his judgment, as well
as ours, an Ordinance very spiritual, and full of the wisdom and Spirit of
God; for proof of this, I refer the Reader to his book of Baptism, but
especially to his Discourse, from p. 101. to 113.

3. And lastly, That the want of it renders beleivers unfit for any spiritual
communion (I am far from thinking so) but that it renders them unfit for
that full communion, which a Church of Christ, in the right order of the
Gospel, enjoys; that I do believe, and have given a full account of it
already, in answer to your third Consideration: And as for making work for a
second Crucifixion of Christ, I suppose Sir, that which made it at first, is
most like to do it the second time, and that was sin and disobedience, not
righteousness and full walking with Christ, according to the rules received of
him.

Your tenth Consideration for substance this: IGnorance in some things
concerning the mystery of Christ, found either in a Church, or particular
persons, hinders not their lawful communion in a Church way, for then there
would be none fit, because the best know but in part, therefore not to be
looked for that they should be practiced in full.
If by the word Church, be meant an orderly joined Church, made of fit matter,
according to the Command of Christ, it is most true that you say, that Ignorance
in many things will not render their communion unlawful, and your reason good
and sound.

But this will not prove, that baptized Disciples may lawfully sit down in
Church bodies with unbaptised, because such conjunctions are disoderly (as I
have proved at large) and consequently sinful, and so not to be indulged, but
corrected and set strait according to the Rule.

But why does Mr. Goodwin tell us so often of judging our brethren unclean for
communion? Is it we that judge you? Col. 2.6.
or is it not rather the Rule of the Lord Jesus? All Christians are commanded
to walk after Christ, and that in matter of Ordinances as well as faith, and if
so doing, judge you, it is not we that judge you, but Christ:, It Is true, in a
sense we judge you, Heb. 11.7.
as Noah by obedience judged the old world, but it is our grief, that there is
occasion for it. But have we judged you any otherwise than you have judged the
godly Presbyterians of Coleman-street? if we be sinners herein, you cannot be
righteous, except the same action may be grace and holiness in one man, which
is sin and unworthiness in another, and that too when done under much the like
circumstances.

Therefore thou art inexcusable oh man, who ever thou art, that judge, for
wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
another do the same thing, Roman. 2.1. If you will needs find fault with us,
you must repent, and return to the Parish again.

As to your odious foul language of sacrilegious Church-breakers; I answer, 1
Pet. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.
hereunto are we called, from the example of Christ, when we are reviled, not
to revile again, but to commit ourselves to him that judges righteously.

Your eleventh Consideration follows, and for substance this: THat Baptism
is no constituting principle of a true Church, yea probably, no part of
Churchship, or the visibility thereof, and that the Apostles did not so look
upon it as being either. 1. Because in his inscription to the Churches, be
mentions their sanctification, calling to be Saints, etc. but not their
Baptism. 2. It is not mentioned by way of commendation, either of Church or
person, more than the observance of other Ordinances.
That Baptism is so essential to a right raised Church of Christ, that without
it there can be none in the right order of the Gospel, I have proved already in
my Answer to your third Consideration.

To the Reasons you give, why the Apostles did not look upon the Baptism of
the Churches as any part of their churchship or visibility thereof, I shall now
address my self to make answer: Your first is, because in the inscription of
his Epistles to the Churches, he mentions their faith, with diverse other
things, but not their Baptism.

If this be ground to presume, that the Apostles looked not upon their
Baptism, as any part of their-churchship or visibility thereof, then neither
was their preaching, or hearing the Word, nor breaking bread, nor watching over
one another, nor admonition in case of sin, neither is the great duty of
prayer, any part of their churchship or visibility thereof, for there is none
of all these mentioned by name in the inscriptions of his Epistles to the
Churches; but I know it is far from Mr. Goodwin to say, that these duties
were no part of their churchship or visibility thereof, and if these were not,
I marvel what were: This therefore is so far from being a reason, that it
has scarce the appearance of one.

But 2. You say, it is not mentioned in Scripture by way of commendation more
than other Ordinances.

Here Sir, but (with respect to your gravity, and my own obligation of respects
to you) I must crave leave, for the truth sake, to say, that our affirming
there can be no true raised Church without Baptism, does not force us to find,
that Baptism must be commended in Scripture above other Ordinances, nothing
lies upon us, but to show what service Christ has appointed it to, and not
what pre-eminence of commendation the Scriptures give to it above other
Ordinances; neither does Christ's choice of this Ordinance, for the service we
speak of, necessarily employ the superexcellency of it above others; no more
than faith, its justifying us and not love, proves faith to be a more noble
grace in the nature of it than love, love is said to be greater than either
faith or hope, 1 Corinthians. 18.13. love being a giving grace, having the whole
world for its object; but faith a receiving, yet notwithstanding the honor of
that high and excellent service of our first justification is given to faith,
and not to love, Romans 5.1. Gal. 2.16.

So here, though Baptism should be found a less noble act of obedience than
some others, yet it will not follow from thence, that its not the Ordinance of
initiation into the visible body of Christ. For a Soldier to behave himself
worthily as a Soldier, more commends him to God and men than his listing
himself, yet is he not reputed a member of the Army without it: Let this
therefore suffice to be spoken against all the insinuations you give throughout
your book against Baptismes, having the honor of entering persons into the
visible body of Christ, because of the meanness of it, least you be found
reproveable for objecting against Baptism for the bodies visible
incorporation, as the Jews was against faith for justification, because to them
works seemed more sightly and agreeable to their reason.

Your twelfth Consideration for substance this: When the Apostle Paul
instructs Christian Churches, what manner of persons they are, who are unmeet
for Christian communion, he mentions fornicators, 1 Cor. 5.11 2 These 3.6.
covetous, railers, and the like, but never unbaptised persons.
It Is true, Paul was wiser than to write any thing in his Epistles to the
Churches, by which he should suppose them guilty of that wherein he knew they
were not in fault; does he not write to the whole Church of Corinth, 1 Corinthians.
1.13. Were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? nay 1 Cor. 12.13. Does he not say,
We are ALL baptized? And does he not praise them, 1 Corinthians. 11.2. that for the
matter of Ordinances, they had kept them, AS he delivered them unto them? and
he delivered them from Christ; 1 Corinthians. 11.1. and we have proved already,
that Christ's Order was to baptize all the Disciples presently without delay.

And if all that has been said in answer to your third Consideration, be not
enough to this point, I heartily desire the Reader to lay to heart that which
follows.

To prove that no persons were reputed of the visible body of Christ before
Baptism, and consequently far enough from sitting down in Church societies
without it, I prove from the 4. of the Ephesians 4, 5. There is one body, which
at the 12. verse is in plain terms and in words at length called, the body of
Christ: Now that by the word body he did not mean it only of the particular
Church of Ephesus, or any other particular Church of Christ, but of the
universal body of Christ, it appears by that which he affirms concerning
the body, which belongs no more to the Church of Ephesus, than to any single
Christian; yea, those many things wherein they are one, he affirms as
belonging to them in common with all the Scripture Christians in the world: Now
to accommodate his design of peace and love in the body, he proceeds to
mention the many things wherein that body is one, which he delivers as so
many notable Characteristical marks, whereby all the members of that body may
be known from all the world, upon these marks I would fix the eye of the
Reader, behold then the Scripture marks of all the members of the visible body
of Christ.

1. They have one Spirit. 2. One Hope. 3. One Lord. 4. One Faith. 5. One
BAPTISM. 6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and in all, and has
Christ linked their oneness in Baptism, with their union in those other
things, yea, placed it in the order of words, before their oneness in respect
of God, who is the Father of them all, as being altogether the characters of a
member of that body we speak of: and does he speak according to the form of
wholesome words that says, men may be visible members without it, or will
Christ hold that man guiltless, that striveth to break this chain, which he in
wisdom has linked together?
That the Text speaks of, real proper Baptism with water, and not of
metaphorical, it appears:

1. As for that which some conceive (though untruly) the Baptism of the
Spirit, namely, the common fruits of the Spirit, such as faith, that he spoke
of before, as that wherein they were one, in distinction from Baptism.

Secondly, As for that which is in truth the Baptism of the Spirit, namely,
speaking with tongues and the like, that cannot be meant, because the Baptism
here, is affirmed of all the members of the body; of whom that cannot be truly
said: I understand therefore by Baptism, in the fourth of the Epesians, the
Church Ordinance of Baptism: with water, by which the Apostle affirms both
Jews and Gentiles put on Christ, Gab 3.27.

And further, how can any one imagine, with any show of reason, that in the
primitive times, there was any such confusion, as the sitting down of baptized,
with unbaptised Disciples: Since its plain.

1. That Christ commanded their baptism presently after discipling. 2. That
the Apostles so practiced it, as we find, in every example. 3. Where any
backwardness appeared, the Servants of God hastened the Disciples to Baptism,
Arise, Acts 22.16
why tarriest thou? says Ananias to Paul. And truly it is a remarkable thing
that though Paul had fasted three days, yet after his discipling he is
hastened to Baptism before he is permitted to eat meat, Acts 9.18. 4. We read
not of one discipled person that ever refused Baptism. 5. Considering the
judgment of the Spirit of God concerning those Rabbi men that did refuse
Baptism, or John's Ministry, whereof Baptism was a part, which was, Luke 7.29.
that they rejected the counsel of God against themselves: I say, considering
all this, with what is offered in Answer to your third Consideration, it is, I
humbly apprehend, one of the most unreasonable apprehensions that ever was
founded upon the Scriptures.
And now let the world judge, whose building is Babel, whether ours, that
answers the Rule to a hairs breadth, or yours, which is quite besides it; and
here Sir we challenge you, to make out your opinion and practice from the
Scripture; as we make out ours, or else your great words, rhetorical
flourishes, angry invectives, being in a manner the best of your strength,
wherewith you fight with us, must all go for tubbish and dirt.

But you say, in case you should relieve the poor, and grant us (that the Sun
shines at noonday) that in the Primitive times was no such confusion of
baptized Disciples holding communion with unbaptised, yet how we know, that in
case there had been any unbaptised brethren, whether the Apostle would have
prohibited communion with them, as well as with fornicators.

To this I answer, if by communion be meant that full communion which orderly
Churches enjoy, I make little doubt but he would: 1. Because he was so full of
this point of advising the Disciples to punctuality in the point of order, Col.
2.6. 1 Cor. 14.40. 2. Because he praised the Church of Corinth for keeping the
Ordinances AS he delivered them unto them, 1 Cor. 11.2. 3. Because order he
looked upon as a beautiful thing, and rejoiced to behold it in the Church of
Colosse, Colos. 2.5. 4. Because he cautioneth the Church to take heed of
Philosophers, that through vain deceit would bring them to disorder, Col. 2.8.
5. Because when any disorder grew in the Church, he took such care to have them
corrected, Titus 1.5. 6. Because he says, his word was not yea and nay, 2 Cor.
1.18. as fallible men's are now, being guided in his orders by an infallible
spirit.


So that to ask, whether Paul would not have prohibited the Churches to hold
communion with unbaptised persons, is to ask, whether Paul would not pull down
with one hand what he builds up with another.

But good Reader, Mr. Goodwin asks us one question, and I would ask thee
another, and it is, whether thou do not think in thy conscience, Mr. Goodwin
has the wrong end of the staff in this controversy? and whether the putting
this question do not discover it? and who it is that builds upon light
conjectures, loose suppositions, presumptuous self-imaginations, Mr. Goodwin,
or his poor brethren of the dip, as he calls them?

Your thirteenth Consideration for substance this: Baptism is at some seasons
offensive, burdensome and grievous to the flesh, and that for Men and Women,
especially being weak and tender of constitution, to submit to it in winter and
cold seasons, is as express a tempting of God, as passing through the fire
would be.
To which I answer. 1. Experience has proved this to be the vainest
insinuation of all the rest, there being not one person, that I ever yet knew
since we came into this way, young or old, though baptized in the depth of
winter, that ever suffered any thing in their health, to the value of the least
hair of their head; yea, some that have been aged and weak in body have
professed, that since the time of their obedience to Christ in this Ordinance
of his, they have not found those weaknesses that formerly they were troubled
with, no question (but in case of sickness) God will have mercy and not
sacrifice, and God will accept the wills of such for their deed: but will that
excuse those that are in health? or does Mr. Goodwin think, that scores of
persons, I might say hundreds of aged and weak persons, that have been baptized
without damage, might have passed through the fire with as little hurt, or if
indeed Mr. Goodwin has reason to judge the danger to be so great?

Then 2. Is it not a notable Argument, to persuade Mr. Goodwin to cast in his
lot with these men, because these God knows above all the Professors of
Religion in the world besides, because though miracles are ceased, and dead as
to others, yet it seems are alive to them, and they daily find the
manifestation of Gods outstretched arm for their preservation, that as God
took care of the Jews, when they went up to worship at Jerusalem, that it
should not enter into the heart of their enemy to invade their Land, so does he
order the element of water, that the worshippers of Christ, by being born of
it, shall have no loss, their bodily health shall not be invaded by it.

But 3. It is very true, that the spiritual design of Christ in Baptism, being
partly to represent Christ's death for ^s, and to oblige us to the death of all
sin, it has pleased him, and that in great wisdom, to order the burial of
the body in the element of water, that the bitter sufferings of the Lord Jesus
for sinners may be remembered, by the help of that sensible sign, wherein Nature
has a gentle taft of some suffering, though not at all to its inconvenience.
And whereas you say, that Baptism was ordained for Disciples of the first peep
out of the shell, and greatest weakness in the faith, and from thence argue,
that surely Christ intended it not to be so offensive to the flesh and the
rather, because the other Sacrament, which yet is ordained for the strong, is
of a more welcome import.

To this I answer. 1. It Is true, Baptism was ordained for young Disciples, but
that this is any Argument, why it should not be grievous to the flesh, I
understand not, I am sure it is not scriptural; Christ says to those that are
young Disciples, Luke 9.23. and he said to them ALL, If any man will be my
Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his cross daily and follow me: and to
those that were looking toward Christianiy, Christ puts the worst to them,
and therefore would have them sit down and cast up the cost.

In the 8. of Math. 20. To the Scribe that said, Master, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go, Jesus says to him, the foxes have holes, the birds
of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

But 2. Why you should say the other Ordinance is provided for the strong, as
if it were so appropriately to them, and exclusive of the weak, (or otherwise
where lies any strength in the Argument) this is not only unscripturall, but
anti-scriptural, Acts 2. They all both weak and strong, all that gladly
received the word and were baptized, continued in the Apostles doctrine, and
fellowship, and breaking bread, and prayer, and indeed more for the weak sake
than the strong, who had less need; and so I appeal to the conscience of the
judicious Reader, what weight there is in all this Argument against us, and
whether these be not carnal complaints against the hardness of Christ's yoke,
and the fruit of such workings of heart as was found in Peter, Math. 16.22.

Your fourteenth Consideration for substance this: THat for persons to mistake
in the matter of Baptism, so as to judge they have no need to be baptized
after beleiving, because they judge themselves sufficiently baptized in
infancy, is a mistake of a venial nature (because almost all the judicious,
learned and grave, all the zealous, faithful and best conscienced Christians
and Servants of God, throughout the world, Fathers, Martyrs, Reformers and
others, for sixteen Generations together, even from the days of the Apostles,
until now) have been so mistaken.
To which I answer. 1. The Apostles did foresee in their time, that there would
be an apostasy from the primitive practice in the worship of God, as well as
the primitive faith for doctrine; the mystery of iniquity beginning to work
very early, which was the reason of those items, to hold fast the Ordinances, 2
These. 2*14. and Col. 2*6. and to beware of Philosophers, that would carry them
from the simplicity of the Gospel.

Accordingly it did fall out, many departures there were even in the Apostles
days, 1 John 2.19. and more foretold, amongst which, this of Infant-sprinkling
is one, wherein there has been a palpable deviation from the rule, which yet
notwithstanding many worthy men suffered, supposing the Church to have power to
make alterations in matter of Ordinances: Com. upon Acts 8.
Calvin himself acknowledges, that the liberty of sprinkling (whereas the
ancient custom was dipping) the Church took to her self: And Mr. Bedford, as
Mr. Baxster reports, p. 301. of plain Scripture proof, flies to tradition
for proof of Infant Baptism; One Doctor Eck, against the new Church Orders in
the upper Marquesdome and Territories of Noremburge, writes, That the
Ordinances, concerning the Baptism of Children, is without Scripture, and is
found to be only a custom of the Church, with a cloud of other witnesses,
yea, even Luther himself the great Reformer, in his book of Anabaptisme,
acknowledges, That it cannot be proved by sacred Scripture, that Childrens
Baptism was instituted by Christ, or begun by the first Christians after the
Apostles, for many years since it came to be in use in the Church, says he,
and was established by Pope Innocentius: And yet for all that he allowed of it,
so that though he was a godly man, and a great Reformer, yet allowed of
alterations in worship upon that ground, which Mr. Baxster abhors to do:
now Mr. Baxster thinks he has plain Scripture proof for Infants baptism, or
he would not own the practice, because he looks upon the Scriptures as a
perfect rule (as well he may) and all deviations from them in worship in
ordinary cases, but so many complaints against the perfection of Scripture.

2. If the judgments of the learned and godly be of so much consideration, as
that it may justly stop proceeding in the work of Reformation, why did it not
curb you from that frightfull tearing your self off from the National Church,
which had been in reputation with the godly many hundred years, and that in
the face of the Sun, and that when such things were comparatively rare, to the
scandal and great offense of your brethren of the Ministry, wherein, as I
remember, you were pretty early, in leading the way of separation from the womb
that bear you, and the paps that gave you suck; or do you think one of forty
of those anciently godly and holy men, would have liked it, and yet for
conscience sake you did it notwithstanding.

3. This Argument becomes not you of all men living, because it is no new
thing with you to leave the road, nay at this day, and in this book that I am
now answering, you plead stiffly for some things, which rendereth you more alone
than we, in the point of denying Infant Baptism, namely, in denying, though
not in plain words at length, yet in effect, that Baptism is the Ordinance of
entrance into the visible Church of Christ, and that a Church may be of as
found a constitution without it as with it, and ordained upon the terms of the
free will Offering under the Law, Water dipping, p. 48.61.
wherein I believe you have no fellow, except some Seekers, and some few
persons leaning that way; others that have gone before have stumbled at the
same stone, and fell, and never rise more, which ought to be like pillars of
salt in the eye of all good men, to take heed of slighting and undervaluing any
of the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, least because they receive not the truth in
the love of it. I say, in the love of it, God deliver them up to a reprobate
mind, and send them strong delusions, that they may believe a lie.

But I hope better things of you, though I thus speak, and it is my earnest
prayer to God for you, upon the bended knee of my soul, to show you the evil
of these arguings, that you may repent in dust and ashes before you go hence,
and be no more seen.

Your fifteenth Consideration follows. THat Baptism how duly soever
administered, is no Church-maker, and that it does not commend us to God or Men
more than other Ordinances.
To which I answer: Mr. Goodwin has put his Considerations into many parts, so
that they go for twenty three, as if he had abundance of reason on his side in
this matter, wherein he argues against us, whereas many of them run into one,
and for substance are the same, so that a particular answer to every one must
needs cause abundance of repetition, and going over and over the same thing.
That Baptism of it self is a Church-maker, I am as far from thinking so as
you are; no, men must repent from dead works and believe toward God, or else
no fit matter for the Church, though baptized, but that there can be any
orderly joined Church without Baptism, though men do repent and believe, is
that I argue against, and have given a large account in my Answer to your third
Consideration and twelfth; and as for the other part of it, that it does not
commend us to God nor men more than other duties, in my Answer to your eleventh
Consideration, you have a full answer to this plea also.

Your sixteenth Consideration for substance this: THat you have no need of
Baptism after Repentance and Faith (which you call new Baptism) because your
old sprinkling in infancy is as effectual to all ends and purposes of Baptism,
which you reduce to three heads: 1. For declaring persons the professed
Disciples of Christ. 2. For obliging persons to be the loyal Disciples of
Christ, in which they covenant so to be. 3. For matter of edification and
comfort to the inner man.

To which I answer, by denying utterly that Infant-sprinkling is as effectual
to all or any of the ends and purposes of Baptism, as the true baptism of
persons after faith and repentance, neither is there any weight in your
Argument to that purpose.

1. You say it declares you with more advantage than ours to be the professed
Disciples of Christ to the world.

And that 1. Because yours the world knows, ours is a kind of Barbarian to
the world.

2. The generality of men do not look upon it as any thing more significative,
of owning the Name and Faith of Jesus Christ.

To both which Arguments I answer. 1. To that plea, that the world is better
acquainted with your way than ours.

It Is most true, that yours being from the world, the world must needs know and
love it better than ours, because it is her own, and ours being from heaven, to
which the Spirit of the world is a stranger, no marvel if it be a barbarian to
them, but whether the worlds natural liking and greedy falling in with yours,
be not an Argument of its carnal, earthly original, and on the contrary, its
disliking ours, be not on the contrary a probable though not demonstrative
Argument of the heavenly pedigree of it, let the Scriptures judge, John 15.19.
The world loves her own; because ye are not of the world, therefore the world
hates you. Of this only by the by.

But how comes Mr. Goodwin to conclude from the dear acquaintaince the world
has with Infant-sprinkling, above what it has with Beleivers baptism, that
therefore Infant-sprinkling is more efficacious, to declare persons the
professed followers of Jesus Christ, then Baptism after faith, since in the
baptism of Infants, there is no profession made at all, by which the world
should take any cognizance of the parties belonging to Christ, neither is the
poor creature capable of making any? ('It Is true, the Bishops being ashamed of
Baptism without profession of faith, devised a remedy by allowing Sureties,
who they called Godfathers and Godmothers, which being a piece of
superstition too gross for the light of this day, it is gone off the stage
without much regret.) Whereas in the true Baptism of the New Testament sealed
in Christ's heart blood, the party himself; (and not another for him) being a
beleiver, made a disciple by Teaching, makes public profession of his faith
in Christ, as you see the Eunuch did, Acts 8,
in his own person, and declares his willingness to accept of Christ, on his
own terms, and to be listed in his army, Gal. 3.27.
and voluntarily puts on Christ thereby (which is the Sctipture expression)
as a servant puts on his Masters Livery.

Who then (that is not bespoke) but will judge, that Baptism into Christ after
faith, at a man's own request (in the presence of God, Angels and men) is more
to declare ones relation to Christ, than the passive, ignorant reception of it
in infancy.

But to come closer, and to take light from the Scripture, what it is that both
makes a man called Christ's Disciple, and what it is declares him so? now it is
plain by the Scripture, that as following the instructions and examples of
Christ, makes a man called his Disciple, Luke 9.23. John 8.31. So also does it
most significantly declare our discipleship to Christ: The Scripture is as
express for this as for the other, By this shall ALL men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another AS* I have loved you: If they would take his
counsel to love one another, especially if after his own example, AS he had
loved them, then he says, By that ALL MEN shall know, they shall not only be
his Disciples, but ALL MEN should know, that they are his disciples: So that we
have a plain rule laid down in Scripture, to guide us, what it is that does,
with advantage, declare men the professed disciples of Christ, and that is the
walking after him according to his word, what made the Jews known to be the
disciples of Moses, but the following of his doctrine, and example: Have we
then any thing more to do, to determine this, but only to lay the two ways,
to the rule; for how can any one imagine with any show of reason, that walking
contrary to Christ, should declare persons his disciples.

If then believers baptism and that by burying the body in water; be that the
Scripture speaks of, as that wherein we follow Christ, and are one with him,
which I have proved already, and as for Infants sprinkling, not a word of it in
all the New Testament, then out of all controversy, the way to declare men the
disciples of Christ, Col. 2.1^.
is to go our way, because Christ walked this way, as we have proved already,
and therefore all that will be called Christ's Disciples by Baptism, must go
this way and no other.

But you say the world looks not upon beleivers Baptism by dipping as any
thing more significative of owning Christ, but the contrary, even disobliging
them rather, from what their first baptism obliged them unto than otherwise.

To that I answer, how willing you are to affirm things loosely, that is like
to reproach this cause, is much more plain, then the truth of your affirmation,
and whether it be not so, I leave the world to judge.

Further to this cruel insinuation against the poor people and way of God,
whereby you seek to pervert the strait ways of the Lord, I shall say little,
but Lord lay not this sin to your charge.

Suppose they should do so, ought the errors of men to be indulged or
corrected? only let me mind you of your own words, which, as at many other
times, so at this, rise up in judgment against you.

Sir, in one of your Letters to Mr. Tho. Goodwin, p. 11. you have these words,
If we judged it any advantage to the truth and cause we maintain against you,
we durst vye morrall imputations with you, and are confident, that we could
assign and suggest against you, both as many and as likely indirect and fleshly
grounds for your departure from us, as you can against us, for keeping our
first standing and profession. BUT the truth will never be made GREAT by such
demonstrations or arguments as these on either side.

If Mr. Goodwin thinks the truth will never be made great by such
demonstrations as these, it is because he judges there is no reason why it
should, and if so, as on the one hand it condemns him for using them, so on
the other hand it justly begets suspicion of error, concerning that opinion,
that such Arguments are used to maintain.

But to proceed, you say; that as to another end of Baptism, namely, the
obliging persons to be the loyal Disciples of Christ, you say, your
Infant-sprinkling or baptism is as operative that way upon the Conscience, as
out Baptism is upon ours, or would be upon yours, if you should come under it.

Here is two things affirmed, but neither of them proved, nor indeed is it
possible to prove them; one is, that your Baptism is as bearing upon your
conscience to become Christ's Disciples, as our Baptism is upon ours; this is a
thing which you affirm at random, not knowing how the baptism of those, that
are indeed rightly baptized, and that take up the ways of God in uprightness,
I say, how it hears upon them, nor ever are like to do, because your
prejudice is grown so great that you know not how to interpret any action they
do charitably, nor scarce word they say.

Another thing you affirm is, that your Infant Baptism is as bearing upon your
conscience, as ours would be if you came under it, and how can you tell that
without trial?

Truly Sir, I should hope, that passing under that figure, wherein in so fully
represented Christ's death, burial and resurrection, and your death, burial
and resurrection with him, being approached unto in the Name and fear of God,
and in obedience to Jesus Christ, that it might be a means of killing that
spirit of cruelty that haunteth your pen in many of your controvert all
writings, to the dishonor of God, and discredit of the opinion you maintain in
them: the strait ways of truth, as they have no need of the crooked ways of
sin to build them with, so they are never like to be built by them.

But thirdly and lastly, You say, your Infant Baptism is as edifying and
comforting.

To which I answer: You must first prove it to be of Christ's appointing, or
else you impose upon us to believe, that the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit
of edification and comfort, will take as much pleasure to concur with men's
inventions, as his own Ordinances, which is quite contrary to the Scripture,
Mark 7.7.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the traditions of men.

But 2. You say your souls have thriven under that Baptism. It Is probable so,
but that does not prove it was by the means of Infant Baptism (of which you
are ignorant, whether ever any such thing was done or no) only that you have
heard so (if this arguing be like Mr. Goodwin in other things I am much
mistaken.)

Christ tells the Jews, John 649. That their Fathers did eat Mannah in the
wilderness, and are dead: but can any body gather from hence, that their death
was caused by the eating of Mannah? These are your own words, p. 44. Of Water
dipping: And is not your reasoning in this place much after the same manner?
you were baptized in Infancy, and thrive in godliness when grown up to years
of discretion; but it no more follows, that your thriving in godliness was
by the means of your Infant Baptism, than that their death was caused by
eating of Mannah.

And is it likely, that ignorant worship of God should have any lively
operation upon the soul, much less, that it should have as much as that which
is done knowingly and voluntarily, and bel^ivingly, the soul having communion
with God in it?

And why may you not as well say, that hearing Sermons in infancy is as
edifying as at age? I know not; Infants would understand as much of the one as
of the other; and when grown up, it might be told them what was (said) then, as
well as now they are told what was (done) then in Baptism; is the darkness of
the darkest night more void of light than this proposition is of truth? Reader
judge.

Your seventeenth Consideration for substance this: IT does not appear from
Scripture, that any Church of Christ, or embodied Society of Beleivers was
commanded by Christ, or the Apostles to be dipped, nor yet threatened or reproved
for the non-practise of dipping.
I answer: It is very true, because the Apostles did not use to spend their
breath in vain, they would not command that to be done twice, which Christ had
ordered to be done but once, nor to reprove where there was no cause.

If you would have the Reader feel any weight in this Argument, you are bound
to find us a Society of embodied Beleivers undipt, which is a task too hard for
you, but yet this light supposition is the very foundation of your Argument,
which being rotten and sandy, the building falls of it self, I need say no
more to it.

Your eighteenth Consideration for substance this: THat it is more than any of
us will be ever able to prove, that there is any precept of Christ, whereby it
is made sinful for any person whatsoever not to be baptized in one form or
other.
1. Because it can be no sin to be undipt, whilst there is no legal
Adminstrator. 2. Because the Commission to baptize is given to the Apostles
only. 3. Because they were not enjoined to baptize any person against their
wills. 4. It is hard to know what is the Antecedent to the Pronoune THEM in the
Commission, or whom, or what persons they are whom our Savior here authorizeth
his Apostles to baptize. 5. In the Commission is no Command laid upon any
person to be baptized. 6. Neither does it appear from those words, teaching
them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, that the Apostles did teach
Beleivers to require Baptism of them. 7. It appears not, that the Apostles
in the course of their Ministry, did ever teach either Church or person to seek
baptism at their hand. 8. Though that should be granted, yet it follows not,
that it was a standing law for all Pastors and Teachers to the worlds end.
1. Because it fully appears, that water-baptisme was never intended by God,
but either only or chiefly, for an introductory or planting Ordinance, at its
first coming unto a City or Nation, till it should get some considerable
rooting and interest among them, not for a staple Ordinance in one and the same
place, with many other such like Pleas as this is, to render it doubtful.

To which I answer, but with much grief of heart, to find such noble parts and
abilities, as God has endowed you with, so desperately engaged in so bad a
cause.

But Sir, if I prove by the Scriptures, that it is sinful for Disciples to
remain unbaptised, and that by the precept of Christ, then all your far
fetched pleas will fall to the ground.

To prove then by the Scriptures, that it is sinful by the precepts of Christ,
that his Disciples should neglect Baptism, I prove from the 2. Acts 37, 38.
that the commandments of the Apostles are to be looked upon as the Commandments
of Christ, it appears, in that they had them from Christ, Acts 1.2. Until
the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had
given commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, Paul, 1 Corinthians.
11.23. pleads, what he delivered them he had from the Lord. Peter therefore,
2 Pet. 3.2. says, he wrote to them, meaning the scattered Disciples, to stir
up their pure minds by way of remembrance, that they might be mindful of the
Commandments of US, says he, the Apostles of our Lord and Savior: besides the
foundation of Religion laid by Christ, and that laid by the Apostles, the
Spirit in Scripture makes one and the same, 1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation can
no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ: Now the same Apostle to
the Ephesians Ephesians. 2 20. says thus, And are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets. So that to build upon Christ's doctrine, and the Apostles
doctrine, is the same, and that for the reason specified. I conclude then, that
if the Apostles command every one to be baptized* then Christ has commanded
every one to be baptized.

But the Apostle Peter in the 2. Acts 38. when the Disciples that were pricked
at the heart by the word preached, asked him what they should do, He commands
them to repent and be BAPTIZED EVERY one of them for the remission of sins. So
that here is a plain positive command to all and every of the persons, at whose
heart the Word comes, not only to repent, but to be baptized. If sin then be
the transgression of the Law (which the Apostle says it is) and that the
Apostles Commands are Christ's, and that the Apostle has commanded every one
that repents to be baptized, then does the conclusion lift up its head, that
there is a precept of Christ in Scripture, whereby it is made sinful for some
persons to remain unbaptised.

But it may be Mr. Goodwin will object, It Is true, this was a command which lay
upon those new Converts as a duty, but does that prove it lies upon us?

I answer: Yes, if the duty of repentance lie upon us as well as on them, for
they are both put together by the Apostle, and if the precepts of the Apostles
to the primitive Churches in any thing be precepts to us, then is Baptism as
well as other things; for as Repentance and Baptism are both enjoined to the
first Churches by the Apostles, so are they both put together in the
Commission, Math. 28.19. Disciple me all Nations, baptising them: and Mark
16.16. Go and preach to every Creature, He that beleiveth and is baptized
shall be saved; and the same presence promised to the end of the world, as well
to baptising as to teaching: Mr. Baxster says, by the end of the world to
understand a period of time, is a piece of impudent violence.

This then is my first Argument for the standing of the Ordinance of Baptism,
it is joined with Teaching in the Commission, and Christ says, what God has
joined together let no man put assunder: But God has joined Baptism and
Teaching together, and for any man to presume to part them, what is it but to
offer an affront to the great God, and God will surely reckon with them for it
first or last, how many are there of such, that for slighting Christ in his
Ordinances, Salt marsh and his followers.
which was the first stone they stumbled at, have had strong delusions sent
them by God, that they might believe lies, and since proved forlorn, woeful
spectacles of Gods indignation.

But to set home this Argument for the standing of Baptism as long as
Teaching, I shall use Mr. Goodwins own words, upon which I would fix the eye of
the Reader: Water dip. p. 12.
No Authority can discharge or dis-oblige, but that which is either greater
than, or at least equal unto that which binds.

If so, then are you not bound by your own principle, to find us out an
Authority, equal to Christ's, that has discharged Baptism, which is by so
great an Authority enjoined, as is Christ's the Lords, the great Judge both of
quick and dead, which I am sure is impossible for you to do, and therefore
Baptism stands in full force and virtue; and all your suggestions rendering
it doubtful, must not, nor will not go for gold, but dirt, except with some,
that in matters of Religion are neitheir hot nor cold, which lukewarm temper
God abhors, and without repentance will one day spue them out of his mouth.

Good Reader let but thy esteem of Baptism stand, till Mr. Goodwin show us an
Authority, equal to Christ's, that has discharged it, and I will promise thee,
that mine and thine shall fall together.

My second Argument to prove Baptism standing is this:

That opinion which tends to the destruction of all Religion can never be the
truth, but to conceive Baptism out of date, tends to the destruction of all
Religion.

That to conceive Baptism out of date tends to the destruction of all
Religion, I demonstrate that thus:

1. By dividing Religion into two parts 1. That which is external, standing in
the exercise of external Ordinances; and 2. That which is internal, standing in
a holy frame of heart and life.


Now that to conceive Baptism out of date tends to destroy the external part
of Religion, I prove it thus:

If the standing of Teaching, and breaking bread, and other acts of Church
fellowship, have no other foundation, but what Baptism has the same, then to
conceive Baptism out of date, is to disparage the standing of all the rest, as
out of date also, because the same God, out of the same infinite wisodme,
ordained Baptism that ordained breaking bread, and all the acts of
Church Fellowship, may, he has cast some degrees of honor more upon Baptism,
then upon some other of the Ordinances, in as much as he singled out Baptism
from some others, and put it in the Commission by name with Teaching, and
ordained it in some sense or other, to serve the grand interest of remission of
sins and salvation, Acts 2.38. Mar. 16.16 Mat. 28.19.
and gave such a particular charge to have it done with so great solemnity,
even, In the Name of the Father, Son and holy Spirit.

Now what is the foundation of the standing of any of the Ordinances, but the
unrepealed Word of God, which as much respects Baptism as any other;
therefore disparage Baptism and disparage all, they live, they die, they
stand, they ^all together.

But 2. That to conceive Baptism out of date, tends to the destruction of
the more spiritual part of Religion, namely, that which consists in a holy
frame of heart and life: I prove thus,

If the use of Ordinances be the souls edification, then to dis-use them is
the way to make havoc of all our spiritual treasure; but to conceive Baptism
out of date, is the way, not only to disuse that Ordinance, but all others,
because they all stand upon the same bottom, as I have proved already.

Now that the use of Ordinances is the edification of the soul, appears by
many Scriptures, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and that Baptism by name
has a rich tendency to edification, I have proved already at large, by showing
the design of God in it, which is to affect the heart by the death, burial and
resurrection of Christ, in that Ordinance SEEN, as well as in the Gospel
preached those truths are HEARD, with other respects of edification, which I
shall not now mention.

But for more full satisfaction at this point, let me give Mr. Goodwins
judgment concerning the edifying nature of Baptism, p. 26. of his water
dipping.

1. That it is operative to the engaging the judgment and conscience to become
the loyal Disciples of Christ.

And 2. the building up of the inward man in grace and peace.

If so, how comes so many suggestions from you, rendering the standing of
Baptism doubtful? Has Christ appointed more ways of teaching the Gospel, and
building up the inner man in grace than needs? and might you not as well think,
that God intended to make darlings of the Christians in the first times, and
but step-children of all the rest of Beleivers to the end of the world, as to
think, that he would take from them any part of the means of their edification
and spiritual comfort, and not give them others in the room?

I conclude then, and I hope with evidence clear enough, that Baptism was not
only intended by God for an introductory Ordinance to last for a time, but for
a staple standing Ordinance with Teaching to the end of the world, and that too
ordained for the Creatures good, and consequently as sinful a thing to neglect
it, as it would be to neglect ones daily bread.

If all that has been said be not enough to satisfy the Reader concerning the
standing of Baptism, I refer thee to Mr. Baxster, P. 542. Of plan Scripture
proof.
who has in his book of Baptism offered ten Arguments, all grounded upon the
plain Text of Scripture to prove it, and in the end concludes thus, I will add
no more because it is but on the by, and because this is sufficient to those
that can judge of Scripture evidence when they hear it, and will be ruled by
it, when they know it, and for others, it is not many words that can cure their
disease.

And if any body think me over zealous in this matter, let them consider the
words of Calvin, p. 208. of his Commentary upon the Acts, though he does most
ingenuously confess, that since the beginning the Church did grant liberty to
her self to CHANGE the Rites, meaning, from putting all the body into the water
to sprinkling: Now the use says, he is to sprinkle the body or the head. But
though they took the boldness to do that which Calvin justifies the Church in,
yet for the continuance of Baptism it self, we ought rather, says he, to
fight a hundred times to death for the ceremony it self of Baptism, in as much
as it was delivered us by Christ, then that we should suffer the same to be
taken from us: But I say, that there is the same reason to fight a hundred
times to death for the right subject, and the right form of administering it. 1.
Because God is wiser than men, and because any body with half an eye may see,
that the change from dipping to sprinkling frustrateth the great design of
Christ in the Ordinance it self, as I have shown already, and in a manner
makes it useless; and because changing of the Ordinances we find to be a
heinous provoking thing to God of old, Isaiah 24.5. The earth mourns and
fades away, the earth also is defiled with the Inhabitants thereof, because
they have transgressed the Laws, CHANGED the Ordinance. Mark, not for a total
laying aside of them only, but for transgressing the rule, and changing them,
yea, the 29.16. Mark, how hainously God takes the wise men's turning things
upside down; I say, mark all ye wise men and consider, Surely your TVRNING
things upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay: yea, he threateneth
at the 14. verse for this very reason, that their FEAR (that is their worship)
was taught after the precepts of men; The WISDOM of their WISE men should
perish, and the understanding of the prudent should be hid: And if any one ask,
why God was so severe upon this account? the conclusion of the 16. verse
tells all, Shall the thing framed say of him that framed it, HE HAD NO
UNDERSTANDING? This then is the account God makes of men's changing the
Ordinances, that it is a reflection upon God, as if he wanted understanding,
changing Gods Laws is no other, but a charging God with that weakness, which
poor fallible men are subject unto, which makes them many times upon
experience to change theirs.

Come close then oh world, and discern the difference between us and our
adversaries, and judge, whether our brethren, that hate us, and cast out our
name as evil, have any just ground for what they do; the difference is easily
seen, they have changed the great Ordinance of Baptism, thou see Calvin
honestly confesses it, whereas we think Christ wiser than Calvin, or the
Church he speaks of, and have we not reason for it? and that instead of
changing his Laws, it becomes us to be humbly obedient to his Laws, and do
not we do well in it? They think they have mended the Ordinances, we think they
have spoiled them; and do plainly see, the ground of their first tampering with
them, was pomp, profit and ease; and that it is our duty, Jude the 3.
on Christ's behalf, to endeavor with all our might the recovery of them to
their primitive purity.

As I have given thee, good Reader, the judgment of Calvin as to the form of
baptising of old, so take his words about the subject, p. 207. of his
Commentary upon the Acts, If Baptism be given without faith, whose seal it is,
It is BOTH A WICKED AND TOO GROSS A PROFANING; it is true, for reasons which
were so to himself, he was for Infant Baptism notwithstanding; but the reason
he gives, is no more a proof to us, than Abraham's begetting Isaac proves we
shall have new heavens and a new earth. Learned Vnsin advising when Baptism is
rightly and lawfully used, faith, It is, P. 414. Catechis.
when the Rites instituted by Christ in Baptism are not CHANGED; And says
further, that the Sacraments are no Sacraments where they are unlawfully
administered. Now compare these two learned men together; Calvin says, the
Church has changed the Rite from dipping to sprinkling; and Vrsin says, that
where there is change the Sacraments are no Sacraments.

If then Calvin say true (whereof there is no doubt) that is, that the
primitive practice was dipping, then in Vrsins judgment, the Ordinance being
changed to sprinkling, it cease to be any thing, and so all sprinkled persons
are unbaptised.

Further as to the subject, P. 414. Of Catechis.
This condition is added (speaking of beleiving) unto the promise, for they who
are baptized cannot receive that which is promised and sealed in Baptism, but
by faith, so that without faith, neither is the promise ratified, nor the
Baptism AVAILABLE: he goes on, In these words is noted briefly the right use
of Baptism, in which right use the Sacraments are ratified to them, which
receive them with a true faith; but in whatsoever corrupt and unlawful use and
administration, the Sacraments are no Sacraments. Note well, BUT ARE SACRAMENTS
TO THEM ONLY WHO RECEIVE THEM WITH A TRVE FAITH.

But if any body say, why but yet Vrsin was for childrens Baptism, as well as
Calvin: yes, he was; but mark the ground.

Whereas they say, P. 420. C^techis. Mark the (...) slippeth out a^.
(meaning the Antipaedo Baptists) that unto the use of Baptism faith is
required: We grant it, but yet distinguishing of faith, so that we say, says
he, actual faith is required in those of understanding, but in Infants is
required an inclination only to this actual faith: afterward thus, Faith is
in Infants potentially, and by inclination. Thus by the help of this
distinction, he hooketh in the baptism of Children: But will this satisfy the
conscience of any considerate Christian? where is an inclination to believe
made the condition of Baptism, for any body young or old, in Scripture? Is
there such a word? and if there be none, as surely there is not, are these men
ruled by the Word, or rather do not they rule it?

Or is there any such thing in Infants, as an inclination to believe? Is it not
the judgment of these men, that all Infants are born children of wrath by
nature, dead in sins and trespasses, as dead to any thing that is spiritual, as
a dead man is to natural? if so, how come they to conceive of such, their
inclinations to believe which is a spiritual thing? and who can tell of any
inclinations in Infants no one thing or other? can any body tell by experience
of any inclinations they had in infancy? What a woeful ground is this to
administer Gospel Ordinances upon.

Or is the next any better, though they have not faith actual, yet they have
potential faith, and is that any more than to say, they may believe one day?
and is not that the condition of Pagans and Infidels? and shall they be
baptized upon that ground? does not this arguing savor of that Philosophy and
vain deceit Paul warns the Colossians of, by which they were in danger of
being carried after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ? Good
Reader, do thou not perceive it, I know that thou perceivest it?

But this is too great a digression, I should now return to Mr. Goodwins pleas,
which render the standing of Baptism doubtful, but that labor is saved,
because I have proved already the continuation of Baptism with Teaching, I
hope, to the satisfaction of all unprejudiced minds: and because my Brother
Allen has lately published a Book, called, Satisfaction for Seekers, where the
case, touching an Administrator of Gospel Ordinances in these times, is
handled, with many other questions thereabout of near affinity to these pleas
of Mr. Goodwins, or rather the Seekers, which Mr. Goodwin has espoused, and
put so great a countenance upon them, as if they had so much weight in them, as
to make the matter difficult, whether the Ordinance of Baptism be standing or
no.

Consider his words, We do not intend that any thing hitherto argued, P. 31. Of
Water dip.
should be taken for a demonstrative or positive proof, that the Ordinance of
Baptism is now extinct, or not administrable without sin in the world.

He confesses they are not a (demonstrative) proof of the death of Baptism;
but it seems they go a great way, and say a good say to it; the truth is,
Sir, you fear not to make great adventures to come into your end, you seem
willing, not only to be content to part with Baptism, which Calvin says, one
would fight to a hundred deaths rather than loose, but to hazard the reputation
of all the Ordinances, rather than the true Baptism of the New Testament
should advance in the minds of men (though the deceit of sprinkling be
detected, that it can scarce look the light of this day in the face) what else
means your countenancing of the Seekers Arguments, which lie as well against
all the Ordinances as Baptism, and which heretofore you have trampled on like
dirt.

Sir, you say to Mr. Edwards, that his Gangrena made great joy in hell;
whatever his Gangrena did in hell I know not, but I believe, upon good grounds,
that your water dipping, especially this eighteenth Consideration, has made
more joy on earth, amongst the Seekers, Ranters, and all sorts of
non-Churchers, than ever they had in all their lives before, by how much you
excel the most, in parts, learning, wit, etc. by so much the more is their
consolation, that you seem to feel weight in their Arguments, HARK HOW THEY
CLAP THEIR HANDS AND SING.

But to conclude, Sir, may not Baptism say to you, as Christ to the Jews; for
which of my good works do yo^ stone me? Has not God made the Scriptures
concerning Baptism upright, why then do you seek out so many inventions.

Your nineteenth Consideration being of one heart and soul with the eighth, I
shall wholly pass it over, referring the Reader to the Answer of that, in
which he shall find the Answer to this also.

Your twentieth Consideration for substance this: PEter being questioned for
holding communion with Cornelius and his Company, by the Brethren of Jerusalem,
he justifies it, by telling them, they had received the holy Ghost, as a
testimony of their faith, and does not so much as hint any thing of their
Baptism in his justification, and with that account they were satisfied.
To which the Answer is ready: 1. It appears clearly, these persons the Text
speaks of, were baptized persons, Acts 10.47, 48.

2. The Communion Peter had with them, was after their Baptism, for presently
upon the testimony of their faith, by Gods giving them the gift of the holy
Ghost, Peter commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord, which was
the manner of Peter, and the rest, in the course of their ministry.

Now if Mr. Goodwin could prove Peter broke bread with them between the time of
their faith and Baptism, which is the matter Mr. Goodwin would prove lawful
by it, then it were something to favor his cause, but not home to the point
neither, because an occasional act with some few persons will not justify the
constant proceedings of a Church.

But why does Mr. Goodwin think, that this instance will prove mixed communion
lawful?

Because Peter in his justification, when questioned for eating with Cornelius,
insisted only upon Cornelius, his having the holy Ghost, not his Baptism.

To which I answer 1. The Scriptures silence does not prove, that he did not
mention his Baptism, and insist on it too, because the Scriptures does not
contain all the Apostles sayings, Acts 2.40. With many other words did he
testify and exhort, saying: So John the Baptist, Luke 3.18. with many other
words.

2. There was no necessity upon Peter, for the justification of his eating with
Cornelius, to mention his Baptism by name, though he could not have communion
with him without it, because in those days, a beleiving person and a baptized
person was presumed the same.

Paul proves they all believed, because they were baptized: Gal. 3.27.

And that 1. Because by the Commission of Christ all Beleivers were presently
to be baptized, Math. 28.19.

And 2. Because none but such was the regular subjects of it, Acts. 8.37.

And 3. Because it was the constant practice of the Servants of God, to call
the Beleivers to Baptism without delay, Acts 22.16. So that the Apostles and
Brethren understood him sufficiently, as to their Baptism, by telling them of
their having the holy Ghost as a testimony of their faith. If they did not take
that for granted, it must be, either because they doubted his understanding of
the Commission of Christ, or else his faithfulness in executing it, or else
their will to be baptized, but there was no cause to doubt either, nor Peter's
understanding the Commission, or faithfulness in executing it, because they had
experience before of Peter, in the case of the three thousand, Acts 2.41. who
the same day that they gladly received the word were baptized; not their
willingness, Acts 10.33
because Cornelius was so ready to obey God in every thing, that he had but a
few fellows, so that the mentioning of his Baptism would have been like a kind
of an impertinency.

3. There was no necessity upon him to mention their Baptism by name, in his
justification of eating with them, though he could not have communion with them
without it.

Because it is common both in Scripture language, and common converse with men
to include all appurtenances, in the mention only of some chief part, see for
this John 5.44. Galat. 3.23. Galat. 3.2. Roman. 10.8. Mat. 21.25. Acts 10.37.
John's Baptism put for his whole Ministry, Luke 7.30.

Calvin calls Baptism an app^rtenance of faith, p. 207. of his Commentary of
the Acts. And no doubt this language was well enough known and understoood by
the Apostles and Elders, so that having mentioned the holy Ghosts coming on
them as a testimony of their faith, what need had he to draw it out in words at
length, that they were baptized? and thus thou see, good Reader, how Mr.
Goodwin indulgeth every light appearance from the Scripture, being passionately
desirous to make that strait which God has made crooked.

Your twenty one Consideration for substance this: THat Pastors and Teachers
were given by Christ, that all Saints, one or other should be perfected by
them, and the whole body of Christ edified, then certainly they have all right
to Church Fellowship, inasmuch as they have their callings only by and
resident in Churches, neither are they in any probable way of perfecting them,
but only when and whilst they are incorporated with them in their Churches
respectively, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12.
To which I answer. 1. Its true, that Pastors and Teachers were given by
Christ, that all Saints should be perfected by them; but it is as evident, the
Saints this Text speaks of, for whom they were given in special, to serve as
Officers in the Church, and who had power to give them their call, they were
such Saints as were of the visible body of Christ, who as they had other
characteristical marks of the members of that body, namely, to have one God,
one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, so one BAPTISM; consult the 4. and
5. verses of this 4. of Ephesians, which Text Mr. Goodwin groundeth his
Argument upon, and you will find it so, and although other persons that were
discipled by the word taught, but yet had not put on Christ visibly by baptism
into his Name. The gifts of Pastors and Teachers were given for the perfecting
of them too, yet but secondarily, not primarily, those gifts primarily respect
the body of Christ so marked, as before is noted; it is plain in the 12. verse,
For the edifying of the BODY of Christ.

That unbaptised persons were not then reputed of the visible body of Christ, I
have proved at large already, and although they might be Saints before Baptism
in the sight of God, yet in the account of the Church none pass for Saints
till then, because their faith it self in Christ, which makes Saints, could
not be clear to the Church till then, and that because Baptism being one of
the beginning doctrines of Christ, Heb. 6.2. Acts 2.38. Mar. 16* 16.
and preached by the Apostles as a duty, with repentance and faith, and that in
order to remission of sins and salvation (in some sense or other) should any
man have stuck at it, and refused Baptism? what ground would the Church have
had to look upon the faith of such as sound? nay, had they not all the reason
in the world to doubt the soundness of it? because the character of a true
lively says would be found wanting, namely, universal obedience, and they
rejecters of the counsel of God.

Nothing in reason could appear as a ground to refuse it, but the danger of the
cross following it; I conclude then, that though the truth of their faith made
them Saints before God, yet without public profession of their faith by
Baptism, they were not owned for Saints by the Church, or any such persons
whose faith was of the right kind, let their professions otherwise be that they
would be.

This is clearly the doctrine of the 3. Galat. 27. Ye are all the children of
God by faith; FOR (mark) as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have
put on Christ; he proves their faith in Christ to be true by this, that they
were not ashamed to put on Christ, to bear his Name publicly, whatever it
should cost them.

And then 2. Whereas he says, AS MANY OF YOU as have been baptized into Christ
have put on Christ. They and only they, that were baptized into Christ, were
judged by the Churches, as persons that had put on Christ, in distinction from
Moses, and that had now embraced the Religion of the Lord Jesus.

And although it be very true, that beleiving persons are not in so-good a way
of perfecting by the gifts of Christ's pastors and Teachers, out of Churches as
in Churches, yet that will not justify the Church in breaking any of Christ's
rules for their admission, their suffering is through their own fault, the
mouth of God being open, and his heart enlarged toward them.

And thus good Reader, how easily may thou see, that the Scriptures complain
of the yoke, wherein Mr. Goodwin forces them to draw.

Your two and twentieth Consideration has many parts, and for substance thus:
FIrst, we understand by books and writings of such authority and credit, that
we have no ground as all to question their truth, that the generation of men,
whose judgments have gone wandering after dipping and re baptising, have from
the very first original and spring of them, since the late reformation, been
very turbulent and trouble some in all places where they have increased to any
numbers considerable, and wiser men than I are not a little jealous over the
peace of this Nation, lest it should suffer as other places have formerly done,
from the tumultuous and domineering spirit of this sort of men, so numerously
prevailing as they do. There is a strong tide of report both from Ireland and
Scotland, that as far as the interest and power, so far the insolency, also,
and importune haughtiness of that generation we speak of, extends in both
these Nations, and that all persons, of what integrity or worth soever, who are
not enlightened with their darkness, about their dipping, are trodden under foot
like unsavory Salt, and judged unmeet for any place of trust or power with
them, being allowed only the preferments of drawing water and hewing wood. One
of this faction or party in England, (and he no small beggar neither) speaking
of a person, who though not of his judgment about the necessity of dipping,
yet otherwise a man that had very well deserved of that way in several
respects, yet speaking of this person, he said, in the presence of several
persons of quality, that He deserved to be hanged; an Aphorism consonant to a
latter saying of a Preacher of that way about the City, who in discourse with a
person walking in communion with me about his judgment, and being as it
seems worsted in the skirmish, at last recovered the lost ground with this or
the like Epiphonema, that she might find her Church at Tyburn and the Gallows.
These words I regard but as muck, notwithstanding it may concern others to look
after the fire. But surely these men, when they come into their Kingdom of
authority and power, will execute judgment without partiality; if so, then he
that deserves to be hanged must expect no better quarter than that of the
halter; and if Justice be administered without partiality, all that are in the
same condemnation of anti-dipping with him, may bear him company in the same
expectation.

Before I make particular answer to this Consideration, I must say, it cannot
pass my observation, how strangely Mr. Goodwins zeal in opposing us
transporteth him, how it makes him forget his old brave sayings, wherein he
certainly had the Spirit of God with him; he once said, The truth would never
be made great by the suggesting of morral imputations against the enemies of
it. Ye a, in his Cautions for Reformation he begins, as well he may, thus;
They who intend a reformation, according to the Word of God, must take heed of
admitting humane passions into their consultations, For in James his divinity,
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, that is, says he, MARK,
subjecteth a wan to an incapability of doing that which is truly agreeable to
his will.

And does not these words come home to Mr. Goodwin? for has he not left calm
reasoning from Scripture ground, and betaken himself to wrath, and the weapons
of reflection? his spirit being as it were of a light fire, no marvel then, if
he manage this controversy upon terms so disagreeable to Gods will, and that
he come to shake hands with the old enemy of the truth, Gangrena, in many of
his methods, and will heaven or earth like of it? He once said, Gangrena would
be found a strumpet, of the race and lineage of the great scarlet whore, that
the vine of the Author was as the vine of Sodom, and his grapes grapes of
gall, his clusters bitter, his wine the poison of dragons, and the cruel
poison of aspes: And has not Mr. Goodwin now justified it?

But if the question be, How Mr. Woodwin has justified Gangrena?

The answer is, by doing himself just as that Author did, which has made some
lift up their eyes to heaven and say, LORD, WHAT IS MAN, THAT THOU ART MINDFUL
OF HIM? If the question be, wherein? it is answered.

1. By taking up disparaging reports against his brethren that never did him
harm, and publishing them to disgrace their religion by. This was the great
fault of Mr. Edwards, for which Mr. Goodwin reproves him thus, p. 4 of
Cretensis, The form of those accusations Mr. Edwards has levied against his
brethren, is much more inexcusable than the matter of them. We do not read,
that either Cham or Doeg, though sons of much unworthiness, ever traded with
Satan for these black commodities, or compassed the earth too and fro, with
their Eves-droppers, Agents or Factors, to gather up and furnish themselves
with the sins or infirmities of the Saints, no, nor that they ever took up a
report into their lip against any man, upon either the loose or malicious
suggestion of others, BUT ONLY (mark that) RELATED and informed what
themselves SAW WITH THEIR OWN EYES, and that casually, without any waiting the
opportunity.

But Mr. Goodwin has not only taken up a report against a man, but against
many, even the generation, as he calls them, that he is now writing against.

2. He has not only taken up these reports into his lip, but like Mr. Edwards
he has published them to the world in print, to be an everlasting monument of
dishonor to them, which heinous sin of yours, against the royal Law of love,
will he found agravated by these two notorious circumstances.

1. The matter of the story it self being utterly untrue, (though you did not
think so.)

And 2. Against persons, many whereof have had honorable thoughts of you, and
much love for you

Secondly, To convince you, that the same spirit or a worse acted you in
writing this book, that inspired Mr. Edwards in his Gangrena, it appears by
your drawing sore conclusions from words, upon suppositions, that are utterly
false, viz. from hence, that a baptized person said of an unbaptised, he
deserved to be hanged (though it is not affirmed for what) much less is it
affirmed, that he said, he deserved to be hanged for not being baptized, and
how unreasonable such a conceit is, I leave to any body to judge. Yet you
conclude sorely, against the Baptists, upon that uncharitable presumption,
thus, in these words, if so, then he that deserves to be hanged must expect no
better quarter than that of the halter, and if justice be administered without
partiality, all that are in the same condemnation of ANTI-DIPPING with him, may
bear him company in the same expectation, which cruel conclusion, that if the
baptized were in power, the undipt may look for the halter, all men may see you
draw from that wrested supposition, that the baptized person should say of the
unbaptised, he deserved to be hanged for not being baptized, the conclusion
otherwise being no ways drawable from the premises.

Oh Sir, Truth is too noble a thing to desire such weapons to fight its battles.

3. Your likeness to Gangrena appears in this, that the faults of some that
were the most unworthy of the Independents, he charged upon the generality of
them, for which you belabour him thus; Do not all men know, that the
composition of the world it self, and of all the parts of it, consists, ex
flore, and faece, of what is excellent and what is excrement, for Mr. Edwards
to judge of Indepency by the miscarriages, whether in practice or opinion, of
some few, that should make an estimate of Cheap Side by the channel that
runs in the midst of it, and give sentence against the holy and elect Angels
by what is found in sin and wickedness in the devil: The most accursed
hypocrites that ever the earth bare have been of the profession of
Christianity, and yet Christianity the best of all professions, with a great
deal more to the same purpose, both rational and pleasant to read.

But yet as if no such words had ever proceeded from Mr. Goodwin, or else that
he had repented of them, he can now find in his heart to argue against the
Generation, as he calls them, of the Baptists, upon the account of the wild
expressions of two persons instanced in, But surely THESE MEN: Again, let no
man think I do not walk charitably to THESE MEN: Again, My conscience bears me
witness, I have been freindly to THESE men: Well Sir, the time will come, when
you shall look upon these men, whom you have peirced, and mourn

4. Mr. Edwards stirs up the Magestrate to suppress the Independents, which
you do not in so many words, but you foment jealousies against them, and
endeavor a frowning brow toward them, by your bitter insinuations, let all
the world judge else by the words following: That wise men are not a little
jealous over the peace of this Nation, least it should suffer as other places
have done formerly, from the tumuliuous and domineering spirit of this sort of
men: and also after your two instances of persons here at home, thus These
words I regard but a^ muck, notwithstanding it may concern others to look after
the FIRE. Whereas amongst all the professors of Religion in the Nation, they
are found to be as peaceable spirited, if not more, than any other sort of men,
witness the Declaration of the Messengers and Elders of many Congregations, met
in London, from many if not most parts of the Nation, published about eight or
nine months ago, speaking their peaceable disposition, as all the world may
see that will read it: besides, let but experience speak to it, what fire have
these men kindled for this many years, that the Nation has had experience of
them? wherein has their turbulency, domineering and tumultuousness of spirit
appeared? nay, are they not branded this day by some for dullness in their
generation, work, upon this very account, because they are not of a more
stirring spirit?

5. Your similitude to Gangrena appears in this, that as he urged the
writings of other men against the Independents to disgrace their Religion, so
do you against the Anabaptists, p. 64. of his Gangrena, being part of a letter
to him sent out of the Country, We have a few Independents in our Town, but we
are more troubled with them, than some are with many, they are so TURBULENT and
VIOLENT. Just what Mr. Goodwin writes from other men, concerning the
Anabaptists, the same does Mr Edwards write from men, concerning the
Independents, which was, that they were proud, turbulent, and every ways
stopping the progress of the work of Reformation. But Sir, will not after ages
give as much heed to the writings of Mr. Edwards, and Mr. Jenkins, and Mr.
Walker, in your disparagement, as you now do to the writings of Luther and the
rest, etc. to the disparagement of the Anabaptists? if they do, what manner of
man will you be in the thoughts of future generations? Does any of those
Authors say worse of the Anabaptists than these men do of you? Do not these
men strive to render you one of the most odious men living? not only a
Schismatic, but an Heretic in grain, yea, a Blasphemer.

But are you ever the more so for all that? and would you hold them excused
that should believe the reports of cruel professed adversaries.

To come a little closer, I look upon your self as a man of as good a
conscience, as the most, if not as the best of those famous Writers you speak
of, yet so transcendent is your prejudice against us, that every light
appearance you have taken for a reality, (as if your were greedily desirous to
believe some ill of us) insomuch that you your self have given as unrighteous
judgment of us, and printed it too, to the perpetual infamy of our persons and
way, as the worst of them have done of you: I am sure what I say is true, and
that you will find one day.

I conclude then, that the testimony of professed adversaries, though good men,
is not to be depended on: And if Mr. Goodwin has not as much need of the truth
of this proposition as the poor Anabaptists, let the world judge.

To conclude then, the truth is, this two and twentieth Consideration, in most
of the nine parts of it, is so like Gangrena, that one would think Mr. Goodwin
had consulted that book in drawing it up, as the Reader may easily perceive;
which being made up of such dirty stuff, without the least breathing of the
Spirit from any word of Gods, I think I may take my leave of it without blame,
and the rather, because of that flood of contempt which he let in upon the
Author of Gangrena, for using such weapons to fight the Lords battles.

Only what he says in the ninth and last place I take my self bound to make
some answer too, because I suppose I am principally aimed at in it: The
substance this:

1. That you never heard of any that got any spiritual good by Baptism. 2. But
you have known, yea, you have known some, who have lost by it: (I suppose you
mean my self, and my Brother and Companion in the Lords work, Mr. William
Allen, with some few others, whom you had more cause to take notice of than any
others.)
Now Sir, having first observed how in this way of arguing you and Gangrena
jump: P. 22, 72, 73. of Gangrena.
They (says Mr. Edwards) generally (meaning the Independents) walk loosely and
at large, ever what they did before they turned Sectaries, and in comparison of
the godly Presbyterians; I do not know nor hear of a Sectary in England, that
is so strict in his life as he was before, and as thousands of the
Presbyterians are; they go to bowls and other sports on days of public
thanksgivings. As Mr. JOHN GOODWIN. This I premise to show to your self, and
confirm the Reader, that the same Spirit that ruled in Mr. Edwards, in whose
strength he strives (but in vain) to hinder trembling souls from obedience to
the truth, and to hold them under the dominions of Antichrist. The very self
same spirit has filled the hears of Mr. Goodwin, out of the abundance whereof
he speaks the same language, to fright humble souls from following their
dear Lord and Master, who says, The sheep (meaning his own sheep) follow him,
for they know his voice, and a stranger they will not follow, BUT WILL FLEE
from him, for they know not the voice of strangers, John 10.4.5.

But Mr. Goodwin, through desire seperateth himself to all wisdom, even that
of the Prophets enemies, Jerem. 18.18. Then said they, Come and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not perish from the Priest, nor
counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet: Come and let us SMITE
HIM with the tongue, and let us not give heed to his words. Judge else by what
follows: Many have we known, who went into the water Lambs, and came out of
it WOLVES and TIGERS; wany who went in Doves, and came out of it SERPENTS, as
if they had met with the Spirit that rules in the air under the water, instead
of the sweet Spirit of Christ; yea, we have known some, who soon after their
dipping have done things so unworthy and unsuteable to their former Genius,
which if any man had challenged them before their dipping, that they would do
after, we have reason to judge, they would have replied to the challenge, as
Hazael did to Elisha, in somewhat a like case, But what is thy servant a dog,
that he should do this great thing? 2 King ^.13.
(That thing was, He would rip up the women with child, dash their children,
slay the young men with the sword, and set the strong holds of Israel on fire.)
So many sad STORIES (they are stories indeed) and spectacles, wherewith our
eyes and ears are filled from time to time, put us into some fears, least as
God in his just, though secret judgment, gives Satan a permission to haunt
some houses, and to misuse and terrify those that shall lodge in them, so he
should, for causes best known to himself, have granted unto this enemy of
mankind somewhat a like power ever the opinion and practice of rebaptising.

Oh unmerciful Pen, that nothing will satisfy, but the very life of the
reputation of those it deals against! There is this only difference between
you and Mr. Edwards in your war against the truth and people of the most High,
he was your match in rage and fury, but he wanted your keen wit and roaring
language to set it off with. Mr. Goodwin, all men know, delights in
figurative speaking, if he be to praise men, then he will lift them up to
heaven, and set them too near the Throne of God; if he be set to dispraise
them, then down he throws them as far on the other hand, he has words at
will to serve both purposes: but surely to hiperbolize in the disparagement of
any man, much less his brethren, let such strains be of what account they will
in Rhetoric, I am sure they are naught in Christianity, they will hardly look
that Text in the face, Speak evil of no man, Titus 3.2. Reader what think
thou?

Or will Mr. Goodwin own these words for words of truth and soberness, That we
went into the water Lambs, and came out such savage beasts, as Wolves, Tigers,
Serpents, and that since we have done things something like Hazael, Who ripped up
women with child, slew the young men with the sword, dashed their children, and
set the strong holds of Israel on fire? Is there truth in these words, and will
not the righteous God of heaven and earth call you to an account for these hard
speeches against your intimate friends, that was always as tender of your
reputation as the apple of their eye? were it not well for Mr. Goodwin, if it
might be truly said of him, when he wrote this book, that which he mockingly
suggesteth of us, that we are persons of a maimed fancy? would not his guilt be
the less?

Honest Reader, the sense of guilt breeds fear and trembling in the soul, but
on the contrary, the conscience of righteousness, innocence and uprightness,
especially where absolutely perfect, as inparticular cases men may be, as it
fills the soul with courage, so it emboldeneth it in the presence both of God
and men, If our heart condemns us not, says the Apostle John, 1 John 3.21.
then have we BOLDNESS toward God. Mark, a full testimony of conscience
emboldneth the soul before God, much more before weak mistaking men.

Again, The righteous are as bold as a Lion: Prove. 28.1.
How then shall we hold our peace, that can call God to record upon our souls,
that we know not any one thing we have done, that should give Mr. Goodwin any
just occasion thus to speak of us: so that if ever there were a pack of
swelling words of vanity put together, they are here, that are every jot as
vain and empty of truth, as they are swelling of poison, insomuch that if I had
not had former and long experience of Mr. Goodwins holy bent in his Ministry
and conversation (excepting the inordinate sharpness of his pen) of which I had
rather speak (God he knows) a thousand times, than of any thing that looks
toward his disparagement.

But I say, if I should judge Mr. Goodwin according to the truth of what he
here affirms concerning us, I should look upon him as a man void of all sense
of conscience and fear of God, by taking liberty to say any thing to blast his
adversary, that his luxuriant wit prompted him unto.

But to answer a little more particulerly what these things are, that we have
done since our baptism, which makes you collect our great spiritual loss; I
bless God I know not any thing, and I am certain no body else does know any
thing, that will judge righteous judgment, and not take face for heart, shadow
for substance; what our gain is, we think it becomes us to speak modestly of
that, and to strive to make it good by actions (wherein oh mighty God help us)
rather than words.

And now, good Reader, to convince thy conscience, that we were not like to do
any such strange things soon after our Baptism, that should render us such
savage beasts. Thou must know, that Mr. Goodwin and the Church were the dearly
beloved of my soul; our relation thereto, and fellowship therein, I reckoned
one of the chiefest comforts of my life; I wanted not, but abounded with
respects from them, above what my conscience told me I deserved, (and who that
knows me knows not this to be true:) I do profess in the fear of that God
(whose I am, and whom I serve) that if I know my own heart, no body could have
hired me from the bosom of that Church with hundreds a year: And when the time
came, that for pure conscience I must be separated from the embraces thereof,
tears was my meat day and night; my grief was such at that time, that it made
the thoughts of death sweeter to me, than ever they were in my life before: my
study and secret workings of heart were, how to make my withdrawing as little
offensive to Mr. Goodwin, and the Church, as I could devise how to do with a
good conscience: I perceived they were not able to bear any public discourses
to the point in difference: Mr. Goodwins tears, at the mention of something
relating thereto, went to my heart, and weakened my hand to those further
applications which I had thought to have made to them. The truth is, my high
(indeed undue) respects to Mr. Goodwin kept me in a kind of bondage, that I was
not at that perfect liberty to discharge all the parts of that duty which their
respects obliged me unto.

So great was my respects to Mr. Goodwin and the Church, that besides my own
frequent addresses to the Lord, for the communication of that light to them,
which he had vouchsafed to me and some others, I got some time solemnly set
apart by some godly friends, and for his cause chiefly did we bow our knee:
this was the frame of heart we were in, honest Reader, soon after our
baptising, and whether then we were like to perpetrate any such unworthy
things, as Mr. Goodwin writes of, I leave to thy conscience to determine; or
rather, whether this Water dipping therefore be not the very monster of
ingratitude? Mr. Goodwin has indeed calumniated us stoutly, supposing that
something will stick on us, and I believe does; which if it cost him not tears
here, I am sure will shame hereafter from that God that vindicateth the
innocent, and then Mr. Goodwin will find the vanity of sporting himself with
the ruin of the good names and reputations of the people of God, which are as
much his interest as their estates, health, or any dear enjoyment they possess,
and as much against the law of love to violate.

I consess the pleasantness of Mr. Goodwins wit-in writing is so lushious, that
it is marvellously apt to tickle and please the flesh; but as the soul of any
man grows seasoned with the salt of heavenly wisdom, it is affected more with
sollid matter than enticing words, it is ready to cry, what will great words do
good at the judgment day; yea, I bless God I have lived to that day, to value
more the breathing of Gods Spirit, in a holy humble gracious soul, than the
greatest words of the gallantest Rhetorician in the world, (and that I have got
since my Baptism:) I confess for Mr Goodwin, set aside these controvertal
writings, and consider him in the tenor of his conversation, I think him, nay,
I know him to be a pattern of patience, humility, meekness, temperance; neither
do I remember one Sermon that ever he made to the point of Tithes, or any
consideration for preaching in all his days, though I lived under his ministry
almost twenty years: and more than all this, all the Arguments of the Gospel,
and out of the Gospel, to prefer holiness and close walking with God, I
believe there are not many men in his time, if any at all, that has managed
them with more authority, life and power, I say it, I say it again, and delight
to speak it, and will persist in it to my last breath, though he grind us to
powder with his mill stone language.

Some change Mr. Goodwin may find in my Genius, I confess it, for heretofore,
having his person in admiration, it was to some degree a snare upon me, to call
him Master in that sense, wherein the Lord Jesus dehorteth from it, Math. 23.
whereas now that by the help of Gods Spirit and my own experience, I see
clearly, that in the communication of light in the things of God, God tieth not
himself to this or that man, I consult with Christ, and lean not to the
understanding of any man I see by experience, that God takes liberty to reveal
to babes the truth, which at some time he hides from the wise and prudent:
Math. 11.
And the more self-sufficient any man grows in knowledge of the reason of
things, the less is he led by examples.

It Is more noble for a man to eschew evil and do good, because it is evil and
good, then because such and such men that are good do so: And though I was apt
enough to lean that way, and to those opinions Mr. Goodwin leaned too, (that
under God had been the great means of any spiritual comfort and edification)
yet I bless God I was not so rankly guilty of that evil, but when Mr. Goodwin
came to open that text, Math. 28.19. and to give it for truth, that by the word
Teach in the Commission was meant, not actual discipling, but the saying such
things only, which was proper to make men so. I palpably discerned the Text
wronged, and the interpretation was like gravel in my mouth, and not only
mine, but that persons also, of whom Mr. Goodwin said at his burial, his worth
was so great, that it was a temptation on him to break promise to speak of it,
and enough to cast a man into an agony of sorrow to think of his death, I say,
he was as much distasted as I at that stroke of the Text. Except in these
respects, or some others like these, I know no change in my Genius, nor I am
sure no body else does.

But I confess there was one unhappy mistake of a word of mine by one of the
brethren, which gave me a visit soon after my baptism, which has more
appearance of evil in it of my part, than any or all the things can be laid
against me I am sure: to which I desire to give both you and all the Church
satisfaction, and that was this, That brother spoken of before, giving me a
visit at my house, where some part of the Church was wont to meet on monday
nights, to edify one another in faith and love: Amongst other discourse, which
I cannot now remember, I affirmed, that the sight of them, meaning our friends,
was a grief and burden to me, which following some words of easy
misconstruction, he concluded they proceeded from an absolute fall of affection
to them, and so presented them to others of the brethren that were wont to meet
there, which conceit got further rooting in the minds of the brethren, by
another unhappy circumstance: The brother appointed to speak the next meeting,
before he began his Sermon, began with this story, making it the ground of no
more meeting at my house.

To which I answer, 1. Those words, The sight of the Church was a grief and a
burden to me: I said, but the principle of them, was not the want, but the
abundance of affection to them, I say again, the abundance of affection to them
(God is my witness) who had indeed obliged me much, which made parting with
them the more gr^^vous, and the necessity of that made me willing to be
estranged from them, that I might the better undergo the burden; this is the
perfect truth, which God the searcher of all hearts knows, and this also was
one main reason amongst others, why I estranged my self from Mr. Goodwin
afterward.

But if it be asked, why I did not reply to the brother, who understood just
contrary.

I answer, I intended to do it, after he had done his Sermon (for it was before
his Sermon that he began to speak of it) but after his Sermon, falling upon
some discourse with Mr. Goodwin relating thereto, I quite forgot, being pressed
with trouble and grief at some high words Mr. Goodwin then gave me.

This is the truth, which the righteous God of heaven and earth knows, for
whose sake we now suffer by Mr. Goodwins unmerciful Pen: To be injured by a
common enemy (...) no matter of wonder, but to be wronged by ones father, as it
is a matter of more strangeness, so of harsher recentment: But it may be God
has bid you to cu^se me, to take me off all glorying in men, that I may be the
more entire to himself; me thinks I now find that Scripture has a fresh edge
upon my spirit, Cease from man, whose breath is in his n^strils, Isaiah 2.22
for wherein is he to be esteemed, 1 Cor. 3.21. Therefore let no man glory in
man

Your three and twentieth Consideration is: THat there is no substantial
Argument produced to justify such a practice, nor you believe ever will be.
Whether we have not given Arguments to justify it, more than one, and that
grounded upon the Scriptures and your own principles, and indeed the principles
of all the learned, I refer to the judgment of the Reader.

As for that which you say, by way of reply to my Brother Allens answer to your
forty Queries about Church communion, I shall leave him to answer, or be
silent, as he finds cause, only it lies much upon my spirit to show unto
your self (if may be) if not to your self yet to the unprejudiced Reader, the
palpable suffering of many of the Scriptures engaged in that service.

The first is the 2. of Acts 41. which Text my Brother Allen urges to prove
addition to the Church and fellowship in it, to follow Baptism, not go before
it: and that 1. Because the Text says, they gladly received the Word. 2. Were
baptized. 3. Were added to the Church. 4. Continued in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship.


Now Mr. Goodwin will have it, that Baptism might be left out of the chain,
and yet they might have been Church members notwithstanding.

1. Because those who are said to have been baptized in the former part of the
verse, are not said in the latter to have been added to the CHURCH, but simply,
they were added or added unto. Mr. Allen understands the Relative to those
words, added to, to be (Them) according to the present translation, and whereto
both he and the Translators are guided.

1. By the mention of the hundred and twenty Disciples in the Chapter before at
the 15. verse, to which these that were now converted were added, which in the
47. verse of this 2. chapter are called the Church in plain English, And the
Lord added to the CHVRCH daily, etc.

And that the Relative to those words ADDED to were the (Church) or the hundred
and twenty Disciples spoken of before, Mr. Goodwin himself in his forty
Queries (which I do not think were written above half a year before this Water
dipping) so understood it, mark his words, It cannot be demonstratively proved
from the Scriptures, that those hundred and twenty Disciples, unto which it is
here said, P. 6. Of 40 Queries. Acts 1.15.
that three thousand were ADDED, etc. which a little before he himself calls
the Church in the same page: But now all of a sudden Mr. Goodwin alters his
mind, and will not let the 47. verse expound the 42. though the context as
fai^ly leads to it as heart can wish, but runs us to the 11* of Acts 24.
to know the Relative to the words (added to) in the 2. Acts 41. because there
it is thus written, And much people was added to (the Lord.) Here again you
insinuate a difference in sense between those words, added to the Lord, and
those, added to the Church, whereas in your Letter to Mr. Tho. Goodwin, p. 5.
you expound the joining to the Lord, spoken of Acts 11.24. of immembring into
the Church, your words these, There is mention made of many that were added or
joined to the LORD, i. e. say you, were immembred into the CHVRCH: Now what
construction can any rational, impartial, considerate man make of this your
shifting too and fro in this manner, but as an evident demonstration, that in
fighting against us you labor to engage the Scriptures in a war they have no
mind too, and so you loose your way, and know not well where to set your foot,
not what ground to stand on: The Lord make you sensible of it.

But again you say, 2. It is said, Acts 2, 47. And the Lord added to the
Church: WHO, says Mr. Goodwin, such as were baptized? No, but such as should
be saved, or were saved, which was not by being baptized but beleiving.

Here Mr. Goodwin says two things.

1. That those that the Text speaks of, that were added to the Church, were
not such as were baptized, but, etc. If this be not a strange proposition, and
as contrary to the Scripture as light to darkness, I am under the enchantment
Mr. Goodwin upbraideth me with so often; for though it be true, that those that
were added to the Church were such as should be saved, yet it follows not,
that those that were added to the Church were not baptized; nay, it is plain
they were by the 41. verse, Then they that gladly received his word were
baptized, and the same day (that is, that they received the Word and were
baptized) there were added unto them, or the Church, about three thousand
souls, who continued in the Apostles fellowship.

But by this doctrine of Mr. Goodwins, Baptism should be a crime rather than
an act of obedience, because he makes the Church not to consist of such
persons as have been baptized; is this doctrine according to the form of
wholesome words? Does not the Apostle write to the CHURCH of Corinth, 1 Cor.
1.10 13. Romans 6.3, 4 Col. 2.12. Gal. 3.27.
and CHURCH at Rome, and Church at COLOSSE, and the CHURCHES of Galatia, and
were they not made up of baptized persons.

But 2. Mr. Goodwin says, The Lord added to the Church such as should be
saved, which say you, was NOT by being BAPTIZED, but beleiving. Here Mr.
Goodwin opposes Baptism to beleiving, in reference to salvation, but it is
not by virtue of this Text, He that beleiveth, and is baptized, shall be saved.
And by virtue of what Text of Scripture he does it, I know not, for though
Baptism should not be looked upon as a condition of absolute necessity to
salvation as faith is, yet sure it is some way necessary to salvation, it is
plain in the Text, and therefore not to be put in opposition to faith in
reference thereto: what a wide difference there is between making Baptism
equa^ with faith, as conditional of salvation, which is the judgment of many
learned men, as you know, and making it stand in opposition to faith, in
reference thereto, as you do.

Sir, will that God that ordained Baptism to be Faiths companion, to serve the
same interest of the precious souls of men, will he take it kindly, that you
toil thus to make them look like enemies rather than friends? In a word Sir,
this doctrine is altogether unscriptural, and as pleasant to the taste of a
healthful soul, as vinegar to the teeth.

But 3. and lastly, you say, though it should be read thus, Then they that
gladly received his word were baptized, and the same day there were added to
the Church: yet the recording their addition to the Church after their
Baptism, does not prove their addition was BY their Baptism.

The cause does not require it, neither does my Brother Allen affirm it from
this Text, but only that addition to the Church followed it, and did not go
before it (which was your own words heretofore, as I have shown already) and we
think it is safest to follow the Scripture pattern (partly because of what you
said heretofore, that all others were but seducers) but chiefly because of the
express Word of God.

But whatever the matter is, you think now one may go another way and do as
well.

The second Scripture, which in my apprehension suffers under your pen is,
Math. 28.19. which I have proved at large already, p. 13, 14, 15, 16. of this
book, where I have laid down my Brother Allens Argument from the words, and
answered Mr. Goodwins objections against it, in doing which, the Reader will
easily perceive that Text complaining of hard usage.

The third is the 1. Corinthians. 12.13. which I have also discharged the service
Mr. Goodwin employed it in, p. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. of this book, because
the truth is, it is not pleased with it.

The fourth, which does not only whisper, but cry out of injury, is the 8. of
Acts 27. And Phillip said, if thou beleivest with all thy heart, thou may.
The words its evident are an answer to the Eunuch, who asked Phillip upon the
sight of water, what hindered that he might not be baptized.

Mr. Goodwin supposes by these words, THOU MAY, he not saying to him, THOU
MUST, is noted a liberty, which he calls an Evangelicall liberty concerning
external Ordinances, implying, he might be baptized if he would, he should not
sin, or he he might refuse without sin.

This I take to be the most unnatural, unkindly, and indeed injurious stroke of
the Text of any that has been touched: Gird up therefore the loins of thy
mind, and consider good Reader, that thou be not hurt by this dangerous
gloss of the Text.

1. If Phillip should have propounded Baptism to the Eunuch, upon such slight
terms, not as a duty on him, but a thing indifferent, he should have done that
he had no warrant for from Christ; Christ gave all his Commands to be obeyed,
not to be trifled with, John 15.14. Ye are my friends if you do WHATSOEVER I
command you. Revel. 22.12, 14. Blessed are they that DO his Commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life. Acts 3* 22. A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you, him shall you hear in ALL things WHATSOEVER he
shall say unto you: And it shall come to pass, that every soul that will not
hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the people: (that by hearing
is meant obeying in this Scripture, is your own sense) Luke 6.46. Why call you
me Lord, Lord, and DO not the things that I say. So that if Baptism be one of
the Commands of Christ, Mat. 28.19. Acts 2.37. Mar. 16.16.
as I have proved from Acts 2.37. and might do it from many others. And 2. that
Christ gave all his Commands to be observed: John. 15.14. Rev. 22.14. Acts 3.22.
And 3. that he counts those no friends of his that baulketh any of them. 4.
That he threateneth them with destruction, that observes him not in whatsoever
he commands, without exception of any thing, yea, that he distateth any ones
calling him Lord that does not obey him.
Then I think it follows roundly enough, that if Phillip should have
propounded Baptism to the Eunuch upon such terms of indifferency, he should
have betrayed his trust, Reader what think thou?

2. To evince, that Phillip by those words, THOU MAY, did not intend them by
way of indifferency as to the Eunuchs obedience, appears by this, because
then he should act by a differing Spirit from all the rest of his brethren, the
Servants of Christ, that were employed in the Lords work. But he was acted by
the same Spirit. I shall take that for granted, that the Spirit that said unto
Phillip, Go near and join thy self, Acts 8.29. that it was the Spirit of the
ever-living God which acted Phillip thorough that negotiation he had with the
Eunuch.

Now that Spirit inspireth Peter to COMMAND Cornelius and his Company to be
baptized after faith, Acts 10.47. Peter did not say, you may, or you may choose,
but though they were deeply baptized with the Spirit, yet Peter commands them
to be baptized with water for all that, In the Name of the Lord Jesus, which
was in full pursuit of his Commission, which also is a clear interpretation of
it, that when Christ says, Disciple me all Nations, baptising them, his
meaning was, that they should, having discipled them, command the Disciples to
be baptized, In the Name of the Lord Jesus; that they should lay it home to the
consciences of the Disciples, and a duty, to be baptized into his Name, and so
bear the Name and wear the livery of their Lord and Master.

The same Apostle to the same purpose, Acts 2 38. Even so did Ananias in
respect of Paul, ARISE, WHY tarriest thou, be baptized and wash away thy sins,
and that before he eat, though he had fasted three days.

I remember, Sir, an observation of your own upon these words, both rational
and pleasant, from hence, that Ananias importuneth Paul to baptism by those
words, Arise, Why? Behold, says Mr. Goodwin, whosoever d^l yeth obedience to
any of the Ordinances of the Gospel, will never be able to give a reason for
it, WHY tarriest thou? This observation, who does not taste the sweetness and
goodness of the truth in it, that has not lost their cast? But for those
observations you now make of the like places, who can cast them but with sorrow
of heart, or behold them with dry eyes.

Again, as Ananias hastened Paul to Baptism after faith, so did Paul hasten
the Jaylour, Acts 16 33. And was baptized he and all his: mark, ST^A ^WAY, even
before his eating of meat. Paul was more set upon the Lords work, than feeding
his own belly. HEAVENLY SOUL, though it was night, and he hungry (for after
they came from baptism into the house, the Jayler set meat before them) yet he
first minds his Lords work, like Christ, John 4. who whilst the woman of
S^m^^^a was present to preach too, the Disciples would not so much as offer him
meat, but when she was gone, the Text says, (IN THE MEAN WHILE) the Disciples
said, Master eat, verse 31. but his content was so great ^n feeding souls,
that he fed upon that as other men did upon meat and drink, verse 32. I have
meat to eat that ye know not off.

But 3. To discover Mr. Goodwins great mistake of this Text, consider this, if
Phillip should have preached Baptism as an indifferent thing, would it not
have been to disparage the wisdom of Christ in ordaining it, who not only
commanded it, but picked it out of all the rest of the Ordinances, to mention
it by name with Teaching in the Commission, Mat. 28 19.
And 2 commanding it to be done with so great solemnity, Acts 2.3^. Mar. 16.16.
and ordering the Apostles to propound it with Repentance and Faith, in order
to remission of sins and salvation, having first been baptized himself to
fultil all righteousness: If Phillip after all this should have preached (...)
as an indifferent thing, would it not have been a great disparagement to the
wisdom of Christ, in thus instituting it, and thus gracing it; for what would
the import of such a carriage have been, but that Christ repented of
instituting it, that he had over shot himself in it, as men use to do, and
that experience proved it to be of no moment? Confider and judge.

But fourthly from the Text it self; it appears clearly enough, that Phillip
had other thoughts of Baptism, than as a thing indifferent, by the high terms
he puts upon it: for upon the question put on the Eunuchs part, what hindered
that he might not be baptized? Phillip answers, If thou beleivest: 2. With
thy HEART 3. With ALL thy heart, thou may: should Phillip have propounded it
as a thing indifferent, THAT would have spoken it a matter of small moment to
the Creature.
But it is plain, he puts high terms upon it, for if he did not believe,
and that with ALL the heart, it would hinder and stop his proceedings to that
Ordinance; and therefore an unreasonable thing to imagine him propounding it as
a matter of indifferency, for does not all men judge it a senseless thing for
any man to put high and extraordinary terms upon a poor and mean commodity, or
does so doing unbecome men? and can any body judge it becoming the wisdom of
the Spirit of God?

The truth is, those words, THOU MAY (following those words, If thou
beleivest with all thy heart, in answer to the Eunuchs question, What hinders?
being understood, as Mr. Goodwin would have them, that is, that he might if he
would, or might refuse without sin) would render his Answer to have no more
savor than is in the white of an Egg, because that sense of them is a plain
contradiction to the high terms he puts upon it.

Besides, at the 12. verse in this 8. chapter of the Acts, it appears Phillip
was very chary of the Ordinance of Baptism: mark, BUT WHEN THEY BELIEVED,
Phillip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the Name of
Jesus Christ, they were baptized both men and women, BUT WHEN THEY BELIEVED,
not before; the truth is, not any one of the Apostles, or Administrators of the
Ordinances, showed a more tender spirit of the honor of Baptism than Phillip,
most unlike therefore was he by those words, THOU MAY, to mean, he might, or
he might not.

5. Phillip insisting upon the doctrine of Baptism, as well as other doctrines
of Christ, at that time to the Eunuch, when he had but a little time to
instruct him in in all, is that which mightily reproves that conceit, that by
those words, THOU MAY, should be meant, thou may, or thou may choose;
can any man imagine, that Phillip should spend any part of his little time with
him, in the discourse of that, which he might neglect without sin or damage.
It seems Phillip opened the doctrine of Baptism to him, as well as other
things, and that he understood it not only as his duty, but a privilege not
to be admitted to absolutely but conditionally, why else should he say, WHAT
HINDERS? Does not that imply, that he thought something might, and withal
doubted his own fitness, which made him put the question?

But if any object, that it appears not that Phillip insisted at all on
Baptism.

I confess it is not said in words at length that he did.

But 1. We find the question put on the Eunuchs part upon his converse with
Phillip.

2. We read of no other that instructed him in Christiaanity.

And 3. It was the manner of the Apostles to preach Faith and Baptism
together, being the beginning doctrines of Christ, and belonging to the
foundation of a Christian man. Heb. 6.2.

Thus did this Phillip unto the Samaritans in the beginning of this 8. of the
Acts, we read only of his preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God,
there is no mention made of his preaching of Baptism by Name, but no body will
be so brutish as to imagine that Phillip would baptize them, before he
instructed them concerning the nature, use and ends of Baptism, because then
they could not worship God in spirit, but ignorantly and carnally, and where
then would the difference be between the worshippers under the Law and under
the Gospel, herein lay a main part of the reformation by Christ, that he
rendereth his worshippers more spiritual than under the Law: It Is such
worshippers that he seeks, John 4. In a word, the Apostles admission, and the
Beleivers submission to Baptism, does imply their being taught and instructed
therein, and that by themselves too, least they should be found accessory to
the profaning of the Ordinance of Christ, by administering it to such as might
be unfit subjects.

Our late Annotators upon Acts 8.36. What hinders me to be baptized? It
appears hence, say they, that among other parts of Christian Religion,
Phillip had preached to him concerning Baptism.

Consider Calvin. p. 207. of his Commentary of the 8. of Acts, But we see that
Christ was preached to the Eunuch in such sort; that he knew that Baptism was
a sign of new life in him, and that therefore he would not neglect the same,
because it was added to the Word, and such an addition as was inseparable.

I conclude then from the premises, that the scope of the place is just the
contrary to what Mr. Goodwin affirms, he would have those words of Phillip to
the Eunuch, THOU MAY, to note indifferency: but I hope I have proved they
note just the contrary, namely, the sacredness of the Rite, and high advantage
of it to the Creature, and consequently, the Eunuchs duty and all Christ's
Disciples to come under it, but with care and fear, therefore he must examine,
whether he BELIEVE WITH ALL HIS HEART.

A fifth Scripture which likes not your gloss is, Galat. 4.1, 2, 3. the words
are as follows, Now I say, that the heir as long as he lives is a child,
differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all, but is under Tutors
and Governors until the time appointed of the Father; Even so we, when we
were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world, but when the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under
the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons.

From the difference of the two states of the Church, under the Law and under
the Gospel, which apppeareth in this Scripture, Mr. Goodwin infers, that the
Church is not now to be looked upon as under the like rigor of subjection to
Gospel Ordinances, as the Church then was to the Ordinances of the Law, and if
it were, the two so different states of the Church mentioned should be
confounded.

To this I say, the inference is not good: The Church now is as straightly bound
to the observation of Gospel Ordinances, as the Church then was to those
Ordinances of Moses. Neither does the conceiving so confound the two different
states of the Church.

1. That we are as straightly bound to Christ's Ordinances, as the Church then was
to Moses his. Consider Acts 3.22. for Moses truly said unto the Fathers, A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto
me, him shall you HEAR, or obey in ALL THINGS WHATSOEVER he shall say unto you:
and it shall come to pass, that every soul which shall not hear that Prophet,
shall be DESTROYED from amongst the people: If so, does it not follow roundly
enough, that we are all tied to obey Christ in his Ordinances, as much as the
Jews were of old to obey the Ordinances of the Law.

For. 1. Are not the Ordinances some of the things Christ has said? 2. Are
they not as plainly commanded, especially this of Baptism? Acts 2.37. Mark
16.16. 3. Are they not exhibited with as high a penalty in case of neglect or
contempt? was there any higher penalty put upon disobedience than destruction?
How then says Mr. Goodwin, we are not now so tied as then? Nay, are we not
tied faster to the Ordinances of Christ? and shall not we contract more guilt,
by contempt or neglect of them, than the carnal Church of the Jews did by the
neglect of Moses?


Considering the 2. Hebr. 1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed
to the things which we have heard, least at any time we should let them slip:
Here he speaks of the words of Christ the great Prophet. Now from the
greatness and excellency of the Commander he argues to their giving the more
earnest heed, least at any time they should let them slip.

To this add Hebr. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that spoke, for if they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. How plain a case
then is this from these Scriptures.

To these we might add the 8. of Mark 38. He that shall be ashamed of me and of
my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of
the Father.

But it may be some may object, we are tied more to obey Christ in other
things, because of the excellency of Christ above Moses, but not to the
Ordinances of Christ.

To which I answer, the Scriptures says, Whosoever shall be ashamed of HIS
WORDS, without exception of any, of him will he be ashamed, etc. Nay, that none
may plead excuse, Acts 3.22. The place touched before, Him shall ye hear in
WHATSOEVER he shall say unto you. Now if Mr. Goodwin can bring us as plain
Scripture any where, that Christ will dispense with disobedience, or neglect of
some of his Commandments, as I have done that he would have none neglected,
then let the world give ear to him, yea in particular, does not the Command lie
expressly as well to respect his Ordinances for worship, as faith or manners
otherwise; Col. 2.6. yea, are not the Churches commanded to hold fast the
traditions which they had been taught, 2 These. 2.15.

To this add 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ. Now I
praise you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ORDINANCES AS I delivered them unto you.

Where it appears 1. That Paul had the Ordinances for the Church from Christ.
2. That it was a praiseworthy thing to keep them ALL. 3. To keep them pure
also from men's inventions; mark, AS I DELIVERED them unto you. 4. His exhorting
them to look to them, and his praising them that they had KEPT them, does
imply, it would be a hard matter to keep the Ordinances pure, from changes and
mixtures of men's inventions, as now we find by experience.


But Mr. Goodwin supposes, that if the Churches now be as straightly bound to
Christ's Ordinances, as the old Church was to Moses Laws, then the two
different states of the Church shall be confounded.

To which I answer, if the difference of the two states lie in no such thing as
the difference of obligation to the Ordinances of the two Prophets, then the
equal obligation to the Ordinances of the two Prophets will not confound the
two different states of the Church, but the difference of the two states lies
in no such thing.

That the difference of the two states lies in no such thing.

If the Scripture no where say any such thing, neither in plain words, nor by
good consequence, then there is no such thing.

But the Scriptures no where affirm any such thing.

Now whereas Mr. Goodwin supposes as much may be drawn from the 4. Galat. 1,
2, 3. That the Text does signify a far different state of the Church is
plain and clear but that that difference should lie in a less obligation to any
of the Commandments of Christ, then the Church then was to the Ordinances of
Moses, this is not in the Text, nor indeed in any other.

It Is true: 1. This Text says, We, when we were children, were in bondage to
the elements of the world, which at the 9. verse he calls weak and beggarly,
but they were no other but the carnal Ordinances of the Law of Moses, those
slavish customs of the Jewish Law, which he calls the rudiments of the
world, or beginnings of teaching suitable to their dark state; but to argue from
their redemption to those Ordinances, to our liberty from obedience to Christ's
in his, which Mr. Goodwin does, (or else where is the countenance this Text
gives his cause) but in my poor apprehension it is a horrid consequence.

Again 2. The Text says further, That we are redeemed from under the Law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons. But that the receiving the adoption of
sons signifies any such thing, as a less tie to obey the great Prophet in his
Ordinances, than was on the Jews to obey their less Prophet in his, or that to
suppose us to stand equally bound to Christ in his Ordinances as they were to
Moses in his, that this will confound the difference of the two states of the
Church, is only said by Mr. Goodwin, not proved, nor attempted to be.

Now as I have shown already, that the difference of the two states cannot lie
in this, that Christ's Disciples are less bound to Christ's Ordinances, than
Moses was in his, by Acts 3.22. Hebr. 2.1. Hebr. 12.25. Mark 8.38. But for the
further clearing of this point, I shall offer briefly wherein the difference of
the two states of the Church does lie, and particularly.

1. In the matter of the Church; the matter of the old Testament Church was
Abraham's carnal seed, without respect to morrals, Acts 7.38. The whole
posterity of Abraham are called the CHURCH in the wilderness. But now under the
new Testament, the matter of the Church is the spiritual seed of Abraham, such
as follow him in faith and holiness, Math. 3.9. John 4.23, 24. 1 Peter 1.5. The
Churches of the new Testament are or ought to be by constituation, called to be
Saints, sanctified by Christ Jesus, 1 Corinthians 1.2. and if any other be
admitted, and prove otherwise, such are not to be endured in communion, 1 Corinthians. 5.13. 2 These. 3.6, 14. Revel. 2.2. Christ affirms it in the honor
of the Church of Ephesus, that they could not bear them that did evil.

2, In respect of the Ordinances, The Ordinances of the old Church exceeding
many. The Gospel sew. 2. The old ones costly and afflictive. The new
comparatively not so. 3. The old ones carnal, the new comparatively spiritual,
Gal. 3.2. especially Baptism, which betokens the reward of duty, namely,
resurrection to glory with Christ, as well as our duty now, and present state
of death and burial with Christ, Colos. 2.12. compared with Colos. 3.1.


3. In respect of a more abundant pouring forth of the Spirit, Luke 11.13. 2 Corinthians. 3.8. the consequence whereof is: 1 More boldness in approaches to God,
Galat. 4 6, Romans 8.15. 2. More light and knowledge touching the good will of
God to sinners, and the way of their reconcilement to God, 2 Timothy 1.10. Ephesians.
1.9. Titus 2.11. 2 Corinthians 5.19, 21.


4. The Churches under the new Testament have richer grounds whereupon to raise
holiness and conformity to God, Titus 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Hebr. 2.3. Romans 8. from
32. to 39. 2 Corinthians. 3.18. 1 Peter 1.16, 17, 18.

5. They have richer grounds of comfort, because clearer ground for faith and
hope, 1 Peter 1.21. Rom 8 21. Romans 4.25. therefore, 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 5.2, 3,
they rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

6. More peace of conscience, Hebr. 7.19. Hebr. 9.9, 14. Hebr. 10.1.

7. More full communion with God the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3.

By all which it appears, that there are respects in abundance to show
wherein the difference of the two states of the Church lies, and consequently
no necessity to conceive, that if the Disciples of Christ be as straightly bound
to obey him in all his Ordinances, as the old Church was to obey Moses in his,
that then the difference of the two states of the Church would be confounded: I
shall conclude this with the words of Mr. Baxster; If when Gods worship was so
much ceremonious, he yet lays a charge to DO WHATSOEVER he commands, and
to ADD NOTHING THERETO, NOR TAKE OUGHT THEREFROM, That is, says he, not to or
from the words commanding only, but also THE WORK COMMANDED; Is it likely
then, that he will be less jealous in this now?

Sixthly, A sixth Scripture complaining of wrong, is the 1 Corinthians. 11.24, 25,
26. There is an eye of Evangelical liberty concerning external observations, P.
61. Of Water dip.
says Mr. Goodwin, in the institution it self of the other Ordinances also, as
the Apostle rendereth it, 1 Corinthians. 11 25, 26. THIS DO YE, AS OFTEN AS YE DO
IT, in remembrance of me, for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, Here is no injunction, how often?
(but a plain intimation of liberty touching this) only the terms for the
manner of doing it is set down, which is the direct calculation or manner of
sanction of the institution concerning the free will offering under the Law;
this kind was imposed on no man as of necessity.

To which I answer: Your inference from the word, I humbly conceive to be just
contrary to the design of our Lord Jesus in the instituting; you suppose he
intended a liberty as to the use of the supper by not determining the time, how
often, they should eat that bread, whereas in truth, the undetermining of the
time, how often, following the positive command of its use, This do ye, notes
rather the frequent use of it upon all convenient occasions, as supposing the
determining of time for the performance of commands, is only necessary where
the matter commanded does not nearly concern the party that does obey, he
supposes principles of self-love will carry men to frequent diligently the
means of their comfort and safety; which also I take to be the reason why it is
not set down punctually how often we shall pray, or hear, or frequent the
assemblies of the Saints: That precept (says Dr. Ames) of an undeterminate
time, Do this, admits no other limitation but want of opportunity, or some
just impediment. But Vrsinus more plain from the words, AS OF T, The Supper
therefore, says Vrsin, is often to be reiterated, and that 1. Because of the
words of the institution: and 2. Because of the end of the institution.
So that from the words of the institution, in conjunction with the end of the
Ordinance, Vrsin gathers, and that according to pure reason, that it ought
often to be celebrated.

But to put it out of all doubt to the godly Reader, that these words, AS OFTEN
as ye do it, does not imply any liberty to neglect it without sin, but the
just contrary. Consider that known general rule to judge of all doctrines. The
true doctrine of the Gospel is a doctrine according to godliness, that is out
of all dispute: Now then bring that interpretation to the standard, which
says, that those words of the institution, As often as ye do it, imply its not
being imposed upon any man as of necessity, but much like the free will
Offering under the Law: Is this interpretation according to godliness, or
rather ungodliness? may not Mr. Goodwin as well say, it is a doctrine according
to health, for a man to neglect the food by which he lives? The design of
Christ in this Ordinance is to keep alive the memories of Christ's death and
passion for us, with all the benefits thereof, 1 Corinthians. 11. to confirm faith,
to convey succouring virtue from Christ to relieve the soul against temptation,
to quicken affection to Christ, and one another, as all agree, and would it be
according to godliness, to be under a liberty to disuse it without sin? may not
Mr. Goodwin as well say, we are under a liberty, not to honor Christ, or do
our selves or the world good? And as for any similitude between the Ordinances
of the Gospel, in particular this, and the free will Offering under the Law.

Surely Sir you are under a wonderful mistake, because the free will Offerings
were not positively commanded, and therefore have the name of free will
Offerings, whereas the Lord Supper is positively commanded, 1 Corinthians. 11.24,
25. And when he had given thanks, he said, take eat, this is my body, THIS DO
in remembrance, etc. After the same manner also he took the cup, and said, THIS
DO, So that though there be not a determinate time, how often they should do
it, yet here is a positive order to the Churches to do it, and therefore could
not be neglected without sin, but for the free will Offerings under the Law,
they were not bound to offer them at all; it is therefore true as you say, this
kind of Offering was imposed upon no man by way of necessity, but it is because
there was no Law positively enjoining them, and consequently no sin at all to
neglect them: What a vast difference then is there between external Ordinances
under the Gospel, and the free will Offering under the Law, even as much as
between a matter commanded and that which is not.

Sir, you say our way has a face of godliness, but a heart of error and
profaneness. But Sir, should you live to these principles (which I am
persuaded you are a better man than ever to do) our way would be before yours,
though what you say were true of it, ours, you say, has a face of godliness,
though it has a heart of error, but yours would have neither face nor heart:
And though you your self never practice that looseness that these pleadings
directly tend to, the Lord knows how many others may be ensnared by them,
which in my apprehension you ought sadly to lay to heart. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling
block or an occasion, to fall in his brothers way, Romans 14.13.

A seventh Scripture, which in my apprehension is a brother in the same
complaint with those which are past, is Gal. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
love.

From hence you say, That the Apostle by shutting out Circumcision instance
wise with Uncircumcision, and letting in only Faith, the new Creature, P. 81.
Of Water dip.
with keeping the Commandments of God as available, he shut out BAPTISM also,
and all ceremonial practications whatsoever.

This consequence is an absolute stranger to the premises, for though the
Apostle shut out Circumcision and uncircumcision, and let in only Faith, the
new Creature, and keeping the Commands of God as available, it follows not
from hence, that he shut out Baptism, as available.

If only such things are shut out as available, which are no commands of God,
then Baptism is not shut out, because Baptism is the command of God.

But only such things are shut out as available, that are no commands of God.

That only such things are shut out as unavailable, that are no commands of
God, appears by their being opposed to those that are: Mark the Text, Neither
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails, BUT KEEPING THE COMMANDMENTS OF GOD.

To infer therefore from Circumcisions unavailableness (which is none of the
Commandment of God) to Baptism its being so, which is the Command of God, and
that serving the grand interest of the Creature, even that of remission of sins
and salvation (in some sense) which must either be acknowledged, or the
Scriptures renounced, Acts 2.38. Mark 16.16. I say, to make such inferences, is
rather to say what one would have, than what is, and to entreat the Scripture
to look toward what YOU would have, rather than in humility to be subject to
what THEY would have; Reader judge else

But 2. If the Apostles intention was to shut out nothing at all by those words
(NOR UNCIRCUMCISION) then your apprehension of Baptism, its being shut out as
available, falls to the ground, because you suppose its exclusion lies wrapped
up in those words.

But the Apostle shut out nothing at all, nor intended the shutting out of any
thing by those words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION.

That he intended not the shutting out of any thing at all, one thing or other
by those words, nor Uncircumcision, but only the notifying, that being
uncircumcised would not hinder the Gentiles acceptance with God now under the
Gospel, no more than circumcision would further it.

It appears first, by comparing this Scripture with the 1 Corinthians. 7.18, 19.
the words as follows, Is any man called being circumcised (that is, is any
Jew converted to the Gospel) let him not become uncircumcised.

On the other hand, Is any called in uncircumcision? let him not be
circumcised; that is, is any Gentile converted to the Gospel? let him not make
conscience of circumcision. The next words, which are the same with these in
the Text, are the reason, why, a converted Jew should not be troubled that he
was circumcised, nor the converted Gentile that he wanted it: Mark,
CIRCUMCISION is nothing, and UNCIRCUMCISION is nothing; meaning, that now since
the Orders of the great Prophet came forth, which all the world are bound to
hear upon pain of death, Acts 3.22. by which the state of the Church is altered
now. Circumcision is nothing, that is, avails nothing to any man's acceptance
with God, whatever it did heretofore; non Uncircumcision is nothing, that is,
the want of circumcision, or being uncircumcised, is nothing to hinder the
Gentiles acceptance with God: but now under the Gospel, or in Christ Jesus, as
we have it in this Galat. 5.6. that which now hears sway is FAITH, Gal. 6.15.
THE NEW CREATURE: And in this 1 Corinthians. 7.19. THE KEEPING THE COMMANDMENTS OF
GOD, meaning the Commandments of the Gospel, now in being, which is the
character of the new Creature, in that 6. Galat. 16. As many as WALK ACCORDING
TO THIS RVLE peace be on them: So then, of the doctrine of these Scriptures
this is the sum, That however Circumcision was a great privilege heretofore,
and a matter acceptable to God, and the want of Circumcision did debar men
from many privileges which the Jews enjoyed, yet now neither will the one do
the Jew any good, nor the want of it do the Gentile any hurt, but now Jew and
Gentile meeting in faith, the new Creature, and keeping the Commandments of
God, now in being, shall both meet in the self same privileges and respects
from God, according to the 3 Galat. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither bond nor free, there is neither mal nor female, mark, for ye are ALL
ONE IN CHRIST JESUS.

Upon the whole matter then I conclude, that by those words, NOR
UNCIRCUMCISION, in all these three places, Galat. 5 6. Galat. 6.15. 1 Corinthians.
7.19. the Apostle intends not the exclusion of any thing, but only to note,
that being uncircumcised, or the want of circumcision would do the Gentile no
damage, no more than the presence of circumcision would do the Jew no good,
now under the Gospel, and my reason for this apprehension is grounded upon the
19. verse of the 1 Corinthians. 7. where those words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, are given
for the reason why, if any Gentile was converted to the faith, they should not
be circumcised, which words could be no reason, why converted Gentiles should
not be circumcised, but upon supposition, that being uncircumcised would not
prejudice them.

2, To understand the words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, of the shutting out of any
thing, as it must be of some privilege of the Gentiles, so it must be of some
they had in distinction from the Jews, because he includes all belonging to
the Jews, under the word Circumcision, but they had none in distinction from
the Jews, therefore none to shut out; as for the Ordinances of the Gospel,
they had them in common with the Jews upon beleiving, and before the Gospel
they had none at all, but lived without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. To the
Jews only were committed the Oracles of God, not any to the Gentiles, Romans
3.2.

3. The scope and drift of the Apostle in this Epistle, is to inveigh against
the standing of the Jewish religion ONLY, and that because the converted Jews
were very apt to be entangled with a conceit of the old Religion, its being of
force under the Gospel. Galat. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not entangled again with the yoke
of bondage; meaning the Jewish Ordinances, to which they were inclinable, he
was not troubled with their over esteem, but their under esteem rather of the
Ordinances of the new Testament, therefore far enough from offering any thing
to their disparagement, but on the contrary, every thing to increase their
esteem of them, that they might the more easily be brought off the old.

4. The words as they lie do not enforce us by those words, Nor
UNCIRCUMCISION, to understand the shutting out of any thing, consider them, In
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision. He
does not affirm the same thing of uncircumcision, that it does not avail any
thing, as he does of circumcision; He says indeed, nor uncircumcision, after
his affirming that circumcision did not avail, which at first sight does tempt
to that understanding of them, but by comparing this Text with that other
mentioned, namely, 1 Corinthians. 7.18 19. where we have the same words used by the
Apostle to another Church, and by a narrow inspection into them, it appears
plainly enough, that his mind is not to suppose the Gentiles possessed of any
thing to exclude as available, but only to affirm that: as Ciroumcision now
under the Gospel would not avail, so neither on the other hand would being
uncircumcised unavail, as has been proved already.

If any one think, that the supplying of these words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, in
the Text, with the addition of these, DOES NOT UNAVAIL OR HINDER, to complete
the sense, that this is harsh.

To such I answer, it is a most frequent thing in Scripture, for the holy
Spirit to express himself so, that there is an absolute necessity of making
such supplies, which notwithstanding the scope, context and clear reason of the
thing leads to: but I shall instance only in these words, in the 1 Corinthians.
7.19. Circumcision is nothing; here is the same reason, indeed necessity of
supply to complete the sense, by these words, DOES NOT AVAIL, as there is to
supply the next words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, with these, DOES NOT UNAVAIL: He
then that complains of harshness in the one, may as well complain of it in
the other.

But if it be objected, No, because the 5. Galat. 6. gives the sense of the
words IS NOTHING, in the 1 Corinthians. 7. to be avails nothing, or does not
avail any thing.


I answer, so does the Apostle his making those words, NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, in
the 1 Corinthians 7.19. the reason why converted Gentiles should not be
circumcised, clearly give the sense of the words, in the 5. Galat. 6. to be,
DOES NOT VNAVAIL, because thereby is a full reason given, why new Converts
should not be circumcised, (to which we have spoken at large already:) By all
which it appears, the Apostle intended not the exclusion of any thing (by
those words) NOR UNCIRCUMCISION, so far was he from shutting out any of the
Commands of Christ by them, or setting some of them against others; but this
untrue supposition being the foundation of Mr. Goodwins Argument from the Text,
his whole building falls to the ground, with all his scoffs at the end of it.

The eighth and last Scripture that complains of the service, P. 81. Of Water
dip.
is Galat. 3.27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put
on Christ: You say, questionless the Apostles meaning plainly and directly by
the particle, As many As, is to part the Beleivers amongst themselves, and
consequently notes a mixture of baptized with unbaptised persons in full
Church communion.

This cannot be the meaning of the place, that the words, As many As, does not
import All, because such a construction of them spoileth the sense, they being
given as an account, why he presumes them ALL the children of God by faith:
Now for him to go about to prove them ALL the children of God by faith, because
of what was done but to a part of them, had been to fall short in his
demonstration, and consequently to loose his Argument, so that parting the
Disciples amongst themselves, can never be the design of the Spirit in those
words, AS MANY AS.

2. To confirm the Reader therein, I refer thee to that proof we have made
in answer to Mr: Goodwins third Consideration, by which it fully appears,
that there was no such thing in those days, as Church Fellowship before
Baptism, where I hope thou will have full satisfaction, as in diverse other
places of this Book.

3. Consider this, the same persons that in the 27. verse are noted under the
words, As many As, in the 28. verse are called ALL, as well as in the 26.
verse, for YE are ALL one in Christ Jesus, that the object of the word YE, is
not a part of the Churches, but the whole, as well in the 28. verse as in the
26. there is no question, because there is nothing affirmed between to enforce,
nay, not to invite to a restrained understanding them.

But if any one ask, what the reason should be, that the Apostle chooses such
words as these, which for the most part are partitive, and yet by them intend
all, and every individual?

I answer: (For variety) the scope and context necessitating them to be
understood universally, yea, the word MANY is upon that account (as I
apprehend) often put in Scripture for ALL, as in the 9. Hebr. 28. He was once
offered to bear the sins of many: Now the 1 Timot. 2.6. says, He gave himself
a ransom for ALL: and Mr. Goodwin understands the word ALL largely, as well
he may: So in the 5. Romans 15. If through the offense of one many be dead: but
by the 12. verse it appears, by this word MANY, he means the whole
posterity of Adam, for he says, Death passed upon ALL men.

Now the words, As many As, served the Apostles design in this place, with as
much advantage every jot as the word All would do. There being two sorts of
persons become proselites to Christian Religion, namely, Jews and Gentiles,
and the Gentiles being apt to think, that they should not be the children of
God upon so good terms as the Jews, because of the high respect God bear from
the beginning to the Jews more than the Gentiles, and that therefore only, so
many of the Church as were Jews should become heirs of that privilege
through beleiving; the Apostle for their comfort does assure them, that not
only so many of the Church as were Jews became the Sons of God by faith, and
put on Christ by Baptism, but AS MANY as were baptized into Christ, though
they were never so many, and of what rank, sex, condition soever, whether they
were Jews, or whether they were Gentiles, and though they were like the
stars in the sky for multitude, they had all put on Christ, and were all
members of the same body, according to the next words, verse 20. There is
neither Jew, nor Greek, nor bond, nor free, nor male, nor female, but ALL one
in Christ Jesus: So that there is a strain of Elegancy in the Apostles varying
the word All to As many As, so far are they from necessitating us to
understand them, parting the Disciples amongst themselves.

So I have done with the Scriptures which Mr. Goodwin uses to overthrow my
Brother Allens Arguments, levied to prove the unlawfulness of mixed communion of
baptized and unbaptised persons in Church Fellowship, besides these eight I do
not find any he uses to found any Argument on to answer him: if then it
appear, that the Scriptures Mr. Goodwin builds on like not the service, but
in truth bitterly complain of it, (and whether they do not so, I refer to
the judgment of the judicious Reader) and let him judge of Mr. Goodwins whole
building, accordingly. And whether Mr. Goodwin find, that heaving at my Brother
Allens Answer to his forty Queries, be but like the heaving at a feather, P.
55. Of Water dip.
which, he says, is too childish a posture for a man? or rather, whether the
truth in it be not like a mountain rather, which the greatest Giant heaving at
(though Mr. Goodwin himself) cannot make to stir.

And now let all the world judge between us and Mr. Goodwin.

1. Whether we are as lie represents us? Persons of a maimed fancy, P. 4. Of
Water dip.
having our reasons, judgments and understandings stupefied, distraught and
confounded, that all reason opposing us is a Barbarian to us, that common sense
is a mystery in accessible to our understandings, men of sound intellectuals
are as men that speak to us in a strange tongue; P. 41, 42.
that if they speak any thing against our way, we know not valleys from hills,
nor hills from valleys, rivers from trees, trees from rivers, halfes from
wholes, nor wholes from halfes, precepts from promises, nor promises from
precepts, ceremony from substance, nor substance from ceremony; every
distinction that attempteth to show us the error of our way, Ipso facto,
becomes a Chaos and confusion. On the other hand, for the maintenance and
defense of our way, the shadows of mountains seem valiant and armed men,
stubble and rotten wood are turned into weapons of steel and iron before us,
letter becomes spirit, face becomes heart, promise becomes precept, ceremony
becomes substance, Apostles become ordinary men and women, disputables become
demonstrations, and peradventures become all Yeas and Amens, in respect of
these mavelous and sad distempers in our fancies and understandings, to
reason with us about our way, or to endeavor our conviction, seldom turns
to any better account than a beating of the air, or their Diogenes his begging
applications to the statues of men.

2. Whether these expressions may not be justly numbered amongst those cruel
mockings which the cruel persecutors of old tried the worthies of the Lord
with, Hebr. 11.36. even those of whom the world was not worthy.

3. Whether such contemptuous revilings be not the way to harden fallen persons
in their sin, there being no sign of charity in them, but hatred, rather than
recover them, and as directly contrary to the rule, as flesh is to spirit, 2
Timothy 2.24. And the Servant of the Lord MUST NOT STRIVE, but be GENTLE TO ALL
MEN, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if peradventure God will give them repentance, to the acknowledging
of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
devil. So also Galations 6.1. If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one in THE SPIRIT OF MEEKNESS, considering thy self
least thou also be tempted.

4. Whether these expressions are not directly contrary to the advice of the
Spirit of God in these Scriptures following, Phillip. 2.3. In lowliness of
mind, let each esteem other BETTER than themselves. Romans 12.9. In honor
preferring one another. Titus 3.2. Speak evil of no man. Colos. 3.12. Put on
therefore (as the elect of God) holy and beloved bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, etc.

5. Whether there be not as palpable a breach of the royal law of Love,
without which all profession of Religion is vain, 1 Corinthians. 13.1, 2. James
1.26. (which Christ calls the new Commandment, 1 John 3.14. His Commandment,
John 15.12. The scope of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.5. The Character of Christ's
Disciples, John 13.35. The mark of translation from death to life, 1 John
3.14.) as any can be imagined, considering what Paul says, Galat. 5.14, 15.
where he opposes biting and devouring one another, to the great law of Love.
All the Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self, BUT IF YE BITE AND DEVOUR, etc. Again, considering what he says, 1 Corinthians. 13.4, 5. Charity suffers long, and is kind, Charity VAUNTETH not it
self, does not behave it self unseemingly, is not easily provoked, THINKS NO
ILL.

6. Whether these contemptuous rebukes be not condemned by the 14. Romans 10.
But why do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou SET AT NAUGHT thy
brother? and whether such that use them can expect to stand with comfort before
God at the great day without repentance, since the Apostle sub-joyneth these
words, We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, to those, Why
do thou set at naught thy brother? And considering the words of our Savior,
Math. 5.22. But whosoever shall say, THOU FOOL, shall be in danger of hell
fire. And Math. 10.3, 4, 6. Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven: whosoever shall
humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of
heaven: verse 6. But who so shall offend one of these little ones, which
believe in me, it were better for him, that a millstone were hanged about HIS
NECK, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

7. Whether then the good Spirit of God, which all good men are exhorted to be
filled with, Ephesians. 5.18. had any thing to do with Mr. Goodwin in the drawing
up this book, which not only in this one page, but frequently, even to the end
thereof, is stuffed with reproaches, either of the morrals or intellectuals of
those he writes against, and that without all bounds, and that too of such,
that not long before he lift up as high toward heaven, as now he throws them
down toward hell.

8. Whether such like Arguments are ordinarily fled too, but in cases of
extreme necessity, when the cause is barren of Scripture evidence and
demonstration? and lastly, whether Mr. Goodwin may not as soon prove the
lawfulness of this way of writing from the holy Scriptures, as baptized persons
sitting down in Church societies with unbaptised?

HEAVENS, EARTH, Judge.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THere is one thing further observable in Mr. Goodwins Answer to my Brother
Allen, which I take my self bound to give the Reader-notice of (least he err
through the ignorance of it) that is, that he does with my Brother Allen, just
as the six Booksellers did with him, p. 64. by leaving out the very word SUCH,
(though I suppose through oversight) whereupon the stresse of the Argument
lies: Consider else; My Brother Allens Argument runs thus, If one Person
may be admitted without Baptism, why not two, if two, why not ten, and so a
hundred, or a thousand, and consequently SUCH, Gospel order, laid totally
aside, meaning Baptism.

Mr. Goodwin answers thus, If a hundred, P. 64. Of Water dip.
or a thousand, or ten thousands should be admitted to Church Privileges upon
a manifestation of their faith (which may be otherwise done, and so far
better satisfaction then by being baptized) with an exclusion of all others,
who are able to give no such account of a work of faith in them, would this be
a total laying aside of Gospel order? Good Reader consider and judge.

My Brother Allen says not, that it would be a total laying aside of Gospel
order, but a total laying aside of SUCH Gospel order, which he was speaking
of, namely, the great Ordinance of Baptism, as Mr. Baxster calls it, and if
the Reader be indeed good, and will obey your summons, to consider first and
judge after, he must needs judge the truth in Mr. Allens Argument shining with
its own light.


