Catastrophe Mundi: OR, MERLIN REVIVED, In a DISCOURSE of PROPHECIES and
PREDICTIONS, And their Remarkable Accomplishment.

With Mr. LILLY's Hieroglyphics EXACTLY CUT; And Notes and Observations
thereon.

AS ALSO A COLLECTION Of all the Ancient (Reputed) PROPHECIES That are Extant,
Touching the Grand Revolutions like to happen in these Latter Ages.

By a Learned Pen.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by John How at the Seven Stars at the South
west Corner of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and Thomas Malthus at the Sun in
the Poultrey. 1683.

The PREFACE.
IT has been (Scandalously) reflected hy Foreigners, That Englishmen always
carry an old Prophecy in their Pockets (see Fullers Church History, Lib. 16.)
yet to do our Nation Right, we may modestly a^ow, That we are no more Addicted
to those Cu^osities than our Neighbors. It Is well known ^w fond the French are
of their Nostradamus; ^he Prediction touching a Red-hair'd Assassi^te has not
wanted its Impressions on one of the ^reatest Spirits in Europe; Nor is there
scarce Cardinal at Rome, but is in Fee with an A^rologer to advertise him of
his Fate, and when ^e luckly Hitt of the Infallible Chair will fall his share.
It must not he denied, That many ^ve rendered themselves Ridiculous in
Publish^g, and more been Befooled in Crediting the ^anciful or Knavish
Prognostics of some En^usiastical or Designing Heads; whence the ^isdom of our
Ancestors has thought fit to re^ain and chastize with Penalties, such as pre^me
to publish false and Fantastical Prophe^s, to the Intent thereby to make any
Rebel^on, Insurrection, Dissension, loss of life, or other Disturbance in the
Realm, Stat. 5. Eliz Cap. 15.

This small Treatise is Chaste from any such lewd Design, rather aiming at the
direct contrary; For understanding that certain Pictures formerly Emitted by
Mr. William Lilly have much been talked of and admired, (perhaps for their being
scarce and unknown (Omne enim Ignotum habetur pro Magnifico) and that the same
have lately been Republisht by one, That not only pretends so shrewdly to
understand them, That he ha^ adventured to place them in a new Order, bu^ also
has added others of his own Invention, and fathers the former (though we think
without any grounds) on Nostradamus; adding likewise several further odd
Prognostications, wherein 'ti^ probable present Confidence is all the Hope of
future Verity: we conceived it could be no offense to gratify the Curious,
truly with thos^ Emblems, just as they were set forth by Mr. Lilly now six and
twenty years ago; Which as Aristotle said of some of his works, are so
published, ^ not to be public; Because I think, scarce Intelligible to any,
till Time (the best Expositer (...) Oracles) shall unlock the Mystery. At
least, tho^ that expect the fulfilling of them All in this o^ Age, (nay, or in
that of our Grandchildren) m^ find themselves as grossly mistaken as those w^
were so confident of the final Destruction of Rom^ and the Papacy in 66; since
Mr. Lilly himse^ tells us, That therein is Represented the fu,+ture Condition
of this Nation, For many hundred of years yet to come.

As for the rest of the Prophecies (for we use ^he vulgar style) hereunto
annexed, all the Learned World knows they are none of our Devising, but have
long since been vouched by many Learn^d Authors; And as we undertake not to
Justify their Authority, so neither do we presume to give their Interpretation.
All we had to do, was to ^ecite them Faithfully, and give the Reader ^he most
certain Account we could of their Original, withal rectifying diverse gross
mistakes, ^ith which (through the Negligence of Transcri^ers, Ignorance of
Translators, or Errors of the ^ress) most Copies of them formerly did abound;
and so they are left to the Censure of the Reader, and Posterity, which more
justly by the Event ^ill know, what Value to put upon them.

What ever success they shall have, or whether ^orthy of Regnard or Contempt,
we shall here ^nclude with an Infallible Prophecy, that for ^er concerns all
the Nations of the World in ^eneral, and each person in particular, and which
we are certain shall come to pass, for the Youth of Eternal Truth has spoken
it: -- If thou shall hearken diligently unto the ^ice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and to all his Commandments, That then the ^^rd will set thee on high
above all Nations of the Earth. Blessed shall thou be in the City, and Blessed
shall thou be in the Field. -- The Lord shall cause thine Enemies that rise up
against thee to be smitten before thy face, and all that thou set thine
hand unto shall prosper. -- But if thou will not hearken to the Lord thy God,
to observe and do his Commanments and his Statutes, Curses shall come upon thee
and overtake thee: The Lord shall send upon thee Vexation and Rebuke, until
thou be destroyed: And shall smite the with Madness and Blindness, and
Astonishment of Heart, and thou shall grope at Noon days as the Blin^ gropeth
in darkness, and thou shall not prosper, but be oppressed and spoiled, and no
man shall save thee. Deuteronomy. 28.

Dicamus bona verba; Deus regit Astra; ferunt^
Illius Arbitrio Sydera, Terra, fretum.
Sed Heu, quam nostra malis deliret moribus Aeta^
Ipsa etiam videas Sydera moest a queri.
God moves the Heavens, and his Mighty Ha^
Both Planets, Earth, and Ocean does Comman^
But we alas! are now so wicked grown
That Threatening Stars our vileness does bemoa^
And with our weighty sins both Heaven an^ Earth do groan.
Of Prophecies, Predictions, and Divinations in General.
And many Remarkable Instances of Things foretold, that came to pass.
AS it is not our purpose to speak of Sacred Prophecies or those Divine
Revelations Contained in the Holy Scriptures, which alone are (...) and of
infallible Credit and Authority; so neither shall we run through all those
Follies and wicked Extravagancies whereby the Heathen pretended to discover
things to come. As their Auguries, Aruspicies, Sortileges, etc. But only to
raise some few Remarks on some of the Celebrated Methods whereby things are
thought to be predicted or foreknown, and frequently come to pass accordingly.
Of this sort are,

I. That of Wise Prudent and Learned men, who from their Observations out of
History, Their knowledge of the Nature of men, and the Constitutions of
Governments, and comparing times passed, with the present, and concluding from
like Causes, like Effects, when they see the same things come again upon the
stage of the World, as have formerly been, and then considering all
Circumstances of Agreement and difference, are able to give a very probable
Conjecture, which seldom fails, of what is like to come to pass. Which sort of
Predictions are not only lawful, but worthy of much Commendation, being oftimes
conducible to the good of Kingdoms, by Premonishing and Preventing
Inconveniences like to come upon them.

II. Astrological Predictions, when the Artist undertakes from the Positions of
the Heavens, the Configurations of the Planets, Eclipses, Conjunctions, Comets
etc. to foretell future Accidents, or as one very significantly defines it. --
Astrologia est Doctrina quae ostendit vires Stellarum cognitas Perpetua
Experientia, et Qualitates, Temperamenta et Inclinationes in Elementis et
Corporibus Hominum, ortas a Luce, Motu, et Influentiis Stellarum; Quibus
Qualitatibus, Temperamentis et Inclinationibus, Respondent suae quaedam
Actiones, nisi aut Divinitus, aut aliis Causis Fortioribus Impediantur. --
Astrology is a sort of Learning which shows the Force and Virtues of the Stars,
known by perpetual Experience, and the Qualities, Temperaments and Inclinations
arising from the Light, Motion and Influencies of the Stars, in the Elements
and Bodies of men; Answerable to which Qualities Temperaments and Inclinations
are their Actions, unless hindered by Divine power, or some other stronger
Causes.

This Art I cannot say is unlawful, but I take it to be but Conjectural, and by
Ignonorant Pretenders much abused: strange things have been, and frequently are
thereby foretold, and prove true, when a skillful Artist has the handling of
the matter; but many times fall out otherwise: sometimes from the Ignorance of
him that undertakes the Judgment, otherwhile from the Influence of some of the
fixed Stars; which being seldom taken notice of, may cross or hinder what may
otherwise be signified; Or 3dly, from the want of a sufficient Treasure of
Observations, by which Judgment ought to be given; The same posture of the
Heavens having never twice hapen'd alike in every circumstance since the
Creation, and by that means leaving the World destitute of stable means whereon
to build their Judgment; since what can be rationally said in that kind must
proceed from the Comparing of Events which have happened under such and such
Configurations, with what are like to be when the same fall out again; Or
lastly, by reason of the care of the party himself, who may by his own Industry
prevent what from the Influence of the Stars would have been his Destiny, for
they at most do not Necessitate, but Incline, and by the Providence and
overruling Power of God, and the Wisdom of Man, are sometimes diverted.

III. A Third sort is a Geomantical or Terrestrial Divination, in which from
certain voluntary Pricks or Points made by the hand at Adventure, certain
Figures are raised; From the first four of which, called Fathers, are produced
other four, called Daughters; These Eight bring forth four Grand Children, from
them come out Two Witnesses, from those a Judge; and the Judgment upon this
sort of Divination is not much unlike that of Astrology. But the Foundation of
all this seems to be laid upon a false Supposition, That the Soul of man
knows things to come, but is hindered by the dullness of the Organs of the
Body. And therefore in the practice of it, a great sedateness of mind is
required, a freedom from all noise that may disturb it, and such like
Circumstances; Which he that has a mind to fool a way time, may find in
Cattan, Flood, and H. de Pisis. But this kind of Divination I take to be idle,
vain and superstitious, as not built upon any stable Foundation of Reason, or
supported by any thing but Fancy.

IV. A Fourth sort is by framing certain Figures of Stone or Metal underneath
such Constellations, and placing them either in some Conspicuous Place or Town,
or sometimes Underground, by which some have pretended to do strange Feats;
These are called Talismans, of which, (as also the Language of the Stars, with
an Alphabetical Table, and how from That, words are framed which shall declare
the Event of things to come, according to the Nature of the Question) Gaffarel,
a Learned Frenchman, has largly written in his Book of Unheard Of
Curiosities; and such no doubt they will prove to him that spends much time in
the study of them.

V. A Fifth sort (if indeed there be any such thing) may be by Communication
with Angels and Spirits; For many have pretended to such a Converse; I do not
mean by the Black-Art, Conjuring, Negromancy or having to do with Devils; but
with good Angels, who out of Charity, Love and Compassion to their Fellow
Creatures, are said often to be willing to forewarn them of impending dangers,
and discover to good men what may be of advantage. Thus the Learned Brown in
his Religio Medici sticks not to declare his opinion to be, That Mankind owes
the Invention of many of our excellent and profitable Arts to the Courteous
Revelation of Spirits.

VI. Lastly, There is Enthusiasm, or Illumination, an Enlightening of the whole
Soul, either from a certain unusual Crasis, or an over-poize of Complexion, or
strength of purer Spirits, or else by some unknown supernatural means, as the
Possession or Inspiration of some Spirit, either good or bad. Aristotle tells
of one Maracus of Siracuse, a Poet, who never made so good Verses as when he
was mad; and immediately before that Story has these words, (...) etc. Many
because that Heat is near the seat of the mind, are taken with sundry Frantic
and Enthusiastic Fits, from whence they become Sybills, Bachides, or inspired,
not from any Disease, but a Natural Temperament -- So that it seems in the
sense, of Aristotle much of this kind of Illumination proceeds from an
Exaltation of the mind by some Ecstatick operation of the Soul; and great
Examples in all Ages, might be produced out of the Observations of Physicians
to this purpose; some whereof have been mere Cheats to gain Credit to such as
should Cure or Exorcise them; Others true and natural, where some Melancholy
Heat, or strong Imagination, or lastly, through Custom and use, the persons
affected have brought upon themselves such an Habit, that fancy prevailing over
their Judgment and Understanding, they have pretended to Prophesy; and
sometimes what they have spoken, has proved true.

Of these several sorts of foretelling, as touching the Astrological
Predictions, or such as are gtounded on that Art, we have briefly shown whence
they may pretend to Credit, having in themselves a natural ground, as Effects
are foreseen in their Causes. But as touching the Common Abstruse Indications
of great Accidents, Wars, death of particular men, Casualties to Cities, etc.
usually styled Prophecies, from what spring to derive them, or to what Cause
they ought to be attributed, is difficult to be determined.

To deny that any things have been so foretold, or that because some pretending
thereunto, were either Cheats, or Hypochondraique, That therefore all were so,
is to give the Lie to the experiences of all Ages, and in many of them the very
great time between the Predictions, and the fulfilling of them, does
sufficiently Evince that they came from an higher Cause than a Melancholy Heat:
For where that is predominant, I have ever observed, that between the
Prophecy, and the time allotted for the Accomplishment, there is rarely or
never more than a score of years, sometimes not so many Months.

I. Concerning the Sybils, not only the Heathen paid a great veneration to
their Verses, but the most Eminent Ancient Doctors of the Christian Church have
made great and good use of them (in that kind of way which Logicians call
Argumentum ad hominem) to Convince their Pagan opposers of the verity of our
Religion, since they gave so clear a Testimony to the Birth and other
Circumstances of the Blessed Jesus, long before his Incarnation. But whether
all or any of them were endued with the Holy Spirit of God, I dare not affirm.
This difference I observe to be between them and the true Prophets, that the
later were never during their Prophecy deprived of their Wits, Senses or
Understanding; For if at any time they have been surprised with Consternation
or Astonishment upon the Appearance of an Angel, or the like, they have been by
the Power of God soon restored to a Temper fit to understand and deliver the
Message wherewith they were Entrusted. Nay they have generally been further
able to Confirm by a Miracle, that they were really sent from God, when it
stood with his Glory to have it so, and the distrust of the people required it;
whereas these Sybils are never reputed to have done any other Miracle, save
that of truly foretelling things to come. It Is indeed in the 18th of
Deutrenomy, made the Mark of a Prophet, not sent by God, if the things foretold
come not to pass, and this is undoubtedly true. But it follows not Convertibly,
that whatever things foretold come to pass, the person foretelling them must
needs be sent by God; except meant permissively; For we know the Oracles of the
Heathen Idols, gave often true Answers, suffered so to do indeed by God, but
inspired by the Devil. And Balaam though he were a Magitan and wicked person,
yet he foretold several excellent Truths.

I am not Ignorant, That many times, as appears from History, false Prophecies
and Predictions have been promoted by crafty Knaves to deceive credulous Fools,
and advance their own Designs, and many that have vainly trusted in them, have
been deceived and brought to Destruction by their overfondness. At such time as
Brittanicus waited for the great Lot of the Roman Empire, by the Encouragement
of a vain Astrologer, ^e lost both Hopes and Life by the Rigor of a Bloody
Tyrant. Seneca by a pretty fan^y, brings in Mercury persuading with the Gods
that they would abridge the Life of Claudius, if not for any other Cause, yet
out of very Pity and Compassion to the poor Astrologers, who had already been
taken with so many Lies about it. That Wily Fox, Trajanus (as Dion tells us) by
the practice and Assistance of Astrologers conveyed a pannick fear into the
Head of Tiberius, That Germanicus aspired to the Empire, whereas in the mean
time he only pusht forwards his own Design: Existimans se cum Juvenem
sustulisset, Facile in Manu Senem Habiturum; Concluding it would be easy to get
the old man into his Clutches, if he could but get rid of the Young One. So
Richard Duke of Gloucester finding that so long as his Brother George of
Clarence stood between him and the Gole, he could never win the Prize on which
he had fixed his Ambitious Thoughts, caused a certain Prophecy to be suggested
to the King his elder Brother, That G. should one day wear the Crown. During
the Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey, neither party wanted Prophets, which
both gave them Encouragement to Proceed, and hope to prevail. And in like
manner in our Domestic Broiles between York and Lancaster, The Books of Beasts
and Babies were exceeding rife and current in every Corner of the Realm, either
Party Applying and Interpreting as they were Affected to the Title. Don John de
Barbuda, a Nobleman of Castile, of greater Courage ^han Judgment, being
persuaded by the Predictions of an old silly Hermit, that without the loss of
one man's Life, he should recover the Kingdom of Granada from the Moors,
undertook the Enterprise against the Advice and Persuasions of the King of
Castile, with no greater force than 1000 Foot and 300 horse, who were together
with himself all Cut in pieces.

Remarkable is that Story of Bassianus Cavacala, who during his War in
Mesopotamia, ordered one of his Counselors at Rome called Maternianus to
procure a Meeting of all the Prophets, Astrologers and Conjurers, to discover
if any Plot or Designs were in hand against his person or Authority; and
Maternianus finding by their Universal Verdict that one Macrinus a Colonel, who
had a charge in the Field at that very instant, under the Emperor, should
bereave him of his Life, sent Advertisement thereof by the next dispatch; which
Post happening to arrive at a time when the Emperor was exceeding earnest and
attentive at his Sport, he commanded this very Macrinus, who (as Fate would
have it) was next at hand, to break up the Packet and inform him of the
contents at the time of Council. By this means Macrinus perceiving the drift
and his own danger (though before never no thought of Disloyalty, much less
murder of his Prince, came into his head) finding there was no middle Course to
be taken, but that either Caracalla, before he should receive further
Advertisement thereof, or to be sure he himself soon after, must dye for it,
made Choice of a desperate Russian that Commanded a Company of foot under him,
To Stabb his Master, as he withdrew from Company to Ease Nature; and so
strangely solved the Credit of the South-Sayers.

In the time whilst Popery and Monkery bore sway in England, There was a great
Loobily Image in Wales called Darvel Gathern, of which an old Prophecy went,
That it should burn a Forest, and on that Account was beheld by the Ignorant
with much Veneration. But the Event was thus: At the time of the Dissolution of
Abbeys under K. Hen. 8 it was brought up to London, and burnt at the Gallows in
Smithfield with the Bowels of one Friar Forest, executed for a Traitor.

Another Prophecy was current in the Abbey of Glassenbury, That a Whiting
should Swim on the Topp of the Torr thereof, (which is a steep Hill hard by,)
and the Credulous Country People understood it of an Inruption of the Sea,
which they suspected accordingly. But it hapen'd, that Abbot Whiting, the last
of that Character at Glassenbury, was hanged thereon for his Recusancy to
surrender the Abbey and denying the Kings Supremacy, so swimming in Air and not
Water, and waved with the wind in the place, made good the Prophecy, though
very unexpectedly.

Did not Anaximander of old foretell the Lacedaemonians of a dangerous and
grievous Earthquake imminent, advising to prevent the Peril and Terror thereof
by forsaking their Houses and avoiding the City, to remain till its fury was
over in the open Field^? which Earthquake shortly after burst out in so
violent manner That the whole City was utterly ruinated, and a great part of
the Mountain Tagetus horribly overwhelmed? did not the Prince of Physicians,
Hippocrates, forsee a dreadful plague, or mortal Contagion amongst the Greeks,
a considerable time before it began to rage? Did not Thales Milesius enrich
himself by foreseeing a Scarcity of Olives in the Milesian Fields, and buying
up a great quantity before hand? Did not Socrates foretell the death of Crito?
Sulla the Death of Caligula? The Caldeans the Death and Parricide of Aggripina
the Empress by her own Son Nero, when he should come to be Emperor? and yet so
possessed she was with the Devil of Ambition, that she cried out Occidat modo
Imperet -- I say with all my Heart, Let him kill me, provided he may but Reign.

Alexander the Great was foretold his Fate by Calanits and Indian, and that if
he Entered Babylon it would prove fatal, and he would dye there; which came to
pass accordingly. Caesar had fair notice given him by Spurina to beware of the
Ides of March, and fell a sacrifice to his own Incredulity or Negligence, in
not observing that Caution.

Ascletarion the Mathematician, being accused that he had predicted the Death
of the Emperor Domitian; The Emperor demanded of him whether he had so done,
or not? And confessing that he had, Then (quoth the Emperor) Pray Sir, you that
are so Skillful in finding out other Peoples Fate, tell me what shall be your
own: To which he answered, That he should very shortly be torn to pieces by
Dogs. Dominitian resolves (as he thought) utterly to spoil this Prediction,
and therefore having ordered him forthwith to be put to Death, Causes his body
to be laid in a very deep ditch and a great heap of Earth to be laid thereon,
that no Dogs should come near it; But mighty Rains happening, washed away the
new unsettled Earth, and Dogs did accordingly tear his Body; And soon after
Domitian's Death confirmed the residue of his Prediction.

Rantzovivus a Noble and Learned Dame, p. 99. tells us, That the Astrologer of
the Emperor Frederiek the Second, being questioned by him, why he paid so much
respect to Rodolphus Earl of Haspurgh, than but a poor Retainer to the Court,
Answered; Because all thy Sons being Dead, (and the Emperor at that time had
no fewer than 10 alive) He and his Posterity shall come to and Enjoy those
Kingdoms whieh now your Majesty does possess; Which was answered with a
punctual Success, Rodolphus being Elected King of the Romans by the Germans,
Anno 1273. And page 97. he Relates, That one Master Christian an Astrologer of
Prague, Admonished Ladislaus Jagello King of Poland by a Priest that belonged
to him, Anno 1434. That he should beware of Death that year, for that many
Planets were then Conjoined, and there would be an Eclipse of the Moon under
the Earth, and accordingly the same year he was Lodged in his Grave.

In the same page, he gives that Remarkable Instance of the Incomparably
Learned Johannes Picus Mirandula, having written and Published a very smart
Treatise against Astrology, several Artists, viz. Bellantius of Sena, Antonius
Sirigatus a Florentine, and Angelus de Catastiris a Carmelite, That they might
demonstrate the Truth of their Art and Convince him of his Mistake, positively
told him in their public Writings, That he himself should not Escape or
Survive the 33d year of his Age, by reason of the Direction of the Ascendant in
his Nativity to the Body of Mars; who flattering himself with a false Conceit,
As if he could wrangle away Death, or elude the Significations of his Stars by
Writing against Astrology, endeavoring to prove the Art vain, his Death
concurring exactly which the Time predicted, Confirmed the same Art to be true,
and more actually Confuted all that he had written against it, Than if all the
World besides had Conspired to Answer him.

Fulgosius, Lib. 8. Ca. 11. Records the wondrous exploits performed by Guido
Bonatus the Astrologer at Forly in Italy, at what time that City was close
Besiedg'd; For he Elected or fortold a Lucky Day, for Guido Earl of Montferrat,
wherein if he would make a Sally he should rout his Enemies and obtain over
them a Complete Victory, but not without receiving a slight wound in the Knee.
And that the Earl might be more assured of what he so foretold, Bonatus would
needs march out along with him, and carried Towe and Eggs and other Necessaries
for dressing his wound. And in the Engagement the Enemy was vanquished, and the
Earl wounded punctually in the place foretold.

Regiomontanus, a little before his death at Rome, viz. in the year 1475. (One
hundred and Thirteen yares before it came) pointed out the year 1588. as a time
of most signal Revolutions and grand Transactions in the world. And to the same
purpose there was a Prophecy published in High Dutch, as follows.

Tansen funfhundert achtzitchtacht
Das is it das iar, das ich betracht
Geth in them de weltnixt under
Geschicht does groz merklich wunder.
Which I have found thus paraphrased into Latin.

Post mill expletos a partu Virginis Annos
Et post Quingentos rursus ab Orb datos
Octogesimus Octavus mirabilis Annus
Ingruet, is secum tristia Fata feret
Si non hoc Anno, totus malus occidet Orbis
Si non in Nihilum terra, fretumque ruet:
Cuncta tamen mundi Sursum ibunt atque retrorsum
Imperia: and Luctus undique grandis erit.
And may be thus English.

From Christo Birth count a Thousand Years complete,
And add five hundred more with Eighty Eight
That year approaching, all men will affright
With woeful Terrors, which on them will light
If the whole world to ruin do not run,
Or into nothing Land and Seas be done:
At least most Realms shall Topsy Turvy turn,
And men on all sides Lamentably mourn.
Now if we examine our Chronicles, we shall find most memorable passages in
diverse parts of the world to have happend in that year. Was it not unusual and
strange, That Poland this year should have three Kings assuming the Title,
whilst the Fourth, viz. Stephen Battori was yet unburied? Namely, Sigismund the
Swede, Maximilian the Emperors Brother, and Henry Valois of France. Of which
three, Maximiliam in the beginning of this year was taken prisoner, his Army Cut
in pieces, and by means there of many thousands of men women and Children
carried away Captives by the Tartars. That Suedeland in the mean time was all
in a Combustion which Tumults, and lost several strong Places to the
Muscovite. The Muscovite himself ran madd, and lost his wits. The King of
Denmark Frederick the Second dyed. In France there happend The Barricado of
Paris, The flight of the King from thence, The slaughter of the great Duke of
Guise, and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain: The Death of the Queen Mother,
The poisoning of the Prince of Condee, and the Overthrow which the King of
Navarre gave unto Duke Mercoeurs; All which gave that Kingdom sufficient Cause
to think 88. a year Extraordinary. At the same time the Duke of Savoy prepared
his Army and surprised the French Kings chief Magazine in Saluze. The Sophy of
Persia dyed, The Turks suffered great Defeats in Hungary. And in Constantinople
by reason of false moneys paid to the Janissaries, they fell into a Mutiny,
Compelled the Grand Seignior to deliver up his chiefest Favorites to be put
to Death, set fire on the Jews Houses, and spoiled their goods, by which means
above 12 thousand Houses were burnt down to the Ground in that City.

And nearer home, did not the world with wonder behold the Spanish Armado
(which they foolishly called Invincible) shattered to pieces by the valor, of
the English; A loss that the Spanish Monarchy has not recovered to this day. In
a word, (says Gallo Belgicus) Ortu solis usque ad occasum, nullus ferme
remansit locus in quo non miratu dignum aliquid hoc Anno contigerit. From the
rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, there was scarce any place, in
which something wonderful did not happen.

It Is a very odd Story, which is credibly related of King James, how he was
premonisht of his death by a Dream, wherein his old Master Buchanan appeared
unto him in his sleep, and gave him these two Verses: Sexte verere Deum tibi
vitae Terminus instat
Cum tua cadenti flagrat Carbunculus igne.
Sixth James! see thou to God do humbly turn
Thy Fate draws near, and men thy death shall mourn
When in the Fire thy Carbuncle shall Burn.


King James was the sixth of that name of Scotland; and next morning he told
his Bedchamber-men and several of the Lords, repeating the verses, and averring
that he did not make them. The success was this: The King had a very large and
fair Carbuncle Stone usually set in his Hat, and sitting by the Fire not long
after, this great Carbuncle fell off into the Fire, and a Scottish Lord took it
up, and 'twas observed the King sickened and dyed very shortly after.

I shall conclude with that most positive prediction of Michael Nostradamus of
St. Remy in France, Physician to the King, and a great Mathematician and
Astrologer, who dyed the second of July 1566. In his Book of Quadrins in
French, Printed 1555. wherein he very plainly foretells the horrid and
detestable Murder of King Charles the First by his own Subjects before his own
Palace. And in Quadrin 51. thus evidently forespeaks the Burning of London, and
expresses the very year 66. in these words.

Le Langue du Just a Londres fera faut
Bruslez par Foudres, de vingt trois, les six
La Dame Antique cherra de place haut
De mesme Seicle plusieurs serront Occis.
Which may thus be Englisht.

For the Blood o'th Just a London spilt, the same
In Sixty Six shall all be in a Flame;
That Ancient Dame shall in the Dust complain
And many of the same Sect shall be slain.
But we are afraid we have already wearied the Reader with these past Stories;
and therefore now proceed to gratify such whose Curiosity delights in such
matters, with Mr. Lillies Hieroglyphics as they were by him published 1651.
with (only) this following Preface.

Mr. Lillies Account of his Hieroglyphics.
HAd the Courtesy of the present times deserved it at my hands, thou had
seen an Explanation of the following Pages, which in Aenigmatical Types, Forms,
Figures, Shapes, does perfectly represent the future Condition of the English
Nation for many hundred of years yet to come. I have borrowed so much time from
my Morning-sleep as has brought forth these Conceptions. You that Read these
Lines must know I do no new thing: I do herein but imitate the Ancients, who so
often as they resolved to conceal their Intentions from profane Hands, used
Hieroglyphics, Images, etc. The Egyptian Priests were herein excellent, and
their Judgment commendable: Our Savior also himself commends; Ne detur
sacrum Canibus. If Providence shall hereafter assign me a quiet life, and
prolong my years, I may then perhaps leave unto the Sons of Art the several
Changes of every Kingdom and Commonwealth in Europe* in suchlike Characters as
these which now follow.

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Mr. Lilly's hieroglyphic (symbolic prophecy)

Notes or Observations on the foregoing Figures, and the Nature of
Hieroglyphics in General.
EGypt (the fruitful Parent of so many Miracles) has always boasted her self
one of the most Early Nurses of Learning: The Grecians in the Days of Solon,
Pythagoras, Herodotus and Plato, Traveled ^hither for the Knowledge of Nature,
and the Acquisition of those Sciences, which rendered them so famous. But the
Egyptian Priests, unto whom it belonged to teach, did never ^ivulge their
Doctrines without a Shadow, or some dark Representation sufficient and very ^pt
in it self to denote the matter they intend^d, many times more significantly
than many words could do, yet not so obvious to be understood by the vulgar;
whereby they Imagined they kept their Mysteries from Pro^^nation: Especially
those which related to ^^eir Gods and Nature, were wrapped up in certain visible
Shapes and Forms of Creatures, those Inclinations and Dispositions did lead ^o
the knowledge of the Truths, intended or Instruction; and they by a peculiar
name ^ere called Hieroglyphics, derived from the Two Greek words (...),
Sacred; an (...) to Ingrave; as much as to say, a Holy Inscription, or Sacred
Engravement. Because all their Divinity, Philosophy, an^ choicest Secrets, were
comprehended in these ingenious Characters.

Nor were they only Contrived to hinder the sublime knowledge of Philosophy
from being profaned; But also that they mig^^ Abbreviate the diffused Notions
of that Science, and fit them for a more easy Comprehension and better
Retention in their Memories. Every Name is an Abreviation of a Thing, but it is
not able to give such a perfect Idea of the Properties and hidden Qualities of
the things intimated, as the Picture of them in a witty Hieroglyphick. And
further the Egyptians by these Inventions had a design to render their
Knowledge Immortal^ for which purpose they did Ingrave them upon Obelisks and
Pillars of Marble, and thi^ long before the use of Paper, (an Invention
originally too of the same Country, being composed at first of the Flakes of
certain Sedgie Reeds growing on the Banks of the Nilt^ called Papyri, moistened
with the glutinou^ water of the River, then pressed together and afterward
dried in the Sun) as is Evident from those Verses of the lofty Luccan.

^ondum flumineos Memphis contexere Libros, ^overat, in Saxis tantum
Volucresque feraeque,

^ulptaque Servabunt Magicas Animalia Linguas.

^emphis yet knew not how with Reeds to frame ^or Books, but Birds and Beasts
Letters became, and Animals Engraved on lasting stone ^ith Magic Tongues,
Learning preserved a^one.

Nor did they only express particular ^ngs and some Secret Knowledge by ^eir
Hieroglyphics, but also whole Sentences, ^riting all their Rules and Precepts
rela^^g to the Worship of their Gods, or to the ^^vernment of the Kingdom in
this manner; ^ich will not appear strange or incredible such as have Conversed
in the East Indies, to it is known that there to this day, there three or four
Nations whose Languages as remote and different as Hebrew and ^ek, or Latin
and Welsh, who yet under^^^nd one another Writings. So that what ^^ writes in
one Language, the other can ^d their own, which could not be but by ^ain
Hieroglyphics, or Universal Chara^^s (an Art commendably attempted of late
amongst us, by the Reverend and Lea^ed Wilkins, in his Book on that Subject)
R^presenting the shapes of things, which a known to men of all Nations and
Tong^ A writing of which Nature was sent to ^ Learned Bochartus from an Eminent
per^ of the Court of France, for him to Inte^pret.

But to give the Reader a Taste of this ki^^ of Egyptian Mystery, Take these
few ^^stances.

They Represented the Providence of ^ by a Basilisk, with an Hawks Head and Ey^
because there is no other Creatures fu^ of Spirits and Vigor, or more
quick-sig^ed.

The Power of God they did express by Body and three Heads, (by which one wo^^
almost have thought they had some notice the Trinity) but without either Hands
Feet; because Almighty God governs things only by his Wisdom and good ple^sure,
and needs no visible Members to p^^duce his wonders.

To signify the Effects of Gods power Nature, they painted a man with a
Mul^^tude of Hands, stretching them out upon t^ World.

The World was sometimes represented a round Temple, because Divine Majesty
ha^^ Created it for his own Glory, to receive therein the Adoration and Homage
of all Creatures; because it appears like a large and Beautiful Edifice,
excellently well adorned, supported by Gods Power, Covered with the Heavens,
and distinguished into several Apartments. But its Ordinary Hieroglyphick was a
Globe, in which were drawn the Circles of the Zodiac, with the Signs in it,
and round about a Multitude of Stars. This Globe was supported on the back of a
man upon his knees, which were Covered with his long Garment, to show how the
World is upheld by Gods Providence, which seems to be Covered to the lower
Ranks of Creatures with diverse Emblems and dark Shadows.

When they intended to point out the continual Mutation of Creatures, and the
Change of one Being into another in the World, they used to put a Snake
representing an Orb, biting and devouring its Tail, because the World feeds
upon its self, and receives from its self a continual supply of those things
that Time Consumes. The same was also an Emblem of the Year, because it does
run round; and where the Old Year ends, the New one begins.

Wisdom, was painted as a Beautiful Woman with four Ears and four Hands, but
with one Tongue, which was hid within her Lips, that were shut Close.

Unity was represented by the Sun and its Beautiful Beams; Peace and Worldly
Felicity by the fruitful Olive Tree; Liberty and Pleasure by the Vine; Chastity
by Beams; and a Plentiful Increase, by Mustard Seed, which grows up into many
and large Branches.

The Relation between Heaven and Earth was signified by a man, with hands tied
with a Chain, that was let down from the Clouds, for there is nothing here
below either so great or powerful but it is held by a Secret Chain, by which
the Divine Providence can turn and wind it at pleasure.

A furious man, was intimated by a Lion eating up his Prey; A Religious man by
a Lion running from a Cock. A Whore by a Lion with a Woman's head, because her
Countenance is fair, her Speech most pleasant, and her Allurements powerful,
but her Nature fierce and cruel, and she intends only to prey upon both Body
and Estate. A Merciful man, was painted having Compassion on a Lamb lying at
his Feet.

A cunning Selfish Time-server was expressed by an Hedg-hog, because this
Creature wraps himself up in his own Warm Down, and turns out Prickles to all
the World besides; and also because it has always two or three holes where it
retreats, and when the wind is cold and boisterous at one hole, it creeps to
the other, and thus it changes its dwelling with the Weather.

A man proud of his Natural or acquired Abilities, was signified by a Peacock
with beautiful Plumes, in a posture of admiring them, and exposing them to the
Sunbeams.

A Grasshopper was the Hieroglyphick of an Egyptian Priest learned in the
Mysteries of Heaven: For as the Grasshopper deserved their Admiration, because
it sings so well without a Tongue; so these men that attained to such excellent
perfections as the knowledge of God and the Superior Beings, by dark
Hieroglyphics and significant Shadows, did no less require their Wonder and
Esteem.

The Chameleon denoted an Hypocrite that studies to please the times in which
he lives, and that can be of any Religion, and take any Impression that will
serve his present ^orn; for it is reported of this Animal that ^t can change it
self into any color but White and Red.

A Prophet, or Prophecy was expressed by ^ Mole, a Creature that is without
eyes, to ^ew that man is naturally blind, and can have ^o clear foresight of
the time to come, with^^t a Divine Revelation, and then the intricate Events of
the future, do appear unto us with many doubts and dark shadows, which hinder
us from a perfect and clear Discovery.

Revenge, was intimated by a Tiger devouring an Horse; a good Eyesight, by a
Lynx, which is a Beast near of Kin to a Wolf.

A Lampray with an Eel was the Hieroglyphick of Adulterers, for the Lampray is
a Fish that seeks the Company of other Fishes of the same shape, for which
reason some say that they are venomous, because they join themselves with
Snakes and other Water-Serpents.

The Head of a man signifies sound Judgment and Wisdom: His Hair cut off,
violent Grief or Bondage; If growing, Liberty. The Forehead is the seat of
Pride and Impudence. The Eye wide open, the token of Wisdom and Justice, the
seat of Contempt, the Throne of Love, and discoverer of other passions of the
Soul. The Nose being large, a Mark of quickness of Apprehension, and the
Excellency of our Understanding. The Mouth was the Hieroglyphick of Modesty;
The Heart of Sincerity; Shoulders, of Strength; The washe^ Hands, of Innocence;
The Right Hand, of Power, Fidelity, and Favor. The Knee express Humility and
Compassion; The Ha^ Freedom; a Crown, Dignity; a Scepter Power; a Buckler,
Defense; an Arrow, Speed; a Spear, War or Valor; a pair of Balances, Equity;
a Sword, Revenge or Cruelty; A sitting posture intimates Security; an Answer,
Hope; The Palm and Laurel, Emblems of Victory and Honor; The Myrtle, of
Pleasure; The Cedar, of Eternity; The Oak, of Strength; the Olive, of
Fruitfulness; the Lilly, of Beauty, etc.

But to come nearer our present subject -- It Is not infrequent in the Holy
Scriptures to express Persons, Kingdoms, Judgments, and other things to come,
after this manner, Hieroglyphically, by the names of Beasts, Birds, etc. So
Judah was prophesied of, by the name of a Lion: Issachar, of an Ass: Dan, of a
Serpent: Napthali, of an Hind: and Benjamin, of a Wolf, Genesis 49. from the 3d to
the 28th verse. And the Babylonian Monarchy, both Heathenish and Mystical
Babylon, was Prophesied of by the name of an Eagle, by several of the Prophets,
as Jer. 48.40. and 49. Hos. 8.1. Obad. 4. and Hab. 1. and Esdras did Prophecy
of it by that name, about 300 years before ever the Eagle was portrayed in the
Roman Ensigns, and became the Badge or Arms of that Empire. Which was first
given by Marius, because being a Child, he found an Eagles Nest and seven young
ones therein; whereupon in his second Consulship, going against the Cinbri (the
Ancient Inhabitants of Denmark and Hostein) he caused an Eagle to be pictured
in his Standard; Which was afterward peculiarly affirmed by the Roman Legions,
to show that they would with as great Courage fall upon and engage the Enemy,
as the Eagle on his Prey.

The Holy Books of Daniel, and the Apocalypse, or Revelations of St. John the
Divine, do also afford us several Instances of Monarchies, Kingdoms, and
Calamities, represented by several Beasts, Vials, Seals Trumpets.

We mention not these Sacred Authors, as intending to compare or Rank these
Hieroglyphics here before set down in the several Figures, with those Divine
Prophecies: far be it from us to advance any such bold and irreverent
Blasphemies; we recite them only to show, that the shadowing out of future
Events in such a way, and under such mysterious Figures, is no novel or upstart
Invention, but has long been used in the world.

As to these present Hieroglyphics, we call them Mr. Lillies, because by him
they were first made public in the year 1651. But whether by him originally
devised, we cannot determine; for as I remember, Mr. Lilly himself about 10
years ago, told me, he borrowed them, and was not the first Inventer, but said
he knew the right Key or Signification of them, and that he doubted not but
Posterity, when Fate should think fit to disclose its Mystic Book, and reduce
the matters thereby intended to be prefigured, into Act, would be well assured
of their Verity. But that they are, or ever were, or ought to be accoun^^^ the
Hieroglyphics of Nostradamus, I said no Authority or proof, though it had
pleased a late Author so to call them.

Nor shall I undertake to decip^^^ th^^ obscure Hieroglyphics, or pretend to
acquaint the world with the meaning thereof or when each particular is to be
fullfilled. The Burning of London seems very plainly to (...) been one of those
Accidents here inter^ and indeed there are two figures that may seem to have
respect hereunto; but I am apt to believe one of them, viz. that where the
Twins (Londons Celestial Ascendent, according to Astrologers) are tumbling down
headlong into the Flames, ought to be understood Metaphorically, as of Heats
and Animosities industriously spread amongst her ^nhabitants by ill men, to put
them into a Combustion, and this I am the rather inclined ^o judge, observing
two Persons pictured pouring in Jars of Oil to increase the Flames.

As touching the Moles which you will find in many of the Figures very busy;
the common opinion is, that they signify the Jesuits, Popish Priests, and
other Emissaries of the Sea of Rome, aptly Emblem'd by the Mole, as being
carried on with a blind Zeal, and mannaging their mischeivous Intrigues
Underground, in Masquerade, and without owning publicly their hellish Designs.

I have heard, that Mr. Lilly, the more to obscure the Signification,
Transposed several of the Figures, and did not set them in that Order of place,
as they were to fall out in respect of Time. However we thought fit, punctually
to observe his Copy: And so thou have them just as he first published them,
without Addition, Diminution, or Alteration.

In the next place, we shall subjoin several ancient Predictions, which so long
have obtained the name of PROPHECIES, that they may now seem to plead
Prescription for that Title; Which be pleass'd to take as follows.

The Prophecy of Rabbi Elias, touching the End of the World.
THe words in the Original, as they are delivered in the Talmudical Books, and
and particularly in the Treatise or Section entitled Havoda Zara, Cap. 1. are
these in Hebrew:

Tana abe Elihau seseth Alaphim sana have Haolam: Seen Alaphim Tohu: Vsne
Alaphim Thora: Vsne Alaphim Iemoth hamas sihi uba Havenothema Serabu Iashu meon
Mascias.

In English thus, verbatim.

Thus said the Sons (or Disciples) of Elias: The World consists of Six
Thousand Years; Two Thousand years Void, Two Thousand the Law, Two Thousand the
Messiah: But for our sins, which are many, those years of that number are
over-passed, which are over-passed.

Whether by this Elias they would have us understand the Divine Tishbite of
that Name, who after so many Miracles, recorded in Sacred Scripture, done on
Earth, was taken up visibly into Heaven; or whether they intend by it some
Latter Rabbin, may be questioned, but I the rather think the last: Though it is
certain this Prophecy, or if you please Declaration, or Division of the
Continuance and several Ages of the World, has been all along of great esteem
not only amongst the Jews, but also with the most Learned and Famous Doctors of
the Christian Church; For both Lactantius, Hierom, Hillary, Ambrose, and St.
Augustine of the Ancient Fathers, and also Melancthon, Peucer, Postellus,
Reslyn, and many other Modern Learned Men, mention it with respect.

The meaning of the first part of the words seem very plain, That the Duration
of the World shall be the Term of Six Thousand years, which should be divided
into three Grand, Intervals, Spaces, Periods, viz. Two Thousand years from the
Creation to the giving of the Law, (which space of time is here called Tohu,
void, because the World was then without the written Law, and without the
External Ceremonies, which were afterward Enjoined.) Two Thousand years more,
under the Law; and the other Two Thousand under the Messiah. Not that this is
to be understood exactly to a year, in each, but 2000, a round Number, is used
for the Number punctual and Certain; and indeed agrees very well with the Truth
of Chronology; For from the Creation, to the time of the Institution of
Circumcision, (from whence we may properly enough Date the time of the Law,
though not fully delivered till diverse years after) there were 2047 years, as
may be made appear from Scripture-Calculation. And from thence to our Saviors
Incarnation above 19 hundred years, or very near 2000. But since this Prophecy
is Jewish, and in so high an Esteem with that Nation, and does so clearly point
out the coming of the Messiah to be about the year of the World 4000, and that
it is notorious, the same is so many ages since past, it may be wondered, why
even from hence they should not be Convinced both that the Messiah is long
since come, and that our Lord Christ must needs be He. But such is the
obstinate Blindness of that People, that they resolve to persist in their Error
and Infidelity, and will rather invent any Evasions than acknowledge the
Evident Truth, as appears in this very Case, and will help us to fish out the
meaning of those last words of this Prophecy -- But for our Sins, which are
many, the years of that Number are over-pass'd which are over-pass'd. Which
words seem to be added to the Prophecy it self, by some latter Rabbis; for you
must note, That the Hierusalem-Talmud being composed above 200 years after
Christ, and the Babylonian-Talmud 400 years after Christ, in both which this
Prophecy is mentioned, The Authors thereof, finding the Term limited already
expired, added this Clause to solve the business, and persuade their People
that the reason why the Messiah was not yet come according to this Prediction,
was the Multitude of their Sins which retarded his appearance, and this they
give out to be the Cause thereof to this day. Note that Talmud signifies as
much as Doctrinale, The Book of Doctrine; and the Books so called, do contain,
Traditions and Observations, which they pretend to have been delivered by God
to Moses, besides the Law written, and from him to have been brought down from
hand to hand amongst the Rabbis, just as the Papists set up their Traditions
as of equal Authority with the Scriptures.

Agreeable to this Cabbalistical Prophecy or Tradition, some Learned men,
supposing that by the six days of Creation, mentioned in the first of Genesis,
The whole Age of the World containing 6000 years, was Mystically and
Allegorically shadowed out, To be Interpreted or Deciphered in such sort, that
the first days work should import or prefigure a certain Resemblance or Type of
such future matters and Events, as were performed in the first Thousand years
of the World; The second days work of such as should consequently happen in the
Second Thousand years, and so forth of the residue, even to the Accomplishment
of 6000 years, At which period the Eternal Requies, or Sabbath of the Lord
should finally ensue, and gloriously appear; even as after six days Work God
stayed or rested at the first, and as now our weekly Sabbath (which is a
reverend figure of that great Everlasting Sabbath) does after every 6 days
successively approach. Pursuant, I say, hereunto, they have distributed the
several Millenaries, as in this Table.

Days. Millenaries. Years. Governors of each Millenary Monday. 1. 1000. ADAM,
who died in the Year 930. Tuesday. 2. 2000. NOAH, who died in the Year 2005.
Wensday. 3. 3000. DAVID, who died in the Year 2929. Thursday. 4. 4000. CHRIST,
who was Born Anno Mundi 3962. Friday. 5. 5000. The POPE, who in this period
grew to his height, if we may extend it unto Hildebrand, who came to the Chair
about 1074. Saturday. 6. 6000. The MARTYRS, Millions having suffeted by Antic.
Sunday. 7. 7000. ETERNITY.

If therefore this Rabbinical Reckoning be to be regarded, let us see about
what Year of the World we are in at this present, and how much may be wanting
of this Sum Total 6000.

The Birth of our Lord Christ, is placed By Chryteaeus In the Year of the World
-- 3962. By Mich. Butherus In the Year of the World -- 3962. By Reniholdus In
the Year of the World -- 3962. By Schubertus In the Year of the World -- 3962.
By and Cunmannus In the Year of the World -- 3962.
By Funccius In the Year of the World 3963 By Luther In the Year of the World
3960 By Beroaldus In the Year of the World 3928 By Mereator In the Year of the
World 3966 By Bucholzer In the Year of the World 3970 By Bibliander In the Year
of the World 3979 By Card. Bellarmine In the Year of the World 3984
So that there is not above 22 years difference amongst them all, except
Beroaldus: Let us therefore suppose it to be with Beucholzer, Anno Mundi 3970,
adding thereunto 1683, makes 5653 years from the Creation; so that according to
this Compute, there should remain but 347 years to the final Conflagration;
viz. in the year of our Lord 2030. -- But -- That day and hour knows no man.
And For the Elects sake those days shall be shortened.

To this we think it not improper to add, That Prophecy or remarkable
Description of the End of the World, some Thousands of years since delivered in
Greek Acrostick Verses, the Initial Letters making up these words, JESUS
CHRIST, SON OF GOD THE SAVIOR, delivered by Sibylla Erythrea, and recited by
St. Augustine in the 4th Book, and 23d. Chapter of his Treatise de Civitate
Dei, which I shall give you in the words of Him who many years since Translated
that excellent Book into English, as follows.

Jn Sign of Doomsday the whole Earth shall sweat,
Ever to Reign a King in Heavenly Seat
Shall come to judge all Flesh: The Faithful and
Unfaithful too before this God shall stand.
Corporal shall he sit, and thence extend
His Doom in Souls, The Earth shall quite lie wast
Ruined, oregrown with Thorns, and men shall cast
Idols away, and Treasure; Searching Fire
Shall burn the ground, and rage with fatal Ire
Through Seas and Skies, and break Hells blackest Gate;
So shall free Light Salute the Blessed State
Of Saints; The Guilty lasting Flames shall burn;
No Act so hid but thence to Light shall turn;
Nor breast so close, but God shall open wide;
Each where shall Cries be heard, and noise betide
Of gnashing Teeth, The Sun shall from the Sky
Fly forth, and Stars no more move orderly.
Great Heaven shall be dissolved; The Moon deprived
Of all her Light: places at Height arrived
Depressed, and Valleys mounted to their Seat,
There shall be Naught to Mortals High or great
Hills shall be Levelled with the Plains; The Sea
Endure no Burden; and the Earth as They
Shall perish, cleft with Lightning, every spring
And River burn: The fatal Trump shall bring
Unto the world from Heaven a dismal Blast,
Including plagues to come for ill deeds past.
Old Chaos through the Scattered Mass appears
Unto this Bar all Kings come Prisoners
Rivers of flaming Brimstone drown their Tears.
The Learned ALSTEDIUS, his SPECULUM MUNDI, and CHRONOLIGY of the Prophetic
Numbers.
1. God alone has reserved to himself the exact knowledge of future Things; as
the incommunicable Prerogative of his Divine Majesty: Therefore, it is
impossible any man though never so clear-sighted, should compile an accurate
Chronology for Time to come, or define the punctual Moments of Futurity; yet is
not therefore the Explanation of Prophetic Numbers to be omitted, for since
God has expressed certain Numbers in the Histories and Prophecies of his Word,
it would be too great both Sloth and Ingratitude not to weigh, and with
reverence and the fear of the Lor, denquire into them.

2. In observing the great Conjunctions or Revolutions of the Planets, as
Superstition and over-scrupulous Diligence is not to be approved, so neither is
Negligence or Contempt thereof to be allowed.

3. The Twelfth Chapter of Daniel ought to be our Pole Star in explaining
Prophetic Numbers, for there we are led, as by the hand, from the building of
the second Temple, to its Destruction: And from the Destruction thereof, which
was Anno Christi 69. by a term of Days he numbers first 1290, and then 1335;
that is in all (with the 69 years which were elapsed from Christ's Birth, to
the overthrow of the Temple) 2694 years: From which if we deduct the 1000
years, Rev. 20.2. we shall be brought to the year of our Lord 1694. whence we
may gather, that the seven Vials are to be poured forth at or before that time,
or their significations to continue no longer.

4. The most eminent Mutations from the year 1600 to 1700, may be gathered from
the Planetary Conjuctions, compared with the Apocalyptical Numbers, which point
out the years -- 1622, 1625, 1636, 1642, 1683, and 1694.

5. The Comparing of Histories one with another, the observation of the Stars,
and a diligent Inspection into the manners of men, do much conduce toward our
predicting of the Catastrophe's of humane things.

6. Those Philosophers that are more skillful in Astronomy, reckon four
Monarchies, not according to the Prevalency of Kingdoms, but according to the
four Coasts of the World. The first was of the East, being the Assyrians: The
second Southern, that of the Persians and Greeks: The third Western, of the
Romans: The fourth of the North, which God shall shortly set up in the
Norrhern-parts by the Lion of the North, to the great Amazement of those who
slight the Divine Apocalypse, and that Harmony which here we are pointing at.

7. The 1000 years mentioned in the Twentieth Chapter of the Revelations, shall
begin about the year 1694, and end 2694; during which time Satan shall be
bound, but afterward being let loose for a small time, he shall stir up Gog and
Magog; that is, the professed Enemies of the Church, against the Saints; But
shall be suddenly overcome, and then our Lord Christ shall come in Glory to put
an end to this World.

Annus Mundi Mirabilis; Or, A Prediction of the last Ages of the World:
Aenigmatically delivered in 12 Months, representing so many notable Periods, or
Catastrophe's, which shall certainly happen in those times. Published many Years
ago, by LILLY.
JANVARY. A shower of Blood shall rain continually for one hours space, in a
certain Land of Europe; That Region, or the People thereof, shall first come to
destruction. FEBRVARY. All Nations troubled with rumors of Wars, every Region
preparing Armies, and Mustering Men, Traffic generally prohibited or
obstructed, by Land and Sea, each Country being enforced to live of their own
stock and commodities. MARCH. The main Sea shall hugely swell with mighty
Tempests and Winds, so that the Banks being overthrown, the Waves shall in many
places overflow their accustomed bounds, and cause Universal Innundations. One
Island shall be quite overflown with the Sea, where the double Cross has
Government, the sins of the Prince or Rulers thereof being so extreme high
against the Majesty of God. APRIL. A terrible Sea Fight, such as has not been
before, occasioning the water to look more red than the Red Sea, the water all
turned to Blood. England! thou will have a share in this Fight, God of his
great goodness make thee victorious; After a hard Fight thou shall overcome.
MAY. War and Bloodshed over all the Earth: A certain Nation shall send so many
Men to the Wars, that it shall for a time be even desolate of Men, so that
twelve Women shall be glad of one Man: Nay, hardly procure one Young Man for
them all. JUNE. In the Eastern parts of the World, a whole Nation shall Fight a
great Battle in a wrong cause, and defend an Evil Man; but the vengeance of God
will rain down a shower of Fire from the Throne of Heaven, and consume that
Army wholly with all their Wealth and Treasures, even as they lie in their
Tents, etc. JVLY. So great a drought, so great a want of water will appear,
that multitudes of People shall dye in many places for mere want of water,
Soldiers shall not be able for heat to carry their Arms; The Earth shall be so
dry and so parched with the Suns hot beams, that it shall yield no fruit to
feed Cattle. AUGUST. Great Plagues and Mortality will cover the whole Face of
the Earth, and so destroy Mankind, that there will not be sufficient Laborers
to get in Harvest, or the Fruits of the Earth. In this Month such swarms of
noisome Fowls and Flies shall come from the East, as they shall devour the Corn
on the Ground, the Fruit on Trees, that all shall be barren: Men living in
those times and in this Month, shall have more sorrow, and more woes, and more
famine, and distress, than was in Jerusalem, when Titus besieged it. SEPTEMBER.
The season of this Month will be so unnatural and the Earth so unfit for
Tillage, that all manner of Cattle will rot on the ground, which will breed
such store of Flies and Vermin, that the Earth will be empoysoned, and receive
no fruit to increase. OCTOBER. A great Famine and Dearth of Corn will
overspread most Nations of Europe, so that the Child shall starve at the
Mothers Breasts, the Mother having no food to nourish her self or Child.
NOVEMBER. One appears suddenly and unexpectedly a great Conqueror, the World
filled with the Fame of this Man, who suddenly like Augustus, gives Peace unto
the whole Earth. DECEMBER. All Wars end, Religion truly Preached Universally
over the World, a General Peace, no more Treason or Rebellion. Not long after
the Trumpet Sounds, and Christ appears.
An Ancient Prophecy of Sybella Tiburtina, found in the Year 1520. in the
Bowels of the Mountain Taurus in Switzerland, after a great Inundation of
waters which broke down part of that Mountain, and left discovered in the
Ruins, the following words, fairly Engraven upon a large Marble Stone, in very
Old Latin Characters and Style, as follows:
ORietour sydous in Europa soupra Iberos, ad magnam septentrionis Domum; cojus
Radij orbem terrarum ex improviso illoustrabunt.

Hoc vero erit tempore desideratissimo, quo Mortalis positis Armeis pacem
Onanimeis complectantor. Certabitor quidem varieis per dioutourni Interregni
occasionem studies, cui Imperii habenae tradantor. Sed vincet tandem aviti
sanguinas propago, quae eousque Armorumvi progredietor, donec fata contraria
fatis obstiterint. Nam eodem fere tempore hoc demorso Sydere, covum quoddam
ejous Loumen long ardentioribus mavortis ignibous exardescens, Antepodum
finibus occludet Imperium.

At prius houic Soumittet cervices Gallia. Ad ejous genoua Soupplex adnatabit
classibus Britannia; Italia egre ad ardua Sceptra respirans, ^lli languentem
portendet dexteram. Verum bocce joubar ante diem ingenti mortalium desiderio se
divum non bibous condet.

Quo extincto, post deiras and sanguinolentas, Cometas, ignivomasque caeli
facies, nihil amplious toutum, Saloutareue erit, Osque animantibous coeli
Firmamentum pugnantibusque planetieis, and contrarieis corsibous
labefactabitor; concurrent orbibous orbeis, Fixae cursu antevertent erratitas,
aequabunt aequora montes; Hec omnia denique erunt Nox, Interitus, Rouina,
Dampnatio, ac ceternai Tenebrai.

In English, Thus:

A Star shall arise in Europe over the Iberians, toward the great House of the
North, whose Beams shall unexpectedly enlighten the whole World.

This shall be in a most desired time, when Mortals wearied with Wars shall
Unanimously desire Peace. They shall strive indeed by occasion of a
Long-lasting Interregnum, with various studies which shall obtain the Reigns
of Empire. But at last, the Offspring of the Ancient Blood shall overcome, and
proceed victoriously by force of Arms, until resisted by contrary Fates. For
about the same time, this Star being set, another Coeval Light blazing with
more Ardent Flames of War, shall spread his Empire even to the Coasts of the
Antipodes.

But first, France shall submit her Neck to his Yoke, and Brittany suppliant in
Ships, shall cast her self at his Feet; Italy faintly breathing toward
Scepters so high, shall stretch out to him her Languishing Hand. But this
bright Beam before his time, shall, with the vast desire of men abscond himself
in the Clouds of the Gods.

Who being extinct, after direful and bloody Comets, and flashings of Fire seen
in the Heavens, there shall remain nothing for the future safe or healthy
amongst Men: The Firmament of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the Planets be
opposed in contrary courses, the Spears shall justle one amongst another, and
the fixed Stars move faster than the Planets; The Seas swell as high as the
Mountains, and nothing remain but Night, Destruction, Ruin, Damnation, and
Eternal Misery.

This ancient Prophecy is recited by Cornelius Gemma, in his Treatise of
Supernatural Apparitions, and taken notice of by several other good Authors; As
particularly by the Imcomparably-Learned Tycho Brahe, in his discourse on the
New Star that appeared Anno 1572. who thus expresses his Judgment of it. --
There were (says he) diverse Expositions of this Prophecy, at the time when it
was first found out, some interpreting it of Charles the Fifth, others drew the
meaning of it to Philip King of Spain, and some thought the King of France was
meant thereby; but I think that it does rather point out those Iberi, who
inhabit Northward toward Muscovia. So that this Oracle of Sybilla Tiburtina,
did not denote the Spaniards, but those Iberians, which are near unto the
Muscovites; especially when she uses these words, Supra Iberos ad Magnam
Septentrionis Domum; Over the Iberi toward the great House of the North. And
truly Muscovia, Scythia, and Tartaria, do make a great part of Europe, so that
it may well be called the great House of the North; And therefore, since this
unusual Star did cast is Perpendicular Beams and Influences on the Country of
Muscovia, it is not to be doubted but that this Star, together with that Tract
of Land, does agree with the Sybilline Oracle.

Thus that Noble Dane, a Person so Famous, that our King James at his Being in
Denmark, went to his Castle of Vraniberg, to visit him, and made these Verses
in his Commendation.

Quod temere est ausus Phaeton, vel praestat Apollo
qui regit Ignivomus Aethere anhelus equos:
Plus Tycho, cuncta Astra regis, tibi cedit Apollo,
Charus and Uraniae es Hospes, Alumnus, Amor.
JACOBVS REX. What Phaeton dared, or what is by Phoebus done,
to Rule the Fiery Horses of the Sun?
More Tycho does, he Rules the Stars above;
and is Vrania's Favorite and Love.
This same Tycho in the Treatise before cited, has also some Expressions,
which we may call Prophetic; As having spoken of a Glorious and Happy Age to
be in the end portended by that Star, and having started an Objection, that
some might say, That the Light of the Gospel and Purity of Religion, does now
shine out clearly, having already overcome the darkness of (Papal) Error. He
shapes an Answer thereunto, in these words, --

If it were so, whence then are those Controversies, and varieties of Opinions
defended by Learned Men, insomuch that the War of Pens, is more dangerous than
that of Swords? Truly (says he) it is rather to be feared, lest we take this
Dawning and Break of Day, to be the clear Noon-light. Therefore, I suppose that
this Star does signify, that there shall be a new change, both in Religion,
and the Estate of Humane Affairs; of which we may say, -- Ventum ad supremum
est, patiuntur summa Ruinam; Qui Deus in Coelis regit, and reget omnia Terris.

We are come now to the highest perfection, the power of Antichrist and the
Pope shall decay, and be brought to ruin; And God who rules in Heaven, shall
also rule all things on Earth.

But if any do object, That the end of the World is at hand, and that therefore
there will not be sufficient time to bring about a new change. I Answer, That
St. Paul does assure us, That the Jews shall again be ingrafted into the Church
before the final Consummation of the World, which (by Humane Conjecture) must
needs require some time before, they being scattered over the whole Face of the
Earth, shall be gathered into one Nation. And impossible it is, to limit and
set forth a certain time for the Consummation of the World, which only
depends upon the good will and pleasure of God, and is not revealed to the
Angels: and therefore, cannot be known by any Humane Prescience.

But if some do suppose, that the Tract of Land to which this Star was
Vertical, is Ominous above the rest, as if from thence the occasion and Author
of so great Mutations are to be expected, we must then choose out those parts of
the Earth, which had the New Star in their Meridian at the time of the New
Moon, next following; which fell out (accounting the time by our Meridian) upon
the 15th. of November, 7 hour 13 minutes, post meridiem. To which, i^ we apply
the Latitude or distance from the Equinoctial agreeable to the declination o^
the Star, which was in 61 the place on the Earth answerable thereunto, must
needs be Russia or Muscovia, especially that part there of, which is joined
unto Finland; For i^ that Tract of Earth, this New Star in the New Moon
following, was in their Zenith just over their Heads, where it stood equally
distant from the Horrizon, and with Right-Angled Aspect, beheld this Country
Therefore, if this Position of the Sta^ do point out the place of the Earth,
from whence these events shall arise, Muscov^ seems especially to be designed,
before an^ other Regions, which are situated toward the North, to whom this
New Star was every day Vertical; whether therefore, the first occasions of so
great disturbances and mutations shall arise from hence, which afterward shall
be sowed and dispersed into other parts of the World, I leave to be
peremptorily decided by others. But verily, that Gogus, whereof mention is made
in the 38 Chap. of Ezekiel, and to whom Isaiah Ca. 17.56. and Chap. 5. does
allude, and with whom Magog is named in the Revelations Ca. 20. may be rightly
understood of the Muscovite, as Castellio has interpreted it on the 38 and 39
of Ezekiel; That Gog should be the Leader of the Muscovites and Iberians,
because the Old Translation reads it, That he should be the Prince of Mosoch
and Thubal, for seeing the Hebrews read it Mesech, and the Greeks and Latin
Interpreters do read it Mosoch, it is probable that the Muscovites are
signified hereby, or else by this name, the whole Northern Tract of Land is
included.

So that it is very likely, that Muscovia is Principally denoted by this Star,
and Gogus their Leader, of whom it is foretold by the Sacred Prophets, and the
Revelation, That having made great slaughter in Europe, he, at last with his
whole Army shall be overthrown, and so the Earth disburthen'd of her wicked
Inhabitants; For it is probable, That there must be a great cleansing and
extirpation of all Earthly Impurities, before that peaceable and happy Age
(whereof the Prophets have spoken) shall happen.

Thus far the words of that Great and Judicious Astronomer.

The Prophecy of Paul Grebnar of Snebergh in Misnia, delivered by him with
other things in Manuscript, to Queen Elizabeth, in the Year 1582. Obtained from
her by Dr. Nevil, Clerk of the Closet, and presented to Trinity College
Library, where to this day it remains. This being an Attested Copy out of that
Original.
ROmano Sceptro and diademate ab Austriaca, Domo Fatali Necessitate deposito
and ablato, eaque a Germanis and exteris Gallis, Anglis, Danis, and Suecis,
hinc inde confluentibus oppressa, horribilis inde cruenta ac aterrima pugna
exorietur, qua Vniversa Europa gravissime concussa contremiscet, and vary
dilaterata, and vastata insignibus mutationibus obnoxia erit.

Ad eam pugnam and ad faciendas Irruptiones in Pomeranorum, Megapolensium, and
Danorum, Provincias hujus temporis Rex Sueciae invitabitur, Scriptis atrocium
Romanae sedis Legatorum, quibus si ille obtemparaverit, socius belli sed male
and inauspicate fit, ipsi propinquitate conjunctissimus. Quamobrem Suadeo
Suetiam in eo statu quo eam acceperit, relinquat; Sic ipse, stirps, and posteri
ejus tranquille pace and quiet fruentur, suis contenti quibus imperant
ditionibus, gentem and subditos suos reservabunt, and sibi divinctos in Officio
retinebunt. Si vero secum cord suo constituet populum suum persuadere, ac in
devia abducere, Dominus eum e medio tollet. Et sic e Carolo Magnus, Carolus
Regnans fit, qui Magno Successu and Fortuna, Septentrionalibus Populis
dominabitur. Et feliciter Class sua contra Hispanicam potentiam and
Tyrannidem, ac eorum Classem seu Armadam, ut Hostis pugnabit. Et una cum
Christianis junctibus viribus fortiter and acriter dimicabit; Deus autem Regis
conjugem positam ex hac vita evocat, unde pontifex Romanus Magnum concipit,
terrorem, qui postea Magis in gra^escet cum Carolus Rex ipse Antichristo sese
opponit, eique adversatur, Et Germanorum ac Vicinorum manui and Robori suas
copias conjungit, and oppugnat Hispanicum Diadema. Et tunc Suecus felecissimo
Successu, Class and suo Populo terra marique in Hostem utitur.

The English.

A Fatal Necessity having taken or torn away from the House Austria, The Roman
Scepter and Diadem, and after an Oppression of the same Austrian House, as well
by the Germans, as by Forraigners, French, English, Danes, and Sweeds, making
their Incursions on every side; there shall arise an horrid bloody and sharp
Contest, wherewith all Europe shall shake and tremble, and being several ways
divided, torn in pieces, and laid waste, shall be Obnoxious to many Signal
Mutations.

A Sweedish King then Reigning, shall, by the Writings of the Wicked Emissaries
of the Sea of Rome, be invited and stirred up to that quarrel, and to break in
upon Pomerane, Mechlenburg, and some Provinces belonging to Denmark; Whereunto
if he harken, he unseasonably and very unfortunately becomes involved as an
Allie or Confederate in a War with one that is very nearly related to him. And
therefore, I advise him to leave Sweeden in the same State he found it; So
shall He, and his Family, and Posterity, in peace and quietness enjoy those
Dominions, over which contented they Reign, and preserve in good Order the
Kingdom, and retain his Subjects devoted to his Interests in due Obedience. But
if he shall imagine in his mind to pervert his People, and lead them aside out
of the way, the Lord shall cut him off by Death. And then Charles of Charles,
or from a Charles, a great Charles comes to Reign; who with great Success and
Prosperity, shall govern the Northern parts of the World. And shall, with his
Fleet, happily oppose the Power and Tyranny of the Spaniard, and engage their
Navy or Armado; And after a Conjuction of his Forces with the States of
Christendom, he shall win a difficult cruel Battle.

But God does take out of this Life, the Popish Wife of the King, whence the
Pope of Rome shall be much troubled; whose Terror shall afterward increase,
when King Charles himself shall set himself against Antichrist, and prove a
professed Adversary unto him, and joining his forces with the German Troops, and
others of his Neighbors, shall pull down the Spanish Diadem. In those days
shall the Sweed be very successful against the Enemy, both by Sea and Land.

Another Prophecy of the same Author, Vexillum. 238.
BOhemia does feel Tumults and Warlike noises, with a great falling away of her
People; and at that time the last Caesar of the House of Austria, shall put on
the Nose of the Elector of Saxony, Spanish deceitful and treacherous
Spectacles; The Nature of which at last he knows, and by experience is taught,
That these Spectacles of the House of Austria are vain encouragments, or
flattering glozing words, wicked and treacherous practices. If he goes on
further to give credit to them, he shall cast headlong himself, wife, and
children, and all Christendom, into pernicious destruction, whence the People
of Rome shall rejoice, and fall into a loud laughter.

But the Lord does raise up an Elector, which shall throw down and root out the
Roman Antichrist in his Dominions, with all her Members and Abbetters: In this
violent, precipitate, tumult raging, like the Sea in a tempest, and in the
despair of the Roman Caesar, the Exiles of all the Kings and Princes of Europe,
the Bavarians, Bohemians, Burgundians, the French, and the Portugals, shall be
restored to their former Estates and Liberties, and a Noble stout Bohemian Lord
does possess and recover his Jurisdictions, by the meeting together of Armies,
and their Dissipation; These being expelled shall seek their recovery, and
their Heirs contend and labor, that by the bounty of the new Emperor of
Germany, they may be set again in the place of their Ancestors.

There arises a new Fortunate Bohemian Zisca, who shall break the Heads of the
Jesuits in Germany, and drive them out of Austria; who shall subdue to himself
the Bohemians, and all the Tract through Austria, and Pannonia, even as far as
Constantinople it self. Therefore, it is meet and requisite, that a glittering
precious Diadem be set upon the head of this Teutonik Zisca; who is the head of
the stock, a great and valiant Warrior, that comes of the stock of Mars the
Sixth. He shall rule victoriously, and do these famous things, happily
finishing them with his other Tribunes and Captains.

After these Revolutions, a subtle exercised Interpreter of the Revelation of
St. John, may more easily be understood, and better decipher the same; The
Nineties being past by little and little, between the Six Hundred and Six
Years. Then shall be a most lively Explanation of those things which Ezekiel
and Daniel have Prophesied of the last Act of the Old Age of the World.

A Prophecy recited by Mr. LILLY, in the Year 1651. relating to the French
Nation.
A Certain Prince, as Religious as a Turk, shall overspread that Peoples most
fruitful Territories, and Wars and Dissolations will be occasioned by the
unruly Nobility, who by their Civil Dissentions, shall occasion the ruin of the
French Monarchy. And if you will know near the time of this great Mutation, It
shall be when a certain King, called Henry, is twice made a King, and a Duke of
Florence turned Protestant.

Rex Franciae depelleter a suis finibus, a propriis subditis, exercebit enim in
eos Tyrannidem in Gentem, and contra Ecclesiam Christi, instigatus ab Episcopis
and Pontificibus, qui proditorie aperta pecuma oppugnati, eum seducent and
tradent: Ipse vero videbitur hoc facere ingratiam Affinium. Verum cum fuerit
amotus and falsus solus relinquetur in auxilio, ab his in quibus erat confisus,
Infine autem. Secundi Incursus hoc fiet, sic Pendet Clipeus in stipite.

The French King shall be driven out by his own People, For he will exercise
very great Tyranny both against his Subjects, and the Church of Christ, being
instigated or stirred up thereunto by the Bishops and Romanists: who being
bribed with money, shall Traitorously seduce and betray him. This he shall seem
to do in favor of his Kingdom or Allies, but when he shall be removed and
deceived, he shall be left all alone in banishment, abandoned by those that he
confided in; This shall happen toward the end of the second Incurse, so the
Shield hangs on ^he Firebrand.

The Mahumetans very near that time shall possess Venice, and the Northern
Eagle ^luck down the Nests of Monks and Friars in Germany, and the Hollander be
brought to Re^entance, their Country at once drowned with Water, Blood, and
Tears.

A Prophecy of the Downfall of the Turkish Empire, delivered by some of their
own Diviners, in the Persian Language, as follows:
PAtissahomoz ghelur: ciaferum memleketi alur, kenzul almai alur; Kapzeiler
jediy ladeigh giaur keleci esikmasse, on ikiyladegh ou^aron. Beghlig eder, eusi
japar, baghi dikers, bahusai baghlur, oglikezi olur. Onichi yldensora
Hristrianon keleci osichar, ol Yurchi gheredine tus chure.

The English.

OUr Monarch shall come, He shall dispossess the Unbelieving Prince of his
Kingdom: He shall subdue the Red Apple, and make it yield to his Government.
And if happily the Christian Sword prevail not unto the Seventh Year, he shall
overruled them unto the Twelfth Year: He shall build Castles, plant Vineyards,
and fortify his Gardens with Walls: He shall increase in issue: But after the
aforesaid Twelfth Year, the Sword of the Christians shall approach, which shall
put the Turks to flight, utterly vanquishing and destroying them.

This Prophecy I find recited in a Treatise, Entitled, A discoursive Problem
concerning Prophecies, by John Harvey, Physician of Kings-Lyn in Norfolk, (who
appears by that work to have been a very Learned and Great-read Man) Published
in the Year 1588. But when or by whom, the same was Originally Communicated to
the World, I have not been able to learn.

Truswell's Prophecy.
THe following Prophecy is ancient, but who was the certain Author, I am no
more able to assure, than what will be the certain event. However, let this
suffice, That it is credibly reported to have been found in the Ruins of a
Religious House, at or near Lincoln, and given to one Mr. Truswell, at that
time Recorder of that City, from whom it now borrows the Name, and goes under
the Title of Mr. Truswells Prophecy, ^he Recorder of Lincoln. It was Writ in an
Obscure and Barbarous Latin, which does in ^ome measure show the Antiquity of
it, and that it was penned in those Ages, when Learn^ng was at so low an Ebb,
that the High Wa^er-mark of it did not run above a sor^ of ^othish Latin; All
beyond which was the Hercules Pillars, as they thought, with the ^e plus ultra
Inscribed upon them, of Graecum ^^t non potest legi.

The Prophecy.

LIlium manebit in meliori part, and movebitur contra Semen Leonis. Et stabit
ex ^^a part inter spinas Regni sui, cujus Regnum ^ in Terra Lunae, per totum
Orbem tremendum. Et veniet Filius hominis, ferens feras in Bra^iis, cum
multitudine Populi, transibit multas ^quas, and veniet in Terram Leonis,
auxilium ^arens a Bestiis terrae suae. Veniet Aquila ex Orient, aliis expansis
Radiis filii hominis. Et hoc anno Castra super Thamesin peribunt, and magnus
erit Timor in toto Orb, and in quadam part Terrae. Magna praelia erunt inter
multos Reges. Et in illo die erit pugna cruenta in qua ^ilium per det Coronam
suam; de qua Coronabi^ur filius hominis. Et quarto anno multa erunt to Fide
certamina; Caput mundi erit ad Ter^am. Filius hominis and Aquila elevabuntur:
Et tunc erit pax in Terris Vniversalis. Et acc^piet filius hominis mirabile
signum. Et e^ magna frugum abundantia, and ibi in terram Cr^cis. The English.
THe Lilly shall remain in the better part and he shall be moved against the Se^
of the Lion. And he shall stand on one pa^ amongst the Thorns of his Kingdom,
who Kingdom is the Land of the Moon, which is be dreaded throughout the World.
An^ there shall come the Son of Man, bearing the Wild Beasts in his Arms, with
a Multitude People. He shall pass many Waters, a^ shall come to the Land of the
Lion, lookin^ for help from the Beasts of his own Countr^ Then shall there come
an Eagle out of (...) the East, and his Wings spread with t^ Beams of the Son
of Man. And in that Ye^ shall be destroyed Castles upon the Tham^ and there
shall be great fear over all the wor^ and especially in one part of the Land.
The^ shall be great Battles amongst many Kin^ In that day shall be the Bloody
Field, in wh^ the Lilly shall lose his Crown, wherewith ^ Son of Man shall be
Crowned, and in the 14 Year, many Battles shall be fought for ^ Faith. The Head
of the World shall brought down to the Dust. And the Son Man with the Eagle
shall be exalted. And there shall be an Universal Peace over all the World. And
the Son of Man shall receive a wonderful sign. And there shall be great plenty
of all Fruits of the Earth. And he shall go into the Land of the Cross.

The Prophecy of Malachy (a Popish Saint) declaring the Number, and some marks
of all the Popes that shall be hereafter, together with the final destruction
both of Popery, and the City of Rome.
THis Malachy was Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland, and of the Cistertian Order
of Monks, a Contemporary with St. Bernard, and very intimate with him about the
year 1140: He pretending to the gift of Foresight, undertook by certain
Hieroglyphical descriptions, to give an account of all and every the Popes that
should be from his time to the Worlds end: or at least until the utter
subversion of the Papacy. All which I find both recited, and as far as then was
accomplished, explained, and by application found to be very true and
significant, in an Appendix to a Book, Entitled, Flores Historici, written by
Johannes de Bussieres, a French Jesuit, abbout the year 1655.

To recite all the old Ones from the year 1143, would be both tedious and
impertinent, being so long past; those that are curious may find them in the
Author just now cited: Only to give the Reader a Taste, that he may the better
apprehend the Humor of this Irish Pope-fortune-teller, I shall give you his
Symbols, and their Explications, for above One hundred years past, and also all
those that are to come; and I will begin at the year 1550.

The Propecy. Popes Names. The year of our Lord and Explanation. De Corona
Montana, the Mountain and Crown, Julius the Third. An. 1550. He was called
before he came to the Popedom, John of the Mountain, and his Arms were
Mountains and Crowns of Laurel. Frumentum Floccidum, Breadcorn suddenly
perishing. Marcellus Second. 1555. He had a blade of Wheat in his Arms,
therefore said to be suddenly perishing, because he continued a very little
while in the Popedom. De Fide Petri, Of the Faith of Peter. Paul the Fourth.
1555. His name was Peter de Carafe, which signifies as much as Peter, Of the
dear Faith. Aesculapii Pharmacum, The Medicine of the Physician. Pius the
Fourth. 1560. He was before called Johannes Medicus, John the Physician.
Angelus Nemorosus, the Angel of the Wood. Pius the Fifth. 1560. Called before
Michael Boschi, Michael Wood. Medium Corpus pilarum, a middle body of Balls.
Gregory the Thirteenth 1572. His Arms, the middle of a Dragon, and was made
Cardinal by Pius the 4th, who had the Balls in his Arms. Axis in Medietate
signi, the Axle-tree in the midst of a Sign. Sixtus the Fifth. 1583. His Arms
an Axle-tree in the midst of Leo. De Rore Coeli, from Heavens Dew. Urban the
Seventh. 1590. He was Archbishop in Calabria, where Manna is gathered. Ex
Antiquitate Vrbis, from a City of Antiquity. Gregory the Fourteen. 1590. Of
Millain. Pia Civitas in Bello, a City pious in War. Innocent the Ninth. 1590.
Of Bononia. Crux Romulea, the Roman Cross. Clement the Eighth. 1592. His Arms a
triple oblique Papal Cross. Vndosus vir, A man gone as soon as a Wave. Leo the
Eleventh. 1605. He continued but Four and twenty days. Gens perversa, a
perverse people. Paul the Fifth. 1605. In his days the Bobemians rose against
the House of Austria, whom our Author will have to be the perverse Nation; but
why not rather the Venetians, with whom this Pope had great Broils. In
tribulatione Pacis, in the work of Peace. Gregory the Fifth. 1621. As soon as
he was made Cardinal he was sent by Paul 5th. Legate to Sav^y, and concluded a
peace between the Duke and the King of Spain, and soon after was chosen Pope.
Lilium a Rosa, the Lilly and Rose. Urban the Eighth. 1623. A Florentine, which
City is so called from Flowers, and has a Rose in is Arms. Jucunditas Crucis,
the joy of the Cross. Innocent the Tenth. 1644. Montium Custos, the Keeper of
the Mountains. Alexander the 7th. Sidus Olorum, the Constellation of Swans.
Clement the 9th. Rospigliosi, he had the Star and Swan in his Arms. De Flumine
magno, of the great River. Clement the 10th. Altieri, born at the time of a
great Inundation of the River Tyber. Bellua insatiabilis, an insatiable Beast.
Innocent 11th. Odischalchi the present Pope, called an insatiable Beast,
because of his great covetousness.

The Symbols or Hieroglyphics of all the Popes in order that shall be
hereafter.
POenitentia gloriosa, A glorious Penitent. Rastrum in Porta, A rake in the
Gate. Flores circumdati, Flowers encompassing De bona Religione, Of a good
Religion. [I wish we might see such a Pope once!] Miles in Bello, A Soldier in
War. Cobumna excelsa, A lofty Pillar. Animal rurale, A rural Animal. Rosa
Vmbriae, A Rose of Vmbria. Visus velox, A quick sight. Peregrinus Apostolicus,
An Apostolical Pilgrim. Aquila rapax, A ravenous Eagle. Canis and Coluber, A
Dog and a Snake. Vir Religiosus, A Religious man. De Balneis Hetruria, From the
Baths of Tuscany. Crux de Cruce, Cross of Cross. Lumen de Coelo, A light from
Heaven. Ignis ardens, A flaming fire. Religio depopulata, Religion laid waste.
Fides intrepida, Faith fearless. Pastor Angelicus, An Angelick Pastor. Pastor
and Nauta, Both Shepherd and Sailer. Flos florum, The Flower of Flowers. De
mediteate Lunae, Half the Moon. De labor Solis, The labor of the Sun, or an
eclipse. Gloria Olivae, The Glory of the Olive.


After which our Irish Prophet concludes with this sad O hone! hone! -- In
persecutione extrema Sacrae Romanae Ecclesiae sedebit Petrus Romanus, qui
pascet Oves in multis Tribulationibus quibus transactis Civitas Sep^icollis
diruetur, and judex tremendus judicabit populum.

In English thus.

In the last Persecution of the Holy Roman Church, one Peter a Roman shall
possess the Chair, and feed the Sheep in many Tribulations; which being
accomplished, the Seven-hill'd City shall be destroyed, and the dreadful Judge
shall call the people to Judgment. Hitherto the words translated out of the
beforementioned Jesuite's Flosculi Historici.

There being according to this man's reckoning, Twenty six of their
Vnholinesses behind, if we shall allow (according to our usual Estimate of a
man's life) seven years to each, it will amount to 182 years, that is, to the
year of our Lord 1865, before the final destruction of the Papacy, and that
bloody City shall be completed: But the Prayers of the faithful, and the Cries
of the Martyrs from under the Altar, may, it is like, sooner draw down and
accelerate the just Judgments threatened to this Babylon and spiritual Sodom;
Quod faxit Deus.

A very ancient Prophecy of Gildas the Scot, recited by Archbishop Usher, in
his Book, Entitled, De Britanicarum Ecclesiarum Primoraiis, Page 680.
FAta ducis celebris super omnia Scotia flebit,
Qui loca Septa Salo junget ubique sibi.
Principe magnifico Tellus viduata vacabit
Annis bis Ternis, mensibus atque novem.
Antiquos Reges, justos, fortes, Locupletes
Largos, Famosos, Scotia maesta luget;
Vt Merlinus ait, post Reges victoriosus
Regis more carens Regia Sceptra Reget.
Vae canet Albaniae tantis praesaga Ruims
Totaque Gens propria fraud perempta jacet,
Quod respirabit, post funus Regis avari
Versibus antiquis prisca sibylla canit.
Candidus Albanus Patriotis causa Ruinae
Traditione sua Scotica Regna teret;
Rex borealis enim numerosa Class potitus
Affliget Scotos ense, furore, fame.
Extera gens tandem Sociorum fraud peribit
In bello Princeps Noricus ense cadet.
Gallica quem gignet, qui Gazis Regna replebit,
O dolor! O Gemitus! Fratris ab ense cadet.
Tristia cessabunt, quae prospera fine sequuntur
Pacis and adveniat Tempore grata quies
Historiae veteris Gildas luculentus Amator
Haec retulit parvo Carmine, plura notans.
Which as near the Sense as I can, to make i^ Verse, I thus English; Those that
can Translate it more exactly, let them.

SCotland 'bove all shall her brave Chief bemoan,
Who all the Sea-girt places Rules alone;
The Widdowed Land of bounteous Prince berest,
Shall Twice Three Years, and Nine long Months be left.
Sad Scotland mourns her Old Just valiant Kings,
But Merlin says, after them up their Springs
One that shall not in Kingly manner sway
The Royal Scepter, yet makes them obey.
To Albany presaging Ruin flows,
By their own fraud undone, more than their Foes.
Yet Old Sybil in Ancient Rhimes has told
She shall revive, when one that dotes on Gold
Is laid to rest. The White Albanion then
By Treachery, undoes his Countrymen:
A Northern Prince with numerous Ships shall vex
The Scot; whom Fury, Sword, and Death perplex.
The Forraigner by fraud of his Allies
Is lost, and in disastrous Battle Dies.
The French-Womans Bearn, who shall his Kingdoms fill
With Wealth; Alas! A Brother's Sword shall kill.
Soon after, sorrows cease, and joys appear,
And Welcome Peace salutes our Hemisphere,
This Gildas in story well-read foreshows,
Whose Verse, thouth brief, much matter may disclose.
The words of Mr. Lilly (Printed with License) in his Almanac, 1677.
AS to the time of Manifestation when these so wonderful Mutations or
Revolutions shall be effected or visibly declared, or put into Action; We say,
That although in part some breakings out there are in esse at present, yet the
most violent Actions, or dreadful Concerments, shall not have full
Manifestation, or perfect appearance, until Three times Ten Years added to
1669. do come, which will be 1699. -- Weighty matters require many Years for
their performances, yet in the mean time the powerful Configurations of the
Superior Planets, the remaining Influences of the Comet, or Comets in 1664,
1665. and also of that 1673. have in some measure begun those Effects which
will in convenient time be more apparent, long before the Year 1699.

In the Year 1682. and Month of October, (Viz.) the Twentieth Day, there will
be a Conjunction of the two Superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter, in the
Twentieth degree of that Regal Sign Leo, which is the Terms of Jupiter, and
wherein he and the Sun have their Triplicity. It will be the Fifth time of
their meeting in the Fiery Triplicity, since their Conjunction in 1603. at what
time they changed one Triplicity, and entered into another: which usually (if we
may credit Antiquity, Experience, or History,) has not happened without
considerable Revolutions and Changes in the World; (Viz.) according to the
Nature and Sign of the Planet most Essentially fortified. -- We have observed,
That those Conjunctions which have happened in the Year 1603. and since
succeeded in the Fiety Trygon, have not been accompanied with Propitious
Successes unto England, or the City of London. At the entrance of those Planets
into the Fiery Trygon, Queen Elizabeth dyed. In 1603. a great Plague was in
London, and in the Year 1623. the Second Conjunction of the Superior Planets
fell in the Seventh Degree of Leo. Not long after King James (a Peaceable and
Wise Prince) dyed; Again, in the Year 1625. at least 50000 Persons dyed of the
Plague in London. In short time after follows the unfortunate business or
attempt of the Isle of Rhee in France, the Murder of Buckingham, etc. and
during all that time a general murmuring and repining of the Common People,
especially amongst those of different Judgments, which gave encouragment to and
occasion of our late unhappy Troubles and Intestine Wars.

In the Year 1642/3;. the Third Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, was
celebrated in Twenty Six Degrees of Pisces; but the Effects most concerned
those People subject to the Sign Aries. Upon this Conjunction our late unhappy
Calamities began, which more or less continued until the Year 1652. In that
Intestine and Bloody War, many Thousand Persons of all Degrees and Qualities
miserably suffered, and the City of London especially in her Trade and
Commerce. What is most remarkable after the Year 1663; was, That in 1665,
(Viz.) the greatest Plague that ever happened in London, wherein it is credibly
reported, that near One Hundred Thousand People perished. And besides, in the
Year 1666. that terrible and never to be forgotten Fire, which destroyed the
greatest part of that Famous and Flourishing City: and these Calamities
followed the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in the Sign Sagittary, of the
Fiery Trygon, Anno. 1663. -- But what manner of accidents shall precede or
follow this next Conjunction of the Superiors in the Kingly Sign Leo, Anno
1682. which will be One Hundred Years and Ten, after the Mock-star of 1572. and
Seventy Nine Years after the great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1603. and
Seventeen Years after the appearance of the Comet in 1665, whose tail extended
Fiery and large toward the East part of Heaven, The Effects whereof we Judge
are not yet in being, but will in part be put forward in or about the Year
1682. or something later: with an heavy vengeance or judgment on those People
and Nations, Providence shall dispose the Effects to fall upon; by Wars,
Famine, Death of Cattle, several Mortalities, barrenness of the Earth, and
cruel destruction of Mankind. -- It portends great Rents and Schisms amongst
the Religious Odrers of Monks, Friars, Jesuits, as also amongst those of
different Judgments, call them by what Name you please; And this Judgment is
the more aggravated, in reguard these Two Superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter,
do also meet again in the Sign Leo, in May 1683. (as appears by Calculation,
and also by the Ephemerides of Argol.) And hence I conclude this Conjunction to
be the Prodromus of every Prodigious Effects, -- which we may not live to see
transacted.

There will be some preceding differences (perhaps Verbal) which will begin to
break forth at first clandestinely before those great Deluges of Affairs are
transacted. For we find, that upon the Fifth Day of September, 1682. there will
first be a Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter, and upon the Twelfth Day of the
same Month in the aforesaid Year, there will be another Conjunction of Tory
Mars with Saturn, in the Seventeenth Degree of the same Sign; and again, in
December following, there happens a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter also, in
or near Twenty Degrees thereof, and both swift motion. Then matters, Treasons,
Consultations, Treachery of Subjects against their Superiors, are Plotting,
Contriving, or Agitating, some Years before this Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter is Celebrated.

Those pretending to Religion, or such as are Famous for Schisms, Haeresies, or
of different Judgments from the Profession of that Religion which is established
by Authority, will for some Years grumble and repine for Restriction of their
Consciences (as the will term it) and the nearer the time of the Conjunction it
self, or a little after, we fear greater disturbances of those Nations, and the
Princes they live under, disquieting their Governors: and this for
Conscience Sake, as they pretend. But in some Nations, Breach of the Peoples
just Privileges, Ancient Customs and former enjoyed Rights, will animate the
Generality to a strong and sturdy Rebellion and countenance that Translation of
Monarchy, mentioned by Trithemius. -- Certainly you Princes of Italy, as also
the Roman Pontisex, or Conclave of Cardinals of the Sea of Rome, will all of
you find great and most grievous distempers in your Governments, near the time
limited: So will many People and Nations subject to the Fiery Triplicity, and
this Evil will be the more aggravated to those Kingdoms or Governments subject
to the Signs Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquary.

Many believe the last Age of the World is at hand, we verily conjecture that a
troublesome and vexatious time is approaching upon most Nations of Europe,
wherein those pretending to Religion, whether Papists or Protestants, will show
little mercy or compassion to those persons whose unhappiness it will be to
fall under their subjection. -- The Coadunation of so many Planets in the Sign
Leo, in the Year 1682. gives very rational grounds to predict the appearance of
another Comet, very strange Apparitions in the Air, or some Prodigious Meteors,
either preceding that Conjunction, or subsequent in a short time after: And we
also are fearful that some more than ordinary Fire or Fires may afflict or do
considerable damage to many Cities of Europe; God keep this Judgment ^om the
City of London, and Bless her Inhabitants with much Health and Prosperity, and
^eliver her from another Plague or Pestilen^al distemper in those Years.

Thus Lilly diverse Years since, wherein his ^rediction of a Comet in 82. which
exactly ^appened in August last, being visible both morning and evening for
many Nights; his mentioning the Word Tory, which when he wrote was not in use,
though since the occasion of many Animosities, his Menaces of more mischief by
Fire, sadly felt by the poor Inhabitants of Wapping near London, on the
Nineteenth of November, this present Year 1682. whereby about 1000 houses were
consumed, are very remarkable, and how far the rest may answer Truth, time may
show.

A Prophecy found in the Library of Salizarius of Heidelburg in Germany, almost
200 years since.
THere shall a King arise out of the Nation of the most Illustrious Lilly,
having a long Forehead, high Brows, great Eyes, and an Eagles Nose; He shall
gather a great Army, and destroy all the Tyrants of his Kingdom, and ^ay all
that fly into Mountains and Caves from his Face; for Righteousness shall be
joined unto him, as the Bridegroom unto the Bride. With them he shall wage War
even unto the Fortieth year, bringing into subjection the ^landers, Spaniards
and Italians; Rome and Florence he shall destroy and burn with fire, so as Salt
may be sowed ^n that Land. The greatest Clergymen who have Invaded Peter's
Seat, he shall put to death, and in the same year obtain a double Crown. At
last, going over-Sea with A great Army, he shall enter Greece, and be named
King of the Greeks. The Turks and Barbarians he shall subdue making an Edict,
That every one shall die the Death, that worshippeth not the crucified One, and
none shall be found able to resist him, because an Holy Arm from the Lord shall
alway^ be with him, and he shall be with him, and he shall possess the
Dominions of the Earth. These things being done, h^ shall be called, The Rest
of the Holy Christians. The Apocalyptical Interpreters adventuring to sail in
the vast Ocean of Futurity, have most-timeS ship-wrackt their judgment and
credit do the Rocks of Presumption; ye^ I shall presume here to add the words
of that Reverend French Divine Peter du Moulin, in his Book Entitled, The
Accomplishment of Prophecies, (Translated into English, Anno 1613 Page 411. as
follows:

As for the time of three days and an half, during which the Bodies of the
faithful Witnesses shall be cast out through all the Quarters of the Roman
Church: It is manifest, that S. John does hereby show us how long the
Persecution of the Church under the Roman Hierarchy, must continue. For to know
how long this time shall endure, and to how much the Three Days and an half
will amount unto; we are to note, that Three Days and an half, make half a
Week, which gives us to understand, that the Holy Ghost here under the name of
a Week, does comprehend the whole time of the Beast's Reign, and does advertise
us, that the Persecution shall last half the time of this Reign. Since
therefore he shall Reign 1260 years (as we have showed before) it follows
that the Roman Hierarchy shall persecute the Faithful 630 years. Now I do not
find, that the Church of Rome did begin to persecute and is use cruelty in
general against all that did withstand her Doctrine till the time of
Berengarius whom Pope Nicholas the Second compelled to Recant by force, in the
year 1059; and ever since the Popes have persecuted such as have maintained the
same Doctrine. If then you add the 630 years to 1059 years, you shall find that
the persecution of the Church under the Pope, shall have an end in the year of
our Lord 1689. This Term once expired, the Truth that was oppressed shall lift
up her head afresh, and the faithful Witnesses shall be seen to stand up again,
who shall astonish the Church of Rome. The Prediction of the most Learned and
pious Archbishop Usher, is very remarkable, as it was printed above a years ago
with License, and the Truth of the matter of Fact therein delivered, never that
I know of denied, out confirmed by many, which in short was thus. -- That the
year before this holy Primate died (who was buried in the Abbey at Westminister
17 of April, 1656. The Usurper Cromwell allowing 200 l. toward his Funeral, so
great his Worth, that it even charmed that Tyrant, otherwise far from being a
Friend to any of his Profe^sson:) An intimate Friend of the Archbishop's asking
him (amongst other discourse) what his present Apprehensions were concerning a
very great Perse^ution which should fall upon the Church of God in these
Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland, (of which he had ^eard him speak with
great confidence many years before, when ^e were in the highest and fullest
state of outward peace and settlement) and whether he did believe those sad
Times to be past, or that they were yet to come? -- He answered, -- That they
were yet to come, and that he did as confidently expect it as ever he had done.
Adding, That this sad Persecution would fall upon all the Protestant Churches
of Europe. His Friend arguing, that he hoped the Affliction might now be over,
and be intended of our late calamitous Civil Wars. The reverend Prelate turning
toward him, and fixing his Eyes upon him with that serious and severe Look
which he usually had when he spoke God's Word, and not his own, and when the
power of God seemed to be upon him, and to constrain him to speak, said thus:
Fool not your self with such hopes, for I tell you, all you have yet seen, has
been but the beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the Protestant
Churches of Christ, who will ere long fall under a sharper Persecution than
ever yet has been upon them; and therefore (said he to him) Look you be not
found in the Outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Trmple before the Altar,
for Christ will measure all those that profess his Name, and call themselves
his People; and the Outward Worshippers he will leave out, to be trodden down
by the Gentiles. The outward Court (says he) is the formal Christian, whose
Religion lies in performing the outside duties of Christianity, without having
an inward Life and Power of Faith and Love, uniting them to Christ, and these
God will leave to be trodden down, and swept away by the Gentiles: But the
Worshippers within the Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed
worship God to Spirit and Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and he is
honored and adored in the most inward thoughts of their hearts, and they
sacrifice their Lusts and vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him; and
these God will hide in the hollow of his Hand, and under the shadow of his
Wings; and this shall be one great difference between this last, and all the
other preceding Persecutions; For in the former, the most eminent and spiritual
Ministers and Christians did generally suffer most, and were most violently
fallen upon, but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved by God as a
Seed to partake of that Glory which shall immediately follow and come upon the
Church, as soon as ever this storm shall be over; for as it shall be the
sharpest, so it shall be the shortest Persecution of them all; and shall only
take away the gross Hypocrites and formal Professors, but the true Spiritual
Believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be over-past.

His Friend then asked him, By what means or Instruments this great Trial
should be brought on. He answered, By the Papists. His Friend replied, That it
seemed very improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now little
countenanced, and but few in these Nations, and that the hearts of the People
were more set against them than ever since the Reformation. He answered again,
That it would be by the hands of Papists, and in the way of a sudden Massacre,
and that the then Pope should be the chief Instrument of it.

He also added, That the Papists were in his Opinion the Gentiles spoken of,
Rev. 11. to whom the Outward Court should be left, that they might tread it
under foot; they having received the Gentiles worship in their adoring Images,
and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many Mediators: And this (said
he) the Papists are now designing among themselves, and therefore be sure you
be ready.

This gracious man repeated the same things in Substance to his only daughter
the Lady Tyrril, and that with many tears, and much about the same time.

We the rather have mentioned this, because we find: many other of our most
Reverend Divines have foretold or intimated a Return of Popery -- As appears by
the Book Entitled Fair warning, the Second part, published with the License of
Dr. Stradling, wherein are recited Twenty Prophecies by Archbishop Whitgift,
Archbishop Bancroft, Bishop Sanderson, Bishop Gauden, Mr. Hooker, and others
to the same purpose,

But if God in Judgment for our Sins should suffer it so to be, yet It Is
certain, the Joy of the Wicked shall be but for a moment, for We have a most
sure word of Prophecy, that in due time Rome shall finally fall, And the Kings
of the Earth shall hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and burn
her with Fire, Rev. 17.16.

Rome tottering long, laden with Errors store,
At last shall fall, and Head the World no more.
FINIS.

