THE Life and Death, TRAVELS AND SUFFERINGS OF Robert VVidders OF KELLET in
LANCASHIRE; WHO Was one of the Lords Worthies, together with several
Testimonies of his Neighbors and Friends concerning him.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1688.

A Short Testimony of the Life, Travels, Sufferings, and Death of that Faithful
Servant of the Lord, Robert Widders.
WHo was Born in Vpper-Kellet in Lancashire, of honest substantial Parentage,
who was a Seeker after the Lord, and the knowledge of his way, and wandered from
Mountain to Hill, but could find no rest nor satisfaction to my Soul, till it
pleased the Lord God, that in the year 1652. Dear George Fox came into these
parts, who informed my mind, and turned me to the Light of Christ Jesus in my
inward parts, which was comfort to me that had long sat in darkness, and so I
was convinced of Gods pure eternal Truth.

And in the year 1653. I and George Fox, and James Lancaster passed into
Cumberland, where I and James Lancaster went to Emelton Steeple-house
Steeple-House.
and I spoke to the Priest and People in public, and charged them in the
presence of God, that if any of them could tell what would become of their
Souls, if they should be cut off that present, let them then speak; but never a
one of them durst open their Mouths.

Then the next First Day, Steeple-House.
I was moved to go to Coldbeck Steeple-house, where I spoke to Priest Hutton
when he was in his High-place -- And the rude people his Hearers did throw me
down among the Seats, and dragged, and trailed me forth into the Yard, and
threw me down upon the Ground, and punshed and beat me till the blood gushed
out at my mouth, and I lay for dead some time -- But a woman took pity and held
up my head, till my breath and life came to me again, as some said that stood
by: Ever blessed be the Lord God, who upheld and strengthened me by his eternal
power, that I was not dismayed, nor discouraged.

For on the same day in the afternoon I went seven Miles to Ackton Steeple
house, Steeple-House.
where I spoke to Priest Nicholls of Ackton in his High-place, and said, Come
down thou Deceiver, thou enemy of Christ, the hand of the Lord is against thee
-- And one William Brisco of Crofton then present, a Justice, commanded the
Constables to secure me; and after examined me in the Priests House; and the
Priest Nicholls flattered and fawned upon me. And I told him, The Spirit of
Persecution lodged in him; he said Nay, he was no such man.

Then presently after he said to the Justice, I had stolen my Horse, and that he
could find in his heart to be my Executioner with his own hands. -- Then I told
him again, Did not I say unto thee, That the Spirit of Persecution lodged in
thee: So the said Justice. Brisco made a Warrant to send me to Carlisle Goal;
and after he had given the Warrant to the Constable, he called me before him
again, and asked me by what Authority, or Power, I came to Seduce and bewitch
People. -- I told him, I came not to Seduce and bewitch People, but I came in
that Power which shall make thee, and all the Powers of the Earth bend and bow
before it (to wit) the mighty Power of God. And as I spoke these words from the
word, the Terror and Dread of God took hold upon him, and sm^te his heart:
Then he called for his Warrant again out of the Constables hand, and caused the
Constable to put me on to a Moor, near Night. -- So the Lord delivered me at
that time.

But not long after was I moved of the Lord to go to the said Ackton-Steeple
House again, where the said Justice Brisco had Power to send me to the
Common-Goal at Carlisle; Prison.
where I didly in the Dungeon among Thieves a long time, and never came out
Night nor Day till I was released.

Then afterward I went to Lamplough Steeple-House and spoke to the Priest,
Steeple-House
and People; and they were very Rude, and tore the Hair off my Head, and rent
my Coat.

And in the Afternoon the same Day, I went to another Steeple House two Miles
from thence, Steeple-House.
and spoke to the Priest: but he went away and would not stay.

Afterward I was with G. Steeple-House.
F. in Scotland, and went there to a Steeple-House, called, New Munckland.

Likewise, as I came back, I was at a Steeple House in Northumberland,
Steeple-House.
and there spoke to the People: And one Henry Harbuttle and his Wife were
Convinced that Day.

And in Bishopric I was at several Steeple Houses. And in Bishopaukland I
speaking through the Town, Several Steeple Houses.
the People stoned me with Stones, and bruised my Head very Sore.

And likewise in Yorkshire, where particularly I was at a Steeple-House near
Skipton, and spoke to Priest Webster, and bid him come down thou Inchanter, for
he was a false Man, for he had been partly convinced and turned back again,
Simon Magus like. I also spoke to the people, and to one Justice Coats, a
moderate man then being present: And I directed them to the Word of God in the
heart, which divided between the precious and the vile.

And then I went to a Moor side, where a few Friends were gathered together;
and I sat down among them, and it was immediately revealed to me, that the said
Justice Coats would send for me. -- And presently there came many Horse men and
Foot, and said I must go before the Justice, who examined me, and said I had
broken the Law in disturbing the Minister and People, and he might send me to
Gaol at York Castle. -- I Answered, Send me to York Castle if thou durst; for
to that of God in thy Conscience am I made manifest. Then said he, I neither
dare nor will: So took me by the Hand, and told me, I might take my own time.
-- And so the Lord preserved and delivered me, for which I praise his Holy Name.

And also, I was at several Steeple Houses in Lancashire, as Warton, Halton,
Kellet, and Arkholm Chapel, Lancas^ire Steeple-House.
where at Arkholm the People were like to Fight; and I standing in the Chapel
Door held up my Hand and spoke to the Priest to come forth and take up the
People, they will needs Fight, they being in the Dogs Nature.

And at the Assize time at Lancaster, I went to the Steeple House and spoke to
the Priest, whilst he was Preaching before the Judges; and the Priest was all
in a Fright, and Smitten, and broke Up, and the People in a have hurried out.

So the Lord God everlastingly Delivered, Kept, and Preserved me by his
Everlasting Power in all my Travels, and Exercises of this kind; Blessed be his
Holy Glorious Name for ever.

Here follows a Breviate of the Heads of the great and sore Sufferings of
this Faithful follower of the Lord, Robert Widders, both in Body, and Goods,
for Tithes, for Sunday Shillings, (so called) and for Meetings by the Act
against Conventicles, keeping the Testimony of Jesus, and his Conscience clear
in the sight of God.
IN the Year 1654. Priest Schoolcroft of Caton in the County of Lancaster,
being concerned in the Tyth of Upper Kellet, did run Robert Widders to an
Outlawry, and by a Writ cast him into Prison at Lancaster Castle, where he
remained Prisoner about one year and an half, and then was freed by
Supersedeas. And also the Farmer of the Outlawyrs came and made Distress for a
Fine.

And they came again the second time and entered me for an Outlawry, but the
Priest died; so that came to nothing.

And after that one William Atkinson being Farmer of Tithes of the said Upper
Kellet, Sufferings for Tithes.
sued me at the Common Law for several years Tithes, and recovered Judgment for
ten pounds, and took Goods to the value of 12 l.

In the year 1678 one James Greenwood, now of Bolton by the Sands in
Lancashire, Farmer of the Tithes in Bolton Parish (whose manner and Custom is
to pay a small Rent in lieu of Tithe Hay) sued Robert Widders for Tithe Hay in
kind for five years. And brought Thomas Lucas his Thresher at Tytheborn, to
swear at the Assize at Lancaster, that Robert Widders had fixty Load of Hay
growing in the year, out of which the Tythe-farmer Greenwood challenged six
load of Hay by the year; tho Tithe hay was not paid in kind but a small Rent
as aforesaid. And Judge Bertie giving treble damage, they took Goods worth 6
l. 15 s.

And at the same Assizes in 1678. the said Tythe-farmer Greenwood sued Robert
Widders for Tithe Corn for five years, he demanding 23 l. 17 s. 5 d. as the
said Thomas Lucas his Thresher, Richard Fawcett of Upper Kellet, and John
Greenwood the Tythe-farmer's Brother swore it, as the single value; and the
said Judge Bertie granted treble value, which came to 71 l. 12 s. 3 d. for
which the Bailiffs, Thomas Foxcroft and George Overend, both of Burton in
Lounsdall in Yorkshire, with others, came and took Goods from the said Robert
Widders worth 98 l. 1 s. as was valued by four credible men of his Neighbors
-- Locking up the Barn door, and Threshing out Corn at their pleasure, taking
the Straw also away, being most part of a year in spoiling.

And again, in the year 1683. the said James Greenwood, Tythe-Farmer, sued the
said Robert Widders at Common Law, for Tithe upon the Statute that gives treble
damage; and brought one Richard Tatem of Ireby in Lancashire, who swore that
the Tithe of Robert Widder's Corn in the year 1678. was worth 1 l. 1 s.

And he brought one John Chapm in of Capenwray, whoswore that the Tithe of
Robert Widder's Corn in the year 79. was worth 5 s. 6 d.

And again, the said Richard Tatem swore that the Tithe of Robert Widders Corn
in the year 1680. was worth 1 l. 6 s.

Also the said Tythe-Farmer Greenwood brought one William Middleton his
Servant, who swore that the Tithe of Robert Widder's Corn in the year 1682. was
worth 4 l. 19 s.

And upon these four said Evidences at Lancaster Assizes in the said year 1683.
Judge Walcot gave Judgment for James Greenwood treble value, which was 22 l.
14 s. 6 d. the single value being 7 l. 11 s. 6 d.

And Edward Charnock of Lancaster, a Sheriffs Bailiff, and Josiah Dickinson of
Nether Kellet, Son-in-law to the said James Greenwood, Tythe-Farrner, came and
took Goods from the said Robert Widders worth 27 l. 15 s. as prized by four
Neighbors.

The Sufferings of Robert Widders for Sunday Shillings (so called.)
THe 14th day of the 10th Month, 1683. came Robert Leaper of Over Kellet,
Overseer, and demanded 3 s. of Robert Widders for being three days absent from
their Worship, which Robert Widders could not pay for Conscience sake: Then by
virtue of a Warrant from Thomas Coall, Edward Wilson, and Roger Moore, all
Justices, took Goods to the value of 3 s.

Again the said Justice Fined the said Robert Widders 3 s. upon the said
account; and by Warrant from the said Justices, came John Butterfield, and
Robert Robinson, Wardens, upon the 27th of the 6th Month, 1684. and took Goods
from the said Robert Widders worth 3 s.

Also Robert Widders was Fined the third time upon the said account 3 s. and by
Warrant from the said Justices, upon the 10th day of the 9th Month 1684. came
Richard Gibson, Constable, and Robert Robinson, Warden, both of Over Kellet,
and took Goods worth 4 s.

Here follows the Sufferings of that Dear and Faithful Servant of the Lord
Robert Widders, for Meetings upon the Conventicle Act, and other ways.
RObert Widders for being at a Meeting was fined 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. by William
Spencer and George Middleton, both Justices, for which William Haughton,
Bailiff of Lancaster, took one Cow.

Robert Widders having a peaceable Meeting in his House the 31 day of the 6th
Month, 1684. where there came Richard Gibson Blacksmith, Constable, and Robert
Robinson, Warden, both of Over Kellet, with a Warrant from Justice Bindless of
Borrick, who put them on. And required Friends to go before the Justice, which
they did; and by some Informers took Information, and Fined Robert Widders 20
l. for his House, himself and his Wife each 5 s. for being at the Meeting in
his own House, by the Act against Conventicles.

And upon the 26th day of the 7th Month, 1684. came Richard Gibson Blacksmith,
and Richard Fawcet Constables, and John Helm, and Thomas Lucas, Overseers, and
John Butterfield, and Robert Robinson, Wardens, all of the Township of Over
Kellet, to Robert Widder's house with a Warrant from the said Justice Bindless,
bearing date the 26th day of the 7th Month, and demanded the said Fines of
Robert Widders, which he refusing to pay, they made distress of his Goods worth
22 l. 7 s. as two of the said Officers did value them.

Again, Robert Widders for being at a peaceable Meeting at William Waithmans of
Lindeth the 7th of the 7th Month 84. was Fined 10 s. by the said Justice
Bindless of Borrick.

Upon the Information of George Dawson, Warden, John Bachouse and John Hall,
all of the Township of Warton, Officers; and upon the 10th day of the 9th
Month, came the said Richard Gibson, Constable, and Robert Robinson, Warden,
both of Over Kellet, and took Goods worth 10 s. from the said Robert Widders.

Again, Robert Widders for being at a Meeting at Richard Lancasters of Yelland
the 21 day of the 7th Month 84. was fined 10 s. by the said Jnstice Bindless,
upon the Information of Robert Bachouse Constaand John Hubersty, Warden, both
of Yelland, had Goods taken from him worth 10 s. by the said Richard Gibson,
Robert Robinson, and Thomas Lucas, all of Over Kellet, the 20th of the 10th
Month, 84.

Also Robbert Widders for being at a Meeting at Robert Hubersties of Capenwray,
the 19th day of the 8^h Month, 84. was fined 5 s. by Thomas Goall Justice, upon
the Iuformation of Richard Gibson, and Thomas Lucas aforesaid, Constables, and
Robert Robinson Warden -- And the 10th day of the 9th Month, came the said
Officers, and took Goods from Robert Widders worth 9 s. 6 d.

And again, Robert Widders for having a peaceable Meeting at his House the
26th. of the 8th. Month, 1684. was fined the second time 20 l. for his House by
the said Robert Bindless Justice, upon the Information of the said Rich. Gibson
and George Eskrigge both of Over Kellet; which George Eskrigge said it was
against his will. And the 20th. day of the 10th. Month came the said Richard
Gibson, Blacksmith, and Thomas Lucas, Constables, and Robert Robinson, Warden,
by Warrant from the said Justice Bindless; and rifled the House of Robert
Widders, shot back locks and pulled out staples of Doors, and Arkes (although they
were told what was in them, and that it was not according to the Act) and then
took Goods worth 10 l. 5 s. so let it fall.

Robert Widders for being at a Meeting at John Bachouse of Yelland, the 14th.
of the 10th. Month, 1684. was fined 10 s. by the said Justice Bindless; upon
the Information of John Smith, Constable, and Thomas Watson, Warden, both of
the said Yelland, had Goods taken from him worth* 10 s. by the said Richard
Gibson, Thomas Lucas, and Robert Robinson all of Over Kellet aforesaid, the
20th. day of the 10th. Month, 1684.

Thus the sufferings of Robert Widders, that Noble Innocent Sufferer, and
Faithful Servant and Witness for the Lord God, may be seen in short.

l. s. d. His Suffering for Tithes 143 11 00 His Sufferings for Sunday
Shillings 00 10 00 His Sufferings for Meetings 37 18 02 Total 181 19 02

And likewise his suffering Imprisonment for the Testimony of the Truth, and
keeping his Couscience clear, was once at Carliste, and several times at
Laneaster, which particularly are not here set down.

And of his going to Steeple Houses, and sometimes of his speaking to Priests
and People, and warning them to repent, here is twelve particularly set down,
besides diverse others in the Bishopric, or else where, not here inserted.

Likewise R^bert Widders writ many Letters when he was in America, and from
diverse other parts, where he was in the Service of the Lord, he writ to his
Relations and Friends of his Love to them, with good Advice and Counsel, with
seasonable Exhortations, To be Faithful, and Noble, and Valiant for God and his
Truth, over all Gainsayers. -- For Truth will stand and Remain, when all
Hypocrisy and deceit will fail; and come to an end. -- Tho all his Writings
particularly are not here set down.

But here are several Writings and Testimonies concerning this true and Noble
Man for God in his day, Robert Widders. And of his Spirit, Gists, and Service
in the Church of God, of which Christ Jesus is the holy eternal head, from
several Friends, as may be seen here following.

The T^stimony of Jane Widders, concerning her dear Husband, Robert Widders.
THis Testimony I have to give for my dear and truly loving Husband, That his
Love was true and sincere to God, and for the prosperity of his blessed Truth
was zealous. -- He was a man (ever since it pleased God to join him and me
together as Man and Wife) that was inclining to seek after the Lord. And in the
time of his outward profession was zealous and honest, according to what he
then knew, till it pleased the Lord, thorough the Testimony and direction of
his faithful Servant and Minister G. F. To turn his mind from Darkness to the
Light of Christ within, who through believing, obeying Christ and the Light of
Life, and taking up the Cross to self, came to witness true peace with God, and
so receiving the Truth in the Love of it, he became a companion of them that
suffered for the Truth. He was so faithful to God; and true for the good of his
Soul, that he would have been loath to have fled the Cross for any outward
advantage. Oh, the integrity of his Spirit and heart, I might speak much of the
same: But it is known to God, and I hope to many faithful Brethren and Sisters
in the Lord, whom he has left behind under the exercise of this transitory
world. Oh! it is the Cry and breathing of my Soul unto God, that he would
preserve me in faithfulness, as he has done my deat Husband, to the end of my
days, and finishing my Course here.

During the time of his weakness of Body, he was kept by the Lords Power, in a
sweet and precious frame of mind, and patientness of Spirit, as one that had
Resigned himself up into the Will of God; and many precious Scriptures passed
through him in that time, as one that might in Truth declare what God had done
for his Soul, as that of the Prophet, where he says, The Lord will comfort
Zion, and repair her decayed places, making her Desert as a Paradise, and her
Wilderness as the Garden of the Lord, Mirth and Joy shall be found there,
Thanksgiving and the voice of Praise. -- And again that of the Prophet, where
he says, The work or fruit of Righteousness shall be Peace; and the effect of
Righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever. -- He would often have said,
his heart was filled with the Love of God, and that there was nothing betwixt
him and the Lord. Thou have taught me the way of Life, and make me full of
Joy with thy Countenance. -- And seeing it is the will of God to take my dear
Husband unto himself, to rest with him in eternal Glory, who was a dear and
tender Husband unto me. Oh, that I in a holy submission to his blessed will,
may be given up, desiring in all things to be made conformable to his heavenly
mind, who alone is worthy to be seared, served, worshipped, and bowed unto, who
is God over all blessed for ever. Amen.

Jane Widders.

Thomas Widders his Testimony concerning his dear and tender Father Robert
Widders.
THis Testimony I have to bear concerning my dear and Loving Father, who is
Deceased, for whom I ever had a Reverent esteem, and that upon a double
account, First, as he was a tender natural Father unto me. Secondly, as he was
an Example of a holy Life and Conversation, and good Advice and Counsel to me.
Also he was sincere and zealous for the propagation of the Name and Truth of
God in his Day, which I know by true experience, was the desire of his heart,
that all who took upon them the profession of the holy Name of Jesus, might
walk answerable to the same, by taking heed to the manifestation of the Spirit,
and the appearances of the Grace of God, given them for that end, that they
might live up in obedience to the same. --

He had likewise a large share of the sufferings of the People of God in his
Day and Age, and did bear his Testimony Faithful for Christ Jesus, whom he
witnessed to be come, the High Priest over the Household of God. And against the
changable Priesthood, as seeing to the end thereof, to the bringing in of the
better hope, whereby all them that believe are brought nigh unto God; and for
the holding of his Testimony with a constant mind, he was exposed to great
Sufferings; but through the assistance of the Almighty God of Jacob, and the
putting on of the Heavenly Armor, he was enabled to pass through them all like
a valiant man; for which everlastingl^ blessed and praised be the Name of the
holy, pure, powerful God, says my Soul. He was a man that was given up to obey
the Lord in what he required of him; neither would he reason with flesh and
blood, but had his eye directed by the Lord, to the recompense of the heavenly
Reward, which I believe was more to him, than all the fading World. Oh, the
remembrance of his Spirit; and the coming up of the same in the endless life,
does often tender my heart. In the time of his weakness of Body, he was very
patient, and often blessing and prasing the Name of the Lord for his favors
and mercy to him through Christ Jesus. And having been in a weak Fit, he said,
Mi^e eye beholds Jerusalem a quiet-Habitation, into the possession whereof, it
is the belief of my heart, God had gathered him, as one of the number of his
Faithful Disciples and Followers, to rest with him in eternal blessedness for
ever and evermore, Amen and Amen, says my Soul,

Thomas Widders.
My Father was about 68 years old when he deceased at his House in Over Kellet,
who was Convinced, and owned the Truth above 34 years; who died the 20th of the
First Month, 1686.



The Testimony of Margaret Fox concerning Robert Widders.
I Have a Real and true Testimony in my heart to bear for my dear Friend and
Brother Robert Widders, who was a Faithful Servant of the Lord, and a good
Soldier under the Banner of Jesus Christ in his Day; he never did shrink nor
sta^^ed aside in no scrive not sufferings, the Lord suffered him to be
exercised in. I have known him, and been conversant with him Thirty four years,
and we were made partakers of the eternal Truth near together, in the beginning
of the infancy of Truth among us, now in out Age, when the Morning Stars Sang
together. He was called forth to the service of the Lord early in this glorious
Day that has ever since shined upon us, glory be to the Son of Righteousness
for ever. He went forth in the power and demonstration of the Spirit, and
turned many unto God early in his Day. He was of a quick understanding, and the
Gift of the Spirit of discerning was plentifully bestowed upon him. And tho he
was not very much in Declaration, yet I know, and many also can bear Witness
and Testimony, that his very presence and countenance, and eye was refreshment
and comfort unto them, and that the witness of God in their hearts would have
answered his appearance, the power of the Lord was so quick and lively in him.
What I write is Sealed in my heart to be true. He was a dear and a faithful
Brother to me, and to my Children, in all our Trials and Sufferings. It is too
much for me to write here, what comfort, strength and assistance he has been
to me and mine, both when we were in Prison and out of Prison; he would not
have failed to come to see us night or day over two dangerous Sands, if it had
been in the deep of Winter, many a time has he done so of his own accord; and
for the most part I have been sensible of his coming before he came, so near
and dear he was unto me. But what shall I say! his Life, and all that ever he
had, was given up freely to the Lord and his service: I believe he never
neglected any service of the Lord, if it was made known unto him, either in
England, or Scotland, or America beyond the Seas. He left his Wife and Family,
and took his Life in his hand and went Joyfully to the service of the Lord. And
when he went first forth into Cumberland and thereawaies, he was beaten, and
stoned, and knocked down. O! the Imprisonments, and cold Winters that he passed
through; so that his body was so starved, that he never quite recovered while he
lived. He gave his back freely to the Smiter upon every occasion, and now in
the latterend of his days, the Tythe-mongers fell upon his outward Estate, and
swept away many of his Goods; and when he had a little more together, the
Tythe-monger and the Informers came again and fetched it away: so that in the
latter end of his days his Sufferings were great, through the Spoilers, who
suffered the spoiling of his Goods joyfully for Christ's sake. -- So that this
good Man has gone through many sorts of sufferings, and now he is gone to his
Rest, and his Father, for whom he has suffered, where he certainly receives
an eternal Reward with a Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into
the Joy of the Lord. -- I was with him in his sickness, and he was as patient
as a Lamb, tho he could take little food, except such as he could drink, so he
passed quietly, and patiently away, and the Lord dealt gently and kindly with
him; and he is now in everlasting bliss and felicity with the eternal God, whom
he served and suffered for.

M. F.

Sarah Bachouse her Testimony of Robert Widders.
THis Testimony did arise in me in tenderness and brokenness of Spirit,
concerning our dear Friend Robert Widders, who has laid down his head in peace
with the Lord. He was a man sincere for God, and did bear a faithful Testimony
for him to the end of his days.

Sarah Bachouse.

Alice Hugginson her Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
THis Testimony arises in my heart as a following stream, and issues out to the
melting of my Spirit, and the refreshing of my Soul with the tendering love of
God in the remembrance of my dear Friend and faithful Brother Robert Widders,
who in his life time amongst us, was a good Example and pattern of holy life,
in and with whom I have often been refreshed, and my heart overcome with the
overcomings of the dear love of God to my Soul, so that I can say, dear Robert,
thou art from us gone, surely for ever to live with the eternal One in Joy and
Peace for evermore. Oh, the heartbreaking tendering love that springs a new and
fresh in me, in the remembrance of him, often refreshes my Soul, being
satisfied that his Memorial in the Truth will never die, nor wear out.

Alice Hugginson.

Anne Camm her Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
I Feel a Concern upon my Spirit to write a few lines concerning my Dear
deceased Friend and Brother Robert Widders; who was a Man that I dearly loved,
and honored in the Truth: for surely he was worthy being Faithful in his day,
and Valiant for the Lord and his blessed Truth. I can truly say, he was Dear
and Precious unto me; one whom I had true comfort in, and refreshment by him in
our converse together; one of the valiants of Israel, I may say he was, that
never turned his back, but stood Faithful and Valiant for the living Truth upon
the Earth, and was a great incourager of all that made profession of the
blessed Truth, to be Faithful to the Lord, and true in their Testimony
thereunto, as he had time and opportunity. Oh! what shall I say, my Soul loved
him dearly: he was a true Friend of mine in the time of my Exercise, his true
care and many tender visits, of which I have many times been a partaker; the
very remembrance hereof makes my heart tender before the Lord, and even pray
unto him, that he would raise up many living Testimony bearers for the
Propagation of his ever lasting Truth; for which this my entirely beloved
Friend and Brother did labor without Weariness, and Travel without Fainting in
his day. Oh! wherewithal shall I take up a Lamentation sufficient for the loss,
or removal of so near a Friend, or amply demonstrate the tender Affection that
ever lived in my heart, since the time I was first acquainted with him;
howbeit, in this is my Spirit comforted, and my Soul has cause to praise the
Lord on his behalf, that is to say, The true sense and consideration of his
unfeigned and innocent life, together with his blessed and comfortable
departure; a few hours before which I was with him, and we were truly refreshed
together by the same heart-tendring power which has often consolated our
Spirits in the days that are past.

And further this Testimony lives in my heart, that the Lord has given him a
Mansion in the fullness of Joy, and set a Crown of Rejoicing upon his head,
where all tears are wiped away, and sorrow ended, where he shall sing praises
to the everlasting God, who sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb, who is
eternally worthy to be glorified for evermore, Amen.

Anne Camm.
Cammsgill, 30 of 3 Mo. 1687.
Thomas Camm his Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
IT was no doubt the serious Observation of a good man of Old, and therefore
recommended unto others, that is to say, to mark the Upright man, especially
his latter end, because it is blessedly accompanied with peace; notwithstanding
that in his Pilgrimage here, he may meet with many troubles, and deep
exercises, yet the Lord his God delivers out of all; of whose faithfulness,
our dear deceased Friend and Brother was a living witness; For tho in his time
he met with manifold Troubles and great Sufferings for the Truths sake, that he
had received in the love thereof, and did bear a Faithful Testimony unto, being
like upright Joseph of Old, sorely shot at, yet his bow still abode in
strength, his Arms being made strong by the Mighty God of Jacob, in whose power
his Faith stood firm unto the end, without either ^ainting or wavering, a good
Example to all that knew him.

And the Memory thereof will live, and be of good savor to Ages to come, For
the Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. It is not with me to
enter into the particulars of his Sufferings, but to leave that to others more
capable. Yet having known him this thirty four years, ever since the Lord
visited us with his Gospel day, that sprung from on high, and broke forth as a
Morning without Clouds, which he with the first in these parts, received with
great Joy and gladness of heart; and in this time have I known most of his
Sufferings, both by way of Imprisonment, and the great spoil of his Goods, both
for his Noble Testimony against the Antichristian Yoke of Tithes, and for
Meeting with the Lord's innocent People to worship the eternal God. I shall in
a general way say, That his sufferings exceeded most that I know, being several
times stripped of much that was within the reach of the wicked Spoilers; But as
his Sufferings and Troubles exceeded, so also did his Christian Constancy and
Valor, well may he be called one of the Valiants of God's Israel. O the
Nobility, the Zeal, the Courage, and resignedness of his Spirit into the Will
of God in his greatest exercises (which fully demonstrated his love to the
Truth, and his regard to the blessed Testimony thereof) has often affected my
Spirit, for I never saw him in the least dejected or concerned, when his
Cattle, Corn, and Household Goods, was, as it were, by Wholesale swept away:
But as one that knew well for what he suffered, and enjoyed the sweetness of an
eternal Rue(...) in heavenly I reasure, in an hundred sold here, together with
(...) of a lassing Crown in Eternity.

Could and had (...) to be as cheerful and well content in the want of those
(...) things, as in the abounding thereof, which he through the (...)ing of
Almighty God had had a large share in, yet like upright Job, he blessed God
that gave, and also permitted them to be taken away. I cannot but with
affection remember his frequent expressions, in dircourse of our or other
Friends Sufferings, as also mention some of them, that is to say, It is well
with all that suffer for Truth's Cause, they are blessed, they enjoy peace.
There is nothing that has come, but there has been need for it, and a service
in it; for all our Sufferings works together for our good, and Gods glory,
and the remainder of the wrath of man will be restrained, etc. And as his
Nobility and Courage was exemplary, and of service to many; so also was his
care and counsel, so that many have cause to bless the Lord on the behalf
thereof. -- I may also add to the Nobility of his Spirit, great Gravity, mixed
with a Lamb-like innocence, which was as a garment of Praise upon him, and made
him right lovely in the eyes of the upright; together with his sound judgment,
clear discerning and savor, whereby a perfect distinction was made betwixt
things of contrary natures, tho under one name or likeness. And as he was
tender to cherish every appearance of good, yet sharp and piercing was his
Testimony against all wickedness and deceit: so that it was hard for workers of
Iniquity or Hypocrites to stand before him, being filled with indignation
against all false-heartedness, deceit and hypocrisy. -- But his very soul was
bound up with the upright in heart, and his Joy made full in the Faithful to
Truths Testimony. And now the Lord whom beloved above all, and feared above the
wrath of Man, and faithfully served in his day, has given him a Crown of
Glory, and a blessed portion in the rest that remains sure for the People of
God, where his manifold sufferings are come to an end, his sorrows ceased, and
all tears for ever wiped from his eyes, being ascended far above the reach of
the wicked one and his Persecutors, where his Spirit lives with Just men made
perfect in Christ our Lord, and with them is, and ever will be of blessed
Memory, having served out his Generation, and attained to a good old Age, and
the honorable Gray Hairs is gathered to Rest in endless G^ory. Amen.

Thomas Camm.
Cammsgill 6 of 4 Mo. 1687.
William Hugginson his Testimony of the Life, and Death, of that ancient Friend
and faithful Brother in the Truth, as it is in Jesus, Robert Widders.
I having had good experience, and knowledge of him near Forty Years, can do no
less, than give a short account of his Godly Life, and holy Conversation he had
amongst us; surely he was a Man of a noble Spirit, endued with a large wisdom
in Heavenly things. -- He had also a deep discerning of the Spirits of men, so
knew right well how to speak to their condition, and that in a right Season;
his words being in the Lise and Power, he has left many living witnesses to
speak forth the same -- And he was a good example in times of Trials and
Sufferings, both in Body and Goods amongst us -- for he had a large share of
both, as does appear in his own Testimony of Sufferings before written; only
this I can say, being of the same Meeting with him, and very intimate, and open
hearted in the things of God, and well knew his care and diligence, both in our
quarterly, monthly, and particular Meetings, and more especially in our great
suffering time by the Informers: His advice was to me, and that very tenderly,
as one said that he became Eyes to the Blind, and Legs to the Lame, and many
precious Exhortations proceeded out of his mouth, to the refreshing and
comforting of the lowest Member, or hindermost of the Flook, and Heritage of
God. He was so tenderly affectioned, that his very Life was given up to serve
the Lord in his day, to strengthen and to stir up the pure Spirit of God in the
very lowest member, so that I was, and am sensible that he answered the mind
and will of God, and did that which was right in his Sight, and laid down his
Head in peace with him. And now the remembrance of that great and dear love
that he had to our Family, often breaks my Heart into tenderenss, and
refreshes my Soul, so that I can say my Family misseth him: -- But to the
Almighty God, we must all submit, to whom be Glory and praise for evermore,
Amen.

And now dear Robert thou art gone, surely living with the Eternal one, in that
heavenly mansion of Rest, and peace for evermore, Amen.

William Hugginson.

Thomas Dockrey his Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
AS for our faithful Friend and Servant of the Lord, Robert Widders: He was
called early of the day of God, when it pleased him to visit his Seed in the
North of England, who in the year 1652. sent his faithful Minister, and joyful
Ambassador, G. F. with others to declare his Name and his Truth, and his
Gospel, and the way of Peace, Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, which indeed
was the greatest joy and satisfaction to many a Soul in these parts, that ever
they met with, who had been seeking after the Lord his peace, power and
presence, which now many has found, and lived in, and has finished their time
and course here, to the laying down of their Heads in peace with God, to whom
be praise for ever.

Robert Widders owned the Truth above 34 years; he was a Man zealous of mind,
and fervent in Spirit, and true in Heart to serve the Lord God faithfully all
his days, after he was turned to the Lord and to his eternal Truth. -- He was
steadfast in Faith, and of a sound judgment, and deep discerning, who visited
many in Sickness of body, and them that were in trouble of Conscience, and had
a true discerning of their spiritual conditions, and could have spoken a word
in season suitable to them: And to those that were innocent, and truly desirous
after good, he was loving and tender, and of a cheerful Countenance. -- But to
the Hypocrites, and false in Heart, he was sharp, and threshing, having the
Spirit of Judgment, so that his Spirit might often have been known by his
Countenance.

But he greatly loved Unity amongst Brethren in the Spirit, and power of the
Lord God. -- And he was one that chosed rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of Sin, and of this world for a
season: For as it may be seen before in this little Book, he was a great
Sufferer both in Imprisonment and spoiling of Goods: For his Testimony to the
Truth, and for keeping his Conscience clear, he was freely given up, and
faithful and true in, and through them all, well knowing that the Doctrine of
Jesus was and is true: Blessed are these that suffer Persecution for
Righteousness sake, theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; and had rather have
suffered much, than that the Lord, and his holy Truth should be dishonored, or
his people evil spoken of.

And now he has finished his course, and kept the Faith, having lived in the
Truth, and dyed in the Lord (Aged about sixty eight years) and blessed are such
for they Rest from their Labor, and their Works follow them; -- And he is gone
as to his natural Life, but his Spirit and Life spiritually yet remains, and
lives; as He that believes in me, said Jesus, has everlasting Life: And this
is the will of him that sent me. That every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting Life, and I will raise him up at the
last day: And he that lives, and believes in me shall never die.

And the Saints in the Apostles days, had a Life hid with Christ in God, who
were come to the Spirits of just men made perfect, to the general assembly, and
Church of the firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven: And to God the
judge of all, to whom all must give account, and who is the just rewarder of
all, according to their deeds done in the Body, be they good or evil. -- And we
that yet remain in the Body, God Almighty keep and preserve us faithful and
true to him, to his Glory, to the end of our days, and to our eternal Peace and
Felicity, Amen.

Thomas Dockrey.

Thomas Jackson his Testimony of Robert Widders.
THis Testimony I have to give, concerning our dear and faithful Friend Robert
Widders. He was a zealous Man, and sincere, for God in his day, and servent in
Spirit always ready, and willing to serve the Lord, wholly resigned thereunto
in Spirit and Body, and Estate, and his Travels, Exercises, Trials and
Sufferings does certify, ever since he was called into the work of the Lord,
and he was called early, and endured the heat of the day. -- And after I came
into acquaintance and fellowship with him, he was a Strength and Comfort to me,
for which I have cause to magnify the Lord on his behalf; for I was sensible
of his labor of Love, and care in the Church of God, that it must be preserved
in Unity as one Body, of which Jesus Christ is head, and that it might be
presented without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing unto God the Father -- He
was a good example, and adorned his profession with a good Conversation, (which
is the substantial part of Religion) He was one of the Valiants in Isruel,
whose Bow abode in strength, and carried perfectly to the mark; his Bow was
bent against Hypocrifie and Deceit, and Unrighteousness; his Feet was shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of Peace: But prepared, and ready to trample upon
that which would have risen in opposition to the Life, and power of Godliness,
though never so fair a show; he was of a good discerning, and found in
judgment, his Countenance very amiable, to those that were faithful to God and
his Truth. -- But terrible to the workers of Iniquity; -- his deportment was
Grace and Comely; I had a reverent esteem of him in my Heart, being one of the
same Meeting with him, he is often fresh in my remembrance, for I have often
been refreshed with his presence: And although his Body be removed from us, yet
his memorial lives with us, and is worthy to be recorded to future Ages; that
by the Foot steps of the Flock of Christ's Companions, many who make a true
enquity after the beloved of their Soul, may come into the fold of Rest, and
lay down their Heads in everlasting peace, as he has done when time here shall
be no more.

Thomas Jackson.

Robert Hubbersty his Testimony concerning Robert Widders
THis loving Testimony I have to bear, for our ancient and well beloved Friend
and Brother Robert Widders, who indeed was a very Fatherly man amongst us, for
so I can truly call him, in respect of his Godly care, and unse^gned love he
had unto the Lords Children and People, for indeed he was one of the Lords
Valiants, who ventured his life freely for the Captain of his Salvation, and
was never weary nor fainted in his service that he required on him, tho he went
many times, as with his life in his Hand to many Steeplehouses, and spoke the
word of the Lord faithfully, both to Priests and People, who often recieved
great abuses from them, and castings into Prisons: But blessed be the Lord for
ever more, who gave him courage and boldness and made him of an undanted
Spirit, that he grew more and more valiant for the Lord, and did bear the
Burden in the heat of the day, and passed through great Sufferings, both in
Body, Prisons and Goods, for bearing his faithful Testimony to the Truth, and
for keeping his Conscience clear in the sight of God. But this good man endured
all with great patience, constancy and cheerfulness. -- Dear Robert, the
remembrance of thee refreshes my Soul, for thou ever preferred the Lords
business before thine own, and was very faithful and valiant for him, and never
lost an Inch of Ground: He was a Man of a quick sight spiritually, of good
discerning, and sound judgment: I speak my own experience of him, and as I took
his Counsel, it always wrought to a good effect. -- He was one that truly
feared the Lord, his delight was in obeying of him, who taught him to live a
Godly life, in this evil World, and has made his latter end everlastingly
blessed. -- And now dear Robert, thou have been an upright man, and has
followed the Lord fully, and has received the Answer of a good and faithful
Servant, and is entered into the joy of the Lord, to reign with him in Glory,
out of the reach of all the Persecutors and greedy Informers: But certainly the
Lord will plead with them in Judgment, who will reward all according to their
deeds, done in the Body and out of the Body, be they good or evil.

Robert Hubbersty.

John Hudson his Testimony of Robert Widders.
THE Testimony that I have to bear for our dear Friend Robert Widders, he was a
Man of a Noble and discerning Spirit, and very weighty in judgment, he was
tender of the young in the Truth, and if any walked disorderly, he was ready to
labor with them for their good, by exhorting them, and would have dealt
plainly with all people, and would have said, that was the purest love that
dealt plainest, and if any was weak, and had a tenderness in them, he was kind
to such, and would have admonished them to mind the Lord, and he would give
them strength over the Enemy; yea, he was a Man that was valiant for the Lord,
and his Truth, as his life and Sufferings does demonstrate, as by
Imprisonments, and spoiling of his Goods for Tithes, and by the Informers: But
in them all still was noble and cheerful, and exhorting Friends to be faithful,
and trust the Lord with all, who was a strength to me in the time of my
Sufferings, when the Informers followed us very hotly, both weekdays, and other
Meetings: dear Robert was very constant, tho weakly of Body, and encouraged
Friends to be faithful to the Lord, and diligent to their Meetings, and the
Lord in mercy did strengthen us, and made us willing to give up for his Name
and Truth-sake, and the Lord has given us peace therein. And tho dear Robert
suffered much by the Tythe-mongers and Informers, yet he was still Noble,
Patient and cheerful, who was so good an Example, as is worthy to be had in
Remembrance. And tho he be removed outwardly to endless Rest with the Lord, yet
his Memorial of good Savor lives with us.

John Hudson.

The Testimony of John Beakbayne concerning Robert Widders.
THis Testimony I have to bear: He was a man quick spirited, and of a cheerful
Countenance; and when the Messengers of the Truth came among us, he was one
with the first in these parts that received them and their Testimony, which he
has faithfully kept and holden, even to the last of his days. He was sharp in
Reproof, gentle in Admonition: his Bow abode in strength; he was as a sharp
Sword to Deceit and Hypocrisy, but as Balm and Oil to help the Tender and
afflicted in Spirit about spiritual things. I being newly Convinced of the
Truth, he was ready to give good Advice to me, and told me, as concerning the
Work of Truth, That there was nothing got but through Judgment, which then I
knew little of: but since has found it the way to Life and Mercy. -- I have
been Prisoner with him several times at Lancaster, and his cheerful
Countenance, and good Example and Advice to Friends, always Ministered strength
and comfort. He was as an Elder, and his presence was encouraging. -- And tho
he be gone as to the outward man, yet his Life and Spirit is in our
Remembrance. His Sufferings were great, yet he never did shrink what ever Storm
or Tempest came, but followed Christ Jesus his Captain through sufferings
patiently, and has obtained an eternal Reward, where the Spoilers cannot come.

John Beakbayne.

Robert Barrow his Testimony of Robert Widders.
O It is freshly in my mind the many comfortable days and sexsons of Love that
we have had together in the enjoyment of God's Power and Presence, in our
Spiritual exercise from time to time. Within this 34 years since (...) Lord our
God brought (...) ^o believe in his N^me, and ma^^ (...), whereby Redemption
from the evil of the World is known, and the freeing virtue of the eternal
Truth witnessed. -- And when I consider his sincerity and-zeal, he was always
concerned for the Testimony of Jesus, for the promoting of the glorious Gospel
Worship, and for the good of the Brotherhood; in which heavenly exercise the
Lord did endue him with wisdom, and gave him a discerning eye, and the Spirit
of a sound mind and true judgment, in the Authority and Dominion of which he
was made bold and valiant for the Truth of God upon earth; and therein was a
terror to Evildoers where ever he came of all sorts, as Priests, hypocritical
Professors, and profane or Will-worshippers of any kind. -- And if any had been
overtaken with a fault (as the Apostle said) he would have endeavored to have
restored them with the Spirit of Meekness, good Advice, and sound Judgment; and
he would have said our God has put us upon a Spiritual Travel, and ought not
to leave a Hoof in Egypt; he was a a strength and encourager to the Faithful.
-- And as concerning his Travels in godly Zeal for the Truths sake, both in
England, Scotland, and some parts of America, tho his Gift was not much in
Declaration, yet he had the word of Wisdom, discerning and sound Judgment: good
Advice and Admonition to Friends, and for the establishing them in the Faith
and Truth of God, where ever he came; and herein the Lord prospered his Work,
and labor of Love in his service. And he was faithful in his Testimony against
Tithes, the Hirling Priests, and Impropriators, and was a great sufferer by
them. -- And was faithful and zealous, for meeting to Worship God in the Spirit
and in the Truth as Christ Jesus set it up above sixteen hundred years since,
tho for standing his Testimony herein. He was a Sufferer; but in all these
exercises he was valiant and steadfast, and the Lord God did bear up his head,
and through the enjoyment of Gods power and presence, he was content in every
condition; of a cheerful mind and good example.

And when weakness of Body attended him, and the time of his departure drew
hear, his love to God, and good will to his Brethren filled his heart with
tenderness and heavenly comfort, in the feeling sense of which, I with other
Friends being present, was made glad in the Lord on his behalf, for he talked
with me very sensibly within unto hours of his departing; at which time I was
assured he was Reodtemed from the Earth, and quit of all Worldly trouble and
care, and in the enjoyment of the seasoning Grace, and sanctifying power of
God, he has ceased from his Labor, and left a good savor behind him, and
laid down his Head in peace. -- This being the sense, and Testimony of one of
his old acquaintance, the blessed Truth and Unity of the peaceable Spirit of
Life.

Robert Barrow.

James Tailor his Testimony of Robert Widders.
THis is a short but true account of the faithfulness, and innocence of Robert
Widders, being with him some months to visit Friends, both in prison, and out
of prison, in Cheshire, Darbyshire, Yorkshire, Bishopric, often meeting with
hardships in the way, it being in Winter, wicked people would take up Stones,
and roll them in Snow, and cast them at us: And in all this time and travel,
dear Robert was still meek and harmless, yet noble and valiant for the Truth of
God. -- And I am satisfied that my faithful and well beloved Friend is entered
into everlasting Rest, Joy and Peace, where I hope e're long to be also.

This is written in much weakness of Body, by me James Tailor, who is since
Dead.

James Lancaster his Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
THis Testimony I have concerning our dear Friend, and my fellow Traveller in
the Service of God, late deceased, at his own House at Kellet in Lancashire,
yet lives in the Spirit in our remembrance of his works and labor of love,
with us in out Service all along, as we traveled in the Truth; soon after it
appeared amongst us, being well informed in our selves by a Messenger of God,
sent of him into our North Country, calling us out of the worlds worships and
forms, and likenesses, to the substance, Jesus Christ, etc. his Light within
Gods Covenant, so came our peace made manifest within, in our Hearts, Souls,
Minds and Spirits, and so came to know what did belong to our peace in that day
of our Visitation from on high from God, by his Light, Grace and Spirit within,
and so were called to go to our neighboring County, called Cumberland, that
they might come to the same, the Light of Christ Jesus within; in whom and by
whom we found that, which we had lost in Adam in the fall, through disobedience
to God, we found Souls, Life and Peace. -- This was our message all along in
that County: And afterward in Scotland, in Northumberland, Bishopric,
Yorkshire, and in our own County Lancashire, and in several Counties in
England, with London City, and were well refreshed, meeting with our Brethren
there, who had been in the same work with us, and had our reward from God and
Life, and peace in our own Bosoms, that which will last and endure, and abode
with us in all forms and tempests, great and high Winds, made great Tossings,
and put great fears upon many: But blessed everlastingly be the Name of our
God, in which we first believed, and went out; none of these things did move
us, so that we might finish our course, and testings, as he my dear Brother and
fellow Traveller has done and ended his days in peace: And I farther give in my
Testimony concerning our dear Brother Robert Widders, who was a Man as my self,
stricken in years, yet was willingly given up at the requirings of the Lord, as
to go into some parts of America, where we arrived at Barbados in seven weeks
time, where we visited our Friends and Brethren in the Truth, and from thence
he with other Friends passed to Jamaica, and was very serviceable there, and
from thence Robert Widders with other Friends passed to Virginia, and so to
Maryland; after that Robert with other Friends passed through the Wilderness,
to East and West Jersey, Long Island, New York, and so by several Islands to
Rhode-Is^and, and New England, where we had many precious meetings amongst
Friends: And after our Service was performed in New England with much
difficulty, Robert Widders with other Friends, returned through the Wilderness
to Virginie, and Maryland again, and had good Service there in our Journey,
where many were turned from the dumb Idol, Shepherds to serve the living God in
the Spirit and in the Truth: And so with much hardship in the Wilderness,
having nodwelling places to lay our Heads in, but in the open wilderness,
several Nights lodged among the Indians and Savage Creatures, who did roar and
make a noise, when we had kindled a Fire to w^rm us with Sticks -- Also we
passed through some parts of Pensilbania, as now so called, where was some Deans
and Swedes, which entortained us quietly, and so to Maryland as abovesaid. --
And when we had done our service for God in diverse parts of America, from
Maryland (having taken leave of our Brethren) we came for Old England our
Native Country, through the mercy of God, and was glad to meet with our ancient
Brethren in the Unity of the Truth, both in London and several parts of this
Nation, who received us in love, and we them, each having our reward from God
of well doing; who was, and is the deliverer, keeper and preservet of his
people, throughout all Ages, to him be Praise, Honor and Glory for ever, Amen.

James Lancaster.

Richard Lancaster his Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
AS for our dear Brother in the Lord, Robert Widders deceased, this little
Testimony rose in my heart to bear for him. He was a man of a clear
understanding, and sound in Judgment in the things that pertains to the way and
worship of the Lord. And as I may truly say, he was as one of the Ancients of
Israel, who followed the Lord fully whilst he had a day on this side the Grave:
for his innocent life and blameless Conversation did adorn his profession, and
brought honor to the Lord, and now everlasting Joy and Felicity is his Reward.
-- For indeed he was a wise man, who built upon the sure Foundation that
endures for ever, for all the Storms and Winds could not shake this true man,
who has many times been Tried diverse ways, and yet never did shrink. So my
desire to the Lord is, that in his Footsteps of Truth I may walk, which is of
more worth than bare talk.

Richard Lancaster.

G.F 's Testimony concerning Robert Widders.
MAny here are the Testimonies of the Sufferings, and Travels of our Dear
Brother Robert Widders, both of his Neighbors and Friends that very well knew
him, and his faithfulness to the Lord, and his Godly Conversation which became
the Gospel of Christ, which he did profess; who in his Day, was as a Son of
Thunder against Sin, Wickedness and Unfaithfulness in People that did not walk
according to what they professed. After that he was turned from the Darkness, and
to the Light the Life in Christ, and from the power of Satan to God. He was
very Valiant for his Name and Truth, and often did Jeopardy his Life for the
same, for I knew him all along from his Convincement; and he often Traveled
with me, and in great hardships many times: He Traveled with me into Scotland,
and several times I was had before the Governors, and he abode with me, and
did not forsake me. And when I was had before Oliver's Council at Edinburgh in
Scotland, and they Banished me out of Scotland, he was with me; and also when I
was Banished out of Johnsons in Scotland, and put over the Water with a Company
of Soldiers, he was one that was Banished out of the City with me, and many
hardships both in Scotland and England, and other places he went through with
me, but the Lord's eternal Arm and Power did support us. And when B^^th's Army
was up, he was made to ride among them with a Twig in his Hand, and told them,
The Lord with his Rod of Iron would break them to pieces; and the Lord
preserved his Life among them, but they took his Horse from him, and in a few
days after they were all broken to pieces, and scattered.

And about 1670. he Traveled with me into America, Barbados, Jamaica, Virginia
and Maryland, and through the Wilderness to Long Island, and from thence to
Rhode Island, and many other places; and likewise back again from Rhode Island
through the Wilderness to Maryland, lying in the Woods, whether it was Winter
or Summer many times, through great perils and danger of wild Beasts, and Men
Eaters, but the Lord carried us by his Arm and Power over all, and out of the
fear of all. And many blessed and precious Meetings we had both among Friends
and Friendly People, and the Indian Emperors, Kings, and Councils of their
People. And the Lord by his power preserved us from the Pirates and Robbers on
the Sea, who were very many at that time, and brought him well home to his
Wife. And he was both an Elder and Pillar, and one of God's Valiants in his
heavenly Israel, who died in the Divine, Holy, and Precious Faith, which was
his Victory in all his inward and outward Sufferings, who did not account his
Life dear for Christ's sake, as knowing that they that Die with him, shall Live
with him; and they which Suffer with him, shall Reign with him, and blessed are
they that die in the Lord, they Rest from their Labor, and their Works follow
them, as certainly this Faithful Robert Widders did; and tho the loss of his
outward presence to his dear Wife and Family is great, yet they may be glad in
the Lord they enjoy him in the Spirit; For Christ said, He that believes in
me, tho he were dead, yet he shall Live (mark Live) and whosoever Lives and
believes in me, shall never die, John 11.25, 26. For he that believes in
Christ has eternal and everlasting Life, a Life in Christ that shall never
die, tho they do put off their outward Tabernacle or Earthly House, Yet they
know they have a Building of God, a House not made with hands, Eternal in the
Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. And of this I do believe our dear Friend and Brother Robert
Widders had an Assurance; and so I am satisfied that he is well in the Lord:
Unto Him for ever be Glory, who is, and has been, and will be the Support,
Succor. Refresher, Strength, and Upholder of all his People: Glory over all be
unto Him and His Holy Name forever. Amen.

G. F.

THE END.

