THE LAMB CALLING HIS Followers TO Retirement.

Being an Humble Enquiry into the duty of Churches, Ministers, and all that
fear the Lord, under the present dispensation of God.

By one that would be found (though unworthy) the Lords Witness and Servant,
and of all his SAINTS.

1 COR. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time, Printed in the year, 1662.

TO THE READER.
THe different apprehensions of the People of God in this day, concerning their
present duty, (being cut off from their public liberties of Worship) gave
occasion to the ensuing Enquiry; some judging it of absolute necessity to
assemble openly, though they expose themselves (or at least their Teachers) to
the utmost hazard; others, that Retirement is that which the present
dispensation calls for, which later this brief Discourse endeavors to prove,
as justifiable from the Scripture, and the practice of the People of God in
former Ages, but more especially to be the voice of the Lord to his people in
the present day, in which there is a concurring judgment of many.

But that Retirement which is first called to, namely, unto the Lord Jesus
himself (which is briefly pressed in the former part) is that which is commended
to all, as absolutely necessary, as ever they expect to be found under his wing
at his coming and appearing; and, Reader, hear the call of Jesus Christ
therein, that thou may lay up thy immortal soul with him, that when storms
are coming upon the World, thou may be found in thy Sanctuary, in thy
Chambers of Rest and Safety, where they shall not reach thee.

As to the Case of Retirement from open Assembling, it is plainly stated from
Scripture evidence, as is humbly apprehended, wherein if there be not enough
said to satisfy a doubting Conscience, yet, at least, there may be sufficient
to engage humble and sober minds to a mutual forbearance.

The duties of all Saints, under this Retirement, are but briefly hinted,
because of brevity, and in that they have been more at large pressed by the
Servants of God, in the two years of mercy we have enjoyed (as the peculiar
blessing of this City) to the honor of the Lord Jesus, the establishment of
the Saints in the faith and worship of the Gospel, and in the Resurrection of
the Cause of the Kingdom of Christ in these Nations, the vindicating and
asserting whereof, has, as is hoped, left a gracious and powerful impression
and savor upon the Spirits of the Lords people, that so they may be found the
more quietly submitting to the dispensation of the Lord, as blessedly
established in the forementioned truths, and may (in those holy principles in
which they have been built up) continue in a more private way, edifying one
another in love, as those (in this their retirement) that are waiting for the
speedy return of their Lord, that when he comes he may find them so doing. This
you may do, as under the wings of the Almighty, in a probable security, and not
hasten your selves into your own sufferings, and if the providence of God,
single out any of you to a suffering testimony, in the loss of liberty, or
goods, or to banishment, verily, you will know the tender heart of Jesus Christ
toward you, and his faithfulness in making up all to you and yours, and that
in this life, a hundred fold.

Be quiet you Captives of hope, for, in returning and rest shall ye be saved,
in quietness and confidence shall be your strength; And though the Lord give
you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy
Teachers be removed into corners any more, but thine EYES SHALL SEE THY
TEACHERS. Do not think that the Lord is now at the end of twenty years work,
and that the present dispensation is the last issue of all his glorious
providence, you have sometime believed that the Exaltation of the Lord Jesus
would be the issue of all the shakings the Lord has made in these Nations, and
you have as great, if not a greater ground to abide in the same Faith as ever;
Take heed of a bewildred Spirit under the dark providence the Lord is leading
us, but consider what the Lord has been doing, and what work has been upon
the wheel, and by faith labor to look to the end of the Lord, and you will be
able quietly to wait for him.

I wish the Case in hand had been stated by an abler hand, but finding nothing
herein, I have found my Spirit (often looking for light from the Father of
lights) drawn out to cast in this mite, to the present Generation of the
righteous, as hoping that the voice of the Lamb is in it, in the main scope of
it; And though, it may be, in what is hinted about the death of the witnesses,
I may differ from some of the Lords Servants, yet I promise my self their
forbearance, it being an hour of enquiry, and we would be all glad to know the
mind of Christ in our day. Something more may be offered to consideration to
clear those hints, and of the nature of the Kingdom of Christ in this World, if
the Lord permit. Now the blessed God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
preserve all his in this hour of temptation, and lead us into his whole
Counsel and Will, to whose immutable grace I commend thee, in the patient
waiting for Zions Redemption,

The 25. of the 5. Month, 1662. Resting, Thy Brother and Fellow Servants in the
Patience of Christ.

ESAIAS 26. 20. Come my People enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors
about thee; hide thy self, as it were, for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast.
THE special Wisdom of the People of God in all Generations, under the variety
of his dispensations, has been to know what the Lord has spoken, and called
his People to, under them, in the knowledge of which has been bound up their,
mercy and peace in every Generation.

All their miscarriages have been for want of attending hereunto, either in a
day of peace and outward blessing, or in a day of affliction and judgment. The
safety of this people to whom this word was spoken, Enter into thy Chambers,
etc. did lie in the obedience thereof at that day, which let us a little more
particularly consider.

This Prophet, though many years before the day of it, spoke of the Captivity
of Judah, and also of her return and restoration, with the blessings that
should attend it, which restoration he more at large begins to discover at the
14. Chap. For the Lord will have mercy upon Jacob, and will yet choose Israel,
and set them to their own Land, etc. Upon which, the Prophet having denounced
the burden of the Lord against Babylon, Chap. 13. threatens all other Nations
to the 25. Chap. that but helped in or rejoyed at the day of his Peoples
Captivity, as Moab, and Syria, and Egypt, and Tire, etc.

As is more generally expressed, chapter 17. 12, 13, 14. Woe to the multitude of many
people, which make a noise, like the noise of the seas, and to the rushing of
Nations, that make a rushing of mighty waters; But God shall rebuke them, and
they shall flee afar off, and shall be chased as the chafe of the Mountains
before the wind, and like a rouling thing before the whirlewind; what is the
reason of all this? why, This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot
of them that rob us; The restoring and salvation of Judah was accompanied with
the distress of all the Nations round abount her, and with the utter ruin of
the Babylonish Monarchy, set forth, chap. 29.

The great revolutions and periods of all the Nations of the World, have been
the issues of the Captivity or Deliverance of the people of God, and God has
governd the World in subserviency thereunto.

The Prophet having thus spoken of Jacobs deliverance, and the great
Earthquake of the Nations that should accompany it, At the 25, 26, and 27.
chap. you have songs of praise referring to that day, mixed with promises of the
Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Knowledge, Light, Peace, and Glory that
should be the issue of the dispensation of grace by him to the Jews and
Gentiles, even all the Nations of the Earth in this 26. chap. You have the song
of praise continued, specially respecting Judahs gathering, magnifying the
power of the Lord in her salvation, and in the ruin of Babylon, v. 4, 5. their
posture in their captivity, v. 8. lo we have waited for thee, etc. Their
visiting the Lord in their distress, and powering out prayer before him, v.
16, 17, 18. At the 18th. verse they are brought in complaining, that they had
been in pangs, yet had wrought no deliverance in the Earth, neither had the
Inhabitants of the World fallen; At the 19. verse, the Lord by the Prophet
gives an answer, that though in their Captivity they did lie as dead men, yet
verse 19. Thy dead men shall live, etc. Awake and sing ye that dwell in the
dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the Earth shall cast out her
dead; Thy resurrection from this Captivity and Death, shall be as the herbs
that lie dead in Winter, but shall revive and spring forth again by the dews of
the spring upon them, in the mean time, the Lord calls them to retire, and
promises to secure them; Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, etc.

Where, 1. You have the tender and affectionate invitement and call of God,
come my People, whatever the World speaks of thee, and makes thee as an
outcast, yet still my People, precious in my sight, under my eye and care,
though no man cares for thee; No matter if all the Nations of the World say,
go you outcasts, if the Lord say, come my people.

2. Where, and to what he calls, enter in thy Chambers, retire thy self as into
thy strong hold for safety; and shut thy door about thee, as when men retire
into their houses from a storm, and shut their doors; further amplified, Hide
thy self, how long? but for a little moment, till the indignation be over past.
Their crying out in pangs, their powering out of prayer, engaged the Lord to
full mercy. 1. To hide them under the indignation. 2. To hasten to their
Salvation, and that speedily, it shall be but for a moment. Then will the Lord
come out of his place, and that to admiration and astonishment; for behold his
appearance shall be wonderful and glorious, in the season of it, and the manner
of it; He will punish the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Earth shall
disclose her blood, the blood of his Servants, spilt as water upon the ground
by the Babylonians,) and shall no wise cover her slain; Thus you have the words
with their coherence opened.

The special thing I would take notice of (in order to the discovery of the
mind and call of Christ to his Saints at this day) is the Lords calling of them
into their Chambers, to shut their doors, to hide themselves; which expressions
denote this one thing in the general, namely, Retirement, which I shall give
forth, in one observation, naturally and clearly decuced, as the scope of the
Holy Ghost in them.

Ob. The Lord Jesus Christ in his providential Dispensations sometimes calls
his People to Retirement.

That I may more particularly discover what I mean by Retirement.

Jesus Christ calls his people to retire. 1. Within himself. 1. As to all
manner of Protection.

2. As to more close and intimate Communion.

2. He calls them to Retirement, as to Public services, and administrations.

1. He calls them to retire under his shade for Protection; so he was said to
spread his wings over his People, as an Eagle does over her young ones, in the
Wilderness of old, Deuteronomy. 32. And in the day of the Nations wrath, when in a
confederacy against his people, they are called his hidden ones, Psalm. 83. They
consult, but it is against thy hidden ones; and so that precious word of grace,
where the Lord holds out his arms to his poor ones in a stormy day, Esaias 4. 6.
There shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and
for a place of refuge, and for a cover from storm and from rain.

So Chapter 25. 4. (And let them be words of faith, to all Saints) for thou have
been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge
from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible one is
against the wall, chapter 32. 2. A man (the man Christ Jesus) shall be as a hiding
place from the wind, and a Cavert from the tempest.

And thus the Saints in stormy times bespeak the Lord, and have fled into him
as their refuge and hiding place; So David often, keep me as the apple of thine
eye, hide me under the shadow of the wings, Psalm. 17. 8. Thou shall hide them
in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou shall keep them
secretly in a pavillion, Psalm. 31. 8. In the time of trouble he shall hide me
in his Pavillion, in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall
set me upon a Rock, Psalm. 27. In the shadow of thy wings will I make my
refuge, until these Calamities be overpast, Psalm. 57. 1. Of which David in all
his persecutions and wanderings, had abundant and sweet experience in the review
and recollection of which he breaks forth into the praises of the Lord, his
heart being warmed with the sense of the Lords goodness and love, Psalm. 18. I
will love thee, (or I will dearly love thee) Oh Lord my strength, the Lord my
Rock, my Foriress, and my Deliverer, my God, my Strength in whom shall I trust,
my Buckler, and the hope of my Salvation, and my High-Tower.

Upon which experience he gives forth, everlasting words of grace for all the
People of God to trust upon in all Generations, as Psalm. 9. 9. The Lord also
will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble, Psalm. 91. 1,
2. He that dwells in the secret places of the Most High, shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty, with many more words to the same purpose, The Lord
at that day of indignation from the house of Saul and all the mighty men of
Israel, against David and such as did adhere to him, calling David to retire as
into his chambers, from the storm that was against him, till the indignation
was overpast, and the Lord hid him from the wrath of man, as has been showed.

Of the same import is that word, Prove. 11. 10. The Name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, and the righteous runs into it and are safe. There are three
Names of God to which his people in a day of indignation fly unto.

The name of his Goodness; that Name which the Lord made known and proclaimed
to Moses, after the People of God had sinned, and Moses had cried to him for
the forgiveness of their sin, and begs his presence may go with them; I will
make (says the Lord) all my goodness to pass before thee, Exodus 33. 19. and
chap. 34. 6. The Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed. The Lord God
Merciful and Gracious, long suffering, abundant in goodness, in truth, etc. So
when David pleads with God in his distress, Psalm. 89. the argument of Faith
is, v. 5. For thou Lord art good, and therefore ready to forgive, etc. and when
he flies unto God, Psalm. 31. he makes this as the wing of God, the Name of his
goodness, verse. 19. Oh how great is thy Goodness thou have laid up for them
that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the
sons of men, thou shall hide them, etc. And Psalm. 144. My Goodness, my
Fortress, and my high Tower, etc. not only my good good, but goodness it self,
etc. Yea this Name of God that he proclaimed to Moses, was as the great refuge
of the Saints in the day of their distress, and which they urged upon him, as
Psalm. 86. and 103. and 145. and Neh. 9. 17. 31* because in all Generations he
would be known to his people by this Name, and by Faith they were to live upon
it, in all their difficulties; The Lord abundant in goodness, and mercy, and
truth, etc. And when Judah was going into captivity, the Lord offers himself to
them by this Name if they would turn unto him, and commands Jeremiah to
proclaim it, as it was proclaimed it, as it was proclaimed before Moses, Jer.
3. 12. Go and proclaim these words toward the North, and say, Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause my anger to come upon
you, (or to settle upon you,) for I am merciful, etc. A heartbreaking word, if
that people had hearkened to it.

To this Name of the Lord do his people retire for shelter and refuge in an
evil day, though they have sinned against him; we have sinned, yet the Lord is
infinitely good, and therefore ready to forgive, Who is like unto him, a God
pardoning iniquity, Micah 7. And therefore where ever the Lord gives out
promises of help and deliverance to his People from captivity and destresse,
he also annexeth free promises of grace, in abundant forgiveness, Esaias 43.
16, 17. speaking of the glorious Salvation of his people; though they had
wearied them with their iniquities, verse 24. yet I even I am he that blotteth
out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, see
chapter 24. 22. see Jeremiah 33. 5, 6, 7. Behold I will bring it health and
cure, and I will cure them, (though a wounded, broken, scattered people) and
will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth, and verse 8. I will
cleanse them from all the iniquity whereby they have sinned against me, and I
will pardon all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me, and
whereby they have transgressed against me; though Against me, (thrice repeated)
against all my kindness to them, and my often Salvation of them, yet I will
cleanse them, and though they are become a reproach to all Nations, yet it
shall be to me a Name of joy, a praise and honor, before all the Nations of
the Earth; See Jeremiah 51. 5. for Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of
his God, of the Lord of hosts, though their land was filled with sin against
the holy One of Israel. Under these wings of grace thus spread forth in
precious promises, do a poor, sinful, broken people shelter themselves, in
humbling and turning to the Lord, and they are safe, this being the great
Covenant Name of God they fly to, and take hold of in all their sins and
distresses.

Secondly, the People of God retire into the Name of his Almightiness, Psalm.
91. 1. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide, (or
lodge as in a house of defense) under the shadow of the Almighty, etc. As a God
infinitely able to preserve and keep safe all the concernments of soul and
life, that his people commit to him, able to save in, and out of all
distresses, from every snare of the Devil, from the wrath of man, as Paul, 2
Timothy 1. 12. For I know when I have believed, and am persuaded that he is
Able to keep what I have committed to him, etc.

Thirdly, The Name of the Lords Everlastingness, sameness, unchangeableness, is
a Refuge to retire to; Abraham called on the Name of the Lord, the Everlasting
God, Genesis the 21. the last verse. So the Lord comfort his people, Esaias
40. 28. Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary,
etc. So the People of God in their Plea, Esaias 63. 16. Thy name is from
Everlasting, etc. And Psalm. 102. Where is set forth a day of sore indignation
and distress, as verse 10. Thou have lifted us up, and cast us down, etc. What
is their stay and Refuge in such a case, why this, verse 12. But thou, oh
Jehovah shall endure for ever. And ver. 27. But thou art the same, etc. And
though we perish, thou art the same; Thou art the same in thy Covenant, mercy
is from everlasting and to everlasting, etc. The same in goodness, pity, and
wisdom, and power, the faithful God, that keep Covenant and Mercy for ever,
as good to save as ever thou wast, and as able to save; so he strengthens and
comforts his People with the discovery of his Name, Mallachi 3. 6. For I am the
Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Let the state
of the people of God be what it will, there is support in this, Thou Lord art
still the same; we have known what thou have been to thy people in days of
old, and what thou have done for them; Oh, where are thy former loving
kindnesses, etc. The Covenant of God with his people is built as upon two
Pillars, Mercy and Faithfulness, Psalm. 89. 2. For I have said, Mercy shall be
built up for ever, thy faithfulness shall thou establish in the very Heavens; I
have made a Covenant with my chosen, etc. Under these two does David shelter,
as the Wings of the Cherubims, 57. 1, 2. God shall send forth his Mercy and
Truth, and shall save me, Mercy to pity and forgive, Faithfulness to fulfill
his Word, here is a safe shelter for Saints; in every strait David, and other
of the people of God, get under these Wings of God, and are at peace; David
near twenty times in the Psalms is putting these two together, thy Mercy and
thy Truth shall prevent me, and in them I trust; If all the Mercy of God, and
all the Truth and Faithfulness of God be my portion, what need I fear? here is
sweet and safe retirement for Saints in an evil day.

But how do poor Souls retire into this Blessed Name of God, a Merciful,
Almighty, Unchangeable God, as a Rock for them.

1. By seeing thorough the Light of the Spirit, the Emptiness and Vanity of all
other refuges, that nothing below an unchangeable God of all Grace, through
Jesus Christ, can be a refuge for a Naked and Forlorn Soul, in Psalm 62. David
mentions two things, which the heart is apt to make a reguge, Men and Riches,
verse. 9, 10. of both these he says, they are a lie, and vanity; And, if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them; do not think them a meet refuge for you
in any day, specially a day of distress; if neither the sons of men nor riches
be a shelter, then, in God, says David, is my Salvation and my Glory, the rock
of my strength and my refuge is in God; Yea, He only is my Rock, v. 6. seel
Psalm. 142. 4, 5. I looked, etc. v. 4. And what did he see? Why, Refuge failed
him, every refuge was too low, too short, too weak, to shelter him, here was
conviction of nothing but emptyness in them, vanity upon them all; What then?
why, verse. 5. I said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion, there is that in
Jesus Christ to ensafe me and satisfy me (the two great ends to which the soul
moves in all its desires) now I have them not in Creatures, they cannot be a
refuge, not a portion, but God in Christ is both, is All, This is a conviction
we should pass under every day.

2. We retire into this Blessed Name of the Lord, by Faith, He is a Rock,
Psalm. 62. the Rock of Ages, or the Everlasting Rock, nothing below himself is
so; Faith sees him so, as a sinking man in the Waters sees a Rock, and makes to
it, and sees him only, he only is my Rock; Now here is the ensafeing Act of
Faith, it can lay up all concernments of Soul and Life, with an unchangeable
God; here I adhere, fasten, cleave; Oh, O that Blessed Glorious Name, a
Gracious, Almighty or All-sufflcient, and Unchangeable Savior, in the day of
my trouble. Oh set me on this Rock, that is higher then I, Psalm. 61. 2. Then
let Waves and Billows beat against me, they may break themselves, but shall
never break the Rock; I shall not be moved, Psalm. 62. That's the stability faith
gives the Soul, let Sins, Temptations, Troubles, beat against me, I shall not
be moved; thus Faith can triumph at all times. Trust in him at all times, God
is a refuge for us; In shaking times, in dying times, all is safe with him, yea
when the Heart is overwhelmed and desolate, Faith thus relieves and fetches up
the Heart in all its sinkings; let the Soul see a storm coming, away it hastens
into its Refuge, into the Chambers of strength, and shuts its door, till it be
overpast.

Because this is the Work of Saints, and the call of the Lord to them at this
day; Consider it a little further.

First, Jesus Christ presents himself to a poor soul as an open refuge, let the
sin, burden, distress, inward or outward be what it will, this door of Grace
stands open, the sinners of the World pass by it, and will not enter (the more
their misery) but poor souls that are beaten out of one hold, after another and
see at last this door of hope opened, in the valley of Darkness and Fears runs
into it; unbelief would draw the Soul back, Satan would shut the Door against
it, but the soul ventures (and venture it must or sink and perish) and gets
into Christ, and he holds out a hand, and bears it up, opens Blood, and
Righteousness, and Grace, and bids the soul make use of it; and here the Soul
retires every day, under this shelter it is driven, and it can be quiet and safe
no where else, if the heart be stealing out else where, to other shelters in
the World, or of its own, Satan's World and Conscience set upon it; And the Soul
flies back, and gets into its strong hold again; No living safely else where;
Now Jesus Christ is an open refuge, in every precious word of free Grace, Esaias
55. 1. Rev. 21. 6. 22. 17. etc. which words Believers see as a blessed safe
Retirement, when they are stormd out of every thing else, and evidences are
bemisted.

Secondly, Jesus Christ presents himself a sure refuge for Souls to Retire
into; He sprinkles blood, casts a Mantle of Righteousness, a Mantle of Love,
and Grace, and Power, over the soul that gets into him, and who then can harm
it? Guilt, and Sorrows, and Temptations, and Pressures, can follow the soul to
the Door, but cannot enter with it; He is near that justifies, who then shall
contend? Esaias 50. 8. there is safety. It Is true, the soul is not always
apprehensive of its own safety, but has its fits of Fears and Mis-givings,
through Temptation and Unbelief, as in David's Case (and mark it) Psalm. 31. 22.
For I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless thou
heardest the voice of my Supplication when I cried unto thee, here was sad
Apprehension, -- I am cut off, (though he had words of Promise to the contrary)
but yet he cried to the Lord in that distemper, but what, did the Lord cast him
off, because of that mixture of unbelief? No, nevertheless he heard and saved
him; a Case of great relief for Dark, Doubting Souls. So that Jesus Christ is a
safe, sure, strong, impregnable shelter, all the World cannot get a soul out of
it, all is safe there.

Obj. But may not my life go for it, for all this?

Answer, That which is indeed thy life, the life of thy soul, the immortal
life, that is most safe hid (or laid) with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. Because I
live, you shall live also, John 14. your life is as safe as my life, it is bound
up with my own, yea it is the same with my own, the life I live, I live in you.
As Christ lives in the Father, so Believers live in him, and have their life
fed in him, and from him, and therefore they shall never die, but have Eternal
Life; What more? Then to live for ever, and so to live for ever, as Christ
himself lives, surely that's a Blessed, Safe, and Glorious Life; This is your
Life.

But secondly, If Jesus Christ will use thy natural life in all the
concernments of it, who shall reach thy life? Not the World, not all the
Persecutions of it, no nor thy liberty neither; Jesus Christ has charged
himself with both, and all the interests of thy life, he will order thy race,
and every step thereof, to that end in which he will most be glorified in thee,
and theresore be putting it by faith into his hand every day; and say as Jesus
Christ himself did, in the interest of his life, Father Glorify thy Name; John
12. 29. This was when our Dear Savior (as a man) was solicitous about his
life, and his soul was troubled, and cries, save me from this hour, verse. 27.
but yet bows to the Will of his Father, Glorify thy Name.

No man shall touch thy life, till thou shall say, I have finished the Work
that my Father gave me to do, John 17. 4. So that Jesus Christ has charged
himself with the care of thy life, liberty and all the interests thereof, as
well as with the precious life of thy Soul.

Thirdly, the loosing thy life, is the saving and finding of it, as to life
Eternal; the death of thy natural life, makes way for the True, Spiritual,
Immortal, Glorious life, The cutting off this momentary life, issues in a
higher and more excellent life, so that there can be no miss of it, faith sees,
a life in death, and that by it Mortality is swallowed up of life; Thus Jesus
Christ is a shelter to thy life.

And so I have opened how Jesus Christ calls his Saints to retire into himself,
by way of safety and protection.

Secondly, Christ calls his own to retire into a more intimate communion with
him, in a time of indignation, when storms are up.

The second Thing.

2. This call of Jesus Christ into a more intimate Communion with him, should
blessed souls attend to in such a day; into the Chambers of his Presence; so
Song of Solomon, chap. 1. 9. Draw me, we will run after thee, the King has
brought me into his Chambers, we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will
remember thy love, more then Wine, the upright love thee; there is sweet and
intimate communion.

Now how does the Lord bring a soul to this?

Answer, Jesus Christ shows himself to the soul, in a greater Beauty and Glory,
then a soul had seen him before, and thereby Humbles, Empties, and Awakens,
brings it lower, and to be viler in its own eyes, takes down all the high
thoughts and conceits of it self, makes the Soul know its own poverty, whereby
it becomes less then the least of all Saints, renders pride, and passion, and
selfishness, and temerity, and censoriousness, and hypocresie, with all fleshly
corruptions, more abominable and loathsome, and the soul abhors it self in the
dust (too good for it) and is burdened, and groans under the
pressuresmentioned, cries and mourns after, a further cleansing, healing, and a
more precious conformity to Jesus Christ, cries out for the Spirit, for
Holiness, for Light and Strength, and cannot live without them; this is the way
to more intimate communion, here is a Vision of the Lord Jesus, in his
Holiness, Beauty, and Glory, that renders the Soul thus infinitely vile in it
self, and draws out such a panting after him; Then it has further Attractives
of love, -- We will remember thy love more then Wine; Then, how Free, how
Precious, how Eternal, how Glorious is the Lords love to a worthless wretch,
whose sin is worse then the sin of Devils (for they never sin against this
love) Oh that the Lord should not only in pity save me, but in love die for
me; who can reach or understand it?

Thus is Glory and Love let in upon the soul; And then the upright love thee;
Oh that I might love the Lord uprightly; love him, and love him uprighty, love
him for himself, love his Glorious Person, be enamoured with the Beauties of
his Holiness, that I might see his Glory, and for ever admire and adore him;
thus souls, when he pleases thus to show himself, are taken into his
Banqueting House, and his Banner over them is love; they retire into him, and
sit under his shadow with great delight, and his Fruit is sweet to their taste,
Song of Solomon, 2. 3, 4. This is precious and Heavenly employment, in such a
day when the Lamb calls to Retirement, when the heat of the Sun begins
thoroughly to beat against it, and the soul finds little shadow in the World,
then the shadow of this Rock in a weary land (a land of sin and trouble) is
sweet and pleasant retirement indeed.

The effect of this special Retirement into the Chambers of our Lord Jesus,
under his shadow, is sweet peace, and rest of mind and spirit, when the Waves
and Billows come against us, a blessed stillness, a composed acquiescency in
the Lord, and a freee resignment to him, the allaying and rebuking the
tumultuous workings of our hearts, a casting our care upon the love, and care,
and faithfulness of the Lord in every condition; In the Multitude of my
thoughts (my careful thoughts) within me, thy comforts delight my soul, Psalm.
94. 19. yea in this blessed Retirement, cries out, Return into thy Rest, oh my
soul; Thou have been wandering after other rest, too too much, but have not
found where to put thy feet, therefore now return to thy sweet, safe, proper
Rest; abide and dwell there, and that for ever. So the soul can in some good
measure, sanctify the Name of the Lord, by believing and trusting on him, and
waiting for him, making Christ his Portion and Everlasting strength, and does
in patience possess it self.

One word by way of more particular Application.

1. If this Retirement into Jesus Christ, into the chambers of his Grace, be
the great interest of souls; What a case then are poor forlorn sinners in that
have no shelter for soul or life, or any thing, but what the wide World (as you
speak) can afford them, which will not keep off a storm, not one drop of the
Wrath of the Almighty? Verily the Wrath of the jealous God is ready to come
forth into the Nations of the earth [after a little stilness that has been
upon them] who is coming [and saints do hear the sounding of his feet] to tread
upon them in his wrath, and trample them in his fury, Esaias 63. and then where
will all your shelters be? When it shall be said to the scoffers at the report
of his day, Behold you despisers, and wonder and perish, for the Anger of the
Lord shall smoke against you; Oh awake and tremble, believe and tremble, and
see your confidencies to be lying vanities, men and riches, and strength, are a
lie, and they shall not, cannot save you in the day of the Lords indignation;
Oh be convinced of it, see the Lord Jesus, in his blood, righteousness, free
promises of Grace, an open shelter, where you may fly and be safe; Oh get thy
polluted, guilty, betrayed soul, into thy shelter, make have to get thy soul
washed, justified, sanctified, renewed in the Blood and Spirit of the Lord
Jesus, get the Mantle of his Righteousness over thee, and his spirit to
quicken thee, or thou shall perish from the way without remedy.

2. Does Jesus Christ call his Saints into his Chambers, to retire with him,
and that for protection and more intimate Communion. Oh let this be the Word of
the Lord to all the Lambs followers; Now Jesus Christ has for a Moment
withdrawn, is gone behind the Clouds, cry, draw us, and we will run after thee.

Now know and see more Experimentally, that Name that is indeed a strong Tower,
that covenanting Name that has been set before you, The Lord gracious and
abundant in goodness; let thy soul say, This is my Rock, a Gracious, Almighty,
Immutable God in Christ God the same yesterday, and to day, for ever,
unchangeable in Grace, Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Love, and that because of a
Covenant built upon the Pillars of Mercy and faithfulness that are for ever;
This is my House of Defense, here will I dwell; This is my Rock, and I shall
not be moved; Here is your life, your strength, your safety, your all.

Oh see what an open and sure Refuge Jesus Christ is, your sins and guilt
cannot enter in with you, but you leave them at the door, say, Ah Lord, spread
the Mantle of thy Righteousness over me, let thy banner over me be love, and
what ever the storm be, I shall be safe; in the heat of the day, under the
shadow of this Rock, will I sit; put me under unchangeable love and grace, and
Lord I shall be safe; say of him, Thou only shall be my portion and my
refuge, into thy Chambers, Oh Lord, I enter (draw me into them) under thy wings
will I make my Refuge, till the Indignation be over past.

Oh accept me, heal me, hold me to thy self, keep me, hide me in thy Chambers
of Grace, watch over me night and day. Yea, Lord, lead me into a nearer
Communion with thee, show me thy Holiness and thy Glory, that I may be yet
more vile in my own sight before thee; Ah humble me, empty me of all, new
season me, new frame me, with seven times more holiness then before; Conform
me to thy self to purpose, and for ever Commune with me, Reckon me, my dear
Lord, as thy Friend and Companion, as thy sweet acquaintance; Oh take my heart,
fill me with love, and let us never, never part any more; Oh thus should be the
breathings and pangs of our souls after our Lord Jesus in such a day. This is
to enter into his Chambers, into his Rest.

Thirdly, As to outward safety, Enter into his Chambers, say with David, Thou
shall hide me in the Secret of thy presence; Lord, Thou art my hiding place,
Yea Lord, let all thy People be thy hidden ones; Call them into thy Chambers,
hide them from the pride and rage of man. Seek the Lord, It may be you shall be
hid in the day of the Lords anger, Zeph. 2. 3. you have at least an It may be,
for it; Who knows but the Lord will hide, wonderfully (for so it must be) and
keep this Generation of his people, though they dwell in the fire; wonderful it
is to see the Bush burning, and yet not consumed.

The Lord has gloriously triumphed in the death of some of his Witnesses, who
by dying have overcome (more than by signal battles in the field) and it may be
has some more to set to their Seal the same way, but this Generation of people
shall enter their Chambers, and shall yet be further hid, till the Lord come
out of his place, and the earth disclose her blood. As I have believed, so have
I spoken.

Blessed be the Lord, who remembers his people in these poor Nations, and will
not cast them off: For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass them as with a shield. Thou art good, and ready to forgive, and
thou will forgive the sin of thy people, (though they have been a rebellious
Seed) because they be thy people, and thy Name is in them, and thy great glory
is conferred upon them; for the needy shall not always be forgotten, nor shall
the expectation of the poor fail from before thee. And thus much of the first
branch of the Proposition* We now come to the second thing, Viz.

The Lord Jesus Christ sometimes calls his Saints to retirement from public
Services, and public Administrations of Worship.
We would prove this, and when the Lord so calls, and why he calls them to such
a retirement.

The two great instances of the Old and New Testament, do confirm this.

1. That of the people of God in Babylon, where the remnant of the best people
were carried, according to the Word of the Lord to them by Jeremiah, and there
the Lord promisseth to be a little Sanctuary to them, Ezekiel. 11. 13. but there
they had no Temple nor Sacrifices while they were in their captivity, but were
to live in the Faith of their return from the Captivity, when the Temple should
be built again; and they were to humble themselves to the Lord, and to cry to
him till it were accomplished: So that here the Lord in that day of distress,
promises to take care of the Remnant, Ezekiel. 11. 13. according to the plea of
the Prophet, Ah Lord God, will thou make a full end of the Remnant of Israel;
And the Lord promises to restore them, to bring them back to their Land, and
to give them his Ordinances as in the days past: Yet during their captivity,
they were deprived of all positive worship, of all public Administrations, but
lived in the Faith of their return, according to the Word of Lord by his
Prophets to them.

So in the New Testament times, during the Captivity of the true Worshippers
and Witnesses of Jesus Christ under the Mystical Babylon; The true Church is
called into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, where she
should be fed, Rev. 12. 6. where she lies hid: And though there is a Temple
measured, Rev. 11. 1. yet it is as shut up, till at the pouring out of the
Vials, the Temple is opened, Rev. 15. 5. But especially toward the end of the
Beasts reign, when the Witnesses have prophesied more openly, and have finished
a Testimony to all the Offices of Jesus Christ, especially that of his Kingly
Power over Saints and Nations, (the Nations that are found in the Spirit of the
Beast, make war against them, and slay them; that is, lay their, Testimony
dead, as if the effects of it should never appear: All public Prophesying, and
public Administrations of Worship, are cut off, and laid dead (wherein the
last slaying of the Witnesses does specially consist) yet the main body and
generation of the Saints preserved; but so, as they are in all respects, either
Civil or Ecclesiastical, called off from the public Stage, to a retired
condition, and do lie as dead men (only they are not buried, but are, as it
were, still kept above ground) till the Spirit of Life from God enter into
them: So at the Text, when the People of God are called into their Chambers, he
said, in the 19th. verse of the 26. chap. of Isaiah, Thy dead men shall live,
etc. while in their captivity, they lay as dead men.

So Hosea 6. 1, 2. When smitten and wounded in their captivity, they shall lie
as dead; but after two days, he will revive them.

But more particularly, when does the Lord call them thus to retirement, call
them off from the public stage, and bids them enter into their Chambers?

1. In the case of the text, When the wrath of man is kindled against them,
when the Nations and people among whom they converse, are in a confederacy
against them, and say of Zi* on, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon
Zion, Micah the 4th. and the 11th. Verse. Then he knows how to hide his
people as in his Pavillion; then shall they be his hidden ones. Psalm. 83. So he
hid the seven thousand in Samaria, that did not bow the knee to Baal, whom the
text says, He reserved to himself, Rom* the 11th. chap. ver. 4. And yet that
people, at that day, were under an obligation of Worship at the Temple at
Jerusalem; but God did indulge them, as may further be showed.

So (as has been hinted) the Lord hides the Woman in the wilderness from the
Wrath of the Dragon, who casts a Flood after her.

2dly, Jesus Christ calls his people to retirement, when he reserves them for a
Day of Mercy and greater Service, and a more pure Reformation, when he thus
lays them dead in order to a more glorious resurrection. So in several Ages
have they been wonderfully kept under the variety of the Lord's Dispensations
to them; as in Egypt, and David, and the remnant of Judab that adhered to them:
Many instances might be given.

3dly, The Lamb calls to retirement when he has been contesting with the
Spirit of the Beast in any of the Nations, by the called, and faithful, and
chosen, Rev. 17. 14. When he has set on foot his controversy with any of the
Horns* and has overcome them, has often carried it against him yet he
suffers his Enemies to rally again, and his own followers are scattered; when
he seems to turn aside from the pursuit, to drink of the Brook in the way, (as
it were) to refresh himself, and then makes a short turn to the Prey again,
Psalm 110. Verse the last, that he may gather his Enemies as sheaues into his
floor, Micah 4. 12, 13. and will make the Horn of the Daughter of Zion as Iron,
to thresh them in such a day* The Lamb withdraws and retires, and calls his
Saints to retire with him: And this is to follow the Lamb wheresoever be goes,
Revel. 14. to go as he goes, and to retire as he retires, and not to run out
without him, upon any account whatsoever. In such a season the Lamb does
indulge them, nay call them off from their public Administrations and
Services, and Prophesyings, and they are to wait till the Cloud appear and go
before them, in which they can see the Presence of the Lamb, and hear his
Voice calling them thereto.

4thly, The Lord (as it follows from the former, calls them to retirement, when
hereby he will fit and separate a genetation to follow him in his next
appearing, when he will prepare them in the fire, melt them, and try rhem,
Jer. 9. 7. I will melt them, and try them; for how shall I do for the Daughter
of my people? Then he will cast out the treacherous dealers from among them, as
Verse 4. of that 9th. of Jeremiah; Take heed every one of his Neighbor, and
trust ye not in any Brother; for every Brother will supplant, etc. And they will
deceive every one his Brother, and will not speak the truth, ver. 5. Now God
will discover and cast out such a mixture and spirit from among his people, in
the day that he will melt them, and try them, v. 7. and Ezekiel. 22. 18, etc.

When the Lord is doing this work, by letting out the wrath of man upon them,
he then calls them to retirement*

2. Why does the Lord thus call them? etc.

1. The Lord calls his people into their Chambers, into a retired condition, to
express his tenderness of them, as he calls them the Apple of his Eye, Zach. 2.
8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine eye, etc. Keep me as the
Apple of thine eye, Psalm. 17. and his peculiar Treasure, Exodus 19. 5. Psalm.
135. 4. Such a day is a day of making up his jewels, Mal. 3. 17. referring to a
day of retirement, when the wicked were set up, v. 15. then when he makes them
up, he not only purifies them, and puts a luster upon them, but spares them as
a Father spares his Son, and does not spend them, but rarely, upon the rage of
men.

2. The Lord thus takes them into his Chambers, that the glory of his Power may
be seen in restraining the wrath of man, and causing it to praise him; that his
people should be in the waters, and not be overwhelmed; and in the fire, and
not be consumed; this is because the Lord is with them, because he is the Lord
their God, the holy One of Israel, their Savior, Isa. 43. 2, 3. That the
Enemies of his People should not be able to act their own counsels, nor to
execute their own rage, by a mighty hand of God restraining. This is, and
should be mavelous in the eyes of his people.

3dly, The Lord calls to retirement, when the generation of the ungodly and
oppressors are ripening for wrath; then does the Lord lay up his people in the
secret of his Presence; so Psalm. 91. which is a word holding out the Lord's
hiding of his people, as has been hinted, So see verse 8. 9. Only with thine
eyes shall thoubehold, and see the reward of the wicked; etc. Thou shall tread
upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample under
foot, v. 13. Now the People of God will discern through the light of the Spirit
in the Word, the Marks and Characters of a generation of God's Wrath, which in
this place I shall not insist on. They are such as these:

When a generation of men do worse then their Fathers, Jer. 7. 2. and chap. 16.
12, 13. Ye have done worse than your Fathers, for behold ye walk every one
according to the imagination of his evil heart, etc. therefore will I cast you
out of this Land, etc. And this in a Land of Vision, and after the hand of God
has been eminently lifted up against them; When a people return to Idolatry,
and Antichristian abominations, when Jesus Christ has begun to reform a
Nation, as in the days of Manasseh; When such a generation do declare their
sin as Sodom, Isa. 5. When abominable uncleanness, excess and riot, and all
manner of villainy is acted as at noonday; When they persecute the Prophets and
Messengers of the Lord, that they may not speak unto the people, 2 Chronicles. 36.
16. But take away the Key of Knowledge, Luke 17. with Mat. 23. forbidding the
servants of Christ to speak unto the people, that they may fill up their sin
always, and wrath come upon them to the utmost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16* (which the
Spirit of God gives as a Character of a people filling up their measure.

When a generation shall doingly blaspheme the Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
calling it an unclean Spirit, Matt. 12. 24. 31. as the Pharisees at that day
called the Spirit by which Jesus Christ did preach, and pray, and wrought all
his works, an unclean Spirit; when in their ordinary language they invoke their
damnation, and set their mouths against the Heavens; and the Spirit, and
Holiness, and Saints, becomes their byword and their song, and entitle Satan
to all the glorious works of Christ in Conversion, and call it all Delusion and
Fanaticism; when they oppress, persecute, (and worse) the Saints and Servants
of the Lord, filling Prisons with them; when they set themselves in the Throne
of the Lord, and will be Lords in the Conscience, and make the Sons of Zion as
the filth of the Earth; and all this after the Lord has been pleading his
Controversy with them, in very stupendous Dispensation, and by their hour of
prosperity they are but hardened in their way, and say they are delivered to
all their abominations; that is certainly a Generation of God's wrath. Now
among such a generation the Lord calls his people to retirment (into their
Chambers) till his wrath come upon the wicked to the utmost, and he will put in
his sickle, and reap down their abominations, and none shall save them*

4. The Lord calls to retirement, that they may deal with him by faith and
prayer, in their secret corners, and may wait for his teachings, etc. as may
further be opened in the close of this Discourse.

And thus we have endeavored to clear the point, That Jesus Christ calls his
Followers from off the public Stage, into a more retired condition, when, and
why he does it. I shall come to some useful conclusions, and so answer the
objections and dis-satisfactions of any that lie against it.

1. If Jesus Christ does sometimes in his providential Dispensations, call off
his people to retirement, and puts them as into the holes of the Rock, then it
will follow that one Dispensation calls for that which another does not; the Lord
calls for that at one time, which he does not at another, sometimes to a more
open appearing in their public services and actings for him, and
administrations of worship and prophesying, sometimes to a more open exposing
to sufferings, and at another time the Word of the Lord is, Enter into thy
Chambers, etc. shut thy doors about thee. So what has been a duty for Saints
in one day, has not been so expressly (I mean the main generation of them) a
duty at another; especially in the later dispensations of the Lord toward the
giving up of the Kingdom of the Beast, when the Lords controversion is now, and
of his Kingdom, has been with a high hand carrying on, as has been showed;
In such a day the Lamb marches against his Enemies, and then re^reats, and
sounds a Retreat to his called Ones; sometimes he faceth the beast, and then
withdraws, and drinks of the Brook in the way; he coucheth like a Lion, and
then anon rises up to pursue the prey: Here is the wisdom of the Saints, here
is following the Lamb; this is to see his footsteps, to walk after them.

2. Let it be therefore for an humble enquiry at least, to all that are sober,
to weigh what has been hinted, and to consider if this be not the Word of the
Lord at this day, whether Jesus Christ has not sounded a retreat, whether he
does not call off from public Prophesying, and more public Administrations,
(though the wickedness of men be instrumentally in it) yea whether the
Testimony be not slain and lies dead; and that all the Characters of it have a
visible accomplishment at this day, a Testimony finished, Rev. 11. 7. to all
the Offices of Jesus Christ, and of his Kingdom in the world, in all the
concernments of it, and against the whole Mystery of Iniquity, and of the
Kingdom of the Beast, and that especially in this part of the world where the
Spirit is given forth.

And when we had been looking for the fulfilling hereof, lo a Death upon the
whole, and the Witnesses lie as dead in all the parts of the world, let the
place be named where an open testimony against all the abominations of the
Beast, against all their National wickednesses, and a testimony for the Lord
Jesus in the whole of his Kingdom, as King of Saints and Nations will be born;
though some Gospel truths will be born, and are practiced among them: Yea, what
a strange healing up has there been in all the Nations of Europe, among all
the ten horns, a General Peace in the Kingdom of the Beast, not a Horn or
Nation that wars against Babylon; not a hand lifted up against her in a way of
War, to hate her, and make her desolate; but all preparations from the North
and the West, hushed up, levelled, and laid dead, when a few years since the
Nations were all in a flame, as if the last distress had been upon them: But lo
a healing up, a stilness, and the proud Whore sits as a Queen, glorifying her
self that she shall see no sorrow, (which she feared before) and shall not be a
Wid^w, nor be made desolate. Which healing and Peace among the horns, is
employed in their sending gifts (by their Ambassadors) one to another. Rev. 11.
10. because the People and Spirit which they most feared, is laid dead; the
prophesying of ruin to the hastening upon the Beast, and wrath upon the
Nations, seems to have been but a fancy, and to come to naught; for behold,
their prayers, witnessings, prophesyings, Armies, every where in the whole
street of the City are come to naught. Is not this the triumph of the Nations
at this day, and of the Beast?

Such as state the last slaughter of the witnesses to be already past, namely
about the year 1558. when that general blow was given to the Protestant
Interest in Germany, and other Nations, and by the Marian Persecution in this
Nation, have sufficient confutation by what has since fallen out in several
Nations, in the persecuting and slaying of the Witnesses in Poland, France,
Ireland, etc. of late years; and the death that the whole Work of Christ is
under at this day, it being clear, that when the last slaughter is past, and
the lying dead three days and an half is over, in the Witness resurrection,
that then they ascend^ to Heaven, into a state of Liberty, Power and Glory,
from which they fall no more; but the seventh Angel sounds, and the third Woe
comes upon the World (the last Plagues to be executed upon the Antichristian
World, and Voices are heard in Heaven (amongst the Churches) proclaiming the
Lord Jesus King of Nations; for that upon the resurrection of the Witnesses,
and sounding of the seventh Angel, the Lord Jesus comes forth to take to
himself his great Power, and to reign, to contest with the Horns about his
Sovereignty, to rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, breaking them in pieces as
a Porters Vessel; at which time (as some eminent Witness of the Lord have well
stated it) The little Stone, cut out without hands (the separated Saints in the
Nations) begins in a more especial manner to smi^e the Image, Dan. 2. 39. (for
the Stone begins to smite upon the feet of the Image, the last part of the
Roman Monarchy, which roes upon the feet ver. 41. are the some with the ten
Horns, as Dan. 7. And the Stone smiting breaking in pieces* and consuming the
Kingdoms (as the Spirit of God opens the meaning of the Stone, and its smiting,
v. 44.) And in the days of these Kings, shall the God of Heaven set up a
Kingdom (the Kingdom of the Stone) which shall never be destroyed, and the
Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces, and
consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever) is interpreted further
in the Vision that Daniel himself had of the same thing, chapter 7. 22. 26 When
Judgment is given to the Saints of the Most High; And ver. 26. The Judgment
shall sit (the Saints judging the tenhorned Beast and his Kingdom) and they
shall take away his Dominion to consurne and to destroy it unto the end. But I
do but hint here, what I may give a further account of in due time, to remove
the stumbling blocks that lie in the way of many of the Lord's People as to
this glorious truth.

But I return to my enquiry, which is, that I humbly judge that the last
slaying of the Witnes^es was not about the time mentioned, for the reasons
hinted (and others might be given) but rather, that great, sore blow upon the
Protestant Interest, to be fixed upon that foot of account, namely, of the
Beast making war with the Saints, and overcoming them, Rev. 13. 7. which War
from the time of the Waldensian people he has been carrying on, and overcome
them: And so in Bohemia, Germany, etc* upon which Word are all the former Wars
and Victories of the Beast to be stated, and not in reference to the last
slaughter, when the Beast makes War with the Witnesses, and kills them, and
overcomes them; which is after a full testimony has been finished to all the
Offices, Work and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and then the Beast (such as are in
the Spirit of the Beast, and influenced by him) rise up (by the wise and holy
permission and ordering of the Lord to bring about his own glorious design) and
slay the Testimony, lay it dead (especially in a civil sense) in that tenth
part of the City where the killing most eminently is (which is, where the most
eminent Testimony for the Kingdom of Christ is the Spirit, has been of any of
the Nations) and so all public prophesying, in an ordinary way, and with an
allowed liberty becomes cut off, and the public assembling of Churches
suppressed, in that tenth part of the City, so that the Work and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ being likely to arise a few years since in the apprehension of most of
the Saints, and to the terror of the Nations, lo it is laid dead; and say the
sons of Babylon, we will so bury it that it shall rise no more, though that will
be found their great error.

I might ^^stance the Judgment of several ancient and holy Witnesses of
Christ, who are now in the same apprehension as to this dispensation we are
under, and of some who in the highest day of our prosperity a few years since,
spoke of it as to come upon us; and also (as is humbly judged by some worthy
servants of the Lord at this day, that a more then ordinary discovery and
revelation has been given forth to a worthy Minister of Christ, and some
others, that this is the 3. days and a half in which the witnesses are to lie
dead, which I think meet only to hint at this time.

But if so, then the Word of the Lord is, Go and dye, as to ordinary, public
Prophesying; and it is the wisdom of the Saints to submit to the Dispensation of
God, and to be content even to lie as dead men, in a civil sense, till the
spirit of life from God enter, and a voice be heard in the providential
workings of the Lord, Come up hither, Rev. 11. 12. And let it be soberly
considered whether the contrary practice be not to cross the very design of the
Lord at this day, and to ruin the Churches and whole Interest of Jesus Christ,
whose res^rrection and restoration we are patiently to wait for.

Yea, (whether this be the last slaying or not) it is worthy a serious Judgment
to consider, That in the several Ages of Persecucion from the Apostles days
(unless where some have been carried forth by an extraordinary impulse of
Spirit) the Professors and Churches of Christ met together in such a way as
might most probably ^^nd to their preservation; in a private and retired way,
in the best Wisdom they could; as the Disciples, John 20, 19. they were
assembled in an upper Room for fear of the Jews: And the Church of Hierusal^m
s^att^red abroad in parties in the several Provinces upon the Persecution, Acts
8. when they began to be hal^d to prison from their Meetings; and those that
remained, kept in a private way, Acts 12. And so we find the Christians
assembling secretly, and by night, as they had opportunity: As that
Congregation that continued together in Q. Mary's days in London, and kept up
their Meetings secretly, and were wonderfully preserved in that day; though (as
I may presently show) it is hard to give out any general, absolute Rule in this
case: But it is certain, this was their ordinary practice: The reasons hereof
have been spoken to. It may further be added, that in such a retired way, they
shall not so much dare and provoke the civil Magistrate to greater wrath
against them, and not lay a stumbling block in their way, but seem more to walk
in the meekness of Jesus Christ; and it is the liberty that Jesus Christ does
indulge them, and answers his promise of preserving, and being a Sanctuary to a
holy Seed from one generation to another, and not to be exposed to the blood
thirstiness and rage of their persecutors, though still honoring himself by the
suffering of some.

And as this has been the practice of the Churches of Christ in times of
persecution, so of particular Ministers and Witnesses of the Lord in all ages,
namely, as they were led by the spirit of the Lord to retire from particular
persecution, especially when their case was different from the rest of the
saints as in some ages it has bin; the first blow was at the Ministers of
Christ; so Moses fled before the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the Land of
Midean till the time of deliverance came to the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 2.
15.

So David from the persecution of Saul, who retired into the Wilderness, where
the Lord hid him, till the time that the promise should be fulfilled in his
reign over Israel, 1 Samuel 19. 18. though in his retirement he was deprived of
the Institutions of the Worship of God in the temple, as he complains complains
in several Psalms.

Elijah had given an eminent Testimony against Ahab, and the abominations of
that day, and prophesied the wrath of God to come upon Israel. But when he knew
the mischief that Ahab intended, and he had finished his Testimony, the Lord
commands him to go and hi^^e himself, 1 Kings 17. 2. and 8. and Chap* 10. 10*
And we know Elijah was an eminent Type of the Witnesses of Jesus Christ under
the New Testament Babylon; though in the third year when it should rain again*
according to the word of the Lord (which made way for Elijah's appearance) he
showed himself to Ahab, and God was with him to deliver him: But when Jezebel
sought after him again, chapter 19. he went into the Wilderness, and hid himsel in
a Cave, v. 9.

At the same time before the three years were finished, and the Persecution by
Jezebel continued against all the Lords Prophets, 1 King. 18. Obadiah hid the
Prophets by 50. in a Cave, who at other times were publicly prophesying.

So when the King had sent out a Warrant and Officers to take Jeremiah and
Baruch, Jer. 36. 26. it is said, The Lord HID them; which implied their own
retirement at that time.

So our Lord Jesus himself, when he heard that John was cast into Prison, he
retired into Galilee, Matthew. 4. 12* And when he further heard that he was
beheaded, he withdrew into a desert place, Mat. 14. 13. And so when the Jews
sought to kill him, etc. till his hour was come; which places are ordinarily
urged by interpreters upon them for the case in hand.

So our Lord Jesus allows his Disciples, Matthew. 10. when he sent them forth as
sheep among wolves, ver. 10. that they should then be wise as Serpents, walk
with such a wisdom as becomes sheep among Wolves, which is not rashly to put
themselves into the mouth of the Wolf. And ver. 17. bids them beware of men;
and then, being persecuted into one City, ^o fly unto another, v. 23. the
(...) that word being to direct them, that when Rulers by their Edicts will not
suffer them to preach in one place, they might go to another; if not in
public, then in private, and from House to House, as the providence of God
should lead them.

When the Jews sought for Paul at Damascus, the Disciples did not press him to
expose himself to be delivered up into their hands, in appearing openly there,
but on the contrary, at a hard rate conveyed him away, Acts 9. 23. 2 Cor. 11.
32. In Damascus, the Governor under Artas the King, kept the City with a
Garrison, desirous to apprehend me; and through a Window in a basket was I let
down by the wall, I escaped his hands: which the Apostle there sets down among
his persecutions; when the Governor of the City would have apprended him, he
thought good, and the Saints with him so judged, to withdraw, and yet he was
not judged unfaithful or fearful in so doing. So Acts 14. when Paul and
Barnabas had spoken holdly in the Lord, for a time at Iconium, when they
understood that the Jews and Gentiles with them made an assault (at their
meeting) to use them despightfully, and to stone them, they were ware of it,
(they thought it ground enough that they were ware of it) and so fled into the
next Province into Lystra* When the Jews laid wait for him, Act. 20. 3. he went
not into Syria, but returned through Macedon^a. And when the Jews had gathered a
company of lewd fallows to assault the meeting at Jas^ns house, Paul and Sylas
withdrew, Act. 17. 5, 6. for, they found them no^, ver. 6. And at Berea, the
Brethren sent away Paul, ver. 14.

So when he would have hazarded himself, the Disciples suffered him not, Act.
19* 30. And when he would go up to Jerusalem, all the Saints besought him not
to go (judging in an ordinary way he ought not,) till they nnderstood that Paul
was under an extraordinary impulse of Spirit to go, and then they ceased.

The case of those famous Ministers and witnesses of Christ at the Sea Book of
Matt*
beginning of Q. Mary's persecution, who preached not after the Queens
Inhibition and Proclamation, though it were not a binding Law, as appears by
the Declaration of their Faith they gave forth when prisoners in the Kings
Bench, in which they thus express themselves; We are not here in prisons as
Trai^ors, or seditious persons, or transgressors of any Laws of this Realm;
Inhibitions, Proclamations, or Commandments of the Queens Highness, or of any
of the Councils, God's Name be praised therefore, etc. Subscribed by Dr.
Tailor, Philpot, Bradford, Hooper, Rogers, Saunders, etc. the most eminent
Ministers and Martyrs of that day, who it appears preached not publicly after
the Proclamation and Act of Parliament, but were committed, as having been men
famous in King Edwards days, and had preached to warn the people against
Popery, in the interval, before the Proclamation was published, and were taken
after, and were put to death because they would not deny the Truth they had
formerly preached; which the servants of Christ at this day hope (through
grace) they shall not do, if called to a trial thereof; and how far several of
the servants of the Lord have exposed themselves, notwithstanding a former
Proclamation, and the latter Act of Parliament, and particular charges that way
lie against some of them, sober Christians may judge, and not passionately
censure any of them; and the due consideration thereof, and of what has been
said in this case; may be more then enough to remove their prejudice, or
mistaken herein.

So that here is both precept, and multiplied examples both of the Old and New
Testament, of the Prophets and Apostles, and the ordinary Ministers of Christ,
that when particular and personal persecution has been against them, a design
to apprehend them, and a lying in wait for them, they have at such a time
withdrawn, and retired themselves from their more public Ministry.

In the ordinary providence of God, these Reasons of it may be instanced:

1. When public Preachers are sent to preach to the world, and the people will
not receive them, but persecute them, they, after some patient waiting, may
withdraw for a testimony against them, Mat. 10. 14. which is too often the case
of the servants of Christ, though it does not fully reach the case in hand.

2. When the Lord Jesus has more wo^k and service for his servants,, and will
preserve them to a day of liberty (as has been showed of the whole generation
of Saints) then he has used to hide them by his gracious providence in a
wonderful manner, and has called them off from the public stage, and kept
them in the midst of the persecutions they have been under, or snatched them out
of them, as abundant instances might be given; so it is prophesied, Isa. 30. 20
That their teachers should be removed into corne^s, till the Captivity was
over, etc.

3. In mercy to the Churches, that the liberties and lives of the servants of
Christ may be preserved, to serve them more publicly when the Lord by his
providence shall make way; and in the mean time may be useful to the Churches in
a more private way; and not to spend them (in a kind of passionate courage)
upon the implacable fury of their persecutors: whence it was, that the
Disciples at Cesarea so passionately besought Paul not to go up to Jerusalem;
And when he would have entered in among the people, the Disciples suffered him
not.

This may suffice to state and clear this case ^o the consciences of such as
may be differently minded herein, which may at least call for a mutual
forbearance in love, and that Satan get not an advantage to stir up heats,
heighten prejudices, beget a greater distance among the people of God; and so
in stead of closing, widen the sad breaches that have been amongst us,

And yet when I have thus stated this case, that the call of Jesus Christ may
be to retire; and that it is lawful upon particular personal persecution, for
the Ministers of Christ to do so; yet I also say with blessed Bucer, as he
states this case on the 4th. of Matthew. upon our Savior's retirement, That
there can be no absolute, binding, unlimited Rule laid down in this case, that
shall be binding in all times, and to all persons. And it is hard for others to
determine when a servant of Christ may more honor the Lord by retirement or by
a public exposing himself* Every man in such a case is to give up himself to
the leading of the Spirit of the Lord, which has carried some of the servants
of Christ in one way, and some in another, in all times of persecution
accordingly, as Christ will be glorified by them. Though the same Bucer (who
also retired in the Germane persecution) concludes thus: Where by retirement
and flight thou may see an advantage of honoring Christ ( tuae te horae
servans) by withdrawing thou do as Christ himself did, and as Paul at
Damascus.

Yet that the minds of Saints may be fully satisfied herein, I will consider
what is usually urged by some to the contrary.

Obj. How do the servants of the Lord give forth a full Testimony, if they
retire when Edicts are given forth against them, seeing it is said they overcome
by the Wo^d of their Testimony, Rev. 12. That we may therefore consider how far
this may reach, and when Saints may be said to keep the Commandments of God,
and to have the Testimony of Jesus Christ, ver. last.

1. A Testimony is given first by the Preachers and Witnesses of Christ, by
discovering the sins and the Antichristian abominations of the age and day they
live in, and witnessing for all the Offices, Worship, Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
according to the Scripture, as the Spirit of the Lord gives light, and acts
them thereunto; and as the Providence of God opens a door to them: Blessed be
the Father of Spirits, that through the Grace and Power of the Lord Jesus such
a Testimony has been given sorth; to the glory of God, the conviction and
establishment (as is hoped) of the people of God, which testimony, no doubt,
the Lord will make good in his best time; and which they leave with God, being
satisfied they are called by the providence of God to a more retired way.

2. All other Saints do keep the Testimony of Jesus (and the Commandments of
God as opposed to the Commands of men in the matters of Christ and his Worship)
when they are (through the teaching of the Spirit in the Word, and the Power of
the same Spirit resting upon them) kept from partaking of the sins, polutions,
and Antichristian abominations of false Worship which men would impose upon
them, Acts 2. 40. Save your selves from this untoward generation, Ephesians. 5: 7. Be
not ye therefore partakers with them, v. 11. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, etc. Touch not the u^clean thing, be ye separate,
2. Cor. 6 Come out of her my people, that ye be not pa tak^rs of her sins, that
ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4.

When the professing people shall obey the Lord in such words as these, and not
defile themselves, nor provoke the Lord to jealousy against them, this is a
good Testimony, and such Saints who call for extremities from others, may find
this to be a Testimony hard enough to be kept, when they are tried, as they
have in lesser matters already.

This Testimony the 7000. kept in Samaria, that bowed not their knee to Baal,
and God accepted them in it. And let all the Ministers of Christ who would
approve themselves as such, to God and his people; take heed that they are
faithful in this testimony (as well as others of the people of God) and that
under pretense of having the liberty of their Ministry, they are not found in
compliance, with Humane Invention^, against light, to render themselves a scorn
to the profane, and a grief and stumbling block to the godly, especially when
such eminent and severe strokes from Heaven have been upon many for so doing.

3. Saints do keep the Testimony of Jesus Christ when they are found in the
practice of Christ's appointments, though in a more private way, which is a
testimony against the persecutions of the World, and the abominations thereof,
as the primitive Christians practiced.

4. Saints do keep the word of Testimony when any of them are called before
men, for not partaking in false ways of Worship, and being so called, do not
deny the truth, but confess it before man, M^t^h. 10. 32, 33. Whosoever
therefore shall confess me before men, him will ^ co^fess before my Father
which is in Heaven; But whosoever shall deny me before men, him nill I also
deny before my Father which is in Heaven. So ^s said, Jesus Christ wi^nessed a
good ^^n^^ssion before Po^tius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6 Though in this case also, it is
not easy to lay down the u^most extent of duty; sometimes the Witnesses of
Christ have ^^eely and openly, upon their convention and examination, without
any proof against them, witnes^ed to the whole truth and ma^^er of Fact, as
carried ^orth, it is to be charitably judged by the Spirit of the Lord thereto,
as in Stephens case, and Peter's Acts 3.

Others have kept silence; and held their persecutors to proof of matter of
Fact against them; yet so as they would not deny the Truth, which is a
Testimony to it. Now such a witnessbearing before the Judicatories of men, as
the Spirit of the Lord carries forth our spirits, is another way of having the
Testimony of Jesus Christ.

Now if the Lord help this generation of his people to be faithful to their
Light in these particulars, they shall be found the Lambs followers, keeping
the Commandments of God and the Testimony of Jesus*

But for any to judge, that nothing else is a finishing a faithful testimony,
(but for the servants of Christ to put themselves into the mouths of those whom
they know wait to devour them, and have laid a snare for them, and that such
are un^aithful, or fearful, or worse) that think i^ not their duty; certainly
when good ^ouls are come to themselves, and shall particu^^^ly know and weigh
the cases of the Lord's poor servants, (without which it is unreasonable to
judge) we shall all have a tender hearted forbearance one of another, as that
case requires.

Obj. 2. But was not this the practice of the Apostles, Acts 4. when commmanded
not to preach any more in the Name of the Lord Jesus, they answered, They ^ught
to obey God rather than men.

Ans. 1. I humbly conceive, that the servants of God at this day if they were
in the like manner called before Magistrates, and were charged by them, as the
Apostles were, namely, Not to preach at all, nor to teach in the Name of Jesus
(for so it was, they would answer as the Apostles did, and would continue
preaching, where the providence of God opened a way to them, as they did.

2: We do not find it expressed that Peter and John preached openly in the Temple
after that, though they witnessed and preached elsewhere, until the Angel of
the Lord opened the Prison doors, and commanded them to go and speak in the
Temple, Acts 5.

3. The Apostles having an extraordinary Anointing, were to witness to all
Nations that they had seen the Lord, and that he was risen from the dead; which
is not the case of every particular Minister: They went and preached by the
special dictate of the holy Spirit in one place, and not in another; it is not
so with ordinary Preachers: And the same Spirit that led them forth sometimes
to expose themselves to hazards, at another time led them to withdraw from
danger, as has been showed. Besides, it does not appear that there was any
more than a mere prohibition not to preach, to Peter and John, by the Council
of the Jews, without any penalty of imprisonment or banishment expressed.

3. Obj. Is not there a strict command, that the Professors of Christ should
not forsake the assembling themselves together, Heb. 10.

Ans. Let it be considered what forsaking of assembling this was; It was the
departing from all Christian worship and fellowship; a casting off their
p^ofession, as ver. 23. Let us hold fast our profession: such a forsaking, as
was a leading to an Apostasy, as is clear in the following verses; For if we
sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, etc. which
is annexed as a reason of not forsaking their assembling; this will not be
judged the present case.

2. Saints therefore do not forsake their assembling, in that sense while they
hold fast their profession, and labor to keep up, worship in a more private
way, where they may likely assemble more peaceably, and with less distraction*
for so those Hebrews did, and all the Churches, as has been showed.

Meeting is a duty; but meeting openly is an accidental thing.

4. Obj. But* how are the servants of Christ consistent to their own Doctrine,
who press others to be partakers of the sufferings of Christ, and would prepare
them for it; when they do not expose themselves to the utmost.

Ans. There may be a prodigal casting away of liberty or life, as well as a
giving them up upon the Call of God; It Is certain, that it is a duty to offer up
every Isaac to the Lord when he Calls for it, but we must see our Call to be
clear: we should through grace be ready rather to suffer the loss of all
things, then to deny the truth, and to follow* the providential leadings of God
thereto: But that it is our duty and call from the Lord to continue publicly
witnessi^g* and to expose our selves to the utmost hazards, rather then give
place* though we know the snare is laid for us, and we in all likelihood put an
end to our Work in so doing, is not yet proved to our Consciences from any Word
of God; but indeed the contrary is clear to them.

If it be said, that the judgment of some Saints is a Call herein; I answer,
That the Judgment of many more may be put in the balance against them, who
judge otherwise* which may have as great, or it may be a greater weight with
them.

Obj. 5. But did not Daniel worship openly notwithstanding the Decree, Dan. 6.

Ans. Whatever is said to the contrary, it will easily appear that the
prohibition and Decree was, that Daniel should not pray unto his God at all, as
v. 7. That whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God or man for thirty days,
save of thee Oh King, etc. Not that Daniel and the Jews should not pray toward
Jerusalem: So that the Decree concerned natural moral Worship, and not positive
instituted Worship, which may sometimes be dispensed with.

2. Daniel in this case had an extraordinary Anointing upon him, as a Prophet,
which carried him forth in this particular, which in every circumstance is not
to be made a standing Rule: Besides, we do not hear of such an open appearing
of the rest of the people of God then in Babylon.

And let it be seriously considered, that sometimes God has indulged his
people in the matter of positive Institutions; as the Israelites in Egypt, who
were obliged to sacrificing, if they could have had liberty; but we do not find
it practiced while they were in Egypt: So of Circumcision in the Wilderness
there was an indulgence of it; and that rolling away the reproach of Egypt,
mentioned at their circumcision; Josh. 5. 9. was not the reproach (as some
learned Interpreters judge) of not being circumcised, but of not being brought
for so many years, into the promised Land, which it is like the Egyp ians
reproached Israel with. So the Building of the Temple (which was Institution)
ceased, Ez^a 4. last. upon the prohibition till the 2d. year of Darius, whose
indulgence they might have soon had, but neglected it, and built their own
houses, and were reproved by the Prophets for their neglect therein.

And that word (as urged by blessed Mr. Buroughs in this case, and other of
the Servants of Christ) is not to be slighted, Mal. 9. I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice, which may well hold forth this, That the Lord has more respect
to a Work of Mercy, than to a Sacrifice; a lawful preservation of a man's self
is a moral duty; a work of mercy not only to himself, but others; to which end
a Sacrifice of instituted Worship at certain times, and in some cases may be
omitted.

Obj. 6. But it is objected, That the case is not the same with that of our
Savior and the Apostles, whose lives were in hazard, but now it is not so, the
Liberties and Livelyhoods of the Ministers of Christ are only endangered.

Ans. 1. The loss of liberty and livelihood, with the ruin of their Families,
is as a l^sser death, the preservation of which is a moral duty.

But, let the case well be considered, what three Months Impriso^ment in such
nasty holes as the Lon^on Prisons are, and it may be understood to amount to
little less than life; and upon what terms liberty may be had at the three
Months end, is not so easy to determine; it cost one eminent Mr. S.
Minister his life already. But if it be stated to be only the loss of
liberty, it will be a tender case of Conscience, whether for once or twice
appearing in public, a Minister is to hazard his service of the C^u^ches and
People of God, to whom h^ may be useful in a more private way.

Obj. 7. But such a withdrawing may be a^ offense ^o some S^ints, though most
othe^^ be sat^fied.

Ans. I shall here speak a little to the case o^ offenses, because Satan has
formerly had great advantage upon the Spirits of the L^rd's people this way.

1. There are o^^^^ces that com by the ungodly, per^ecuting world, who lay
stumbling blocks in the way of the people of God by their persecuting them; to
such it is said, Woe to the ^orld because of offenses, Mat. 18. Saints are not
surely to pronounce those woes one upon another upon different apprehensions of
duty.

2. There are offenses that arise among the Churches and people of God
themselves; such are,

1* Either really given one to another. Or

2dly, Through misunderstanding, weak^ess, passion or temptation, are unduly
taken, and not given.

1. Concerning the former, namely, offenses really given (which will too often
be, while we s^e but in part, and are holy but in part) the Spirit of God calls
for all forbea^ance, compassion and restoring one another, and bearing one
another burdens, according to the Royal Law of L^v^, Gal. 6. 1, 2. Ephesians. 4.
Ph^l. 2. Col. 3. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 8. from which Scrip^ures let Saints and Members
of Churches learn what Spirit and carriage is required one of another in case
of offenses; which through miscarriages, mistakes and hours of temptations,
will befall the poor children of God while they are in the flesh, and therefore
do call for such an exercise of grace one toward another; and not for rigid
censuring, debasing, treading one another names under their feet (or worse) if
it may be) which are fruits of the flesh, and of the pride of our own hearts,
when we set up a Throne in our own spirits, and all must bow and ^all down to
it, to be judged either as to matter of Judgment or Practice, and wonderfully
please our selves in it, which will not well consist with a well humbled heart.

2. There are Offenses upon the Spirits of Saints, that are taken, but not
really given, through weakness of Judgment, mis-guided Zeal, Rashness and
Passions, and not attending to a well studied and rightly informed Judgment;
whereby the Tempter waits to stumble good sculs, and to hinder their peace and
communion with the Lord.

Hence* the Wisdom of God taken special notice of the evils that befall the
spirits of men in this case; A Brother offended, is ha^der to be non than a
strong City, and their conte^tio^s are li^e ^^e ^^rs of a Castle, Prove. 18. 19.

Yea, let it be seriously attended to by all that fear the Lord, whether all
the Teachers that have been among the People of God, have not ri^e^ either for
want of a compassiona^^ bearing of offenses given, or by taking offenses
unduly, when not really given, and by which Satan has been gra^fied, and the
u^converted world has been stumbled; and all for want of thorough-heart
^umiliation, Wisdom, Love in the Spirit, whereby they should be able to judge
^oberly, and walk in peace, as becomes Saints.

But oftentimes this temptation has not rested here, but as it has been
observed by holy men, that all backfliding and apostasy begins in taking
offense, first offended at one thing or person, then at another; and ^o at
more, till they drink in prejudice against the Servants of the Lord, and the
Way they walk in* ^^^l from all sound and searching Ministry, and so run from
M^u^tain to Hill, from one thing to another, till they come to nothing* un^ess
the Lord in rich (...) ^^cov^r them by a sound W^rk of Humiliation upon them.
(...) laid in that Parable Matthew 1^. 12. That he that has not r^ot in
himself in ^ time of persecution, is offen^^^. Various ways has Satan to
offend and stumble them: Our Lord Jesus warned his Disciples of this, Matthew.
26. 31. Then says Jesus unto them, All ^e shall be offended because of me this
Night, etc.

And when the Lord promises to bring back the Captivity of his people, he
says to his servants, Cast ye up, cast ye up; prepare ye the way; take up the
stumbling block out of the way of my people; Then will the Lord remove their
offenses, and heal their spirits, and they shall walk on in the way to Zio^, and
shall not stumble any more.

Obj. 8. But does it not proceed from carnal fear in such, as judge that
retirement is the duty of this day.

Ans. A grain more of love may cast it, that the Lord's servants, and such of
the Churches that so judge and walk, do walk after their light, conviction, and
satisfaction of conscience, which happily a little time may determine.

Truly most of the sons of men have an Absoloms spirit, and say in our hearts,
What would I do, if I were in such, or such an ones case? wherein our own
hearts wonderfully deceive us. Yet if any of the servants of the Lord have a
more then ordinary impulse of spirit at this time, (as it may be some have had,
since this dispensation of giving in their testimony) it is b^st to leave them
to the Lord, without judging each other.

Concerning the Ministers of Christ, I would humbly say thus much; That i^ they
shall be found in their particular practice faithful to the light and testimony
they have given forth, through the same grace upon them, and choose the greatest
of sufferings rather then defile themselves, and continue edifying of the
Saints and Churches of God in a more private way, as they have opportunity, I
humbly judge they shall be accepted with the Lord as his faithful witnesses, and
be just fied in the consciences of all serious people; especially when the
issue of this dispensation shall be made manifest.

And thus have we stated this case, we hope, according to Scripture light, and
leave it with the Lord, to make it a blessing to any of his.

But what does the Lord call for, by way of duty, of all his people in a time
of retireme^^.

1. To sp^ak often one to another, Mal. 3. It was a time when there was hardly
a Priest to speak publicly to them, but such as corrupted ^he worship of the
Lord: Then they that feared the Lord spoke often o^e to another, an^ the Lord
bearkened and hea^d it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that se^red the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. They had great
thoughts of heart for the Name of their God, and they spoke, no doubt, of his
dispensation, and of the signs of the times, and what he called for, to
strengthen, settle, and comfort one another; this is the practice Saints should
be serious and conscientious, and often in, in such a day, and so keep up the
practice of Ordinances among them.

2. To be found as the mourn^rs of Z^on: In the day of Zions breach and
Captivity, the promise of mercy runs to her m^urn^rs, to the humble and
contrite ones, Isa. 57. 15. and 18. with those he will dwell, those he will
revive and heal. He will not c^ntend always; lest their spirit fail; but will
restore comfort to the m^u^ners. So ^saiah Chap. 61* ver. 2, 3. And Chapter 60*
verse. 10. This was Jeremiahs* spirit, In that day, Jeremiah 14* ver. 17. let
mine eyes run down with tears, and let them not cease; for the Virgins Daughter
of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous ^l^w.

Oh that the Lord would give down this Spirit upon his people; as we would call
for a Spirit of Bravery and Courage, which in its season is honorable, and has
appeared upon many of the Ministers of Christ) so let us call upon one another
for this Spirit also, to be found mourning apart, and together in our
retirements, for the abominations and blasphemies of the land, for our former
un profitableness, unholiness, security, formality, hypocrisy, pride of life,
divisions, frowardness, back shdings, breach of Vows and Covenants with the
Lord, self-seekings in the management of the precious cause of the Lord Jesus,
which now lies as crucified: Oh! do we mourn over it, as well as talk of it?

3. Jesus Christ calls to heartsearching: In such a day is every one to be
retiring into their own hearts, and finding out the plague of them, Lam. 3. 40.
In the day of their captivity, then says the Prophet, let us search and try
our ways, etc.

Then is every one to be awakening his own heart, every soul attending to a
renewed repentance and humility, to renewed mortification in the spirit, that
it may be as a day of a new conversion upon all our spirits.

4. In such a day, Jesus Christ calls his to uniting, that we get all our
prejudices to be removed and healed, though under different measures of light;
as we are upon the enquiry of our way to Zion (after the long night of
Antichristian darkness) we have many stones in our way, and much remaining
darkness) upon our spirits, and the Lord gives out light gradually to his
people in the Churches restoration, which calls for a mutual forbearance from
all, that would see the beauty of Zion, and press after it, and not imposing
one upon another, much less devouring one another by the way. Ah! when our
spirits are more melted by the Gospel, and we are more in the spirit of the
Gospel, it shall be so; then shall we know one another as Saints, and upon
that account have Communion together, and not be bound up to any Form, and
make it a Law of Communion, which is indeed no better then a dreg of
christia^ism upon our spirits. Union with the Lord Jesus is the ground of
fellowship with him, and lo^t should be one with another, 1. Joh. 1* 3 Let us
all contend together for the great interest of the ^ospel; power of Godliness,
purity of Worship as as the great and common interest of all that fear the Lord.

5. In retiring times the Lord calls to much secret duty, especially of prayer;
Cant. 2. 14. Oh my Dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, etc. Jesus Christ
behold his Dove in the clifts of the Rock in her retirement) as hid from the
wrath of her Enemies) and there she mourns in a Dove ^ike spirit, and the Lord
delights to see her face, and hear her voice.

Some have more fully heard what great things single Saints have ^one in prayer
for the people of God, how they have prevailed with God, as J^cob, Moses,
Joshua, Samuel, David. Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, etc. in their several
generations, who were men of like passions with us: Let me alone, says the
Lord to one Moses. Every praying soul should be so awakened and engaged in this
Work at this day, as if the whole lay upon his, or her shoulders; as if his
cries (even alone) were to prevail for Zion's deliverance.

Oh my dear Companions in the Kingdom and Patience of Jeius Christ, cry
mightily, and sigh with ^itrerness and unutterable groans, pour out your souls
as water before the Lord, because of the sin and breach of the people of your
God; Oh cry for Healing for Zion* cry for your Bread, those precious
Gospelfeedings of which you are bereft; cry against Babylon, and the Horns that
are pouring ou^ the blood of your Brethren: Cry ^or the ruin of the Beasts
Kingdom, and the exaltation of the Throne of Jesus Christ in the world. It Is
said Dan. 7. 13. One like the Son of Man came to the Ancient of Days, and they
brought him near before him. Saints by Faith and Prayer do bring the Son of Man
near before the Father; And then there was given him Dominion, Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him, ver. 14.

If such a Spirit be given forth in the entering into our Chambers, verily the
wind thereof shall put such an Earthquake into the tenth part of the City, and
the Foundations that are now laying, that it shall be like a breach, ready to
fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose br^aking come^h suddenly a^ ani^stant.
Isa. 30 13. 14. And the Adversaries of the Lord shall not see whence their blow
comes. Certainly never did such a praying generation miscarry.

6. In retiring times the People of God should walk w^sely, at such a time when
a man is made an offender for a word: Let us all labor to do all in the Wisdom
of Jesus Christ, in our walking toward the World, in (...) assembling, in our
particular walkings, in our silence and in our speaking* lest not only
themselves, but their Brethren also suffer by their weakness and folly: Whosoever
^^lketh wisely, shall be delivered, Prove. 28. 26.

7. In retiring times Jesus Christ calls for bowels toward the affl^ctions and
necessities of Brethren; this is a special duty of the day; some thousands of
Families are bereft of their bread, while the Lord has spared to others a full
portion, not only in m^r^y to themselves, but to be a blessing to their
distressed Brethren. Blessed be the Lord for what he has done upon the spirit
of his servants in this thing already; A^ the distress will increase, so should
the hearts and bowels of such in whose hand it is, be enlarged, else let not
them think to partake of the day of mercy, if they show no mercy to their
Brethren, when the present dispensation so eminently calls for it. A blast from
Heaven will come forth upon the Estates, Families, Names, Spirits of such
professors who withold bread from the hungry, and cast it not upon the waters
in such a day. Never was such an opportunity put into the hands of any
generations, to show much kindness to Christ and his Saints, as at this day,
never such a time to lay up much treasure in Heaven* 8. The day calls for
resignment to the will of God, to suffer or to do according to his good
pleasure. The Lord has triumphed in some of his suffering ones, who have
gloriously overcome by the Blood of the Lamb; not loving their lives ^^to the
death; it is possible some others may be called forth in the same way, many to
prisons, and much hardship; Oh! let us be resigned up to the will of Jesus
Christ, to be contented he should glorifi^ himself upon us which way he
pleases: Live upon that faithful saying, 2 Timothy 2. v^r. 11, 12. If we suffer
with him, we shall also re^gn with him; what more can be ^esired*

You have the p^^mise of Jesus Christ to be with you in what he calls you to,
and you have the rich experience of your Brethren of his faithfulness therein,
who triumphed over death, in a spirit of glory that was upon them; for the
Lords Prisoners, even in every Prison of England, their hearts are full of the
praises of the Lord, crying (to the amazement of their Persecutors) Blessed be
the Lord for a Prison; let not our Brethren be discouraged, for Christ w^ll
meet them, and walk with them there: This may quiet the hearts of all Saints,
and not be troubled, in case the Providence of God so dispose of them; and yet
they are to walk wisely in this, not exposing themselves beyond what they see
the Lord clearly calling themto, and their own conscience satisfied therein: A
good Cause, a good Call, and a good Conscience makes a man's sufferings sweet to
him. A servant of Christ may be in a good Cause, and in a good work, in a
Christian du^y, ye^ no^ have a clear Call at that time and season to it.

9. The Lord calls for Cruci^iedness to the world; a weanedness from all
Creature comforts; Redemption from all Earthly Interests, that their hearts be
loosned from them. The world was got into the hearts of Professors, now it must
be cast out, and the heart crucified to it, if they think to follow the Lamb at
this day. Let every Believer improve his fellowship with the death of Jesus
Christ to this purpose, and by Faith realize Christ, and heaven, and glory, and
for the heart to feed upon them, that the world be not as a weight upon their
spirits; which has already drowned, ensnared, perverted too many, and is the
very bane of profession, if not to the falling short of the Kingdom of God, yet
as to their own comfort, and their serving the Lord in their Generation. Jesus
Christ never much honored a worldly Professor, or if so, if the world at last
^ook hold of him, ^ b^ast was upon him.

1. In retiring times the Lord calls to waiting, a patient waiting; I charge
you that you sleep not, nor awake my Lov^till he please, says the Spouse,
Cant. ^. 7. The Soouse was contented to wait for him: That word of Es^y chap.
52. 12. should be pondered by all that fear the Lord; For ye shall not go out
in have, nor go by flight, for the Lord will go before you, and the God of
Israel will be your Re^eward. The word refers to the day of the Captivity; they
should not go out by have, but see the Lord going before them by some signal
providence or other, as a call to them to go forth: Then the Lord faith he
would be their Rereward, though the Enemy pursue them, they should not be able
to harm them; the Lord in some Cloud or Pillar of Providence or other, will
call ^orth his People, and they shall hear his voice, and follow him.

Precipitancy is the issue of unbelief, men do not hang upon the Arm of the
Lord, when impatiency carries them to such precipitancy.

Specially let us take heed to this, When the Lord is casting in such
Harbingers as forerunners of his coming, by signs and wonders in the Heaven^,
and on the Earth, and on the Seas; yea, it may be by special Visision to some
of his Servants, and the expectation of Saints generally raised to look for
him. Oh let us wait, for he will bring distress upon his Enemies, that they
shall walk as blind men; Neither shall their silver nor their Gold be able to
deliver them in the Day of the Lords Wrath upon t^em, Zeph. 1. 17. For behold
the Lord comes out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the Earth for
their iniquity, and the Earth shall disclose her blood. Isa. 2^* v. last.

11. As Saints are patiently to wait, so also to take heed that they do not
fall asleep: I say, the Lord delayeth, etc to let them be girt up, as expecting
their Lord calls* and be ready to follow him wheresoever he goe^h, etc. let
them not say in their hearts, that the Lord has for^aken his people, that he
is carrying the gospel from England, that it is like to be as in the Bo^emian
day; and so be consulting to make haste by flight into other Countr^ys (unless
such whose case may be pe^uliar) verily this would be for a provocation; this
would be the bitter fruit o^ unbelief: lo, the Lord will hide you in your own
land, and keep you as the apple of his Eye, ( hid^ thy self as it were for a
little moment) fre^ not against the Lord, though you are called off from your
public Assemblies, and your Ministers laid as dead: Verily the Lord, who
holds his Stars in his right hand, will cause them to shine ^orth again, and
they shall give a more glorious light; the Lord will be against the foolish
Shepherds that would devour the Flock, and will deliver them out of their
mouths, and he will make them as the dung of the Earth; they shall no more
speak l^es in the Name of the Lord; but the Hailestrom shall sweep away the
refuge of lies, and the eyes of this generation shall see it. Be making ready
for the glorious appearance of the Lord, and cry, Mak^ have my bel^ved, and be
thou l^ke ^o ^ Roe, or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices.

12. Wait for an Anointing of Light, Zeal and Magnanimity, to execute the
vengeance of the Lord upon the beast; for Wrath is determined from the Lord,
and the Nations shall tremble because of it, and the Cup of it shall speedilybe
put into theirhands, though they have said, A confederacy, and there is a
healing and peace among them, and the Testimony lies dead, yet the Lord will
come upon them as the breach of many waters. Let that word of our Lord dwell
upon your hearts, for the day of it is coming upon the World, Luke 21. 25. etc.
An^ there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and
upon the Earth DISTRESS of NATIONS, with perplexity, the Sea, and the waters
roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the Earth; for the Power of Heaven shall be shaken; and
th^n shall they see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with Power and great
glory* And when these things begin ^o come ^o pass, then look up, and lift up
your h^ads, FOR YOUR REDEMPTION DRAWS NIGH.

No age of the world has produced such a series of Signs and Wonders as this
has done, in these two years last past, (which are still multiplied) which
though neglected and blasphemed by a generation of scoffers, yet are to be had
in reverence by all that fear the Lord, and regard the (...) of his hands:
Which signs usu^^ly be speak distress of Nations; and the S^^n^s that observe
them, are called to li^t up their ^ead^. The voice of the Lord ^o Egypt in the
signs and wonders of that ^^y, was, Let my people go, that they may serve me,
Exodus 16. 14, 16. ^^. 8. 1. chapter 9. 1. 13. chapter 10. 3. And when Ph^roah refused
^o let the People of God go free that they might serve the Lord, and hard^ned
himself against the wonders of God, it proved his and the Egyptians
destruction, and wrath was upon them, and the Lord by a strong hand let his
people go. But this Consideration would require a larger discussion. Let what
has been hinted, help you to a patient waiting; let us say with good Jeremiah,
Chap. 14. verse. last. Art not thou he, Oh Lord our God? therefore we will wait
upon thee, for thou have made all these things.

The Lord will raise the expectation of his Saints, (as he has already begun)
and then he will come into them, Psalm 9. 15. then, it is but for a moment, a
little moment, nay, but as it were, a little moment, scarce to be called a
little moment, but as it were so; and the indignation shall be over-past: The
Lord would assure his poor people* That he waits but his si^test season, as if
delay were more grievous to him than to his people: Who would not wait for such
a God? Oh! blessed be all they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 8. Take that word
which the Lord has spoken to one or another of his poor s^rvants, Ps. 3^. 34.
Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land
when the wicked are cut off: THOU SHALL SEE IT.

Amen.
FINIS.

