A TREATISE OF PARTICVLAR PREDESTINATION; Wherein ar^ answered three Letters.

1. Tending to disprove particular Predestination. 2. To show the contradiction
betwixt Christ dying for all, and Gods Election of some. 3. To prove that the
soul does not come from the parent, and consequently that there is no
Original sin.
By THOMAS LAMB.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642.

To the unpartiall Reader, Grace, and Peace.
Courteous Reader.
FOr as much as the glory of God ought to be most dear in our eyes, which we
ought to seek, and prefer more then our lives; I could not with good
conscience and reason, but publish these few lines following, (especially being
earnestly desired by some of my dear friends,) and the reasons are, Gospel,
which holds forth Christ's giving himself a ransom for all men, 1. Tim. 2.6. A
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. and that he tasted
death for every man Heb. 2.9. (which is such a glorious truth, as without which
first the Gospel of Gods free grace cannot be preached to all men, secondly
neither can wicked men nor unbelievers be required to believe; and thirdly
neither can the not believing in Christ be concluded to be a sin,) all which
being professed by the people of God (who desire in all sincerity to walk in
all the ways of God, and to be led wholly by the rule of his word, what ever
the hazard be thereby) they are thereby scandalized to hold free will, and to
deny particular election of persons, and persons hereby kept from the truth:
to the end therefore that these stumbling blocks might be taken out of the
way: these following lines do manifestly declare Christ's dying for all, and
particular Election to stand together, which therefore can be no let to hinder
people from the ways of God, nor yet from discerning this particular truth of
Christ's dying for all, the excellency whereof none can prize, but those that
know it; the which excellency if others could know, I am confident they would
not be such enemies to their own souls as to slight it. 2. Because those
that do deny particular election do press upon us, as if we were behind hand
to defend our selves, and our principles against them, whereas it is manifest
(and they know it to be true) that they have had these three Letters in way of
answer to their Letters, and have made no reply, and therefore to the end that
it might appear, that we do not comply with them, secondly that we are not
behind hand to defend our selves against them, and thirdly that we might
provoke them to reply, and to manifest their reasons to public view, if they
have any for the defense of themselves in answer to what I have written to
them, which I conceive they cannot do, I have therefore adventured to put
forth the same to prove whether they can or not, and lastly conceiving that
some may be staggering, and not so well established as were to be wished, and
conceiving that these may be some stay to them, and means to give them further
light then yet they have, (which if they lie in obscurity would do no such
good) for whose sakes in special, J do endeavor that they should bave this
for present, till further occasions bring forth further labors; accept
therefore I entreat you in love this small endeavor read it over with earnest
intention, meditate of it, and try it by the Scriptures with pious devotion;
and if any good light and divine knowledge comes to thee by it, I shall have my
desire, give God the glory of it, let me have the benefit of thy faithful, and
fervent prayers, and I shall ever rest.

Thine in any service of love to my power. THOMAS LAMB.

AN ANSWER TO A short writing, for the disproving of particular
Predestination, made by T. S. in which answer, particular Predestination is
cleared and proved by T. L.
IT is said that God has predestined, that those that will believe in Christ
shall be saved, and those that will not shall be damned.

To which I answer, that this is to short a description of Predestination,
because Predestination is not a conditional but an absolute Decree, as the
Scripture holds it forth, Romans 8.30. In which place two things are to be noted,
and the first is the definition of the Subjects of predestination, and they are
only those which are in time called, justified, and glorified, and the second
is the order of the causes where we are to note, that glorification is not the
cause of our Justification; but Justification is the cause of glorification; so
likewise Justification is not the cause of vocation, but vocation is the cause
of Justification; so likewise vocation is not the cause of Predestination, but
Predestination is the cause of Vacation; and there is no cause of
Predestination, but the mere will of God; and therefore Predestination is
absolute not conditional; promises and threatenings may be found conditional,
but a conditional decree the Scripture maintains not.

And where it is further said that many do affirm, that God has decreed some
to do wickedly, and so to fall under condemnation.

I answer, that God has decreed to permit some to do wickedly, and to refuse
grace, and accordingly to pun^sh them; and to prevent others and to create them
in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10.
unto good works; and accordingly to save them; and to this accords, Romans
9.22.23. what and if God will to declare his wrath, and make his power known,
suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared or fitted to
destruction; that he might declare the riches of his mercy upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto Glory; and they have not prepared themselves
thereunto.

Now to disprove this kind of Predestination, something is said concerning
Adam, how that he was created after the Image of God in the faculties of his
soul; and disposition of his body; and set by God in the Garden of Eden, who
gave him a Law concerning the Tree of Knowledge of Good, and Evil, decreeing
that if he did obey he should live; but if he did eat he should die; and that
although God foresaw that Adam would break his Law, yet it will not follow that
God decreed he should break it;

To which I answer that it does follow that God decreed he should break it
else he would not have suffered him to break it; having power to hinder him, if
it were his will (he could easily do it) but he will not: therefore it is his
will to permit Adam to break his Law.

And where it is said that if it were so, then Adam had no means to resist
sin.

(I answer) I deny the consequence, for it does no more follow, that Gods
Decree that Adam would, or should certainly fall by his permission, does take
from Adam power of resistance of sin, then Gods infallible foresight th^^
Adam would fall does; the later you grant and prove, Acts 15.18. therefore the
former stands upon the same ground.

And whereas it is said, that if Adam had resisted the Tempter and stood he had
crossed the decree of God, which is impossible, because Gods Decree is
unalterable.

I answer, and affirm the like of his prescience or foreknowledge, which is
as infallible as his decree, for if Adam had resisted the tempter and had
stood; God had been deceived in his foresight concerning his fall; and this
Argument is as much as if the sky fall we shall have Larkes: but it does not
fall, and therefore they be not easily had.

And where it is further said that if it should be granted, that God decreed
that Adam should eat and die, and yet commanded him that he should not eat, to
the end that he might live, this were to make the Lord contrary to himself.

I answer denying the consequence, for these things are not contrary, namely
for God to command Adam not to eat; as having Authority so to do, to the end
he might try his willing obedience, and in case he fell to discover the
heinousness of his sin and disobedience, and God foreseeing he would fall
to permit him so to do is no contradiction at all, but a pure truth; for if
men were elected in Christ before the foundation of the world, then was the
fall presupposed, and that they were so Paul affirms it, Ephesians. 1.3.4. and
therefore in this point there is no danger at all.

And where it is further said, if there were no such decree concerning Adam,
then not concerning his posterity neither.

To which I answer, that there is such a Decree concerning Adam, to permit him
to do the evil which was forbidden; Ergo there is such a Decree concerning
his posterity. Also to permit them to do those things which they do that are
forbidden.

And whereas it is further said, that if any still will hold, that God decreed
any man's condemnation, then it is for transgression of the Law, which no man
could do before he was created

I answer, that although no man could transgress the Law before he was
created, yet God could foresee that man would transgress a Law before man was
created: and decreed to suffer him so to do, and decreed to punish him
accordingly.

And wherereas it is further demanded, whether God decreed the condemnation of
Adams person, and supposed the answer will be no: because God decreed to send
his son, to redeem him from Death, and if him why not all his Posterity:
seeing it is written, Ioh. 3.16. That God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish but
have Everlasting Life.

To which I answer, that it does not follow from hence, that God has decreed
to do for all alike, in causing of them to believe: Ezekiel. 3.6.7. Mat. 11.21
for though it may be concluded, that God gave Christ and Christ gave himself
for all alike: yet he does not give the Doctrine of the same to all alike,
Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.28.
much less does he give Faith, which is the effect of the same Doctrine to all
alike: and therefore is said to be the gift of God, not in common, as the
Preaching is, but in special and peculiar as the Election is. Romans 11.7. and
therefore true Faith is called the Faith of Gods elect: Tit. 1.1. given only
to some and not to others, Mat. 13.11. as being those that are Predestined,
and therefore effectually called, justified and glorified. Romans 8.30. but
others he suffers to walk in their own ways. Act. 14.16. as the Vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction Romans 9.22. And the Reprobates and wicked of the
World, could not do such wickedness as they do, but that it pleases God to
suffer such dishonorable ways and practices to be for a time, as knowing how
to bring forth his own glory in their just deserved damnation: But he does not
suffer his Elect to walk in their own ways: but does prevent them that they
escape Eternal Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.32. That he might glorify himself in
them in his mercy, as upon the Vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto
glory,

Whereas you conclude with this request, that your positions against particular
Election, may be either received or answered, I now conclude with the like,
(having as I suppose sufficiently answered this:) that you would either show,
wherein the insufficiency of my answer lies, or yield thereunto.

An Answer to a Letter written by R. H. sending to show the contradiction that
is betwixt Christ's dying for all, and Gods Election of some.
The which Answer shows, that there is no contradiction betwixt these two,
but a sweet concord; by T. L.
First you say you write to show the contradiction that is betwixt universal
redemption and particular election, and how do you do this; you ask the
question how Christ died for all men, seeing he never intended salvation to
them.

To this I answer, that Christ may be said to have died for all men, although
he never intended to make all men to believe in his death for salvation; you
say if God has only elected some persons, and rejected all the rest, then
there is no way of recovery made for them that are rejected;

But Christ has made a way of recovery out of the lost estate, for all those
for whom be died. Ergo.

To this I answer, that Christ has made, or purchased away of recovery for all
men, if they do not reject him and it also; but election is a fore-apointment
that such persons are elected, shall believe and be recovered, and if the rest
do not it is their own fault, because they believe not the truth which
preached, Romans 11.5.7. John 16.9. Mar. 3.5. You say general redemption extends
it self to all; particular Election it opposes it; and says no not to all
but to some only.

This I deny and say, Election does effect that some do believe, but it does
not oppose any in point of believing: and so it does not follow that although
man do not effect in himself in himself faith, and cause himself to be
elected (as is imagined) that he is not the cause of his own destruction by
the refusal of grace offered, and I put the case that none were elected at
all: would it then come to pass that general redemption which extends it
self to all would save all; (because you say particular Election intends only
the salvation of some) if not then would I ask the reason why? if you say
because all do not believe, then you say true, and what if none believe, then
none should be saved: whereby you may see that although general Redemption
extends it self to all, to all, yet nevertheless if none believe, none should
be saved; and that none would believe unless they were elected, appears in
that none would believe unless God work it, such evil is in man's nature, as
does continually oppose the Doctrine of grace, until they be overcome
thereby, which Doctrine for God to afford to men effectually proportionable to
the measure of corruption, even to the taking of it away in some and not in
others, by the extent of his providence, proceeds only from the good pleasure
of his will differently as the same is extended by his continual government of
the world; so then it does appear that Election is a thing super-added over
and above, besides the means of Redemption to cause some to believe, which
otherwise would effect the same.

You say they contradict one another in their ends, which they cannot do, if
they be truths both as for example: you say the end of general Redemption is
the salvation of all, and the avoiding of respect of persons; but the end of
particular Election is this and but this: (namely) to save this person and
condemn that, and because he will do it he will do it; and can give no
Reason, nor show any cause why to clear his Justice or vindicate his Mercy;

To which I answer, that the will of God is reason enough for the disposing of
his gifts of Grace, to whomsoever he pleases, both for the clearing of his
Justice, and vindicating of his Mercy.

Secondly, I say to command and provide me^nes for all, or ^ending to the
salvation of all: and yet to decree the salvation only of some is no
contradiction at a^l: but only a wise disposal of the matter; so as not to
be wholly frustrate of his Commands and means; which otherwise would come to
pass, if he should leave to mankind the whole disposal of the business.

Thirdly I answer, concerning respect of persons, we are to mark and mind
what it is, and in it we are to consider two things: first that it is always
something in the person, for which he is respected, and secondly that the thing
is unsufficient why he should be so respected, but o^herwise to give unlike
Gifts to persons that are alike is no respect of Persons: or if it be then God
is such a resp^cter of persons as may be proved plenteously, for the people of
the Jews were as bad as other Nations, and yet God gave them more and greater
Gifts then he did to other Nations, Ezekiel. 16.47, 48. Deuteronomy. 7.7. Act. 7.39 40.
And likewise Manasseh who did more evil then the Heathen whom the Lord had
destroyed, 2 Kings 21.9. 2 Chronicles. 33.9.10. Neither were the 42. Children worse
then Manasseh, and the Jews living in his time which notwithstanding perished,
and the other were spared as is to be scene 2 Kings 2.24. and God gave them no
time to repent of their sins, as he did to Manasseh, and the people who
notwithstanding when the Lord spoke unto them would not regard. And Paul
likewise exceeded many other in wickedness, or at least was as bad, and many
of them which yet had no miraculous apparition of Christ, to effect their
conversion, Faith and Grace as Paul had: therefore the dealing of God in
communicating of Gifts do differ, though the persons do not differ, but be
one as bad as the other, yea many, those which have the most and greatest gifts
bestowed upon them are the worst; and therefore in Election if there be any
difference God chooses the worst both of persons and things, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27,
28. the end is that he might avoid respect of any thing, in the persons or
things which he chooses, either present or foreseen, ver. 29. for what any
person or thing is in goodness, he or it is, Ephe. 2.19 Iam. 1.17
that he or ^^is by the work of God, verse. 30. the end is that he might have
the whole praise, verse. 31.

Fourthly I say if God leave the matter wholly to man in general Redemption, as
that he does Elect Persons no otherwise then in Relation to qualities: then he
has respect to persons, and the reason is, because he has respect to
something in the person, for which he does respect him: and yet the thing is
insufficient why he should be ^o respected, for according to that position more
should have been chosen, but with respect to what they do, which others do
not, now it remains to be examined whether that which some do of themselves by
their own power, puts a worth and excellency upon their Persons, to cause God
to choose them above others: if not then I demand why and upon what reason God
should choose them above others; and again, if that which some do of
themselves, and by their own power put a worth and excellency upon their
Persons, to (...) God to choose them above others; th^n Paul ^rreth in saving
that Election is or favor or Grace, Romans 11.5 6. Now I conceive it will not be
said there is a worth or excellency upon the person of any man, by what he ^oth
by his own power, in point of believing Sanctification, obedience, and
perseverance to cause God to choose him; and if not, then is God a respect^r of
Persons, and not just but partial; because he does respect one more then
another, and yet the thing for which he is respected does not deserve why he
should be so respected, and according to the Argument it is all one, as if a
Judge should save some Malefactor, because he is rich, strong, wise,
beautiful, or because near of kindred, whereas he will condemn another,
because he is a stranger, or evil favored, poor, foolish or weak which
were partiality.

And on the other side, and if any will affirm that what some do of
themselves, by their own power in point of believing, Sanctification,
obedience, and perseverance, put a worth and excellency upon their persons
above others, to cause God to choose them, the absurdities will be more
horrible; which what they will be I leave to you to conceive and judge of.

In the next place, you say you come to answer some of my Scriptures, that I
bring to prove particular Election, and first you begin with my saying, that
they which are in time saved were formerly appointed so to be: you say it is a
very truth, but nothing at all for particular Election: and why does it not?
you say; it proves yours to be a truth also; for all that are or shall be
saved were formerly appointed so to be; but who be they? not any person
abstract from Faith Sanctification, or obedience to the Gospel as you say I
must prove, if I will prove particular Election.

To which I answer, I do observe in your answer subtilty, weakness and error,
and first for Subtilty it is observable, that you say, who are they that are or
shall be saved, and then you answer not any person abstract from Faith,
Sanctify, etc. and herein you do subtly turn the question from Election to
Salvation, thereby insinuating as if we should say, that some persons abstract
from Faith, Sanctification, and should be saved, whereas the proper question is
who be they that are elected: or more properly whether men believe before they
be elected, we know grant and agree, that all that are saved do believe, and
are sanctified before they are saved: but most properly is the question whether
Faith, Sanctity, and obedience be the cause of Election, this do I absolutely
deny.

Secondly, I do accuse you of weakness, because you do not answer to the
second part of the reason at all, which if you had I conceive you would have
found it to strong for you, and therefore it is mere weakness to shun the
strength of an Argument: to prove this I express the former Argument by me
framed, and it was this.

That which God does in time, he did appoint or decree to do before time; but
he does cause some to believe in Christ, and not others; Ergo he did so decree
before.

This you say proves not particular Election, and does it not indeed? I would
put you in mind that it does; for it shows that God does in time cause some
to believe, and not others: Ergo, he did elect their persons, and appoint and
decree them to believe in Christ before.

Now to prove this, I showed that the sole cause of the difference proceeded
from the Lord, why one believed and not another by these Scriptures, Mat.
13.11. Where Christ says, To you it is given to know the Secrets of the
Kingdom of Heaven, but to others it is not given, Phil. 1.29. To you it given
for Christ, not only to believe in him but also to suffer for his sake. Phil.
2.13. for it is God which works in you both the will and the deed.

The Conclusion then is this, if God work Faith in some in time, and not in
others, then he did appoint so to do before, and consequently did elect them
and not others; the former is by me proved, and not by you disproved nor
denied, for you make no answer thereunto, whether God God causes some to
believe above others or no, this you speak nothing to at all: and the other
you grant to be a truth, namely what he does in time he decreed to do before;
Ergo, he did elect and appoint some to believe and not others.

And thus you may behold your self to deal very weakly, and the strength to
prevail against you, deal therefore more strongly next time and more
punctually, or else yield to the truth.

Thirdly, I do accuse you of error in the sequel of your discourse, in that
you make a respective Decree of Election in reference, unto what man will do
in point of believing, Sanctification, obedience and perseverance; which if it
be so then man is the cause of his Election and adoption, and then such a
person may rejoice in what he has done in causing himself to be elected and
adopted, but against this I do set the manifest words of Scripture 1 Cor. 4.7.
who is it that has separated thee, or caused thee to differ from another man?
you say a man's self by his voluntary believing, and practicing the duties of
Sanctification, obedience and perseverance, but against this the text is
considerable: what have thou that thou have not received? if you will now say
that the Gospel is Gods gift but the ability to believe obey and presevrere is
in man or else God should be Unjust to condemn us for not doing that with we
have no Power to do; here would I have you to hold to the Text, that either
you have not this Power as you are men simply, or if you have, then another man
has it as well as you, then does Paul ask the question still, who has
separated or caused thee to differ from another man? if you say you used the
ability or power which you had aright, which if another had done as I have, he
had sped as well as I: then this will follow that you have separated or caused
your self to differ from another man, by a right use of the power you had in
your self above another, and have not received it and may glory as if you had
not received it, but fie upon this filthy error which does so set up man, and
take from God contrary to the mind of Paul in this place; and also in the 1
Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Where it is said that God electeth foolish weak vile
despised things, and things that are not: one end is to bring to naught things
that are, another end is that no Flesh should glory in his presence, in Ephesians.
1.4.5, 6. compared with chap. 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. We
may see that he choseth those that were dead in sins, Children of wrath,
Gentiles, uncircumcision, such as were without Christ, strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel, aliens from the Covenants of Promise, such as had
neither Faith nor Hope, but were a far off without God in the World; yea even
at this time when they were dead by sins, ver. 5. then did God set his great
love upon them ( ver. 4.) to choose them ( Chap. 4.) that he might work Faith
and Holiness in them ( Chap. 2.8.10.) that thereby he might set forth his rich
Grace and kindness, and praise. ( ver. 7 Chap. 1.6.) and that he might take
from man all occasion of arrogating to himself any boasting at all ( Chap.
2.8, 9.) thus I conceive I have replied sufficiently to your answer, and would
put you in mind that there were two reasons more, which you have not spoken too
at all: and it is much that you (...) three Reasons, (...) two of them: (...)
you have ans^^red the (...) to my purpose, (...) have no^ spoken to (...) them
(...) to prove the thing in a (...)

That (...) is the (...) the (...).

Now the (...) why God sends the Gospel (...) be preached which is the (...) of
Faith, (...) plen^^^sly, in the pla^^ then (...) of his El^^t and chosen ones
in th^^ place (...) Act. 18.6.9^ 11. comp^^^ with the 16.7, 8, 9, 10. (...)
Election is (...) cause of Faith.

Eternal life is the gift of God Rom 6.22. therefore all the causes concurring
to (...) be the gift of God also;

But some persons only are (...) those (...) as those in whom only (...)
Faith is a cause concurring to (...), E^go Election (...) cause and Faith as
its proper effect, it is the gift of God.

Here follows an answer to Letter which was (...). In which answer is showed
how that the some and original sin, and corruption of nature is derived by
the (...) ration from Adam.
LOving friend according to you^ (...) have ad^^ssed my self to you in these
few following (...) for you^ perusal.

You say we have been in dispute about the souls coming from God, you say,
I deny it. I conceive you are mistaken, for I only say the soul does not come
from God immediately with out the means of the parents, for by the means of
the Parents hold the soul to come from God and the body also

You say it is impossible for the (...) of one (...) the Sp^rit^ f^^ other,
because the Spirit is the (...)

To which I answer, separate the Spirit of the (...) from the flesh in the act
of generation, and what g^^^^ing w^^^ there be (...) of soul (...) body,
wh^^^^s on the other side if you conjoyn (...) together in the ge^i^^^ wh^^
should hinder, but that there should be the same conjunction (...) g^neration
(...) thing gendered, (...) ^^ing to the (...) command of God to every creature
gendering, that they should go forth and multiply according to their kind, not
a part but the whole of their kind, such as they themselves are; you allege
Zach. 12.1. which says God forms the Spirit of a man, and so he does the
body too, Job. 31.15. and the body of the corn also, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38. But
this hinders not, but that he uses the means which he has appointed in
nature, for the effecting of these forms, for it is plain that they are all
natural forms, and essential to the nature of the creature formed, so man,
soul and body both parts are essential to his nature, and effected by means
of man, whose nature it is you allege, Psalm 33.15. He fashioneth their hearts
every one of them; which is to be understood of Providence whereby he orders
their hearts in their several operations, and affections and nothing pertinent
to creation or infusion of souls.

As for Heb. 12.9. I showed that the Apostle calls God the Father of Spirits in
respect of his absolute authority over them, secondly in communicating grace
and goodness to them, you say you can see no reason to take it so, and why you
say he opposes the soul to the body, this I grant, but whereas you say he
opposes the fountain of the one to the fountain of the other; that remains
yet for you to prove, that he opposes the fatherhood of the one, to the
fatherhood of the other, cannot be denied, but that by fatherhood should be
meant fountain, cannot be clearly concluded in respect of the essence, of
soul and body, unless you mean by fountain, author of the spiritual life
of grace, and salvation, communicated to the soul by the Gospel of God, as
Iam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. for to speak as the thing is it is Grace communicated
which gives the soul its true being, for before the soul is dead in
trespasses, but grace makes it alive, and God by communicating the same grace
by which the soul lives, is called the Father of Spirits, or spiritual Father
opposed to our natural Father, of whom we are carnally begotten, and borne,
and the Apostle would have the believing Hebrews to submit themselves unto his
chasticements, who as he is the Author of our spiritual life, so is he the
preserver of the same spiritual life, and uses the same for their profit and
life, as he does express himself, and therefore seeing you have submitted
your selves to your natural Father, much more should you submit your selves to
this spiritual Father for your profit, and spiritual benefit, that you might
be partakers of his holiness.

You say if the soul comes by generation, then there must be a conjunction of
Spirits at the same time as is of bodies, and this you deny, Ergo.

To this I answer, that bodies of mankind abstracted from their spirits have no
conjunction.

you say if souls of Parents begets the souls of the children, then a learned
man must beget a learned child, and a gracious man a gracious child as well as
a sinful man a sinful child, seeing learning grace and sin are all accidents,
having a being in the man, not being with the man, for a man say you may be a
perfect man as Adam was without them.

First I deny the consequence which is, if a soul begets a soul, then a
learned man must beget a learned child, and so of grace as well as of sin:
beca^se if the soul do beget a soul it is to be supposed that it begets
such a soul in likeness as it was in natures being: and not such a one as it
was by art or gift, but learning is artificial and grace is of gift: but sin
is natural, for it is the corruption of nature, and did enter in^o the world
by one man over all men, Romans 5.12. and therefore we are by nature the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and not by accident.

Secondly I answer to the antecedent that the soul does not beget the soul,
but the person soul and body does beget the person soul and body; and such as
is the person begetting in his nature, such is the person begotten.

And whereas you say all persons are free from sin till they commit actions of
sin, and thereby only do become in bondage to it to which you allege, Ioh.
8. which place does more directly show the person that is in bondage, than the
thing which brings him into bondage, as if he should say he that commits
sin, does plainly declare himself serviceable and subject thereunto, Romans
6.12. and whereas you say a present bondage presupposes a former freedom, this
is not denied, so as you have respect to Adam who was created good, and so free
from sin, till he fell from that state into sin, into which he brought all his
posterity together with himself, Romans 5.12. otherwise there are many of the
sons of Adam, which should need no redemption by Christ, if they be free from
sin in themselves, and besides as it overthrowes Christ's dying for all: so I
see not why they should not continue free by a careful use of their power they
have in nature, even in keeping the Law, and so consequently be saved thereby
which is the opinion of diverse, and then should Christ die in vain and to no
purpose at all, Gal. 2.21. and by the same reason one may, all may, nay if
there had been a Law which could have given life, surely r^ghteousnes should
have been by that Law, Gal. 22. but the Scripture has concluded all de^^^r
sin, therefore since the fill of Adam free from sin no otherwise then by
(...) faith in Christ, and so I (...) questions.

That all m^n have as much benefit (...), without (...) Adam (...) and death
(...) as all die in Adam 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.

To which I say all have not to much benefit (...) Christ's resurrection (...)
their actual Faith, as they have (...) death by Adams sin or death without
actual sin, because ^hey (...) have natural union with Adam: without their
actual sin, but none have spiritual union with Christ without actual Faith
(or I had rather say personal Faith, because I conceive faith may be
potentiall as well as actual) as for the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. by which
you back your question. I conceive it is by you mistaken very much, because you
gather from thence that all men have benefit by Christ's resurrection without
their personal faith: which I conceive is not the mind of Paul, but only to
show that Christ was the head or first fruits, whose resurrection is both the
beginning, and also a sure pledge of the resurrection of his body or whole lump
that have being in him by faith, ver. 18. and have his spirit in them, Rom
8.10.11. Christ by his Spirit quickens their mortal bodie^, the certainty
whereof makes them debtors to live after the spirit, ver. 12

And Christ in four several places in Ioh. 6. speaks of this matter as of a
special benefit belonging to the faithful, 1 in ver. 39. 2d. in v. 40. 3d. in
ver. 44. 4d. in ver. 54.

It is true the wicked also shall rise but not as a benefit from Christ's
resurrection, in, or unto which they have no relation but by an effect of his
glorious power to their utter confusion and condemnation Ioh. 5.19

^est
And whereas you ask how Christ restores all things from the bondage of
corruption, I conceive by a^l things you will understand a limitation in
relation to the univers^, ^^s.
or else I will ask you whether wicked persons be not things, and whether those
things be restored from the bondage of corruption by Christ, and therefore by
all things must be meant a^l the faithful, and all things in relation to them
for their happiness.

Your last qu^st^^n is whether Christ the righteous Jud^^ will judge by the law
given to Adam before the f^^, or by the Gospel after, or by both by both, ^s.
for the law given to Adam before he sinned, is it which he sinned against, and
thereof it comes that man has need of a Gospel or glad t^dings of grace and
mercy which grace and mercy if it be received it delivers from the curse of
the Law, if it be not received he lies under the curs^ of the Law still, and
under the refusal grace also according a^ the means of making ^^owne this
grace has been aforded.

FINIS.

