A SERMON Preached before the KING, AT KENSINGTON, January 13. 1694/5.

By J. LAMB, D. D. Dean of Ely, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON.

Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1695.

JOB v. 2. The latter part of the Verse. -- And Envy slays the filly one.
PLUTARCH says of Human Passions, that they are not Evil in themselves, but
Good Affections, which Nature has furnished us withal, for great and noble
Purposes. De Virt. and Vit.


Right Reason, Wisdom, and Discretion, are our principal Faculties, it is true;
These ought to Command, and give the Rule; yet all our other Powers and
Passions have their proper place, and are designed to signify and express, to
attend and follow the Resolution of our Judgment, and to exert themselves so
far as Reason shall direct.

And were this Order well observed, how blessed, how happy should we be? Our
Motions all Harmonious, our Minds serene, our Ends well chosen, our Methods
apposite, and we should be easy under all Events.

But oh! how shamefully do we invert the Order of our Nature. How basely do we
force our Reason, and make it truckle to a present Pleasure? How easily do we
suffer an Intestine War, and submit to a perpetual Clashing, Tumult, and
Disorder in our selves.

If Brutes could understand, they would rejoice in their Condition of
Necessity, and despise our Estate of Liberty and Reason, when they observe how
fatally we abuse them: How we Love and Hate, Desire and Shun, are Eager and
Impatient, Vehement and Furious, beyond the Direction of our Reason, or the
Value of the Object.

And thus, by Indulging to our Passions, we destroy our Happiness; as well in
all other Instances, as in those of my Text, for Malice Kills the Foolish
Man; and envy slays the silly one.

I shall not trouble you with an account of the Wisdom, and Antiquity, of this
Book of Job; the truth of the History, its Credit and Esteem; the vastness of
his Riches, and the Prosperity of his Family; the Malice of the Devil, and the
sad Catastrophe of his Affairs. It is enough that I observe the occasion of the
Words, and then I shall proceed to the Argument it self.

Chapter the third, at the first Verse, we find this Holy Saint in great
Affliction on every side; and so much the more as he was deserted, or, which is
worse, Chap. 6.14, etc.
reproached and upbraided by his pretended Friends. For Eliphaz the Temanite,
though he seems to pity and advise him, yet he loads him with Calumny, Cap. 2.1^.
and lays all manner of Evil to his Charge. That Ploughing Iniquity, and Sowing
Vanity, he had Reaped the same, (Chap. 4.8.) That, by the blast of God he
perished, and by the breath of his Nostrils he was consumed, Ver. 9.

This is his Accusation, and this the Comfort they administer. But as for the
Proof, it appears that he did not speak these things upon his Knowledge, or
upon the Testimony of credible Men; but resolves, from a very uncertain Topic,
that Job must needs be such an one, because he was Afflicted. Remember, I pray
thee, (Ver. 7.) who ever Perished being Innocent, or where were the Righteous
cut off. And, Call now, (Chap. 5. at the 1 st. Verse) if there be any that will
answer Thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? For Malice kills the
foolish Man, and Envy slays the silly one.

And thus he insults this Holy Sufferer, and would have him believe, that he
was this Malicious Man whose Vice had killed him, and this Envious Man whose
Spite had slain him.

Because Ambition and Envy are the common Vices of a plentiful Fortune, he
concludes that Job must needs have been guilty of them, and is therefore
Punished.

But leaving Job to justify himself, as he does by appealing to God, Thou
know that I am not Wicked, and that there is none can deliver out of thine
hand, (Chapter 10.7.) And leaving him also to answer his Friend, and expose his
Reasonings; For God destroys as well the Perfect as the Wicked, as he proves at
large, Chap. 9.22, etc. Leaving, I say, the Dispute to them, the Maxim of the
Text remains a Truth, which neither part denied, which all must allow, That,
Envy slays the silly One.

These Words are one entire unlimited Proposition, viz. That, Envy slays the
Envious Man.

And that we may more clearly understand it, and be more sensibly affected with
it, I shall proceed, with all possible brevity, in this following Method.

First, I will endeavor to explain the Vice, or what we understand by Envy,
and when a Man may be said to be an Envious Man. Secondly, I shall enquire into
the Truth of his Character, or how justly it is said of an Envious Man, that he
is a silly one. Thirdly, I shall consider the fatal Effects of this Foolish
Vice, or how certainly it will destroy him; for, Envy slays the silly one.
Fourthly and Lastly, by way of Application, I shall humbly propose the proper
Remedies of so great an Evil.
Envy, and when a Man may be said to be an Envious Man.

Now, Envy is a Regret of Mind, or an inward trouble at the Prosperity of
another, ea ratione, or for that reason only, because he is successful in the
World.

There are a great many Vices, as Ambition, Malice, Pride, and others, that
carry a resemblance of it, and are related to it; but they either proceed from
a different Principle, or terminate in some particular Object: They are
confined and limited, but Envy is Indefinite. Thus Malice is a disgust to a
particular Person or Company, upon supposition of Injury received; an Ambitious
Man would attain to such a degree of Honor as he proposes to himself, but is
well pleased that others should enjoy the rest. A Proud Man would be respected
above his Merit, but is content, if ye will value him as he desires, to allow
you something in return.

But the Principle, the formal Reason of this singular Vice of Envy, is a
Repining, a Gnawing, a Trouble in the Mind, that any Man should prosper.

Whether his Enjoyments are any prejudice to him that envies them, or whether
they are not; whether he has the same, or greater advantages in the World, or
whether he has not; it is enough that his Neighbor is happy, he is not able to
endure it.

Thus Plutarch has defined it by, Spite Indefinite, and says, That it resembles
the Disease called Opththalmia, a Disease in the Eye, which makes it unable to
endure the brightness of any Light whatever. And with him Tully, and all
Philosophers agree, Invidentia est aegritudo suscepta propter alterius res
secundas, quae nihil noceant invidenti. Tusc. Quaes. l. 4.
That the Specific difference of Envy is Impatience at the Prosperity of
another as such, or though it be in no wise prejudicial to him that envies it.

This is the Vice of Envy; and it is more or less predominant and rancorous,
according to the Tempers of Men, and the Indulgence that it finds.

Sometimes it spits its Venom at the Throne of Heaven, and strikes at the
Majesty of God Himself. Sometimes it is exercised upon Kings and Princes, and
Persons of the highest Rank; yet Instances of such Extravagance are more rare,
but the usual Objects of our Envy, are those of our own Condition; those with
whom, as we think, we may pretend an equality, not far above us nor below us,
but such as are upon or near our Level. The extremities of Fortune, (...).
Simplic. in Epict. (...). Id.


as the Philosopher observes, are for the most part free from Envy. Mighty
Acquisitions, such as we can never hope for, are apt to extinguish it; and such
an inferior Station as we are not likely to fall into, cannot easily provoke
it.

The usual Objects then of Spite and Envy, are those of the same Condition and
Pretenses; those that are in our Eye, those whom we emulate, and with whom we
contend and strive.

This is the Vice, and this is the Sphere of its activity.

And, indeed, there is not any evil habit to which we are more inclined, than
to this of Envying the felicity of our Neighbor; nor is there any more
pernicious. Plerique sunt Invidi, says Tully, De Orat.
maximeque est hoc commune vitium. Most Men are envious in some degree; nor is
there any Vice so general as this.

Nothing therefore can be more expedient than to expose this Monster, this
corruption. of Human Nature, in its proper Colors.

For though all Men are inclined to it, as I said, yet none can endure to own it,
it is so contrary to Humanity, Friendship, Society, and Good Will, that every
one detests the Imputation. But nevertheless, it is of so corroding a Nature,
that it eats through the Heart, it makes its way through all its coverings, and, in
spite of all endeavors, it will break forth into the open Air, it may easily
be discerned. For,

What He! What such an one! so contemptible a thing! it can never be! The news
of another Man's success, ferments and swells him into Rage and Fury. They bark
like a Dog, (says St. Augustine) and are pale in the face; they threaten with
their Head, they wring their Hands, and gnash their Teeth. Nothing so
ungrounded, if it be ill, that he will not say; nothing, Aug, Sermon. 18.
that has the least appearance of Truth, that he will not aggravate.

Or if these grosser Transports are restrained, or entrusted only with his
intimate Friends, yet the Distemper will appear, through all the various
Disguises of it. For,

Though it seems an easy matter, says St. Chrysostom, to rejoice with them that
do rejoice, yet, in Truth, it is very difficult, Hom. 53. de Char.
and he must be a Man whose Mind is exercised in Virtue, that can sincerely do
it.

For when with his Tongue he gives you joy, you may read his Trouble in his
Face, in his uneasy manner and exotic Actions; in the rolling of his Eyes, in
the convulsion of his Feet; in some involuntary Motion or other, in every part.

Simplicius says of an Envious Man, That he is an Enemy to every one that is
happy; and therefore if he cannot destroy him, he will at least dishonor,
lessen, and undervalue him, as much as he can.

He appears very well indeed, he will tell you, but no Man is happy in every
part; his Age or his Infirmities, his Passions or his Troubles, his Crosses or
Miscarriages, in these or those particulars, are such that I would not change
Conditions with him. Nay, perhaps he will say, that He is sorry for it too, but
you may be sure he dissembles, for he never hangs so long upon the brighter
side of his Affairs; he only touches upon that, that he may introduce the
other, (which he loves to hear and speak of) with the less suspicion.

That he has endeavored, though he says it, to merit what others obtain; but his
Simplicity, or his Modesty, or his Ignorance of some kind of Arts, have kept
him where he is; and if Fortune rule the World, he must have done. But there
will come a Time -- And thus, by a great many broken Expressions, you are to
understand, that by how much he is not so happy as another, by so much he is
injured; and that is some sort of ease and satisfaction to him.

of the World. Despicio Urbem! What I do not need, I do not Envy! Content's a
Feast. Lord what a noise, what a dust they make! How much happier am I that aim
at nothing, that hope for nothing, that would not be troubled with any more
than I have?

Thus Envy shelters it self under the Principles of Philosophy, (as the most
Sacred things are liable to abuse) whilst they use them only as Vehicles of
their Malice, to amuse the Hearer, and diffuse their Discontent with the
greater Secrecy, and less reflection.

The truth of the matter most commonly is this; They could not have their Will,
and now they are convinced, as they make you believe, that there was nothing in
it, if they had obtained it. They cannot destroy your Fortune, or reduce it to
nothing in Fact, and therefore they please themselves, by making it nothing in
Truth, in Worth and Value.

Envy upon their Spleen, and then they think they may vent it freely, and
without reflection upon themselves; Complain, Revile, Arraign, Condemn, and be
as Free and Witty with your Reputation as they please; and when they have done
all the Mischief they can, beg Pardon for their Freedom, and hope you will
ascribe it to the sourness of their Blood, and not believe it is their real
Opinion or habitual humor.

Plutarch observes, they vent their Malice under a Pretext of Virtue, and a
Public Spirit. It is a sad thing, say they, to observe how Affairs are
managed. Come, come! the World was never made for the Wicked! we shall see,
e're long, how the Mighty Ones are fallen, and then, The Meek shall inherit the
Earth.

And thus, by their envious Glosses, they profane the Sacred Writings, and
forge a Title to other Men's Estates.

And therefore, Lastly, Envy will express it self as occasion offers, in
Rapine, Violence and Murder.

It is certainly a Vice of the most bitter Nature. When Wiles and Projects
would not do, Saul sets his Servants, nay, Jonathan his Son, to Murder David;
these failing, he sought to act the Villainy himself. The Envy of Joseph's
Brethren prompted them to kill him out of hand; but Reuben's Vice was a little
better natured, and he compromis'd the matter, and only sold him for a Slave.

Indeed, he that cannot bear the Prosperity of his Neighbor, would certainly
reduce him if he could. And therefore the Envious are always ripe for Mischief:
They bridle their Malice, or vent it with as little noise as may be, when they
are not able to hurt; but whenever occasion offers, they bite like an Adder.
When they act without restraint or fear, nothing can divert them. For Wrath is
cruel, and Anger is outrageous, but who can stand before Envy, Pro. 27.4.

These are a few of the more notorious Methods, by which the Envious express
their Temper. And if we lay them altogether, and consider them impartially, we
cannot choose but have an ill opinion of the Vice.

For, I hope, by this time, it appears, that nothing in the World is more
unworthy of a Man of Sense, of Truth or Honor.

For an Envious Man is a malicious Hypocrite; if he should appear as he is, he
would be banished out of all Society; and therefore he dares not own his
Quality, but lives in a disguise, studies to be wisely spiteful, and hides his
Rancour under every Cloak.

But alas! his Nature will appear, and his Villainy will be detected. His Vice
is very Foolishness; it will expose and ruin him at the present, it will
destroy and kill him in the end. For Envy slays the silly one.

Second Place, to consider the truth of his Character, or how justly it is said
of an Envious Man, that he is a silly one. And this was the second Head of
Discourse proposed.

It is observed by some that the Particle (...) which we render for (for Envy
slays the silly one) may be also rendered vere, just, merito, and so the
vulgar Latin translates it here, Vere parvulum occidit invidia, which adds a
mighty Emphasis to the assertion of the Text, viz. That Envy slays the
Envious Man, who is a silly one indeed, his Folly is extreme, apparent, and
indisputable.

Wisdom consists in three particulars:





toward the bringing our designs to pass.

A Wise Man then is one who weighs, compares, and values things exactly; who
governs his Passions, and keeps his Mind entirely free; who judges impartially,
chooses rationally, and pursues his Ends with diligence and proper Application:
Who clears his Way of all Obstructions that arise from himself, and can avoid,
as much as may be, such as are not in his Power.

Now Folly is directly opposite to Wisdom, and therefore if this be a true
Account, or Character of a Wise Man, we cannot mistake the notion of a Fool.

A Fool then is one whose Understanding is prejudiced, whose Judgment is not
free; who is vern'd by his Passions, drawn into false Opinions, wild,
unreasonable Ends, and destructive Measures.

But such a silly one as this is, is that of my Text; he endures and cherishes
a Vice that blinds his Reason, and puts him out of all possibility of being
happy.

Do but consider how odious, how despicable, how deserted such Men are; how
they lose both their Interest and their Friends; and this alone is enough to
manifest their Folly, and support their Character.

No Man is self-sufficient, no Man is able to stand alone; we cannot be happy
but by the Mediation, the good Will and Assistance of one another.

But an Envious Man is a common Nuisance, that every one is offended with, and
no Man can endure.

Indeed he hopes to be hid; it is the only Malignity, as Plutarch observes,
that no Man will own; but Envy is so rank a Poison, that it corrupts not one
part only, but all the Man. Let him therefore gild over the bitterness of his
Spirit as well as he can, it will taste of the Principle, it will discover it
self in spite of Art.

And thus, silly Man! whilst he designs to hurt his Neighbor, he destroys
himself. His Spite and Indignation make him over-shoot all modest bounds. He is
so impatient till you understand his Worth, and how contemptible those are of
whom he speaks, that he thrusts it upon you, that he overloads you, and raises
a prejudice against himself. Merito omni amico privari debes, eo quod de nullo
amicorum bono gaudere probaris. St. Aug.
For every Man that is present (such is the benignity of the Human Nature) is a
Friend to him that is aspersed, and looks awry upon his Enemy. It is but
natural to reflect, that he must surely be a considerable Man, Nemo homini
Contempto pertinaciter, nemo diligenter nocet. Sen.
who is so industriously vilified.

And thus the Dart that he shoots at his Neighbor, recoils upon himself. For
there is such a complication of Evil Qualities in Envy and Detraction; of
Curiosity, Conceit, and Pride; of Meddling, Judging, and Malicious Censure, as
makes the Guilty nauseous to all; and no Man knows but he may be the next, that
shall come under his Lash, and therefore every one despises and avoids him.

Or if these things seem to affect his Happiness at too great a distance; if he
could have Spirit enough to bear up against a general Contempt, against that
Scorn and Neglect he must certainly meet with; yet his Vice it self is a
constant Misery that cannot by any means be shaken off; it is of so Pestilent a
Nature that it puts him out of all possibility of being happy, and makes him
the most uneasy Creature in the World.

No Being can be happy but in the way of his Nature. And therefore he that will
grasp at that which is out of his Line, he that must have what he lists, and
will have all things go according to his Mind, or will be angry, is sure to be
always miserable.

For the Goods of the World, of Body, Mind, and Fortune, are dispensed in
Measures and Degrees amongst us all. No Man can command what he will, or hinder
others as he pleases. No Man can be the best, or self-sufficient, or not
wanting something that another Man enjoys.

And therefore he that does not consider his Condition simply, as it is in it
self, (and bring his Mind to a satisfaction in it) but with relation and
respect to other Persons, shall never be easy whilst he lives. If another
Man's Estate will sour the enjoyment of his own, he must be unhappy till he
has engrossed the World. If he will not suffer others to be under the same
possibilities of good Fortune with himself; if he must be distinct from the
rest of his kind, or neither endure himself nor them, he must of necessity be
always Miserable, for the World will never be at his Command.

But is not this a most horrible Infatuation, O! Invide qui nunquam quiescere
potes! an ignoras quod omnis malitia habet aliquam felicitatis umbram, sed tu
ipsa Invidia, nequissima peffis, totmentum sine refrigerio, morbum sine
remedio, laborem sine Respiratione, poenam sine intermissione, famem sine
saturitate, semper habere videris? Aug. Sermon. 18.
a blindness upon the Mind? Is he not a silly one indeed? He is not a Fool in a
single Instance, but he has lost his Understanding. It looks like a Judgment of
God upon a Man, a Punishment of Wickedness, rather than a Vice: For, as a Bird
in a Net, he is always busy, always angry; striving, and fretting, and
laboring in vain, till his Spirits are exhausted, and he has worked himself to
Death.

And thus much for the Character of an Envious Man, that he is a silly one.

Third Place, to consider the fatal effects of this foolish Vice, or how
certainly it will destroy him. For Envy slays the silly one; it does not only
expose him at the present, and make his Life uneasy to him, (...), as the
Philosopher calls it, but it destroys him utterly, and kills him in the end.

It affects his Body, vitiates his Mind, destroys his Soul, and ruins him in
all Capacities.

First, It affects his Body.

It is not understood, that every Man that is Envious dies of Envy; but that
the Distemper is Mortal, and every Man that labors under it, is in danger of
Death: The causes are at work which naturally tend to produce the effect.

For there is nothing plainer than that the Passions of the Mind have good or
ill effects upon the Body, as they are managed. An easy cheerful steddiness of
Temper, contributes very much to the Vigor, Health, and Pleasure of the Body;
but a tetrical Humor, Envy, Peevishness, and Discontent, ferment and sour the
Blood, precipitate the motion of the Spirits, urge outrageous Passions, fill
the Mind with angry Thoughts, hinder Rest, destroy our Appetites, and take away
all Enjoyment, breed Grief and Melancholy, and end in a sickly livid Look, in
Lassitude, Consumption, and Despair. Nay, many times it affects the Head so
far, that it makes the Envious his own Destroyer. Isoc.
(...), says the Philosopher. And upon these Accounts, it is expressed in
Scripture by a Fire that melts him, (Psalm. 112.10.) by a Worm that gnaws him.
by a Canker that frets him, (Psalm. 37.1.) by Rottenness in his Bones, (Tarmes
Ossium) that consumes and wastes him, (Prove. 14.30.) Thus Envy is a lingering
Death, and he that is troubled with it has his Mortal Wound about him. It is a
Poison that is slow but sure.

Second Place, it vitiates the Mind, and destroys the Moral Life. Envy is the
Corruption of the Human Nature, a base degeneracy into the bestial State.

For what is the distinction between Us Men, and Brutes, but the Social
Virtues? but Right and Property? or the gratifying of our selves with respect
and safety to the interest of others? Envy therefore changes our very Nature,
and superinduces another, but a most horrid, Form upon us.

When Universal Justice and Mortality are laid aside, there is not in the World
so mischievous a Being as Man. When the restraints of Virtue are losened, or
put off, he is by so much the most Savage Creature, as Reason abused; that is,
resolved into a selfish, spiteful Cunning, is the keenest, and the most able
instrument of Mischief.

Thus Envy never is alone; it is not a single Vice, but a radical Evil, that
diffuses its Malignity into every part, and expels all Virtue out of the Soul.
Omnes virtutes concremat, says St. Augustine, Omnia bona dissipat, omnia mala
generat. Ser. 18.
And, Where Envy and Strife are, there is Confusion and every Evil Work, says
the Apostle St. James.

And if Envy divests a Man of his Virtue and his Reason, it must of necessity
destroy his Soul too; and thus it slays the silly one, in all his Capacities
of Suffering.

Envy is more directly contrary to the Nature of God, than any other Vice; more
diametrically opposite to Love and Goodness, which are his very Definition, for
God is Love, 1 John 4.8.

Where then will the Envious Man appear, who has defaced the Image of God upon
his Soul, and turned the Laws of his Nature off the Hinges, as St. Chrysostom,
in one of his Homilies, expresses it.

Or if he be a Christian, as we all are, it is so much the worse; for
Christianity condemns him utterly; he is a Scandal to the Gospel, and ought to
cast off the Profession of it.

For Christianity is founded in Love; and our Savior was introduced by the
Heavenly Choir, with, Peace on Earth, Good Will to Men. And what was the Design
of his Glorious Appearance, but to Reconcile us to God, to skreen us from his
Wrath, and establish Love and Amity in the World? And what was his Doctrine
that he taught us? Was it not To Love our Neighbor as our selves? Was it not
to Learn of Him, to be Meek and lowly in Mind, and not to affect applause,
superiority, or the highest Place?

This then is Christianity, that we wish well to all Mankind, and are content
with our own Condition; that we sympathize with our Neighbor, as Members one
of another; Romans 12.
that we Rejoice with them that do Rejoice, and Mourn with them that Mourn;
that we be not high-minded, but apt to prefer one another in Honor: that we
think no Evil, that we speak no Evil of any Man; but that we walk according to
the Gospel, and not in Strife and Envying.

This is the Life and Spirit of our Religion; and therefore Envy is opposed to
Christianity, and represented as a Gentile, Heathen Disposition, (1 Cor. 3.3.)
and the Envious are said to be Enemies, and at Enmity with God, St. James 4.5,
6, etc. and that they shall never Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5.21. No!
to that Spirit, without all dispute, they must go, and with him they shall
live, whose Image they bear, and who acted them here on Earth. He has rooted
out of his Soul whatsoever was Divine, and now his Spirit is removed so far
from God, that it can never be united to him, for He that Loves not, knows not
God.

Thus Envy is a Mark upon a Man; it is the effect of a Reprobate Mind, and a
consignation of him to eternal ruin, Romans 1.29.

And thus, as briefly as I could, I have discussed the Nature, the Character,
and the Effects of Envy.

And do we yet believe the Scriptures? Do we allow the Proposition? Are we
convinced in earnest that Envy is a foolish, and a destructive Vice? I am sure
we may, for it cannot be represented so deformed, so fatal, as indeed it is.

Would they not then, whose Tempers are a little tinctured with it, be
delivered of it? Would they not return again to the easy cheerfulness, and
candor of the Human Nature? it is never too late; Resolution, with a due
application of means, will effectually cure the Evil.

Be pleased but to observe these following Rules, and you shall never be
troubled with the Distemper more.

Fourth and last particular I proposed to consider, viz. The Methods of
Recovery.

First Place, he that would be free from Envy, must endeavor to deserve, as
well as may be, both of God and Man.

True Virtue gives a Man an Humble Opinion of himself; acquaints him with his
own Defects, or what he is not, as well as what he is. It gives him such a
solid Peace, as he would not lose to gain the World. It enlarges his Spirit,
and makes him less sollicitous about Rewards, calm and easy under any
Disappointment. It is Virtue only that can subdue our Passions; but a Spirit
truly Good, will become, insensibly, the Master of it self.



The Imperfection of our present State, or our Capacity of enjoying a great
deal more than we can have here, dispose us to a continual desire of that which
we have not, and a loathing of that which we have; or to set a greater value
upon the Possessions of others, and less upon our own than they deserve.

But we shall never be clear of Envy till we have disciplined our Minds into a
better Opinion. For that which we eagerly desire, we shall be angry if we don't
obtain. He then that would be easy in his Mind, must govern his Desires, and
make the best of what he has: He must be glad that he enjoys so many things,
and that he needs, or wants, so few.

There is, upon the matter, an equal destribution of Good. If one has Riches,
another has Health; if one has Honor, another has Wisdom; and no Man's Case is
either all Evil, or all Good. He therefore who would be free from Envy, must
turn his Eyes within. We live amongst innumerable Contingencies; we cannot have
all, or what we will: And therefore accept of your Lot, and be thankful that it
is no worse, Sic ver^ Invidiam effugies: Si te non ingesseris oculis, si bona
tua non jactaveris, si scieris in sinu gaudere. Sen.
or there can be no end of your Misery. You cannot be a Lion and Lap-Dog, a
Soldier and a Philosopher, says Plutarch, Sparta is your Province, look well to
that, and acquit your self as you should do.

Thirdly and Lastly, He that would be free from Envy, must wean his Affections
from the World, and learn to value it at no higher a rate than it deserves.

Glittering appearances possess our Minds with vain Imaginations, and delude us
into false Opinions; these stimulate Desire, and that produces Discontent and
Envy.

He then that would be easy and quiet in his Mind, must look upon the World in
a better Light. He must consider what it is not, as well as what it is; or that
the Possession of the Universe, if he could Command it, would not recompense
the Misery, the Weight, and Anguish, that Envy brings upon us. All Earthly
things, says Seneca, are trivial alike; in their outward Face; indeed, they
seem to differ, but, in truth, they are equally vain; they are hardly worth our
care, but much below our Envy.

USE.

What then remains, but that we endeavor to subdue our Passions, to Master our
Spirits, and live according to Reason in the World.

He is certainly the Wisest Man, who passes his Life with calmness and
tranquillity of Mind; with a prudent manly Steddiness and Composure: Who values
things according to Weight and Measure, and pursues his Ends in a due
proportion; who keeps his Happiness within his Power, and is not a Slave to
things without him.

And he is the best Christian, without Dispute, who comes the nearest to the
Pattern of the Holy Jesus; who has imbibed, and is united to the Laws of his
Religion; who shines in the Ornament of a Meek and quiet Spirit; who is
resigned entirely to the Will of God, and satisfied in all Events.

What sincere and solid Joy, what Honor in the World, what glory to God, what
regard to the Gospel, would such a Christian Temper cause? What an easy
Passage through all the various Fortunes of this present Life does it procure?
till we arrive at last to a perfect, settled State, where we shall be filled as
full as we can hold; where no Emulation, Envy, or Despair can enter; where
there will be an eternal sympathy between God and Us; where one only Principle,
one Motion, one Desire, one Life, one Joy, shall act us all for ever. To which
may God, etc. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Written by the same Author, and Printed for Walter Kettilby.
1. A Dialogue between a Minister and his Parshioner, concerning the Lord's
Supper. Principally designed for the Instruction of those that never yet
received. To which are annexed three several Discourses, of Love to God, to our
Neighbor, and to our very Enemies, 8 vo. 2. A Sermon Preached before the King
at Windsor, June, 13. 1680. on Matthew. 6. 26. 3. A Sermon Preached before the
Lord Mayor, Feb. 5. 1681. on Psalm. 119.165. 4. The Liberty of Humane Nature
Discussed, Stated, and Limited; in a Sermon on 1 Cor. 6.12. 5. A Sermon
Preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, Jan. 19. 1689. on Prove. 22.4.
6. A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, Jan. 24. 1690. on Tit.
2.10. 7. A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at White Hall, on Sunday
Jan. 15. 1692. on Isaiah 57.21.
These seven by the Reverend J. Lamb, D. D.

Mr. Tho. Lambe's Stop to the Course of Separation, 8 vo. -- 's Fresh Suit
against Independency, 8 vo.

