LILY, Improved, Corrected, and Explained; WITH THE Etymological Part OF THE
Common Accidence.

By W. T. Master of a Boarding-School at Fulham, near London, for above Two and
Twenty Years.

Tota domus nititur fundamento. Sic in Grammaticae fundamenta fideliter
jeceris, quicquid superstruxeris, facile corruet: Sed multarum lues est
Scholarum quod Latinarum vocum Declinationes and Conjugationes vel omnino
negligant vel festinantius and percurrant.

Carpere sed noli nostra, sed ede tua.
Quis gremio Enceladi doctique Palaemonis adfert
Quantum Grammaticus meruit labor?
-- -- res nulla minoris
Constabit patri quam filius.
-- -- -- sed culpa docentis
Scilicet arguitur si in laeva part mamillae
Nil salit Arcadico juveni.
Juven. LONDON: Printed for B. Bentley, in Russelstreet, in Covent Garden.
MDCXCVI.

Honoratissimis ac Dilectissimis Georgio Treby, Georgii Trebi, Equitis Thomae
Powis, Thomae Powis, Equitis Dicat, Dedicat Consecratque,

W. T.

THE INTRODUCTION OF The Eight Parts of Latin Speech, and a perfect succinct
Explanation of the Royal and Authorized, commonly called Lilly 's Grammar, with
several Amendments, Supplements, and Animadversions.
I. THE Eight Parts of Speech, with their Accidents, explained and examined out
of the Common Accidence, with a supply of many Defects, and an Addition and
Resolution of many things necessary for Youth to know.

II. The Four Parts of Grammar discussed by Questions and Answers, the first
being Orthographia, or rather Orthoepeia, carefully to be observed by those
that learn the Latin and English Tongue, with an account of the Points or
Pauses which are to be minded in Writing and Reading. The Second Part being
Etymologia, (to which all Words or Parts of Speech belong) under which Propria
quae Maribus, Quae genus, and As in Presenti are fully examined, the Defects
supplied with many Additions, and the Mistakes amended. The Third Part of
Grammar, being Syntaxis, is epitomized and made shorter by two Thirds, with
very small Alterations to the same Rules, and yet many things added; to which
is subjoined an Examination thereof by Questions and Answers, with a short
account of the Figures of Grammar, and with some hints to a Schoolboy how he
should be examined his Lesson in Latin. And last of all, the Fourth Part of
Grammar, viz. Prosodia, is fully explained after the same manner, with a supply
of many Defects. The whole comprising whaever Brinsley, Dugard, Hool, Leech, or
Walker, in his tedious Explanations and Quotations, etc. have attempted upon
Grammar after this manner of Questions and Answers, which certainly (as it is
asserted by the greatest Judgments and Men of Learning) must be the best Method
of instructing Youth in all sort of Knowledge. What is contained under
different Characters, may be omitted by Tyrocinians, till they come to be
something more knowing.

III. Observations concerning the Government of Words by Signs.

IV. Rules to turn Latin into English, or English into Latin; with Directions
to place Latin Words: Lastly, short Instructions to Tyrocinians, for composing
of Themes, Verses, Epistles, Orations and Declamations.

THE Eight Parts of Speech Examined out of the Common Accidence BY Questions
and Answers.
Q. WHAT is the Accidence, and why is it so called?

A. It is a Book that teaches the first Grounds of the Latin Tongue, so called
because it chiefly teaches the Accidents (i. e.) the things belonging to the
Eight Parts of Speech.

Q. Into how many Parts is the Accidence divided?

A. Into two; first, an Introduction of the Eight Parts of the Latin Tongue or
Speech; secondly, the Co^struction or joining together of the Right Parts of
Speech.

Q. What do you mean by Construction?

A. A framing or setting together of the Eight Parts of Speech to make a
Discourse, the examination of which part we omit in the common Accidence,
because it is examined fully in the Latin Syntaxis.

Q. How many Parts, or how many sorts of Words are there in the Latin Tongue or
Speech?

A. Eight, and no more or less, viz. a Noun, a Pronoun, a Verb, a Participle,
an Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection; for, every word whereof
Speech is made is one of these Eight Parts, though there be many thousand words,
yet each of them is one of these.

Q. What things belong to all the Eight Parts of Speech?

A. Species and Figura, (i. e.) Form and Figure. For any of the Parts of Speech
may be first Primitive or Derivative; secondly, Simple or Compound.

Q. How are these Eight Parts of Speech divided?

A. They are divided into Declined and Undeclined.

Q. How many are declined?

A. The four first, viz. a Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle.

Q. How many are undeclined?

A. The four last, viz. an Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, and Interjection.

Q. Why are the four first declined, and the four last undeclined?

A. Because the first four may change their ending or termination into diverse
other endings; as, magister, magstri; ego, mei; amo, amas; amatus, amata,
amatum. The four last never change their ending; as, Cras, at que, ad, heus.

Q. How many of the Parts of Speech are declined with case, and how many
without case?

A. Three with case, Noun, Pronoun, Participle, and one without case, viz. a
Verb.

Q. Are there not many Nouns and Verbs undeclined?

A. There are, but it is in regard of Use that they are not declined, not in
regard of the Nature of Words.

Q. What is Speech, of which you tell me there are eight parts?

A. Speech is properly the uttering or declaring of our Minds by Words.

Q. Which and what is the first part of Speech?

A. It is a Noun, which signifies the name of any thing that may be seen, f^l^,
heard, or understood, as the name of my Hand in Latin is manus, etc.

Q. Is a Hand a Noun?

A. A Hand itself is not a Noun, but the word signifying a Hand is a Noun.

Q. How comes nihil to be a Noun when it signifies nothing?

A. Though nihil signifies nothing, yet it is a Noun, because it is not meant
properly nothing, but a thing of no value, having the name of hilum, the black
in the top of a Bean; as, nihil or nihi^um, not so much as the black in a Bean.
In Grammar therefore we are to consider Words, not Things.

Q. How many sorts of Nouns are there?

A. Two, a Noun Substantive and a Noun Adjective.

Q. What is a Noun Substantive?

A. It is a Noun that stands by it self, and requires not another word to be
joined with it to show its signification; and it may have the Signs A or The
before it, and cannot have the word Man, or Thing, after it, as an Adjective
has.

Q. With how many Articles is a Noun Substantive declined?

A. With one Article; as, hic magister a Master; or with two at the most, as,
hic and haec Parens a Father or Mother.

Q. How many fold is a Noun Substantive, according to its signification?

A. It is twofold, either Proper, which is the proper name of a thing, as,
Edvardus; or Common, which is common to all of the same kind, as homo is a
common Name to all Men.

Q. What is a Noun Adjective?

A. A Noun Adjective is that cannot stand by it self in Reason or
Signification, but requires to be joined with another word, as Man or Thing;
as, bonus good, felix happy.

Q. How many fold is a Noun Adjective from its manner of signifying?

A. It is twofold, Proper, signifying an Affection peculiar to one, as
Gradivus to Mars, Quirinus to Romulus; and Common, which signifies an Affection
common to many, as bonus, malus, solers, satur.

Q. How many-fold is an Adjective, according to its declining?

A. It is twofold, for it is declined either with three terminations, like
bonus, or with three Articles, like felix and tristis.

Q. How many things belong to a Noun?

A. Seven in all, Number, Case, Gender, Declension, Comparison, Form, and
Figure; but Comparison properly belongs to a Noun Adjective, and Form and
Figure to all the Parts of Speech.

Q. Why does not Comparison belong to a Noun Substantive?

A. Because the signification of it cannot be increased or diminished.

Q. What is Number, being the first Accident belonging to a Noun?

A. Number is a separation or distinction of One from Many.

Q. How many Numbers are there?

A. Two; the Singular, that speaks but of one, as lapis a Stone; and the
Plural, that speaks of more than one, as lapides Stones.

Q. Do all Nouns of the Singular Number speak but of One?

A. All Nouns speak but of One in the Singular Number, except the Nouns
Collectives, such as populus, grex, turba, etc. which signify many, or a
multitude in the singular Number; as, on the contrary, there are Nouns of the
Plural Number that signify but one thing, as Nuptiae, Gabii, Thebae, Athenae,
etc.

Q. Does Number only belong to a Noun?

A. No, but it belongs to all the declined Parts of Speech.

Q. What is Case, the next Accident of a Noun?

A. It is the diverse ending of a Noun, Pronoun, or Participle, in the
declining of them.

Q. How many Cases are there?

A. Six; the Nominative, the Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative, the
Vocative, and the Ablative.

Q. How may the Cases be known one from the other?

A. Thus; the Nominative and Accusative by their Places, the other by their
Signs.

Q. Which is the place of the Nominative?

A. Thus; the Nominative is placed before the Verb in due order of Speech, and
Answers to the Question Who or What; as, magister docet, the Master teaches;
and it is known by the Signs A or The.

Q. Why is it called the Nominative?

A. Because we give Names to all things in this Case from nomino.

Q. How know you the Genitive Case?

A. The Genitive is known by these Signs, Off or 'S, answering to the Question
Whose or Whereof; as, Doctrina magistri, the Learning of the Master; and it is
a Case governed.

Q. Why is it called the Genitive Case?

A. From gigno, because it begets or produces all the following Cases; for when
I know the Genitive Case of any word, I may easily know all the following Cases
of that Declension.

Q. How know you the Dative Case?

A. By the Sign To, and sometimes by the Sign For, and it answers to the
Question To whom, or To what; as, Do librum magistro, I give a Book to the
Master; and it is likewise a Case governed.

Q. Why is it called the Dative Case?

A. From Do, to give; for if I speak, Deliver or Give to one any thing, I use
this Case.

Q. How know you the Accusative Case?

A. The Accusative follows the Verb, and answers to the Question Whom or
What; as, amo magistrum, I love the Master; and it has the same Signs as the
Nominative, viz. A or The, which are common Signs to all the Cases, but more
proper to the Nominative and Accusative.

Q. Why is it called the Accusative Case?

A. From the Verb or Law-term Accuso, for this is the Case by which Judges do
use to pronounce their Sentence.

Q. How know you the Vocative Case? and, why is it called so?

A. The Vocative Case is known by calling or speaking to; as, O magister, O
Master, and it is so called from the Verb Voco, to call or speak to any body.

Q. How know you the Ablative Case? and, why is it called so?

A. The Ablative Case is known either by Prepositions serving to it, or else by
these Signs, In, with, through, for, from, by, and then, after the comparative
degree. And it is called the Ablative Case from aufero to take away.

Q. How are the Signs of the Cases delivered in short?

A. Thus; A, The, Of or 'S; To, and sometimes For; A, The, O: From, etc.

Q. What Case is that which is called Octavus Casus?

A. It is the Dative put instead of an Accusative with a Preposition; as, it
^lamor coelo for ad coelum.

Q. What Case, or where then is the Seventh Case?

A. The Seventh is the Ablative, uttered or used without a Preposition, as some
will have it: though indeed there are but six Cases, according to the Declension
to which every word belongs: so that the Septimus and Octavus Casus are Cases
by Licentia Poetica.

Q. What Case is that which is called the Rectus Casus?

A. It is the Nominative and Vocative that is like to it, the other Cases being
called oblique Cases.

Q. Why is the Ablative called Latinus Casus?

A. Because it is pr^per to the Latins, for the Greeks have no Ablative.

Q. What follows next after the Cases in the Accidence?

A. Articles, which are marks to know the Genders by in declining.

Q. How many Articles are there, and whence are they borrowed?

A. There are three, viz. Hic, haec, h^c; and they are borrowed of the Pronouns.

Q. What do hic, haec, hoc signify?

A. When hic, haec, hoc is a Pronoun it signifies this; but when it is d^clined
with a Noun it signifies nothing, only it points out the Gender.

Q. How do you decline Articles together and severally with a Noun?

A. Thus:

Singul. Plur. M. F. N. M. F. N. Nom. Hic, haec, hoc. Hi, hae, haec. Genesis
Hujus, hujus, hujus. H^rum, harum, horum. Dat. Huic, huic, huic. His, his, his.
Acc. Hunc, hanc, hoc. H^s, has, hae^. Voc. O, O, O. O, O, O. Abl. Hoc, hac,
h^c. His, his, his.

Q. Why are they set before the Genders and Declensions?

A. Because they serv^ to note out the Genders, and also decline Nouns in every
Gender.

Q. What is a Gender?

A. It is the difference of Sex by Nature, as they are Male and Female; but by
Institution and Art Words may be of the Male and Female Gender, and yet have no
relation to Sex; as Musa, or Lapis, etc.

Q. How many Genders are there?

A. We reckon Seven, though there are properly but Three, Masculine, Feminine,
and Neuter; the other four, viz. the Common of two, the Common of three* the
Doubtful, and the Epicene, are compounded of all or some of those three.

Q. Which is the Article of the M. G. and what does it belong to?

A. It is hic, and it belongs to Males or He Is, and such words as are used
under the Names of He Is, either by Art or Institution.

Q. What is the Article of the F. G. and what does it belong to?

A. It is haec, and it belongs to Females or She Is, or things going under the
name of She Is.

Q. Which is the Article of the N. G. and what does it belong to?

A. It is hoc, and it belongs to words which signify aeither He or She.

Q. What Articles has the Common of two, and what belongs it to?

A. It has hic and haec, and it belongs properly to words signifying both Male
and Female, that is, both He and She.

Q. What Articles has the Common of three, and what does it belong to?

A. It has hic, haec, and hoc, and it belongs only to Nouns Adjectives.

Q. What Article has the Doubtful Gender, and what belongs it to?

A. It has hic or haec, which of them you please, and it belongs to Creatures
in which the kind is unknown, whether they be he or she; as, a Snail, a Snake,
also to lifeless things; as, a Day, a Channel, etc.

Q. What Article has the Epicene Gender?

A. It has only one Article, but under that Article both kinds, that is, both
He and She are signified; as hic Passer, the Cock or Hen Sparrow; haec Aquila,
the He or She Eagle.

Q. How may the Genders of Nouns be known?

A. Either by their signification, termination, or more especially by the Rules
to know the Genders of Nouns in Propria quae maribus.

Q. Which is the fourth Accident belonging to a Noun?

A. It is Declension, which is the varying of the first ending of a word into
diverse other endings called Cases.

Q. How many Declensions of Nouns are there?

A. There are five Declensions of Nouns.

Q. What Terminations has the first Declension, what is the Example, and whence
proceeds it?

A. The first has but one Latin Termination in A, the Example is Musa; but it
has three Greek Terminations in As, Es, and E; as, Thomas, Anchises, Phaebe,
and it proceeds from the first Declension of the Greeks.

Q. What Terminations has the second Declension, what are the Examples, and
whence proceeds it?

A. It has five proper to the Latins, Er, ir, ur, us, um; as, Aper, vir,
satur, Dominus, Templum; and three of the Greeks in os, on, eus; as, Delos,
Ilim, Orpheus: the Examples of it are Magister and Regman, and it comes from
the third Declension of the Greeks.

Q. What Terminations has the third Declension, what are the Examples, and
whence comes it^?

A. It has all Terminations besides Vm and V; the Examples are lapis and
parens, and it comes from the fifth of the Greeks.

Q. What Terminations has the fourth Declension, which are the Examples of it,
and whence proceeds it?

A. It has two, Us and V, and the Examples are Manus and Genu; but those that
end in U are' (...), or invariable in the Singular Number, and in the Plural
they are commonly declined after the third Declension, to which third
Declension may be reduced the fourth and fifth.

Q. What is the Example, and how many Terminations has the fifth Declension?

A. It has only one Termination in es; the Example is meridies.

Q. What Exceptions are there belonging to the first Declension?

A. Filia and Nata, which make the Dative and Ablative Cases plural in is or in
abus, and anima, Dea, Mula, Equa, Famula, Liberta, which make the Dative and
Ablative Cises plural in abus only.

Q. What Exceptions are there under the second Declension?

A. The first is of Nouns that end in Us, which make the Vocative in E; as,
Nominativo hic Dominus, Vecativo O Domine: 2. Proper Names of Men that end in
ius, make their Vocative to end in i; as, Nom. Hic Ge^gius, Voc. O Georgi: 3.
These Common Names, viz. Agnus, Lucus, vulgus, populus, chorus, sluvius, which
make their Vocative in E or in Us.

Q. What say you of Nouns of the Neuter Gender of the second declension?

A. They have three Cases alike, viz. the Nominative, Accusa^ive, and Vocative,
which three Cases do end in the plural Number, always in (a), except Amb^ and
Duo, that make the Neuter Gender in (o).

Q. How is Duo declined?

A. Like Ambo, thus: Plu. Duo, duae, duo, etc.

Q. But how are the Declensions distinguished, and how may it be known of what
Declension a Noun is of, besides by these Termi^ati^ns of the Declensions? for
hardly any of these Terminations are peculiar to any Declension; for many words
that end in A, As, Es, E, are of the third, as well as of the first Declension;
and so words that end in Us may be of the second, third, or fourth Declension,
etc?

A. The Declensions are distinguished by the termination and ending of the
Genitive Case singular of each Declension, which Genitive Case shows what
Declension every Noun is of.

Q. How then does the Genitive Case of each Declension end, and how do all the
rest of the Cases end that proceed from those Genitives?

A. They end thus, according to the following Table.

Singular. Plural. Genesis Dat. Acc. Vocat. Ab N Genesis Dat. Ac Abl Declensions 1 ae
ae am Like the Nominative every where, except in the 2d Declension. a ae arum
is as is 2 i o um o i orum is os is em e um 3 is i and es ibus es ibus im i ium
4 us ui um u us uum ibus us ibus 5 ei ei em e es erum ebus es ebus

Q. Of what Gender are all Nouns of the fifth Declension?

A. They are of the Feminine, except meridies, of the M. G. and Dies, of the D.
G. in the singular, and of the M. G. only in the plural.

Q. How many Declensions may Adjectives be said to have?

A. Three.

Q. Which is the first?

A. The first is of Adjectives in us, er, ur, with three terminations or
endings; the first ending or termination being of the M. G. as, Bonus, pulcher,
satur; the second being of the F. G. as, Bona, pulchra, satura; the third
ending being of the N. G. as, Bonum, pulchrum, saturum.

Q. Which is the second Declension of Adjectives?

A. The second is of Adjectives ending in X or ns, and all others having one
ending in the Nom. Case, which are of all the three Genders; as, hic, haec, and
hoc audax, -acis: hic, haec, and hoc vetus, eris, etc.

Q Which is the third Declension of Adjectives?

A. It is of Adjectives that end in is, or the positive, and of those that end
in or, of the comparative degree with two endings, the first ending being of
the M. and F. G. the second ending being of the N. G. as, hic and haec Tristis
and hoc Triste; hic and haec durior and hoc durius, etc.

Q. How is a Noun Adjective of three terminations declined?

A. After the first and second declension of Substantives; as, Bonas after
Dominus, Bona after Musa, Bonum after Regnum

Q. What Adjectives are there besides of three terminations that are otherwise
declined?

A. These, with their Compounds, unus, totus, solus, ullus, alius, alter, uter,
newer, which make the Genitive Case in ius, and the Dative in i.

Q. Can unus, signifying but one, have the Plural Number?

A. Vnus never has the Plural Number, but when it is joined with a word that
lacks the Singular Number; as, unae, literae, una maenia, where literae
signisying an Epistle or Letter, cannot be of the Singular Number, nor Maenia.

Q. What Case do ullus, alius, alter, uter, and neuter lack or want; and how
are they declined?

A. They want the Vocative, and are declined in all other cases like unus.

Q. How are Adjectives of one ending, and Participles of the Present tense
declined?

A. They are declined after the third Declension of Substantives, like felix.

Q. How are Adjectives of two endings declined?

A. They are likewise declined after the third declension of Substantives, like
tristls.

Q. What is the next Accident of a Noun after Declension?

A. It is Comparison.

Q. What is Comparison?

A. It is the altering the signification of a word into more or less by degrees.

Q. D^es Comparison belong to all Nouns?

A. No, it belongs properly to Adjectives, though Substantives are compared
(...), only by abuse, not properly; a^ also some Pronouns: but Adverbs coming
of Adjectives, may be compared, and Participles, when they are changed into
Nouns Adjectives, and some Prepositions when changed into Adverbs.

Q. May all Adverbs be compared?

A. No, none but whose Signification may be increased or diminished.

Q. What is it to have the Signification increased or diminished?

A. It is to be made more or less; a^, hard, harder, hardest: and so back
again; as, hardest, harder, hard.

Q. What mean you by a Degree of Comparison?

A. I mean, that every word that alters its signification by more or less, is a
Degree.

Q. How many Degrees of Comparison are there?

A. Three, the Positive, Comparative, and Superlative.

Q. What is the Positive Degree?

A. It is a Degree that signifies a thing absolutely without Excess (that is,
without more or less, or without having respect to any other word); as, Durus
hard, without being compared.

Q. What is the Comparative Degree?

A. It is a Degree which somewhat exceeds his Positive in Signification, (i.
e.) when the signification of the Positive is somewhat increased or made more.

Q. What is the Sign of the Comparative Degree?

A. The Syllable (more) being set before, or the Syllable (er) being added to
it; as, more bard, or harder.

Q. Of what is the Comparative Degree formed?

A. Of the first Case of its Positive that ends in I, by putting to it (or)
for the M. and F. G. and (us) for the N. G.

Q. What is the Superlative Degree?

A. It is a Degree that exceeds i^s Positive in the highest, in signifying, so
that one thing being compared with many, is said to be most of all this thing
or that thing.

Q. Whence is it formed, and what is the Sign thereof?

A. It is formed of the first Case of its Positive that ends in I, by putting
to it the Letter S, and Simus; as, Duri Durissimus, the Sign of it is (most)
put before its English; as, most hard: or (est) added to its English; as,
hardest.

Q. How do you compare the said three Degrees of Comparison?

A. By declining altogether in ea^h Cafe and Gender; as, Nom. Durius, durior,
durissimus; dura, durior, durissima; durum, durius, durissimum: Genesis Duri,
durioris, durissimi: Dat. Duro, duriori, durissimo, etc.

Q. How many Exceptions are there from these regular and general Rules of
Comparison?

A. There are four, which make an irregular Comparison.

Q. Which is the first irregular Comparison or Exception?

A. It is of these five Nouns, Bonus, melior, optimus; Majus, pejor, pessimus;
Magnus, major, maximus; ^arvus, minor, minimus; Multus plurimus, multa plurima,
multum plus plurimum; with many more in the Latin Grammar.

Q. Which is the second irregular Comparison or Exception?

A. It is of Positives that end in (r) which form their Superlatives of the
Nominative Case, by putting to it rimus; as, Pulcher, pulcherrimus; Niger,
nigerrimu^, etc. except Dexter, dexterrimus; maturus, maturimus, or
maturissimus.

Q. Which is the third irregular Comparison or Exception?

A. It is of these six Nouns ending in lis, which make the Superlative by
changing lis into limus; as, Humilis, humillimus; Similis, simillimus; Facilis,
fac^llimus; Gracilis, gracillimus; Docilis, docillimus; agilis, agillimus.

Q. How do all other Nouns in ((...)) form their Superlative Degree?

A. They follow the general and regular Rule of Comparison.

Q. Which is the fourth irregular Comparison or Exception?

A. It is of Adjectives having a Vowel before Us, which then are compared by
the two Adve^bs, magis before the Comparative, and maxim before the
Superlative; as, Pius, magis pius, maxim pius; assiduus, magis assiduus,
maxim assiduus.

Q. Why are not Adjectives compared when a Vowel comes before Us?

A. Because the C^mparative ought to exceed the Positive by a Syllable; as,
doctus, doctior; which cannot be in those Adjectives that have a Vowel before
Us; f^r I, between two Vowels becomes a Consonant: Or if it remain a Vowel,
whereby it may exceed the Positive, from that co^course of Vowels would arise a
Cacophaton or unpleasant sound.

Q. What is the second Part of Speech, viz. a Pronoun?

A. It is a Part of Speech much like to a Noun, or put instead of a Noun; and
therefore called a Pronoun; but not having the Sign A or The before it.

Q. How many manner of ways is a Pronoun used?

A. Two manner of ways, in showing or rehearsing.

Q. How does it d^ffer from a Noun?

A. Thus: a Pronoun first has reference to a Noun, and after that signifies
the thing; but a Noun signifies the thing immediately.

Q. Why was a Pronoun invented?

A. That it might be joined to the first and second Person of a Verb, which a
Noun wants.

Q. How many Pronouns are there?

A. There are fisteen, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus,
suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras.

Q. What Case do Pronouns want?

A. They all want the Vocative Case, except tu, meus, noster, and nostras, and
sui wants the Nom. and Vocative.

Q. What Pronouns may be added to the fifteen?

A. (...), tute, idem, and also qui, quae, quod.

Q. How many fold is a Pronoun?

A. Twofold, either Substantive or Adjective.

Q. How many Pronoun Substantives are there?

A. Three, Ego, tu, sui, with their Compounds.

Q. How many Pronoun Adjectives?

A. Twelve; Ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester,
nostras, vestras, and qui, that is added to them.

Q. How are Pronouns divided according to their Species?

A. They are divided into Primitives and Derivatives.

Q. How many Pronoun-Primitives are there?

A. Eight; Eg^, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic and is.

Q. Why are they called Primitives, and what are they called besides?

A. They are called Primitives from Prima first and chiefest, and therefore
they cannot be derived of others; they are called also Demonstratives, because
they commonly show a thing not spoken of before.

Q. How many of th^se Primitives may also be called Relatives?

A. Four, Hic, ille, iste, and is.

Q. How many Pronoun Relatives are there?

A. Six, Hic, iile, iste, is, idem, and qui, which is the most special Relative.

Q. But how can hic, ille, iste, and is be Demonstratives and Relatives too?

A. Because they serve both to show and rehearse.

Q. How many Pronoun Derivatives are there, and why are they so called?

A. There are Seven; meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, n^stras, vestras; so
called, because they are derived of mei, tui, sui, nostri, and vestri, being
the Genitive Cases singular or plural of ego, ^u, sui; for of mei and nostri,
the genitive, singular and plural of ego, comes meus, noster, and nostras; of
tui and vest^i the genesis (...). and plur. of tu, comes tuus, vester, and
vestras, and of sui comes suus.

Q. How many sorts of Derivatives are there?

A. Two, Possessives; as, meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, and Gentiles,
as, nostras, vestras.

Q. But what say you of the number of Pronouns, viz. Fifteen, for there are
Eight Primitives, Six Relatives, and Seven Derivatives, which make them to be
Twenty One, and withal quis, uter, qualis, and many others are accounted
Pronouns by good Gramma^ians, for they may signify instead of a Noun?

A. As for the number Twenty One. I have showed already that some of the
Pronouns were both Primitives and Relatives: as for other words that are
reck^n'd Pronouns by some Grammarians, they signify no certain or determinate
thing, as the fifteen Pronouns do, and therefore they are not Pronouns, but
Nouns Adjectives.

Q. How many things belong to a Pronoun?

A. Five, according to the Accidence, Number, Case, and Gender, (which belong
also to a Noun) Declension and Person, which it has of its own; it has also
the Accidents common to all the Parts of Speech, z^z. Form and Figure.

Q. How may one know the Gend^r in Pronoun Substantives?

A. Thus: Pronoun Substantives are of the same Gender with the thing whereof
they are properly spoken. The Gender of Pronouns-Adjectives is known like as in
Nouns-Adjectives.

Q. How many Declensions of Pronouns are there?

A. There are four declensions of Pronouns.

Q. How may one know of what declension a Pronoun is?

A. By the ending of the Genitive Case singular, like as in Nouns.

Q. How does the Genitive Case singular of each of the declensions end?

A. They end thus:

The First Second Third Fourth i i^s i ae i atis jus

Q. What Pronouns be of the first Declension?

A. These three, ego, tu, sui, declined as in the Book, etc.

Q. What Pronouns be of the second Declension?

A. These six, ille, ipse, iste, which three make the Genitive Case in ius,
like unus; and hic, is, and qui, which make the Genitive in jus.

Q. How is iste declined?

A. Thus* Sing. Iste, ista, istud; as in the Book, etc.

Q. How are ille and ipse declined?

A. Like iste, saving that ipse makes ipsum in the N. G. of the Nom. and Acc.
Case singular, and not ipsud.

Q. How is hic declined?

A. Thus: Sing. Nom. Hic, haec h^c, Genesis Hujus, Dat. H^^c, etc.

Q. How are is and qui declined?

A. Thus, as in the Book:

Sing Nom. Is, ea, id, etc. Qui, quae, quod, etc.

Q. Why do they say Qui in the Ablative Case?

A. (...) Qui in the Ablative Case is of all Genders, and may be put for Quo,
qua, or quo.

Q. How are quis and quid declined?

A. Like qui.

Q. How is Quisquis declined?

A. Thus:

Sing. Nom. Quisquis Acc. Quicquid Abl. Quoqu^, Quaqu^, Qui^qui^ Qu^quo.

Q. What is the difference between Quid and Quod?

A. Quid is always a Substantive of the N. G. Qu^d requires for the most part
a Substantive or an Antecedent.

Q. Which Pronouns are of the third Declension?

A. These five Possessives; men's, tu^s, su^s, n^ster, and vester.

Q. How are they declined?

A. Like Nouns Adjectives of three terminations, except that meus makes mi in
the M. G. of the Vocat. Case singular.

Q. How is meus then declined?

A. Thus; meus, mea, m^^n, etc.

Q. How are noster, and tuus, suus, vester declined?

A. Like meus, saving that tuus, suus, vester want the Voc. Case.

Q. What Pronouns are of the fourth Declension?

A. Nostros, vestras, and this Noun cujas.

Q. How are they declined?

A. They, and many more such, as Londinos, Arpiu^^, Ravennas, Pelia^, are
declined thus, and not as the Book directs: Sing. Nom. Hic, haec and h^^
nost^as. Genesis Hujus nostratis. Dat. (...) nostrati. Acc. Hunc and hanc
nostratem, and hoc nostras, etc.

Q. What are these of the fourth Declension called, and why so called?

A. They are called Gentiles, because they properly betoken pertaining to
Countries or Nations, to Sects, Sides, or Factions.

Q. What Auth^rity have you contrary to the B^ok, that these Adjectives
Gentiles in (As) should be of all the three Genders, and not have the (...)
Gender in (Ate)?

A. I have the greatest Authors; as, In quo ^lexus est ad iter Arpinas: Cicero.
Capenas bellum live. l. 5. and l. 8. Bellum Privernas initum est. Th^se
Adjectives first of all had their N^minative in (atis), and were declined like
Tristis; but since the Termination Atis has been contracted in As, they are of
all the three Genders, and they may all of them be declined as Felix.

Q. What is the fifth thing belonging to a Pronoun?

A. It is Person, or any thing which speaks of it self, or is spoken to, or
spoken of.

Q. How many Persons has a Pronoun?

A. It has Three.

Q. What is the first Person?

A. The first Person speaks of himself alone; as, Ego, I; or with others, as,
Nos, We: and these two are properly all the words of this first Person.

Q. What is the second Person?

A. It is the Person or Thing spoken to, either alone or with others; as, Tu,
Thou; Vos, Ye: and these two are properly also all the words of this second
Person.

Q. What Case is of the second Person?

A. Every Vocative Case.

Q. What is the third Person?

A. It is the Person or Thing that is spoken of; as, Ille, He; Illi, They: and
of this Person are all Nouns, Pronouns and Participles, except the four words
of the first and second Person, viz. Ego, Nos, Tu, and Vos.

Q. Which are the more worthy Persons?

A. The first is more worthy than the second, and the second more worthy than
the third.

Q. Which is the Third Part of Speech?

A. It is a Verb.

Q. What is a Verb?

A. It is a Part of Speech declined with Mood and Tense, and betokens or
signifies doing; as, Amo, I love: or suffering; as, Amor, I am loved: or being;
as, Sum, I am.

Q. What is the difference between a Noun and a Verb?

A. A Noun signifies the Name of a Thing; a Verb signifies the manner of doing,
suffering, or being of that Thing.

Q. How many-fold is a Verb?

A. It is twofold, Personal and Impersonal.

Q. What is a Verb Personal?

A. A Verb Personal is that which is declined with three Persons in both
Numbers, and such as has a Nom. Case.

Q. What is a Verb Impersonal?

A. A Verb Impersonal, according to the Book, is that which has no Persons, or
rather it is a Verb which is declined in the third Person singular only, and
has no Nom. Case.

Q. How many kinds of Verbs Personals are there?

A. Five, according to the Book, Active, Passive, Neuter, Deponent, and Common,
which is now grown out of use.

Q. How do these five sorts of Verbs differ one from another?

A. They differ three ways; 1. In Termination, for some end in O, as, Actives
and Neuters; some in Or, as Passives, Deponents, and Commons, and a few Neuters
ending in M* as sum, forem, inquam, possum. 2. They differ in signification. 3.
In declining or forming.

Q. How is a Verb Active known?

A. By its ending in O, and betokening or signifying to do; as, Amo, I love.

Q. What may a Verb Active be made?

A. It may be made a Verb Passive, by putting to it r; as, Amo, Amor.

Q. How is a Verb Passive known?

A. A Verb Passive ends in (or) and betokens or signifies to suffer; as
Amor, I am loved.

Q. What may a Verb Passive be made?

A. It may be made an Active, by putting away r; a^, Amor, Amo.

Q. How does a Verb Neuter end?

A. In O or M; as, Curro, I run; Sum, I am.

Q. Cannot a Verb Neuter, seeing it ends in (O) as well as a Verb Active, take
(R) to make it a Passive?

A. No; for though I say, Curro, I run, yet I cannot say, Curror, I am run.

Q. How does a Verb Neuter signify?

A. It signifies sometimes actively; that is, like a Verb Active; as, Curro, I
run, and sometimes passively, or like a Verb Passive; as, Aegroto, I am sick;
and sometimes it signifies being, as, Sum, I am.

Q. How does a Verb Deponent end?

A. It ends in (R) like a Passive.

Q. How does it signify?

A. It signifies either like a Verb Active, as, Loquor Verbum, I speak a word;
or like a Verb Neuter, signifying actively; as, Glorior, I boast.

Q. How is a Verb Deponent declined?

A. Like a Verb Passive, but with Gerunds and Supines, especially the first
Supine, and with Active Participles.

Q. How does a Verb Common end, which you say is out of use?

A. It ends in (R) like a Verb Passive.

Q. How does it signify?

A. It signifies both as a Verb Active, and as a Verb Passive, and therefore it
is called a Verb Common; as Osculor, I kiss or am kissed.

Q. May I take away (R) from a Verb Deponent or Common, whereby they may be
made Actives, for they both end like a Verb Passive, and the one of them (viz.)
a Verb Common, signifies also like a Verb Passive?

A. No, you cannot take away (R), for Loquor cannot be made Loquo, nor Osculor
Osculo.

Q. Some Verbs are said to be Transitive, others Intransitive, how may I know
which is which?

A. Thus: those are Transitive whose Action or Doing passes into another
thing, and have not a perfect sense in themselves; as, when I say, Amo, I love,
I must say I love something; as, Amo Magistrum, I love the Master.

Q. How may I know which are Intransitive Verbs?

A. Intransitives are those which have an absolute and perfect sense in their
own Signification, without asking the Question whom or what; (which may be
asked in Transitives) as, Curro, I run; agroto, I am sick; after which I need
not add or put any thing.

Q. How many things belong to a Verb?

A. There belong to it properly these f^ur, viz. Kind, Mood, Time, and
Conjugation, with ^^rm, Figure, Number, and Person, which are Accidents c^mm^n
to the other declined parts of Speech as well as to a Verb.

Q. What is Mood, for we ^ave sp^ke already of the kinds of Verbs?

A. Mood is an Accident that add^th to the signification of a Verb the manner
of signifying.

Q. How many Moods are there?

A. Four properly, and indeed; though the Book says six.

Q. What is the Indicative Mood?

A. It is a Mood that shows a Reason true or false; as Ego amo, I love; or else
asks a Question and doubts, as, Amas tu, Do thou love?

Q. What is the Imperative Mood?

A. It is a Mood that bids or commands, exhorts or entreats, and it
has often before it (except in the second Person sing, and pl.) this sign Let;
as, Amato, Let him love.

Q. Why does the Imperative Mood want the first Person singular?

A. Because the first Person, being the Person that speaks, cannot be said to
comm^nd himself.

Q. But how can it be, that Passives have an Imperative Mood, seeing that a
Passion cannot be commanded?

A. Because a disposition to do, bel^^gs to the Doer or Agent, and therefore he
is justly commanded; as, Amator ab hero, (i. e.) So order or behave your self
that you may be beloved of your Master: So Docetor, Be thou taught, (i. e.)
Reject not your Teacher, but mark well what he says.

Q. How know you the Subjunctive Mood?

A. The Subjunctive Mood depends on another Verb in the same Sentence, and
has evermore some Conjunction (or an Adverb having the nature of a
Conjunction) joined with it; as, Ede ut vias: Cuma^tarem: or else it has some
Indefinite coming between; as, Qui, quid, qualis, quo, etc. as, vide quid agas.

Q. Why do you leave out the Optative and Potential Mood?

A. Because they d^ffer not from the Subjunctive, except in the manner of
signifying; so that the same Mood implying wishing, is called the Optative;
signifying a power, duty or desire the Potential; with a Conjunction, or an
Adverb having the nature of a Conjunction, it is called the Subjunctive.

Q. But why do you choose to call this Mood the Subjunctive, rather than either
the Optative or Potential?

A. Because the Subjunctive is far more used; and it is usual for things to
have their denomination from the chief and principal.

Q. Is not the Subjunctive used sometimes instead of the Imp^^ative?

A. It is s^; as, Tua quod nihil resert percontari desinas, for desine, Ter.
Nihil incommodo valetudinis tuae f^^^ris, for fac, Cicero. So in these
Expressions, Ut vidiam, Let me see; Cures, Have a care; Fiat, Let it b^d^ne;
and in our Obligations, Noverint universi, f^r noscant.

Q. How are the third Persons of the Imperative Mood Active and ^assive, ending
in to, and tor, called by Grammarians?

A. They are called Modus Legitimus, The Lawyers Mood, according to Vossius;
because it is used by Lawyers most commonly*

Q. How know you the Infinitive Mood?

A. The Infinitive Mood signifies, to do, to suffer, or to be, and it has
neither Number, nor Person, to limit its signification, and therefore it is
called Infinitive, and it has ^o Nom. Case before him; being no real Mood of
it self, but as it may be resolved by Qu^d or ut, an, quin or ne non, etc.

Q. What are peculiarly belonging to the Infinitive Mood?

A. Three Gerunds and two Supines.

Q. Why do the Gerunds and Supines belong to the Infinitive Mood?

A. Because their signification (like that of the Infinitive Mood) is infinite,
not making difference of Number or Person.

Q. How do the three Gerunds end?

A. In di, do and dum.

Q. What significations have Gerunds?

A. They have both the Active and Passive signification; as, amandi, of loving
or of being loved; amando, in loving or in being loved; amandum, to love or to
be loved.

Q. How do you decline Gerunds, and what are they, are they Verbs or
Participles?

A. They are declined in the Verb, yet they are not Verbs, because they want
Tenses, which a Verb must have; nor are they Participles, (though they are like
those in dus) for they denote no time, as a Participle does, and withal, they
have an Active and Passive signification, which a Participle has not;
therefore, with Vossius and others, I leave them to be Nouns Verbal
Substantives Pentaptots of the second Declension.

Q. Why may they not be Verbs, seeing they retain their Construction?

A. That matters not, for that is common to Nouns; as, Quod si est obtemperatio
legibus scriptis, Cicero. So Plautus, Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem.

Q. How do the two Supines end?

A. The first ends in um, and the latter in u.

Q. Why is that which ends in um, called the first Supine?

A. Because it has the signification of the Verb Active; as, Eo ama^um, I go
to love.

Q. Why is that which ends in u, called the latter Supine?

A. Because it has for the most part the signification Passive; as, Difficilis
amatu, Hard to be loved.

Q. What are Supines?

A. They are Nouns Verbal Substantives (as the Gerunds are) Dipto^s of the
fourth Decl^nsion.

Q. Do they change their Gender?

A. No, for if they did, they could not be said to be Substamives; for we say,
Vitam ire perditum, not perditam.

Q. What is the third Accident of a Verb, viz. Tense?

A. It is the difference of a Verb, according to the times past, present or to
come.

Q. How many Tenses or Times are there?

A. Five; the Present Tense, the Preterimperfect Tense, the Preterperfect
Tense, the Preterpluperfect Tense, and the Future Tense.

Q. What Time does the Present Tense speak of?

A. It speaks of the Time that is now present, known by the Signs, Do or Am;
as, Amo, I do love; Am^t, I am loved.

Q. What Time does the Preterimperfect Tense speak of?

A. It speaks of the Time not perfectly past, but as it were still present,
known by the Signs, Did or Was; as, Amabam, I loved or did love; Amabar, I was
loved.

Q. What Time does the Preterperfect Tense speak of?

A. It speaks of the Time perfectly past, though lately; with this Sign, Have or
have been; as, Amavi, I have loved; Amatus sum vel fui, I have been loved.

Q. What Time does the Preterpluperfect Tense speak of?

A. It speaks of the Time more than perfectly past, or past a long while since,
with this Sign, Had or had been; as, Amaveram, I had loved; Amatus eram vel
fueram, I h^d been loved.

Q. What Time does the Future Tense speak of?

A. Of the Time to come, with this Sign, Shall or will, or shall or will be;
as, Amabo, I shall or will love; Amabor, I shall or will be loved.

Q. Which are the Root or Principal Tenses in Conjugating of a Verb Active or
Neuter?

A. They are the Present Tense and Preterperfect Tense, from which all the
other Tenses, called Cognat^ Tempora, allied Tenses, are formed.

Q. How may one come to know every kind of Verb, and what Tense it is of?

A. B^ their Signs; for every Verb that signifies Actively, is either a Verb
Active or Neuter, signifying Actively, or else it is a Verb D^ponent: and every
Verb, tha^ signifies Passively, is either a Verb Passive or a Verb Neuter,
signifying Passivel^: The Signs of which Verbs and their Tenses, this Table
will make plain.

The Signs of the Verbs and their Tenses are of the Actives Neuters, signif^ing
Actively and Dep^nents. Passives and N^uters, signifying Passively. Present
Tense. Do, do, does. Am, is, are, art, and sometimes be was, were, were.
Preterimp. Did, did. Preterpe^f. Have, have, has. Have been. Preterplup.
Had, had. Had been. Future Tense, Shall or will and hereafter. Shall or will
be.

Q. What is Person in a Verb?

A. Every several word, in every (...) and Tense, except the Infinitive, which
has no Person.

Q. Why are these called Persons in a Verb?

A. Because one of the three Persons of the Pr^n^un is understood in every one
of them; as, Amo, I l^ve, is as much as Ego amo, I love; Amas, thou love, is
as much as Tu amas, thou love.

Q. How many Persons are there in Verbs?

A. In Verbs Personals th^re are three Persons in both Numbers, like as in the
Pronouns; as, Sing. Ego (...), I love, tu amas, thou love, i^e amat, he
loves, Pl. Nos amamus, we love, v^s amatis, ye love, illi amant, they love.

Q. Hatb every Mood and Tense three Persons in both Numbers?

A. Ye^ in perfect Verbs, except that the Imperative Mood wants the first
Person Singular, and the Infinitive has no Persons at all.

Q. How differ your Persons in Verbs from Persons in Nouns and P^^nouns?

A. The Persons in Nouns and Pr^nouns, signify who or what Person it is that
does or suffers any thing. The Persons in Verbs, signify what it is that
such a Person does or suffers; as, Magister docet, the Master teaches;
Magister is the Person of the Noun doing something, Docet the Person of the
Verb signif^ing what he does.

Q. What is the next Accident of a Verb, viz. Conjugation?

A. It is the varying of a Verb by its final Terminations in both Numbers in
every Person in each Mood and Tense.

Q. How many Conjugations have Verbs?

A. They have four Conjugations.

Q. How may the four Conjugations be known asunder?

A. By their several Vowels, which are the Marks or Characteristicks to know
them by.

Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the first Conjugation?

A. It is (a) long before, re, and, ris; as, Ama^re, amaris.

Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the second Conjugation?

A. It is (c) long before, re, and, ris; as, Doce^re, dece^^is.

Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the third Conjugation?

A. It is (e) short before, re, and, ris; as, Legre, legris.

Q. What Vowel is that by which we know the fourth Conjugation?

A. It is (i) long before, re, and, ris; as, Audi^re, audi^ris.

Q. Where shall one find this (re) and (ris) to know the Conjugation by?

A. You will find (re) in the Infinitive Active, and (ris) in the second Person
Sing. Passive.

Q. What is the Forming or Conjugating of a Verb?

A. It is the breaking or varying the first (...) of the Verb into sundry other
words coming of it by Persons, Tenses and Moods.

Q. In declining and conjugating of Verbs, what am I chiefly to mind?

A. You are to mind in every Voice the first and second Person of the Present
Tense, and the first Person of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood,
the Present Tense of the Infinitive Mood; the Gerunds, Supines and Participles,
if the Verb be Active, Neuter or Deponent; if Passive, you must omit the
Gerunds and Supines, which Passives have not.

Q. How many Examples have you to decline and conjugate all perfect Verbs by?

A. I have four, according to the number of the Conjugations.

Q. What are the four Examples of the four Conjugations?

A. They are, Amo, D^cco, Lego, and Audio.

Q. How do you decline them?

A. Thus; as in the Book, Amo, as, vi, re, etc. Doc^o, es, ui, c^re, etc. Lego,
is, gi, re, etc. Audio, is, ivi, i^e, etc.

Q. Into how many Voices are these Examples formed?

A. Into ^wo, Active and Passive: for all regular Verbs in (o) are formed or
declined like Amo, Docco, Lego, and Audio: And all regular Verbs in (or) like
Amor, Doceor, Legor, and Audior.

Q. What Method ought a Tyr^^in^an to observe for the perfect understanding and
learning of Verbs, for I find that therein, and in the declining of Nouns,
consists the chiefest business of a Master, and the greatest task of a young
Stholar?

A. For the Verbs, I would have him always use this Method: First to learn them
perfectly, as in the Book, with the Latin before the English; after that with
the English before the Latin, naming each Person Singular and Plural, that he
may know which is the first, second or third: after this, let him say them
backward with the Latin first before the English, and then the English before
the Latin. This being done, he may join both the Active and Passive Voice
together, and put first the Latin before the English, and then the English
before the Latin. And lastly, Let him say both Voices backward, with the Latin
before the English, and the English before the Latin, observing the Signs of
the Verbs and Tenses in each Voice, according to the foregoing Table. I would
have him also learn to form and run over the first Person Singular throughout
each Mood and Tense, and to get perfectly the Terminations of the Tenses in
every Person in each Voice, first in the Active, after that in the Passive;
last of all, let him get the Terminations Active and Passive both together.

Q. Which are the Terminations Active and Passive in each Conjugation, Mood,
Tense, Number, and Person.

A. The Active and Passive are as follows.

Indicative Mood Active and Passive.

Present Tense. Conjugations. Pers. Sing. Persons Plural. Persons Singular.
Persons Plural. 1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3. 1. o, as, at, amus, atis,
ant. or, aris vel are, atur, amur, amini, antur. 2. eo, es, et, emus, etis,
ent. eor, eris vel ere, etur, emur, emini, entur. 3. o, is, it, imus, itis,
unt. or, eris vel ere, itur, imur, imini, untur. 4. io, is, it, imus, itis,
iunt. ior, iris vel ire, itur, imur, imini, iuntur. Preterimperfect Tense.
Conjugat. 1. abam, 2. ebam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant, bar, baris vel bare,
batur, bamur, bamini, bantur. 3. ebam, 4. iebam, Preterperfect Tense. Conjugat.
1. 2. i, isti, it, imus, istis, erunt vel ere. us sum, us es, us est, ti sumus,
ti estis, ti sunt. 3. 4.

Preterpluperfect Tense. Conjugat. 1. eram, ra^, r^t, ^amus, ratis, rant. us
eram, us era^, us erat, ti eramus, ti e^atis, ti erant. 2. 3. 4. Future Tense.
Conjugat. 1. abo, bis, bit, bimus, bitis, bunt. bor, beris vel bear, bitur,
bimur, bimini, bun^ur. 2 ^bo, 3. am, es, et, emus, etis, ent. a^, eris vel ere,
etur, emur, emini, entur. 4. iam, iar, ieris vel iere, ietur, iemur, iemini,
ientur. Imperative Mood Active and Passive.
Present Tense. 1. a, et, emus, ate, ent. are, etur, emur, amini, e^tur. ato,
ato, atote, anto. ator, ator, amin^r, antur. 2. e, eat, eamus, ete, eant. ere,
eator, eamur, emini, eantur. eto, eto, etote, ento. etor, etor, eminor, entur.
3. e, at, amus, ite, anto. ere, atur, amur, imini, antur. ito, ito, itote,
unto. itor, itor, iminor, untor. 4. i, iat, iamus, ite, iant. ire, iatur,
iamur, imini, iantur. ito, ito, itote, iunto. itor, itor, iminor, iuntor.
Subjunctive Mood.
Present Tense. Conjugat. 1. em, es, et, emus, etis, ent. er, eris vel ere,
etur, emur, emini, entur. 2. eam, as, at, amus, atis, ant. ar, aris vel are,
atur, amur, amini, antur. 3. am, 4. iam, Preterimperfect Tense. Conjugations 1.
arem, res, ret, remus, retis, rent. arer, reris vel rere, retur, remur, remini,
rentur. 2. erem, erer, 3. erem, erer, 4. ierem, ierer, Preterperfect Tense.
Conjugat. 1. erim, ris, rit, rimus, ritis, rint. us sim, us sis, us sit, ti
simus, ti sitis, ti sint. 2. 3. 4. Preterpluperfect Tense. Conjugat. 1. issem,
isses, isset, issemus, issetis, issent. us essem, us esses, us esset, ti
ess^mus, ti essetis. 2. ti essent. 3. 4. Future Tense. Conjugat. 1. ero, ris,
rit, rimus, ritis, rint. us ero, us eris, us erit, ti erimus, ti eritis, ti
erint. 2. 3. 4. Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect Tense. Conjugations Active. Conjugations Passive.
1. are. 1. ari. 2. ere. 2. eri. 3. ere. 3. i. 4. ire. 4. iri. Preterperfect and
Preterpluperfect Tense. Conjugations Active. Conjugations Passive. 1. isse. 1.
um esse vel fu^sse. 2. 2. 3. 3. 4. 4. Future Tenses.
Conjugat. 1. Active. Conjugat. 1. Passive. 2. urum esse. 2. um iri vel ndum
esse. 3. 3. 4. 4. Gerunds.
Conjugat. 1. andi, ando, andum. 2. endi, endo, endum. 3. endi, endo, endum. 4.
iendi, iendo, iendum. Supines.
Conjugat. 1. um, u. 2. 3. 4. Participles of the Present Tense.
Conjugat. 1. ans. 2. ens. 3. ens. ^. iens. Participle of the Preter Tense.
Conjugat. 1. us. 2. 3. 4. Participle of the Future in rus.
Conjugat. 1. urus. 2. 3. 4. Participle in dus.
Conjugat. 1. and^s. 2. endus. 3. endus. 4. iundus.

Q. Do the two Future Tenses of the Infinitive Mood Active and Passive vary and
change their Gender and Number according to the Substantives they are joined to?

A. The Future Passive is not changed either in Gender or Number; ^s,
Repudiatum iri legem intelligebat, Cicero. And, Rumor venit non datum iri
uxorem filio, Ter. The Infinitive Active was not varied amongst the Ancients;
as, Per omnes Deos and Deas dejeravit occisurum eum hac nocte quicum c^baret,
for occisuram; for he means the Maid Cosnina, Pl. Quo te occisurum minatur,
speaking of a Woman. But this is an Archaismus and grown obsolete; as, Cicero,
lib. 2. De Divin. An credis hanc anum tam deliram futuram esse?

Q. What must we do in th^se Verbs that want the Future in rus?

A. We must use in its stead fore or futurum; as, Spero fore ut contingatid
nobis.

Q. Do the Periphrastical Tenses of the Passive Voice vary their Gender
according to their N^minative and Substantive?

A. They do; as, Cicero, Pub. Clodium meo consilio interfectum esse dixisti.

Q. How are Verbs Deponents declined?

A. Like Passives, but with Gerunds and Supines, (especially the first Supine,
because they want Actives) and with Active Participles as we^l as Passive.

Q. What signification have their Participles?

A. Their Participles of the Present Te^se, and Future in rus, sig^ifie and
g^vern the same Cases as their Verbs; their Participles of the Pret. Tense have
both Active and Passive Signification, because their Verbs were formerly
common: Their Participles in dus signify always pass^vel.

Q. How and from whence do we form their Preterperfect Tense?

A. To form their Preterperfect Tense, we must fancy or feign a regular Active.

Q. What kind of Verbs are sum, possum, volo, nolo, malo, edo, fio, fero,
feror, for they are not declined as Regular Verbs?

A. They are Verbs Irregular, or Verbs g^ing out of Rule, which are declined
and formed by themselves.

Q. What say you of E^ and Que^, what do they make in the Preterimper^ect
Tense, and Future of the Indicative Mood, and how do they make their Gerunds?

A. They make Ibam and Quibam in the Preterimperfect Tense, and Ib^ and Quibo
in the Future Tense, and eundi, eundo, eundum, in their Gerunds.

Q. What Tenses are formed of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood?

A. The Preterpluperfect of the same Mood, and the three last Tenses of the
Subjunctive, and the Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect of the Infinitive Mood.

Q. How are these formed of the Preterperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood?

A. Those which end in ram, rim, to, are formed of it, by changing I into E
short. Those which end (...) sem or se, are formed of it, by putting to s, with
sem or se.

Q. What is a Verb Impersonal: and how known in English?

A. It is a Verb deficient in Person, for it is declined only in the third
Person Singular, in all Moods and Tenses, and it is known by the Sign, It,
before its English, and sometimes by the Sign, There; but V^ssius says, that a
Verb Imper^onal wants the Imperative Mood, for which is used the Present Tense
of the Subjunctive.

Q. Why is it called I^p^^sonal, is it because it wants the Persons?

A. Not so, but because i^ wants the first and second Person, as being the m^^t
wor^hy, f^r the third Person being Indefinite cannot be called a Person.

Q. What is a Participle?

A. It is part of Speech derived of a Verb having Declension, Case, and Gender,
like a Noun, and Tenses like a Verb, and Number and Figure like both.

Q. Why is it called a Participle?

A. It is so called from taking part of a Noun and part of a Verb.

Q. How many kind of Participles are there?

A. Four; two Active and two Passive; of which, two may signify the time
present, and two the time future, for the Preter Tense Passive may be also
present.

Q. How do you know the kinds of Participles?

A. Partly by their ending, partly by their signification.

Q. How know you a Participle of the Present Tense?

A. By its Latin in Ans or Ens, and its English in Ing.

Q. Is every w^rd ending in Ing, a Participle of the Present Tense?

A. N^, unless the Latin end in Ans or Ens, and have ^^e other properties of a
Participle; for a word ending in Ing, having A or The before it, is a Noun
Substantive.

Q. Whence is a Participle of the Present Tense formed?

A. From the Preterimperfect Tense of the Indicative Mood, by changing the last
syllable into us.

Q. How know you a Participle of the Future in Rus, and whence is it formed?

A. I know it by its Latin ending in Rus, and by its signifying, to do, like
the Infinitive Mood Active, and it is formed from the latter Supine, by putting
to it rus.

Q. How know you a Participle of the Present or Preter Tense Passive, and
whence is it formed?

A. I know it by its English ending in d, t, or n, and its Latin in tus, sus,
xus, and it is formed from the latter Supine, by putting to s, except Mortuns;
this kind of Participle is englished sometimes by the Sign having; as, l^cutus,
having spoken.

Q. How know you a Participle of the Future in dus, and whence is it formed?

A. This Participle signifies, to ^^, like the Infinitive Mood Passive, and it
is formed of the Genitive Case of the Participle of the Present Tense, by
changing it is into dus; as, Amantis, Amandus.

Q. What if Actives want the Supines?

A. Then the Fu^ure in rus is wanting, and the Participle of the Preter
Passive, for both are formed from the latter Supine Active; so if the
Preterperfect Tense Active b^ wanting, the Supines, the Future in rus, and
Preterperfect Tense Passive must be wanting.

Q. What, or how many Participles can a Verb Deponent have?

A. Three at the least, the Present Tense, the Future in rus, and Preter Tense,
and if it govern an Accusative Case, it forms also a Participle in dus.

Q. How are these four kinds of Participles dec^ined?

A. Those of the Present like Adjectives of three Articles, the rest like
Adjectives of three endings.

Q. Why was a Participle invented?

A. That is might supply what was wanting to a Verb, (to wit) Case and Gend^r.
So that a Participle is nothing else but a Casual Verb.

Q. What is an Adverb?

A. It is a Part of Speech underlined, joined to a Verb, Noun, or Participle,
to express and signify some circumstance or quali^y thereof.

Q. How many (...) of Adverbs are th^re?

A. There a^e several (...) of Adverbs, but all of them may be reduced to those
of Quality or Quan^ity.

Q. Which are the first (...) in the A^^idence?

A. They a^^ Adverbs of (...); as, hodie, to day; cras, to morrow; heri,
^esterday; perinde, the next day after to morrow; olim, in time past, or in
time to come, or once; aliquand^, sometimes; nup^r, lately, or of late; cum
quando, (...); nun^, jam, now; tunc, tum, then; quoad, usque, dum, don^^,
until; quamdi^, as long as.

Q. What are the next sort of Adverbs?

A. They are Ad^erbs of place; ubi, where; ibi, istie, illie, there; hi^,
(...); intus, within; for as, without, or abr^ad; fo^is, from abr^ad; unde, from
whence; procu^, a far ^ff; ubicunque, ubi ubi, where soever; ubi vis, quovis,
where you will; quoquo versum, which way soever; ^squ^m, any where; nusquam, no
where; undique, utroque, utro^ique, on both sides; ultro citroque, to and
ag^in; qua, which way; quo, whither, to what place, etc.

Q. What Adverbs (...) there of Number?

A. T^es^: s^mel, once; (...), twice; ter, thrice; quater, four times; vi^ies,
twenty times; iterum, again.

Q. What are the Adverbs of Order?

A. They are, inde, thence; deinde, afterward; denique, lastly, to e^^clude;
postremo, last of all.

Q. What are the Adverbs of Asking and Doubting?

A. They are, cur, quare, quamobrem, wherefore; unde, from whence; quo^sum, to
what end; number, nunquid, whether, etc.

Q. What are those of Calling?

A. (...) are, ^eus, h^, O (...); ehodum, come hith^r a little; ho, (...), etc.

Q. What are th^se of Affirming?

A. They are, c^rt^, certainly; nae, profecto, truly; save, ye^ ind^^d;
scilicet, yes forso^r^; licet, esto, let it b^ s^.

Q. What are the Adverbs of D^nying?

A. They are, non, minime, no; neutiquam, at no hand, in no wise; nequaquam, in
no wise.

Q. What are the Adverbs of Exhorting?

A. E^a, go to, well; age, go to; agite, go ye to; agedum; go to a little.

Q. What are th^se of Flatte^ing?

A. They are, sod^s, if thou durst, in good fellowship, I pray the^; amabo, of
all love.

Q. What is the forbidding Adverb?

A. N^, n^, not.

Q. What are the Adverbs of W^shing?

A. They are, utinam, I wish, oh that, or I would to God; si, if it might; ofi,
(...) that.

Q. What are the Adverbs of gathering together?

A. They are, simul, together; una, in me t^gether; pariter, together,
likewise; non modo, non sol^m, (...) only.

Q. What are those of Pa^ting?

A. They are, scorsim, asunder; sigilla^im, (...); vicatim, street by street,
^r village by village; v^^tim, man by man.

Q. What are the Adverbs of Chusi^g?

A. They are, potius, rather; in^o, yea rather.

Q. What are th^se (...) a thing not fin^shed?

A. They are, pene, fere, modo non, almost; prope, nigh, near, or almost, vix.
scarecly.

Q. What are those of Sh^wing?

A. They are, en and ecce, lo, b^^old.

Q. What are the Adverbs of (...)?

A. They are, forsan, for^^tan, ^^radventur^; forta^sis, it may be; forta^^e,
it may fall out.

Q. What are th^se of Chance?

A. They are, forte, as hap was, by chance; ^^rtuit^, by chance, or at
adventure.

Q. What are those of Likeness?

A. They are, sic, s^; s^u, sicut, v^lut, quem ^^modum, ut, tanquam, as; quasi,
ac^i, as if; qu^m quommodo, how.

Q. What are the Adverbs of Qu^lity?

A. They are, been, well; male, id; doct^, l^ar^edly; fortiter, valiantly.

Q. What are th^se of Quanti^y?

A. They are, mult^m, (...); parum, (...); minimum, the least of ad; paululum,
(...) s^mewhat; plurimum, the most ^f a^, (...).

Q. What are the Adverbs of C^mparis^n?

A. They are, tam, s^; quam, as; mag^s, m^re; minus, l^^s; maxim, m^st of all;
tum tum, cum tum, as well as.

Q. Are not some Adverbs compared?

A. Yes; as, docte, learnedly; doctius, more learnedl^; doctissime, m^st
learnedly, from doctus. Fortiter, valiantly; fortius, more valiantly;
fortissime, most valiantly, from fortis. Prope, near; proprius, nearer;
proxime, the nearest of all, from prope. But Adverbs borrow these Degrees of
Nouns Adjectives of the Comparative and Superlative Degree, for they have none
of their own, neither do they f^rm any Comparison.

Q. What are Prepositions when they are set alone, without any Case serving to
them?

A. They are turned into Adverbs; as, Qui ante non cavet post dolebit, He that
does not beware aforehand, shall be sorry afterward. Coram laudare and clam
vituperare inhonestum est, In presence to commend, etc.

Q. How may (...) know Adverbs?

A. Our English Adverbs commonly end in ly; the Latin eres in ^, ter, o, um,
im; as, certe, libenter, crebro, tantum, viritim, statim, etc.

Q. What is a Conjunction?

A. It is an undeclined part of Speech, that joyneth Words and Sentences
together.

Q. How many sorts of Conjunctions are there?

A. There are twelve sorts of Conjunctions, Copulatives, Disjunctives, (to
which all the rest may be reduced) Discretives, Causals, Conditionals,
Exceptives, Interrogatives, Illatives, Adversatives, Redditives, Electives,
Diminitives.

Q. Which are the Copulatives, (viz.) those that couple both Sense and Words?

A. They are, Et, que, ^c, atque, and; qu^que, also; nee, neque, neither.

Q. Which are the Disjunctives, (viz.) those which part the Sense and not the
Words?

A. They are, au^, ^e, s^u, ^el, either; sive, whether.

Q. Which are the Discretives, (viz.) those that imply a Difference?

A. They are, sed, aut^m, vero, at, ast, but; quidem, truly.

Q. Which are the Causals, (viz.) those which imply a Reason?

A. They are, nam, namque, enim, etenim, for; quia, qu^d, quoniam and quando
set for quoniam, (...); ut, that; quum, seeing that.

Q. Which are the Conditionals, (viz.) those that imply a Condition?

A. They are, si, if; sin, but if; modo, dum, dummode, so that.

Q. Which are the Exceptives, (viz.) those that imply an Exception?

A. They are, ni, unless; nisi, ex^ept; quin, but; alioquin, otherwise;
pr^^erquam, save that.

Q. Which are the Interrogatives, (viz.) those which ask a Question?

A. They are, an, ne, utrum, whether; ne^ne, anne, whether or no; nonne* is it
not so?

Q. Which are the Illati^^s, (viz.) such as make Inferenees?

A. They are, ergo, ideo, igitur, itaque, proin, therefore; quare, wherefore.

Q. Which are Adversatives, (viz.) such as grant somewhat to be said against?

A. They are, etsi, quamquam, quamvis, although; licet, although, albeit; esto,
suppose (...) be so.

Q. Which are Redditives, (viz.) such as give an answer to the Adversatives?

A. They are, tamen, yet; attamen, yet, notwithstanding.

Q. Which are Electives, (viz) such as imply a choice?

A. They are, quam, a^ atque, as.

Q. Which are Diminit^ves, (viz.) such as lessen the meaning?

A. They are, saltem, at the least; vel, even.

Q. What of the foregoing Pa^ticles use to begin, and what use to follow?

A. Those that use to begin are, Et, vel, nam, sed; th^se that fo^low a^e, que,
ve, enim, autem, vero, quidem.

Q. What is a Preposition?

A. It is an undeclined part of Speech most commonly set before other parts,
either in Apposition, that is, when it is set before another word, and is no
part of it, as, ad Patre^; or else in Composition, that is, when it is made a
part of the word which it is set before, as, Indectus.

Q. Why say you most commonly?

A. because some Prepositions are set after their Case; as, Versus, p^n^s,
tenus, cum and usp^e; others may be set also after their casual words by the
Figure Anastrap^e; as, (...).

Q. What use do Prepositions chiefly serve to?

A. They serve to govern Cases or to make Compound Word^.

Q. What Cases do Prepositions serve to?

A. Some serve to an Accusative and some to an Abl^tive, some both to an
Accusative and Ablative.

Q. How many serve to an Accusative?

A. Thirty two, viz. Ad, to; apxd, at; aute, before, etc.

Q. How many serve to an Ablative?

A. Fifteen, viz. A, ab, abs, etc.

Q. Do none of the Prepositions serve to a Genitive?

A. Yes, Tenus does, when the casual word joined with it is the Plural Number,
for then the casual word is put in the Genitive Case and set before Tenus.

Q. What Prepositions serve to an Accusative and Ablative?

A. In, super, sub, subter, and clam, as some will have it.

Q. When does in govern an Accusative Case?

A. When it has the Sign in^^, or when it is put for erga, co^t^a, ad^,
otherwise it serves to an Ablative.

Q. When does sub govern an Accusative?

A. When it is put for per, ad, or ante; that is, when it signifies, unto, by,
about or before, otherwise an Ablative.

Q. When does super govern an Accusative Case?

A. When it is put for ultra, beyond, else an Ablative; subter we use as we
please with either Case.

Q. Have you no more Prepositions but those that serve to the aforesaid Cases?

A. Yes, these six, am, di, dis, re, se, con, which serve to no Case, for they
are only found in Composition.

Q. What is an Interjection?

A. It is an undeclined part of Speech which signifies some sudden Affection or
Passion of the Mind in an imperfect Voice.

Q. Are all Interjections imperfect V^ices?

A. All which are pr^perly Interjections, but masum, with a mischief; infandum,
a thing not to be spoken of ^ amabo, of all fell^wship! perii, alas! with
several other perfect words of any part of Speech are not properly
Interjections, though they may be so used to express a sudden Passion.

Q. Which are the Interjections of Mirth?

A. They are, Evax, be brave; vah, hey day.

Q. Which are those of Sorrow?

A. They are, Heu, alas; hei, alas, well-a-day.

Q. Which are those of dread?

A. Atat, o^, out, alas, aha.

Q. Which are the rest of them?

A. Some are of Marvelling; as, Papae, O marvelous, O strange!

Some of Di^daining; as, Hem, ob what; vah, ab, away!

Some of Shunning; as, Apage, get thee gone, Avaunt!

Some of Pra^sing; as, Euge, well done!

Some of Sc^^ning; as, hui, whoo!

Some of Exclamation; as, Proh Deum atque hominum fidem, O the Faith of Gods
and Men! O strange!

Some of Cursing; as, Vae, (...); malum, with a mischief.

Some of Laughing; as, Ha, ha, he; ha, ha.

Some of Calling; as, Eho, oh; ^o, ho Sirrah, avoy.

Some of Silence; as, Au, whist.

Brief Examinations on the Four Parts of Grammar.
Q. WHat is Grammar?

A. Grammar is an art of speaking well.

Q. How many Parts of Grammar are there?

A. There are Four, Orthographia, Etymolegia, Syntaxis, (...), which last part
most Grammarians make to be the Second.

Q. What is Orthographia?

A. Orthographia is that part of Grammar which teaches us the way to Write and
Spell truly; as, Lectio with (...), and not Lexio with an x.

Q. How does it differ from Orthoepia?

A. Orthographia, is a true writing of Letters; Orthoepia, is a right
pronunciation of them.

Q. Seeing Orthographia teaches us with what Letters every Syllable and Word
are to be writ, what is a Letter?

A. It is the least part of a Word or an articulate Sound which cannot be
divided.

Q. How many Letters are there in the Latin Tongue?

A. There are twenty two, but K, Y, and Z, (though they are in the number) are
not ^eckoned Latin Letters, and H is only a Note of Aspiration; in the English
there are twen^y four Letters.

Q. How many fold is a Letter as to its found?

A. It is two fold, Vowel and Consonant.

Q. What is a Vowel?

A. It is a Letter that makes a perfect sound of it self; as, A, E, I, O, V,
and Y spelt like I, of which I and V become Consonants, when they are put
either before other Vowels, or before themselves.

Q. What if two Vowels joined together make but one sound and are spelt at once?

A. They make a Dipthong.

Q. How many Dipthongs are there?

A. The most usual in the Latin Tongue are five, ae, oe, au, ei, eu; the less
usual are, ai, oi, ui, and the Greek yi. In the English there are eight proper
Vowels, ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou, oo, ee, and six improper ones, to answer the
first six proper ones, ay, ey, oy, aw, ew, ow.

Q. What is a Consonant?

A. It is a letter that makes no sound of it self, but as it is joined with a
Vowel.

Q. How many sold is a Consonant in Latin?

A. It is two sold, Mute and half Vowel.

Q. What is a Mute?

A. It is a Letter which has a very obscure sound, or rather none at all,
unless what the Vowels do communicate.

Q. How many Mutes are there?

A. Nine, according to the received Grammar, b, c, d, f, g, k, p, q, t, in all
which the sound of the Vowel follows; as, in be, ce, de, ge, pe, qu, te, except
in f, where it goes before; as, of.

Q. How many half Vowels are there, and what is a half Vowel?

A. It is a Letter which has or makes some sound, and as it were half a sound
of it self, of which there are seven, l, m, n, r, s, x, z, in which the sound
goes before in the first six; as, el, em, en, er, es, ex, but in z the sound
follows.

Q. How many fold are these half Vowels?

A. Two fold, either Liquids or Doubles, called Duplices in Latin.

Q. What is a Liquid, and how many Liquids are there?

A. A Liquid is a Letter which being put after a Mute in the same syllable,
melts away, (i. e.) loses its force, of which there are four, l, m, n, r; l
and ^ among the Latins only; and m and n among the Greeks become Liquids, (i.
e.) liquescunt.

Q. May not s and u be added to Liquids?

A. Amongst the Ancients s in the end of a word became a Liquid; as, Ennius in
three places, Nunc seni^ confectu' quiescit pro confectus. Fa^it cur v^lito
vivu' per ora virum, for vivus: Virgins nam sibi quisque domi Romanus habet
sas, for suas. And so u, if g, q, or s, go before; as, 1. Lingua, anguis. 2.
Aequ^s, linquo. 3. Suadeo, suesco.

Q. What is a Double, called in Latin Duplex, and how many of them?

A. A Duplex is that which is put for two Consonants, of which there are two, x
and z, and sometimes i between two Vowels; x is put for cs or gs; as, dux, for
dacs; rex, for regs: z is put for ds; as, Zephyrus, for Dsephyrus; but the
Latins use in the middle of a word to turn z into a double s; as, patrish, for
patrizo.

Q. What do you mean when you say, S, est suae potestatis litera?

A. I mean, that s is neither a Liquid nor a Duplex.

Q. What sort of Letters are r and y said to be?

A. R is said to be the canina litera, the doggish Letter, by reason of its
snarlish or harsh sound: Y is called the Pythagorean Letter, because Pythagoras
resembled Virtue to this Letter, spreading up its branches.

Q. How many fold are Letters as to their shapes or as they are written.

A. They are two fold, the Great and Capital Letters, and the Small Letters.

Q. Where do we make use of great Letters?

A. 1. In the beginning of Periods. 2. In Proper Names. 3. In the Names of
Arts, Dignities or Honors, Offices, Feasts, in the beginning of every Verse,
Titles, and in words that have a great Emphasis, and also in the English
Pronoun, I.

Q. What do the Great or Capital Letters signify, when they are writ alone?

A. They signify, first, either a Praenomen, the first Name, (or, as we term
it, the Christian Name) as, A. for Aulus; C. for Caius; D. for Decius; or a
Title; as, L. for Lord; LL. for Lords; B. for Bishop; BB. for Bishops: Or,
secondly, the Great Letters signify a Number; as, I, for One; V, for Five; IX,
for Nine; X, for Ten; XL, for Forty; L, for Fifty; XC, for Ninety; C, for a
Hundred; D, for five Hundred; M, for a Thousand.

Q. Now we have done with single Letters, I pray, what must he do that will
Spell right, and Write true Orthography?

A. He must readily learn to distinguish, or to part, and to join Syllables.

Q. What is a Syllable?

A. It is a perfect sound, and distinct part of a word, being made up of as
many Letters as we spell together: where note, that a Latin Syllable cannot
exceed six Letters, and that an English Syllable may arise from one Letter to
eight and no more; and an English Word from one Syllable to seven and not above.

Q. How many fold is a Syllable?

A. It is two fold; Proper, consisting of one or more Consonants, with a Vowel
or Dipthong; or Improper, consisting of one only Vowel or Dipthong.

Q. What Rule am I to observe concerning the right parting and joining of
Syllables?

A. A Consonant between two Vowels belongs to the latter; as, in a-mor. 2. If a
Consonant be doubled, the former belongs to the former Syllable, and the latter
to the latter Syllable; as, in an-nus. 3. Consonants which cannot be joined in
the beginning, are not to be joined in the middle; as, ar-duus. 4. Consonants
which may be joined in the beginning of a word, are joined also in the middle;
as, no-ster, vo-lu-ptas. So bd, ct, ps, s^, tu, gm, gn, xi, do belong to the
following Vowel; as, in A-bdo-men, do-ctus, scri-psi, Ae-^^a, A-gmen, i-gnis,
di-xi, etc. 5. In compound words, every part of syllable is to be separated
from the other; as, in-ers, abs-condo, juris-con-sultus. But observe, that in
words compounded with a Preposition we must please the Ear, and a good and
pleasing Sound; as, o^^urro, rather than obcurro; officio, rather than obsicio;
aufero, rather than abfero, etc. Between m and n we do not insert p; no^ do we
commonly write s after x.

Q. How is c pronounced or spelt before a, e, ae, oe i, y, o, u?

A. Before a, o, and u, like a k; before the e, ae, oe, i, and y, like an s,
with a hissing.

Q. How is g spelt or pronounced before an e, or i, and how before a, o, and u?

A. Before e, and i, it sounds or is spelt softly, like gh, or like the Hebrew
Jod, (age egi) before a, o, and u, hardly, like the Gre^k Gamma; as, gaudium,
gloria, gula.

Q. What observation do you make of que and u, in spelling?

A. That q will have u after it, and u will have c before it and not k.

Q. What observe you of the sound of ti?

A. I observe, that ti, when a Vowel follows, sounds or is spelt like si; as,
Orati^, patientia, etc. unless in Greek words; as, Politia; or in the beginning
of a word; as, T^ara; or in the Infinitive Mood Paragogick; as, mittier, for
mitti: or if s, or x, goes before; as, Quaestio, mixtio: or, lastly, in the
Genitive Case Plural of vi^ium from vitis, to distinguish it from the
Nominative vitium. Observe, That the syllable of any Latin or English word in
the end of a line, is not to be disjoined, but the word is to be continued by a
Hyphen, called a Note of Continuation.

Q. But have we not many English words in which several Letters are quiescent,
or not pronounced?

A. Yes, for a is quiescent after the first a in Aaron, Canaan, Isaac; after e
in the same syllable; as, conceal, b^stead; and after o in the same syllable;
as, eneroach, hoary; e is not sounded in George, heart, ^earken, M^neth,
Tuesday, Atheism; nor is ^ sounded in the end of any English word, yet it
alters the sound, and also it makes the syllable long in many words; as, hau,
have; lou, love; cau, cave; sau, save; mad, made; tam, tame; except that it is
sounded in me, ye, be, he, we, and in certain words derived of other Languages;
as, Jesse, Penel^pe, C^nge, Epitome.

Q. Are there any more of the Letters quiescent?

A. Yes, both Vowels and Consonants; as, i and y, o and u, in Carriage,
Attorney, People, buy, bu^ld, etc. b, in Lamb, Deb^; c, in Pack, etc. g, in
Ensign, Phlegm, Reign, etc. h, in Ghost, John, etc. n, in Hymn, etc. p, in
Psalm, Receipt, etc. s, in Isl^; t, in catch, ditch, botch: with many such to
be observed by Use and Reading.

Q. How many are the Vices or Faults of Orth^^peia, sc. of Pronunciation?

A. They are tive; Iotacismus, Lamdacismus, Ischnotes, Traulismus, Plateasmus,
of which see the Grammar.

Q. What are the Points and Stops used in Writing and observed in Reading?

A. They are these, 1. A Comma, marked thus, (,) which notes a small stay. 2. A
Colon, with two pricks thus, (:) which notes a longer stay; to which belongs a
Semi-colon, marked thus, (;). 3. A Peri^d, marked thus, (.) which notes a full
stay, as if we had ended. 4. A Note of Interr^gation, thus, (?) used when we
ask a Question. 5. A Parenth^s^^, marked thus, () used when Words or a Sentence
is added which might he left out, and yet the Sense whole; as, Teach ^^, (I
pray you) to read. 6. An Apostroph^^, which is a Comma writ over the place or
top of a Vowel or Dip hong cut off; as, loved, for loved; (...), for Tantone.
7. A D^aeresis, which notes a Dipthong to be parted into two syllables, marked
thus, () as, Poeta, not Poeta. 8. A Point of Admiration or Exclamation, thus,
(!) 9. An Obelisk, thus, () and it is referred from the Matter to the Margent.
10. An Index, marked thus, () which points from the Margent what is remarkable.
11. An Asterism, when any part of the Sentence is lost, marked thus, (*). 12. A
Paragraph, (). 13. A Parathesis notes an Adverb marked thus, (`). 14. A Note of
a long quantity thus, (); and of a short quantity after this manner, ().

Q. What is the next Part of Grammar?

A. It is Etymologia, which teaches the Proprieties and Difference of Words,
especially in their Terminations, and it considers and contains under it the
Eight Parts of Speech, with their Accidents.

Propria quae Maribus, Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER.
Q. WHAT does Propria quae Maribus contain, and to what part of Grammar does it
belong?

A. It contains General Rules for the Declining of Regular Nouns, and both it
and Quae Genus belong to Etymologia, because they treat of Nouns which are the
first part of Speech.

Q. Into how many Parts may Propria quae Maribus be divided?

A. Into three; viz. 1. Into Rules for the declining of Nouns Substan^ives
Proper. 2. Into Rules for the declining of Nouns Substantives Common. 3. Into
Rules for the declining of Nouns Adjectives.

Q. How many General Rules are there for the declining of Nouns Substantives
Proper?

A. Two; Propria quae Maribus, that is, Proper Names of Males or He Is; and
Propia Fae^ineum, Proper Names of Females or She Is.

Q. How many sorts of Proper Names are there of the Masculine Gender?

A. Five; 1. Of Gods; as, Mars, it is; Bacchus, chi; Apollo, inis. 2. Of Men; as,
Cato, onis; Virgilius, lii.

3. Of Rivers; as, Tybris, bris; Acc. im; Abl. i; Orontes, it is. 4. Of Months;
as, October, bris; Abl. i. 5. Of Winds; as, Lybs, bis; Notus, i; Auster, i.

Q. What Objections can you make against the foregoing Rule?

A. That the Names of Rivers are of that Gender which the Termination requires,
for if they be Feminine or Neuters according to their Termination, and that
nevertheless they be used in the Masculine Gender that happens by a Syllepsis,
because the common Name Fluvius or Amnis is understood. 2. The Names of Months
are Adjectives, used substantively, and Mensis is understood, which sometimes
also is expressed. 3. In the Names of Winds there is a regard to the common
word Ventus.

Q. Grammarians averr, that Proper and Common Names, that signify the
Male-kind or He Is, are of the Masculine Gender; how comes it to pass, that
these Nouns of the Feminine Gender signify Males or He Is, viz. Operae,
Custodiae, Copiae, Vigiliae, Excubiae, Curae?

A. Because, first of all, and properly, they signify Action, and by a
Metonymia of the effect, they are spoken of Men, keeping the Gender of their
proper signification: for the same reason, scortum, mancipium, and prostibulum,
are Neuters.

Q. How many sorts of Proper Names are there of the Feminine Gender?

A. Five; 1. Of Heathenish Goddesses; as, Juno, o^nis; Venus, ^ris. 2. Of
Women; as, Anna, ae; Philotis, ot^dis. 3. Of Cities; as Elis, i^dis; Opus,
untis. 4. Of Countries; as, Graecia, ae; Persis, i^dis. 5. Of Islands; as,
Creta, ae; Britannia, ae; C^prus, i.

Q. What Words are there excepted from this General Rule?

A. These Proper Names of Cities, viz. Sulmo, o^nis; Agragas, gantis, are of
the Masculine Gender; Argos, gi; Tibur, bu^ris; Praeneste, is, of the Neuter
Gender; and Anxur, u^is, of the Masculine and Neuter Gender.

Q. What may be objected against the said Rule, that is, Propria Foemin^um?

A. That the Names of Cities, Countries, and Islands, do rather follow the
Gender of their termination, and if they have an Adjective contrary to their
termination, that is by a Syllepsis; and there is a regard to be had to the word
Regio, Urbs, Terra, and the like.

Q. Where does the Second Part of Propria quae Maribus, that is, Rules for the
declining of Substantives Common, begin?

A. It begins at Apellativa arborum.

Q. How many things do you observe in this Second Part of Propria quae Maribus?

A. Three* first, that those Substantives which are the Common Names of Trees
have a General Rule by themselves for their declining, and are commonly
according to their kind and nature of the Feminine Gender; as Alnus, ni;
Cupressus, i; Cedrus, i.

Q. Are there any Exceptions to this Rule?

A. Yes, Pinaster, tri; Oleaster, tri, of the Masculine Gender, and siler,
eris; suber, eris; thus, uris; ro^ur, oris; ^cer, eris, of the Neuter Gender.

Q. What is the Second Observation?

A. It is of Epicenes, that is, of Nouns which commonly and of their own nature
under one Termination and one Gender signify both kinds, (i. e.) the He and
She; yet not always; as, in Gallus and Gallina; Leo and Le^na.

Q. How many kinds of Epicenes are there?

A. Three: 1. Of Birds; as, Passer, ris, M. G. Hirando, inis, F. G. 2. Of
^easts; as, Tygris, dis, F. Vulpes, is, F. 3 Of Fishes; as, Ostrea, ae, F.
Cetus; ti, M. To Epicenes may be added Mancipium, sc^rtum, ^umentum, etc.

Q. Of what Gender is every Noun that ^ndeth in um?

A. Of the Neuter; as, Londinum, Latium, Brund^^ sium, except Proper Names of
Men and Women, according to the common exception, Omne quod exit in ^m, si
^ominum tu propria tollas, etc.

Q. Of what Gender is every wor^ that does not alter its Termination?

A. Of the N. G. if it be a Substantive; as Nom. Nil, ^^n. Nil, Dat. Nil, etc.
and whatever stands inst^ad of a Noun or Nom. Case: But Adjectives invariable,
are of any Gender, according to the Substantive* they agree wi^h; as, (...)
homo, a good Husband; Fr^gi (...), a good Housewife. So tot, quot, are of all
Ge^ders.

Q. How may the Genders of all other Nouns Substantives Common be known, which
is the third thing observa^^^ in this S^co^d Part of Propria quae Maribus?

A. Partly by the^r Signification, partly by their Termination, but principally
by the G^nitive Case of ^ach (...) according to the Special Rules with their
^xceptions.

Q. How many Special Rules have you to know the Gender by the encrea^^ng or not
increasing of the G^ni^ive Case?

A. Three; 1. N^men n^n crescens genitivo, etc. 2. Nom^n (...) is p^nultima si
genitivi syllaba acuta sonat. 3. Nom^n crescent is penultima si genitivi sit
gravis, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the first Special Rule, Nomen non cr^s^ens?

A. That every Noun Su^stantive Common, that does not increase in the Genitive
Case, (i. e.) that h^th no more syllables in the Genitive Case th^n in the
Nominative, is of the Feminine Gender; as, Caro, ca^nis; Capra, ae; Nubes, is.

Q. How many Exceptions are there under this Rule?

A. Four; Masculine, Neuter, Doubtful, and the Common of Two.

Q. How many Rules of Masculine Exceptions not increasing are there?

A. Four; 1. Nouns ending in a, signifying the Offices of Men; as, Scriba,
assecla, scurra, rabula, Lixa, Lanista, ae. 2. Mascula Graecorum, (i.e.) Greek
words that end in as and es, of the first Declension of the Greeks, and end in
a, in the Latin, are of the M. G. as, satrapes, satrapa, athle^^s, athleta, ae;
ex ep^ charta, margarita, cataracta, catapulta, etc. which are of the F. G. 3.
These Mascusines, Ver^es, vatales, a^uales, is. 4. Nouns compounded of as,
assis; as, ^entussis, is. 5. These Nouns, Li^nis, ^^bis, callis, (...), follis,
colli^, mensis, ensi, fustis, funis, panis, pen^s, crinis, ignis, caseis,
fascis, (...), se^ti^, pis^is, (...), vermis, vectis, p^stis, axis, is. 6. All
Nouns tha^ end in er; as, Venture, tris: in os; as, (...), gi: in us; as, Anmes,
ni.

Q. What kind of Rule is this, to wit, Faeminei generis sunt mat^r, humus, etc?

A. It is a Feminine Exception on the foregoing Rule, viz. on Mascula in er,
etc. and no^ on the first Special Rule; for a Feminine Rule cannot have a
Feminine Exception; ^or M^ter, t^is, is an Exception of Nouns that end in er:
And th^se Nouns, Humut, mi; domus, mi, or us; alvus, t; colu^, i; ficus* ct,
and cus; acus, porticus, cus; tribus, bus; (...), ^s; nurus, us; manus, us: Pl.
Idus, uum; anu^, us; vannus, ni. Likewise these Greek words that change o^ in^o
us; as, Paprrus, ri; antido^us, ^i; costus, ti; dipthongu^, gi; byssus,
abyssus, si; crysta^lus, si; s^n^dus, di; sapphyrus, ri; eremus, mi; arctus,
ti, are an Exception of Nouns that end in us.

Q. What is the Neuter Exception of Nouns not increasing?

A. It is first of Nouns ending in e in the Nom. Case, and make is in the Genesis
as, Mare, rete, is. 2. Of all Nouns in on and um; as, (...), ti; ovum, vi. 3.
Of these Nouns, Hippomanes, (...)* is, Virus invariabile; Pelag^s, ^i. And,
last^y, this word Vulgus, i, is both of the M. and N. G.

Q. What words of the Doubtful Gender are excepted under the first Special Rule?

A. They are, Talpa, dama, ae; canalis, halcyonis, F. finis, clunis, restis,
is; penua, (...), or us; amnis, is; pampinus, ni; corbis, is; linter, tris;
torquis, is; specus, ci, or us; anguis, is; Ficus, ci, F. phaselus, li;
lecythus, thy, F. atomus, mi; grossus, si; pharus, i, ^. paradisus, si. M. G.

Q. What is the Common of two Exception under the first Sp^cial Rule?

A. It is of Nouns compounded of a Verb and end in a; as, gra^^gena, ae. from
graius and gigno; agricola, ae, from ager and colo; and advena, ae, from ad and
venio: Likewise these, Senex, is; auriga, ae; vernae, ae; sodalis, is; vates,
is; patiuelis, perduellis, affinis, ju^eni, testis, civis, canis, hostis, is.

Q. Which is the second Special Rule for the Gender and declining of Nouns
Substa^tives common?

A. Every Noun Substantive common which increases long, and the last syllable
save one is lifted up in the Genesis Case, is of the F. G. but every word that
thus increases is not of a long quantity; as, in vir, vri; mas, maris.

Q. How many Exceptions are there under this second Special Rule?

A. Four: 1. Masculine Exceptions. 2. Neuter. 3. Doubtful. 4. Common of two.

Q. How many Masculine Exceptions has it?

A. 1. It has these Monosyllables, or Nouns of one Syllable; Sal, salis; ren,
splen, car, ser, is; vir, ri; vas, dis; as, assis; mas, ris; bes, bessis; cres,
it is; praes, dis; pes, pedis; glis, gliris; mos, moris; flos, floris; ras,
roris; tros, trois; mus, muris; dens, dentis; mont, it is; pons, it is; sons, it is;
seps, sepis; gryphs, phis; thrax, cis; rex, regis; grex, gregis; phryx, gis. 2.
These Pollysyllables, or Nouns of more than one Syllable ending in n; as, 1.
Acarnan, a^nis; lichen, e^nis; delphin, inis. 2. Pollysyllables which end in o,
signifying a body; as, Le^, curculio, onis; with these, Senio, ternio, sermo,
onis. 3. Nouns ending in er; as, Crater, e^ris: in or; as, Conditer, o^ris: in
os; as, Heroes, cis* 4. These Nouns ending in ens; as, Torrens, n^frens, oriens,
bidens, it is. 5. These Nouns ending in as; as, Gigas, elephat, adamas, garamas,
antis. And these in es; as, Tapes, lebes, cures, magnes, etis; meridies, ^i. 6.
Nouns compounded of as, assis; as, Dodrans, antis; semis, semissis. Likewise
these Nouns; Samnis, itis; hydrops, o^pis: With these ending in x; as,
Nycticorax, acis; thorax, acis; vervex, e^cis; Phxnix, i^cis; hombyx, bycis.
And Spadix, volvox; and esox, cis: But Siren, e^nis; sor^r, o^ris; and uxor,
o^ris; cos, it is; d^s, it is; cos, eois; and glos, it is, are of the F. G. contrary
to the f^regoing Exceptions; and mulier, iris, b^longs rather to the Feminine
Exception under the third Special Rule, because it increases short.

Q. What Neut^rs are there excepted from the second Special Rule?

A. 1. Words of one syllable, Mel, mellis; fell, fellis; vas, vasis prim^;
vasorum vasa secundo; os, ossis, and oris; rus, thus, jus, crus, pu^, ris. 2.
Nouns of many syllables in all; as, Capital, lis; and in ar; as, laquear, a^ris,
except sala^ of the M. G. likewi^e halec, e^cis, of the N. and F. G. in the
Sing. and of the F. only in the Plural.

Q. What is the Doubtful Exception from this Special Rule?

A. Doubtfuls excepted are, Python, onis, M. scrobs, obis; serpens, it is; bubo,
onis; rudens, it is; grus, gruis; perdix, di^^is; lynx, cis; limax, a^cis;
stirps, pis; calx, cis; dies, ei, which is only Masculine in the Plural.

Q. What words of the Common of two are excepted under this Special Rule?

A. They are, Parens, ^ntis; author, oris; infans, it is; adolescens, it is; dux,
cis; ill^x, ^gis; haeres, e^dis; exl^x, le^gis: Also the Compounds of Frons;
as, bifrons, it is. Likewise these Nouns, Castos, odis; bos, bovis; fur, furis;
sus, suis; sacerdos, dotis.

Q. What is the meaning of the third Special Rule?

A. That every Noun Substantive common increasing short in the Genitive Case,
(i. e.) having the last syllable save one pressed down, is o^ the Masculine
Gender.

Q. How many Exceptions are there under this third Special Rule?

A. Four: 1. Of Feminines. 2. Of Neuters. 3. Of Doubtsuls. And, 4. of the
Common of two increasing short.

Q. What are the Feminines excepted?

A. They are, first, all Noun^ of more than two syllables that end in do or go,
making dinis and ginis in the Genitive Case; as, Dulcedo, dinis; compago,
gi^nis. 2 Virgo, gi^nis; grand^, dinis; fides, ei; compes, pe^dis; teg^s,
ge^tis; seges, ge^tis; arb^r, o^^is; hyems, e^mis; bacchar, cha^ris; syndon,
s^ndo^nis; gorgon, go^nis; icon, o^nis;, o^nis. 3. Gre^k words which end either
in as; as, Lamp^s, p^dis, or in is; as, jaspis, i^dis, with the Latin words
Cassis, i^dis; cuspis, i^dis; pecus, ^dis, when it signifies small Cattle.
Forf^x, i^cis; pellex, i^cis; carex, i^cis; coxendix, i^cis; filix, ^cis, to
which add tomex and for^ex; and mulier, e^ris, to be added according to this
Verse: Huc add is Mulier propria si class locabis.


Q. What Neuters of Nouns increasing short are excepted under the third Spec^al
Rule?

A. They are all Nouns that signify a thing without life, ending either in a,
as, Problema, atis. en, Omen, inis. ar, Jabar, aris. ur, Je^ur, oris. us, Onus,
eris. put, Occiput, itis. Except Pecten, i^nis, and furfur, u^ris, which are of
the M. G. though they end in en and ur. 2. Cadaver, e^ris; iter, tineris; suber,
tuber, uber, gingiber, laser, cicer, piper, papaver, siser, siler, e^ris.
Aequor, marmor, ador, oris, (and pecus, pecoris, for great Cattle) are of the
N. G.

Q. What words of the Doubtful Gender are excepted from the third Special Rule?

A. They are these, Card^, inis, M. margo, inis, D. G. cinis, eris; obex, icis;
pulvis, eris; adeps, dipis; sorceps, cipis, F. pumex* icis; ramex, icis, M.
anas, atis, F. imbrex, icis; culex, icis, M. natrix, icis, M. onyx, ycis;
sardonyx, yeis; silex, icis: To these doubtsuls add, Cortex, icis; varix, icis,
and ales, itis.

Q. What words are there of the Common of two excepted from the third Special
Rule?

A. These, Vigil, pugil, ilis, M. exul, praesul, u^lis, M. Homo, i^nis; nemo
Genesis caret, Dat. nem^ni; martyr, yris; ligur, u^ris, M. areas, a^dis, M.
antistes, i^tis; miles, i^tis; pedes, i^tis; interpres, i^tis; comes, hospes,
i^tis; praeses, i^dis, M. princeps, ci^pis, M. ^uceps, cu^pis, M. eques, i^tis;
obses, i^dis, with many other Nouns derived of Verbs; as, Conjux, ju^gis;
judex, opifex, aruspex, i^cis, M. to which add municeps, cipis.

Q. How many Rules are there for the declining of Nouns Adjectives?

A. Three.

Q. Which is the first?

A. The first is, That Adjectives, having one only Termination, are of the
Common of three Genders; as, Hic, haec, and hoc faelix, i^cis; hic, haec, and
hoc audax, a^cis; hic, haec, and hoc quadrupes, pe^dis: to which Rule belong
these undeclinable Adjectives, viz. Nequam, tot, quot, miile, etc.

Q. Which is the second Rule for the declining of Adjectives?

A. The second is, That if an Adjective have two endings, the first ending must
be of the M. and F. G. and the second of the N. as, Hic and haec omnis, and hoc
omne, is.

Q. Which is the third Rule for the declining of Adjectives?

A. The third Rule is, That if an Adjective have three endings, the first
ending is of the M. G. the second of the F. and the third of the N. as, Sacer,
sacra, sacrum.

Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, At sunt quae flexu, etc?

A. The meaning, according to the Book, is, That there are some Adjectives
declined with two Articles (i. e, with hic and hae^) like Substantives, yet in
very deed are Adjectives, and are so used; as, Pauper, puber, degener, uber,
e^ris. Yet most of them are found in the Neuter Gerder; as, Hor. l. 1. Epist.
10. Sub paupere tecto. ^ikewise Ovid. Trist. l. 2. El. 1. Divitis ingenii est
ingentia Caesaris acta scribere. -- So Juven. Sat. 13. Depositum tibi sospes
erit. -- Ovid Amor. l. 3. El. 14. Post mea mansurum fata superstes opus. Tacit.
Rari imbres; puber solum: Comes in the Rule seems rather a Substantive of the
C. G. Victrix and ultrix are of the Feminine Gender in the Singular Number, and
of the Feminine and Neuter Gender in the Plural, being Adjectives defectives.

Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Haec proprium quendam sibi fle^um, etc?

A. The meaning is, That these Adjectives have a peculiar manner of declining,
differing from the common form, viz. that they have three Endings, and three
Articles; as, Hic campester, haec campestris, hoc campestr^, or hic and haec
campestris and hoc campestre, is. Hic volucer, haec volucris and hoc volucre,
or hic and haec volucris and hoc volucre, is. Celeber, bris, bre. Celer, ris,
re. Saluber, bris, bre. Pedester, tris, tree. Equester, tris, tree. Acer, cris,
cre. Pal^ster, stris, stre. Alacer, cris, ^re. Sylvester, tris, tree.

Of Nouns Heteroclites.
Q. WHat does Quae genus contain?

A. It contains Rules for the declining of Heteroclites or Irregular Nouns, as
Propria quae maribus does of Regular; so that Quae genus is no more than an
Exception on Propria quae maribus.

Q. How many sorts of Heteroclites or Irregular Nouns are there?

A. Three: 1. Variantia genus aut slexum; that is, such as vary or change their
Gender or Declension. 2. Defectiva; such as want some Case or Number. 3.
Redundantia; (i. e.) such as abound or have overmuch in declining. All which
three sorts are mentioned in the first D^stick thus: 1. Quae genus aut flexum
variant. 2. Quaecunque novato ritu deficiunt. 3. Superantve Heteroclita, sun^o.

Q. How many sorts of Nouns Heteroclites are there that change their Gender and
Declension?

A. There are six sorts.

Q. What are the first sort of them, and which is the Rule?

A. They are these of the F. G. in the Sing. and N. in the Pl. as, Pergamus,.
mi; a, orum; supellex, ctilis; ilia, ium. The Rule is, Singula Foemine^s,
neutris Pluralia gaudent. To this Rule may be added, Hierosolyma and Carbasus,
being of the F. G. in the Sing. and of the N. in the Plural.

Q. What are the second sort of Nouns that do change their Gender and
Declension, and which is their Rule?

A. They are those of this Rule, Dat prior, etc. which are of the N. G. in the
Sing. and of the M. and N. in the Plur. Rastrum, tri; tri, tra, rorum. Fraenum,
ni; ni, na, n^rum. Filum, li; li, la, lorum, N. Capistrum, tri; tri, stra,
strorum, N.

Q. What words are of the third sort, and which is their Rule?

A They are these of the N. G. in the Sing. and only of the M. G. in the Plur.
as, Coelum, li; li, lorum. Argos, gi; gi, orum. The Rule is, Moscula duntaxat,
etc.

Q. What words are of the sourth sort, and what is their Rule?

A. They are these of the N. G. in the Sing. and of the F. G. in the Plur. as,
Nundinum, ni; nae, arum. Balneum, ei; ae, arum. Their Rule is, Neutra quidem
primo, etc.

Q. What words are of the fifth sort, and what is their Rule?

A. They are these of the M. G. in the Sing. and of the N. G. in the Plur. as,
Maenalus, li; la, lorum. Dyndimus, imi; ma, morum. Ismarus, i; a, orum.
Tartarus, ri; a, rorum. Taygetus, i; a, orum. Taenarus, i; a, orum. Massicus,
i; a, orum. Gargarus, i; a, orum. The Rule is, Haec maribus dantur, etc.

Q. What are the sixth and last sort of Variants, and which is their Rule?

A. They are these of the M. G. in the Sing. and of the M. and N. G. in the
Plur. as, Sibilus, li; li, la, orum. Jocus, ci; ci, ca, little, Locus, ci; ci,
ca, little. Avernus, ni; ni, na, orum. The Rule is, At numerus genus his dabit
alter utrumque.

Q. How many sorts are there of Deficient Heteroclites?

A. There may be said to be three sorts of these, though the Book speaks but of
two; the first sort are such as are deficient in declension or not at all
declined, called Aptota in the Grammar, though more properly Aclita, viz. such as
have no different Case, but are alike in all Cases; for Apto^a (as Priscian
says) are those which are found in no other Case, besides the Nominative; as,
Expes, satias. 2. Such as are deficient in one of the Numbers. 3. Such as are
deficient in some Case or Cases in either or both the Numbers.

Q. Where does the first sort of Nouns, called Defectives, begin, and what are
they?

A. They begin at, Quae nullum variant ca^um, and they are such as vary not in
any Case from their Nom.

Q. What words are defective of the first, sc. of the undeclined sort?

A. They are these: 1. Nom. Genesis Da^. etc. Fas, nil, nihil, instar invariabile.
2. Wo^ds that end in u, and i; as, Cornu, genu; Gummi, frugi; and haec tempe,
and cete in the Plur. with hi, hae and haec tot, quot, invariabile. Likewise
all Nouns from three, to a hundred; as, Hi, hae and haec, quatuor, quinque,
d^cem, viginti, triginta, and mill the Adjective, invariabile: Mill the
Substantive is Hoc mill, invariabile in the Sing. as, Mill hominum occiditur,
and, Mill hominum occiso. Cic. 6. Phil. In the Pl. N. Haec millia. Mill the
Adjective takes to it self an Adverb; as, Te^ mill virorum: But Mill the
Substantive requires an Adjective; as, Hominum eo die caesa plus duo millia. To
this Rule add, Nequam, volupe; necesse, necessum: Also, Pondo and caepe, or
cepe in the Singular and Plural. Likewise Hebrew Names in m; as, Adam, A^h^m,
Cheru^^m, etc. Also the N^mes of Letters; as, Alpha, Beta, etc. And, la^^ly,
the Names of Towns, that end in i and y; as, Aixi, Ille^urgi, Aepy, D^ri.

Q. Of what Number are these, viz. Fa^, nil, nihil, instar, cornu, genu, gummi,
frugi?

A. The four first, with gummi, are of the Singular Number, undeclined; cornu
and genu, with others that end in u, except gelu, are commonly declined in the
Plural, only veru makes verua, verubus, and not veruum: But frugi is of the
Singular and Plural undeclined, and of all Genders.

Q. What are the first sort of those that are deficient in Case called?

A. Monoptots; being so called because they are found in one oblique Case only;
as, Abl. Hac noctu. (Ut, ^redo ego hac noctu obdormivisse ebrium, Plant. Amph.)
Abl. Hoc natu, jussu, injussu, promptu, permissu, astu. Pl. Acc. Hos astus.
Acc. Has inficias.

Q. How are the second sort of Defectives in Case called?

A. Diptots.

Q. Why are they so called?

A. Because they are said to have commonly but two Cases, yet we decline F^rs
thus: Nom. Fors, Genesis Fortis, Dat. Forti, Acc. ^wtem. Voc. O Fors, Abl. Forte.
Genesis Spontis, Abl. Sponte. Nom. Acc. Plus, Genesis Pluris, Genesis Repetundarum, Abl.
Repetundis. Genesis Jugeris. Abl. Jugere. Genesis Verberis. Abl. Verbere. Nom.
Suppetiae, Acc. Suppetias. Nom. Tantundem, Genesis Tantidem. Genesis Impetis, Abl.
Impete. Acc. Vic^m, Abl. Vice. Of which Verberis, Vicem, Plus, and Jugeris,
have the whole Plural Number, except that Vicium is not read in the Genitive
Plural. The Cases here are to be understood of Cases of Termination, not of
Cases of Signification. To this Rule, add, Dica, dicam; Chaos, chao; Melos,
melo; Tabi, tabo.

Q. How are the third sort of Defectives in Case called?

A. Triptots; though some of them may be called Tetraptots.

Q Why so?

A. Because they have only three or four Cases; as, Genesis Precis, Dat. Preci,
Acc. precem, Abl. prece* Opis, opem, open. To which are added the Tetraptots
Frugis, and ditionis, which only want the Nominative and the Vocative Case
formed from it. Also Vis that wants the Dative; and likewise those Nouns that
want the Vocative Case are Pentaptots.

Q. What and how many are those Nouns Pentaptots that want the Vocative Case?

A. They are, 1. Relatives; as, Qui, quae, quod, etc. 2. Interrogatives; as,
Ecquis, ecqua, ecquid. So Quis, numquis, uter, qualis, quantus, quotus, cujus,
and cujas, are Interrogatives. 3. Distributives; as, Nullus, a, um. Neuter,
tra, trum. Omnis, ne. Likewise Vllus, solus, uter, alter, nemo, alius, aliquis,
quidam, quispiam, quilibet, quisque, unusquisque, quotusquisque. 4.
Indefinites; as, Quilibet, quaelibet, quodlib^t. Alter, tera, terum, which is
hardly an Indefinite. 5. All Pronouns, except these four, Noster, tra, trum.
Nostras, it is. C. 3. Meus, a, um, and Tu, whereof some of them sometimes have a
Vocative Case; as, Aperite aliquis ostium, etc.

Q. What are the next sort of Defectives?

A. They are those that are deficient in Number.

Q. What is the first Rule of Deficients in Number?

A. It is Propria cuncta notes, etc. In which Rule there are six sorts of words
that want the Plural Number. 1. All Proper Names, signifying one thing, whether
of Gods; as, Mars, it is. Of Men; as, Cato, onis. Of Countries, Cities, Hills,
Rivers, Dogs, Horses; as, Gallia, ae, F. Roma, ae, F. Ida, ae, F. Tagus, gi, M.
Laelaps, pis, M. Parnassies, si, M. Bucephalus, li, M. 2. The Names of Corn or
Grain; as, Triticum, ci, N. Siligo, ginis, F. Ador, oris, M. 3. Things that are
weighed; as, Piper, e^ris. Saccharum, ri. Butyrum, ri. Resina, ae. 4. The Names
of Herbs; as, Ruta, ae. Salvia, ae. 5. Of moist or liquid things; as, Lae, it is.
Oleum, i. 6. Of Metals and Minerals; as, Aurum, i, N. Argentum, i, N. Sulphur,
u^ris, N. Nitrum, i, N.

Q. But may not some of them sometimes have the Plural Number?

A. Yes, as may apprear by the clause or ending of the Rule, Est ubi pluralem
retinent haec, est ubi spernunt. For Proper Names, when they are taken for
Substantives Common, or when there are more of the same Name, have the Plural
Number; as, when Catones are taken for Wise Men, as Cato was; and Maeccnates,
for Noble Men, as Maecenas was; according to the Verse,

Sint Maecenates, non decrunt, Flac^e, Marones.

Q. What sort of Rule is this, viz. Hordea, farra, ^orum, etc?

A. The words of this Rule are a particular Exception on Propria cuncta notes;
and they have three like Cases in the Plural Number, viz. the Nominative,
Accusative, and Vocative; as, Hordeum, ei; Far, farris; Forum, ri; Mel, mellis;
Mulsum, si; Desrutum, ti; Thus, thuris: To which you may add, Jus, mare, rus,
vinum, aes; ^s, oris, dans G^nitivo; yet aeribus and oribus are read, though
aerum and ^rum are not.

Q. What are the second sort of those that are deficient in Number?

A. They are these Masculines that want the Plural Number: Hesperus, ri;
Vesper, eris; Pontus, ti; Limus* i; Fimus, i; Penus, ni and us; Sanguis, i^nis;
Ether, e^ris; and Nemo, ini^, which commonly, they say, wants the Genitive,
and Vocative Cases, and Plural Number, according to the usual Verse: Nemo caret
genito, quinto numeroque secundo.
To this Rule may be added, Pudor, sopor, muscus, etc.

Q. What are the third sort of those that are deficient in Number?

A. They are these Feminines that want the Plural Number, viz. Pubes, is;
Salus, u^tis; Talio, o^^is; Indeles, is; Tussis, is, Acc. tussim; Pix, i^is;
Humu^, m^; Lues, is; Sitis, is, Acc. sitim; Fuga, ae; Quies, etis; Cholera, ae;
Fames, is; Bilis, is; Senecta, ae; Juventus, u^tis; Soboles, is; Labes, is.

Q. What Cases will all Nouns of the fisth Declension have in the Plural
Number, and what is the Rule?

A. They will have three like Cases in the Plural Number; to wit, the
Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative. The Rule is, Vt and omnia quintae tres
similes casue, etc.

Q. But what Nouns of the fifth Declension are excepted?

A. These: viz. Res, ei; Species, ei; Facies, ei; Dies, ei, which have the
whole Plural Number, by this Rule, Quas voces numero totas, etc.

Q. Are there no other Feminines that want the Plural Number?

A. Yes these: Stultitia, ae; invidia, ae; sapientia, ae; desidia, ae; with
many others which are to be found in reading Authors; as, Castitas, elegantia,
fides, ei, justitia, pietas, requies, ira, spes, fama, sanies, supellex, tabes,
cum multis aliis.

Q. What are the fourth sort of Defectives in Number?

A. They are these Neuters that want the Plural Number, viz. Delic^um, cii;
senium, nii; l^thum, thy; caenum, ni; salum, li; barathr^m, thri; virus
invariabile; vitrum, tri; viscum, sci; penum, ni; justitium, tii; nihilum, li;
ver, veris; lac, ctis; gluten, ^nis; hale^, e^cis; gelu invariabile; solium,
ii; jubar, a^ris.

Q. Which is the fifth Rule, or fifth sort of Deficients in Number?

A. The fifth Rule, and the two next Rules following it, are of words that want
the Singular Number, the four first being of words that wanted the Plural.

Q. What is the fifth Rule of Deficients in Number, and what are the words?

A. The fifth Rule is of these Masculines that want the Singular Number; as,
Manes, ium; majores, um; cancelli, orum; liberi, orum; antes, ium; menses, ium;
lemures, rum; fasti, orum; minores, um; natales, ium; penates, ium; gabii,
orum; locri, orum; to which add, caelites, codicilli, annals, fasces,
carceres, indigetes, pugillares, quirites, primores, op^imates, ga^amantes,
nomades, etc.

Q. What words are of the sixth sort of Deficients in Number?

A. They are these of the Feminine Gender that want the Singular Number, viz.
Exuviae, phalerae, arum; grates in the Nom* Acc. and Voc. manubiae, arum; idus,
^^m; antiae, ind^^iae, insidiae, minae, excubiae, nonae, nugae, fricae,
calendae, quisquiliae, thermae, cunae, dirae, exequiae, feriae, inferiae,
primitiae, plagae, valvae, divitiae, ^uptiae, arum; lactes, ctium; Thebae,
Athenae, arum; to which may be added, dapes, Dryades, Eumenides, fauces,
minutiae, parcae, reliquiae, alps, Symplegades, ambages, etc.

Q. What is the last Rule of Desectives in Number?

A. The last is of these Neuters, that want the Singular Number; as, Maenia,
tesqua, praecordia, lustra, arma, mapalia, bellaria, munia, castra, justa,
sponsalia, rostra, crepundia, cunabula, exta, effata, orum; bacchanalia, ium,
etorum: but mapalia makes orum and ibus; so does sponsalia, orum, ibus;
bacchanalia, orum, ium, ibus.

Q. Where does the Third Part of Quae genus begin, viz. of Nouns Irregular,
called Redundants, or that have overmuch?

A. It begins at Haec quasi luxuriant, etc.

Q. How many sorts o^ Redundants are there?

A. There be two sorts of Redundant Nouns, viz. some Substantives and some
Adjectives.

Q. How many sorts of Redundant Substantives are there?

A. Two; Redundants in the Nominative as well as in other Cases; and Redundants
only in the Oblique Cases.

Q. How many sorts are redundant in the Nominative Case?

A. Two; some according to different Terminations are of different Genders;
others under different Terminations are of the same Gender.

Q. How many are of the first sort, that according to different Terminations
are of different Genders?

A. There are two of these, for some under different Terminations are still
Latin words; others in which one differing Termination is Greek, from whose
Accusative Case in a, is found a new Nominative in a, of a Latin Termination.

Q. Which is the Rule for those Redundants, that, under diverse Terminations,
are of diverse Genders, yet both the Terminations Latin, and what words are they?

A. The Rule is, Haec quasi luxuriant, etc. viz. of these Nouns agreeing in
their signisication, though differing in their Gender, according to their diverse
Terminations; and they are, Tonitrus, us, M. Tonitru invariabile, N. Clypeus,
ei, M. Cl^peum, ei, N. Baculus, i, M. Baculum, i, N. Sensus, us, M. Sensum, i,
N. Tygnus, ni, M. Tygnum, i, N. Tapetum, ti, N. Tapete, is, N. Tapes, e^tis, M.
Punctus, i, M. Punctum, ti, N. Sinapi invariabile, N. Sinapis, is, F. Sinus,
us, M. Sinum, ni, N. Menda, ae, F. Mendum, di, N. Viscus, ci, M. Viscum, ci, N.
Cornu indeclinabile, N. Cornum, ni, N. Cornus, us, M. Eventus, us, M. Eventum,
ti, N. with many more that you may meet with in reading Authors.

Q. Which is the Rule and the Words of the second sort of Redundant
Substantives, which in their Nominative Cases have two Terminations, one
originally Greek, the other ^atin, which comes from an Accusative Case in a of
that Greek word.

A. The Rule is, Sed tibi preterea, etc. as, Panther, e^ris, M. Acc. Panthe^ra.
Nom. Panthe^ra, ae, F. Crater, e^ris, M. Acc. Cratera. Nom. Crate^ra, ae, F.
Cassis, idis, F. Acc. Cassida. Nom. Cassida, ae, F. Ether, eris, M. Acc.
Aethera. Nom. Aethera, ae, F.

Q. What are the third sort of Redundants, that, under different Terminations,
are of the same Gender and Signification?

A. They are these, viz. Gibbus, by, M. Gibber, e^ris, M. Cucumis, is, M.
Cucumer, e^ris, M. Stipis, is, F. Stips, stipis, F. Cinis and ciner, ^ris, D.
G. Vomer, ris, M. Vomis, ^ris, M. Scobis, is, F. Scobs, bis, F. Pulvis, ris, D.
G. Pulver, ris, D. G. Pubes, is, F. Puber, ris. C. 2. Likewise word that end in
or and os in the Nom. as, Honor, and honos, o^ris, M. Labor, labos, o^ris, M.
Odor, odos, o^ris, M. To which add Apes, apis, is, F. Plebs, is, F. Pl^bes, ei,
F. with many Nouns borrowed from the Greeks, which admit of a double manner of
declining; as, Delphin, inis. Delphinus, ni, M. Elephas, antis. Elephantus, ti,
M. Congrus, i. Conger, gri, M. Meleagrus, gri. Meleager, gri, M. Teu^rus, cri.
Teucer, cri, M.

Q. What are the next sort of Redundants, and the Rule for declining of them?

A. They are these, that are redundant in the Oblique Cases, being of the 2d
and 4th Declension; as, Laurus, ri and us, F. Quercus, ^i and us, F. Pinus, ni
and us, F. Ficus, ci and us, F. Colus, li and lus, F. Penus, ni and nus, D. G.
Cornus, ni and us, F. G. Lacus, ci and us, M. Domus mi and us, F. (Sed Toll
me, mu, a Singulari, and mi atque mis a Plurali, si declinare domus vis) The
Rule of them is, Haec simul and quarti flexus sunt atque secundi.

Q. Are there no Redundants of other Declensions, besides those of the second
and fourth Declension?

A. Yes, for some are of the first and third; as, Orestes, ae, is. Orontes, ae,
is. La^bes, ae, it is. Thales, ae, it is. Calchas, ae, antis. Pascha, ae, a^is. And
some are of the second and third; as, Mulciber, beri, beris. Polypus, pi,
podis. Glomus, mi, eris. Vesper, ri ris. Aedipus, i, podis. Sequester, tri,
tris.

Q. What is the Rule for Redundant Adjectives?

A. The Rule is this, Et quae luxuriant sunt, etc. that is there are many
Redundant Adjectives, especially those derived of these Substa^tives, viz. Of
Arma, jugum, nervus, somnus, clivus, animus, limus, cera, fraenum, bacillum;
which Adjectives may be either of three Terminations, or three Articles; as, Of
Arma, comes inermus, a, um, and inermis, me; but Hilarus is very seldom read,
though Hilaris is very common.

As in Praesenti, Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER.
Q. WHat does As in Praesenti contain?

A. It contains Rules for the Preterperfect Tenses and Supines of Simple and
Compound Verbs.

Q. Into how many Parts may it be divided?

A. Into Ten; viz. 1. The Preterperfect Tenses of Simple Verbs in o. 2. The
Preterperfect Tenses of Compound Verbs. 3. Supines of Simple Verbs. 4. Supines
of Compound Verbs. 5. Preterperfect Tenses of Verbs in or. 6. Verbs having two
Preterperfect Tenses. 7. Verbs Neuters Passive (i. e.) which end in o, and yet
have a Passive Signification. 8. Verbs borrowing the Preterperfect Tense. 9.
Verbs wanting the Preterperfect Tense. And, lastly, Verbs wanting the Supines,
whereof the five first concern R^gular Verbs, the five last Irregular Verbs,
which are either Redundant, Variant, or Defective.

Q. What does the first Part teach?

A. It teaches to know the Preterfect Tense of Verbs in o, in all the four
Conjugations.

Q. What is to be observed in the forming of the Preterperfect Tense of Verbs
in each Conjugation?

A. That the first, second and fourth have peculiar Terminations in their
Preterperfect Tenses; viz. the first in avi, the second in ui, the fourth in
ivi; but the third Conjugation forms its Preterperfect Tense variously,
according to the T^rmination of Verbs in the Present Tense; as, bo makes by, co
makes ci, etc.

Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in o, of
the first Conjugation, declined like Amo?

A. The Rule is, As in Praesenti.

Q. What is the meaning of the Rule?

A. That Verbs of the first Conjugation, having as in the second Person of the
Present Ten^e will have avi in the first Person of the Preterperfect Tense; as,
No, nas, navi: Vocito, tus, ta^i.

Q. What Verbs are excepted from this Rule?

A. These: Lavo, as, lavi, lotum, lautum, lavatum. Juvo, as, uvi, utum only in
composition, nexo, as, xui, xum. Seco, as, cui, ctum. Neco, as, ui. Mico, as,
ui. Plico, as, avi and cui. Frico, as, ui, ctum. Dom^, as, ui, itum. Tono, as,
ui, itum. Sono, as, ui, itum. Crepo, as, ui, itum. Veto, as, ui, itum. Cubo,
as, ui, itum. Do, das, dedi, datum. Sto, stas, steti, statum.

Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in eo, of
the second Conjugation, declined like Doceo?

A. It is this, Es in praesenti perfectum format ui dans.

Q. What is the meaning of this Rule?

A. That Verbs of the second Conjugation, having es in the second Person of the
Present Tense, will have or make ui in the first Person of the Preterperfect
Tense; as, Nigreo, es, ui, etc.

Q. How many Exceptions are there from this Rule?

A. There are six.

Q. What is the first Exception?

A. The first is of these Verbs, viz. Jubeo, es, ssi, ssum. So^beo, es, ui, and
psi p^um. Mulceo, es, si, sum. Luceo, es, xi --. Sedeo, es, di, ssum. Video,
es, si, sum. Prandeo, es, si, sum. Strideo, es, di --. Suadeo, es, si, sum.
Rideo, e^, si, sum. Ardeo, es, si, sum.

Q. What is the second Exception?

A. Quatuor his infra, etc. viz. That the first syllable of the Preterperfect
Tense is doubled in these four Verbs, Pendeo, es, pependi, sum. Mordeo, es,
momordi, sum. Sp^ndeo, es, spo^^^ndi, sum. Tondeo, es, totondi, sum.

Q. What is the third Exception?

A. The third is, If l or r come before ge^, in the Present Tense, the
Preterperfect Tense shall end in si; as, Vrgea, es, si, sum. Mulgeo, es, si and
xi, ctum: And these ending in geo make xi; as, Frigeo, es, xi --, Lugeo, es,
xi, ctum. Augeo, es, xi, ctum.

Q. What is the fourth Exception?

A. It is of these Verbs, Fleo, es, vi. Leo, es, vi. Deleo, es, vi. Pleo, es,
vi. Neo, es, vi, tum.

Q. What is the fifth Exception?

A. It is of these three Verbs that make si in the Preterperfect Tense, Maneo,
es, si, sum. Torqueo, es, si, tum, and sum. Haereo, es, si, sum.

Q. What is the last Exception?

A. It is, Veo fit vi, viz. Of Verbs in veo, which make vi in the Preterperfect
Tense; a, ^^rveo, es, vi --: Except Niveo, es, xi --. Conniveo, es, xi --.
Cieo, es, vi, tum. Vieo, es, e^vi, tum.

Q. Are all Verbs in ^o of the second Conjugation?

A. No, for beo, creo, screo, meo, calceo, laq^eo, nauseo, enu^leo, and the
Compounds of any of them are of the first: and e^ and queo, with their
Compounds, are of the fourth Conjugation: and therefore es, in the second
Person of the Present Ten^e, proves a Verb to be of the second Conjugation, and
as proves a Verb to be of the first.

Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of all Simple Verbs in o, of
the third Conjugation, decli^ed like Lego?

A. It is, Tertia praeteritum formabit, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the Rule?

A. That Verbs of the th^rd Conjugation, having no common ending in (...)
Preterperfect Tense, as Verbs of the first and second Conjugation have, form
their Preterperfect Tense according to the several Terminations of the first
Person of the Present Tense.

Q. What if the first Person of the Present Tense end in bo, in Verbs of the
third Conjugation?

A. Then the Preterperfect Tense shall end in by; as, Lambo, is, by --: Except
Scribo, is, psi, ptum. Nubo, is, psi, ptum. Cuinbo, is, ui, itum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in co?

A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in ci; as, Vinco, is, vici, ctum: Except
Parco, is, peperci, and parsi --. Dico, is, xi, ctum. Duco, is, xi, ctum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in do?

A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in di; as, Mando, is, di, sum: Yet these
lose n out of the middle; as, Scindo, is, scidi, ssum; findo, is, fidi, ssum;
fundo, is, fudi, sum: And these admit a reduplication in the beginning; as,
Tundo, is, tutudi, tunsum; pendo, is, pependi, pensum; tendo, is, tetendi,
tensum; pedo, is, pepedi, peditum; cado, is, cecidi, casum; caedo, is, cecidi,
caesum.

Q. But how do Cedo, vado, rado, etc. make their Preterperfect Tense?

A. They make it in si, and their Supines in sum; as, Cedo, is, ssi, ssum;
vado, is, si, sum; laedo, is, si, sum; ludo, is, si, sum; divido, is, si sum;
trudo, is, si, sum; claudo, is, si, sum; plaudo, is, si -- rodo, is, si, sum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in go?

A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in xi; as, Jungo, is, xi, ctum: But if
there be an r before go, that Verb will make si; as, Spargo, is, si, sum, etc.
And these Verbs ending in go, make gi; as, Lego, is, gi, ctum; ago, is, egi,
actum; tango, is, tetigi, tactum; pungo, is, xi, and pupugi, ctum; frango, is,
fregi, fractum; pango, is, pepigi, pegi, and panxi, pactum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in ho?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in xi; as, Traho, is, xi, ctum; veho, is, xi,
ctum.

Q. What does lo make in the Preterperfect Tense?

A. It makes ui; as, Colo, is, ui, cultum: But Psallo and sallo, is, li, sum;
vello, is, li and vulsi, vulsum; failo, is, fefelli, falsum; cello, is, ceculi,
and cellai, culsum, and celsum; (but percello, is, culi, culsum; excell^, is,
lui, celsum:) pello, is, pepuli, pulsum.

Q. What does mo make in the Preterperfect Tense?

A. It makes ui; as, Vomo, is, ui, itum: But Emo, is, mi, ptum; como, is,
compsi, ptum; promo, is, prompsi, ptum; demo, i^, dempsi, ptum; sumo, is,
sumpsi, ptum; premo, is, pressi, ssum.

Q. What does no in the Present Tense, make in the Preterperfect Tense?

A. It makes vi; as, Sino, is, vi, tum: But Temno, is, psi, ptum; sterno, is,
stravi, tum; sperno, is, sprevi, tum; lino, is, levi and lini, litum; cerno,
is, crevi, tum; gigno, is, genui, genitum; pono, is, posui, positum; cano, is,
cecini, cantum.

Q. If the Present Tense end in po, how must the Preterperfect Tense end?

A. In psi; as, Scalp^, is, psi, ptum: Except Rumpo, is, rupi, ruptum; strepo,
is, ui, itum; crepo, is, ui, itum.

Q. If the Present Tense end in quo, how does the Preterperfect Tense end?

A. In qui; as, Linquo, is, liqui: But Coquo, is, xi, ctum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in to, how does the Preterpersect end?

A. In vi; as, Sero, is, vi, satum; signifying, to plant or sow: But in another
signification, Sero, is, ui, sertum: So Verro, is, ri, sum; gero, is, ssi,
stum; quaero, is, sivi, itum; tero, is, trivi, tum* curro, is, cucurri, cursum;
uro, is, ssi, stum.

Q. What if the Present Tense ends in so?

A. The Preterperfect Tense shall end in sivi; as, Accerso, is, sivi, itum;
arcesso, is, sivi, itum; incess^, is, si and sivi, situm; lacesso, is, sivi,
itum; capesso, is, si and sivi, sum and situm; facesso, is, si and sivi, sum
and situm; viso, is, si, sum; pinso, is, ui, stum.

Q. What if the Present Tense end in sco?

A. Then the Preterperfect Tense ends in vi; as, Pasco, is, pavi, pastum:
Except Po^co, is, poposci --; disco, is, didici --; quinisco, is, quexi --.

Q. What if the Present Tense ends in to?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in ti; as, Verto, is, ti, versum: Yet Sisto,
is, stiti, statum; mitto, is, si, ssum; peto, is, petu, or petivi, itum;
sterto, is, ui --; meto, is, ssui, ssum.

Q What if the Present Tense ends in ecto?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in exi; as, Flecto, is, xi, x^m: But Pecto, is,
makes xi and xui; and necto, is, xui and xi.

Q. What if the Present Tense ends in vo?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in vi; as, Volvo, is, vi, volutum: Except Vivo,
is, xi, ctum.

Q. What if the Present Tense ends in xo?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in ui; as, Nexo, is, ui, ctum; texo, is, ui,
xtum.

Q. What if the Present Tense ends in cio?

A. The Preterperfect shall end in ci; as, Facio, is, feci, factum, jacio, is,
jeci, jactum: Except the Old Verb Lacio, is, lexi, ctum; specio, is, spexi,
ctum.

Q. What does dio make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes di; as, Fodio, is, di, ssum.

Q. What does gio make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes gi; as, Fugio, is, gi, etc.

Q. What does pio make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes pi; as, Capio, is, cepi, captum: Except Cupio, is, pivi, itum;
rapio, is, ui, rap^um; sapio, is, ui and ivi, itum.

Q. What does rio make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes ri; as, Pario, is, peperi, partum.

Q. What does tio make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes ssi, with a double ss; as, Quatio, is, ssi, ssum.

Q What does uo make in the Preterperfect?

A. It makes ui; as, Statuo, is, ui, utum: But pluo, is, vi and ui, itum;
struo, is, xi, ctum; fluo, is, xi, xum.

Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of Simple Verbs in io, of the
fourth Conjugation, declined like Audio?

A. It is, Quarta dat is, ivi, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the Rule?

A. That all Verbs of the fourth Conjugation, make their Preterperfect Tense in
ivi; as, Scio, is, seivi, tum: Except Venio, is, veni, tum; cambio, is, psi,
psum; raucio, is, si, sum; farcio, is, si, tum; sarcio, is, si, tum; sepio, is,
psi, ptum; sentio, is, si, sum; fulcio, is, si, tum; haurio, is, si, stum;
sancio, is, xi and ivi, ctum and citum; vincio, is, xi, ctum; salio, is, ui,
tum; amicio, is, ui, (...) and amixi, ctum.

Q. Do none of these that are excepted, ever make their Preterperfect Tense in
ivi, according to the Rule of the fourth Conjugation?

A. Yes, Cambivi, haurivi, sepivi, sanxivi, sarcivi and salivi, are sometimes
though seldom read.

Q. Are there not many Verbs in io, which are not of the fourth Conjugation?

A. Yes, for these are of the first, though they end in io, viz. Glacio, emacio,
socio, crucio, saucio, calcio, nuncio, fascio, catamidio, radio, hio, retalio,
spolio, amplio, lani^, somnio, pio, strio, vario, decurio, centurio,
succenturio, furio, basio, satio, vitio: But some that end in io, are of the
third Conjugation, viz. Facio, jacio, lacio, specio, f^dio, fugio, cupio,
rapio, sapio, pario, quatio.

Q. What is the Rule for the Preterperfect Tense of Compound Verbs, being the
Second Part of As in Praesenti?

A. It is, Prae^eritum dat idem Simplex and Composi^ivum.

Q. What is the meaning thereof?

A. The meaning is, that the Compound Verb has the same Preterperfect Tense as
the Simple Verb; for as deceo makes docui, so edoceo makes edocui.

Q. Has this Rule no Exceptions?

A. Yes, it has several Exceptions, whereof the first is, Sed syllaba semper
quam simplex geminat composto non geminatur; that is, the syllable which is
doubled in the Preterperfect of the Simple Verb is not doubled in the
Preterperfect Tense of the same Verb being compounded; for though tendo makes
tetendi, yet extendo makes ex^endi: except in these three, praecurro, excurro,
repungo, and in the Compounds of do, disco, sto, posco, which double the
syllable when they are compounded.

Q. What is the second Exception on Praeteritum dat idem?

A. When plico is compounded with sub or a Noun, it will have avi in the
Preterperfect Tense; as, supplico, as, avi; multiplico, as, avi: but applico,
as; complico, as; replico, as; explico, as, make ui or avi.

Q. What is the third Exception?

A. That though the Simple Verb oleo makes olui in the Preterperfect Tense, yet
its Compounds rather make olevi; as, exoleo, es, levi: only redoleo, es, ui;
suboleo, es, ui.

Q. What is the fourth Exception?

A. It is, that the Compounds of pungo make punxi, except repungo, is, repunxi,
and repupugi.

Q. What is the fifth Exception?

A. The fifth is, that the Compounds of do, being of the third Conjugation do
make didi, and not dedi; as, addo, is, didi; credo, is, didi; edo, is, didi;
dedo, is, didi; reddo, is, didi; perdo, is, didi; abdo, is, didi; obdo, is,
didi; condo, is, didi; indo, is, didi; trado, is, didi; prodo, is, didi; vendo,
is, didi, itum; except abscendo, is, di and didi, sum and itum: To which Rule
is added the Compounds of sto, that make stiti.

Q. What and how many other Exceptions are there wherein the Compound Verbs do
differ from the Simple?

A. There are three general Exceptions, (viz.) 1. Verba haec simplicia, etc. 2.
Haec habeo, lateo, etc. 3. Haec si componas, etc.

Q. What is the meaning of the first Exception, (viz.) Verba haec simpli^ia?

A. That these Verbs following, (viz.) Damno, lacto, sacro, fallo, arceo,
tracto, satiscor, partio, carpo, patro, scando, spargo, and pario, when they
are compounded, change their first Vowel in all Tenses into e; as, damno,
condemno, lacto, oblecto, sacro, consecro: but two of the Compounds of pario,
(viz.) Comperio, is, rii, and reperio, is, ri, make their Preterperfect Tense
in ri, the rest of its Compounds make ui; as, aperio, is, ui, apertum; operio,
is, ui, opertum: but all of them in general, except in the Preterperfect Tense,
are declined like Verbs of the fourth Cunjugation, though the Simple Verb pario
be of the third.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of Pasco, belonging to this Rule, Verba haec
simplicia?

A. That two of its Compounds change the first Vowel into e, and make their
Preterperfect Tense in ui, viz. Compesco, is, ui; dispesco, is, ui; but all the
rest of the Compounds of Pa^co do keep the Vowel and Preterperfect Tense of the
Simple Verb; as, Epasco, is, vi, stum.

Q. What is the meaning of the second general Exception, (viz.) Haec habeo,
lateo, etc. wherein Compound Verbs differ from the Simple?

A. That these Verbs, viz. Habeo, lateo, salio, statuo, cado, laedo, pango,
pegi, cano, quaero, caedo, tango, egeo, teneo, taceo, sapio, rapio; being
compounded, change the first Vowel in all Tenses into i; as, Habeo, cohibeo,
rapio, eripio.

Q. What is to be observed of the Compounds of Cano?

A. That they make their Preterperfect Tense in ui, (though it self makes cecini)
as, Concinno, is, ui, tum.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of Placeo?

A. They change the first Vowel into i; as, displiceo, es, ui, itum: except
complaceo and perplaceo, declined like the Simple Verb placeo.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of Pango?

A. That these four, depango, oppango, circumpango, and repango do keep a like
the Simple Verb: but all the rest of its Compounds change a into i; as,
impingo, is, pegi.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of Maneo?

A. That these four Compounds of Maneo, viz. Praemineo, es, ui; emineo, es, ui;
promineo, es, ui, and immineo, es, ui, do change the first Vowel of the Simple
Verb into i, and do make their Preterperfect Tense in ui; but all the rest of
its Compounds keep the Vowel a, and are declined like Maneo.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of scalpo, calco, salto?

A. They change a into u; as, scalpo, exculpo; calco, incul^o; salto, resulto.

Q. What say you of the Compounds of claudo, quatio, lavo?

A. They cast away a; as, claudo, occludo, excludo, quatio, percutio, excutio;
lavo, proluo, diluo.

Q. What is the meaning of, Haec si componas, etc. the third general Exception
of Verbs Compounds that differ from their Simple?

A. That these Verbs, Ago, emo, sedeo, rego, frango, capio, jacio, lacio,
specio, premo, when they are compounded, change the first Vowel of the Present
Tense, and the Tenses formed thereof into i; but not of the Preterperfect
Tense, nor of the Tenses formed of it; as, frango, refringo, is, fregi; capio,
incipio, is, cepi.

Q. Are there no Exceptions from this Rule?

A. Yes, for perago and satago are declined like the Simple Verb ago: and these
two Compounds of it, dego, cogo, with pergo, do cast away the middle syllable
of the Present Tense; for instead of deago, we say dego; cogo instead of coago;
and pergo for perago; so surgo for surrego.

Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Nil variat facio?

A. That the Compounds of facio, do not change the first Vowel into i; as,
olfacio, calfacio; unless when facio is compounded with a Preposition; as,
inficio.

Q. What is the meaning of, A lego nata, etc?

A. That lego being compounded with re, se, per, prae, sub, or trans, does keep
e, and not change it into i; but when it is not compounded with re, se, etc. it
does change the Vowel into i; as, intelligo, diligo, negligo, which three make
the Preterperfect Tense lexi, all the rest of its Compounds legi.

Q. How is the Sup^ne of a Simple Verb known, being the Third Part of As in
praesenti?

A. It is known by the ending of the Preterperfect Tense.

Q. What if the Preterperfect end in by, how shall the Supine end?

A. It shall end in tum; as, bibo, bibi, tum.

Q. What is ci in the Preterperfect Tense made in the Supine?

A. It is made ctum; as, vinco, vici; ico, ci, ctum; facio, feci, factum;
jacio, jeci, jactum.

Q. What is di made in the Supine?

A. Sum; as, video, vidi, sum: but these Verbs do double ss; as, pando, pandi,
passum; sedeo, sedi, ssum; scindo, scidi, ssum; findo, sidi, ssum; fodio, fodi,
ssum: Observe that the syllable which is doubled in the Preterperfect Tense, is
never doubled in the Supine; as, tondeo, totondi, tonsum, and not totonsum;
cedo, ceci^di, caesum; cado, cecdi, casum; tendo, tetendi, tensum, and tentum;
tundo, tutudi, tunsum; pedo, pepidi, peditum; do, dedi, datum.

Q. What is gi made in the Supine?

A. It makes ctum; as, l^go, legi, lectum; pango, pegi and pepigi, pactum;
frango, fregi, fractum; tango, tetigi, tactum; ago, egi, actum; pungo, pupugi,
punctum: but fugio, fugi, fugitum.

Q. What is li made in the Supine?

A. Sum; as, sallo, salli, salsum; pello, pepuli, pulsum; cello, ceculi,
culsum; fallo, fef^lli, falsum; vello, velli and vulsi, vulsum: but fero, tuli,
latum.

Q. What are these Terminations of the Preterperfect Tense, mi, ni, pi, qui,
made in the Supine?

A. Tum; as, 1. Emo, emi, emptum. 2. Venio, veni, ventum; cano, cecini, cantum.
3. Capio, cepi, captum; caepio, caepi, caeptum; rumpo, rupi, ruptum; linquo,
liqui, dant pignora lictum.

Q. What does ri make in the Supine?

A. Sum; as, verro, verri, versum: except pario, peperi, partum.

Q. What does si make in the Supine?

A. Sum; as, viso, visi, visum: but mitto, misi, missum, with a double s. And
these make tum, fulcto, fulsi, fultum; haurio, hausi, haustum; sarcio, sarci,
sartum; farcio, farsi, fartum; uro, ussi, ustum; gero, gessi, gestum; torqueo,
torsi, tortum and torsum; indulgeo, indulsi, indulsum and indultum.

Q. What does psi make in the Supine?

A. It makes tum; as, scribo, scripsi, scriptum: but campsi makes campsum.

Q. What does ti make in the Supine?

A. Tum; as, sto, steti, and sisto, stiti, statum: but verto, verti, makes
versum.

Q. What does vi make in the Supine?

A. It makes tum; as, flo, flavi, flatum: except pasco, pavi, pastum; lavo,
lavi, lotum, lautum and lavatum; poto, potavi, po^um and potatum; caveo, cavi,
cautum; sero, sevi, satum; lino, livi and lini, litum; solvo, solvi, solutum;
volvo, volvi, volutum; singultio, singultivi, singultum; veneo, is, venivi and
ii, venum; sepelio, is, sepelivi, sepultum.

Q. What does ui make in the Supine?

A. It makes itum; as, domo, as, ui, itum: but ui, of a Verb in uo, makes utum;
as, exuo, exui, exutum: except ruo, is, rui, ruitum; seco, as, ui, sectum;
neco, as, necui, nectum; frico, as, ui, frictum; misceo, es, miscui, misium;
amicio, is, amicui, amictum; torreo, es, torrui, tostum; doceo, es, docui,
doctum; teneo, es, tenui, tentum; consulo, is, consului, consultum; alo, alui,
altum and alitum; salio, is, salui, saltum; colo, is, colui, cultum; pinso, is,
pinsui, pistum, pinsitum and pinsum; rapio, is, rapui, raptum; sero, is, serui,
sertum; texo, is* texui, textum.

Q. But what is the meaning of this Rule, Haec sed ui mutant in sum?

A. That these Verbs turn the Preterperfect Tense ui, in sum; as, Censeo,
censui, censum; cello, cellui, celsum; meto, messui, messum: (but nexo, nexui,
n^xum; pecto, pexui, pexum) pateo, patui, passum; careo, carui, cassum and
caritum.

Q. What does xi in the Preterperfect Tense make in the Supine?

A. It makes ctum; as, vincio, vinxi, vinctum: but these five Verbs in xi cast
away n; as, fingo, finxi, fictum; mingo, minxi, mictum; pingo, pinxi, pictum;
stringo, strinxi, strictum; ringo, rinxi, rictum: and these four Verbs in xi
make xum, not ctum; as, flecto, flexi, flexum; plecto, plexi, plexum; figo,
fixi, fixum; fluo, fluxi, fluxum.

Q. What is the Fourth Part of As in Praesenti?

A. It is, Compositum ut simplex formatur quodque supinum, viz. The Supines of
the Compound Verbs are the same as the Supines of the Simple Verbs; for as
doceo makes doctum, so edoceo makes edoctum.

Q. Is there no Exception on this Rule?

A. Yes, for sometimes the Compound Supine has not the same syllable as the
Supine of the Simple, for though tundo makes tunsum, pertundo makes pertusum, ruo
makes ruitum; yet corruo, corrutum; salio, saltum; resilio, resultum; sero,
satum; insero, insitum: Also these Supines, Captum, factum, jactum, raptum,
cantum, partum, sparsum, carptum, fartum, change a into e when they are
compounded.

Q. What will edo make when it is compounded?

A. It will make esum, and not estum; as, exedo makes exesum; only comedo make^
comestum and con^sum.

Q. What do the Compounds of nosco make in the Supines?

A. They make notum; as, dignosco, dignotum: except cognosco, cognitum, and
agnosco, agnitum.

Q. What is the meaning of the Fifth Part of As in Praesenti, (viz.) Verba in
or admittunt ex posteriore supino, etc.

A. The meaning is, that all Passives do borrow their Preterperfect Tense of
the latter Supine of the Active Voice, by changing the Termination u into us,
and adding sum or fui; as, of lectu is made lectus sum or fui: Which sum or fui
differ thus: Amissus est qui adhuc desideratur: Amissus fuit qui jam inventus
est.

Q. What is the meaning of this Insertion, At horum nunc est Deponens?

A. The meaning is, that in Verbs deponent (because they are not read in the
Active Voice to have a latter Supine), we do feign a latter Supine whereby
their Preterperfect Tense may be formed.

Q. What Verbs of this sort are most to be observed?

A. They are those of the Book which seem to differ from the common way of
declining; as, Labor, eris, lapsus sum vel fui; patior, eris, passus sum;
compatior, eris, compassus sum; perpetior, eris, sus sum; fateor, e^ris, sus
sum; confiteor, e^ris, ssus sum; diffiteor, e^ris, essus sum; gradior, eris,
gressus sum; digredior, eris, essus sum; satiscor, eris, fessus sum; metior,
i^ris, mensus sum; utor, eris, usus sum; ordior, i^ris, orsus and orditus sum;
nitor, eris, nixus, and nisus sum; ulciscor, eris, ultus; irascor, eris, atus
sum; reor, e^ris, ratus sum; obliviscor, eris, litus sum; f^uor, eris, ctus and
itus sum; misereor, e^ris, ertus sum; tuor, eris, tuitus sum; tueor, e^ris,
tuitus sum; loquor, eris, locutus vel loquutus sum; sequor, eris, u^tus sum;
experior, i^ris, ertus sum; paciscor, eris, pactus sum; nanciscor, eris, nactus
sum; apiscor, eris, aptus sum; adipiscor, eris, adeptus sum; queror, eris,
stus, sum; proficiscor, eris, ctus sum; expergiscor, eris, rectus sum;
comminisc^r, eris, entus sum; nascor, eris, natus sum; morior, eris, mortuus
sum; orior, eris, ortus sum.

Q. Which is the Sixth Part of As in Praesenti, and what does it treat of?

A. The Sixth Part is, Praeteritum Activae and Passivae vocis habent haec; and
it treats of Verbs Irregular redundant.

Q. What Is the meaning of the Rule it self?

A. The meaning is, that these Verbs Neuters redound and have a Preterperfect
Tense of the Active and Passive Voice, viz. Coeno, as, coenavi and coenatus
sum; juro, as, juravi and juratus sum; poto, as, potavi and potus; titubo, as,
titubavi, titubatus; careo, es, carui and cassus sum; prandeo, es, prandi and
pransus; pateo, es, patui and passus; placeo, es, placui and placitus; suesco,
is, suevi and suetus; veneo, is, venivi and venditus sum; nubo, is, nupsi and
nupta sum; mereor, e^ris, merui and meritus sum; li^et, 2. libuit, libitum est;
licet, 2. licuit, licitum est; taedet, 2. taeduit, pertaesum est; pudet, 2.
puduit, puditum est; piget, 2. piguit, pigitum est: Yet few of these, except
placeo, nubo, and the five last, have a Preterperfect Passive.

Q. Which is the Seventh Part of As in Praesenti, and what does it treat of?

A. It is this, Neutro-passivum sic Praeteritum tibi format, and this Part and
the next Part treats of Irregular Variants.

Q. What is the meaning of the first Rule of Variants?

A. That these Verbs Neuters, though they end like Verbs Actives, have an
irregular Preterperfect Tense, (i. e.) are declined with a Preterperfect Tense
of the Vassive Voice; as, Gaudeo, es, gavisus sum; fido, is, fisus sum; audeo,
es, ausus sum; solco, es, solitus sum; fio, fis, factus sum; maereo, es,
maestus sum.

Q. What is the difference between Neutro-passiva, and Neutralia-passiva?

A. Neutro-passiva have a Preterperfect Tense after the manner of Passives, and
commonly also a Passive Signification; as, Audeo, aufus sum; but
Neutralia-passiva have only a Passive Signification, without any ending like a
Passive; as, Vapulo, veneo, exulo, etc.

Q. Which is the Eighth Part of As in Praesenti, being the second Rule of Verbs
Irregular Variant?

A. The Eighth Part is, Quaedam praeteritum verba accipiunt aliunde: (i. e.)
These Verbs are declined with a Preterperfect Tense borrowed of the Primitives
whereof they are derived, having none of their own; as, 1. Verbs Inceptives in
Sco, (i. e.) signifying, to begin to do a thing, or to wax more; as, Tepesco,
is, tepui, to begin to be warm, or to wax more warm; from tepeo, to be warm;
and so fervesco, is, fervi, from ferveo.

Q. What other Verbs of this Rule do borrow or vary their Preterperfect Tense?

A. These, Cerno, is, vidi, from video; quatio, is, concussi, of concutio;
ferio, is, percussi, of percutio; meio, is, ininxi, of mingo; sido, is, sedi,
of sedeo; tollo, is, sustuli, of suffero; sum, es, fui, of fuo; fero, fers,
tuli, of tulo; sisto, is, stiri, of sto; furo, is, insanivi, of insanio;
vescor, e^ris, pastus sum, of pascor; medeor, e^ris, medicatus sum, of medicor;
liquor, e^ris, liquefactus sum, of liquefio; reminiscor, e^ris, recordatus sum,
of recordor.

Q. Which is the Ninth Part of As in Praesenti, and what does it treat of?

A. It is, Praeteritum fugiunt, etc. and its treats of these four sort of
Verbs, which are desective in their Preterpersect Tense; as, 1. Vergo, i^,
ambigo, is; glisco, is; fatisco, is; polleo, es; nideo, es. 2. Verbs Inceptives
ending in sco, signifying a beginning, (which are neither put for nor have any
Primitive Verbs) want the Preterperfect; as, Puerasco, is. 3. Such Passives
whose Actives want the Supines, from which the Preterperfect Tense Passive is
formed; as, Metuor, e^ris; timeor, e^ris. 4. All Meditatives, (viz.) such as
signify a meditation, or a desire to do, or to be about to do a thing; as,
Micturio, I have a desire to make Water; scripturio, I am about to Write;
except parturio, is, ivi; esurio, is, ivi.

Q. What is the Last Part of As in Praesenti, and what does it treat of?

A. It is, Haec raro aut nunquam retinebunt Verba Supinum; and it treats of
these Verbs that commonly are defective in their Supines; as, Lambo, is; mico,
as; rado, is; scabo, is; parco, is; dispesco, is; posco, is; disco, is;
compesco, is; quinisco, is; dego, is; ango, is; sugo, is; lingo, is; mingo, is;
satago, is; psallo, is; volo, vis; nolo, nonvis; malo, mavis; tremo, is;
strideo, es; strido, is; annuo, is; flaveo, es; liveo, es; aveo, es; paveo, es;
conniveo, es; ferveo, es; with the Compounds of nuo, is; and cado, is; except
occido, is, occasum; and re^ido, is, recasum: Also these Verbs want the Supine,
respuo, is; linquo, is; luo, is; metuo, is; cluo, is; frigeo, es; calvo, is;
sterto, is; timeo, es; luceo, es; arceo, es; but the Compounds of arceo do make
ercitum: The Compounds of gruo want the Supines; as, ingruo, is. Lastly, All
Verbs Neuters of the second Conjugation, which have ui in the Preterperfect
Tense, do want the Supines; except oleo, es; doleo, es; placeo, es; taceo, es;
pareo, es; careo, es; noceo, es; pateo, es; lateo, es; valeo, es; caleo, es,
tum.

SYntaxis Liliana in Compendium redacta: Nam tantam Regularum molem, quae a
Lilio multiplicatae sunt, neutiquam necessariam esse sentio: Sed siquis quaerat
quare tam pauca exempla eaque taris in locis hinc illinc sparsa in Syntacticas
hasce Regulas citavi, sciat me consulto and ad imitationem doctissimarum
Scholarum hoc fecisse. Insuper Specimina and Exempla in Lilianam Syntaxin a
multis edita non desunt; necnon Anglica argmenta quotidie meis tyronibus Latin
vertenda dictare soleo: Et denique in Syntactica Verborum examinatione eorum
constructionem, and quos casus plerumque regunt, non omnino perfunctorie
tractavi. Siquid novisti, siquid excogit^sti (Quicunque es) rectius aut melius
istis, candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.

GRammatica est recte scribendi atque loquendi Ars.

Grammaticae parts sunt quatuor: 1. Othographia, quae circa veram literarwn
scripturam. 2. Etymologia, quae circa singulas parts orationis. 3. Syntaxis
quae circa v^ces vel parts orationis conjunctas. 4. Prosiodia quae circa
syllabas recte pronuntiandas versatur.

Syntaxis est congrita octo partium orationis inter se disp sitio.

Syntaxis est duplex Perfecta seu Analoga, quae est regularis and Figurata seu
Anomala quae non est regularis, sed re^^dit a communibus regulis, and tamen
bonorum scriptorum autho^itate nititur.

Perfecta seu Analoga item est duplex, Concordantia quae est dictionum inter se
convenientia, and Regimen quod est dependentia unius dictionis ab alia.

Concordantia vocum declinabitium est duplex, vulga triplex; prima Verbi cum
Nominativo, secunda Adjectivi cum Substantivo ad quam tertia (quae est Relativi
cum Antecedente*) referri potest.

De tribus Concordantiis and casu Relativi: de Interrogativo and Redditivo, and
Substantivorum convenientia.
VErbum personale cohaeret cum nomina^ivo, numero and perfo^a.

Adjectiva ut and. participia and pronomina cum substantivis, genere, numero,
and casu consentiunt, etiam cum Verbum intercesserit.

Relativum Qui, cum Antecedente, genere, numero, and persona, interdum etiam
and casu concordat.

Relativum aut erit Verbo nominativus, aut a Verbo aut ab alia dictione regitur.

Interrogativa and Indefinita Relativorum regulam sequuntur.

Interrogativum and ejus Redditivum ejudem casus and temporis erunt, nisi
Interrogatio fiat per dictionem variae Syntaxeos, vel per Cujus, ja, jum, aut
Responsio per haec possessiva, Meus, tuus, suus, etc.

Substantivum cum substantivo ejus rei aut personae convenient casu.

Figurata Syntaxis.
VErba Insiniti Medi pro Nominativo Accusativum ante se statuunt.

Hic modus resolvi potest per, quod and ut, aliquando per an, ne and quin,
praecedente non; post videor non resolvitur.

Nomen multitudinis singul^re quandoque Verbo plurali jungitur.

Nominativus primae vel secundae personae (nisi discretionis and emphasis
causa) and nominativus tertiae personae quando ejus significatio ad homines
tantum pertinet, raro exprimitur.

Discretio vocatur cum diversa studia significamus; ut, tu nidum servas, ego
l^udo ruris amaeni -- rivos* Hor.

Emphasis est cum plus significamus quam express dicimus; ut, tu audes ista
loqui, cantando tu illum? subaudi vicisti. Virg.

Aliquando Verbum infinitum, aliquando oration, aut membrum aliquando orationis,
aliquando adverbium cum genitivo, aut dictio aliqua materialiter sumpta,
supplet locum nominativi, substantivi aut ante^edentis.

Duo nominativi singulares, duo substantiva, and duo antecedentia singularia,
intercedente conjunctione copulativa, verbum, adjectivum, and relativum plurale
requirunt, Quod quidem verbum, adjectivum and relativum, ^um nominativo,
substantivo, and antecedente, dignioris personae and dignioris generis
consentit, nisi quod in inanimatis neutrum genus dignius est.

Verbum substantivum inter duos nominativ^s diversorum numerorum, and relativum
inter duo antecedentia diversorum generum ^ollocatum cum alterutro convenire
potest.

Mobile fit fixum, si fixum mente suba^dis, (i. e.) Adjectiva substantive
usurpata, ejus sunt generis cujus est substantivum intellectum.

Aliquando relativum, aliquando and nomen adjectivum respondet primitivo, quod
in possessivo subintelligitur.

De Regimine.
REgimen est dependentia unius dictionis ab ali^: and est duplex, Casus and
Modi.

Omnes parts orationis regunt casus, excepta conjunctione.

Substantivorum regimen seu Constructio.
Posterius duorum substantivorum diversas res significantium, in genitivo
plerumque ponitur, sed saepe in Adjectivum possessivum mutatur, and aliquando
in dativum vertitur.

Adjectivum aut pronomen adjectivum in neutro gener^ absolute positum,
genitivum regit, and substantivum fit, ut e contrario substantivum praecipue
apud Graecos quandoque fit Adjectivum.

Secundum hanc regulam, haec dictio (Res) cum sit juncta adjectivo potest
omitti.

Prius substantivum aliquando sub auditur.

Laus and vituperium rei quae significatur alteri inesse aut adesse in ablativo
vel genitivo post verbum aut nomen substantivum effertur.

Opus and usus ablativum exigunt.

Verbalia in io antique regebant casum verbi unde derivata erant; ut, Quid tibi
hanc curatio est rem? Quid tibi nos mendice homo tactio est? Plaut. Justitia
est obtem peratio legibus scriptis. Traditio alteri. Cicero. Domum reditionis
spe sublata. Caesar. de Eell. Gal.

Sic adjectiva praesertim verbalia in, bundus; ut, populabundus agros.
Vitabundus castra hostium. Imaginabundus carnificem. Gratulabundus patriae.
Studiosus adulterio sc. studere adulterio Plaut. Cumque sit ignis aquae pugnax.

Adjectivorum regimen seu Constructio.
GENITIVUS.
ADjectiva desiderium, notitiam, memoriam, curam, metum significantia, atque
iis contraria, etc. Item verbalia in ax; item partitiva, comparativa,
superlativa, distributiva, interrogativa and certa numeralia genitivum
adsciscunt.

Sed partitiva and quae partitive significant, aliquando usurpantur cum his
praepositionibus, Ab, de, e, ex, inter, ante.

Compos, impos, consors, exors, particeps, p^tens, impotens, cum ingenti
adjectivorum turba, nullis regulis obstricta casum patrium postulant.

Reus, certior, and sollicitus, genitivo adhaerent aut ablativo cum de, sed
conscius genitivo rei, interdum and dativo ^ungitur, at semper dativo personae.

DATIVUS.
Adjectiva quibus commodum, incommodum, amititiam, odium, aptitudo, ineptitudo,
facilitas, difficultas, (item plurimum similitudo, dissimilitudo, and
propinquitas) voluptas, dolor, submissio, aut relatio, ad aliquid signi^icatu^.
Item nomina ex con praepositione composita: Denique verbalia in bilis and
participialia in dus, in dativum trantranseunt.

Sed natus, commodus, incommodus, utilis, inutilis, vehemens, aptus, par,
aequalis, interdum etiam Accusativo cum praepositicne adjunguntur.

Communis, alienus, immunis, variis casibus inserviunt.

ACCUSATIVUS.
Magnitudinis mensura subjicitur adjectivis in accusativo, interdum and in
ablativo vel genitivo.

ABLATIVUS.
Adjectiva quae ad copiam, egestatemve pertinent in ablativo vel genitivo rei
gaudent.

Comparativa cum exponuntur per quam; item dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus,
contentus, extorris, fretus, vilis, carus, venalis. Denique nomina
significantia causam, instrumentum, formam, aut modum rei, vel aliquid simile,
uti adjunctum vel circumstantiam regunt ablativum.

Nomina diversitatis Ablativum sibi cum praepositione subjiciunt, non unquam
etiam Dativum.

Tanto, quanto, multo, long, eo, quo, paulo, nimio, aetate, natu, and
comparativis, and superlativis app^nuntur.

Comparativum magna ex part ad duo, superlativum ad plura refertur.

Pronominum Constructio.
CVm passio significatur primitiva, cum actio vel possessio possessiva
usurpantur (i. e.) substantiva affectuum significant passionem, cum regunt
hosce genitivos pronominum, mei, tui, sui, nostri, vestri, sed haec possessiva,
meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, active explicantur.

Ex pronominibus, ipse and idem, omnibus personis jungi possunt.

Idem habet post se, qui, and, ac, atque.

Hic proximitatem, Ille excellentiam, Iste contemptum, significant.

Sui and suus reciproca sunt: hoc est, cum tertia persona redit vel transit in
seipsam; ut, Caesar recordatur sui, indulget sibi, amat se; parcit erroribus
suis, etc. sed in prima and secunda persona, non fit reciprocatio, nam non
dicimus, dixi sibi, sed ei: nec nosti suum fratrem, sed illius.

Constructio seu Regimen Verborum.
Nominativus post Verbum.
VErba Substantiva; ut, sum, forem, fio, exisio. 2. Passiva vocandi iisque
similia; ut, dicor, vocor, salutor, habeor, existimor, videor, etc. Et 3. Verba
Neutra gestus; ut, eo, incedo, curro, sedeo, bibo, cubo, studeo, dormio,
somnio, etc. utrinque nominativum aut cesdem casus expetunt.

Genitivus post Verbum.
SVm signisicans possessionem, proprietatem, aut officium Genitivum p^stulat.

Excipiuntur hi Nominativi, Meum, tuum, suum, nostrum, vestrum, humanum,
belluinum, and similia.

Verba aestimandi cum Accusativ^ admittunt hosce aestimationis genitivos,
tanti, quanti, cum compositis, magni, maximi, pluris, plurimi, parvi, minoris,
minimi, nihili, slocci, nauci, pili, assis, hujus, teruncii.

Aestimo vel Genitivum vel Ablativum adsciscit, sed hos Ablativos, magno,
permagno, parvo, nihilo, saepe recipit.

Item Verba accusandi, damnandi, monendi, absolvendi and consimilia praeter
Accusativum personae Genitivum postulant criminis and interdum paenae.

Sed Genitivus horum Verborum vertitur aliquando in Ablativum cum vel absque
praepositione; praecipue, si, uterque, nullus, alter, neuter, alius, ambo, and
superlativus gradus sequantur id genus Verba.

Satago, misereor, miseresco, Genitivum admittunt.

Reminiscor, obliv^scor, recordor, and memini Genitivum aut Accusativum
desiderant.

Potior aut Genitivo aut Ablativo jungitur.

Dativus post Verborum.
OMnia Verba acquisitive posita adsiscunt Dativum ejus r^i aut personae cui
aliquid acquiritur, and cui aliquid usitatius ad^mitur.

Haec regula omnia Verborum genera in se comprehendit, Activa, Passiva, Neutra
and Deponentia, tam transitiva, quam intransitiva, and quoslibet Dativos tam
reiquam p^rsonae.

Hui^ regulae appendent imprimis Verba significantia commodum, incommodum. 2.
Verba comparandi. 3. Dandi and reddendi. 4. Promittendi, solvendi and debendi.
5. Imperandi and nunciandi. 6. Fidendi and iis contraria. 7. Obsequendi and
repugnandi. 8. Minandi and irascendi. 9. Sum cum compositis. 10. Verba neutra
and passiva composita cum his praepositionibus, prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post,
ob, in, inter. 11. Verba composita cum his Adverhiis, satis, been and male. 12.
Est and suppetit pro habeo. 13. Sum cum quibusdam aliis geminum adsciscit
Dativum. Aliquando apponitur Verbis Dativus pro Accusativo cum praepositione;
ut, it clamor coelo pro ad coelum: Belloque animos accendit agrestes, pro ad
bellum; Me mea paupertas vitae tradueit inerti, pro ad inert^m vitam.

Est aliquando Pleonasmus, (sc. Redundantia vocabuli horum Dativoram) mihi,
tibi, sibi.

Quaedam Verba vary construuntur; ut, ausculto tibi and te. Sic dono, aspergo,
impertio, interdico; Tempero, moderor tibi and te; refero tibi and ad te, and
refero ad senatum; do tibi and ad te. Item mitto and scribo tibi and ad te
literas; consulo tibi te and in te; aequi boni consulo and facio, caveo tibi;
cavere periculum; aemulor tibi, sc. invideo; aemulor te sc. im^tor; deficiunt
mihi vel me vires; conducit tuae laudi and in tuam laudem, etc.

Accusativus post Verbum.
VErba Transitiva seu potius Activa, and pleraque alia uti Deponentia, and
Neutra actionem transeuntem significantia Accusativum regunt.

Quaedam Intransitiva cognatae significationis Accusativum regunt (ut, vivo
vitam vel aetatem; curro cursum; longam eo viam; duram servio servitutem, etc.
alioqui non, nam secus est in neutris and deponentibus quae actionem habent
absolutam, qualia sunt existo, sto, sedeo, venio, surgo, orior, morior, etc.

Verba rogandi, vestiendi, celandi. Item doceo and moneo cum compositis, atque
etiam hortor duplicem regunt Accusativum: Sed rogo, exoro, p^sco, doceo,
edoceo, moneo, and admoneo, Accusativum rei retinent etiam in Passivo.

Ablativus post Verbum.
QVodvis Verbum admittit Ablativum significantem instrumentum, causam, Modum
actionis aut partem, sed aliquando additur praepositio ablativo causae, Modi
actionis and partis.

Quibuslibet Verbis subjicitur nomen pretii in Ablativo casu.

Excipiuntur hi Genitivi sine Substantivis positi, tanti, quanti, pluris,
minoris, tantidem, quantivis, quantilibet, quanticunque, sin addantur
Substantiva, hi Genitivi in Ablativo efferuntur.

Sed vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo, dimidio, duplo, adjiciuntur
saepe sine Substantivis.

Instrumentum quaestioni factae per quocum, causa per quare, modus actionis per
quomodo, and pretium rei per quanti respondet.

Valeo tum Accusativo tum Ablativo junctum reperitur.

Verba abundandi, implendi, onerandi, and illis diversae Ablativo gaudent,
interdum sed rarius Genitivo.

Fungor, fruor, utor, vescor, epulor, dignor, gaudeo, laetor, glorior, sto,
consto, creor, nascor, muto, numero, communico, afficio, prosequor, impertio,
impertior, laboro, pro male habeo, nitor, supersedeo, and vivo pro victito, and
similia Ablativo junguntur.

Mereor cum Adverbiis, been, male, melius, pejus, optime, pessime Ablativo
adhaerent cum praepositione De.

Quaedam accipiendi, distandi, and auferendi Verba Ablativum cum praepositione
optant, sed hic casus vertitur aliquando in Dativum.

Verbis, quae vim comparationis obtinent, adjicitur Ablativus significans
mensuram excessus.

Aliquando additur Ablativus absolute sumptus cum participio adjecto vel
intellecto; qui resolvi potest per hasce particulas, dum, cum quando, siquam,
postquam.

Eidem Vero diversi casus diversae orationis apponi possunt.

Passivorum Constructio.
PAssiva habent Ablativum agentis cum Praepositione, a, ab vel abs, and
i^^erdum Dativum.

Caeteri casus, excepto Accusativo, manent in Passivis qui fuerint Activorum.

Passivorum constructionem sequuntur Neutro-passiva, vapulo, vaeneo, liceo,
exulo, fio.

Verba Infiniti Modi vel aliis Verbis, vel Participiis, aut Adjectivis
subjiciuntur. Verba Infiniti Modi interdum figurate and absolute ponuntur.

Quatuor sunt Verborum genera quae solum post se Infinitivum habere
perhibentur. 1. Quae significant sensum; ut, audio, sentio, intelligo, docco,
disco. 2. Quae significant voluntatem; ut, cupio, posco, libet, placet. 3. Quae
potentiam; ut, possum, queo, valeo: Et 4. Quae s^quuntur, Licet, liberum est,
par est, aequum est, contingit, etc.

De Gerundiis.
GErundia and Supina active significantia regunt casum suorum Verborum.

Gerundia in di, pendent, a quibusdam tum Substantivis tum Adjectivis Genitivum
regentibus. Sed Poetice Infinitivus Modus hujus Gerundii loco ponitur; ut,
studium quibus arva tueri, etc.

Gerundia in di, pro casu sui verbi quem debent regere habent aliquando
genitivum pluralem, (i. e.) Accusativus pluralis vetitur aliq. in genitivum
pluralem; ut, novarum qui spectandi copiam faciunt; causa est quia Gerund^a
sunt substantiva utriusque numeri, uti plerique vosunt.

Gerundia in do, pendent ab his Praepositionibus, a, ab, abs, de, e, ex, cum,
in, pr^, aut ponuntur absque Praepositione cum ^^gnificatur causa vel modus;
ut, nihil est quin male narrando p^ssit depravarie^r, Ter. Omnia conando
docilis solertia vincit, Mart. Alitur vitium crescitque tegendo, etc.

Gerundia in dum, pendent ab his Praepositionibus, inter, ante, ad, ob,
propter, aut ponuntur absolute cum Dativo expresso vel inrellecto quando
significatur necessitas.

Quandoque Gerundia significant passive; ut, Athenas erudiendi grati^ missus.

Gerundia vertuntur eleganter in Adjectiva and cum Substantivis, genere,
numero, and casu convenient; ut, ad discendas literas.

De Supinis.
PRius Supinum sequitur verba aut participia significantia motum ad locum.
Posterius Supinum sequitur nomina adjectiva au^ verba significantia motum de
loco; ut, obsonatu redeo, Plaut. Primus cubitu surgat. Postremus cubitum eat,
Cat. de re rust.

Constructio Temporis and Loci.
TErminus temporis respondens ad quaestionem factam per Quando, quid sit
factum? in Ablativo effertur. Spatium temporis respondens ad quaestionem factam
per Quamdiu? and spatium loci respondens ad quaestionem factam per Quantum? in
Accusativo frequentius, interdum and in Ablativo efferuntur.

Locorum Constructio.
NOmina majorum locorum, nempe regionum, insularum and provinciarum, ut and
appellativa locorum adduntur plerumque cum Praepositione.

Propria Urbium and Oppidorum.
PRopria urbium and oppidorum quae in loco significant, and respondent ad
quaestionem, Vbi? Si sint numeri singularis, and primae vel secundae
declinationis in Genitivo efferuntur, sin pluralis, tantum numeri aut tertiae
declinationis fuerint in Dativo aut Ablativo efferuntur.

Humi, domi, militiae, belli, ruri vel rure, propriorum sequuntur formam.

Propria urbium and oppidorum ubi motus ad locum significatur, and ad
quaestionem Quo? respondetur, in Accusativo citra Praepositionem efferuntur.
Sic Domum and Rus usurpamus.

Propria urbium and ^ppidorum a loco aut per locum significantia and ad
quaestionem, unde aut Qua? respondentia, in Ablativo sine Praepositione
efferuntur. Sic Domo and rure utimur.

Domi non alios Genitivos adjectivorum patitur quam Meae, tuae, suae, nostrae,
vestrae, alienae. Si alia addas Adjectiva in Ablativo cum domo efferuntur.

Impersonalium Constructio.
GENITIVUS.
HAeC Impersonalia interest and refert Genitivum sibi personae plurimum
subjiciunt, nisi quod pro genitivis pronominum primitivorum regunt hos
ablativos foemininos, Mea, tua, sua, nostra, vestra and cuja. Regunt and hos
genitivos quantitatis, tanti, quanti, magni, parvi, pluris.

DATIVUS.
In Dativum feruntur haec Impersonalia, accidit, certum est, contingit,
constat, confert, competit, conducit, convenit, placet, displicet, dolet,
expedit, evenit, liquet, libet, licet, nocet, obest, prodest, praestat, patet,
stat, restat, benefit, ^^lefit, satisfit, superest, sufficit, vacat pro otium
est.

ACCUSATIVUS.
Haec Impersonalia Accusandi casum exigunt, juvat, decet, cum compositis, item
delectat and oportet.

His vero attinet, pertinet, spectat, proprie additur Praepositio Ad.

His Impersonalibus subjicitur Accusativus cum Genitivo, poenitet, taedet,
miseret, miserescit, pudet, piget.

Impersonalia praecedentem Nominativum non habent.

Nonnulla Impersonalia aliquando remigrant in personalia.

Impersonalia vel ponuntur absolute, vel post se verborum personalium ^asum
regunt.

Verbum Impersonale passivae vo^is pro singulis personis utriusque numeri
indifferenter accipi potest.

Participiorum Constructio.
PArticipia regunt casus suorum Verborum, cum facta sint nomina genitivum
regunt. Praeter haec, Natus, prognatus, satus, cretus, creatus, ortus, editus,
oriundus, Ablativum regentia.

Participia passiva plurimum Dativis, Participia active significantia magna ex
part Accusativis gaudent.

Exosus, perosus, pertaesus, active significantia Accusativum, exosus and
perosus passive significantia Dativum regunt.

Adverbii Constructio.
EN and Ecce demonstrandi Adverbia Nominativo frequentius, sed exprobrandi
Accusativo nectuntur.

Quaedam Adverbia loci, temporis and quantitatis ut and ergo and instar
Genitivum post se vecipiunt. Sed instar aliquando usurpatur cum praepositione
ad.

Quaedam Adverbia Dativum admittunt nominum unde deducta sunt.

Hi Dativi sunt Adverbiales, Tempori, Luci, Vesperi.

Quaedam etiam Accusandi casum admittunt praepositionis unde sunt profecta.

Accusativos Adjectivorum in neutro genere utriusque numeri absolute ponunt
Poetae pro Adverbiis; ut, Torvumque repent clamat, Virg. Aen. 7. Horrendum
strident, Aen. 6. Immane spirans, Aen. 7. Turbidum laetatur: Perfidum ridens.
Hor. Acerba sonans, 3. Georg. Transversa tuentibus hireis, Virg. 3. Ecl.

Adverbia Comparativi and Superlativi gradus eandem cum nominibus
constructionem habent.

Plus, amplius, minus, Nominativo, Accusativo, Ablativo junguntur, subaudita
conjunctione quam; ut, Minus quindecim dies sunt. Plus quingentos colaphos
infregit, hora amplius, minus nihilo.

Abhinc etiam jungitur Accusativo vel Ablativo; ut, Abhinc sexaginta annos and
annis.

Constructio Conjunctionum.
COnjunctiones copulativae and disjunctivae, cum his sex, quam, nisi,
praeterquam, an, cum and tum geminatum similes casus nectunt, nisi casualis
dictionis ratio aliqua privata repugnet.

Aliquoties similes modos and tempora nectunt and aliquoties similes modos sed
diversa tempora.

Quae Particulae modis inserviant.

Subjunctivum regunt, 1. Voces Indesinieae, quis, qualis, quantus. 2. Causales,
quin, qui, ut, uti, quo, dummodi, and dum pro dummodo and frequentius quomvis,
etsi, ta^ets^, e^iamsi, and licet. 3. Dubitativae, an, ne, number. 4. Oprativae,
utinam, Osi. 5. Dissimulativae seu simulationis, perinde, aesi, quasi, ceuvero,
pro quasi vero, tanquam, sed cum sunt semilitudinis Adverbia, Indicativum
amant: quippequi, utpote qui, ubi, cum, ni, nisi, si, quod, quia, postquam,
etc. utrumque; modum amant: at si, pro quamvis subjunctivo tantum.

Ne prohibendi vel Imperativis vel Subjunctivis praeponitur.

Sed ne, an, number, Interrogandi particulae, quando, quandoquidem, quoniam,
quippe, dum and donec, pro quamdiu; ut, pro postquam, quolnodo, sicut,
Indicativo gaudent.

Quod and ut, ne consundantur, sic distingui possunt.

Quod idem valet ac quia, and plurimum de re gesta sive praete^ita usurpatur:
Ut valet, eo, fine, and potissimum in Fu^uris hoc utimur; velut, gaudeo quod
veneris: scripsi ut venires.

Post has voces, adeo, ideo, ita, sic, tam, talis, tantus, tot, tantum abest,
etc. nunquam ponitur, quod, sed ut, cum subjunctivo; ut, non sum ita hebes ut
ista dicam: Ut habet quoque; locum post verba petendi, jubendi, timendi, etc.
Item post verba quae voluntatem ac studium significant: velut, volo, curo,
laboro, etc. and post haec verba quae indicant eventum, fit, evenit, accidit,
contingir. Caetera de particulis Authorum sedula lectio curiosos doceat.

Praepositionum Constructio.
PRaepositio aliquando subauditur. Aliquando Verbum Compositum regit casum v^
Praepositionis, aliquando repetit candem Praepositionem cum suo casu e^rra
compositionem.

Quaedam Praepositiones Accusativis, quaedam Ablativis inserviunt: de quibus in
Rudimentis.

Tenus gaudet Ablativo tum Singulari tum Plurali and Genitivo tantum Plurali.
Quaedam ut^ique casui inserviunt; ut,

In, super, sub, subter, casum subnectito utrumque.

Quartum cum motus sextum cum voce quiet is.

His quoque clam jungas quod casu ga^det utroque.

In, pro, erga, contra, and ad, Accusativum ha^er.

Am, di, dis, re, se, con, sunt Praepositiones quae nunquam extra compositionem
inveniuntur.

Praepositiones cum casus amiti ant, migrant in Adverbia.

Interjectionum Constructio.
OExclamantis Nominativo, Accusativo and Vocativo jungitur, cum vocandi est
particula Vocativo tantum; ut, huc ades O Galataea.

Heu Nominativo, Dativo and Accusativo; ut, Heu pieta^. Heu misero mihi. Heu
stirpem invisam.

Hei and Vae Dativo solum; ut, Hei mihi qualis erat. Vae tibi causidice.

Proh, ah, and vah, regunt Accusativum and Vocativum; Ah me miserum. Ah virgo
in feli^. Ah inconstantiam.

Heus and Ohe tantum Vocativo! Heus Syve! Ohe libette! Ter. and M^rt.

Apage and hem Accusativo* ut, Hem astutias!

Apage istiusmodi salutem quae cum cruciatu advenit. Plaut. in Merc.

The foregoing SYNTAXIS Examined and Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER.
Q. WHat Part of Grammar is that which teaches us to make and speak Latin?

A. It is the Third Part of Grammar, called Syntaxis in Greek, in Latin
Constructio.

Q. What is Syntaxis?

A. It is a right and due joining of the Parts of Speech together in speaking
or writing Latin according to the Natural Manner and Rules of Grammar, and this
is the plain, simple and analogous Syntaxis; as, Magna pars vulnerata. But the
Syntaxis which differs from the same is called the Figurative Syntaxis; as,
Magna pars vulnerati: Whence Syntaxis is twofold, 1. Perfecta, called Analoga,
viz. the Regular Syntaxis. 2. Figurata, called also Anomala, viz. Irregular.

Q. How many fold is the plain or analogous Syntaxis?

A. In general, this plain analogous, perfect or simple Syntaxis is twofold, 1.
Concord of Words. 2. Government of Words, (i. e.) Construction in the Agreement
of Words, and Construction in the Government of Words.

Q. Under how many Heads may Syntaxis thus divided he considered?

A. Syntaxis, for the greater ease of Tyrocinians in making and parsing of
Latin, may be considered and reduced into Twelve Heads or Parts.

Q. Which are those Twelve Parts or Heads?

A. They are first the Concords. 2. The Case of the Relative. 3. The
Construction of Nouns Substantives. 4. The Construction of Adjectives. 5. The
Construction of Pronouns. 6. The Construction of Verbs Actives, Neuters, or
Deponents. 7. The Construction of Verbs Passives. 8. The Construction of
Gerunds and Supines. 9. Of Time and Place. 10. Of Impersonals. 11. Of the
Participles. 12. Of the undeclined Parts of Speech.

Q. What ease and benefit does the considering and reducing of Syntaxis under
these particulars produce?

A. The ease and benefit is this: Consider first, that every word is governed
most commonly of that which goes before it in Construction; for in the
Construction of that foregoing word you shall find the Rule for the government
of that word you last construed: for if you have a word in the Genitive Case
coming next after a Verb in construction, I conclude that the Rule for that
word is to be found in the Construction of Verbs with a Genitive Case.

Q. What is Concord, the first of the twelve Parts?

A. It is the agreement of words together in some special Accidents or
Qualities; as, in one Number, Person, Case, or Gender.

Q. How many Concords or Agreements are there?

A. There are really but two, though commonly reckoned three: the first between
the Nominative Case and the Verb; the second between the Substantive and
Adjective; the third between the Antecedent and Relative, which may be referred
to the second.

Q. Why must these six so agree together?

A. It is because the three latter, viz. the Verb, Adjective, and Relative, are
weak and cannot be placed orderly in Speech, except they be guided and holden
up by the three stronger, (i. e.) by the Nominative Case, Substantive and
Antecedent.

Q. Now, before I proceed farther in Syntaxis, which teaches me to make Latin,
let me know when an English is given to be made in Latin what I must do.

A. You must look out for the Principal Verb.

Q. What Verb is that you call the Principal Verb?

A. It is the first Verb, or ought to be the first Verb, in a Sentence.

Q. Is the first Verb always the Principal Verb?

A. No: For, 1. if there comes an Infinitive Mood before it; or, 2. if it has
before it a Relative; as, that, whom, which; or, 3. a Conjunction; as, ut,
that; cum, when; si, is, and such others, then the first Verb is not the
Principal Verb.

Q. Why cannot the Infinitive Mood, or the Verb that follows the Relative or
Conjunction, be the Principal Verb?

A. Because they do most commonly depend upon some other Verb going before them
in natural or due order of Speech.

Q. Must not the same Way and Method be used when a Latin is to be construed or
turned into English, as when an English is given to be made into Latin?

A. Yes, the very same; for then the Principal Verb must be sought and marked
carefully, because that will point out the right Nominative Case that agrees
with that Verb in Number and Person.

Q. After one has found out the Principal Verb, what must he then do?

A. He must seek out its Nominative Case, by asking the Question, who or what
in the Verb; for the word that answers to the Question will be the Nominative
Case.

Q. Must one always thus seek out the Nominative Case?

A. Yes, in Verbs Personals; for a Verb Impersonal will have no Nominative Case.

Q. How shall the Nominative Case be set in Making or Construing Latin?

A. It shall be set before the Verb.

Q. Is it always set before the Verb?

A. No: For, 1. if a Question be asked; as, Am^stu? Do thou love? 2. If the
Verb be of the Imperative Mood; as, Ama^tu, Love thou. 3. If this Sign, It or
There, comes before the English of the Verb; as, Est liber meus, It is my Book.
Venit ad me quidam, There came one to me; for them it is placed most commonly
after the Verb, or after the Sign of the Verb.

Q. What Case shall the casual word be, which comes next after the Verb, and
answers to the Question, Whom or What, made by the Verb?

A. It shall commonly be the Accusative Case.

Q. Why do you say commonly, Is there any exception?

A. Yes; for sometimes, and that pretty often, a Verb may properly govern
another Case after it to be construed withal; as, Si cupis placere Magistro
utere diligentia, nec sis tantus cessator ut calcaribus indigens. If you cover
to please thy Master, use disigence, and be not so great a Truant, or so slack,
that thou shall need Spurrs; where placere goverus properly a Dative, and utere
and indigeas Ablatives.

Q. Before you examine the following Parts of the Syntaxis, be pleased to tell
me, to how many Heads the examination of any declined word may be reduced?

A. It may be reduced to these ^our: 1. The Knowledge of it. 2. The Declining
of (...) 3. The Accidents of it. And, 4. The Government of it. The three first
belong to E^^mologia, and the last to Syntaxis.

Q. That we may return to the Examination of the twelve Heads of Syntax^s, let
me know how the first Concord, viz. a Verb Personal agrees with its Nominative
Case?

A. It agrees with it in Number and Person.

Q. What mean you by this?

A. That the same Number and Person that the Nominative Case is, the same the
Verb must be of.

Q. What say you of the second Concord, wherein is the Agreement?

A. That Nouns Adjectives and also Participles and Pronouns agree with their
Substantives, in Case, Gender and Number, yea, though a Verb comes between.

Q. What say you of the third Concord, which may be referred to the second?

A. That the Relative, Qui, agrees with its antecedent in Gender, Number and
Person, and sometimes in Case.

Q. What say you of the Case or Rule of the Relative?

A. The Relative is either the Nominative Case to the Verb, or it is governed
of the Verb, (i. e.) it will be of such a Case as the Verb will have after it;
or if it is not governed of the Verb, it must be governed of another word; but
observe, that it is construed always before the Verb.

Q. What sort of Nouns are those that follow the Rule of Relatives in
Construing and Covernment?

A. Nouns Interrogatives and Indefinites; as, Quis, ecquis, quisnam, etc.

Q. What say you of the Question and Answer to it?

A. I say, that when a Question is asked, the Answer in Latin must be made by
the same Case of a Noun, Pronoun or Participle, and by the same Tense of a
Verb, that the Question is asked by; as, Whose Ground is this? My Neighbors,
What do Boys do in the School? They ply their Books.

Q. How many Exceptions have you from this Rule?

A. Three; 1. When a Question is asked by a word that may govern diverse cases;
as, For how much have you bought this Book? For little. Do you accuse me of
Theft, or Murder, or both? Of neither, etc. 2. If a Question be asked by
Cujus, ^a, jum; as, Whose Saying is this? Cicero's. 3. When an Answer is made
by one of these Possessives, Meus, tuus, suus noster, vester* as, Whose House
is that? Not yours, but Ours. Whose Book is this? It is my Book.

Q. How comes it to pass that one Substantive oftentimes agrees with another
Substantive in the same Case?

A. It is because it signifies or belongs to the same thing or person; as, I
have protected a Thousand Sail with my Courage, the hope of your return. My
Father a Man, loves me a Child.

Q. Which is the first Rule of the Figurative Syntaxis, and what is the meaning
thereof?

A. It is Verba Infiniti Modi, (i. e.) Verbs of the Infinitive Mood set an
Accusative Case before them, instead of a Nominative; as, I am glad that you
are returned safe. I will have you act a Comedy. I bid yo^ be gone.

Q. How may this Mood, or Figurative Way of Speaking be resolved?

A. Sometime^ by Quod, which commonly renders a Reason, and is for the most
part spoken of the thing gone or past; as, I am glad that you returned safe.
And sometimes by Vt, which is spoken of the final cause or thing to come; as, I
bid you be gone: Also sometimes it is resolved by an, ne, and quin, non going
before; as, I doubt whether your Father bid you. I fear that the Stranger will
not abide it, etc. After videor it cannot be resolved; for we do not say,
Videor quod terram video, though I may say, Videor terram videre.

Q. Which is the second Rule of the Figurative Syntaxi^?

A. It is Nomen multitudinis singular, etc. viz. A Noun of Multitude, being
singular, will have a Verb Plural; as, Part are gone. Somebody open the Door.
Both are mocked with deceit. We the People are overcome by one.

Q. Which is the third Rule of the Figurative Syntaxis?

A. It is Nominativus primae vel secundae personae, etc. (i. e.) the Nominative
of the first or second person, (unless it be for difference sake, or the better
expressing the thing to be spoken) and the Nominative Case of the third Person
when its signification only belongs to Men is seldom expressed.

Q. Which is the fourth Rule or thing to be observed in the Figurative Syntaxis?

A. That sometimes an Infinitive Mood, sometimes a Sentence, or some part of a
Sentence, sometimes an Adverb with a Genitive Case or a word taken (...), or
mater^aliter, (i. e.) for it self, may supply the place of a Nominative Case,
Substantive, or Antecedent; as, To lie is not our property. To rise betimes in
the Morning is the most wholesome thing in the World. Add, That to have learnt
the Liberal Sciences faithfully, makes Men to be of a better deportment, and
suffers them not be Clowns and Brutes. To love one's Parents is just. Part of
the Men were slain. Homo is a word of two syllables, and Fur is a word of three
letters, etc.

Q. Which is the fifth Rule observable in the Figurative Syntaxis?

A. Two Nominative Cases, two Substantives, and two Antecedents Singular, with
a Conjunction Copulative coming between them, will have a Verb, Adjective, and
Relative Plural, which Verb, Adjective, and Relative agrees with the Nominative
Case, Substantive, and Antecedent of the more worthy Person and more worthy
Gender: except that in things without life the Neuter Gender is more worthy. I
and you, who live in the Fields here, are contented. You and your Daughter, who
live at London, do see fine Shows. Both Mars and Venus were taken by Vul^an's
Wiles. Mulciberis capti Marsque Venusque dolis. The Rule and Dignity which thou
have required. You sleep much and drink often, both which things are naught for
the Body. The Bow and Arrows which thou have broken.

Q. Which is the sixth Observation or Rule in the Figurative Syntaxis?

A. A Verb Substantive placed between two Nominative Cases of diverse Numbers,
and a Relative between two Antecedents of diverse Genders, may agree with either
of them. The falling out of Lovers is the renewing of Love. A living Creature
full of Reason, (animal plen. rationis) which we call a Man, quem or quod
vocamus hominem. There is a place in Prison called the Dungeon. There was one
shape of Nature in the World called Chaos.

Q. What is the meaning of this Verse in the Figurative Syntaxis, Mobile fit
fixum si fixum menie subaudis?

A. That Adjectives taken substantively, are of the same Gender as the
Substantive understood is; as, Few are good.

Q. What is the meaning of this Rule, Aliquando Relativum, aliquando and nomen
Adjectivum?

A. That sometimes a Relative, and sometimes a Noun Adjective or Participle
answers to, or agrees with its* Primitive understood in the Possessive; as, I
have seen your Handwriting. All Men spoke well, or did say all good things,
and did praise my good hap, who had a Son endued with so good a Nature. You
have seen the Eyes of me weeping. Seeing that no body reads the Writing of
me, fearing to recite them to the Common People.

Q. What Parts of Syntaxis are we next to examine?

A. We are to examine those Parts of Syntaxie concerning the Government of
Words.

Q. What is Government in Syntaxis?

A. It is the depending of one word upon another^ and most commonly every word
depends or is governed of that word which goes before it in con^^^^ction,
except in the Relative Qui: In Nouns Interrogatives and Indefinites, which with
their Substantives joined with them, are governed of the word following; as,
Coelestis ira quos premit miseros facit, humana nullos, etc.

Q. How many fold is Government?

A. It is twofold, the Government of Cases, and the Government of Moods.

Q. What Parts of Speech govern Cases?

A. All Parts of Speech except a Conjunction.

Q. What is the first Part in the government of Cases?

A. It is the government of Nouns Substantives.

Q. What Cases do Substantives govern?

A. They govern commonly a Genitive, some a Dative, or an Ablative, and some of
old did govern an Accusative.

Q. What is the Rule for those that govern a Genitive?

A. It is, Posterius ^^orum Substantivorum, etc. That is the latter of two
Substantives, signifying diverse things, shall be the Genitive Case; as, The
Love of Money increases as much as the Money it self. Which Genitive is often
changed into an Adjective Possessive, and put to agree with the former
Substantive in Case, Gender and Number; as, The House of my Father. My Father's
House. Sometimes this Genitive also is turned into a Dative, He is a Father to
me, or my Father.

Q. What is the second Rule in the Construction of Substantives?

A. It is this, A Noun or a Pronoun Adjective being put absolutely in the
Neuter Gender, becomes a Substantive and governs a Genitive Case; ^s, on the
contrary, a Substantive sometimes, especially amongst the Greeks, becomes an
Adjective. By this Rule also the English of the word Res, being joined to an
Adjective, may be omitted, for an Adjective in the Neuter Gender may signify
for Res and it self too.

Q. Which is die third Rule in the Construction of Substantives?

A. It is, Prius Substantivum aliquando subauditur, (i. e.) The former
Substantive is sometimes understood.

Q. Which is the fourth Rule in the Construction of Substantives?

A. La^^ and vituperium, etc. Words that denote any quality or property
inhering or adhering to the praise or dispraise of a thing, are commonly used
in the Genitive or Ablative Case, after a Noun or Verb Substantive.

Q. What follows next?

A. Opus and usus require an Ablative Case; but opus governs also a Dative of
the Person, and sometimes it has a Nominative.

Q. What say you of Nouns derived of Verbs, or Verbals in i^?

A. Of old they were wont to govern the same Case as the Verb whence they were
derived; as, Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem? Plant. Quid tibi nos mendice homo
tactio est? Plant. Justitia est obtemperaetio legibus scriptis, Cicero.
Traditio alteri, Idem. Domum reditioni^ spe sublata, Caesar. l. 1. de Bello
Gallico. So Adjectives, especially Verbalia in bundus; ut, (...) agros,
vitabundus castra hostium. Imaginabundus Carnisicem. G^atulabundus Patriae.
Studiosus adulcerio s^. studere adulterio, Plant. (...) sit ignis aquae pugnax.

Q. What comes next, or what is the second Part of Syntaxis in the Gorvernment
of Words?

A. It is the Government or Construction of Nouns Adjectives with a Genitive,
Dative, Accusative, or Ablative Case.

Q. What sort of Adjectives govern a Genitive Case?

A. Adjectives signifying desire, knowledge, remembrance, care, fear, and
Adjectives contrary to them; likewise Verbals in ax; also Partitives,
Comparatives, Superlatives, Distributives, Interrogatives, and certain Nouns of
Number.

Q. Do all these always govern a Genitive Case?

A. Not always, for Nouns Partitives, and those that are put partitively, are
sometimes used with these Prepositions, Ab, de, e, ex, inter, ante.

Q. What say you of Compos, impos, consors, exors, particeps, potens, impotens,
etc?

A. They govern a Genitive Case.

Q. What say you of Reus, certior, sollicitus, and conscius?

A. The three first govern a Genitive or an Ablative with de, but conscius is
joined to a Genitive of the thing, and sometimes to a Dative, but always to a
Dative of the Person.

Q. What sort of Adjectives govern a Dative Case?

A. Adjectives that signify, Profit, disprofit, friendship, hatred, aptitude,
ineptitude, etc. Likewise Adjectives compounded with the Preposition con; and
lastly, Verbals in hilis, and Participials in dus.

Q. But what say you of Natus, commodus, incommodus, utilis, inutilis,
vehemens, par, aequalis?

A. They are sometimes joined to an A^c^sative with a Preposition

Q. What say you of Communis, alienus, immunis?

A. They serve to diverse Cases, but most commonly to a Genitive or Dative; but
immunis and alienus are used sometimes with a Preposition.

Q. What Adjectives govern an Accusative and sometimes a Genitive or Ablative?

A. Adjectives of Quantity; as, Longus, long; latus, broad; altus, deep or
high; crassus, thick: for the word signifying the measure of length, breadth,
or thickness of any thing, is put after Adjectives in the Accusative Case, and
sometimes in the Ablative, and sometimes, though seldom, in the Genitive.

Q. What Adjectives govern an Ablative Case, or a Genitive of the thing?

A. Adjective which signify Plenty or Want.

Q. What other Adjectives govern an Ablative Case?

A. Adjectives of the Comparative Degree havin By or Then after them; likewise,
Dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, extorris, fretus, vilis,
charus, venalis. Lastly, Nouns signifying the cause, instrument, form or
manner, or some such thing; as, the Adjunct or Circumstance.

Q. What Case will Nouns of Diversity govern?

A. An Ablative with a Preposition, and sometimes a Dative.

Q. What sort of Words are used to be added to Comparatives and Superlatives?

A. Tanto, quanto, mult^, long, eo, quo, paulo, nimio, aetate, natu.

Q. What say you of the Construction of Pronouns?

A. When Passion or Suffering is signified, these Primitives, Mei, tui, sui,
nostri and vestri are used; but when Possession is signified, Meus, tuus, suus,
noster and vester are used, signifying actively, as the other signify
passively.

Q. What Pronouns are they that may be of any Person?

A. Ipse and idem, which idem has after it, qui, and, ^c, or atque.

Q. What say you of Hic, ille and iste, how are they distinguished?

A. Hic shows proximity, ille shows excellency, and iste contempt. Iste also
shows him who is next unto you, and ille one remote from both. Hic also is
referred to the latter and nearer of two Antecedents. Ille to the farther off,
or that which is first spoken of, etc. Yet it happens sometimes otherwise.

Q. Which is the next Part of Construction or Syntaxis?

A. The next is the Construction of Verbs with a Nominative Case after them;
with a Genitive and Dative governed of them; with an Accusative following
Verbs, signifying actively, and with an Ablative governed of them.

Q. What Verbs a^e (...) that will have a Nominative or the ^ame Case (...)
them, as they have before them*

A. They are, 1. Verbs Substantives, Sam, forem, (...), ^xista, (so called
because they signify a Substance or Being.) 2. Certain Verbs Passives of
Calli^g; as, Dicor, vocor, (...), ap^llor, haboor, existim^r, videor. 3. Verbs
Neu^ers of Gesture, (so called because they signify some Gesture or Posture of
Body;) as, Sodeo, (...), ^^bo, eo, incedo, c^^ro.

Q. What if Verbs Substantive^ and Passives have an Acc^sative or Dutive Case
before them?

A. Then they have an Accusative or Dative Case after them, as Infinitive Moods
commonly have.

Q. But will they always have a Nominative after them when they have it before
them?

A. Yes, because they must have such after them, as they have before them.

Q. Which is your Rule for Verbs governing a Genitive, and what sorts of Verbs
are they?

A. The Rule is, Sum significans Possessionem, etc. That is, when Sum signifies
Possession, Owing, Property or Duty; or when you say, It is one's Part or Duty
to do such a thing, it governs a Genitive Case.

Q. Is there no exception?

A. Yes; for Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, must be the Nominative Case
agreeing with the Substantive going before, expressed, or understood, because
they are Pronouns Adjectives.

Q. What (...) Verbs govern a Genitive Case?

A. Verbs that be^oken, to esteem; viz. signifying the value, require a
Genitive Case with an Accusative, signifying the thing valued.

Q. What Genitives are those?

A. They are these, Ta^^i, qu^nti, with their Compounds; likewise Magni,
maximi, pluris, plurimi, parvi, mi^oris, mi^imi, nihili, ^^ooci, nanci, pili,
ass^s, hujus, teruntii.

Q. Which are the common Verbs of Esteeming?

A. They are, Aestimo, pendo, facio, hab^o, duco, puto, to which add consulo,
etc.

Q. What Cases else may aestimo govern?

A. These Ablatives, Magno, permagno, parvo, nihilo.

Q. What other Verbs require a Genitive Case?

A. Verbs of Accusing, Condemning, Warning, Purging, Quitting, or Assoiling,
will govern (besides an Accusative of the Person) a Genitive of the Crime, and
sometimes of the Punishment.

Q. Which are those Verbs that signify, 1. To Accuse. 2. Condemn. 3. Warn. 4.
Purge, Quit, or Assoil?

A. Of the first sort are, Accuso, incuso, adstringo, etc. Of the second,
Datnno, condemno, judico, noto. Of the third, Admoneo, commoneo, commonefacio.
Of the fourth, Absolv^, libero, purgo, solvo, etc.

Q. May these Verbs have no other Case of the Crime?

A. Yes, an Ablative, with, and most commonly without, a Preposition,
especially if Vterque, nullus, alter, neuter, alius, ambe, or a Superlative
Degree follow.

Q. What other Verbs require a Genitive Case?

A. Satago, misereor, miseresco.

Q. What Case do Reminiscor, obliviscor, recordor, and memini govern?

A. A Genitive, and sometimes an Accusative; but memini signifying, I make
mention, may have an Ablative with a Preposition; as, Memini de te.

Q. What Case does Poti^r govern?

A. A Genitive or Ablative; as, Potior urbis, potior voto.

Q. What Verbs govern a Dative Case?

A. All sort of Verbs put acquisitively, (i. e.) having To or For after them,
govern a Dative Case of the Thing or Person, to whom any thing is gotten, and
commonly from whom any thing is taken.

Q. What sort of Verbs belong to this Rule?

A. All sort of Verbs, Actives, Passives, Neu^ers, and Deponents, as well
Transitives, as Intransitives.

Q. What are the first sort of Verbs that belong to this Rule?

A. They are Verbs signifying Profit or Disprofit.

Q. What Verbs are there of this sort?

A They are, Plaoeo, displiceo, commodo, incomm^d^, proficio, noceo, officio,
(except juvo, laedo, offend, and d^leo, of the thing; as, Tu tua damna dole?
Doleo vicem tuam.) Also, Auxil^or, opitulor, opem fero, subvenio, patrocinor,
medeor, faeveo, grator, gratulor, gratificor, pa^co, indulgeo, consulo,
prospicio, studeo.

Q. What are the second sort of Verbs that belong to this Rule?

A. They are Verbs of Comparing; as, Comparo, compono, consero, aequo, adaequo,
aequiparo, contendo, and certo pro comparo, which sometimes are governed of
Prepositions with their Cases.

Q. What are the third sort of Verbs governing a Dative?

A. Verbs of Giving and Restoring; as, Dono, concedo, trado, reddo, confero,
tribuo, attribuo, largior, elarglor, ministro, restituo, suppedito, repono, etc.

Q. Which are the fourth sort of Verbs that govern a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs of Promising, Paying, and Owing; as, Promitto, polliceor,
spon^deo, debeo, solvo, appendo, numero, etc.

Q. Which are the fifth sort of Verbs governing a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs that signify, to command, show, or declare; as, Impero,
praecipio, dominor, mando, (and sometimes jubeo) nuncio, renuncio, dico,
declaro, aperio, expone, explico, monstro, indico, significo, narro, patefacio,
^stendo, etc.

Q. Which are the sixth sort of Verbs that govern a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs of trusting, and Verbs contrary to them; as, Credo, sido,
sidem habeo, dissido, etc.

Q. What are the seventh sort of Verbs, that govern a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs of complying with, or obeying, and Verbs of resisting or
thwarting; as, Obedio, pareo, obsequer, obtempero, moremgero, cedo, morigeror,
servio, famulor, ancillor, velisicor, blandior, adulor, assentior, palpo,
p^gno, repugno, resisto, adversor, luctor, reluctor, recla^o, certo; but
adulor, assentior, adversor, and palp^, are read also with an Accusative Case.

Q. Which are the ninth sort of them?

A. They are Verbs of threatening, or being angry with; as, Minor, indignor,
iraescor, succenseo, minitor, intermino^, offender.

Q. Which are the tenth sort of Verbs, that govern a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs of meeting with; as, Occurr^, obvenio, obviant eo, obviam
fis, or habeo.

Q. Which are the eleventh sort?

A. They are Sum and his Compounds; as, Adsum, praesum, prosum, intersum,
supersum, desum, etc. except possum, and also absum; as, absint inani sunere
neniae.

Q. Which is the twelfth sort of them?

A. They are Verbs Neuters and Passives, compounded with these Prepositions,
Prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ^b, in, inter; but (...), anteeo, anteoede,
anteste, anteverto, praevenio, praevinco, praecedo, praecurro, praeverto,
pr^vertor, are joined to an Accusative; so are invideo, insulto, occumbo,
subeo, sufficio, illudo, attendo.

Q. Which are the thirteenth sort of these Verbs, that govern a Dative Case?

A. They are Verbs compounded with these Adverbs, Satis, been, and male; as,
satisfacio, benefacio, malesacio, benedico, maledico.

Q. What other Verbs place will govern a Dative Case?

A. The Verb Est and Suppetit, when they signify for habeo, to have.

Q. What observe you of Sum; and some other Verbs?

A. That it and some others govern a double Dative Case.

Q. What more have you to say of this Rule, Omnia Verba acqulsitive?

A. That the Poets put a Dative Case sometimes to Verbs, instead of an
Accusative, with a Proposition, and also sometimes there is added a Dative Case
overmuch, not for necessity sake, but rather for pleasure. There are also
certain Verbs that govern diverse Cases in different respects; as, Ausculto tibi
and te. Consulo tibi, te, and in te, etc.

Q. What Verbs govern an Accusative Case?

A. Verbs Transitives, or rather Actives, and most others; as, Deponents and
Neuters having a transient action (i. e.) passing their signification into
another word making no perfect sense without it.

Q. What other sort of Verbs may govern an Accusative Case?

A. Verbs Neuters Intransitives, (i. e.) which do not transfer or pass over
their signification to another word, may and do often govern an Accusative of
their own or a near signification; as, vivo vitam, etc. otherwise they do not;
for it is otherwise in Neuters and Deponents, which have an absolute action or
signification in them, such as are sto, (...), sedeo, venio, surgo, orior,
morior, etc.

Q. What Verbs are those that will govern two Accusative Cases after them?

A. They are Verbs of asking, teaching, arraying, concealing; as, Doceo,
edoceo, moneo, rogo, exoro, posco, hortor, induo, exuo, celo. Of which rogo,
exoro, posco, doceo, edoceo, moneo, and admoneo, do retain or govern an
Accusative of the thing even in the Passive Voice.

Q. What Verbs govern an Ablative Case?

A. All manner of Verbs signifying the instrument, (put with this sign with
before it) or of the cause, manner of doing, or part; but sometimes a
Preposition is added to the Ablative of the cause, manner of doing, and of the
part.

Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case?

A. Verbs wherein the word of Price (i. e. buying or selling, letting or
hiring) is mentioned.

Q. Are there no Exceptions from this Rule?

A. Yes, these Genitives being put alone without Substantives, Tanti, quanti,
pluris, minoris, tantidem, quantidem, quantivis, quantilibet, quanticunque, are
excepted: but if Substantives be added to these, they and their Substantives
are put in the Ablative Case; yet vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo,
dimidio, duplo, are often added (though they be Ablatives) without Substantives.

Q. What words are those by which the Question of the instrument, cause, or
manner of doing, are answered by?

A. The instrument answers to the Question made, by Quocum, With what? The
cause, by Quare, Wherefore, for what cause or reason? The manner of doing, by
Quomodo, How or by what means? The price of the thing answers to Quanti, For
how much, or how great a price?

Q. Does Valeo always govern an Ablative Case of the price?

A. No; for it governs sometimes an Accusative?

Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case?

A. Verbs of abounding, (i. e. of plenty) filling, loading, and those that
signify contrary to them, sc. Verbs of scarceness and want, emptying and
unloading, some of which sometimes, though seldom, govern a Genitive Case.

Q. What other Verbs govern an Ablative Case?

A. Fungor; fruor, utor, ves^or, epulor, dignor, gaude^, glorior, laetor, muto,
numero, communico, afficio, prosequor, impertio, impertior, consto, creor,
nascor, laboro for mal^ habeo, to be ill. Nitor, supersedeo, and vivo pro
victito, to live upon.

Q. What say you of Mereor?

A. Mereor, with the Adverbs been, male, melius, pej^s, optime, pessime,
governs an Ablative Case with the Preposition De.

Q. Are there any other Verbs that govern an Ablative?

A. Yes* some Verbs of receiving, of being distant, and of taking away, will
have an Ablative with a Preposition, which Ablative is turned sometimes into a
Dative.

Q. What say you of Verbs which have the force of comparison, or signify
exceeding?

A. They govern an Ablative Case of the word that signifies the measure of
exceeding.

Q. Is there no other Rule for an Ablative Case?

A. Yes, an Ablative Case absolute, with a Participle expressed or understood,
being put in a Comma by it self; which Ablative may be resolved by any of these
words, Dum, cum, quando, siquam, postquam; as, Imperante Augusto (i. e.) cum or
quando imperabat.

Q. May there not diverse cases be put to the same Verb?

A. Yes, there may diverse Cases of diverse Reasons; as, Dedit mihi vestem
pign^ri, te praesente, propria (...).

Q. What part of government follows next?

A. The Construction or Government of Verbs Passives.

Q. What Case do they govern?

A. An Ablative of the Doer, with the Prepositions, A, ab, or abs, and
sometimes a Dative.

Q. What say you of the other Cases of Verbs Passives?

A. As for other Cases they are the same that their Actives govern, except an
Accusative, which ought never to follow a Verb or Participle Passive, except in
those aforementioned, sc. R^go, ex^ro, pos^o, doceo, edoceo, moneo, admoneo,
which retain an Accusative of a thing in the Passive Voice.

Q. What say you of these Neuter Passives, sc. Vapulo, vaeneo, liceo, exulo,
fio?

A. They have a Passive Construction, or govern Cases as Passives do, according
to our Grammar, though controverted by some.

Q. What is the Rule of Verbs of the Infinitive Mood, and of what are they
governed?

A. Verbs of the Infinitive Mood are governed, or depend, either on Verbs,
Participles, or Adjectives.

Q. Can all Verbs govern an Infinitive Mood after them?

A. No; for we cannot say, curro ludere, o^ viva ^dere, etc. There are only
four sorts of Verbs which govern an Infinitive Mood, viz. 1. Those that
signify sense; as, Audio, sentio, intelligo, doceo, disco. 2. Those that
signify will or desire; as, Cupio, posco, libet, placet. 3. Which signify
power, or ability; as, Possum, queo, valeo, etc. And, 4. these, viz. Lic^t,
liberum est, aequum est, par est, contingit, etc.

Q. Are not Verbs of the Infinitive sometimes put absolutely and figuratively?

A. Yes; as, Haeccine fieri flagitia? Criminibus terrer^ novis.

Q. What part of Government comes next?

A. The Construction of Gerunds and Supines.

Q. What Case do Gerunds and Supines govern?

A. Gerunds and Supines, signifying actively, govern the Case of their Verbs.

Q. What do Gerunds in di depend upon?

A. They depend upon certain Substantives and Adjectives governing a Genitive
Case.

Q. What Case have Gerunds in di sometimes, instead of the Case of their Verbs?

A. A Genitive Plural, (i. e.) an Accusative Case is sometimes turned into a
Genitive; Novarum qui spectandi copiam faciunt, pro novas. Ratio scribendi
literarum pro literas.

Q. Of what are Gerunds in do governed?

A. Of the Prepositions, A, ab, abs, de, e, ex, cum, in, pro, or else they are
put without a Preposition, when the cause or manner is signified; as, Nihil est
quin male narrando, etc.

Q. Of what are Gerunds in dum governed?

A. Of these Prepositions, Inter, ante, ad, ob, propter, or else they are put
absolutely with a Dative, expressed or understood when necessity (i. e. when
must or ought) is signified.

Q. May not Gerunds elegantly be turned into Nouns Adjectives?

A. Yes, and then they must agree with their Substantives in Case, Gender, and
Number.

Q. What is the first Supine governed of?

A. The first Supine follows Verbs* or Participles, signifying moving to a
place.

Q. What part of Government falls under the ninth place?

A. The Construction of Time and Place.

Q. In what Case is the Term or Word of Time put, answering to the Question
When?

A. In the Ablative.

Q. In what Case is it put answering to the Question, How long? And in what
Case is the space of a place put answering to Quantum, How much or how far?

A. In the Accusative commonly, and sometimes in the Ablative.

Q. How are the Proper Names of great Places used, to wit, of Countries,
Islands, and Provinces? And how are the Common Names of Places (i. e* Nouns
Substantives common, denoting place) uttered?

A. They are commonly uttered or used with Prepositions.

Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Towns and Cities put, when they
signify, in, or at, a City or To^n, and answer to the Question, V^i, Where?

A. If they be of the first or second Declension and Singular Number, they are
put in the Genitive Case; but if they be of the Plural Number or third
Declension, they are commonly put in the Ablative, and, as some say, in the
Dative.

Q. What Words follow the Rule of Proper Names?

A. (...), domi, militiae, belli, r^^i vel rure.

Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Cities and Towns put in, when they
signify moving to a place, and answer to the Question Quo, Whither?

A. They are put in the Accusative Case without a Preposition, and so are Domum
and Rus used.

Q. In what Case are the Proper Names of Cities and Towns put in, when they
signify From or By a place, and answering to the Question Vnde or Qua, from
whence or which way?

A. They are put in the Ablative Case without a Preposition, so are Domo and
Rure.

Q. What Genitives of Nouns Adjectives will Domus only admit of?

A. None but these, Meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vestrae, alienae, for if other
Adjectives be used with Domi, they must be put with it in the Ablative Case.

Q. What part of Government comes next?

A. The Construction of Verbs Impersonals.

Q. What Impersonals govern a Genitive Case?

A. Interest and Refert most commonly govern a Genitive of the Person, save
that instead of the Genitive Cases of the Pronoun Primitives, they govern these
Ablatives Feminines of the Pronouns Possessives, Mea, tua, sua, nostra, vestra,
cuj^. Interest and Refert govern also these Genitives of the thing, viz. Tanti,
quanti, magni, parvi, pluris, and sometimes other Cases; as, Interest ad laudem
meam, It makes to my praise.

Q. What Impersonals govern a Dative Case?

A. Accidit, certum est, contingit, constat, confert, competit, conducit,
convenit, placet, displicet, dolet, expedit, evenit, liquet, libet, licet,
nocet, obest, prodest, praestat, patet, stat, restat, benefit, malefit,
satisfit, superest, sufficit, vocat forotium est, etc.

Q. What Impersonals govern an Accusative Case?

A. Juvat, decet, with their Compounds; likewise delectat and oportet.

Q. To what Impersonals is the Preposition ad properly added?

A. To these, Attinet, pertinet, spectat.

Q. What Cases will Paenitet, taedet, miseret, miserescit, pudet, piget, govern?

A. An Accusat^ve with a Genitive.

Q. But may not some Impersonals become Personals?

A. Yes; as, Namque decent animos mollia regna tuos.

Q. Have Impersonals a Nominative Case before them?

A. No; for they are called Impersonals, because they have no Person, nor
Number, nor Nominative Case: And Vossius says they want also the Imperative
Mood, instead of which we use the Present Tense of the Subiunctive.

Q. How are Impersonals put?

A. Either absolutely (i. e.) by themselves, or they govern after them the Case
of Verbs Personals; as, Non nocebitur ei nocturnis roribus, The Dew shall not
hurt it by night.

Q. How may a Verb Impersonal of the Passive Voice signify?

A. It may signify indifferently, for every Person of both Numbers with the
Preposition, a or ab, understood, and the Ablative Cases Singular or Plural of
ego, tu, ille; as, statur, I stand, thou stand, he stands; we stand, ye
stand, they stand.

Q. What Part of Government does next follow?

A. The Construction of Participles.

Q. What Case will Participles govern?

A. They govern the Cases of their Verbs.

Q. What Case do Participles of Verbs Passives commonly govern?

A. They govern for the most part a Dative, and Participles, signifying
actively, for the most part govern an Accusative Case.

Q. What Case do Participles govern when they are changed into Nouns?

A. They govern a Genitive.

Q. But how many ways are Participles changed into Nouns?

A. Four; 1. When a Participle is construed with a different Case, then the
Verb that it comes of is construed with it. 2. When it is compounded with a
Preposition, with which the Verb it comes from, cannot be compounded. 3. When
it forms all the Degrees of Comparison. 4. When it has no respect or express
difference of Time.

Q. How are such Participles as are changed into Nouns called?

A. Nouns Participials.

Q. Do all other Nouns Participials require a Genitive Case?

A. No; Exosus, pertaesus, perosus, are excepted; for when perosus and exosus
signify passively, they govern a Dative Case, and when they signify actively,
all the three govern an Accusative: And natus, prognatus, satus, cretus,
creatus, ortus, editus, oriundus, govern an Ablative.

Q. What part of Construction comes in the twelfth and last place?

A. The Construction of the Undeclined Parts of Speech.

Q. Which of them comes first?

A. An Adverb, according to order.

Q. What Case do Adverbs govern?

A. Some a Nominative and an Accusative; as, En and Ecce, when they are Adverbs
of showing, govern most commonly a Nominative Case, seldom an Accusative; but
when they signify upbraiding, reproaching, or disgracing, they have only an
Accusative.

Q. What Adverbs require a Genitive Case?

A. Adverbs of Quantity, Time and Place, and the Adverbs Instar and Ergo; but
Instar, with the Preposition Ad before it, is a Noun invariable.

Q. What Adverbs govern a Dative Case?

A. Certain Adverbs derived of Nouns Adjectives which govern a Dative Case; as,
obvi^m derived of obvius, and similiter of similis.

Q. Are there not some Datives of Nouns Substantives used adverbially?

A. Yes, Tempori, luci, vesperi.

Q. What Adverbs derived an Accusative Case?

A. Certain Adverbs derived of Prepositions, serving to an Accusative; as,
proprius and proxime, of the Preposition prope, and clanculum of clam; as
Clanculum Patres, Plaut.

Q. How many ways may Prepositions be changed into Adverbs?

A. Two; 1. When they are set alone without their Case. 2. When they do form
all the Degrees of Comparison.

Q. What Case will Adverbs of the Comparative and Superlative Degree have?

A. The same as the Nouns Adjectives of those Degrees of which they come.

Q. What Case are plus, amplius, and minus, joined to?

A. To a Nominative, Accusative, and Ablative, the Conjunction quam being
understood.

Q. What is the Adverb abhinc joined to?

A. To an Accusative or Ablative.

Q. But do not Poets often use the Accusative Cases of Nouns Adjectives of the
Neuter Gender in both Numbers for Adverbs?

A. Yes; as, Torvumque repent clamat. Horrendum stridens. Immane spirans.
Turbidum laetatur. Perfidum ridens, Hor. Transversa tuentibus hircis. Acerba
sonans. Crebra fremit; multa gemens, Virg. The manner of these Expressions are
in imitation of the Greeks.

Q. What Cases do Conjunctions govern, being the next in order?

A. They govern none; but they couple like Cases, and sometimes like Moods, and
Tenses, and sometimes like Moods, but diverse Tenses.

Q. What Conjunctions do couple like Cases?

A. All Conjunctions Copulatives, and Disjunctives, with these six, quam, nifi,
praeterquam, an, cum, tum and tum doubled.

Q. But may they not couple sometimes diverse Cases?

A. Yes, in regard of some private reason, as in words that are of diverse
Constructions.

Q. What Particles are there that govern Moods?

A. These following govern a Subjunctive Mood: 1. Indefinite words, (i. e.)
words used in a general, not in a particular sense; as, Quis, qualis, quantiss.
2. Causals, (i. e. that give a reason or show a cause;) as, Quin, quippe, qui,
ut, uti, quo, dummodo, and dum for dummodo, and most an end quamvis, ersi,
tametsi, etiamsi, and licet. 3. Dubitatives, (i. e. when a Doubt is made;) as,
An, ne, number. 4. Optatives, (i. e. Particles or Words of Wishing;) as, V^inam,
si, osi, o. 5. These of Simulation, Perinde, a^si, quasi, selt vero, for quasi
vero, tanquam; but when they are Adverbs of Similitude, they govern an
Indicative.

Q. What Particles govern both Moods, sc. an Indicative and a Subjunctive?

A. Quippe qui, and utpote qui, ubi, cum, ni, nisi, si, quod, quia, postquam;
but si for quamvis, governs a Subjunctive only.

Q. What say you of the Adverb ne, of forbidding?

A. It governs an Imperative or Subjunctive.

Q. What Participles govern an Indicative Mood?

A. Ne, an, number, being Particles of Interrogation, likewise quando,
quandoq^idem, quoniam, quippe, dum and donec, put for quamdiu; ut put for
postquam, quomodo, sicut.

Q. How are quod and ut distinguished in making Latin, for both signify that?

A. Quod most commonly signifies the same as Quia, because, or it signifies,
that, noting the efficient cause; as, Quod tu rediisti, Because you have
returned; and for the most part it is used concerning a thing done and past. Ut
signifies to the end that, noting the final cause or effect; as, Ut tu fabulam
agas Volo; and we use it chiefly for the future, and in things to come; of both
thus; Gaudeo quod veneris scripsi ut veni^res.

Q. Which do you put, Quod or Ut, after these words, viz. Adeo, ideo, ita, sic,
tam, talis, tantus, tot, tantum abest, etc?

A. We never put Quod after them, but Ut, with a Subjunctive M^od.

Q. After what Verbs may Ut be also used?

A. After Verbs of seeking, bidding, fearing, and after Verbs that signify a
will, or study, or endeavor; as, after volo, curo, laboro, and Verbs that
signify an event; as, fit, evenit, accidit, contingit, etc. He that would know
more concerning Particles, and the Government of Moods, let him read and
consult Authors.

Q. What say you of the Government of Prepositions?

A. That the Preposition In is often understood and sometimes others.

Q. What comes next concerning the Government of Prepositions?

A. That a Verb compound sometimes governs a Case by the sorce of the
Preposition it is compounded with. And sometimes the same Preposition is
compounded or joined with the Verb, and put before the casual word also; as,
Amicos ad vocabo ad hanc rem, where ad is put to vocabo, and put before hanc
rem besides.

Q. What Cases do Prepositions govern?

A. Either an Accusative or Ablative, some govern both, only Tenus governs an
Ablative both Singular and Plural, and a Genitive Case Plural, but not Singular.

Q. Which are those Prepositions that serve to both the Accusative and Ablative?

A. They are, In, super, sub, subter and clam; in used for erga, contra, and ad
serves to an Accusative. Officers are elegantly expressed in Latin by the
Preposition A, with the Verb Est, and a Dative of the Possessor, or Master; as,
Est Regi a consiliis, He is one of the King's Counsel, or Privy Counsel. A
pedibus, A Footman. A manibus, a Secretary or Manuensis.

Q. But are there not some Prepositions, that are never found but when they are
compounded with Verbs?

A. Yes these, Am, di, dis, re, se, con

Q. What become of Prepositions when they govern no Case?

A. They are turned into Adverbs.

Q. The Construction of which, of the undeclined Parts of Speech, does now
remain?

A. The Construction of Interjections.

Q. What Cases do Interjections govern?

A. O, a Particle of Exclaiming, governs a Nominative and Vocative; but when it
is a Particle of Calling, only a Vocative; as, O Melibaee Deus nobis haec otia
fecit. Hue ades O Galatea, Virg. Eclog. 9. Heu governs a Nominative, Dative, or
Accusative; as, Heu Pietas; Heu mifero mihi; Heu stirpem invisam. Hei and Vae
only a Dative; as, Hei mihi; Vae tibi Causidice.

Q. What Cases do Proh, ah and vah govern?

A. They govern an Accusative and Vocative; as, Proh Sancte Jupiter! Proh Deum
atque hominum fidem! Ah Virgo inselix! Virg. Eclog. 6. Ah me miserum! Ter. Vah
mea Antiphila! Vah inconstantiam! Ter.

Q. What Case do Heus and Ohe govern?

A. Only a Vocative; as, Heus Sire! Ohe Libelle! Ter. and Mart.

Q. What Case do Hem and Apage govern?

A. An Accusative; as, Hem astutias! Ter. Apage istiusmodi salutem quae cum
cruciatu venit, Plaut.

Observations for the Government of Words by Signs.
A Sign is a word which of it self-signifieth nothing, but shows how another
word signifies.

A, An, The, be signs of a Nominative Case which goes before the Verb. These
are also the signs of a Noun Substantive, to which you cannot put the word Man
or Y^ing, as you can to an Adjective.

The Accusacive has the same signs, and it follows the Verb.

O is the sign of the Vocative, and it is known by calling or speaking to any
body

O, is the sign of a Genitive when a Noun goes before it.

Except, 1. Of after Adjectives, signifying fullness or emptiness, and before a
word signifying the praise or dispraise of a thing, then it is a sign of a
Genitive or Ablative.

Except, 2. Of after dignus, indignus, natus, prognatus, sutus, cretus,
creatus, ortus, editus, and most commonly after opus and usus, signifying need,
notes an Ablative.

But of after a Verb is made by one of these Prepositions, A, ab, e, ex, except
after Verbs of accusing, condemning, warning and acquitting, a Genitive or an
Ablative, with or without a Preposition. Also of after paenitet, pudet, taedet,
piget, miseret, miserescit, and after the Verb Sum, signifying a Property or
Duty, notes a Genitive.

Of after Verbs of filling, easing, emptying, depriving, ridding, spoiling,
unburthening, notes an Ablative without any Preposition.

Of signifying concerning, is made by De.

Of after Verbals in bilis, Participles of the Preterperfect Tense and Futures
in dus, is a sign of a Dative; yet sometimes it is made by a Preposition.

To before a Noun is a sign of the Dative Case: but after aptus, pa^atas,
tardur, and after a Substantive not governing a Genitive Case, which signisies
the matter of a thing or person, it is made by the Gerund in dum, or Participle
in dus, with ad.

But To, after a Substantive or Adjective, governing a Genitive Case, is made
by a Gerund in di.

To before a Verb is a sign of an Infinitive Mood; but after attinet, pertinet,
spectat, loquor, h^r^o, invito, provoco, addo, voco, and Verbs of motion is
made by ad.

To also after Verbs and Participles, signifying moving to a place, is usually
made by the first Supine or Gerund in dum with ad, or by the Participle in rus.

About to, to intend, or to purpose, is also made by the Fu^ure in rus.

To be is a sign of the Infinitive Mood Passive; but to be after the Verb sum,
or a Substantive, is made by the Participle in dus.

To be after these Adjectives, facilis, difficilis, dignus, indignus, is m^de
by the latter Supine.

For is sometimes the sign of a Dative Case; but sometimes it is made by a
Preposition: But for the cause is always the Ablative; and for the price,
except after tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, standing without Substantives,
then it notes a Genitive.

With, the cause or manner, is a sign of an Ablative.

Except when it signifies Society, it is made by cum.

Except also after Verbs of comparing, being angry with, or at; to meet with,
it is a sign of a Dati^e Case.

From is an Ablative, except after Verbs of taking away, then it is a Dative
commonly.

By, and then, after an Adjective of the Comparative Degree, be signs of an
Ablative Case.

That, when it is joined with man or thing, is made by is, ille, or iste;
otherwise (if it cannot be turned into which) it is a Conjunctio^ to be made by
qu^d or ut.

How, before an Adjective is to be made by quam; before a Verb by qu^medo.

More, most, and very, before an Adjective, are signs of the Comparative and
Superlative Degree.

It, or there, before a Verb, are signs of a Verb Imperson^l, or of a
Nominative Case set after a Verb.

A Par^iciple of the Present Tense having a sign of the Geni^iv^ C^se, is made
by a Gerund in di; having the sign of an Ablative, is made by a Gerund in do:
but the P^r^iciple in ing, having a or the before it, is a Substantive.

About, concerning, is made by de; before a Noun of ^ime, or Number, with ad,
circi^er, or circa; otherwise with cir^a, circum.

Before, or before with a Noun or alone, is made by an^e; af^r^ that, before
that, before, before, with a Verb antequam.

After, with a Noun is post, after that, after, with a Verb postquam;
afterward, postea; with the wo^ds mann^r, or f^shion, ad.

All, viz. whole, is made by totus; otherwise by omnis.

Along, before a Substantive is per; along with, and cum.

At, ut; As, being repeated, or so-as, when a comparis^n, is made by tam-quam,
tum-tum, cum-tum, ae^ue, perinde^a^, tam-ac, adco ut; as much as, as great as,
tantus, quanius; as many as, so many as, tot-quot; as like as, such as, taelis
qualis; as far, as to, as concerning, as much as belongs to, quantum ad, quod
ad, quo ad.

But, sed; on^^, tantum; unless, nisi, praeterquam; after cannot, non; after
nothing else, quam; after I doubt not, quin.

Over, ab^ve, is made by supra, beyond by ul^ra, through by per or trans.

That, for this; the, is made by ille; for which, by qui.

The, being thus repeated, the more the more; the first is to be made by quo,
quanto; the latter by tanto, eo, boe.

Till, aso^e a Verb is made by dum, or don^^c; before a Noun, by ad, usque, ad.

Very, before a Substantive is made by ipse, otherwise by valde.

Under, above, over, after a Noun of Number are made by minus, plus; otherwise
by subter, supta.

Worth, before a Verb is made by valeo, being a Noun by dignitas; but worth the
pains, operae pretium; otherwise it is a sign, etc.

Too he be never so learned or rich, is not to be made by quamvis nunquam sit
tam Doctus or Dives, but t^us, Doctissimus vel ditissimus, licet sit, etc.

The signs, on, at, before a Nown of Time, Age; also on after nitor to lean,
and vescor to eat, notes an Ablative: Likewise at in such words, at table, at
first sight, at first coming. etc. Also at School, at Church, by i^, with an
Ablative and not by ad or apud. Of the rest of the Particles, co^sult Walker.

Observe what follows for making elegant Latin.

When this English That, may be formed into this English Which, it is a
Relative; otherwise it is a Conjunction, which is called in Latin quod or ut;
and in making Latin it may elegantly be put aw^y, by turning the Nominative
into the Accusative, and the Verb into the Infinitive Mood.

The English must or ought, that seems to be made by oportet or de^eo, may be
put in the Gerund in dum, with the Verb est set impersonaily turning the
Nominative into the Dative.

The Verb have may be made by est in Latin, if you turn the Nominative into
the Dative, and the Accusative into the Nominative.

A Verb Neuter may be changed into the third Person Passive with an Ablative,
and a Preposition expressed or understood.

If a Verb Active be changed into a Passive you must turn the Nominative into
the Dative or Ablative with a Preposition, and the Accusative into the
Nominative.

A Substantive with a Participle standing within a Comma by it self, and that
is neither the Nominative Case to the Verb, nor governed of any other word, is
put in the Ablative Case absolute, which Ablative may be resolved by one of
these words, dum, cum, quando, si, quanquam, postquam.

Rules to turn English into Latin, or Latin into English.
BEfore you construe, read the Sentence to a period, observing the Proper
Names, (that begin with great Letters) and the Hard Words, with the meaning of
what you are to construe. After that,

1. Take the Vocative Case (if there be any) with its Interjection, and
whatsoever depends upon it.

2. Take the Nominative, or whatsoever is put instead of it, and join with it
whatsoever depends upon it.

3. Take the Principal Verb, and whatsoever depends on it.

4. Take the Case following the Verb, by asking whom, or what? and after it all
the other Cases in order: first the Genitive, then the Dative and Ablative,
known by their signs; but Relatives and Nouns that follow the Rule of the
Relative, together with their Substantives, (if they have any expressed) are
commonly taken before the Verb, or any other word whereof they are governed;
and so are Conjunctions and Adverbs of likeness; as, quemadmodum, ut, sicut,
having sic or ita to answer them, in the second part of the Sentence.

5. Take the Substantive and Adjective together, unless the Adjective pass over
its signification unto some other word which it governs.

6. Observe the Indeclinables, and the Case (if they require it) that follows
them.

7. The Substantive (with its Participle, etc.) which neither agrees with the
Verb, nor is governed of any word, (i. e.) the Ablative Case absolute, which is
put in a Comma by it self.

Lastly, All the Circumstances comprehended in this following Verse are to be
well weighed:

Quis, cui, causa, locus, quo tempore, prima sequela. That is, 1. Who speaks in
that place; what he speaks. 2. To whom he speaks. 3. Upon what occasion he
speaks, or to what end. 4. Where he speaks. 5. At what time it was. 6. What
went before in the Sentence next. 7. What follows next after. If any thing be
against Sense or Grammar, cast it off till you have sound out the right.

Short Rules for the placing of Latin, Words.
1. THe Oblique Cases, (that is, all besides the Nominative and Vocative) are
to be placed in the beginning, unless they be Negatives, then they may
elegantly be put in the end; so may Adjectives or Par^iciples, that contain the
chief point of the sense.

2. The Nominative Case is to be placed in the middle before the Verb, except a
Question be asked, and then the Nominative is set after the Verb, or after the
sign of the Verb, as Amas tu? 2. When the Verb is of the Imperative Mood, as
Ama tu. Or, 3. when this sign it or there comes before the English of the
Verb, as Est liber men's, Venit ad me quidam.

4. The Adjective may be placed before the Substantive, and between them may be
fitly placed the Genitive of the latter of two Substantives: Also between the
Adjective and the Substantive of the Genitive Case, the word governing the
Genitive Case may be elegantly put. Adverbs and Participles may be placed where
they seem most to please the ear: But the word governed is most commonly placed
before the word governing, contrary to Grammatical order.

De Figuris.
Q. QVid est Figura?

R. Est nova vel novata are aliqua dicondi form^.

Q. Quot ^plices sunt Figurae Grammaticae?

R. Sunt quadruplices, Orthographiae, Etymologiae, Syntaxis, Pr^s^diae.

Q. Quot sunt Figurae Orthographi^?

R. Sunt novent; 1. Prothesis. 2. Amphaeresis. 3. Epenthesis. 4. Syncope. 5.
Paragoge. 6. Apocope. 7. Antistoicon, se^ A^ith^sis, 8. Metathesis. 9. T^^esis.
Sed haec omnesque Figurae Grammaticales ad Pleonasmum, Ellipsin, and Enallagen
reduci possunt,

Q. Quid est Prothesis?

R. Est appositio literae vel syllabae ad principium dictionis; ut, Gnatus pro
Natus: tetuli pro tuli.

Q. Quid est Aphaeresis?

R. Est ablatio literae vel syllabae a principio dictionis; ut, ^uit pro eruit:
teninere pro conte^^ere.

Q. Quid est Epenthesis?

R. Est interpositio literae vel syllabae in medio dictionis; ut, relliquias,
relligio, addita L: Induperatorem pro Imperarorem.

Q. Quid est S^noope?

R. Est ablatio literae ^el syllabae e medio dictionis; ut, (...) pro abivit:
dixti pro dix sti: repostum pro repositum.

Q. Quid est Parag^ge?

R. Est appositio literae vel syllabae ad finem dictionis; ut, dicier pro dici:
mittier pro mitti.

Q. Quid est Apocope?

R. Est ablatio literae vel syllabae a sine dictionis; ut, Pe^uli pro peculii:
dixtin' pro dixtine: ingeni pro ingenii.

Q. Quid est Antistolcon, s^^ Ant^thesis?

R. Est literae pro litera positio; ut, Ol^i, servos, pro illi and servus.

Q. Quid est Metathesis?

R. Est literae alicujus ex propria sede in aliam transpositio; ut, Thymbre pro
Thymber: I prae pro praei.

Q. Quid est ^^esis?

R. Est v^cis compo^^tae intersectio per u^am pluresve dictiones interpositas;
ut, Quae meo cunque animo libitum est sucere. Per mihi, inquam, gratum seceris.

Q. Quo^ ^unt Figurae Etymslogiae?

R. Sunt tres, 1. Enallage. 2. Hellenisinus: Et, 3. Archaismas.

Q. Quid est Enallage in Etymologia?

R. Est quando vel ipsae pattes ^rar^onis vel earum accidentia, ita inter se
permutantur, ut nihil in leges constructionis five Synta^eos peccetur; ut, Sic
vita erat, pro talis. Hostis habet muros, pro hosts habent

Q. Quid est Hellen^sinus in Et^mologia?

R. Est cum dictiones Latinae Graecorum sequantur flexionem, non propriam; ut,
Nec auras nec sonitus memor, pro aurae, Virg.

E^ mullos illic Hectoras ess puto; pro Hectores, Ovid.

Q. Quid est Archaismus in Etymologia?

R. Est dictio pr^seis ^sitara, sed praesenti sae^ulo ol^sole^a; ut, Magnai
relpublicai gratia, pro magnae republicae.

Q. Quot up^^ces sunt Figurae Syntaxeos?

R. Sunt du^^^ces, quae fiunt vel spectantur. 1. Ratione Convenientiae: Et, 2.
ratione Regiminis.

Q. Quomodo spectatur Figura Syntaxeos ratione Convenientiae?

R. Spectatur vel in partibus declinabilibus vel indeclinabili^^s.

Q. Quen^^^ Figurae (...) vel spectantur ratione Con^^nientiae in partibus
declinabilibus?

R. Syllepsis, Prolepsis, Ze^gm^, Synthesis.

Q. Quid est Syllepsis seu Conceptio Laetine dicta?

R. Est cum Verbum aut Adjecti^um pluribus suppos^^is additum cum digniore
convenit non cum vicini^^e; (...)* Si ^^ exercitusque valetis. Pater and Matter
m^tu^.

Q. Quotuplex est Conceptio seu Syllepsis?

R. Est duplex, directa quae fit per Conjunctionem Copulativam; ut, Quid tu and
soror facitis; vel indirecta quae fit per praepositionem Copulativam; ut, Ipse
cum fratre adesse jussi sumus.

Q. Quotuplex est directa Conceptio?

R. Est duplex, 1. Personarum; ut, Neque ego neque tu fecimus, Ter. 2. Generum;
ut, Rex and Regina beati.

Q. Quid est Prolepsis seu Praesumptio?

R. Est pronunciatio quaedam rerum summaria, vel est cum praecessit vox aliqua
totum significans, quae in partibus max non explicatur, sed intelligitur: sive
vel cum toti subj^ciuntur parts, numeris aut personis diversae; ut, Duae
volabant aquilae, una ab ortu, altera ab occasu, etc.

Q. Quid est Zeugma?

R. Est unius Verbi vel Adjectivi vicinicri respondentis ad diversa supposita
reductio; ad utum express, ad alterum per supplementum, estque 1. Vel Generis;
ut, Vtinam aut hic surdus aut haec muta facta sit, Ter. Vel, 2. Numeri; ut, Hic
illius arma, hic curris fuit. Vel, 3. Personae, ut, ille timore, ego risu
corrui.

Q. Quid est Synthesis?

R. Est structura seu praetio sensu, non voce congruens; ut, Pars in srustra
secant. Gens armati. Estque triplex, 1. Generis tantum; ut, Centauro in^ebitur
magna, se. Navi, Virg. Scelus postquam iudificatus est virginem pro scelestus,
Ter. Samnitum caesi duo millia, Live. 2. Numeri tantum; ut, Pars volucres
factae, Ovid. Turba ruunt, Virg. 3. Generis and Numeri simul; ut, Pars iersi
tenuere rate^, Virg.

Q. Quomodo and quibus Figuris figuratur Syntaxis ratione Convenientiae in
partibus indeclimibilibus?

R. Figuratur vel additione; ut, In Polysindeto, vel detractione; ut, In
A^^ndeto: vel trajectione; ut, In Andstrophe and Synchysi sive Hyperbato.

Q. Quid est Polysindeton?

R. Est Conjunctionum in oratione redundantia; ut, Hunc and Tarentini and
Rhegini and Neopolitani, civitate, praemiis; donarunt.

Q. Quid est Asyndeton?

R. Est Conjunctionis in oratione defectus; ut, Aequi boni consulo.

Debelitant vires balnea, Bacchus, amor.

Velis nolis fiet, pro velis seu nolis fiet.

Q. Quid est Anastrophe?

R. Est cum Praepositio suo casui postponitur; ut, His accensa super, Virg.

Q. Quid est Synchisis seu Hyperbaton?

R. Est confusus ordo dictionum, quae ita miscentur in oratione, ut tota oration
inde fiat obscura and confusa; ut, Namque pila lippis inimicum and ludere
crudis: sc. Ludere pila est inimicum lippis and crudis, Hor.

Q. Quaenam sunt Syntaxeos Figurae quae in Regimine inveniuntu^?

R. Sunt, Qu^, 1. Vel in additione fiunt; ut, Pleonasinus* Vel, 2. detractione;
ut, Ellipsis. Vel, 3. immutatione; ut, Enallage.

Q. Quid est Pleonasmus?

R. Est cum una pluresve dictiones supra necessiatem in oratione redundant; ut,
Sic ore locuta est, Ter. Hisce o^ulis egomet vidi, Virg. Vocemque his auribus
hausi, Idem.

Q. Quid est Ellypsis quae dicitur Figura Syntaxeos in detractione?

R. Est dictionis ad legitimam Constructionem necessariae in sensu defectus;
ut, Aberat bidui, sc. vi^. Decies sestertium (i. e.) decies centena millia.
Proh Deum immortalium, sc. fidem: Non est oneri solvendo (i. e.) aptus. Ego
continuo mecum, supple cogitabam. Omnes ad unum occidit pro usque ad unum.
Tertio nonas, pro ante nonas. Invenitur haec figura in omnibus orationis
partibus.

Q. Quid est Enallage, quae est Figura Syntaxeos in immutatione?

R. Est qua voces, dut earum accidentia contra usitatae Constructionis leges
permutantur.

Q. Quomodo vocis immutatio dicitur?

R. Dicitur Antimeria; ut, Scire tuum, Pers. Sole retens orto, Virg.

Q. Quomodo Accident is immutatio dici solet?

R. Heterosis aut Alloiosis, ac fit in omnibus partibus declinabilibus: In iis
quae per casus variantur, fit, 1. In genere; ut, Et mammae putres, aequina
quales ubera, pro qualia, Hor. 2. Numero; ut, Et flesti and nostros vidisti
flentis ocellos, pro meos flentis. 3. Casu, quae species Aenallages vocatur
proprie Antiptosis, quae est positio casus pro casu; ut, Adsis laetitiae
Bacchus dator, pro Bacche. Haeret pede pes, dens usque viro vir, pro pedi,
Virg. Occurrunt animae, quales neque candidiores terra tulit, pro qualibus,
Hor. Hanc pius Aeneas eripuisse ferunt, pro pium Aeneam, Ovid. Vrbem quam
statuo vestra est.

Q. Quid est Synecdoche quae ad Hypallagen referri potest?

R. Est, cum Ablativus partis vel Adjuncti mutatur in Accusativum: Partis; ut,
Explerimentem nequit. Deiphobum vidi laceratum crudeliter ora: Adjuncti; ut,
Omnia mercurio similis vocemque coloremque. Flores inscripti nomina regum, Virg.

Q: Quid est Hypallage quae est altera species Aenallages?

R. Est mutua Casuum permutatio; ut, In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas;
pro in novas formas, Ovid. Dare classibus Austros, pro classes austris seu
ventis.

Q. Quid est Hendiadis?

R. Est cum unum p^r duo exprimitur; ut, Pateris bibamus and auro, pro aureis
pateris.

Q. Quid est Hysteron Proteron sive Hysterologia?

R. Est, cum id quod secundo loco poni debet, ponitur priore; ut, Moriamur, and
in media arma ruamus; pro in media arma ruamus and moriamur, Virg.

Q. Quid est Hellenismus seu Graecismus in Syntaxi?

R. Est, cum a Latina consuetudine recedentes, imitamur Graecos; ut, Desine
mollium tandem querelarum, Hor. Os humerosque Deo similis, Virg. Abstinet
irarum.

Q. Quid est Archai^mus?

R. Est structurae ratio veteribus in usu, quae jam exolevit; ut, Quid tibi
hanc rem curatio est.

Q. Quaenam dicuntur vitia vocis and orationis and quomodo distinguuntu^?

R. Dicuntur, Barbarismus and Solaecismus, and distinguuntur ut in ho^ disticho.

Barbarismus erit si vox corrumpitur una;
Esto Solaecismus vitiosa oration quaevis.
Est etiam sermo quem vocant, (...), sc.
Inconsequens, cum sequentia prioribus non cohaerent.
De Prosodiae Figuris in ipsa tractabimus Prosodia.
Modus examinandi Lectionem.
Q. PRoposita voce quid faciendum est?

R. Dicendum est, quae and qualis sit pars orationis, an sit declinabilis vel
indeclinabilis.

Q. Si sit nomen vel Verbum, (nam hae sunt principales parts orationis) quid
faciendum est?

R. Inflectendum est nomen per casus, and genera; and Verbum per Tempora and
Modos.

Q. Si sit nomen quale nomen est?

R. Est Substantivum vel Adjectivum; Proprium vel Apellativum, quod dicitur
Commune.

Q. Quid est Substantivum?

R. Est quod nihil addi postulat ad suam significationem exprimendam.

Q. Quid est Substantivum Proprium.

R. Est quod rem uni individuo propriam significat, and est triplex, Praenomen,
Nomen, Cognomen.

Q. Quid est Substantivum Communes seu Apellativum?

R. Est quod rem multis communem significat.

Q. Quot accidunt nomini?

R. Septem, declinatio, genus, numerus, casus; comparatio quae proprie est
Adjectivi: Species and Figura quae duo omnibus orationis partibus sunt communia.

Q. Quale Nomen est quoad Speciem and Figuram?

R. Est Primitivum vel Derivativum, Simplex vel Compositum.

Q. Cujus vel quotae declinationis?

R. Primae, secundae, etc.

Q. Vnde dignoscitur declinatio?

R. Ex Genitivo Singulari.

Q. Quomodo inflectis?

R. Inflecto sic, etc.

Q. Ad quam regulam specialem pertinet?

R. Ad primam, secundam, tertiam, etc.

Q. Quomodo s^is?

R. Quia non crescit, acute crescit, vel graviter crescit in Genitivo.

Q. Cujus Generis est?

R. ^st M. F. N. C. D. G.

Q. Si sit Substantivum Proprium, Quale est Proprium?

R. Est Proprium Nomen. M. G. sc. Dei, Viri, Fluvii, Mensis, Venti: vel F. G.
sc. Deae, Feminae, Vrbis, Regionis, Insulae.

Q. Cujus Casus, Numeri and Personae est haec dictio?

R. Nominativi, Genesis etc. Singularis vel Pl. Numeri, and primae, secundae,
tertiae Personae.

Q. Quare est talis Casus?

R. Praecedit Verbum (si sit Nom.) sequitur Verbum (si sit Acc.) Vocativus est
quoniam alloquitur. Regitur^ Verbo, Adjectivo, etc. Est posterius duorum
Substantivorum, diversae, ejusdem significationis. Significat laudem, vel
vituperium rei. Significat instrumentum, causam, modum rei. Significat spatium
l^ci: Ponitur absolute in Ablativo. Significat speciem temporis. Est Nomen
pretii. spatium Loci in quo. ad quem. a quo, per quem. Per quam regulam? Recita
regulam.

Q. Quale Adjectivum est hoc quoad significationem?

R. Est proprium, quod affectionem uni individuo peculiarem significat. Est
Commune quod affectionem multis communem significat.

Q. Quale Adjectivum est quoad inflexionem?

R. Est trium articulorum vel trium terminationum.

Q. Cujus Casus, generis and numeri est?

R. Est, etc.

Q. Quare?

R. Consentit cum Substantivo.

Q. Cujus gradus Comparationis est?

R. Est Positivi, Comparativi, Superlativ^.

Q. Quomodo comparatur?

R. Sic, durus, durior, durissimus.

Q. Quotuplex est gradus Comparationis?

R. Est duplex, Regularis and Irregularis.

Q. Quid est Pronomen?

R. Est pars orationis declinabilis vicem nominis supplens, qua in demonstranda
aut repetenda re aliqua utimur.

Q. Quotuplex est Pronomen?

R. Est duplex Substantivum and Adjectivum.

Q. Quaenam and quot sunt Pronomen Substantiva and Adjectiva?

R. Substantiva sunt quatuor, Ego, tu, sui and quid; reliqua sunt Adjectiva.

Q. Quot sunt species Pronominum?

R. Sunt tres, 1. Primitiva, quae and alio respectu demonstrativa vocantur. 2.
Relativa, quae referuntur ad vocem antecedentem. 3. Derivativa quae Possessiva
dicta sunt, excipe Nostras and Vestras, quae sunt Gentilia, and Cujas quod est
nomen Gentile.

Q. Quale pronomen est hoc in praelectione tua?

R. Est Primitivum, Derivativum, vel Relativum: concordat cum Antecedente,
Genere, Numero, and Persona.

Q. Cujus generis sunt omnia pronomina?

R. Sunt omnis generis.

Q. Quale genus Verbi est hoc?

R. Est Activum, Passivum, Neutrum, Deponens.

Q. Quomodo inflectis?

R. Inflecto sic.

Q. Cujus Modi est and Temporis?

R. Indicativi, Imperativi, Subjunctivi, Infinitivi; Et Praesentis, Imperfecti,
Perfecti, Plusquam perfecti, vel Futuri temporis.

Q. Quare est Subjunctivi Modi?

R. Regitura Conjunctione: and cohaereret cum Nominativo, etc.

Q. Quare est Infinitivi?

R. Posterius duorum Verborum ponitur in Infinitivo; uti Posterius duorum
Substantivorum in Genitivo.

Q. Quaenam aliae responsiones aliquando redduntur?

R. Hae sc. Imperativus deest. Imperativus caret prima persona, quia non
imperamus nobis metipsis. Caret praeterito. Caret supinis. Caetera desunt.

Q. Vnde formatur? Vnde derivatur? Vnde componitur? Quare mutatur Consonans vel
Vocalis?

R. Euphoniae gratia.

Q. Quae pars orationis est proxima sc?

R. Est Participium.

Q. Quid est Participium?

R. Est pars orationis inflexa casu, quae a nomine genera, casus, and
declinationem; a Verbo tempus and significationem, and ab utroque Numerum and
Figuram accipit.

Q. Quot accidunt Participio?

R. Septem, Casus, genus, declinatio, tempus, significatio, Numerus Figura, and
aliq. Comparatio.

Q. Quot sunt species Participiorum?

R. Quatuor, 1. Participium praesentis quod exit in, ans, ens, and iens. 2.
Futuri in rus, significationem habens Infinitivi Modi Activae vocis. 3.
Praeteriti quod exit in, tus, sus, xus. 4. Futuri in, dus, semper significans
passive.

Q. Quot sunt tempora Participiorum?

R. Tria, 1 Praesens, quod formatur a Praeterito, Imperfecto, ultima sylliba
mutata in ns. 2. Praeteritum quod formatur a posteriore supino addito S. 3.
Futurum, quod duplex est, 1. In, rus, and formatur a posteriore supino. 2. In,
dus, quod a participio praesenti formatur, inserto du, ante^s final^m; ut,
amans, amandus.

Q. Quot Participia veniunt ab Activis and Neutris.

R. Duo, Praesens and Futurum in rus.

Q. Quot participia veniunt a Verbis Passivis?

R. Duo, Praeteritum and Futurum in dus.

Q. Quot participia veniunt a Verbis Deponentibus?

R. Tria, Praesens, Praeteritum, Futurum in rus, and multis accedit quartum sc.
Futurum in dus.

Q. Quid sunt participia omnia?

R. Sunt Adjectiva: ac quaedam, eorum instar comparantur; ut, exspectatior,
exspecta^issimus: optatior, optatissimus, etc.

Q. Qualis est haec dictio sc?

R. Est prius vel posterius Supinum.

Q. Quid est haec particula sc?

R. Est Adverbium quod est pars orationis indeclinabilis, adjecta Nomini vel
Verbo ad explicandam ejus significationem.

Q. Quale Adverbium est?

R. Est Adverbium, Temporis, Loci, Quantitatis, Qualitatis, Numeri, Negandi,
Affirmandi, Demonstrandi, Ordinis, etc.

Q. Quot sunt accidentia Adverbio?

R. Quatuor, significatio, Comparatio, species and Figura?

Q. Quae particula est haec?

R. Est Conjunctio, quae est pars orationis invariabilis dictiones and
sententias conjungens. Copulat similes Ca^us, Modos, Tempora. Accidunt ei
Figura, Potestas, and Ordo.

Q. Quae particula est haec quoque?

R. Est Praepositio, quae est pars orationis indeclinabilis aliis partibus, vel
in compositione vel appositione praeposita. Ex quo fit, ut praepositiones sunt
vel seperabiles vel inseperabiles.

Q. Qualis est haec Praepositio?

R. Est seperabilis Praepositio.

Q. Quibus casibus inserviunt Praepositiones?

R. Quaedam Accusativo, quaedam Ablativo, and quaedam utrique casui inserviunt.

Q. Quid sunt Inseperabiles Praep^sitiones?

R. Sunt quae extra Compositionem, non sunt in (...).

Q. Quae est haec particula?

R. Est Interjectio, quae est pars orationis indeclinabili^, per se sententiam
perficiens, serviens vel Nom. Dat. Acc. aut Vocativo.

Q. Quaenam aliae responsiones aliq. reddi solent inter examinandum.

R. Variae; ut, Est Figurata Syntaxis vel Constructio. Est Graecismus. Est
Archaismus. Est Error Typographi.

PROSODIA Examined and Explained by QUESTION and ANSWER.
Q. WHat is Prosodia?

A. Prosodia is that part of Grammar which teaches the true Pronunciation,
Quantity, or Accent, of words.

Q. How is Prosodia divided?

A. 1. Into Tone or Tune. 2. Breathing (in Pronunciation.) 3. Time (for the
Pronunciation of a long or short syllable.)

Q. What is an Accent properly?

A. It is a way, law, mark, or manner of pronouncing, whereby a syllable is
either lifted up, or pressed down.

Q. How many fold is a Tone or an Accent?

A. It is threefold; 1. Acute, which acutes a syllable and lifts it up, and
the Acute Accent is marked with a little oblique, or overthwart stroke, or a
little line ascending toward the right hand thus'; as, in Domus. 2. Grave
Accent, which makes grave, and presses down a syllable, and is marked with an
overthwart or little oblique line, descending toward the right hand thus*; as,
in Docte. 3. A Circumflex Accent, which utters a syllable with a somewhat
longer note than a Grave Accent; it is made of both the Acute and Grave after
this fashion*; as, in Amare.

Q. What is an Apostrophus, which may be added to the Accents?

A. It is a Comma, or a certain part of a Circle p^t to the top of a Letter,
which shows, that the last Vowel of a word is wanting; as, Tanton', for
Tantone; loved, for loved.

Q. How many Breathings or Spirits are there?

A. Two; the rough or harsh Breathing, called Asper Spiritus, when a word
begins with H, and the mild or smooth Breathing, called Lenis Spiritus, when a
word begins with a Vowel without H.

Q. What Rules am I principally to observe concerning the Accents?

A. 1. That Monosyllables being either of a short or long ending by position
are acuted; as, Mel, fell, pars, pax; or being by nature long are circumflected;
as, Mos, spes. 2. Dissyllables having the former long by nature and the last
short are circumflected; as, Musa; but when the last is made long, the
Penultima is acuted; as, Musae: in all others there is an Acute; as, Citus,
latus, solers, satur, etc. 3. Polysyllables having their Penultima long by
position are acuted; as, Camillus: but having it long by nature and the last
short, they are circumflected; as, Romanus, amare: except the Compounds of fit,
whose Vltima is acuted; as, Malefit, calefit, benefit, satisfit. The Penultima
being short, the Ante penultima is acuted; as, Dominus, dicere: except the
Compounds of Facio; as, Benefacis, malefacis, calefacis, frigefacit. The Vltima
being long, the Penultima is acuted; as, Sacerdos, amplecti: all others are
grave.

Q. But may there not be same Exceptions made on these Rules of the Accents?

A. Yes; For, 1. there are some for difference sake, that transpose the Accent;
as, the Adverb ^Ina, acutes the last, lest it might be taken for a Noun. So in
eo, alio, aliquo, puta for sicut, pone for post. Ergo the Conjunction, and Ergo
pro causa, etc. 2. Encliticks transfer their Accent unto the precedent
syllable; as, luminaque. So do the Parelca, dum, si, nam. But where there is a
manifest composition the Accent is not varied; as, Denique, utique, itaque,
undique, huccine, quisque; for in these the que is not an Enclitick: but ubique
and ubivis keep the accent. 3. Some are circumflected in the Vltima for
difference sake; as, Ablatives, Poeta, gloria, with these, nostras, vestras,
cujas, Arpinas, Ravennas, etc. Some in the Penultima; as, in such syncopated
words, Amasse, decresse, Deum pro deorum.

Q. What is Time or Quantity, being the third part of Prosodia?

A. It is the measure, which is as it were the while we take in pronouncing a
syllable, for a short syllable is pronounced quietly, and is but of one time,
and it is marked thus ^: and a long syllable is pronounced more leisurely, and
is of two times, that is, it takes twice as much to be pronounced as the short
syllable does, and it is marked thus.

Q. Of what do Feet consist?

A. Of syllables disposed or placed in a just or right order.

Q. What is a Foot?

A. It is the setting or placing together of two syllables or more, according
to the certain observation of the times, or measures of the syllables.

Q. How many sorts of Feet are there?

A. Two sorts, Feet of two and Feet of three syllables; there are also Feet of
four syllables, which may be omitted as needless.

Q. Which are the Feet of two syllables?

A. They are, 1. A Spondee, which consists of two long syllables. 2.
Pyrrichius, which consists of two short ones. 3. A Trochce, which consists of
the first long, and the last short: And, lastly, an lambus, which consists of
the first short and the second long.

Q. Which are the Feet of three syllables?

A. They are a Tribrachus, which consists of three short syllables. 2. A
Dactile, which consists of the first long and the two last short. 3. An
Anapest, which consists of the first short and the last long. The rest may be
omitted.

Q. Of what does a Verse consist, or what is it made up of.

A. Of Feet trimmed or well composed in a just and lawful number and order.

Q. What is a Verse?

A. It is a Speech bound to a just and lawful number of Feet.

Q. What must he first learn that is to make a Verse?

A. He must learn to measure it rightly by Feet, called Scanning.

Q. What is Scanning?

A. It is the lawful measuring of a Verse into several Feet.

Q. How many are the Figures of Prosodia or Meter that belong to Scanning.

A. They are, Synalaepha, Eclipsis, Synaeresis, Diaeresis, Caesura, Systole,
Diastole.

Q. What is Synalaepha?

A. It is a certain striking out of a Vowel or Dipthong in the end of a word,
when the next word begins with a Vowel or Dipthong: but heu, and o, ah, in,
proh, vah, hei, are never cut off or taken away; as, Et bis io, Arethusa, io
Arethusa vocabit, Ovid. But sometimes the Synalaepha is neglected; as, Et
succus pecori and lac subducitur agnis, Virg. Post habita coluisse samo, Hic
illius arma. But when Vowels and Dipthongs are not taken away, they are common;
as, first, short, Victor apud rapidum Simoenta sub Ilio alto.
Insulae Ionio in magno quas dira Caelaeno.
Long; as, Lament is gemituque and foemineo ululatu.
Ante tibi Eoae Atlantides absconduntur.
Long and short in this Verse:

Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio ossam.
Q. What is Eclipsis?

A. It is a Figure when m in the end of a word with the Vowel going before it
is cut off, by reason of the Vowel following; formerly also s was cut off; as,

A^boribus veteres decidere falcibu' (...).
Q. What is Synaeresis, called also Synecphonesis and Syn^zesis?

A. It is the contraction or drawing together of two syllables into one; as,
Seu lento fuerint alvaria vimina te^ta. This Figure happens often in the
Genitive Cases of Nouns in Eus; as, Thesei, Achillei, Vlyssei, for Thesei,
Ach^llei, Vlyss^i. And when the Vowels i^ and u are chan^ed into j and v
Consonants; as, parjete and tenvis, for pariete and tenuis. So likewise in all
these words that belong rather to Synaeresis than to a Syna^aepha; as, Dii,
Diis, iidem, iisdem, deinde, deinceps, proinde, deell, deero, decrit,
antea^^bulo, anteit, antehac, etc.

Q. What is the Figure Diae^esis or Dialysis?

A. It is when two syllables are made of one, cut nsunder or parted; as,
Stamina non ulli dissoluenda Deo, Tioull.

Q. What is Caesura?

A. It is when a short syllable in the end of a word and in the beginning of
the foot is made long.

Q. What is Sy^tole?

A. It is the ma^ing short of a long syllable; as, Matri longa dec^m tule^runt
sastidia Menses. Obstupui steterunque c^mae, etc.

Q. What is Diastole or Ectasis?

A. It is the making long of a syllable short by nature; as, Atque hic
Priamidem laniatum corpore toto, Virg. Exercet Diana choros.

Q. Which are the kinds of Diastole in Caesura?

A. They are, 1. Triemimeris, which after one foot does make a short syllable
long; as, Pectoribus inhians, etc. 2. Penthemimeris, which after two feet makes
a short syllable long; as, Omnia vincit amor, etc. 3. H^p^hemimeris, which
after three feet makes a short syllable long; as, Ostentans artem pariter
arcumque etc. 4. An Enemimeris, which after four feet makes a short syllable
long; as, Ille latus niveum molli fultus hyacintho. A Diastole happens often in
a Penthemimer, and Hepthemi^mer seldom in the rest.

Q. What is the difference between Carmen and Versus?

A. Carmen implies the whole, whither an Epigram, an Eclogue, Satyr, or Ode,
etc. and Charisius interprets it (...). Versus signifies but one; as, Versibus
ex multis carmen componitur unum. But Carmen, or a Poem, may be finished in one
Verse; as, Mart. in two places; Omnia Cast^r e^^is, sic siet, ut emnia vendas.
Pauper videri (...), and est pauper.

Q. Which are the most usual sort of Verses?

A. They are, 1. An Hexameter, or Heroic, wherein the deeds done by Noblemen,
or Heroes, are let down with praise; and it consists of two sorts of feet, (i.
e.) Dactiles and Spondees, and of six of these feet in number, of which the
fifth place must be a Dactile, and the sixth a Spendee.

Q. What is the next more usual sort of Verse?

A. It is a Pentameter or El^giack, wherein lamentable Matters were at first
used to be set forth, and it consists of five f^et, being Dactiles and
Spondees, of four whole ones, and two long syllables in the third and sixth
place, which make up the fifth foot, but the fourth and fifth places must
always be two Dactiles.

Q. Which is the third usual so^^ of Verse?

A. It is an (...), of which (...) was the first Author, and this consists of a
Dactile, Spondee, and a long syllable and two Dactiles at last.

Q. Which is the fourth usual sort of Verse?

A. It is a Saphick, which consists of a Trochee, a Spondee, a Dactile, and at
list of two Trochees, to which an Adonick, consisting of a (...) and Spondee,
is added after three Verses.

Q. Which is the fifth usual sort of Verse?

A. It is a (...), whereof (...) was the first Author, or a Verse of eleven
syllables, c^^sisting of a Spondee, Dactile, and of three Trochees.

Q. Which is the sixth sort of Verse?

A. It is an Iambick, consisting of six Iambicks alone.

Q. Are these all the more usual sort of Verse?

A. Some add a Glyconick, which consists of a Spondee, and two Dactiles; as,
Sic te Diva potens Cypri. And some an A^chilochius Versus, which consists of
two Dactiles and a Syllable; but this and an Adonick are invented for the sake
of Tyrocinians, that, being exercised in them, they may proceed to Elegiacks.

Q. How is the quantity of syllables known, and by how many manner of ways?

A. The quantity of syllables is known two ways, (i. e.) first, by Rules,
secondly, by Authority or Examples.

Q. How many fold are the Rules?

A. They are twofold, 1. General, which may be observed in every syllable. 2.
Special, of, or concerning the last syllables.

Q. Which and how many are the General Rules?

A. They are these: 1. A Vowel before two Consonants, or a double Consonant in
the same word, and before one Consonant in the end of one word, and before
another in the beginning of another, is everywhere long by position.

Q. What do you mean by double Consonants, and how many are there of them?

A. I mean by a double Consonant, that which stands for two Let^ers or
Consonants; as, X, and Z, the first standing for, Cs, or, Gs; as, in Dux, Ducs,
Rex, Regs; the second, sc. Z, standing for Ds; as, Zephyrus, D^ephyrus: Some
also reckon J between two Vowels a double Consonant, as in Major and Pejor,
etc. except in the Compounds of Jugum; as, Bijuges, Quad^ijuges, Mul^ijuges,
which are short.

Q. Is a Vowel before two Consonants in the same word always long?

A. No; for if a Mute, and the Liquids L or R, are put in the same syllable
after a short Vowel, that Vowel in a Verse becomes common; as, in Patris,
Volucris, Locuples, Tenebrae, reflo, repleo, poples, etc. But the Vowel being
long, it is not changed; as, aratrum, simulacrum.

Q. What if the former word end in a short Vowel, the word following beginning
with two Consonants?

A. It is sometimes, though seldom, made long; as, Occult^ spolia and plures de
pa^e triumphos. Quid gladium demens ^omana stringis in ora? Mart.

Q. What is the third general Rule for knowing the first syllables?

A. A Vowel before another in diverse syllables of the same word, is everywhere
made short amongst the Latins; as, Deus, meus, etc. but among the Greeks it is
ever now and then made long.

Q. What other Exceptions have you, besides this Greek one?

A. The Genitive Cases in ius of the second declension of the Pronouns; as,
Vnius, illius, etc. where the Letter i is found common; but in alterius it is
always short, and in alius always long.

Q. What other Exceptions have you of a Vowel, not being short, before another
in the same word?

A. The Genitive and Dative Cases of the fifth declension, where e between the
double i is made long; as, facie^i; otherwise not; as, re^i, spe^i, fide^i;
except also fi in fio, which is long; as, Omnia jam fient, fieri quae posse
negabam; but if e and r follow together, fi is short; as, fierem, fieri: Di in
Diana is doubtful, but the syllable contracted of two is made long; as, exit
for exiit, petit for petiit; so obit, abit, of obiit and abiit.

Q. What is the fourth general Rule?

A. Every Dipthong among the Latins is long; as, aurum, neuter, musae, but prae
in composition, when a Vowel follows, is often made short; as, sudibusque
praeustis^.

Q. Which is the fifth general Rule?

A. Derivatives, or words derived of others, are allotted or have the same
quantity with their Primitives; as, a in amator, amicus, amabilis, is short,
because a in amo is short.

Q. Are there no Exceptions on this Rule?

A. Yes; for some few words, being derived of short ones, are made long; as,
vox vo^cis of voco; lex le^gis of le^go, etc. and there are some, on the
contrary, which being derived of long words are made short; as, Dux ducis of
du^co, dicax of dico, fides of fi^o, etc.

Q. Which is the sixth general Rule?

A. The quantity of compound words is known by the simple, and likewise the
quantity of simple words by the compounds; as, So^l^r, conso^lor, le^go,
perle^go, etc. except Innuba, pronu^ba, of nu^bo, and dege^ro, peje^ro, of
ju^ro; persidus, persidia, of si^dus; semisopit^s of so^pio, and vide^sis of
vide^, siquidem of si^. Ambi^tus the Participle, makes the last save one long;
the Noun makes it short. Idem of the Masculine Gender is long, of the Neuter
Gender short. These Compounds are also long, though their Simples are common,
ubi^que, ubi^libet, ibi^dem, quando^que, quando^cunque, except quandoquidem.

Q. Which is the seventh general Rule?

A. A Preposition in composition retains its quantity, unless a Vowel
following, or position hinder. A, de, prae, se e, are long Prepositions, and
di, unless in dirimo and disertus, and also the Latin pro; unless in these,
procella, prosugus, protervus, etc. and pro in procurro, prosundo, etc. but in
the Greek pro, it is always short. Re in r^sert, for interest, from the
Ablative re, of res, is long; but re, in resert, from the Preposition, is
short. The rest of the Prepositions, besides d, de, prae, se, e, di, and pro,
are short, if position does not hinder.

Q. Which is the eighth general Rule?

A. Every Preterperfect Tense of two syllables makes the first syllable long;
as, le^gi, e^mi; except in fidi of findo, bibi, dedi, seidi, steti, tu^li, and
every Supine of two syllables is long; as, mo^tum, la^tum, lo^tum, cre^tum;
except these, quitum, situm, litum, itum, rutum, ratum, datum, satum, and citum
of cieo, es: but ci^tum of cio, of the fourth Conjugation, has the first long.

Q. But what say you of Verbs doubling the Preterperfect Tense?

A. They have the first syllable short; as, pependi, tetendi. Preterperfect
Tenses and Supines of many syllables, have the same quantity in the first
syllable, as they had in the first of the Present Tense; as, vocavi, vocatum,
of voco; cla^mavi, cla^matum, of clamo: except posui, of po^no; solutum, of
so^lvo.

Q. Which is the last general Rule of knowing the first syllables?

A. It is the Authority and Examples of Poets, which we are to bring when the
quantity of words do not sall under none of these foregoing Rules.

Q. How may one know the quantity of the middle syllables, and what syllables
are reckoned to be the middle syllables?

A. Every syllable, besides the first and last, is a middle syllable; as, in
Fortitudine, For is the first syllable, and ne the last: the rest are middle
syllables. The middle syllables are known partly the same way as the first, and
partly by the Analogy of the Declensions and Conjugations; to wit, a, o, and e,
in the last syllable save one of the Genitive Case Plural, are made long; as,
musa^rum, domino^rum, die^rum. Likewise the last syllable sa^e one in words of
many syllables, increasing long, is made long; and in words increasing short,
is made short, according to the second and third special Rule. So a and o, in
the last syllables save one, in Dative and Ablative Cases Plural, are long, i
and u short in them; as, dua^bus, du^obus, dapibus, arcubus. So also a, the
sign of the first; e, the sign of the second; and i, of the fourth Conjugation;
are made long; e, of the third, short.

Q. Are there no Exceptions, but that a, of the first Conjugation must be long?

A. Yes; for do, and its Compounds, being of the first Conjugation, does make a
short; as, damus, circumdamus, dabis, etc. And rimus and ritis in the
Preterperfect Tense of the Subjunctive Mood, are everywhere short, but in the
Future Tense they are long in Prose, in Verse common.

Q. What say you of a and e, before the Tenses in bam and bo?

A. They are made long; but e, before ram, rim, to, is short; as, legeram,
legerim, legero; e, in the third Person Plural of the Preterperfect Tense of
the Indicative, in every Conjugation, is long; as, lege^runt vel lege^re, etc.

Q. What say you of the Preterperfect Tenses in vi and si?

A. They produce the last syllable save one; as, ama^vi, quie^vi, quae^i^vi,
divi^si, audi^vi.

Q. What say you of the last syllable save one of Adjectives in inus?

A. They make it long; as, Clandesti^nus, matuti^nus, vesperti^nus, etc. except
diutinus, cras^^^nus, pristinus, etc.

Q. What say you of the Penultima of Adjectives in anus, arus, orus, osus, and
of Adverbs in atim and itim?

A. They are all long; as, M^nta^nus, ava^rus, cano^rus, ^di^sus ^sti^tim,
viri^tim: except affatim, perp^tim, and statim, which are short.

Q. Which are the special Rules of the last syllables?

A. The first is of words that end in a, which are long; as, ama^, contr^,
erga^; except quia, ita, eia, postea, and the Adverb puta for videlice^; but
not puta^ from puto, putas. But Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative Cases in
a, are short, except Vocatives from Greek Nominatives in as, which are long;
as, Aenea: but Vocatives in a, from Nominatives in es, are short; as, Thyesta,
Oresta.

Q. But of what quantity are Ablatives in a, and Numerals of Nouns of Number in
ginta?

A. The Ablatives in a, are long; as, Musa^: but the Nouns of Number in ginta,
are common, and for the most part long.

Q. What quantity are words that end in b, d, t?

A. They are short; as, ab, ad, caput; but words in d; as, David, Bagud, and in
like words of strange Languages are rather produced.

Q. What quantity are words ending in c?

A. They are long; as, ac, sic, and the Adverb hic: but three in c are always
made short; to wit, lac, nec, donec; two are common, sac, and the Pronoun hic,
and the Neuter h^c, if it be not the Ablative Case.

Q. What quantity are words ending in e?

A. They are short; as, Mare, pen^, lege^, scribe^, except all words of the
fifth Declension in e, together with Adverbs derived thereof; and also the
second Persons Singular of the Imperative Mood Active of the second
Conjugation; likewise words of one syllable in e, are made long; except que,
ve, with these syllabical additions, ce, ^e, pt^, and ne, the Interrogative:
but ne, the Adverb, is long. Adverbs also in e, derived of Adjectives of three
Terminations, are long, except bene^ and male; but Adverbs derived of
Adjectives of three Articles are short; as, facile^, dulce^, suav. Lastly,
Words that are writ in Greek with the long e, called Eta, are long in every
Case, Gender, and Number; and e in Fame, being of old a word of the fifth
Declension, is long; as also e in ferme, sere, and ohe.

Q. Of what quantity are words that end in i?

A. They are long, except the last i in mihi, tibi, sibi, ubi, ibi, with their
Compounds; as, sicubi, a ibi, veluti, which are common; i in ibi^dem and
ubi^que, are always long; in utique short; in ubicunque doubtful: but nisi and
quasi are short, and all the Dative and Vocative Cases of the Greeks, whose
Genitive Case Singular ends in os; as, Phillis, Phillidos, Phillidi; Pallas,
Pallados, Palladi, etc.

Q. What quantity are words that end in l?

A. They are short, except nil contracted of Nihil, and Sol, and certain Hebrew
words in l; as, Michael, etc.

Q. What quantity are words that end in n?

A. They are long; as, Paean, etc. except forsan, sorsitan, an, tamen,
attame^n, ve^untamen; except also in, with its Compounds; as, exi^, subin,
dein, pro^n; and these words which are cut off by the Figure Apocope; as, men,
vidin', nostn', audin, nemon'. Also words in n, that increase short in the
G^nitive Case; as, Carmen, and Greek words in on, by the little o, and some
that end in in; as Alexin, and in in, by y; as, I^yn. And, lastly, Words that
end in an, of Nominatives in a; as, Iphyge^ia, Iphygenian, etc. but words that
end in an, of Nominatives in as, are made long; as, Aeneas, Aenean, etc.

Q. What quantity are words that end in o?

A. They are common; as, amo, virgo, etc. except Oblique Cases, (i. e.) Datives
and Ablatives in o, which are always long; as, ^^ic Domino, ab hoc templo, etc.
also Adverbs derived of Adjectives are long; as, tanto, quanto* etc. besides
sedulo, mutuo, crebro, sero, which are common. M^d^, dummodo, postmodo, and
quomodo, are always short. Cito, illico, ambo, duo, ego, nomo, scio, nescio,
cedo for dic, are scarce read long: Words of one syllable in o, are long; as,
do, sto, ergo, for the cause, and words writ by the Greek Omega; as, Sapph^,
etc.

Q. What quantity are words that end in r?

A. They are short; as, Caesar, torcular, per, vir, etc. but cor is read long
in Ovid. Far, lar, nar, ver, sur, cur, and also par with his Compounds are
long; as, Compar, impar, dispar, and words that end in Greek in er, with eta;
as, Ae^r, crate^r, characte^r, etc. are long; except Pater and Matter, whose
last syllable the Latins make short.

Q. How know you the quantity of words that end in s?

A. Words that end in s, have as many Terminations as there are Vowels, to wit,
as, es, is, os, us, and is.

Q. What quantity are words that end in as?

A. They are long; as, amas, musas, majesta^, bonitas, for as, etc. except Greek
Nominatives whose Genitives ends in adis vel ados; as, Ilias, Pallas, Ar^as, to
which add Anas; and except also Accusatives Plural of Greek Nouns of the third
Declension increasing; as, Crateras, Heroas, Phyllidas, Cyclopas, Troas, all
which are short.

Q. What quantity are words that end in es?

A. Long; as, Anchises, seeds, doces, patres; except Nouns in es of the third
Declension increasing short; as, Mile^s, sege^s, dive^s; but aries, abies,
paries, ceres, and pes, with its Compounds; as, Bipes, tripes, quadrupes, are
long. Es of the Verb sum, with its Compounds; as, potes, ades, prodes, obes, to
which join penes, and Greek Neuters Singular in es; as, Hippomanes, Cacoethes,
and also Greek Nominatives Plural, whose Nominatives Singular increases in the
Obliques, sc. in the Genesis and Dat. as, Arcades, Clyclopes, Na^ades, Troades,
Thraces, are short.

Q. What quantity are words that end in is?

A. They are short; as, Paris, panis, tristis, hilaris: except Dat. and Abl.
Plu. which are long; as, musis, mensis, dominis, templis; as also quis for
quibus, with words in is, that make long the last syllable save one of the
Genitive Case increasing; as, sa^^is, salamis, and also Greek and Latin words
that end in the Dipthong eis; as, Sim^eis, Pyroeis, Parteis, Omneis, with all
words of one syllable; as, Vis, lis, except the Nominatives Is and Quis, and
Bis in Ovid. Lastly, The second Person Singular of the Present Tense of the
Indicative Mood in the fourth Conjugation; as, audis, dormis; also sis and
velis, with the Compounds of both; as, praesis, malis, (...), are long. Futures
of the Subjunctive Mood in ris are common, though the Grammar says they are long.

Q. What quantity are words that end in os?

A. They are long; as, h^^os, nepos, dominos, servos, except compos, impos, and
os ^ssis, and Greek words by the little o; as, Delos, Chaos, ^allados,
Phyllidos, which are short.

Q. What quantity are words that end in us?

A. They are short; as, Famulus, regius, tempus, amamus; except words that end
in us, making long the last syllable save one of the Genitive Case; as, salus,
tellus; also all Nouns of the fourth Declension are long, except the Nominative
and Vocative Cases Singular and Dative and Ablative Case Plural of that
D^clension; likewise words of one syllable in us are long: and lastly, Greek
words by the Dipthong ous, are long; as, Amanthus, Supphus, Clius, Panthus,
except the Compounds of p^us; as, Oed pus, P^lypus, which are short; but
Melampus and Tripus are long, as also us in Jesus.

Q. What quantity are words that end in u?

A. They are all long; as, Ma^u, genu, amatu, diu.

Q. What qu^ntity are words that end in is and y?

A. They are short; as, Chelys, Tiphys, Capys, Libys, T^phy, M^ly.

Instructions to Tyrocinians for the Composing of a Theme.
THemes, or the Wise Savings of Learned Men, which are used to be given to
School boys, for the exercising of their Faculties, are two fold: 1. Chreiae,
wherein the bare knowledge of a thing, without either injunction or persuasion
to it, (yet useful) is proposed; as, Death is common to all. Life is short, but
A^t long, if we make use of our Time. 2. Gnomae, wherein are enjoined things
either to be performed, or omitted and avoided; as, Do all things with
deliberation. Go not too far in any thing; or too much of one thing is good for
nothing. Meddle not with Edge-tools. Halt before a Cripple. Cut your Cloak
according to your Cloth, etc. In these two parts, (to wit) Chreiae and Gnomae,
four things especially are to be observed: 1. The Propositio, which plainly
contains in clear words the sum of that we are about to speak of. 2. The Ratio,
or state of the matter in hand, whereby we prove the Proposition to be true by
some Argument. 3. The Confirmatio, whereby we further back that Reason with
sufficient Arguments. In these two parts, we use these or the like Forms of
Speech: Nam, Enim, Erenim, Quippe, Nimirum, quid enim? etc. In the Consirmatio
we make use of Similies, Examples, and Testimonies. 4. The Epil^gus or
Conclusion, that consists of two parts: 1. An Anacephalaeosis, or brief
Repetition of what was spo^en. 2. A pathetick Conclusion, urging the Truth and
Necessity of what we affirmed, with the praise of the Author of the Saying.

The Forms of Speech used in the conclusion are, (...), Quare, Quamobrem, Quae
cum ita sint, etc. To these four parts some add an Exordium, or Preface, before
the Preposition; also a Confutation, or Answering of Objections after the
Confirmation and Amplification before the Conclusion: But a due observation of
the pre-mentioned will prove a Task hard enough to a Schoolboy, the rest are
needless Niceties.

For the Composing of Verses.
IN the Composing of Verses, we are first to observe, that every kind of Verse
will run better and more smooth, if the Feet (of which a Verse consists) be
linked together, as in this of Virgil: Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem.
But the Verse which altogether wants a Caesura, at least after the second or
third Foot, (especially an Iambick Senarius, Asclepiadick, Saphick, and an
Heroic,) yields a very unpleasant harmony; as, Aurea carmina, Juli scribi
maxim vatum.
But two Monosyllables coming together, may be accounted as a Dissyllable; as,
Qui scit quam quis amet qui per convivia currit.
Yet the last of the Monosyllables, or a word of two short syllables, must be
reckoned as part of the Polysyllables; as, Vinea quod primis fioret cum cana
rocemis.
Cursorem sext^ tibi Rufe remisimus hora.


An Hexameter runs more pleasant, and carries a better sound with it, which
begins with a Penthimimer, and ends in a word of two or three syllables; as, In
nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas.
Omnia vincit amor, and nos cedamus amori.
But let there be as few breaches and cuttings off by the Figures, Synelepha
and Eclipsis, as possible you can.

A Pentamete^ should end with a word of two syllables, and that either with a
Verb, as a Key shutting or concluding the Sentence, or with an Adjective;
neither is any Adjective to be placed here, unless meo, tuo, suo, but by no
means an impertinent Epithet. We must also have a care that a Penthimimer ends
a word; for, if otherwise, it will be a great fault, though we have in Catellus
some of this sort; as, Nec speraret linguam esse nec auriculam.


An Adonick runs smoother, and carries a greater grace with it, which consists
of two words, of which if the one be a Substantive, whose Adjective is
expressed in the precedent Verse, it seems the better, because the whole
series, as it were one body, is annexed. Also, a single monosyllable is seldom
used in the end of an Adonick, unless que, ne, ve, the enclitical Conjunctions,
besides one or two Examples in Horace; sometimes the first syllable in an
Adonick is cut off with the end of the preceding Verse, sometimes it belongs to
it without a Synalepha; as Hor. Labitur ripa jove non probante uxorius amnis.
Grospe non gemmis neque purpura venale nec auro.
But the^e are not to be imitated, polysyllables are commendable in the end of
a Phaleusick; as Horace, Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem.


Versus ^^enini are to be avoided, viz. those that have the same sound repeated
in the middle and in the end, which the best Poets are branded with; as Virgil,
Trajicit, i, verbis virtutem illude super^is.
Si ^rojae fatis aliquid restare putatis,


Lastly, Words that are too long or too short, too often, unp^easant, or harsh
Synalepha's, are not to be made use of; as in these, C^^turbabantur,
Constantinopolitani; Tu in me ita es, him! in te ut ego sum, ac tu ^e ^bi ama,
ut te eg^ (...) hic jam.

A Brief Advice touching Epistles, Orations and Declamations.
Of Epistles.
AN Epistle is a Writing wherein we talk with an a^^ent Friend as tho pr^s^nt.

All Epistles consist of th^se ^^ur Accidents or Parts: 1. Compellation. 2. A
Sub^^^iption. 3. A Date. 4. A Supers^^ipt^^n.

All Epistles ought to be written in ^ Plain, Brief and Pithy Style, without
A^ectation, or Per^phra^s; and Tautologies a o^ded, by varying the Phrase when
the same Expression is to be used.

Epist^^s are either, 1. Demonstrative, consisting of the pra^^e or di^praise
of a thing. 2. Deliberative, which ^end to pers^^ade or dissuade. 3. Judicial,
in which we accuse or def^nd.

Demonstrative Epistles are either, 1. Narratary, consisting of Relations. 2.
Congratul^tory, expressing our joy for the good befallen our Friends. 3.
Lamentory, expressing our grief for our own or Friends Calamity. 4.
Eucha^istical, praising the Courtesy received. 5. Officious, when we offer our
service to our Friend in any business unrequested. 6. Disputatory, propounding
the Question, Occas^on, Opinion or Judgment of others or our own. 7.
Deprecatory, when we confess our Faults.

Deliberative Epistles are, 1. Swasory, or Hortatory, when we persuade, or
earnestly ^xhort our Friend. 2. Cons^latory and Monit^^y, which consist of
Comfort and Advice to our Friend. 3. Commendatory, containing the
Recommendation of some Friend and his Worth. And, 4. (...), when we inf^^uate
our selves into one's favor, t^ll^ng our request.

Judicial Epistles are, 1. (...), or Objurga^ory, consisting of Repr^hensions.
2. (...), when we apologize for a ^rime imputed. 3. (...), when we upbra^d the
ingrat^^ue of a Friend.

Of Orations.
An Oration is a Discourse wherein we praise or dispraise, persuade or
disswa^^, prove or disprove. Orations (like Epistles) are ei^^er D^monstrative,
D^l^berative, or Judicial; for which let the Philologer consult Demosthenes,
Ta^ly, or Liv^'s Orations.

Of Declamations.
There be four kind of Declamations: 1. (...), when we enquire, whether or by
whom a Fact was committed; as, An Clodius occide^i^ (...)? 2. Finitive. when we
enquire whether the Cr^me imputed be such, as, if a Pers^^n be slain, whether
the Fact be Murth^r, Manslaughter, Chance medley, or Se defenden^o. 3.
Qualitative, when we enquire concerning the quality of an Action, whether
profitable or unprofitable, just or unjust. This is either, 1. Negotial,
wherein we deliberate concerning Matters public or private. 2. Judicial,
wherein we, plead the lawfulness o^ justice of a past Action. 3. Legal, wherein
the state or case especially consists in the meaning of a Law. 4. Quantitative,
wherein we enquire of the hainousness of an offense; (...)* whither of the two
Crimes be the great^r. Those that will dive farther into this sort of Exercise,
let them read Quinti^ian's Decla^^tions, and Seneca's Controversies.

FINIS.

