The Earls of LINDSEY and CUMBERLAND'S Petition to the KING AT YORK, In
behalf of the PARLIAMENT, June 2. 1642. And his Majesty's gracious Assent
thereunto.

With his Majesty's Commission for the confirmation of Truce, made between his
Majesty and the King of Casteele, the two Kings of East India, D. Michael de
Loronha, Conde de Linhares, Viceroy of Goa, and William Methwold President of
the English in East India.

In all the Lands, Places, Castles, Ports, and Coasts of Africa, Guyne, Bine,
the Island of Saint Thome, etc. and beyond Gape bona Speranza in the Dominions
of the King of Portugal.

London Printed for J. Harrison, June 11. 1642.

His Majesty's gracious Assent to the Petition of the Earls of Lindsey and
Cumberland.
THe Earl of Lindsey and Cumberland petitioned to his Majesty both, to return
to his Parliament (as was expressly intimated in their Petition) and humbly
desired his Majesty to assent unto those Propositions which were sent by the
Parliament: who declare therein, That they had nothing in their desires and
thoughts more precious and of higher esteem (next to the honor and immediate
Service of Almighty God) then the just and faithful performance of their duty
to his Majesty, and their fidelity to the Kingdom? These said Earls were sent
for from York to attend the House the precedent Week; but they showed the
Messenger of the House special Warrants under his Majesty's Hand, expressly
commanding them to the contrary, and that should attend his Majesty there, till
his further pleasure should be declared unto them.

But they being very sensible of the great inconveniences of this Kingdom, and
what irrecoverable danger those inconveniences may produce* if not prevented
before they grow to maturity, after a deliberate observation of the causes
thereof, did present their dutiful Petition to his Majesty in the posture as
well of all sincerity as humility: That out of his Princely Wisdom, for the
establishing his own Honors, and Safety, and gracious tenderness of the
welfare and security of his Subjects and Dominions, He would be pleased to
return to his Parliament, as being the most necessary and principal means
(through Gods blessing) of removing those jealousies and differences, which
have unhappily fallen betwixt him and his People, and as the effectual way to
procure both to his Majesty and to the Parliament, a constant course of their
Peace and Happiness.

His Majesty took the Petition very graciously, and desired some time of
serious consideration thereon, and then he would give them an effectual
Answer. For all the distractions, and distempers of this Kingdom are derived
only from his Majesty's absence, and if he would be so condescentious as to
return, questionless these suspicions would be expelled, and better opinions
entertained. And it is very requisite, That the great affairs of this
Kingdom, may not be concluded or transacted by the advice of any private Man,
or by any unknown and unsworne Councellor; but that such matters as concern
State and the public accommodation of the Realm, are proper for the high
Court of Parliament, which is his Majesty's great and supreme Council, ought
to be debated, resolved, and transacted only in Parliament, and not elsewhere.
And such as shall presume to do any thing to the contrary, ought to be
reserved to the censure and Judgment of Parliament, and such other matters of
State as are proper for your Majesty's Privy Council ought also to be debated
and concluded by such of the Nobility and orhers, as shall from time to time be
chosen for that place, by approbation of both Houses of Parliament; and that no
public Act concerning the Affairs of the Kingdom, which are proper for your
Privy Council may be esteemed of any validity, as proceeding from the Royal
Authority, unless it be done by the advice and consent of the Major part of
the Council, attested under their Hands.

And without doubt His Majesty will condescend to so fair a proposition, for
the Parliament is his high and chief Court and Council; wherefore it is very
expedient, that the doubtful matters of State should be descided, discussed,
and concluded by that high Senate.

His Majesty has also sealed with his Commission, and concluded, That the
convention of Truce made between D. Micha^l de L^ronha, Conde de Linhares,
Viceroy of Goa, and William M^thwold President of the English in East India,
shall be continued and kept between the Subjects of both Kings in East India,
and in all the Dominions of the most re^owned King of Portugal beyond Cap^
bona Speranza: and tha^ the Commissioners to be named by the said Kings, shall
in East India take Cognizance within thirteen years of the demands, which have
been or shall be by the Subjects and Vassals of both Kings for their commerce
in India aforesaid, that so a perpetual peace and confederation may be
confirmed and established by the said Kings, and between their Subjects on both
sides. And because the commerce of free coming of the Subjects of the King of
great Britain to the Coasts and parts of Africa, the Island of Saint Thome,
and other Islands comprehended under them, could not yet be agreed upon by
reason of the defect of the powers sent by the most renowned King of Portugal
to his Ambassadors, that by this debate, this present Treatise of Peace and
Amity between both Kings and their Subjects be not delayed* it is on both p^rts
concluded on, That in the Lands, Places, Castles, Ports, and Coasts of Africa,
Guyne, Bine, etc. the Island of Saint Thome, and other Islands comprehended
under them, wherein it shall appear, That the Subjects of Great Britain have
dwelt for trade of Merchandise, or have had trade or commerce there, in the
time of the King of Casteel^, or hitherto; there shall be no alteration or
change, neither shall they have any trouble or injury done them by the
Portugals, for that cause.

And if any Customs be to be demanded from the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain on any Cause in the Castles, Places, and Islands aforesaid, they shall
not be greater, or more grievous then those which shall be demanded from other
Nations in league with the King of Portugal. And the Subjects of the King of
Portugal wanting foreign ship^ for their Navigation, and Commerce to the
Coasts and Islands aforesaid may freely at their own pleasure hire the Ship; of
the Subjects of great Britain, and that Commissioners and Ambassadors shall be
named, by both Kings, who shall create and conclude concerning the commerce,
and free-comming to the Coasts, Islands, and Places aforesaid, which has been
demanded by the Commissioners of the King of Great Britain, for the Subjects of
their King, being persuaded out of the confidence of the ancient amity which
has been between the Predecessors of the same Kings, that the most renowned
King of Portugal will grant to no Nation whatsoever more ample Rights,
Immunities and Privileges, then he will grant to the Subjects of Great Britain.

FINIS.

