An Account of the late Great and Famous Victory Obtained over Two Thousand
High-Land Rebels, In the North of Scotland, by His Majesty's Forces, Commanded
by Sir Tho. Levistone, WITH A particular Relation of the Killing Five Hundred
of the Enemy, and the Taking of One Huodred Prisoners; of which Number, were
several Officers of Note.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

JUst now the Council received the following Account, by an Express from Sir
Thomas Levistone (who Commands a part of our Forces in the North) that he
having intercepted some Letters which discovered some Intriegues of the Rebels,
and the measures they designed to take; he immediately assembled his Forces,
which consisted of Eleven Hundred Men, and marched all Night after the Enemy,
who were to the Number of Two Thousand: And, in their March, were forced to
Ford a River up to their Armpits; Colonel Levistone, and other Officers, (to
encourage the Soldiers) went in first: Our Men came up to the Enemy before day,
and Attaqued them in their Camp; which was so great a surprise to them, that
they immediately fled; and, in pursuit, there were Killed about Five Hundred of
the Rebels, and One Hundred taken Prisoners, (among which were many
considerable Officers of Note) with little loss on our side. The Prisoners gave
Sir Thomas an account, That they expected daily to be joined by a great many
more; of whom the Colonel designs to go in pursuit of; and doubts not, but in a
very little time, to be able to give a very good account of them.

On Saturday advice was brought to Edenbrough, from the West, giving an
account, That a Ship Landed in Gallaway, near the Mouth of the Water of Oar,
sent from the late King James, from the Bay of Dublin, with Men, Arms, and
Ammunition, etc. they Landed some Men in the Night, undiscovered, who have gone
through the Country with several Letters from the late King James. The Country
People in that Place being in a posture of Defense, the next day seized the
Vessel in the River, with the Arms and Ammunition, etc. and Sixteen Officers,
who are sent for by the Council. This Ship carried but Four pieces of Cannon.

As the happy News, which almost daily arrives from Ireland, of the good
Success His Majesty's Forces meets with there, both by Sea and Land, is
sufficient to encourage the hopes all good Protestants, and Well-wishers to the
Interest of great Britain have, of a speedy and entire Reduction of that
Kingdom, to the subjection of the Crown of England; So the no less happy
Accounts we have received of His Majesty's Affairs in the Kingdom of Scotland
confirms all good Men in their Belief of the speedy and entire Settlement of
that Kingdom, in the true Foundations of Peace and Unity; notwithstanding the
Roman Catholics and other Jacobites, Enemies to the Interests of their
Majesty's, and these Kingdoms, by their no less Impudent than false and
scandalous Reports, which they daily spread abroad, with design to Poison the
Minds of many well-meaning People, and persuade them to the contrary: For as
hitherto Almighty God has blessed His Majesty, and His Arms with Success, in all
His no less Just and Righteous, than Great Undertakings; so we doubt not but He
will continue his Blessing unto Their Majesty's, and Their good Subjects, and
frustrate all the Designs of their Enemies. For a continuance of whose Blessing
is, and ought to be the Prayers of all good Men.

London, Printed for W. D. in Bartholomew's-Close. 1690.

THE SPEECH OF William Earl of Crawfurd. PRESIDENT To the Parliament of
Scotland. 1690.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I May say with Nehemiah, to the Nobles, Rulers, and rest of this Honorable
Assembly; The work before us is great, let us not be separated upon the Wall
one far from another, and our God will do for us, Our Religion,
Church Government, Public Safety, Laws and Liberties, are all at Stake; and
the Enemy is watching for our halting in our endeavors, for every one of them:
Yet if God countenance us, so that Duty be made plain, and we be helped to
follow it, we are under the Protection of a Prince, who is a great Judge where
our true Interest lies, and I am convinced, will frankly deal to us, whatever
upon a just Claim, we shall apply for.

His Majesty's Printed Instructions for last Session, are plain evidences of
His tender regard of His People, and contain greater Condescentions than we
have seen. or read of, in the Reigns of any of our Kings, for many Ages. But I
trust this new Dyer, will complete that Tranquillity, which we so impatiently
wish and wait for: And that we shall be engaged to say of His Majesty, as the
Queen of Sheba did of Solomon; Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in
thee, to set Thee on the Throne, because the Lord loved us, therefore made he
the King to do Judgment and Justice.

It were a suitable Return to His Majesty, for the great things He has done
for us, to repose an entire Trust in Him, and evidence a true Zeal for His
Service; which in this Crittical time, as it would be most satisfying, and
engaging to so generous a Prince: So it would be of notable advantage to His
and our Affairs.

Were it not a seasonable part to guard against Prejudices toward one another,
and when all is at Stake, to part with trivial differences, (our Enemies only
reaping advantage by them) and to employ our selves to the outmost, for the
Settlement of our Church, the Defense of the Kingdom, and the Enacting of other
good Laws, now under our Consideration: That we may comfortably and fully
partake, of the wonderful Deliverance God has wrought for us?

If in our last Session we had begun at the House of God, other things might
have framed better in our hands; has not the Church Suffered sadly by our
Differences? And have not our delays made the Work more difficult? The
Opposition at home, and Clamor abroad, had certainly been less, and many honest
suffering Ministers ere now had been relieved of their Pinches, if a greater
Dispatch had been made. But what if any remainig Obstacle should prove a real
Disappointment in the Establishing of our Church, would not the blame be lodged
at our own Door? Some are at the same Language that was spoken in Haggai's
days; The time is not come that the Lord's House should be built: To such I
shall give the Prophets Answer, It is time for you to dwell in your Cieled
Houses, and this House ly waste?

We have occasion with Ezra, to Bless the Lord God of our Fathers, that the
stop is not at the King's Door, but that he has put such a thing as this in
his Heart, to Beautify his House with that Model, which shall be suited to the
Inclinations of his People, which I trust will be squared to the Pattern that
was showed in the Mount, and not merely regulated by Humane Policy.

We are threatened by a Foreign Enemy, our Country is Infested at home, and the
Kingdom sadly exposed to many great Inconveniences: What should become of us,
if His Majesty withdrew His special Protection, and we were left to the rage of
our Enemies? Though our Church were Settled to the greatest Advantage, and our
other Grievances likewise Redressed, the Nation cannot be safe, without a
supply suitable to the present Exigency.

It is matter of heavy Regrate, that so many are Groaning under the load of
Forfeitures and Fines, and His Majesty willing to relieve them, and as yet no
Issue put to those desirable Purposes.

May the Wisdom and Goodness of God, so Overruled all our Counsels, that we be
not imposed upon by false Notions of things: Let neither Partiality on the one
side, nor Passion on the other, either keep up former Differences, or give a
rise to new ones, lest it be said of us, as was spoke by Ezra upon the like
occasion; And after all this is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our
great Trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and have given us such Deliverance as this, should we again
break thy Commandments?

What my Lord Commissioner spoke the other day, was delivered to such
advantage, that any enlargment I could make on it, would be like a rash touch
of a Pencil, by an unskilful hand, upon a complete Picture; So I forbear every
thing of that kind.

It is beyond Debate, that in this Honorable Assembly, the Hearts of a great
many are very warm to His Majesty, and that His, tho at a distance from us, is
no less filled with thoughts of Favor to us: So if the Result of our Counsels
be not comfortable to our selves, and of National Advantage, I am afraid, the
present oppertunity of doing well, if neglected, shall prove a heavy Charge
against us, in the Day of our Accounts.

But as the Lord's hand has been eminently seen in every step of our late
escape from Popery, and begun Reformation; So I trust the Head-stone shall be
put on with Shouting, and we shall in the Issue be forced to acknowledge, This
is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our Eyes.

FINIS.
Printed at Edinburgh: And Reprinted at London by George Croom, at the
Blue-Ball in Thames Street. 1690.


