THE Country-Man's Treasure, SHOWING The NATURE, CAUSE, and CURE of all
Diseases incident to CATTLE; WITH Proper Means to prevent their common Diseases
and Distempers. Being very useful Receipts as they have been practiced by the
long Experience of Five and Thirty years, and all Approved of. Fitted for the
use of all Farmers and others that deal in CATTLE.

By JAMES LAMBERT.

With a TABLE of the several Diseases therein contained.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Twyford in Vine Court Middle Temple. 1676.

depictions of cattle, sheep, and hog

TO THE READER.
I Do here present to thy view the several Diseases incident to Cattle, which
in Number I have computed to be about Sixty and One; I have also showed you the
Nature of every Disease, and how you may make your Observations to know them,
and to distinguish one Disease from another; and afterward the immediate way
of the Cure, which is done with very little Charge, the Medicines being both
Plain and Safe, and easily obtained: as also how to prevent any growing
Distemper, which by the alteration of the Place, or other accidental Causes do
too often happen. These Medicines I have practiced with very good success for
above this Five and Thirty years; and now do here freely communicate them to
all my C^untry men, not doubting (by Gods-Blessing on the Means) they may
obtain the good end, which is wholly designed by

Your Friend JAMES LAMBERT.

THE TABLE.
A Special Remedy for sore Eyes in Bull, Ox, Cow, or Calf. Page 1 Another for
the sore Eyes. 2 For the Garget in the Head. 3 For the Garget on the Tongue and
Throat. 4 Another for the same. 6 For the Garget in the Head and Throat, as
some do call the Murrain, or Long-sought. ibid A special Cure for the Murrain
in a Beast. 8 Another excellent Cure for the Murrain in Ox, Cow, or Calf. 9 A
good Receipt to take off an Anberry or Wart on any Beast. 10 A good Receipt for
the Madness in the Head of Bull, Ox, or Cow. 11 For the Garget in the Maw. 12
For the Yellows in the whole Body. 13 For the Worm in the Tail. 14 For the
making of Blend-water. 15 Another good Receipt for the Blend-water. ibid. A
good Receipt for the Water-Murrain. 16 A good Receipt for the Rising in the
Body and Swelling behind. 17 Another good Receipt for the Rising in the Body.
18 For the Towering Long-sought, that is, Hide-bound. 19 For the scowring
Long-sought that stinketh 20 A good Receipt for a Beast that cannot Piss
without pain. 21 For the swelling Foul 22 For the Foul betwixt the Claws that
comes by Sand, Stub or filth of the Earth. 23 A good Receipt for the Evil. 24
For the Speed in the hinder parts. 25 For the Pantas. 26 A good Receipt for the
biting of a Shrew-Mouse. 27 Another good Receipt for the Shrew-Mouse. 28 For
the stinging of Adders and Scorpions, and the biting of a Hedgehog or Shrew.
29 For the Swelling of an Oxes Cod. 30 For an Ox or Cow that has lost their
Appetite. ibid. A Remedy for the loss of the Cud. 31 For the Lungs Growing of
any Beast. 32 For to kill Worms in Ox, Cow, or Calf. 33 A good Receipt for a
Beast that is Dewboulne at the Spring, or in Eddige-time. ibid. A good way to
breed Milk. 34 For the Withering of a Cow. ibid A good Receipt for a Beast that
makes Blend-water that comes by a strain, and issues through the Bladder. 35
For to get a Beast a Stomach when he is weary and tired. 36 For the hardness or
swelling of a Bull or Oxes Pisle that is bruised by Riding. 37 For Forbaiting
or a swollen Foot of any Beast. ibid. For the stenching of Blood of any Beast cut
or hurt, and how to make a Salve to heal it. 38 For to make a Cow to take the
Bull by Milk. 39 For to keep an Ox sound. 40 For the Fever in a Beast. ibid.
For the Scab on a Beast. 41 A good Receipt to purge Beasts. 42 For a dry
Hoarsness or Caugh in a Beast. 43 Another good Receipt for purging of Cattle.
44 Another good Receipt for the Fever in Beasts both in Winter and Summer.
ibid. For an inward sickness in Cattle. 45 An excellent Cure for a Burn in a
Bulls Yard, or in a Cows Matrix. 46 For a sucking Calf that scowreth. ibid, For
a Bull that shedeth his Seed. 47. For the Disease in Beasts called the Sturdy,
or turning Evil. ib. For a Caugh or shortness of Breath in Cattle. 49 For to
kill Lice in any Beast. ibid. For the Milting of a Beast. 50 For the Rottenness
in a Beast. ibid. For the Clush and swollen Neck. 51
THE COUNTRY-MANS TREASURE FOR The CURE of CATTLE.
I. A special Remedy for Sore Eyes in Bull, Ox, Cow, or Calf.
TAke six Egg-shells and put the Meat clean forth, and lay the shells betwixt
two Tile Stones, and lay the Stones and the Shells in the hot glowing Fire, and
burn them well, and cover the edge of the Tiles with Clay for to keep the Ashes
from the Shells, and when they are burnt, pound them to Powder, and searse them
finely, and with a Quill blow the Powder into the Beasts Eye, and it will mend
presently, and blow it in three times a day: Also take white Sugarcandy, and
pound it small, and blend it with the aforesaid Powder of the Shells and
May-butter, or for want of that, take other fresh Butter without Salt, and work
it into a Salve, and anoint the Eyes Morning, Noon and Night, and it will help
them.

II. Another for the Sore Eyes.
TAke Mutton-bones and burn them well, and pound them to Powder, and searce
them very well, and take burnt Allom and Tutte, and white Sugarcandy, and the
juice of Ivy, and it will help them that has a Fleam that comes by a chaff
or stroke. Also take the Marrow of a Goose-wing, and it will help them: Also
take white salt and burn it in a Dock or wet Cloth, and take the middle Core of
it and mix it with the Juice of Saladine, and it will help them.

Also there is a Disease on the Eyes, which is called the Inflammation of the
Eyes, which comes by blood, and breeds Choler and Blindness; sometimes the
Beast sees a little, and sometimes not at all.

The Cure.

You must first Cord them in the Neck, and blood them in the Temples under the
Eyes, and let them bleed very well, and put in some burnt Allom and live Honey
mix't together every day, and they will mend for certain. Approved.

III. For the Garget in the Head.
FOr the Garget in the Head, you must find it out by the swelling in their Eyes
and Lips; their Eyes will be swelled up, and the Face and Cheeks will be
swelled; and you must look into their Mouths for blisters on their Tongues, and
if there be any, you must break them, and if the Tongue be swelled you must
pull it forth and look under it, and if there be no blisters, then you must
take your Knife and slit it underneath the Tongue an Inch long for to let forth
the Poison, and wash it with Vinegar for the present, and within an Hour, then
give them three penniworth of the Powder of Fenigrick, Turmerick, long Pepper,
Liquoris-powder and Anniseeds in a quart of strong Ale or Beer Milk-warm. And
for to prevent this, blood them well at the Spring and at the Fall, and when
you Blood them, give to every Beast some Rhue in a pint of Ale or Beer, if they
be never so well Milk-warm, and they will do well. Approved of my self.

IV. For the Garget on the Tongue and Throat.
THis Disease sometimes comes of Blood, and sometimes of eating of poison
Grass, as Dogs-bane, Goose-foot, Helmet flowers, all these are poison either to
Beast or Swine.

The Cure.

You must first blood them in the Neck, and if they be swelled under the Jaws
against the Throat-Bowl, then you must pull forth his Tongue, and cut a Vein
that lies under the Tongue, and cut the Skin two inches long under the Tongue,
length-way for to let forth the Blood and Water, and wash the Tongue with
Vinegar, Salt and burnt Allom: and for the out side that is swelled you must
slit the Hide just against the swelled place four Fingers broad every way, and
then put in a good handful of Speargrass, Salt and Butter, and stitch some of
the hole up again, then take a lump of the blewest Clay, as much as a
Mustard-ball, and boil it with old Urine, and the middle Green Bark of young
Elder, and a good handful of Salt, and let them boil a quarter of an Hour or
more, and put in a little reased Bacon, and boil them all together until they
be thick like Pap, and then bath the Beasts Face from the Ears downwards, and
stroke it downwards toward the Slit as hot as you can endure, the hotter the
better, and bath the Beast so three times a Day; and when the swelling is
abated, them take Tar, fresh Butter and Beeswax, and anoint the sore place,
and it will be well presently by Gods help. Approved.

And to prevent this Disease, you must do by them as I said in the former
Chapter: Blood them and give them some Rhue and strong Ale or Beer compounded
together, and give it them Milk-warme.

V. Another for the same.
TAke the blewest Clay that you can get, and take Hogs Grease and a little
Grunsel, and boil them in new milk until the Herbs be well boiled, and put in a
handful of Salt, and bath the Beast as hot as you be able for to put in your
Hand, but first let blood in the Neck, and give them three penniworth of
Fenigrick, Turmerick, Long-Pepper, Anniseeds, Liquoris, all in equal Portions,
but three Pence in all; and give it them in a quart of strong Ale or Beer
Milk-warm, and they will mend presently by Gods help. Approved of my self. And
for the preventing of it you must Blood them in the Spring and Fall, and it
will prevent them, giving them some Rhue in strong Ale when you blood them.

VI. For the Garget in the Head and Throat, as some do call the Murrain
Long-sought.
THis Garget is Cosen German to the Murrain, for they will swell and be puck
under their Jaws like a rotten Sheep, their Cheeks will be swelled up to their
Eyes, they will not foam at the Mouth, but they run water very much, and
sometimes their Tongue will be swelled at the Root, and yet there will be no
blisters, but only the Venom that comes of an ill distemper of Stomach, and so
fumeth into the Head, and if it be not staid, it will return to the Heart, and
all over the Body. The right name of this Disease is called the Mountain Evil
among Beasts.

The Cure.

First let them Blood in the Neck Vein both sick and sound, and give to every
Beast to drink both sick and sound a pint of old Urine, and a good quantity of
Hens-dung laid in steep Eight or Ten Hours, and grind for every Beast a handful
of Rhue, and put to the Hens-dung and Urine when it is strained, and give it to
the Beasts both sick and sound, but more to the sick, and less to the sound,
and it will cure the sick and prevent the sound. Approved.

And for to keep them sound, if the year time be dangerous, you must take Time
and lay it in steep in White Wind Vinegar, and the Beasts own Water, and a
handful of Salt, and blend with the Vinegar, and rub their Mouth and. Tongue
very well, and put the rest down the Beasts Throat, and it will keep their
Stomach, and preserve their Health, but Blood both at the Spring and Fall of
the Leaf, and give them Rhue as aforesaid.

VII. A special Cure for the Murrain in a Beast.
THis Disease comes many several ways; first it comes of rankness of Blood
or Feeding, or from the corruption of the Air, or the infection of other
Cattle; you may find this Disease by their Carriage, That is, they will foam at
the Mouth, and blow very thick and short, and their Heart and Lights will beat
very sore, and sometimes their Face and Chaps will swell, and their Eyes will
run with water.

The Cure.

First let all your Beasts Blood, both Sick and Sound, and give to the sick
some Rhue, Fetherfew, Sage, Hyssop, Time, Marjerom, Marigolds, Fennel, Tansey,
Lavender, and Spike, of every one a small handful, and boil all the Herbs in
Spring Water, and boil them from a Gallon to a quart, and then strain the
Herbs forth, and put to for every Beast a pint of strong Ale to the Juice, and
put to the Juice and Ale some long Pepper and green Anniseeds, Peace and
Bay Salt, Treacle, and Liquoris-powder and Butter; pound all these Spices and
put them to the Juice of Herbs, and give to the sick a full pint, and to the
sound half a pint, and they will mend for certain. Approved.

VIII. Another excellent Cure for the Murraine, in Ox, Cow, or Calf.
FIrst, you must take for every Beast a quart of old Wash, and a good quantity
of Hens-dung, and lay the Hens-dung in steep Eight or Ten Hours, and then
strain the Dung forth, and break to every Beast Two rotten Eggs into the
forenamed Juice, and give to every one two penniworth of Spikenard, and blend
all these together and give it the Beast; but first let Blood, both sick and
sound, and separate the sick from the sound, Blood and Drench both Horses and
Swine, for they are both apt to take the Disease. Bury the Dead Carrion deep in
the Ground, that the Dogs cannot pull it forth for to feed on it, for they are
those that carry the Desease from one place to another, and be careful where
you lay the Murrain Hide of an Horse, or how a man does take off the Hide while
the Beast is hot, for it is infectious, the safest way is to bury the Beast,
the Hide and all, for that is the best way, and by Gods help they will be well
again presently.

IX. A good Receipt for to take off an Anberry or Wart on any Beast.
THis Anberry comes of Blood, and is a spongie kind of Flesh, full of Blood
and Water, and grows most commonly on young Beasts betwixt one year old and
four.

The Cure.

If it be of any bulk, so that you can tie any thing about it, take ten
Horse-hairs and tie them about the Wart as hard as you can, and once in eight
days you will see it fall away, and then you may heal it up with unslack't Lime
and Honey, and if it be flat, then you must take it off with a hot Iron, and
heal it up as is said before; and if it be in such a place, as among Sinews and
Veins, then you must eat it away with Rosulger or Mercury, and then stop the
hole with Flax and the white of Eggs for two days, and then heal it up with the
Powder of unslack't Lime and Honey, and it will do well. Approved of my self.

X. A good Receipt for the Madness in the Head of Bull, Ox, or Cow.
FOr the madness in the Head, it proceeds from Blood.

The Cure.

First cord them in the Neck, and Blood them in the Temples under the Eyes, and
in the Ears, and let them bleed very well, and give them Fenigrick, Turmerick,
Long Pepper, and green Anniseeds, all alike in Portions, and but three Pence in
the whole, and the Juice of Rhue, or else very small Grains, and put all
together, and give it them in a quart of strong Ale or Beer Milk-warm, and give
the one half of the thinnest in at their Nostrils, and the rest at their Mouth;
this Disease is easily found, for they will reel as they go, and set their Head
into the Heck, or against a Wall or a Gate, and two men can hardly stir them.
And thus much for this Disease, for I have approved it.

XI. For the Garget in the Maw.
FOr the Garget in the Maw, you may perceive it by their drooping and heaviness
in their Head, and hanging down their Head and Ears, their Heart will beat very
sore, and many times they will be very Costive in their Body, and will not eat
any thing, but sit continually.

The Cure.

Let them Blood in the Neck-Veine, and let them bleed very well, and then draw
your Cord, and take Rhue, Plantane, Southernwood, Wormwood, Shepherds-purse,
Smalledge, Calewort, if you can conveniently get them, or the most part of
them, every one half a handful, bruise them very small, and take a handful of
Hens-dung, and lay it in steep in a Pint of old Wash eight Hours, and then
strain forth the Hens-dung, and put the Herbs and the Wash together, and put a
full quart of strong Ale to the Herbs and Wash, and set them on the Fire, and
boil the one half away, and then strain them over again and put in an ounce of
Treacle, a spoonful of the Juice of Garlic, and some Anniseeds, and some
Liquoris-powder, blend all together and give to the Beast Milk-warm. This is
special good for the Murrain, or for any Garget or Long-sought whatsoever, it
will cure them by Gods help. Approved

XII. For the Yellows in the whole Body.
THis Disease is a forerunner of all Diseases, and is the soonest found out,
for they will be Yellow in their Ears, Eyes, and in the Tail end, and
sometimes all over the Body.

The Cure.

You must blood them in the Ears and in the Tail very well, and put some Salt
in their Ears, and rub them betwixt your Hands when they are blooded for to
make them for to bleed, and then give them two handfuls of Salt down their
Throat dry over Night, and in the Morning give them Fenegrick, Turmerick, long
Pepper, and Anniseeds and Liquoris, but two pence in all, the whole made in
Powder and given them in a quart of Ale Milk-warm, is very good for the
overflowing of the Gall. Approved.

XIII. For the Worm in the Tail.
FOr the worm, you may presently perceive it by the Tail, for sometimes the
Hair will go off where the Worm lies, and most commonly the Joints some of
them is eaten asunder, which you may feel knock one besides the other. Many one
does conceive that when a Beasts Tail is soft below toward the end, they have
the Worm, they are merely mistaken, for every Beast has so.

The Cure.

You must be sure that you slit the Skin of the under side above the decayed
Joint, just against the Vein, and prick the Vein and let it Bleed very well,
then take Garlic, Butter, and Salt, and bind it to and it will mend, and slit
their Gums against every Tooth, and rub them with Salt and they will grow fast.

XIV. For the making of Blend-Water.
THis Disease is, as some do call it, the Morehough; it is a Disease that
comes several ways: First it comes of Blood, and secondly it comes from the
Yellows, which is a Ringleader of all Diseases; and thirdly it comes by
change of Ground; the Ground being hard it breeds this Disease, which if they
have not help in Six days, they will be past help.

The Cure.

You must take a penniworth of Bole-armonick, and as much Charcoal-flower as
will fill an Egg-shell, and a good quantity of the inner Bark of an Oak, dried
and pounded together to Powder, and put them into a quart of new Milk, and a
pint of Erning, and give it the Beast at twice, and it will help them for
certain. Approved.

XV. Another good Receipt for the Blend-Water.
THis Receipt never failed: Take a quart of new churned Milk, and take a good
piece of Lean-Salt-Hung-Beef and lay it upon the Coals, and burn it as black as
a Coal, and when it is cold pound it to Powder, also take a penniworrh of
Bole-armonick and pound it, and a handful of Shepherds-purse, and put all
together and give it to the Beast, for it never failed me.

XVI. A good Receipt for the Water Murrain.
THis Disease comes of Rankness of Blood, and chiefly it takes those that are
young, betwixt one year old and three; this Disease is easy to find out, for
they do swell on the Back and both sides the Chine, and if they have not
present help they will die; the Hide will be puffed up to the Shoulder Blade on
both sides.

The Cure.

You must first let them Blood in the Neck, and give them some Fenegrick,
Turmerick, long Pepper, Spikenard, all made into Powder, and give it them in
Ale or Beer Milk-warm; and for the swelling on the Back, you must take three
handfuls of Salt, and a pint of Spring water, and a pint of Whitewine Vinegar,
and take a ^ittle Allom and pound it, and put it all together and beat it with
a Slice until it be white like Milk, and then bathe the swelled places very
well and it will dry up the rhume and they will be well presently by Gods help.
Approved. And for the preventing of this Disease, Blooding is the best in time:
Also if they be swelled very much on the Back, rowel them on both sides behind
the Shoulder Blade against the Heart, and put ^n some Hair to keep the holes
open, and they will amend presently. Approved.

XVII. A good Receipt for the rising in the Body and swelling behind.
FOr the Rising in the Body and swelling behind, you must look in their Mouths
and behind for Blisters, if they have any, you must break them first, and then
let them Blood under the Tail, and then let them be Raked with a little hand in
their Bodies behind for to break the Blisters in the Body, and give them a
quart of churn-Milk, and some Soot of the Chimney, Bole-armonick, a red Onion,
an Egg the shell and all put together and give it them and they will mend
presently without fail; but walk them.

XVIII. Another good Receipt for the Rising in the Body.
IF the Beast be swelled in the Belly that you think they are almost past help,
look on the near Side and you shall see the Belly swelled above the Ridge of
the Back, and then with your Thumb and your Finger you must feel the Rib on the
one side, and the Hip on the other side, and the Loyn-bone above, then take a
Penknife and a handful from the Loyn, and as much from the Rib, thrust in
your Knife four Fingers Deep into the Windy-belly, and you will let forth that
filthy wind which would have killed them, and they will recover presently; then
within an Hour give them a Drink of Fenegrick, Turmerick, long Pepper and
Grain, Anniseeds, Liquoris-powder, and a little handful of Rhue bruised, and
put all together and give it them in strong Ale or Beer Milk-warm, and they
will mend presently, and within fourteen days let them blood in the Neck-vein,
and give them a little Rhue and a pint of Ale. This I have tried many times my
felf for certain.

XIX. For the Towering Long-Sought that is Hide-bound.
THis disease commonly comes to those that are in Poverty and low of Flesh,
the Signs are, they will look frozenly on their Sides, their Hide will grow
fast to their Back, and their Eyes will sink in their Head, they will whet
their Teeth, and will not chew their Cud, and they will go by themselves and
cares not for their Fellows.

The Cure.

You must first Blood them in the Neck-vein, and take a handful of Rhue,
Hyssop, Sage, Fetherfew, Southernwood, Rosemary, every one of these Herbs a
handful, chop and grind these together, and take a quart of strong Ale or Beer
and put to the Herbs and stir them together, and then strain the Herbs as well
as possibly you can from the Ale, and then take long Pepper, Fenegrick,
Turmerick, Anniseeds, and Liquoris-powder, make all these into Powder and take
two penniworth of Salade Oil, mix all these with the Juice of the Herbs and
Ale, and make them Milk-warm, and give it to the Beast, and if they be weak and
far spent, then you must cut them in the Dew-lap, and put in some Bears-foot or
Speargrass, with Salt and Butter, and they will mend presently. Approved.

XX. For the scowring Long-sought that stinketh.
THis Disease sometimes comes of Blood and sometimes by Distemper of Body,
either by over-heating or by unwholesome Fodder, which will breed laxativeness.
The Signs are apparent for to be seen in their scowring and stinking.

The Cure.

First let them blood in the neck Vein, and then take Fenegrick, Turmerick,
Long-pepper and Grain, Anniseeds, Liquoris-powder, and half a pound of Allom,
a good quantity of Charcoal, make all these into powder, then take Rhue, Sage,
wild Mint, Parsley, Southernwood, Wormwood, Rosemary, Hyssop, chop and grind of
every one of these half a handful as small as you can and put a Gill of
Whitewine Vinegar to the Herbs, and roll all together, and then strain the
Herbs forth, and put to them a little Ale and roll them again, and then strain
that forth which is left, and put all the juice together, and blend the juice
with the fore mentioned Powder, and put to a quart of strong Ale or Beer and
give it to the Beast Milk-warm, and they will mend in one night. Approved. Also
you may then take a quart of Tanners Ooze, Charcoal-flower and Chalk, Allom and
burnt Clay, or very well burnt Tobacco Pipes pounded to Powder and finely
searced, blend all these with the strongest Ooze you can get, and give it to
the Beasts Milk-warm, and they will mend in twelve hours I am sure. Approved

XXI. A good Receipt for a Beast that cannot Piss without pain.
THis Disease sometimes comes of over much heat, and sometimes of drinking
Sand-water, which does oft-times gather together and hinder the passage of the
Bladder, and sometimes by bruised Blood that may stop the neck of the Bladder,
and so hinder the passage.

The Cure.

Take Anniseed, Cumminseed, Parsley seed, Watercress-seed, or the Herb it self,
and Mustardseed; bruise all these and lay them in steep in Whitewine Vinegar
ten hours; then put a pint of Whitewine to the Powders when they are steep't,
and give it to the Beast Milk-warm; also take Bayberries, Butchers-broom,
Setwel, stone-Parsley, or other Parsley, Sowthistle, Lettice, Peneroyal, Red
Nettles, bruise all these with a little White Wind Vinegar, and strain them,
and put to a pint of Whitewine, also put in some Anniseeds, and some
Carraway-seeds bruised, put all together and give it to the Beast warm.
Approved.

XXII. For the swelling Foul.
THis Foul comes of Blood and waterish Rhume that falls into the Legs, and
causes a swelling sometimes in all four Legs.

The Cure.

You must cast the Beasts and tie their feet together, and take a sharp knife
and slit the Skin an inch above the Heel under the Fetlock-joint, straight up
and down for fear of cutting the Sinews, then you must take Nettles, and
Garlic, and Salt, and bruise them together and bind them on, and remove the
Plaster within a Night and a day, and they will be well presently. Approved of
my self.

XXIII. For the Foul betwixt the Claws that comes by Sand, Stub or filth of
the Earth.
FIrst you must cast the Beasts and tie their Feet, and with a sharp knife pare
off all that is dead, and rub it very well for to make it bleed, and then take
dry Verdigrease and bruise it small, and dry off the Blood and lay it on again,
and then take Hog's Grease, and dip it in the Verdigrease, and bind it on with a
linen cloth, and keep it dry one night and it will be well. And if they chance
to have a Wart grow betwixt their Claws or in the Heel you must pare it with a
knife and let it bleed very well, and then take a hot Iron and sear it; also
then take Tar, yellow Wax and Butter melted together on the Fire, lay it on
with a tent of Flax, and bind it on with a cloth and it will be well presently.
Approved.

XXIV. A good Receipt for the Evil.
THis Evil is easily found out by reason of its taking of their Limbs from
them; sometimes it takes them in the Neck, and sometimes in their Legs, and
sometimes in both; and if it do take them in their Limbs it is very hard to
recover them.

The Cure.

Take Rosemary, Sage, Unset Hyssop, Woodbine-leaves, every one of these a good
handful, and two handfuls of Burdock leaves, and boil all these in a Gallon of
spring Water till they all come to a quart, and then strain forth the Herbs,
and melt in half a pound of Roach-Allom and put it into an earthen Pot and keep
it close from the Wind and give it the Beasts in at their Nostrils by six
spoonfuls at a time, and no more, each Nostril three spoonfuls, and give it
them three times a day and no more, and give it them as long as the Liquor
lasts and it will help them. Approved. But first let them Blood in the Tail,
and let them bleed very well, there is no question of their mending.

XXV. For the Speed in the hinder parts.
THis Disease may well be called the Speed, because it either mendeth or ends
in three days time; it comes of the rankness of blood, and is catching among
young Cattle betwixt one year old and three, and none else; it also comes for
want of blooding. It takes them in the hinder parts.


The Cure.

Give them Salt and Whitewine blended together, and those that are well, blood
them in the neck Vein, and those that are fick, blood them in the Tail, and
let them bleed very well, and then cast them and tie their Feet, and take a
sharp knife and slit a hole two Inches long in the inside of the hinder Legs
above the hollow of the Gambrel straight up and down for fear of cutting any
Vein or Sinew, and make some room with your Finger for to put in some
Speargrass, Salt and Butter, and give them a quart of Ale and some Rhue, Sage,
Fetherfew, and Spurge ground small and put to the Ale, and give to the Beasts
warm; but you must not drive them above twelve Hours, if you do they will be
past help; if they be taken while they can stand they are curable, by Gods
help. Approved.

XXVI. For the Pantas.
THis Disease is called the Pantas; it comes by eating foul sour Grass or dry
harsh Grass in Summer, which does not go forth of their Maw, but makes them go
with a short grunt, and go but a little, and stand as if they were not able to
go half a Mile.

The Cure.

Take a quart of half-churned Milk with the Butter in it, and take a good
Garlic head or two little ones and pill them as if they were to eat, and
bruise them, and take a penniworth of the finest Tar that you can get, and a
good handful of the finest Feathers that can be got without any stumps, for
fear of sticking in the Beasts Throat, and beat all these together, and if they
chance to go on lumps, put them all together and beat in a little Soot and give
it the Beasts, and they will be well in four and twenty Hours. Approved.

XXVII. A good Receipt for the biting of a Shrew-Mouse.
THis Shrew-Mouse (for her bigness) is a more Venomous Beast then any; for if
she biteth any Beast, though it be but little, it will swell abundantly.

The Cure.

When you see that your Beast is bitten and is swelled, then take an Awl and
prick it up and down as far as it is swelled through the Hide, and no further,
then take the Earth where Wains and Carts do much use to go, (but let it be the
dryest of it) and blend it with Whitewine Vinegar, and it will presently
assuage and heal the swelling. Also take the Earth of a Cart-wheel and the
earth of a Swallows nest and pound them together, and blend them with old Urine
and make it thick like a Salve, and anoint the sore place that is bitten, and
it will cure either Man or Beast. Approved

XXVIII. Another good Receipt for the Shrew-Mouse.
THe biting of this Shrew is venomous, as is said before.

The Cure.

First open the Skin and let out the venom, and if it be swelled, then beat
Salt and Vinegar together and bathe the sore place with it, and then boil some
Herbs to bath the swelled place, but boil them in old Urine; bathe it round
about the Sore, and if it chance to break, then you must take Barley and lay it
on a Fire-shovel and burn it black-brown, and then pound it to Powder, and lay
it in steep in Whitewine vinegar all night, and put to a little of the juice of
Dill, and blend them together and anoint the place till it be well, and that
will be quickly. Approved of my self.

XXIX. Another for the Shrew-Mouses.
THe bite of a Shrew-Mouse is as venomous as the sting of a Wasp, for if she
bite either Man or Beast it will swell immediately.

The Cure.

You must take Parsley seed and boil it with Whitewine, Salade oil and Hogs
grease, also take some Powder of burnt Barley and blend in it and make it like
a Salve, and anoint the Sore till it be well. This is good for to cure the
biting of Hedge-hogs, or the stinging of Hornets.

XXX. For the stinging of Adders and Scorpions, or the biting of a Hedgehog or
Shrew.
FOr the stinging and biting of these venomous creatures, take the oil of
Scorpions and Vinegar, with Plantane and Bolearmonick made thick like a Salve,
and anoint the place so grieved three times a day. Also take Sanguis Draconis,
and a little Barley Meal, and the white of Eggs; beat all these together and lay
them on Plaister-wise to the Sore, and renewing it once in twelve Hours, it
will help them for this, and for the the stinging of Hornets. Approved.

XXXI. For the swelling of an Oxes Cod.
FOr the swelling of an Oxes Cod by any chance whatsoever, you must anoint him
with sweet Seam at the first three times a day, and if it do not fall, then
take Wallearth and dissolve it in Vinegar and the Dung of an Ox, and bath them
with it. Some holds it a natural remedy for the dung of a Dog to cure the
swelling of an Oxes Cod or Pisle, if they be often rubbed with it.

XXXII. For an Ox or Cow that has lost their Appetite.
FOr the Beasts that are tired by labor and have lost their appetite, you must
cause them to swallow raw Eggs well beaten with Honey, Vinegar and Salt.

Also give them Horehound made into fine Powder to drink, and it will help the
Appetite.

Also stamp the tops of Rhue, Leeks, Smallage, and Sage, and give it them to
drink in Whitewine, and it will help their Appetite.

Also for the swelling of the Palate of the Mouth, take a sharp knife and
lance it, and let forth the Water and Blood, and rub the slit with Water and
Salt, and it will do well.

XXXIII. A Remedy for the loss of the Cud.
BEasts sometimes lose their Cud by chance, and if so, then they will mourn;
and sometimes by sickness and poverty.

The Cure.

Take sour Leaven of Rie-bread and Salt, and beat it in a Mortar with man's
Urine and Barm, and make a big Ball or two of it, and put them down the Throat
of the Beasts and they will do well.

Also take part of the Cud of another Beast and blend it with Rie-bread and
sour Leaven and Salt, and pound them in a Mortar, and make it into Balls and
give it to the Beasts, and they will get their Cud again for certain.

XXXIV. For the Lungs Growing of any Beast.
THe Lungs of a Beast is very often subject to sickness or stopping, as will
appear by their coughing and hosting, and sometimes they will hang forth their
Tongues a great while after their hosting, that is a sign of the Lungs Growing.
There is no other Medicines for this Disease but these two following.

The Cure.

You must take a pint of Tanners Ooze and blend it with a pint of new Milk and
an ounce of brown Sugarcandy, and two penniworth of Salade Oil, and two
spoonfulls of Tar, and give it to the Beast warm at twice.

Also you must give them two Balls (either of them as big as an Egg) of Tar,
Butter, Garlic and Sugarcandy blended all together, and it will mend them
presently. Approved.

XXXV. For to kill Worms in Ox, Cow, or Calf.
THere is nothing better to kill Worms in Cattle then pounded Savin and black
Soap, blended with a quart of sweet Wort and given them in a morning fasting,
and keep them without meat three Hours after.

XXXVI. A good Receipt for a Beast that is Dewboulne at the Spring or in
Eddige-time.
FOr this Dewboulne, you must first let them blood in the Tail, and then take a
Nutmeg and grate it, and take an Egg and take off the top of the shell and put
out so much of the white as you may put the Nutmeg into the shell, and blend
them together, and put it down the Beasts Throat shell and all, and walk them
up and down and they will mend presently.

This swelling most commonly comes when the Grass is full of Water, and then
it is full of Wind also; so that then the Beast lappeth up both Wind and Water
and that causes them to swell; then stir them up and down and cause them to
Purge and they will do well.

There is less danger in putting them to wet Eddige then there is to dry, for
the dry Eddige will not go through their Maws so well when it is dry and the
Beasts hungry.

XXXVII. A good way to breed Milk.
IF your Cow chance to have a Calf and be poor, or to Calve before her time,
and has not Milk for to keep her Calf, you must give her good store of Mashes
of Malt Milk-warm; also give her every morning and evening a quart of Ale made
into a Posset, and take off the Curd and put in Anniseeds, Cummin seeds,
Lettice seeds, and Coriander seeds, all made into Powder, and blend them with
the Posset, and let them stand three Hours blended together, and then give it
the Beast for four days one after another, and by often drawing of her Paps her
Milk will be sure to increase mightily in a short time.

XXXVIII. For the Withering of a Cow.
FOr the Withering of a Cow, take Coleworts, Mallows, Maidenhair, Mugwort,
Bettany, Aristolochia, and boil all these in Water and give it to the Beast
Milk-warm. Also take Aristolochia, Mirrhe, and Pepper, and bruise them and give
it the Beast in white Wine or strong Ale Milk-warm, and it will cause her to
cast forth her Latter burden or dead Calf, and make her whole for certain.
Approved.

XXXIX. A good Receipt for a Beast that makes Blend-water that comes by a
strain, and issues through the Bladder.
THere may be several causes for the making of Blend-water. First it may come
by a Strain, Crush, or Wrench in the Back, which may cause some Vein to be
broken near the Kidney, and so may feed the Bladder; and it may come to a Cow
in her Calving by a strain, or it may come by change of Ground or harsh
feeding, as I mentioned before in the former Chapter.

The Cure.

Take a Swallows nest the Birds and all, if you can get them, and put them all
into a Mortar, and pound the Birds, Nest, and Feathers all together, and then
boil them in fair Water, and put in a good handful of Plantane leaves and
seeds, Blewbottle, and the roots of Daffidillies, also put in a little Sumack
and boil them very well; then strain them and put to a little sweet Wine and
give it the Beast Milk-warm fasting. But first let blood in the Neck-vein for
to draw the Blood back, and within half an Hour give them the Drink, and it
will stay certainly.

XL. For to get a Beast a stomach when he is weary and tired.
WHen a Beast is tired or weary, it may be through weakness and poverty of his
Body, it will bring some Disease or other upon him.

To prevent that and bring him to a Stomach, take a little handful of Salt and
Whitewine Vinegar, and rub his Mouth and Tongue very well, and put the rest
down his Throat and he will eat his Meat presently.

XLI. For the hardness or swelling of a Bull or Oxes Pisle that is bruised by
Riding.
FOr the swelling of a Bull or Oxes Pisle, you must take Holyhawk, Houseleek,
and a little Plantane, and stamp them together with fresh Butter, and anoint
it twice a day, and if it be sore you must cast him and wash his Sheath and
Pisle with Whitewine-vinegar very well, and if there be any Cancer or Holes in
the Yard, then you must put some burnt Allom to the Vinegar and wash it very
well, and he will mend in three times dressing without fail. Approved.

XLII. For Forbaiting or a swollen Foot of any Beast.
THis Forbaiting comes by sore travel or work, which causes lameness and
fretting of the Foot.

The Cure.

You must Boil Honey and Hog's Grease in Whitewine until it be thick like Pap,
and lay it on the Foot a good thickness, and let it lie on three days before
you remove it.

Also for a swollen Foot, take half a handful of Elder-leaves, a few leaves of
Grunsel, and a few crops of Chickweed, and a little Housleek and Swines-grease,
and beat them altogether in a Mortar till they be like a Salve, and lay it on
Plaister-wise, and it will take down the swelling without fail.

XLIII. For the stenching of Blood of any Beast cut or hurt, and how to make a
Salve to heal it.
FIrst if you chance to have any Beast cut or hurt, you must take Hares-wooll
or Rabbets-wooll, and fill the cut or slit full of it, and hold it to with your
your hand, or else bind it fast with some string, and burn the upper Leather of
an old Shoe, and take the Ashes of it and strew amongst the Wool and it will
stay the bleeding. But let it lie on four and twenty Hours before you do take
it off.

The Cure.

Take a little Wax, Honey, Turpentine, Swines-grease and Wheat Flour, and set
them all on the Fire and let them boil gently, stir and blend them together,
and then take them from the Fire and use them at your leisure. And if there be
a cut of any deepness, lay in a Tent of Flax or Linen cloth dipped in the
Salve, and lay a Plaster of the same over it, and let it lie on four and
twenty Hours, then remove it and that is enough, and it will heal it for
certain. Approved.

XLIV. For to make a Cow take the Bull by Milk.
IF your Cow be in good case, and you would have her to take Bull, if you have
any Cow that is a Bulling or any Neighbors Cow, get a quart and a half of that
Cows Milk that is on the Road, and give it to that Cow that you would have to
be a Bulling, and let the Bull go with her, and she will be a Bulling within
six or eight days at the farthest.

XLV. For to keep an Ox sound.
FOr to keep an Ox sound, you must wash his Mouth with his own Water and
Whitewine-vinegar once in twelve days, and it will bring a great deal of Phlegm
and Water off which would take away his Stomach, and cause him to hang down his
Ears and have weeping Eyes. Also wash his Mouth with Whitewine-vinegar and Time
stamped in a little Salt, likewise wash his Tongue very well, and he will have
a very good stomach again.

XLVI. For the Fever in a Beast.
THis Fever may be taken in the heat of Summer, in driving or hard laboring,
and by drinking cold Water when they are exceeding hot, and so cause a shaking
on them first, and afterward produce a Fever.

The Signs. They will be very heavy in the Head, and will have swollen Eyes, and
an extreme heat in their Bodies, their Hair will stand of a Sweat upon their
Backs.

The Cure.

You must cut them some Grass, and give them some Lettice amongst it to cool
their Bodies, and the next morning let them blood in the Neck-vein, and give
them the juice of Purslain blended with Gum Dragant, Anniseeds, the Powder of
Damask Roses, and put into it a quart of strong Ale and make it sweet with
Honey; Then blend all together and give it to them three mornings one after
another Milk-warm, and keep them warm, and they will mend presently by Gods
help. Approved.

XLVII. For the Scab on a Beast.
FOr the Scab on a Beast, take his own Water, Salt, Butter, and
Whitewine-vinegar, with a little Salade Oyland a little Brimstone; blend all
together and rub it on, and it will mend presently.

XLVIII. A good Receipt for to purge Beasts.
FOr to purge Beasts and to cleanse the inner part of their Bodies, you must
give them the dross of Olives after the Oil is pressed out in new Milk.

Also take a quart of Clay-water, and put in two penniworth of Honey, and two
penniworth of Salade Oil, and twelve Laurel Leaves dried and made into Powder,
put all together and make it warm and give it to the Beast.

Also take half a pound of sweet Soap, and sweet Ale that is in the Fat, and
put in twelve Laurel leaves or the powder of the same ground small or pounded
into the sweet Ale and Soap, and blend all together and give it to the Beasts
Milk-warm and it will help them. Also take a halfpenny Candle and put up at
his Fundament as far as you can reach, and leave it behind in the Body.
Approved.

XLIX. For a dry Hoarsness or Cough in a Beast.
THis Hoarsness or Cough in Ox or Cow must be carefully looked to, for it will
grow in time to a worse Disease; therefore it is good to prevent it.

The Cure.

Take the distilled Water of Hyssop, or else the decoction of Mint and Hyssop
together, with the juice of Leeks, and give it with the Oil of Olives and a
little Garlic, for there has not been so long a Cough known but this Medicine
has helped it: sometimes if it be an easy Hoarsness you may give them Tar
with Honeywater, and it will help them for certain. Approved.

L. Another good Receipt for purging of Cattle.
THere is nothing better for purging Cattle at tht Spring before they go to
Grass, then to keep them in the House a Week, give them Cinnamon, or Hartshorn,
and common Salt boiled together warm: Also give them Tar, Butter, Honey, brown
Sugarcandy, and the powder of the leaves of Laurel, either in Balls or in warm
water, and when they go to Grass, within a Week after let them Blood, and give
them a handful of Rhue in a pint of Ale warm, and this is called the
preservation of Health to any Cattle that is ready to feed, or any other
service.

LI. Another good Receipt for the Fever in Beasts either in Winter or Summer.
Cattle may sometimes get the Fever in Winter as well as in Summer, (if the
Beast be low in Flesh) by drinking cold Water, (especially in a morning) they
will begin to shake and tremble; and if they chance to get the Fever, they will
tremble and have heavy Eyes, and groan, and froth a little at the Mouth.

The Cure.

First let them Blood, and then give them a drink of a quart of Ale, and four
roots of Plantane, and two spoonfuls of the best London-Treacle, and let their
meat be sprinkled with Water and they will do well. Approved.

LII. For an inward sickness in Cattle.
IF you cannot find out the Disease of the Beast, take a quart of Ale, and a
handful of Wormwood, a handful of Rhue, and a handful of Rosemary, all being
bruised in a Mortar, and then boiled a little, strain the Herbs forth very
well, and add two spoonfuls of the juice of Garlic, and as much of the juice
of Housleek, and as much London-Treacle, and blend all together and give it to
the Beasts Milk-warm, and they will mend presently, Approved.

LIII. An excellent Cure for a Burn in a Bulls Yard, or in a Cows Matrix.
FOr a burned Bull, you must first cast him and pull forth his Yard, and wash
both his Sheath and Yard with Whitewine vinegar, and then take the juice of
Housleek, burnt Allom, Honey, and the juice of Lettice, blend all together and
anoint the Bulls Yard, and use it some three times and he will mend.

And for the Cow you may wash and anoint her Bearing, and she will mend.
Approved of my self.

LIVE. For a sucking Calf that scowreth.
YOu must take a pint of Verjuice and Clay that is burnt until it be red, or
very well burned Tobacco-pipes, and pound them to Powder, and searse them very
finely, and put to a little powder of Charcoal, and blend all together and give
it to the Calf, and he will mend in a night for certain.

LV. For A Bull that shedeth his Seed.
TAke Clary-leaves and dry them, and pound them to Powder, and take the Powder
of Tanners Bark and brown Sugarcandy, and take two penniworth of Turpentine,
and work the Powders and the Turpentine very well into Balls as big as a great
Crab, and give him two at a time night and morning, and he will mend presently
without fail.

LVI. For the Disease in Beasts called the Sturdy or turning-Evil.
OF this Disease there are many kinds, one in the Brain-pan of one side or
both, and another under the Horn-root, and another in the Neck-joynt; If it be
in the Neck-joynt, or under the Horn it is uncurable; as for that in the
Neck-joynt, you may find it out by their carriage, for they will hold up their
Heads in the Air and look wildly; and for the other under the Horn, they will
turn round: none of these are curable, but that in the Brain-pan.

The Cure.

You must first cast them and bind their Feet, then slit the Skin against the
Brain-pan, and with a Needle and a long double Thread stitch up the Skin out of
your way, and then take a strong short Knife, and a Hammer, and cut the Scaup
two inches square, and turn it up, and then you may see the Bladder; then take
it out very carefully for fear of breaking it, and cast it away, and anoint
the place with fresh Butter, and always apply warm Cloths for fear of the cold,
and be very careful that you lay the Scaup on again in the right place, and
then turn down the Skin, and stitch it down with some Silk close together, and
then make a Plaster of Turpentine, Wax, Rosin, and Swines-grease or fresh
Butter, and a plaster of Flax-hards, and lay on four or five doubles of
Wollen-cloth, for to keep it from the Wind and Weather; remove the Plaster
once in five days, and be careful of cold, and let them drink no cold Water
for six or ten days or more, and they will do well. Approved of my self.

LVII. For a Cough or Shortness of Breath in Cattle.
IF your Beasts are troubled with a Cough, as I have already showed, this will
cure them, if they are Curable.

The Cure.

Take a quart of new churned Milk, and beat in some Ta^, and a Head of Gail^ck
clean pilled, Alicampane made into Powder, and a little brown Sugarcandy; blend
all together, and give it to the Beast three mornings one after another, and if
they be curable this will our them without doubt.

LVIII. For to kill Lice in any Beast.
FOr the killing of Lice in any Beast, you must take Quicksilver and kill it
with Swines-grease, and rub them very well about the Horns, Head and Neck, and
upon the Shoulders and Dewlap, and they will lick the rest of their Body
themselves, or strew some keen ashes on their hinder parts, and let them stand
in the Rain a while, and it will make them all fly away from the Beast for
certain.

LIX. For the Milting of a Beast.
THe Milting of a Beast is when they have got a stroke with a Goad, or Cudgel,
or Rush against some piece of Timber. The Signs are, when they lay themselves
down they will rise again presently and cannot rest, but sit in pain.

The Cure.

You must take Stone-pitch and pound it small, and blend it with Ale, Saffron,
and Pepper, and give it him and walk him a little after it, and he will mend
presently for certain.

LX. For the Rottenness in a Beast.
IF your Beast be subject to Rottenness, you may know it by his Poverty and
Leanness, and continual scowring; and if they be very rotten they will scower
Whitish Brown, and it will stink filthily.

The Cure.

You must give them Bayberries beaten to Powder, Mirrhe, Elder-leaves, Rhue,
Fetherfew, all made small, and take a lump of the blewest Clay you can possibly
get, and burn it till it be very red, or almost black, and then pound it to
Powder, and and blend it all together in strong Urine, and give the Beast half
a pint at a time three several times Milk-warm, and it will stay the Scowering
of the Beast and heal the Disease.

LXI. For the Clush and swollen Neck.
FIrst let the Beast rest three or four days, then take fresh Butter, Honey,
Hogslard, and Wax, all in equal quantities, and melt them together like a
Salve, and annoint the place and it will mend presently.

Also if the Neck be swollen and raw, then take Honey and Mastick, and a little
fresh Butter (without Salt) or fresh Swines-grease, (without Salt) and boil
these all together, and anoint the sore place and it will mend.

Also if the Neck be puffed and swollen, and raw, you must take Alicampane, and
boil it very well, and stamp it with Hogsgrease and the fat of a Weather, and a
little Honey, and Frankincense, and new Wax, blend all together and anoint the
place, and it will presently amend. Approved.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in Vine Court
Middle Temple, London.
THe Gentleman's Jockey and approved Farrier, instructing in the Nature, Cause
and Cure of all diseases incident to Horses, with an Exact and easy Method of
Breeding, Buying, Dieting, and otherwise Ordering of all sorts of Horses, as well
for the Common and Ordinary use, as the Heats and Course, with diverse other
Curiosities; Collected by the long Practice and Experience, of J. H. Esquire,
Matthew Hodson, Mr. Holled, Mr. Willis, Mr. Robinson, Mr. Medcalf, and
Nathaniel Shaw, Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. The Clarks Tutor to Arithmetic and
Writing, being a plain and easy way of Arithmetic, and for Buying and
Selling of Land either in Possesion or Revertion at 6 or 8 per Cent; The
measureing of Timber, Stone, Paving, Housing, Surveying of Lands, Dyalling,
etc. Being Remains of Edmund Wingate, Esquire, Octavo, price 2 s. The Countess
of Arundels Secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery, Preserving and Candying etc. The
Chemical Galinist, wherein the Practice of the Ancients are reconciled to the
new Discoveries in the Theory of Physic, by George Castle, Doctor of Physic,
Octavo, price 2 s. Italy in its original Glory, Ruin and Revival; Being a
survey of the whole Geogrophy and History of that famous Country, with the
Adjacent Islands of Sicily and Malta, and whatever is remarkable in Rome, and
all those Towns and Territories mentioned in Ancient and Modern Authors by
Edmund Warcup, Esquire, Folio, price 6 s. A Comentary on Antoninus his
Itinerary or Journeys on the Roman Empire so far as it concerns Britain,
wherein the first Foundation of our Cities, Laws and Government according to
the Roman Policy, The Ancient names of their Garrisons, with their sight and
true distances: Their military ways and walls, with many Antiquities, Medals,
Inscriptions, and Urnes, very useful for all Historians, Antiquaries,
Philologists, and more particularly for the students in law: By William Burton,
Bachelor of Laws. Folio, price 6 s. History of the troubles of Swedland and
Poland, which occasioned the expulsion of Sigismundus the Third King of those
Kingdoms, with his heirs for ever from the Sweedish Crown. By John Fowler,
Secretary to Sir George Douglas, Knight, Folio, price 5 s. The Annals and
History of the Low Country Wars, by Hugo Grotius, in English, Octavo, price 6
s. Ecclesia Restaurata: Or, the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England, containing the Beginning, Progress and Success of it; The Councels by
which it is conducted, the Rules of Piety, and Prudence by which it was
founded: The several Steps by which it was promoted: The first preparations to
it by King Henry the Eighth, until the Legal setting and establishment of it
under Queen Elizabeth. By Peter Heylin D.D. Fol. price 10 s. The Minister of
State, wherein is shown the true use of Modern Policy: By Monsieur de Sithon,
Secretary to Cardinal Richelieu: In two Parts, Fol. price 10 s.

