A TREATISE OF Election and Reprobation; In Vindication of the Universal Grace
AND LOVE of GOD TO MANKIND.

By B. L.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gr^^ious-Street,
1700.

THE PREFACE.
IT is God's Will, That Testimony should be born, Age after Age, unto his
Truth; and that Error, and the Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, as well as
Ungodliness, and Sin, should be Testified against; the one being an inlet to
the other, and the Gate in at which it enters; and whoever is inveloped in the
one, is besmeared with the other. But as Light springs up, so will Holiness;
for they are coincident, as Sin and Error.

Light and Truth goes together, accompanying each other; and so does Darkness
and Error.

He that has the clear Light and Knowledge of God, and lives therein, lives an
holy Life, and is a true Worshipper of Him. Let him depart from this, and
Wisdom soon departs from him; for into a malicious Soul, Wisdom will not enter;
nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto Sin; such an one shall have no
fellowship with Her.

The Wisdom of the Truth, cannot be held without the Obedience of the Truth,
nor the Light without the Life of it. I have lived some Years, and observed,
and never saw any Man swerve from Faithfulness, but as the gathering together
of thick Clouds, he became darkened, be his Understanding never so clear
before; of which we have a miserable Instance in G. Keith.

But he that testifies against Error and Darkness, testifies against the Root
of Ungodliness and Sin, and the Region of Evil, in which all Filthiness of
Abomination is committed; for all these are Works of the Night.

And when these destructive Holds of Satan are discovered, Men will fly unto
God's Hold.

Where it is Day, it is Light, they are not separable. And it is Light's Nature
to discover and manifest things, and these Discoveries are of the Truth, and
for the Information of Man in the things of God; and the Understanding being
truly Righted, draws the Will after it, tending much to its righting also.

It is God's Will and Work, that the Light of his Servants shine before Men;
there is no cause to be afraid of, or suspect the Day, (...) it is Light; this is
concomitant with its warmth. Light and Nourishing Heat goes together, as Wisdom
and Life; for Wisdom is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold on her, as is
Ignorance and Error a Tree of Death.

And there is scarce any Error to be met with so deep and depraved, as this Man
run into, about Election and Reprobation, which stubs up all Religion by the
Roots, and stands, Dragon-like, ready to devour the Gospel, and evacuate all
Godliness.

So it is here endeavored, to state and clear those Doctrines from Men's false
Notions thereof: Which, when I had gone a pretty way thorough, came
accidentally to my hands a Book of George Keith's, which he calls Truth
Advanced; whose Arguments upon this Subject falling quite contrary to mine, and
unto the Truth, it appeared to me necessary to give an Answer unto it, which is
accordingly done in the end of this Book.

B. L.

A TREATISE OF Election and Reprobation, etc.
The Introduction.
Reciting those Scriptures so frequently Urged, in Defense of Election and
Reprobation, and the Inferences usually (though falsely) drawn from them; with
some gross Absurdities that Doctrine naturally resolves into.

PEter the Apostle makes this Remark upon the Epistles of the Apostle Paul,
That in them are some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own Destruction: And it is still so, as it was then; the
things in his Epistles are the same, the difficulty in understanding them (and
many others, of which some are hereafter considered) the same now as then; and
the unlearned and unstable, like those of old, make the same ill use of them
now, the others did then.

And which those places are, seems to appear from the many great and continued
Disputes that have arisen about them, and filled the Minds of People unto this
day; as these following, and some others.

Romans 8. v. 29. Whom he did foreknow, he also did Predestinate, etc.

30. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called; and whom he Called, them he
also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified.

Romans 9. v. 11. The Children being not yet Born, neither having done any good
or evil, that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of
Works, but of him that Calls.

12, 13. It was said unto her, The Elder shall serve the Younger; as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.

18. Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
hardens.

22. What if God, willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known,
endured with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction.

23. And that he might make known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of
Mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory.

Ephesians. 1. v. 4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundation
of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

5. Having Predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will.

11. In whom also we have obtained an Inheritance, being Predestined
according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the Counsel of
his own Will.

Before I enter upon a particular Disquisition of these Scriptures, there are a
few things to be premised. As, 1st, That for special and eminent Services, God
has been pleased to choose out some particular Persons, as peculiar
Instruments (as his choice) Prophets and Ministers, and has attended,
preserved and supported them, by his special Providence and divine Power, for
those eminent Services in his Work and Ministry: As the Prophet Jeremiah,
before formed, known of God, and sanctified, before he came forth of the Womb.
Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.15. Acts 9.15.
John Baptist, filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mother's Womb. And the
Apostle Paul, a Chosen Vessel. 2dly, These and the like being granted, do not
make for an absolute Election, either of a certain definite number of Persons,
of all that are or shall be saved; nor of a personal, absolute, unconditioned
Predestination, of the greatest part of Mankind to Damnation. 3dly, That we
oppose the Notion of Reprobation, as it opposes Universal and Saving Grace, as
come by Jesus Christ; and the Notion of a Personal Election absolute, as it is
set up to limit and confine Saving Grace only to a few Persons, and indulge
that few as secure in Sin, etc.


Which being premised, I observe, That these Scriptures, with several others
which are herein after spoken to, seem to me to be some of those places hard to
be understood, of which the Apostle made the Observation; but be it so or not,
there is a great Misunderstanding of them amongst many People, who from hence,
1. Distinguish all Mankind into Elect and Reprobate. 2. The first they make but
a very small Number. 3. The latter, an huge Number, and abundance of Infants
and young Children among them. 4. They conclude all the first under Salvation.
5. And all the last under Damnation. 6. And that the first can in no wise miss
of Salvation; nor the latter escape Damnation, by any endeavors whatsoever,
they are both so fixed and unavoidable upon them. 7. And they also hold, That
the Salvation of the one, and Damnation of the other, are by an absolute
Decree, without any respect to their Good or Evil Deeds.


All which resolves into this: 1st, That God loved but a few, and hated the far
greater part of Mankind, from all Eternity, or from the Fall, or at least from
before they were Born. 2dly, That those few, whom he loved, he ordained to
Salvation, so positively and absolutely, as that they could never, in any wise,
or by any means, miss it. 3dly, That that great Number, whom God hated, he
ordained to Damnation, after the same positive and arbitrary manner, and so
absolutely as they can never in any wise, by what means so ever, avoid it.
4thly, That as God, of his own free will and choice, loved those few, without
respect to any thing in them, either Good or Evil, when as yet they had done
nothing to deserve or procure it; so after the same manner he hated the other
great Multitude (without any cause, or respect, but to his own Will) having yet
done nothing to procure or deserve it.


Now, it is hereby intended to detect, and remedy, and to expose the Evil
Tendency and Consequence of such Abuse and Misunderstanding of these, and
several other Scriptures, of like import.

The First Part. Treating Principally of Reprobation.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is laid down Two Positions, opposing the Doctrine of Reprobation, and
the same demonstrated by sundry Arguments: 1. From God's Work of the Creation
in the beginning, and from his Divine Nature and Attributes. 2. From Solomon's
Observation of that great Work. 3. From the Rejoicing of the Heavenly Host over
that Blessed Work. 4. From the Creature made; the Universality of Christ's
Death, and of the Gospel, and God's Grace and Love to Mankind. 5. From sundry
Destructive and Pernicious Consequences, naturally and clearly resulting from
this Doctrine. 6. From sundry clear Texts and Authorities of Scripture.

AND for the better ordering the Argument to treat of Election and Reprobation
severally, to avoid the inconvenience of keeping no Method, by handling them
Promiscuously, I shall begin with Reprobation, and show: 1. That God did not
Hate and Reprobate the greatest, or any part of Mankind from all Eternity, or
from the Fall, or from before they were Born. 2. But that we came forth into
this World free and clear from any such fixed Decree, accompanied with the
Grace and Love of God, being God's Delight; and so far from the wretched
Condition this false Doctrine represents us, in crawling under the Burden of a
Decree of Destruction; which, let us struggle under its weight never so long,
and do our utmost endeavors, we must at length be overcome of it, and fall
inevitably under Ruin thereby.


Both which are demonstrative:

. 1. From the Work of Creation, that great and first of the Works of God, in
time, that began with the beginning of Time, and is the Date of Mankind; in
which we come to our Spring Head, and are Streams from thence.

If this was a Work of Blessedness, Goodness, Grace and Love, in a most
comprehensive and entire Sense, then no part of Mankind was Predestined to
Damnation, or Hated of God from all Eternity; for that would be an exception to
its being a Work of Grace and Love. Destruction and Misery are not from thence;
that sweet Fountain sends forth no such bitter Streams.

But that this Work of Creation was a Work of Blessedness, Goodness, Grace and
Love, is shown:

From the Divine Nature and Attributes of God, the great and blessed Author of
it, by whom we are taught, That as is the Workman, so is his Work: A good Tree
brings not forth corrupt Fruit; neither does a corrupt Tree bring forth good
Fruit, etc. Luke 6.43, 45.
A good Man out of the good Treasure of his Heart brings forth that which is
good; and an evil Man, out of the evil Treasure of his Heart, brings forth
that which is evil. As is the Man, so is his Work; and as is God, so is his
Work: But God is good in the greatest Eminency, the Treasury of Blessing is
with him; he is abundant in Goodness, Grace and Love; which the Beloved
Disciple makes his Definition, 1 John 4.8.
in so many express words, saying, God is Love: Then his chief Motive in the
Creation of Man must be his own Benignity, Goodness, Grace and Love; and his
End, that Man might partake of his Glory, and enjoy Him for ever. Which shows,
God did not Hate Man, nor put him under any such unavoidable Decree of
Destruction from all Eternity.

. 2. From the Observations of Solomon, upon this great Work of Creation; which
are, first Negative, That God made not Death; neither has he pleasure in the
Destruction of the Living. Wisd. 1.13, 14.
Then Affirmative, That he created all things, that they might have their
Being; and the Generations of this World was healthful, and there was no Poison
of Destruction in them, or Kingdom of Death upon the Earth. But we were made in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
(or Holiness of Truth.)

And to have our Being as such, is to have (or enjoy) God, the Divine Life; for
a Man cannot properly be said to have what he does not in some measure possess
or enjoy; so this End, to which we were made, is an high State of Glory, above
Death, Destruction, or Misery; all which made their Entrance through the Fall.

Neither has he pleasure in the Destruction of the Living.

Then he has not from all Eternity had pleasure in Decreeing their
Destruction; for otherwise he was not a free Agent in so Decreeing, but under
some necessity of working against himself, of acting and doing contrary to his
pleasure, which subjects him to Misery; showing, as if He, who is the most
Sovereign and free Agent of all, received Control from some other; which is
absurd and blasphemous, as are all the Consequences of this false Principle.

There was no Poison of Destruction in them, or Kingdom of Death upon the
Earth.

Then there was no Curse, but all was in the Blessing, then God had not Hated
or Decreed the Destruction of any number of Men; for if so, there had been some
Poison of Destruction, and there had been some Kingdom of Death upon the Earth.
And if God had not then done it, in the beginning of the World, which was in
Time, being computed about Five Thousand Seven Hundred Years since, much less
had he done it from all Eternity.

. 3. From the Rejoicing of the Heavenly Host over this Blessed Work of
Creation; Job 38.7.
for then the Morning-Stars sung together, and the Sons of God shouted for joy;
which holy pure Spirits rejoice not at the Outgoings of Destruction, or
Misery, or Death, or Hell; but at the Outgoings of the Power and Work of God,
and of his Life and Glory; which excellently illustrates the Blessedness of
this great Work, its being ushered in, in the Morning of it, with those holy
Songs and Shoutings of Joy so Divine and Heavenly.

. 4. From the Creature made; for God created Man in his own Image, in the Image
of God created he him, etc. Even this gives us a pregnant Instance of the great
Love of God to us in our Creation, and secures us against the Fear of being put
into the hands of Destruction by an Eternal Decree. To be made in the Maker's
Image, and in his Likeness, is sufficient warranty against it, to any who know
what it is to be formed after that Pattern of perfect Bliss; for it must needs
be, that God beholds Himself above all, and loves his own Image above every
Image, and thence has made choice to dwell with Man, delighting in him, and
loving him: For, of which of the Creatures ever said he at any time, I will
walk in them, and dwell in them: Nor does he afflict willingly, or grieve the
Children of Men; much less will he, without cause, Lament. 3.33.
destroy with an Eternal Destruction the Creature, that with so much Wisdom he
has so curiously framed. And had there been such an Eternal Destructive Decree
upon Mankind, then he had been created under the Curse, and could not have born
the Image of the Blessed; on the contrary, as he was created in the Image of
God, he could not be hated of him, nor have any such Decree impending him or
his Offspring.

Again, If there had been such a Decree, Man must either have been created with
the Seed of this Destruction in him, which in despite of all his endeavors
should increase and grow up with him, till he were consumed of it; or he must
causlessly have been cast down of God into Perdition.

It cannot be the first, for Man was made very good, Genesis 1.31. Jer. 2.21. Mat.
13. --
planted wholly a right Seed, sown a good Seed, etc. and the latter is
Blasphemy.

As God made nothing evil, so he made nothing to an evil End; it is incompetent
with Wisdom and Justice, to make a good thing to an evil end; and to be sure,
he that made all things good, Genesis 1.30.
hated no good thing; for no Man willingly propagates what he hates; he must
be blinder than a Beetle, that gives credit to such stuff, which stubs up all
Wisdom and Religion by the Roots, inverts all Series and Order into Confusion,
bereaves God of his Wisdom and Goodness, and Man of his Honor and Blessing.

Object. But it is alleged, that Man forfeited his blessed Estate in the Fall,
and became subject to Misery, so that God might justly have given him over to
utter Ruin; but through his infinite Mercy in Christ Jesus, he choosed to save
a few, Vincent's Catechism, p. 19, etc.
and pass by all the rest of Mankind. So that God's Eternal Decree of
Reprobation, is his leaving them to perish in their Sins, unto the Praise of
the Power of his Wrath, and infinite Justice, in their Everlasting Punishment.

Answ. If so, this Forfeiture was general; either all forfeited their Blessed
Estate, or none at all. Then how is that Mercy infinite, which forgives but a
few? or that Justice infinite, which punishes not all? But as the Mercy of God
in Christ is infinite, there is made Provision therein for the Salvation of
all, if they will accept God's Salvation on God's Terms; and as his Justice is
infinite, it is provided therein to punish all Men, that despise or neglect so
great Grace and Mercy. And if God should leave any to perish in their Sins,
through their impenitency, how can this be called his absolute Eternal Decree
of Reprobation of Persons? Or how does the leaving a Man to the natural
Consequence or Effect of his own evil Actions, imply the Decreeing him to such
an End, or such Actions? Put the case of a Man's stabbing himself with his own
Sword, Is the not forcibly hindering him from it, the forcing him thereto? Is
the bare permitting him to do it, the putting him under a fatal necessity of
doing it, as is implied in these words [ God's Eternal Decree of Reprobation?
etc.] What passage can be collected out of all the Scripture, to show God's
seeking to have Praise ascribed to his Wrath? Which is not voluntary, or a
first Principle in him, as shall hereafter be manifest. So that in short, these
Tenants are sad ones, equally void of Reason and of Gospel.

But I shall make it appear, God did not take this Advantage against any part
of Mankind, or absolutely Decreed their Destruction from Eternity, or from the
Fall, but tendered Salvation and the Gospel to them: Then, Neither has he done
any thing to frustrate any one's Salvation before his Birth.

1. From the Benefit of Christ's Death, universally extended; 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
1 Timothy 2.6. Hebr. 2.9.
he died for all Men; he gave his Life a Ransom for all.

2. From the Universality of the Gospel; it brings good Tidings of great Joy to
all People; Luke 2.10. Mat. 28.19. Mark 13.10.
and was to be preached to, or in, every Creature under Heaven; all Nations to
be taught, etc.

3. From the Universality of the Grace of God, called in Scripture, Titus 2.11.
Gratia Salutifera, the Salvation-bringing Grace, or the Grace of God that
brings Salvation.

This Grace has appeared to all Men, and it brings Salvation; it appears not
empty-handed; if it should cease to have such a Gift, it should cease to be
that Grace; but all Men have the Tenders of Salvation in and through this
Divine Grace, and this since the Fall: So God has not taken that Advantage
against any from the Fall, as to leave them unavoidably to perish in their
Sins, etc. but visits all Men in and by his Divine Grace, in order to their
Salvation; and enlightneth every Man that comes into the World; and has not
done any Act to frustrate the Salvation of any before their Birth.

He that is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance; 2 Pet 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4.
who will have all Men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the Truth:
He has done nothing to frustrate the Salvation of any Man before his Birth.

But God is not willing that any Man should perish, etc. So here we acquit our
selves of Decretal Reprobation, either Eternal or Temporal, that is previous to
our Birth; and indeed of all Decretal Reprobation.

. 5. That Doctrine, which makes the cause of the Destruction of the Wicked to
be of God, and not of themselves; and that Evil is no cause of it, but God's
Decree, etc. hides and conceals the Malignity and Poison of Sin, which of its
own Nature is pernicious and destructive to Man's Soul, tainting and infecting
it with Corruption and Rottenness, by which it slides into the deep Abyss of
Death and Misery, as a due Reward.

This Doctrine searches not into the Wound of the Soul, made by Sin, which
decays it, and of its self brings Death and Ruin, if not timely cured.

And this Doctrine makes the Physician, the Malady; the Healer, the Destroyer;
the most Sovereign Balm, the Canker of the Wound.

So if we can admit of all these Absurdities, and abundance more, we may admit
of Decretal Reprobation; which cannot be.

. 6. For the Scripture declares, 1 These. 4. v. 3. That this is the Will of God,
even your Sanctification.

Verse. 4. That every one should know how to possess his Vessel in
Sanctification and Honor.

Verse. 7. That God has not called us unto Uncleanness, but unto Holiness.

Ezekiel. 18. v. 32. That he has no pleasure in the Death of him that dies.

Chap. 33. v. 11. That he has no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that
the Wicked turn from his way and live.

Luke 15. v. 7. That there is Joy in Heaven for one Sinner that Repents, etc.

Now, as Holy Writ has given us this true Account of God's Will; for us to
conclude him Acting quite contrary to it, is, to affront the Scripture, and
oppose God, against himself; making him Will one thing, and Act another; Who
works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will.

But for us to conclude him Decreeing any Man's Eternal Destruction from all
Eternity, or from the Fall, or from before his Birth, without any respect to
his Deeds, etc. is, to conclude him Acting quite contrary to his declared Will
in Scripture, etc.

Then he that works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will; and
wills not, nor has pleasure in the Destruction of the Wicked; he has not,
without any respect to their manner of Life, decreed it.

But God works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will; and wills
not, nor has pleasure in the Destruction of the Wicked; therefore he has not
absolutely Decreed it, etc.

Object. But they say, God has his Declared Will, and his Secret Will; and
that Men are Decreed to Election or Reprobation, according to his Secret Will,
etc.

Answ. As to this, we read of Secret things that belong unto God; Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Psalm 25.14.
and of his Seerets that are with the Righteous, and with them that fear him.
This Secret Will, of which they talk, Job 15.8.
must be the one of these two sorts; if of the first, how do they know it? Do
they understand the Secrets of God? And do they restrain Wisdom to themselves?
If of the latter, what Proof give they of it? Or how do they reconcile it, that
there should be in God two opposite Wills; the one Secret, the other Revealed;
and these contradictory to each other; the one preservative, the other
destructive, of Men? According to the one, he has Sworn, He wills not the
Death of a Sinner; according to the other, He both Wills and has Decreed it;
because of his Will, not because of their Sin: And thence come so many Thousand
innocent Infants to be in Hell (according to them) among the Damned. A witless,
graceless, merciless, gospel-less Opinion, a most staring Piece of Confusion
and Blasphemy, which either charge Schism upon God, or reconciles
Contradictions.

There have been none so bad, but what have had Offers of Salvation; Cain had
it, the Old World had it, Sodom and Gomorah, Genesis 4.7. and 6.3. and 18.30, etc.
Jonah 3. -- Jer. 51.8, 9. Rev. 2.21.
Nineveh, etc. Nay, even Babylon, God called to Mourning for 'em, saying, Howl
for Babylon, take Balm for her Wound, if so be it may be healed; he would have
healed Babylon. And of Jezebel he says, I gave her time and space of
Repentance, but she Repented not.

In the next Chapter, I shall take account of some general Relations of God to
us, and show from them, That our Preservation, not our Destruction, is his
Work, Will and Delight, etc.

CHAP. II.
Being a further Refutation of the Doctrine of Reprobation, by Arguments
deduced from some General Relations of God to us. viz. 1. From his Regal Office
and Power. 2. From his being the Everlasting Father. 3. From the Office of
Jesus Christ, as our High Priest, etc.

. 1. THe Lord most High is a great King over all the Earth. Psalm 47.1, 2. Mal.
1.14. Rev. 19.16.


And Regis est Regnare; it is the Property of a King to Reign: According to
which, there are several Powers or Prerogatives belonging to him; the Power of
Sovereign Rule, Power to execute Justice and Judgment, Power of Life and Death,
of Punishing and Pardoning Offenders, etc. Where the Word of a King is, there
is Power; and who may say unto him, What do thou?

But all this Power is lodged in him, not for the hurt, but good of his
Creatures, for their Benefit, not Detriment; His Office is not to Destroy, but
to Preserve and Defend them, against the Violence and Spoil of foreign Enemies,
and the Injuries of one another; their Safety is his Law: Salus populi suprema
lex; He is the Terror of the evil doer, and Praise of them that do well.

Now, should a King use his Power to an evil end, to bereave the greatest part
of his Subjects of their Properties and Lives, not because of their Fault, but
of his own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure, and had only this to be said for him,
That he was extraordinary kind to a few. Or suppose he agreed with his
Rebelling Subjects on these terms: 1. To forgive all past, and accept them
still, on Condition they behave themselves well and dutifully for the time to
come. 2. That their Treason should not attaint their Children, or subject them
unto any Forfeiture or Punishment; and should pass these Covenants into Laws.
Yet should, notwithstanding all this, without Provocation by any new Offense,
break out into Fury against them, and should utterly Kill the far greatest part
of them, and their Children, merely for his own Will, or to show his great
Power over them, or to set forth the Terribleness of his Wrath, or to spread
his Name abroad, etc. In an Earthly King, this would be accounted (and that
truly) the height of Persidiousness, Cruelty and Tyranny; and yet these
Predestinarians consequentially lay all this at his door, and aver it to be the
way and manner of the great King.

. 2. God is called in Scripture, the Everlasting Father; and we are called his
Offspring; The Offspring of God, etc. For he is the Father of us all by
Creation. Now this is not a Destructive, but a Preservative Relation, who
cares for the Life of his Children, nourishes and provides all things
necessary for them; and if they be wicked, and go from him, Luke 15.
and abuse his kindness, and spend their substance upon Harlots, as the
Prodigal Son; if they do but consider, and return, he seeing them afar off,
has Compassion, and runs to meet them, and kisseth them; and brings forth the
best Robe, and kills the fatted Calf, and feeds and clothes them, and rejoices
over them, etc. Now if our natural Fathers know how to give good Gifts unto
their Children, how much more shall our Father which is in Heaven give good
Gifts to them that ask him? Mat. 7.

A natural Father, declining from this Rule, comes under the Reproach of being
Unnatural, Careless, Senceless, etc. But should he not only omit the Fatherly
Love, Care and Provision, becoming him, but also inhumanely Slay the most of
his Children; how odious a thing would this be amongst Men? He would incur the
Infliction of Death.

And yet the Tenants I Am opposing, lay even harder things than these, at the
door of the Almighty and most Merciful Father; the Slaying his Children, not
only with Temporal, but Eternal Death, for the Praise of the Power of his Wrath.

. 3. Jesus Christ is our High Priest, and as such, it is his Office to Bless
us, to offer up our Sacrifices, to Atone and Intercede for and in our Behalf.
Heb. 5.1, 2.
Every High Priest taken from among Men, is ordained for Men in things
pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins; who
can have compassion on the igrant, and on them that are out of the way, etc.
And if Men had such great Benefit and Blessing by the High Priests after the
order of Aaron, how great Blessing and Benefit then have we by our High Priest
after the order of Melchizedec, who was before Aaron, and is greater than
Aaron? etc.

Great was the Love of God unto us, in giving his Son to be our High Priest, to
have the oversight and cure of our Souls, and ineffable the Benefits Mankind
receive by him, who being exalted by the right Hand of God, and having received
from the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, has shed forth this in some
measure upon all. O how wonderfully did he, when he took our Nature upon him,
show how great was his Goodness to the Sons of Men! So if under the Cure of
such an High Priest we come to any miscarriage, it must be through our selves.

But what for a Priest, do the Priests of these times make him, with their
Reprobate Doctrine, which renders him shutting the Gates of Heaven against the
greatest part of the Flock, committed to his Cure; and instead of interceding
to God for them, delivering them over to Satan, and to Eternal Ruin; and this
not because of their Wickedness, and that they will not be Reclaimed, but for
the Pleasure of his Father's Will; even because God has Willed and Decreed it?
(as they say.)

See here how injurious is this Doctrine of Reprobation unto God and Christ, in
those general Relations of King, Father and Priest, etc.

CHAP. III.
Reassuming the Substance of those Scriptures and Inferences mentioned in the
Introduction, most usually Urged in pleading for Personal Reprobation, with
particular Answers and Explications to each, according to their true and
genuine Sense; in which is clearly Refuted those false Senses and Meanings
which the Predestinarians commonly impose upon them: The whole comprised in Ten
Objections, and their respective Answers.

HAving thus far gone upon General Reasons, I shall now come to a Particular
Examen of sundry Scriptures, most used in pleading for Personal Reprobation;
which I shall put as Objections, not that they are really so, to the Argument
I Am Advancing, but the Misunderstanding, or that false Sense put upon them: So
what I put down under the Head of Answer, is the Explication of their true
genuine Sense, and Refutation of those false and foreign Senses and Meanings
imposed on them: Which, having (for avoiding of Cavils) premised, I proceed.

Object. 1. Though God be Love, Good, Gracious, Merciful, etc. yet is he
Excellent in Power and in Judgment, and in plenty of Justice; and the Scripture
tells us of the Fierceness of his Anger, and of his Indignation, and of his
Wrath and Vengeance, etc. Deuteronomy. 9.7, 22. and 13.17. Josh. 7.26. Job 37.23. Jer.
50.7. Mic. 7.9. Romans 12.19.

Answ. All such places, in which God's Anger and Wrath, etc. are spoken of,
have respect to Provocation, and Offense given, and not otherwise; for all his
Attributes are resolvable into Goodness and Love; Mercy and Truth meet together
(or are united) in him; and Justice and Peace kiss each other (or agree in one)
in him; so speaking of God, simply, as what he is in himself, or what is
Primary and Spontaneous in him, and he is all Goodness and Love, Deus est
primario bonus, atque ex indole Naturae and secundario and ex accidente severus
idem est ex populi peccato: God is primarily good, out of the inclination of
his Nature; but secondarily and accidentally he is severe, by reason of
People's sins.

So Anger, Wrath, Fury and Vengeance, the executive part of Justice, are
consequential from God, and not primarily in his Being; but stirred up by the
Devil, and wicked Men, proceeding according to his Lusts, and the Inclination
of their depraved Nature, it is the Fruit of their Doings; but the Fruit of the
Spirit is Love, Gal. 5.22. and God is Love.

God is slow to Anger, it is not kindled in him, nor repays he Vengeance or
Wrath, without great Provocation, and cause given on our part; take away this,
and Justice is our Friend and Advocate, and is as sweet as Mercy.

It Is Transgression puts the Rod into the Hand of Justice, or she Chastizeth
not: She never smites the Innocent, or wounds the Mind that is Guiltless; if
so, it would cease to be, it would be no more Justice; but it is the Wicked that
are slain at her feet, and Transgressors are wounded by her.

And as Anger, Wrath, etc. are not primary or voluntary in God, but as effects
of Provocation and Offense; so neither is he inclined or prone thereto; which
is an ill Character in a Man, and denominates him crabbed, peevish, angry,
implacable, etc. which by no means may be spoken of God. Thus the Race of
Mankind could not offend their Maker before they were made, neither could it be
consistent with him to make such a number of Living Souls, so Good, so
Honorable, and Resembling Himself, to an End so Miserable as the Torments of
Hell.

Object. 2. The Scripture mentions Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction; and
also, Vessels of Mercy; and it is plain, some Men are intended by Vessels of
Wrath, and some Men by Vessels of Mercy. Now there is a vast difference betwixt
Wrath and Mercy, and the Scripture speaking of Mankind under the terms of so
great difference, shows as if they were not all made to the same End.

Answ. The Vessels of Wrath, are them that become such through Degeneration and
Sin; and even toward these God exercises great Patience, Goodness and Mercy,
gives them time and space of Repentance, indures them with much long Suffering,
till the Day of their Visitation is over, then they are Vessels of Wrath fitted
for Destruction; but that they were so from before they were Born, or fitted to
Destruction in their first Structure, neither this or any other Scripture
holds; whosoever are saved, it is through Regeneration; and Regeneration
supposes Generation; and Degeneration going before, Regeneration is a
restoring our Generation, bringing us into our first State and Image; and all
such are Vessels of Mercy. And the Vessels of Wrath, are the Unregenerate, them
in the Degeneration; but no Man was made a Vessel of Wrath in the Day in which
he was made.

Object. 3. The Scripture says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my Power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared throughout all the Earth; therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and whom he will he hardens. From whence some conclude Pharaoh to be
made for a purpose of Destruction, etc.

Answ. This Scripture refers to Exodus 9.16. where the words in the Lattin are,
Veruntamen propterea feci ut restares; nevertheless therefore I made, that thou
mighest remain, etc. (or that thou remainest) and in the Margent is put, Made
thee stand; instead of which is put, in the English Bible, For this cause have
I raised thee up; and in Romans 9.17. For this same purpose; where in the Latin
both Tremellius, Beza, etc. use the Verb Excitavi, and in the Greek (...) of
the same Signification.

None of all which Expressions relate to the Creation of Man, or Pharaoh's
being made to such an end, but to something done to him, or permitted, or
suffered, after he was Man: Nor is it denied, but God may Judicially harden
People, after so long and manifest Opposition and Rebellion against him.

Now were past already Seven of the Plagues of Egypt, and the Eighth about to
be poured forth; so no question, God in his Justice sooner might have cut
Pharaoh off: Yet Time was lengthened to him, and his Punishment further
deferred, for God's greater Glory, that he might multiply his Signs upon Egypt,
and so his Power be manifest, and Name declared throughout all the Earth; and
this is all that place imports.

But, not that Pharaoh was made on purpose for this End of Destruction, and no
other; nor does Temporal Destruction always imply Eternal, (the terms in the
Argument) for instances, not a few, may be collected in Scripture, where God
pardons the Sin, as to the Eternal Punishment of it, and yet inflicts an heavy
Temporal Punishment.

I come now to the second part of the Objection: Therefore has he Mercy on
whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

As to this, and such Passages, though our Opposers would have them carry their
Sense; yet read but (as they should be read) this Apostle's Epistles through,
and they explain themselves, and show in what manner and order, and for what
cause God declares his Wrath on the Vessels of Wrath, and the Riches of his
Glory on the Vessels of Mercy; and also teach us, That every one, who is a
Vessel of Wrath, becomes such by slighting the Mercies of God, graciously
tendered him in the Day of his Visitation: For there is such a Day to every
one, in which they may be saved, and wherein God works upon them in order to
this End. This is a Day of Days, an entrance into Life and Glory to them that
know and improve it.

And these are them God will have Mercy on; who, in the time of their
Visitation, receive his Grace and Love, and through the Power and Work of the
Divine Word, attain the New Birth.

And those that God will Judicially harden, are they who despise the Riches of
his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, (as did Pharaoh) not knowing
that the Goodness of God leads to Repentance; these through their hardness
and impenitent Hearts treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath. And the
others do not harden their Hearts, but obey the Truth.

Now these different States have different Rewards; and thus is Mankind
distinguished into Vessels of Wrath, and Vessels of Mercy: Thus is it that some
find Mercy, and some are Hardened.

And as to such Expressions; as Whom he will he hardens; and God hardened
Pharaoh 's Heart, etc. they are not to be understood, as if hardening Men were
simply of God, until they have rejected the Tenders of his Love, or without
long and great Provocation on their part. Nor are we to suppose, they might not
have avoided the cause of such Provocation from any fore-designed Hardening on
God's part. For during the time of any one's Visitation, God freely offers them
Mercy; and what he does afterward, has no influence upon this Argument, but
even that, seems rather a leaving them to themselves, a giving them over to a
Reprobate Mind, to Impenitency and Hardness of Heart, than active Hardening of
them. And so concerning the Hardening of Pharaoh's Heart, it is said, Exodus
4.21. and 7.13. and 10.27. That God hardened it; and in the same Book, Exodus
8.32. and 9.35. it is said, That Pharaoh hardened his Heart.

So in the Scriptures first quoted, the hardening Pharaoh's Heart, is spoken of
as God's Act; and in the latter, the same is spoken of as Pharaoh's Act: Which
seeming Difference is thus Reconciled.

Hardening in Scripture-sense is to be understood, as a Searedness and
Insensibility of things, concerning the Glory of God, and our Happiness; which
Condition is an effect of a customary and habitual Sinning, according to that
Saying, Consuetudo peccandi Peccati sensum tollit; The custom of Sinning takes
away the Sense of Sin.

So Pharaoh persisting in a course of Sin and Wickedness unto great
Obdurateness, thus it is said, He hardened his Heart; and God ceasing to strive
with him by his Spirit, and relinquishing him to that Obdurateness, thus it is
said, God hardened his Heart: For, as his Provocation was the cause of his
Plagues, so his Rebellion was the cause of his being Judicially Hardened.

By all which we may learn, in what a Qualified Sense such Scriptures are to be
understood, and the ill Consequence of a partial taking them; which may suffice
to this Objection.

Object. 4. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? For who
has resisted his Will?

Nay, but O Man, Who art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?

Has not the Potter power over the Clay, of the same Lump, to make one Vessel
unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor?

Answ. God does not find fault where his Will is not resisted; that were to
find fault where there is none; then he would not do right to Men. And shall
not the Judge of all the Earth do right?

This were to slay the Righteous with the Wicked; and if it were thus, the
Righteous should be as the Wicked. But Abraham communing with God, Genesis 18.25.
says, That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the Righteous
with the Wicked; and that the Righteous should be as the Wicked, that be far
from thee.

If this were, God should not be a Righteous Judge, neither should he Judge the
World with Righteousness, or the People with Equity.

But the Lord is the Righteous Judge; with Righteousness shall he Judge the
World, 2 Timothy 4.8. Psalm 98.9.
and the People with Equity.

Some may query, Does not the Apostle call such Reasoning a Replying against
God? Which Word is diversely rendered; as, Reply, or Answerest again, or
Disputest thou with God?

Now there is a great Variety in God's Works, and there are Degrees of Honor;
he has put the Heavens above, and the Earth below; and in Heaven he has made
several Degrees and Orders of Angels, and has caused one Star to differ from
another in Glory, and in Magnitude; yet the less Glorious are Stars too, and
all Stars are from brightness and shining, the least has its luster. And in
the Earth there are different Ranks and Degrees of Men, Superiors and
Inferiors, etc. even in the Natural Body; some parts are more, some less
Comely; yet the less Comely parts (though not so Honorable) are of great use
in the Body. And this is that thing we are not to dispute with God, why he has
made us thus: He is the Former, and We the thing formed; who are but as the
Clay to the Potter, in comparison of him. So, We unto him that striveth with
his Maker; let the Potsherd strive with the Potsherds of the Earth: Shall the
Clay say to him that fashioned it, Isa. 45.9, 10.
What make thou? etc. Woe unto him that says to his Father, What begettest
thou? Or to the Woman, What have thou brought forth? It Is our place to be
content with what God has done, both as to what he has Made us, and as to the
Station and Capacity he has placed us in; and not to murmur, or have
Emulation, against such as are greater than we, or are more endued with Power
and the Divine Wisdom, but be thankful for them, as Helps in the Church, etc.
and to God, that we are related to him; and not the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?

Ay, but say some, has not the Potter power over the Clay of the same lump, to
make one Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor?

We dispute not God's Power, but assert his Act, and aver, He has not in our
first Creation made any Man, in a strict and proper Sense, a Vessel of
Dishonor, to break or destroy it; for all the Vessels of the Potter are, by
designation, Vessels of Use; he makes none on purpose to break them in pieces
again, and to no other end, but merely to show his Power over the Clay; and
even this, if he did so, would not answer to God's making Men to an End of
Eternal Destruction, because of the Torment of that State; whereas the other is
but dead Clay. Though he has the Potter's Power, he is not as that foolish
Potter, who counted it his Glory to make counterfeit things. wisd. 15.9.


The Prophet Jeremiah gives a Relation, of his going down to the Potter's
House, and the Vessel that he made of Clay was marred in his hand; so he made
it again another Vessel, as seemed good to him; and the Word of the Lord came
to him, saying, O House of Israel, cannot I do with you as this Potter? Behold,
as the Clay is in this Potter's hand, so are ye in my hand.

Here God declares his Power, what he could do, and then his Act, what he would
do; the order and manner of which is especially observable, and is thus:

At what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, to pluck up, and to pull
down, and to destroy it; if that Nation, against whom I have pronounced, Jer.
18.^
turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto
them: Is not this great Grace and Mercy? If, as to such then as Miscarry, God
would amend their default; how much less would he make any to miscarry?

Here are, in this Text, People denoted, who had swerved from their proper End,
and who (saving God's Power) were marred for being Vessels of Honor; and God,
according to his great Power and Justice, might have concluded them under
Everlasting Dishonor * yet he forbore the Execution of this, being still ready
to spare them, if they would turn from their Evil.

And if he be thus sparing, concerning them that have sinned, to put the Seal
of perpetual Dishonor upon them, (for Vengeance is his strange Act, which
whenever he executes, he puts on his Armor) how much less has he made any to
be Vessels of Wrath and Dishonor?

For whatsoever is Good, is Honorable; but God made all things Good, therefore
he made all things Honorable.

Whatsoever tends to stain God's Honor, is false and wicked; but it is a
Dishonor to the Maker, to make any thing Dishonorable; therefore to hold
that, is false and wicked.

In short, it is contrary to Reason and Scripture, and to the Verity and Honor
of God, the Maker and Creator of all things, to say, he made any thing
Dishonorable in their first Structure, in a strict and proper Sense; but it is
allowed comparatively, or with respect to Degrees of Honor.

Now this is as to our first Make; but what God may do with us afterward,
because of our Sin, or we make our selves, or the Enemy may make us, relates
not to our first Creation or Being.

The Potter wrought a Work on the Wheel; and the Vessel that he made of Clay
was marred (or broken) in his hand; Jer. 18.3, 4.
so he made it again another Vessel, as it seemed good to the Potter to make
it. Now Man is compared to this Vessel of Clay, which was marred in the hand of
the Potter; and he made it again another Vessel, as seemed good to him; and
though we cannot miscarry in God's hand, through any deficiency in him, as a
Workman; yet we may miscarry in our own Conduct, after we are formed and
fashioned by him, as free Agents, at liberty to choose the Good, and eschew the
Evil. And it is not God's Power, but Man's going into the Evil, is the cause
many miscarry, and become Objects of God's Displeasure, and Vessels of Wrath.
Thus Men's Destruction is of themselves, and not of God.

And it is plain, when the Potter wrought his Work on the Wheel, it was first
intended for another thing, but being marred in his hand, he made it another
Vessel, as seemed good to the Potter to make it.

Now it is a received Axiom, Nullum simile currit quatuor; therefore as no Work
of God was marred in his hand, Mankind came forth from him, according to his
designation, in his own Image, a Vessel of Honor, etc.

Object. 5. The Children not being yet born, neither having done any good or
evil (that the purpose of God according to Election might stand, not of Works,
but of him that calls) it was said, The Elder shall serve the Younger; as is
written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, etc.

Answ. The Scripture speaks sometimes of singular Persons, or Individuals, when
it is to be understood, 1. Of Nations or People descending from them; or, 2. Of
certain Spiritual States and Conditions.

We have instance of the first in Canaan, the youngest Son of Ham, Genesis 9.25.
whom his Grandfather Noah cursed, and denounced him a Servant of Servants to
Shem and Japheth.

And in Esau and Jacob, of whom it was foretold, The Elder should serve the
Younger. Genesis 25.23.


And in Ephraim and Manasseh, of whom it was said, Genesis 48.19.
The Younger should be the greater.

None of all which things were fulfilled in their Persons, but in their
Posterities, etc.

For instance, of the second, Abraham had his Son Ishmae! by Hagar, Sara's
Handmaid, a Bondwoman of Egypt, of the Posterity of Ham; this is said to be
born after the Flesh. And he had his Son Isaac by Sarah the Freewoman; and
this is said to be by Promise.

And these things, says the Apostle, are an Allegory; for these are the two
Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, Gal. 4.26.
which is Hagar, answering to Jerusalem that now is; the other answering to
Jerusalem from above.

The like Instance we have in Isaac, Abraham's Heir, and the Heir of God's
Promise; he had by his Wife Rebekah two Sons, Jacob and Esau, under whose Types
are typified the Spiritual and Carnal Mind and Birth, the Degenerate and
Regenerate, the Earthly and Heavenly, etc.

So they are a double Instance to us, in treating of this Text, which is to be
Mystically, and not Literally understood; as appears from the Blessing of Esau
with the Fatness of the Earth, Genesis 27.39.
and the Dew of Heaven from above; which is the same in effect with Jacob's
Blessing, only he had rule given over him, but 'twas only for a time; for in
the said Blessing, the time is prophesied, in which Esau should break Jacob's
Yoke from off his Neck.

Now if God had hated Esau, then Isaac could not at all have Blessed him in the
Faith; for whatsoever is done in the Faith, is done in concurrence, and accord
with God; but if God hated Esau, and Isaac blessed him, they would be contrary
and repugnant the one to the other, (for all Blessing is of Love) and so
Isaac's Blessing of Esau had not been in the Faith; for in it only things
pleasing and acceptable to God are done, and no works of jar and disagreement,
or contrariety to him, these are not of Faith; but the Scripture is express in
it, Heb. 11.20.
That by Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come; so it
must needs be, that these things are an Allegory, and that God did not hate
Esau's Person, but spoke of what he hated under the Type or Figure of him.

Take this Scripture literally, to relate unto Esau, in a strict and proper
Sense, and it would be of absurd and blasphemous Consequence; for if it
represents God as at Variance with himself, and in a great degree Unhappy,
working without Pleasure, Grace, or Goodness, in the Production of wretched
hated Beings, to Eternal Misery; even Nature shrinks, and is in horror at any
dissimulate and monstrous Birth; much more it is contrary to the God of Nature;
and to suppose othewise of God, is no Christian, but an Heathenish Notion; it
is so remote from Divine, it is not Humane; that God should be employed in the
making so many Thousand of People for the Torments of Hell Fire. Such Notions
had the Heathens of old, concerning their Moloch, and other false Deities; to
appease whose imagined Fury, they caused their Children to pass through the
Fire, and become Burnt Sacrifices.

Having showed the Blasphemy and Error that attends a Literal Construction of
this Text, and that it should be Mystically understood, I shall proceed to
speak something of its Mystery, before I pass from hence.

We read in Scripture of two Seeds, Mystically; the Seed of the Woman, which
Seed is Christ, who is also the Seed of the true Church, and of the Kingdom of
God; and the Serpent's Seed, or Seed of Antichrist; of which comes the false
Church, and Kingdom of Darkness.

And as every Birth has its beginning from some Seed, so of the first of these
proceeds the Birth of the Spirit, called in Scripture Regeneration, the New
Birth, the New Man, etc. And without this be, there is no Salvation; and how
pure and spiritual a Seed is this Seed of the Living God, of which Souls and
Spirits are born!

Of the other, proceeds the Birth of the Flesh, called in Scripture, The Old
Man with his Deeds, Degenerate, or the Uncircumcision, the Reprobate Birth,
etc. And how filthy and polluted a Seed is this Seed of the Serpent, whereby
Men become as Dogs, Swine, Serpents, Dung, Filth! etc.

Now, as according to the first, we are in Christ, Branches of him, and Christ
is God's Elect, in whom his Soul delights, blessed above all for ever.

And according to the other, we are of the Devil, Children of him, Sprouts out
of his Stock; and the Devil only is God's Enemy, cursed above all Cattle, and
above every Beast of the Field. So of the first of these, Election is
predicated, and Reprobation of the latter.

We are in a State of Election or Reprobation, as we are related to the one or
other of these Births; if we live according to the one, we shall die; or the
other, we shall live.

Note, For the prevention of mistakes in the weakest Reader, that this Birth,
called the Birth of the Flesh, is not to be understood simply of the Natural
Birth, but as fallen into Carnal-mindedness.

And the Scripture teaches, That to be Carnally-minded, Romans 8.6, 7.
is Death; but to be Spiritually-minded, is Life and Peace; that the Carnal
Mind is Enmity against God; it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can
be; so they that are in the Flesh cannot please God.

This Mind is Dead, an Enemy, a Rebel, and can never be otherwise; it is not
capable of being made better, to please God, or to be subject to him, or live;
there is neither Life, Salvation or Blessing belongs to it; it is not Heir to,
or capable of any good; it is none of God's Works, but is of the Evil One: This
is the Reprobate's Description.

On the other hand, That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit; this Birth is
willing to all good, it is its Meat and Drink to do the Will of God; it is
holy, pure, and loved of God; it lives in Obedience, keeps the Commandments,
Sins not: Whosoever is born of God, 1 John 3.9.
does not commit sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God: This is the Description of the Elect.

Thus is opened, in some measure, the Mystery of Election and Reprobation, the
Loved and Hated Birth, spoken of under the Types of Jacob and Esau.

And Christ is declared to be that Promised Seed, not in a divided, but in the
most comprehensive Sense. But to proceed in these Mysteries, leads from the
Matter before me, to which I must now return.

Object. 6 There are certain Men crept in unawares, Jude 4.
who were of old Ordained unto this Condemnation, etc. From whence they
conclude some positively Ordained to Condemnation, etc.

Answ. The stress of this Argument lies upon the word Ordained, and there is
no such word in this Text, the Greek word is (...), compounded of (...) ante,
and (...) scribo; in Latin Prescripti, in English fore-written; and so it
should be translated, and not Ordained; which alters the point mainly; for
right read, it amounts to no more, than that such were before of old prophesied
of, and those Prophecies committed to Writing; or that there were written
Prophecies of them; for (...) to Prophecy, comes from (...) predico, compounded
of (...) ante, and (...) dico; that is, to foretell or fore-speak of a thing;
so the one is a Written Prophecy, the other Verbal; that is all the difference.

And what weakness is it from hence to conclude, some under a necessity of
Sinning? This makes the Visions and Prophecies, the cause of the things so
happening; then the fault would be upon the Prophets and Seers, and upon their
Prophecies and Visions, and the Scriptures the cause of the Sins they foretell
and reprehend.

But if the Prediction of things so to happen, be not the cause of of their so
happening, then neither is the Prescription, or putting what is foretold in
Writing or Print, any cause thereof, and that is as far as this Scripture
mentions; which, though our Opponents put great Stress upon it, yet being right
read, it supports no part of their Argument. For, 1st, Here is their great word
Ordained, set aside; which the Greek has nothing of, though it be put in the
English Bibles. 2dly, The words [Before of old] are not old enough to serve
this turn, having reference unto the Writings of Enoch, Paul, Peter, Jude 14. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. 2 Pet. 3.3.
etc. but these have their Date in time, and are Prophetical, not Decretal; so
are no proof of an Eternal Decree (or any Decree) of Personal Reprobation.
3dly, The style of these Prophecies, is not particular, of such and such Men,
that they should do so, and be so wicked, and fall under such Condemnation,
etc. but it is in general, as in the words of Enoch, the Seventh from Adam:
Behold, the Lord comes with Ten Thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all, and to reprove all that are Ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, etc. And so the words of the rest,
which shows, that such wicked Men there should be, but not that they were under
a fatal necessity of being so, or had never been in a capacity of Salvation, or
were condemned without any respect to their good or evil Deeds, etc.


For the Apostle Jude admits these Men to have been sometime in a capacity of
Salvation, as appears by his comparing them: 1. To the People whom God had
saved out of Egypt, and afterward destroyed them that believed not. 2. To the
Angels, which kept not their Principality, but left their own Habitation, etc.


The first were at least in a capacity of Salvation and Glory; and the latter
in the blessed Fruition on it.

Then neither were these Men condemned without any respect to their good or
Evil Deeds, as appears from their being compared: 1. To the Israelites that
believed not. 2. To the Angels that kept not their Principality. 3. To Sodom
and Gomorah. 4. To Cain, 5. to Balaam. 6. to Core.


Now the first are charged with Unbelief.

The second with Apostasy.

The third with grievous Sin.

The fourth with the Murder of his own Brother.

The fifth with Covetousness and Iniquity.

The sixth with Gainsaying and Rebellion.

So allow but the Apostle Jude to explain the Apostle Jude, and it is plain,
these Men's Evil subjectd them to Condemnation; to the which they were not
Fore-ordain'd, nor was it inflicted on them without any respect to their good
or evil Deeds.

Object. 7. They distinguish the Grace of God into Common and Special, and
allow, that every one has Common Grace; but hold, that only the Elect have
Special Grace; and that none are saved by Common Grace, or can be; but
whosoever have Special Grace, can in no wise miss of Salvation, etc.

Answ. There is no where mention in the Scripture, that I can find, of Special
Grace; which is my first Exception to the distinction, as Unscriptural.

Next comes to my thought that saying, A great Liar ought to have a good
Memory; and indeed so ought any one that deals in false Doctrines and Errors:
For generally, Ignorance and Error is incongruous, it is of the nature of a Lie;
there is no Line of Coherence in it, to lead one along, as we have Instance here.

One while they say, God hated the greater part of Mankind, and decreed their
Reprobation, etc. Another while, All Men have Common Grace; and that implies
the Favor and Love of God in some measure; for Grace is Favor, etc. But how
God should love and hate the same Persons, and at the same time, is a
difficulty they have to Unridle.

Then the word Common, is either to be understood (according to them) as vile,
importing a thing of mean or no value; in which Sense, to apply it to God's
Grace, is Blasphemy. Or it must be understood to signify General, or
Universal; a Sense in which it is commonly taken. And according to this most
common understanding of the word Common, it appears, the Apostles themselves
were saved by Common Grace, From their own Testimony:

That the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all Men;
Tit. 2.11, 12.
teaching us (say they) that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should
live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World, etc.

So they ascribe the inward Work of their Salvation to God's Universal Grace,
that is, to common Grace; in such Sense, in which the Grace of God can be said
to be Common.

But these Ingrossers, or Impropriators of Salvation, are a very particular
sort of Men, and will not go to Heaven the common Way, nor prize the Grace God
is pleased to vouchsafe to them, in common with other Men; but are for a
Special Grace, peculiar to themselves, though the Scripture be silent as to any
such thing.

They agree exact to the Pattern of the old corrupt hypocritical Pharisees,
Mat. 9.11. Luke 19.17.
who would not eat or drink with Publicans, but said, I am not as this
Publican, etc. They will have none of the common Grace, common Faith, common
Salvation, etc. but will have Grace, Faith and Salvation, all Special, and
peculiar to themselves; excluding the rest of Mankind, as Creatures of no worth
or value; they must not share in this Special Grace, must have no Portion in
David, or Inheritance in the Son of Jesse; their Trumpet sounds like that of
Sheba, their Language like his, which cost him his Head.

However, Common Grace, Faith and Salvation, is Gospel Grace, Faith and
Salvation, propounded in Scripture. So herein they differ from true Religion,
from the Scripture, and from the Gospel, that brings good Tidings of great
Joy, which shall be unto All People; and set up a particular special way of
their own, which has no footing in Scripture; a new and another Gospel of
Christ, and of another and quite contrary Tenure; for it brings Good Tidings of
great Joy but to a few; and bad Tidings of great Misery to many.

But let us a little consider; let us try before we trust, and examine well the
Matter, before we leave the good old Way, and the ancient Paths, for these
by-Ways.

As to the Common Salvation, we have instance of some that have been saved in
that way; of a Cloud of Witnesses that have passed that way; that the Nations
of them that are saved shall walk in that way, etc.

Then as to their way and manner of Salvation, by some special particular
Privilege, peculiar to themselves, and exclusive of the rest of Mankind, as
having no share or interest therein: 1. Can they give us Instance of any one
Man saved in that way? 2. Are there any Witnesses of Fame gone on it, and who
are they? 3. Is there any Testimony to it in all the Scripture, and where?


Till they show us this, we will rather be Scholars with Paul and Titus, of
the Common Grace; and Sons with Timothy, Titus 1.4. 1 Timothy 1.2.
after the Common Faith; and with Jude, diligent concerning the Common
Salvation, than trust to such imaginary Conceits of a company of Self-lovers,
and Brainsick bigoted People.

Object. 8. That the Apostle, in the afore-cited Scripture, has respect to the
Elect; for he says, Teaching us, etc. but does not say, It taught all.

Answ. The Reason is plain, why all were not taught of this Grace; some would
not learn thereof. It was ever so, some would none of his Counsel, would none
of his Instruction, but cast his Reproof behind their backs, etc. And the Lord
compels not Men to be happy, he forces Discipline upon none; so all are not
taught.

But though the Apostle does not say, The Grace taught all; he says, It appeared
to all, it brings Salvation, etc. And to what other end does it appear, but for
Salvation unto all, and to be a Teacher of good things? etc.

Mankind is One, the Divine Grace One, the Giver of it One, and the End for
which it is given, One and the same. So if it should not do the same for all
that receive it, it should cease to be Grace; which can never be.

Object. 9. We read of Paul 's Preaching at Antioch, and the People were glad;
and as many as were Ordained to Eternal Life believed: Acts 13.48.
Whence they infer, Some were not Ordained to Eternal Life, Romans 11.7.
because some believed not. And also the same Apostle, writing to the Romans,
says, The Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded, etc.

Answ. This mentions the Apostle's coming to Antioch, and the two Sermons he
preached there, and their Service, etc. All which are Particulars; and to draw
a General Conclusion from Particular Premises, is false Reasoning. And as to
the Sentence, which seems most General, That as many as were Ordained to
Eternal Life, believed; even this is to be understood Restrictively, or in a
Particular Sense; for understand it in General, and its Consequences are such
as renders the Preaching of the Gospel wholly void, in all other places, than
at Antioch.

In all other places wholly void, because none should be found in them Ordained
unto Eternal Life.

And void there, with respect to the begetting any more into the Faith;
because, as many as were Ordained unto Eternal Life, believed already.

And this makes void all the other Travels of the Apostles, their Preaching,
and Planting other Churches, and the Conversion and Holiness of those, etc.

But how extravagant would it be thus to think, or that there was not before or
after, in that place, any one Ordained to Eternal Life, only the Proselytes of
that day.

Though there be a time to all, in which they have the Tenders of Salvation;
yet time is not the same to all; some come in at the third, some at the ninth,
and some at the eleventh hour: So that this is to be understood, of such only
to whom it was then the season of Life, who were ripe for the Birth, fitted, or
set in order for it; and so is the proper Signification of the Verb (...)
(which is the word used in this place in the Greek) and is in our English
Bibles translated Ordained; the which it does not properly signify, but to set
in Order, or in a fit Posture of Mind, etc. And so is this Scripture explained,
which is not exclusive of any such, whether there at Antioch, or elsewhere, who
should afterward receive the like precious Faith with those.

And as to the other, the Election is said of the Spiritual, who have the true
Spiritual Sight and Discerning, by which Christ is known and born Testimony to;
that is, such who have made their Election sure, by adding to their Faith,
Virtue, etc. For all Israel were God's Elect People, as the Scripture does
abundantly show; but of them, some gave not diligence to make their Election
sure, by adding to their Faith Virtue, etc. and such became Blind; could
discern the Face of the Sky, but not the Signs of the Times, nor the Coming of
the Just One; and so obtained not what they sought for, but became forgetful of
their Cleansing, and Reprobate; forfeiting, as well the End, as Name of their
Election, as is further shown hereafter.

Object. 10. That the purpose of God, according to Election, might stand; not
of Works, but of him that Calls.

Answ. It Is owned, the purpose of God, according to Election, is such, That he
loved us while we were yet Enemies; it has been unto us, according to what the
Apostle expresses, As touching the Election, Beloved; while as concerning the
Gospel, Enemies: Romans 11.28. Romans 5.10.
For if when we were Enemies, we were Reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son; his Election then must stand on this bottom, Not of Works, but of him that
Called; for this precedes Works. We did not first choose him, but he has
chosen us, at a time when there was no merit in our hands.

Some would abuse these Truths, to the exclusion of all good Works; but without
them we are not saved; though they have not the first place in our Salvation,
yet they have their place, and come in, in their order.

There is something to be done on our part, when we are Called and Elected;
namely, To use diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.5.
by adding to our Faith, Virtue, etc.

Some say, It is sure; for the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance,
etc. This indeed shows the sureness of it on God's part; but on our parts, it
is conditional; all God's Dealings with us being by way of Covenant: So that we
are not saved, Nolens volens; whence it comes to pass, of the many that are
Called, few are Chosen. Mat. 20.16


For there it a great Work to be done, before we are made New Creatures; we are
not to rest in the bare beginnings of an Election, and being Called, etc. as if
our Work were done; but go on to Perfection: For through the help of Christ,
joined with our diligence, a progress may be made unto that degree of God's
Love, and State of Assurance in Christ Jesus, from whence there is no Apostasy:
And these are God's Sealed Ones, Mat. 24.24.
called in Scripture, the very Elect; whom neither false Christ's, nor false
Prophets, with their great Signs and Wonders, shall ever be able to deceive.

For to this degree of Perseverance must this Scripture relate, or else it
would interfere with those Scriptures, that show the possibility, and even
danger, of falling from Grace, of forfeiting our Calling and Election, of
making Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, of denying the Lord that
bought us, of Crucifying him afresh, and putting him to open Shame; as, 1 Cor.
9.27. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 1.8. 2 Pet. 1.9, etc.

Having done with that part of the Argument, which respects Reprobation; I come
next to treat of Election.

The Second Part. Treating more particularly of Election.
CHAP. I.
Containing some Short, but General Arguments: viz. 1. Showing some further ill
Tendencies of the false Notion of Election and Reprobation. 2. The Necessity of
Practical Religion. 3. The Mistake in Understanding some Words and Sentences in
Scripture, always in the same Restricted Sense. 4. That God deals with Mankind
in way of Covenant. 5. That God made Man a free Agent, capable to choose for
himself either Good or Evil. 6. Of God's Wisdom, Love and Justice, in dealing
with Mankind. 7. To what end the Grace of God has appeared to all Men.

. 1. AS the false Notion of the first, leads to Despair; so the false Notion of
the second, to Presumption: And both make void all Religious Exercise and Care,
concerning the Performance of Divine Worship, and all Holy Duties.

As the Tendency of the Arguments upon the first Part, is to remove all ground
of Diffidence and Despair; so shall it, on the other hand, be endeavored to
remove that ground of Presumption and Selfsecurity, which has been hurtful to
many.

. 2. And to show the necessity of Practical Religion unto Salvation; even the
Obedience of the Faith and Gospel of Christ; that we may redeem the Time
allotted us, working out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; and so, through
the Mercy and Power of Christ, raising us up, (in our selves, and not without
us) we may come to escape all the Evil of Reprobation, and to enjoy all the
Good and Blessings of Election; but without this, we can neither avoid the one,
nor attain the other.

To save Transciption, I desire the Reader to look over the Scriptures in the
Introduction; several of which are spoke to already, and it remains to say
something of Foreknowledge, Predestination, Calling, Election and
Justification, etc.

. 3. And as is shown in the other Part, concerning Hating, Hardening,
Reprobation, Vessels of Wrath, etc. the inconvenience of taking them in a
primary, strict, positive Sense; and as respecting particular Persons, without
regard to their good or evil Deeds; so take these Terms in a strict positive
Sense, to respect particular Persons, as words of the first intention, and
simply without any regard to their good or evil Deeds, and exclusive of others,
etc. and we shall run into great Error and Blindness, and lose the Truth.

. 4. For, as is in part observed before, all things between God and Man are
transacted by way of Covenant, and every Covenant supposes Terms or
Conditions, and a Possibility of Performing or not Performing of those
Conditions, and Loss or Benefit, Reward or Punishment, according as we keep or
break Covenant.

Those Terms God proposed to Cain, that Murderer of his Brother, and first
Murderer amongst Men, Genesis 4.7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? But if thou do evil, sin
lies at the door. And no Man ever had other Terms; all are accepted in
welldoing, but none at all are accepted in evil-doing.

God has commanded no Man to do wickedly, neither has he given any Man
license to sin; but being Righteous himself, he orders all things
righteously; Ecclus. 15.20. Wis. 12.15.16.
thinking it not agreeable with his Power, to condemn him that has not
deserved to be punished; for his Power is the beginning of Righteousness, etc.

. 5. So having made Man a free Agent, capable of adhering either to Good or
Evil, having power and understanding to will, distinguish, and choose for
himself; and having first proposed the Good to him, with Promises of Life, and
blessed Rewards; and cautioned him against the Evil, with Threats of Death, and
Everlasting Punishment and Misery; he then leaves him capable to receive his
Counsel. But he does not forcibly determine him to Good or Evil Actions; for
then there would be no Virtue or Vice, well-deserving or ill-deserving,
Obedience or Disobedience, Good or Evil, Wisdom or Folly, no Will, Choice, Love
or Hatred, etc. So no Rewards or Punishments; which makes void the State of
Man, and the Gospel, and God's Economy, and brings all his Works into
Confusion, altering things from that Order of Wisdom he has placed them in.

Obj. Some object, Seeing God fore-knows all things, to what End is Grace
given, and a Day of Visitation, in which they might be saved, to such as come
not to be benefitted by it, but reject so great Mercy and Goodness?

Ans. Many think, this and such like, are wise and puzzling Questions, though
the very Query convicts a Man of Ignorance; showing that he neither knows God,
nor yet himself, nor God's Economy, (his Order in the Creation) for any of
these being known, all such Scruples vanish.

For as God is the most intelligent Being, and free Agent, above all other; so
has he made Man in his Image, an intelligent Being, a free Agent. A Mavelous
Work of the great Worker of all things! With respect to which, David said,
Psalm. 139.14.104.24.
I am fearfully and wonderfully made, etc. And concerning the variety of God's
Work, he says, O Lord, how manisold are thy Works! In Wisdom have thou made
them all, etc.

Now it behooves, That He who made all things in Wisdom, should exercise an
Order of Wisdom amongst them all; should rule and govern them in Wisdom, every
thing according to its Capacity and Creation. Should he do otherwise, it would
be contrary to his Work of Creation, in framing Man's Heart, so as it is not
ordinarily wrought upon but by Persuasions.

Accordingly he draws Men with Cords of a Man, even with Loving Kindness; and
says, I will instruct thee, Hosea 11.4. Psalm 32.8.
and teach thee in the way thou shall go; I will counsel thee with mine Eye,
etc.

. 6. Here is God's Wisdom exalted, in that he deals with us, as is proper to
Creatures of our Frame and Make; voluntary intelligent Beings, that may
distinguish and choose for our selves; and if we be changed to Good, through
Obedience to the Grace of God; or to Evil, through yielding to the Enemy's
Temptations; must receive Rewards or Punishments accordingly: But once pervert
this Order of Heaven, and we should let in Confusion amongst God's Works, etc.

Also, The Love and Justice of God is here exalted.

His Love, Because he would have all Men come to the Knowledge of the Truth,
and be saved; but Men cannot come to this Knowledge, nor cannot be saved,
without this Grace.

And his Justice, that (as says the Psalmist) He might be Justified when he
speaks, and Clear when he judges; for if this Grace were not given, Psalm
51.4.
Men should have no Sin; because where there is no Law, Romans 4.15.
there is no Transgression. And concerning the Persecuting World, John 15.22.
Christ says, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin;
but now they have no cloak for their sins. So take away this Divine Light, and
Grace of God, which is the Standard by which Good and Evil are measured, and
there should be neither Virtue nor Vice, Rewards or Punishments.

So this is the Wisdom and Manner of God, his Economy (or Houshould-Order) his
Way in the Creation; that having set Life and Death before us, with
Exhortations to choose Life, he leaves us, according to the wise Man, in the
hand of his Counsel; (that is, so far as we are left to our own choice, and not
forced; for this would be repugnant to our Constitution) For He himself made
Man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his Counsel; saying, If
thou will keep the Commandments, Ecclus. 15.14, 15, 16, 17.
and perform Acceptable Faithfulness: He has set Water and Fire before thee,
stretch out thine hand unto whither thou will. Before Man is Life and Death,
and whether him likes, shall be given him. But there had been none of the Life
here spoken of, if he had not had Grace, and a Day of Visitation, etc.

. 7. Having now past this Objection, I would query, To what purpose has the
Grace of God appeared to all Men? Which the Scripture calls Gratia illa Dei
Salutifera, and benignitas Dei servatrix omnium, (the Salvation-bringing Grace
of God, the Goodness of God, the Preserver of All) and which those Men call
Common Grace. To what purpose, I say, has it appeared to all Men? And why is
it called, The Preserver of all, if no Man whatsoever obtain Salvation by it?
Which is according to their Principle.

Having hitherto, in this Second Part, cleared up my Passage, by these few more
General Arguments: I shall come now to treat more particularly of those Terms
under Examination.

CHAP. II.
Treating, 1. Of God's Foreknowledge. 2. Of Predestination; the Definition
thereof, and how to be understood in the Scripture-Sense, which is Conditional;
with Two Objections answered, to clear that Point. 3. That Predestination,
Calling and Justification, may be forfeited, or fallen from. 4. That
Predestination is implied in Calling, Election and Adoption; all which may be
lost, or forfeited.

Of God's Foreknowledge.
. 1. IT is granted, That known unto the Lord are all his Works, from the
beginning; he knows all things, past, present, and to come; but there is no
necessity of Sinning, proceeding from this Foreknowledge: This Knowledge in
God, how and in what manner things will come to pass that are Evil, is not at
all the cause of their coming so to pass; for then the fault would be upon God,
when things are so, and issue ill.

If we should charge any fault on God, and make him the Author of Sin, or else
that there should be no Sin; we should let in great Blasphemy and Absurdities;
as is in part already shown, in answer to the Objection taken from Jude, etc.
in page 24. preceding.

Of Predestination.
. 2. Predestination, is Fore-appointment, or Ordaining before, what shall come
after; which some understand, according to the Praedestinatiani, a kind of
Heretics, that held fatal Predestination of every particular Matter, Person or
Action; and that all things came to pass, and fell out necessarily, especially
touching the Salvation and Damnation of particular Men; and that Omnia suint
salo, etc.

And it is thus defined by Walter Raleigh, in his first Book, folio 16. We can
(says he) difference Predestination no otherwise from Providence and
Prescience, than in this, That Prescience only foresees. Providence foresees
and cares for, and has respect to all Creatures, even from the brightest
Angels of Heaven, to the unworthiest Worms of the Earth; and Predestination is
only of Men, and yet not of all, to Men belonging, but of their Salvation
properly, or Perdition, etc.

So herein these differ; the first hold it, Of every particular Matter, Person
or Action, etc. the latter, Of Man only, and yet not of all to Men belonging,
etc. And yet in one thing, they both agree, which is nevertheless a great
Error, That Predestination has respect unto the Damnation and Perdition of
Men; which is no where found in the whole Scriptures: But wherever we read of
any being Predestined, it is unto the Adoption of Sons, unto Salvation, unto
Eternal Life, and unto Glory, etc. but never unto Destruction and Misery: So
Predestination is not unto Perdition.

And as it respects the Salvation of Men, it is not to be understood simply, or
absolutely and positively; but is to be understood secundum quid, according to
the Covenant betwixt God and Man, in a conditional Sense: For if otherwise, all
would be saved, because all were made to an End of Salvation; which signifies
their Fore-appointment unto Glory, or in other terms, their Predestination; for
to be Predestined, or Made, or Ordained, or Fore-appointed unto Glory; all
import one and the same thing.

Again, If Predestination were absolute, without any respect to the Man's being
good or evil, Salvation were unavoidable to such Men, live as they will.

But God's Saved Ones were plucked as Brands out of the Fire; Zach. 3.2. Job 33.
and delivered from going down to the Pit; and brought back from the Pit, to be
enlightened with the Light of the Living; and were brought up out of an horrible
Pit: And being straightned, and seeing this danger, prayed, Deliver me out of
the Mire, and let me not sink; let me be delivered from them that hate me, and
out of the deep Waters: Psalm 69.
Let not the Water-floods overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up; and
let not the Pit shut her Mouth upon me.

Object. 1. Ay, but say our Opponents, They that are Predestined unto
Salvation, as the end, are also Predestined unto Righteousness and Holiness,
as the means leading to that End.

Answ. If it be thus, and this Predestination sovereign and absolute; then how
is this Holiness, or Salvation of Men, effected? It must be either: 1. By a
Super pondium of the Will and Affection, etc. 2. Or by Force.


To the first of these, it would be contrary to God's Work of Creation, in
making us free voluntary Agents, so as to will, distinguish, and choose for our
selves; and it un-Mans us, depriving us of those Powers and Faculties so
essential to a Rational Creature.

And as to the second, then Men would be saved Nolens volens, whethey will or
nay; which is contrary to Seeking, Searching, Inquiry, Supplication, Prayer,
Faith, Obedience, Love, etc. And overthrows all Divine Testimonies; so that
were it Truth, it would be the most obstinate repugnant Truth that ever was
heard of; for it renders all the rest of the holy Scriptures not to be true,
and gives the lie to all those inspired Writings; and therefore it is
Self-erroneous in the Sense they urge it.

Object. 2. Whom he did Foreknow, them he also did Predestinate; whom he did
Predestinate, them he also Called; whom he Called, them he also Justified; and
whom he Justified, them he also Glorified. But it does not say, He
Predestined any, but whom he foreknew, etc.

Answ. This place indeed speaks only of such as love God, and are foreknown of
him as such; and it is, as the foregoing words show, a Declaration how all
things work together for good, unto such a People; but it does not say, That
none else are ever Predestined or Called, but such as are thus Fore-known.
But the contrary appears: 1. From Christ's weeping over Jerusalem, because in
that her day, she had not known the things that appertained to her Peace, and
then they were hid from her Eyes. 2. From that, Of the many that are Called,
few are Chosen.


. 3. And speaking on it in a general Sense, Predestination may be forfeited; for
if Justification can be fallen from, and forfeited, then may Predestination and
Calling, being lower Steps, and in order to it.

But that Justification may be forfeited, appears from that all True
Justification is by Grace and Faith, Romans 3.24, 28. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16. and
3.24. Tit. 3.7. And we read of some, that turned the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness; and some, Jude 4. 1 Timothy 1.19.6.10.
that made Shipwreck of Faith; and have erred from the Faith; and pierced
themselves through with many Sorrows.

So if Justification be by Grace and Faith; and if Grace and Faith, by which we
are Justified, may be fallen from and lost; then may Justification also be
fallen from and forfeited; and if Justification, then also Predestination and
Calling.

This is further manifest, from Ezekiel. 18.24. which says, When a righteous Man
turns away from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity; in his Trespass
that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in them shall he
dye: Which shows a possibility of falling from Righteousness, and even of a
total and final Apostasy from it. And if from Righteousness, then from
Justification; for they are equivalent. A righteous or justified Man is the
same.

. 4. Then Predestination is implied in Calling, Election and Adoption; so if
these can be lost and forfeited, Predestination may, being implied in them: And
as it is shown before, concerning Calling, that it may be fallen from, and
lost; the same I shall show concerning Election and Adoption.

The first appears from 2 Pet. 1. where we are exhorted, To use all diligence,
adding to our Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to Knowledge, Temperance; to
Temperance, Patience; to Patience, Godliness; to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness;
to Brotherly Kindness, Charity; for he that lacks these things, is blind, and
cannot see afar off; and has forgot that he was purged from his old Sins:
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure.

Which shows, though they were Called, Elected, and Brethren, etc. yet there
was a possibility of their losing that State again, and of forfeiting what God
had done for them, in purging them from their old Sins. and of their falling
into Blindness, etc.

On the other hand, If we do these things, we shall never fail: Here Is a
Conditional Assurance, If we do them, we shall never fail; if we do them not,
we shall fail: For what signifies Faith, without Virtue; Religion, without
Holiness? And it is plain, this our not failing, or preservation, depends upon
something we are to do; but yet not so as of our selves, but by the Grace of
God; by and through this Grace, we may do these things; upon which depends our
Preservation. And for want of this doing, we fail; so our Destruction is of our
selves, and in God is our Help: But he helps us by our selves, not without our
selves; if we do these things, it is left upon that, whether we fail, or never
fail.

The second is shown in the Instance of Israel, to whom appertained the
Adoption, and the Glory, etc. and yet they would not receive Christ, but
crucified him, and fell away, and lost the Holy Land, and became Fugitives in
all the Earth; Esau answered, in the Type, unto this State, he fainted and lost
his Birthright; and Fainting, spiritually, is understood of Unbelief; and it
was through Unbelief those Israelites, whom the Apostle renders as the Natural
Branches in Christ, the true Vine, were broken off from him, and fell from the
Adoption. So in the Mystery, that which Faints is Esau, and this loses the
Adoption, and Spiritual Birthright.

CHAP. III.
Showing, 1. That Election and Reprobation are of the Two Seeds; and that
Predestination, Election, Adoption, Justification, etc. are all in Christ. 2.
That Election (according to Scripture) is not strictly to be understood of
particular Persons, without respect to their being Good or Evil; and the same
evinced by sundry Propositions (with their Affirmative Proofs) laid down,
concerning the falling away of some, and not falling away of others, of the
Elect, according to Scripture.

. 1. ELection and Reprobation are of the two Seeds, or Principles, before
spoken of; whosoever is Elected, it is in Christ the heavenly Seed, and for his
sake, and not otherwise: He is God's Elect, in whom his Soul delights; He is
God's Oath and Covenant unto Mankind, and them that go out of him, break the
Covenant, and lose their State; and none are in Christ otherwise, than as they
keep God's Covenant, and perform their Duty to God, in and through his Spirit
inabling them.

So Predestination, Election, Adoption, justification, etc. are all in Christ;
and import, on the one hand, the Acts of God toward Men; and on the other,
Men's Spiritual States and Conditions in him, and are thus to be understood,
because the contrary would run us into Confusion. For instance:

. 2. If we understand Election, strictly and properly, of Persons, without any
other respect to Good or Evil, how shall we reconcile these following Passages,
deduced from Scripture?

1. That there is a State of Election, from which Men may fall away.

It is clear from Scripture, all Mankind was made Good, was God's Chosen
Creature, and his Delight; made to an end of his Glory, and to enjoy Him for
ever; and yet through the Fall, all Mankind suffered loss; according to which,
the Scripture says, We have all sinned, and come short of the Glory of God:
That in Adam all died; that Man that was in Honor, and abode not therein,
became as the Beasts of the Field, that perished.

Adam was thus Elect, and fell; the People of Israel were God's Elect People,
and many of them fell.

2. That this State of Election; though Men may fall from it, yet may be
restored again.

Israel was a peculiar and chosen People; an Election out of an Election, to
whom appertained the Adoption, and the Glory, etc. And yet those, the Natural
Branches, were some of them broken off through Unbelief; Romans 11.
notwithstanding of them it was said, If they abode not in Unbelief, they
should be grafted in; for God is able to graft them in again. This the Apostle
clears by the following Instance, If thou were cut out of the Olive Tree,
which is wild by Nature, and were graffed, contrary to Nature, into a good
Olive Tree: How much more shall these, who be the Natural Branches, be graffed
into their own Olive Tree? So here is evinced, the possibility of some of the
Elect's falling, and of their being restored again.

3. And also, That some who are Elected, may fall away, and cannot be restored
again.

It is impossible for those, who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly Gift, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of
God, and the Powers of the World to come; if they fall away, to renew them
again unto Repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame.

4. That some Elected may finally and totally fall away.

It is manifest from the abovementioned Scripture, and from Heb. 10. v. 26,
17. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received the knowledge of the
Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgmen, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries. So here is a possibility of the Elect Ones (Graduates in Election)
falling away, finally and totally; so as never to be restored again.

5. That there is such a State, or Degree of Election, from which there is no
falling away.

Such a State of certainty and fixedness is attainable, from which there is no
apostasy, or falling away; because we are exhorted unto it, To use all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; wherein we shall never fall:
And there is no Spiritual Exhortation in vain, or ill grounded; which this
would be, if it could not be made sure. The Apostle Paul was persuaded,
concerning himself and some others, That nothing should be able to separate
them from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Rom 8.38, 39.


Now this Persuasion, being of the Truth, makes it evident, That he, and those
concerning whom he was so persuaded, had attained this State.

And of such he affirms, That they could do nothing against the Truth, but for
the Truth. 2 Cor. 13.8.


And of himself, he says, I have fought a good Fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at
that day, etc.

So here is the Race run, the Rest entered into, the Fight fought, the Victory
obtained, the Wicked One overcome; and so the Fixation, the durable State, the
Assurance for ever.

1. For Christ has promised, He that overcomes, shall inherit all things; and
I will be his God, Rev. 23.7.
and he shall be my Son; and if he shall inherit all things, he shall inherit
this good State, from whence there is no falling.

2. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out. Rev. 3.12.
So here is no more falling away from this degree; these are God's Sealed Ones,
com'd higher than the first Adam before the Fall, into a State in the second
Adam, from whence there is no falling.

These are called, The Election that has obtained; and it is said, The rest
were blinded: But the reason is evident, Romans 11.7.
they gave not diligence to add to their Faith, Virtue, etc. and he that has
not these things is blind, etc.

And those are called, by way of Pre-eminence, the Very Elect, whom neither
false Christ's, nor false Prophets, with all their lying Wonders, shall ever be
able to deceive: For to this State must these, and such like Scriptures relate;
or else they would contradict those Scriptures which show the possibility of
falling from Grace, Faith, Righteousness, etc.

Thus all these Propositions are expounded and demonstrated from Scripture, and
their co-incidence and agreement clearly shown; which otherwise taken, run into
Confusion and Contradiction.

And there is no more ground left, to presume of our being absolutely or
unconditionally Elected, than there is to Despair, lest we be Reprobated;
because there are things to be done by us, which if we do, we shall never fall;
and if we do them not, we shall fall; and through the Spirit of Christ helping
us, we are all enabled to do these things, during the time of our Visitation:
So if we persevere, we are happy; If thou return, then will I bring thee again,
and thou shall stand before me; and if thou take forth the Precious from the
Vile, thou shall be as my Mouth, Jer. 15.19.
etc. So take thy Number O Sion, and shut up those of thine that are clothed in
white, which have fulfilled the Law of the Lord.

CHAP. IV.
Containing an Inquiry, touching the Two select and principal Tribes of Israel,
to wit, 1. Levi. 2. Judah: Whom, of all the rest, had the Precedence, both in
Honor and Favor with God; nevertheless, by their wilful Disobedience, and
repeated Provocations, fell under God's great Displeasure and Rejection. 3.
Showing from thence the Nullity of their (or any others) Election, when falling
short of Honoring God, and Performing Covenant with Him.

HAving spoken of Israel in general, that Elect People, whom the Apostle Paul
differs from other People in his Comparisons; as, the true Olive Tree, from the
wild Olive Tree; and as the Natural Branches, to them that are not Natural
Branches of the true Olive Tree; but, in a way above Nature, might be grafted
in.

I shall now say something of the Two Principal Tribes amongst them, and the
most Select Families amongst those Tribes; because, if ever any were saved,
without any respect to their Walking with God, etc. they would be found here,
we should meet with them among these Beloved and Honored People. And

1. First, of Levi, that Priestly Tribe; in that same Night, in which God slew
all the First Born of Egypt, he sanctified to himself all the First Born of
Israel; and he made choice of, and accepted this Tribe, in lieu of them, and
separated them unto the Priests Office, and none were to bear the Tabernacle or
Ark, or come near to touch the holy things, but them; and their incampment was
round about the Tabernacle, etc.

And of this Tribe, the Dignity and first Honor fell upon Aaron and his Sons,
Eleazer and Ithamar, and they were distinguished in their Consecration, with
Water, Oil, Hysop, and Blood; in their Offerings made for them, in their
Vestments, Food, Services, their Incamping next the Tabernacle, Eastward; where
if any Stranger came, he was to be put to Death.

Now Aaron, the first High Priest, confirmed in his holy Office, against the
Contenders for that Dignity, by a great Miracle, the Budding of his Rod in one
Night, its Blossoming, and bringing forth Almonds; he died in Mount Hor. And
Moses put his Robes upon Eleazer, his Son and Successor, in the Honor of the
high Priesthood, which was confirmed to him, and Phineas his Son (when he slew
Zimri and Cosbi) by way of the Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood; yet a
period was put to the descent of this Honor, in Eleazer's Line, at the Death
of the Fourth High Priest after him; and it appears, it had been of more
duration, by the Promises made unto the next Family, had they kept God's
Covenant.

For the fourth High Priest from Eleazer being dead, that Dignity devolved upon
Eli, the first High Priest of the Line of Ithamar, whose Sons were Sons of
Belial, and knew not the Lord, but committed great Wickedness, and their Father
restrained them not. And there came a Man of God unto Eli, and said unto him,
Thus says the Lord, Did I plainly appear unto the House of thy Father, when
they were in Egypt? 1 Samuel 2.33.
etc. -- And did choose him out of all the Tribes of Israel to be my Priest?
etc. -- Wherefore kick ye at my Sacrifices? etc. -- And honor thy Sons
above me, etc. -- Wherefore the Lord God of Israel says, I said indeed that
thy House, and the House of thy Father, should walk before me for ever; but now
the Lord says, Be it far from me: For them that honor me, I will honor; and
they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Behold the days come, that I
will cut off thine Arm, and the Arm of thy Father's House, etc. -- And the Man
of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine Altar, shall be to consume thine
Eyes, and to grieve thine Heart, etc. Soon after this, Israel was smitten by
the Philistines, the Ark of God taken, the two wicked Priests (the Sons of Eli)
Hophni and Phinehas, slain in one day; and Eli, upon the News thereof, falling
from his Seat, broke his Neck, and died, etc. Hence it is plain, the exceeding
Love of God to this Family, and how perpetually Happy they might have been, if
they had Honored God; and how Wretched and Miserable they made themselves, by
provoking him with their Wickedness and Abominations: So as this high Honor
was quite removed out of their Line, in the time of King Solomon, when he
expelled Abiather from the Priesthood, 1 Kings 2.26.
who was the last of the high Priests of the House of Ithamar; in whose place
he constituted Zadock, and in him was again restored the Line of Eleazer, to
the possession of that Dignity; to which (as that Prophecy, here fulfilled,
teaches) they now ascended by the steps of the Trespass of the other. From
whence it is clear, that Sin is Sin in the most Beloved People; and that God may
be provoked by it to forsake 'em, and instead of the purposed Blessing, to
bring a Curse upon them: So there is no continuing Sanctuary in Election, if we
make it not sure, after the abovementioned Gospel-manner; but in Virtue and
keeping the Covenant, there is Sanctuary; in Faith and Holiness, is an
Invincible Shield.

To which agrees the Prophecy of Malachy, who in his day, told the Priests on
this manner, If you will not hear, if you will not lay it to heart, Mal. 2.1, 2.
to give Glory to my Name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a Curse
upon you, and I will curse your Blessings; yea, I have cursed them already,
because you do not lay it to heart; I will corrupt your Seed, and spread dung
upon your Faces, etc. So here God will be Glorified in the House of Eleazer:
For want of this, we see Ithamar's House long since rejected and cursed; and
now the Curse entering upon the House of Eleazer, for the same cause, of not
giving Glory to the mighty Name of God: And they were a select People, and had
great Promises; concerning the first, God had said indeed, Thy House, and the
House of thy Father, shall walk before me for ever; and to the latter, he had
long since given his Covenant of Life and Peace, even the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood; but is now beginning to corrupt his Seed, and to spread
Dung on his Face; and what is become of their Priesthood, their Tabernacle,
their Temple, their Mercy-Seat, Ark, Altar, Sacrifices, and all their holy
things? How is Levi this day cast off, scattered, rejected, etc? And as it is
Glorious on the one hand, to consider their high Dignity and Honor; so is it on
the other hand, Astonishing, to consider their Privation of it, their
Debasedness and Misery.

2. I come next to speak of Judah, the most Enobled and Royal Tribe of the
whole Earth; if distinction is to be made of Blood, it is to be found here, the
most Royal Blood that ever run in Humane Veins; if of Lineage and Families, the
World affords us instance of none so Great, so Renowned as this, Honored with
the Birth of Christ; his Name imports Praises, and his Excellency was held
forth in his Blessing: Judah, thou art He whom thy Brethren shall Praise; thy
Hand shall be on the Neck of thine Enemies, thy Father's Children shall bow
down before thee, etc. Genesis 49.48.

Whence, and from several other Scriptures, may appear, That Judah had the
first place in the Love of God, before any other Tribe or Family then upon
Earth; yet God would not bear their Wickedness, but was provoked by it, so as
he slew Er, the First Born Son of this great Father of the Tribe, and from whom
it took its Denomination.

And in After-time, when their Kings did wickedly, God was provoked with it, as
appears particularly in the Instance of Manasseh, who did evil, above all that
the Amorites did, which were before him; for which cause, God said, He would
bring such Evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever should hear of it,
both his Ears should tingle: And further, I will forsake the Remnant of mine
Inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their Enemies, and they shall
become a Prey and a Spoil unto all their Enemies, because they have done that
which is Evil in my sight, and provoked me to Anger, etc. And notwithstanding
the great Reformation soon wrought in Judah, by that good King Josiah, (who was
this wicked King's Grandchild) of whom it is Recorded, That like unto him was
no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his Heart; neither after
him, arose there any like him: Yet so far was the Lord provoked, upon so great
a defection of the People, that he turned not from the Fierceness of his Wrath,
wherewith his Anger was kindled, etc. but said, I will remove Judah also out of
my sight, as I have removed Israel; and I will cast off this City Jerusalem,
which I have chosen; and the House, of which I said, My Name shall be there,
etc.

. 3. So it is clear, People in great Favor with God, could forsake him by
Disobedience, and forfeit their share in his Love, and instead thereof, draw
down his Displeasure and Wrath upon them; For no Man shall please the Lord, or
continue long in his Favor, who does not Love, Honor and Serve him; and it
has been in many Instances observable, That the nearer God takes any People
unto himself, the more need they have to be humble, reverent and holy, as they
are nearer the Divine Presence: For the Lord has said, He will be sanctified
in them that come nigh him; which when Moses expounded of the sudden and
miraculous Death of Nadab and Abihu, Aaron held his Peace; this high Priest
could not deny the Exposition. Levit. 20.1, 2, 3.

So for People to take a greater liberty in their Words, Actions, and
Conversation, because of an Opinion of their being more Beloved of God, and his
People in a more peculiar manner than others, is exceeding foolish and
erroneous; this has introduced that evil Licenciousness with some People, that
they could think those things tolerable in themselves, which they condemn in
others; and has found out that hurtful distinction between the Sins of the
Saints, and the Sins of the Wicked; and has brought a strange Species of Sin
(for they will not allow it to be of the common fort) into the Prayers, and best
Duties, of the Saints; which many will plead for, as though it were either
necessary or unavoidable: Whereas the Man that is thus stated, with respect to
the Divine Favor, should rather show it forth out of a good Conversation, with
Holiness of Truth.

Next, Amos the Prophet says, in God's Name, unto this Select People, Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the Fumilies of the Earth; therefore I will
punish you for all your Iniquities; which has come to pass on this (once
Honorable) Tribe, as well as on the rest of the Jews, whose Government is
overturned, their Country inhabited by another People, and they under a more
visible Dispersion into other Lands, than any other People or Nation under
Heaven; and remain to this day, as a sort of Vagabonds and Fugitives scattered
up and down upon the face of the Earth, having neither King or Nation of their
their own; for as Levi has lost his Dedicate things, so has Judah his
Regalia; the Scepter is departed from him, and the Lawgiver from between his
knees.

CHAP. V.
Being, 1. An Inquiry into the Infamous Race and Posterity of wicked Ham, whom
their Father Noah Cursed, with great Bondage and Servitude; notwithstanding
which Curse and Rejection, many good People were found amongst them. 2. That
their General Restoration is held forth in Scripture.

. 1. HAving taken a view of the two most honored and beloved Families upon
Earth; let us next take a view of the most Accursed and Infamous Family upon
Earth; that of Ham's, not Excluding even those that wear the black Badge of
Darkness, in the surface of their Skin; the Posterity of him who blushed not at
his Father's Nakedness, became as it were incapable of a Blush. Our Savior
himself speaks of this People, in comparison of the aforementioned, as Dogs to
Children. Mat. 15.


So that if there had been such a special Election, according to which some had
been saved, without any respect to their Faith, Obedience, etc. it would have
been found among those; or if there had been such an absolute Reprobation,
according to which some had been cast headlong into Perdition, without any
respect to their good or evil Deeds, we should find it among these.

But in the trace of the former, it is showed, how that notwithstanding their
special Election, many of them were rejected, and fell away.

So it may appear concerning these, that such of them as walked according to
the Grace given them, were received and accepted for good. For Instance: 1.
Vriah the Hittite, one of David's Worthies, a Man of great Zeal and Virtue, who
was with Israel in their Wars against Ammon; and his Zeal for God was such, as
coming on an Errand from the Army, he refused the King's Order to go home unto
his Wife; saying, The Ark and Israel, and Judah, abide in Tents; 2 Samuel 11.11
and my lord Joab, and the Servants of my lord, are encamped in the open Field;
shall I then go into mine House, to eat, and to drink, and to lie with my Wife?
As thou live, and as thy Soul lives, I will not do this thing. 2. The Widow
of Zarepha, or Sarepta, to whom Elijah the Prophet was sent, after he had
prophesied against Ahab, King of Israel; and she was a Woman of great Faith, as
the following Passages show.


At that time there was a sore Famine in the Land, and she was run to the last
extremity, having left her but an handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oil
in a Cruise, and she was gathering Sticks to bake it, for her and her Son,
being resigned unto Death, after that their last Cake was eaten. And yet, even
in this extremity, she was persuaded to feed the Prophet with this her Food,
and to believe him, contrary to the common course of things, that her Barrel of
Meal should not waste, nor her Cruise of Oil fail, till the Lord should send
Rain upon the Earth. Great was her Faith, and the Mercy shown her great; for
her Meal and her Oil failed not, so that she with her Son were preserved
through the Famine; and her Son being Dead, was restored to Life again by the
Prophet. 1 Kings 17.


Christ recounteth this as a special Mercy, even above what was shown the
Widows of Israel; for he says, There were many Widows in Israel in the days of
Elias, when the Heavens was shut up three Years and six Months, Luke 4.25, 26.
when great Famine was throughout all the Land; but unto none of them was Elias
sent, save unto Sarepta, a City of Sidon, unto a Woman that was a Widow.

3. That Woman of Canaan; who, when Jesus departed into the Coasts of Tire and
Sidon, came out of the same Coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have Mercy on
me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.
Mat. 15.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
But he answered her not a Word; and his Disciples besought him, saying, Send
her away, for she cries after us. But he answered, saying, I am not sent, but
unto the lost Sheep of the House of Israel. Then she came and worshipped him,
saying, Lord, help me. But he answered, It is not meet to take the Children's
Bread, and cast it to Dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the Dogs eat of the
Crumbs which fall from their Master's Table. Then Jesus answered, O Woman,
great is thy Faith; be it unto thee even as thou will. And her Daughter was
made whole from that very hour.

4. The Ethiopian, an Eunuch of great Authority under Candace, Queen of the
Ethiopians, Acts 8.27.
read at large his miraculous Conversion, and Confession of Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God.

As in our view of those honorable Tribes, we find some wicked People of Levi
and Judah; so in the search among these infamous People, we find some good of
Ham; and as the evil People of those chosen Families were cast off and
rejected, so were the good People of this cursed Family received of God, and
accepted.

From whence may appear, that we are not saved in a Life of Sin, by Virtue of
any previous Election; nor destroyed in a Life of Holiness, by means of any
previous Reprobation.

Whoever perished being Innocent? or where were the Righteous cut off? Job 4.7.
Who ever found Life in Death? or being guilty, were saved? or perished being
Righteous?

That this People were of Ham's Race, is apparent; from that, one of them is
called a Woman of Canaan, and the answer of Christ to her; and from that,
Sarepta and Tire belonging to Sidon; which City has it is Name from Sidon, the
firstborn Son of Canaan, the youngest Son of Ham; who, as History gives
account, invaded the Land of Promise, called then Phenicia; but from him it was
called Canaan; of his Brother Mizraim came Philistine; and of himself came
(besides the Sidonians) the Jebusite, the Amorite, the Girgashite, the Hittite,
etc. and these planted themselves there, in part of Shem's Inheritance; for
their Father Noah, as Antiquity mentions, gave Asia to Shem, Europe to Japheth,
and Africa to Ham; whence David calls Egypt Ham's Land.

Israel came also into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the Land of Ham. He sent
Moses his Servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen; Psalm 105.23, 26, 27.
they showed his Signs among them, and Wonders in the Land of Ham, etc.

. 2. And though Noah their Father cursed this People, and pronounced him three
times, a Servant, and Servant of Servants, etc. yet we see there arose some
good People among them; and their general Restoration seems to be held forth in
some Scripture-Prophecies, as these following, etc.

Princes shall come out of Egypt; Psalm. 68.31.
Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.

In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the Language of
Canaan, and swear to the Lord of Hosts, etc. And there shall be an Altar to the
Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt, Isai. 19.18, 19, 20, etc.
and a Pillar at the border thereof to the Lord; and it shall be for a sign,
and for a witness unto the Lord of Hosts, in the Land of Egypt; for they shall
cry unto the Lord, because of the Oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior,
and a great One, and he shall deliver them. And the Lord shall be known to
Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do
Sacrifice and Oblation; yea, they shall vow a Vow unto the Lord, and perform
it. The Lord shall smite Egypt, yea, he shall smite and heal it, and they shall
return even to the Lord, and he shall be entreated of them, and shall heal
them. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even
a Blessing in the midst of the Land; whom the Lord of Hosts shall bless,
saying, Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the Work of mine Hands, and
Israel mine Inheritance.

And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great Trumpet shall be blown,
Isai. 27.13.
and they shall come which were ready to perish in the Land of Assyria, and the
outcasts in the Land of Egypt, and shall worship the Lord in the holy Mountain
of Jerusalem.

So in the Lord's Way, here is Salvation for all People; but out of it, no
Salvation: If we walk in the Light, even as he is Light; we have fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
Unrighteousness. 1 John 1.7.


THE Corrector Corrected:
BEING An Answer to George Keith 's Arguments, concerning the great Mystery of
Election and Predestination, after a peculiar way, (as he terms it) in his Book
he miscalls Truth Advanced, in the Correction of many gross and hurtful Errors,
etc. Printed in the Year 1695. Page 9, and 10.

1. GEORGE KEITH says, Although he is well persuaded, there is no absolute
Reprobation of any Souls of the Children of Adam, or Decree of Eternal
Destruction past upon them, that is Absolute; but only such as is Conditional,
and relative to their final State, in Sin and Unbelief.

2. Yet he is well, and fully persuaded, there is an Election of Souls, and
Seeds that is certain; to wit,

3. That God has chosen all such Souls of Mankind, who shall be saved from the
beginning of the World unto the end of it, both to Faith and Holiness, as the
Means; and to Eternal Life and Happiness, as the End, to be obtained by the
said Means.

4. And that in all Souls that are to be saved, although both Holiness and
Eternal Life, is to be their free Choice; yet that Choice is not a bare,
indifferent, or contingent and accidental Choice; but God has most certainly
and absolutely purposed, to work that free Choice in them, both to Holiness, as
the Means; and to Eternal Life and Happiness, as the End, to be (in due time)
obtained by the said Means.

Answer. Reprobation, he here makes conditional and relative; and Election,
certain and absolute; and by Election, he understands God's Choice of all such
Souls of Mankind who shall be saved, both to Faith and Holiness, as the Means;
and to Eternal Life, as the End, etc. By which it appears, that in his account,
there are some Souls of Mankind God has not made choice of, not only who shall
not be saved, but according to his next Paragraph (which I mark 4.) that are
not to be saved.

But God made all Souls of Mankind; so, according to Geo. Keith, God made some
Souls of Mankind that are not to be saved, and some that are to be saved.

Now, to be sure such Souls as are not to be saved, are not made to that End;
nor has God intended the Salvation of such: So then there must be an absolute
Reprobation of them. But he says, He is well persuaded there is no absolute
Reprobation, etc. Contradiction 1.

Then, according to G. K. God made not Choice of all Souls of Mankind from the
beginning, but only all such as should be saved, etc.

But the contrary is evident.

For Adam, our first Parent, and the common Representative of Mankind, was made
in God's Image, was Christ's Delight, was made Good, etc. And God has ever
chosen his own Image, he beholds and loves his own Image, above every Image:
And Christ's delighting in Men, shows his Choice of them. Besides, he never
made any Good thing to an Evil end; and he has expressly said, All Souls are
mine. Ezekiel. 18.4.

And after the Fall, God made a Promise unto Adam, That the Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Serpent's Head; which afterward he renewed with Abraham,
etc. And all Mankind had their share and interest in this Promise, and Covenant
of God, made with Adam, their common Parent and Representative; so all Mankind
were again made capable of Salvation, after the Fall.

So I would query of G. K. whether after the Fall, there was not the means of
Restoration free, and offered unto all Mankind?

But if Faith and Holiness be included in this Election pleaded for, as the
Means of their Salvation so Elected, and as the Effect of their Election before
the World began, then either all Men are Elected unto Salvation, or else none
can be saved but who are so Elected; and all the rest of Mankind must of
necessity be Damned, because not Elected unto Faith and Holiness, as the Means;
and Salvation and Happiness, as the End. And then what is become of Universal
Grace, so much pleaded for by G. K. heretofore, and with his now being well
persuaded, there is no absolute Reprobation of any of the Souls of the Children
of Adam, etc? Contrad. 2.

He says, That in all Souls that are to be saved, both Holiness and Eternal
Life is to be their free Choice. But upon the matter, he makes this free
Choice, no Choice at all; but rather a Sovereign Act of God upon the Creature:
Then the Creatures Act like the Ranters, who say, If God would have me to be
good, he can make me good, etc. We own, that it is of Grace that we choose the
Good, etc.

But if it were by such a sovereign Act of God, as he seems to hold forth, then
it would not be Choice; for Choice is our Act, and God persuades us to make
that good Choice; but it must be our free Choice. He compels none; for that
would be contrary to his Wisdom in framing our Hearts, so as they are not
ordinarily wrought upon, but by persuasion.

He brings some Scriptures to prove his Doctrine; as, Whom he did foreknow,
Romans 8.29.
he also did predestinate, etc. But I wholly pass by these here, they being
particularly spoken to in the foregoing Treatise, of Election and Reprobation.

His next Scripture is, He has chosen us in Christ Jesus, before the
Foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4.
to be holy and without blame before him in love.

To this, All things were made by Jesus Christ, and for him; and all Mankind
was made after his order, as he is the Son of Man; so all Men chosen in him
before the Foundation of the World, etc.

But he says, (in p. 10.) Augustine well observed, about Twelve Hundred Years
ago, That it is not said, God has chosen us for our foreseen Faith and
Holiness, but he has chosen us to be Holy: So that our Faith and Holiness is
wholly the Effect of God's Election, not at all the Cause or Condition of it.

Notwithstanding the Antiquity of this Observation, its famous Author, and G.
K's Commendations of it, yet to me it seems rather an Amusement than an
Argument: For here is an Election, which he says, our Faith and Holiness is not
the cause of; whoever pretended it so to be? Nor is it (he says) the Condition
on it, but wholly the Effect on it; but says, This Effect is not forcibly
produced, it is a Work of God's Grace.

And this Grace is Universal, and for the same end to all; so that in whom it
produces not this Effect, the cause is, Their resisting the Grace; and not
their non-Election. And there is a Fallacy in seeking to separate the Condition
from the Effect; the Condition and Effect of a thing may in sundry respects be
the same, and often (as here) are as it were interwoven in each other. But

If, as G. K. says, Faith and Holiness be wholly the Effect of God's choosing
us in Christ Jesus before the Foundation of the World; from thence it follows,
That none can have Faith and Holiness, unless they be chosen of God in Christ
Jesus before the Foundation of the World.

And if Faith and Holiness be wholly the Effect of this Choice; then, to all
Men who are not thus chosen, Faith and Holiness are impossible.

But to them, to whom Faith and Holiness is impossible, Eternal Life and
Happiness is also impossible; for no Man comes unto the End, but by the Means.
And if to some Men, Eternal Life and Happiness is impossible, then there is an
absolute Reprobation of them. But G. K. says, He is well persuaded there is no
absolute Reprobation, etc. Contr. 3. And if, as he says, God has chosen all
such Souls of Mankind, who shall be saved, from the beginning of the World,
etc. Then this Election either comprehends all the Souls of Mankind, or it
takes in but a part of them: If but a part of them, the other part cannot be
saved.

G. K. says further (in p. 11.) If such a Conditional Election were, it would
be General or Universal, and comprehend all Mankind; for why are one part more
than another, seeing Eternal Life and Salvation are held forth Conditionally to
all? But the Scripture no where holds forth a General Election, but only of
some; and therefore Christ taught, That though many are Called, yet few are
Chosen.

To which I answer, Calling is an effect of God's Love, and Election is from
the same. From God's Love to us, springs his Choice of us: So Calling and
Election are equivalent, or the same in kind. But there is a degree of
Election, which is only said of the Faithful; they were Called, and Chosen, and
Faithful and True; but though all are Called, yet only a Remnant prove Faithful
and True: Thence it comes to pass, of the many that are Called, few are Chosen.

Wisdom, says the wise Man, exalts her Children, etc. If a Man commit
himself unto her, he shall inherit her, etc. At the first she will walk with
him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with
her Discipline, until she may trust his Soul, and try him by her Laws; then
will she return the strait way unto him, and comfort him, and show him her
secrets; but if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his own
Ruin. I could wish this were not G. K's own case, but I am afraid on it.

However, it appears hence, that God's Dealing with us is Conditional; and what
were these many called to, if not to Faith, and Holiness, and Eternal Life? And
whence comes it, that so few of them are chosen, but from their Disobedience
and Unfaithfulness? Who, not committing themselves to the holy Spirit of
Discipline, nor abiding the Trial of her Laws, have gone wrong, and so been
forsaken, and given up to their own Ruin.

But G. K. will neither have Election to be Conditional nor General; though he
must either grant this, or allow a possibility of Salvation to such as are not
chosen of God, or Elected to Faith and Holiness, as the Means; nor to Eternal
Life and Happiness, as the End, (to be in due time obtained by the said Means)
or else agree to an absolute Reprobation of some: But he says, He is well
persuaded there is no absolute Reprobation, etc. Contr. 4.

And if he allows a possibility of Salvation to such as are not Chosen, etc.
then he will make two ways of Salvation; the one by Election, the other some
other way, (he is yet to tell us of.) According to the first, the Elect only
are saved; according to the latter, some other People. If he allow it not, he
must concede an absolute Reprobation of them; and so take home his
Contradiction. Besides, if he deny an Universal Salvation, as free for Mankind,
he must also deny Universal Grace, the Universality of Christ's Death (who
tasted Death for every Man) and of the Gospel; all which imply Universal
Salvation tendered.

G. K. argues (in p. 11.) If Election were only Conditional, why did Paul (he
should have said Peter) exhort Believers, To give all diligence to make their
Calling and Election sure? For how can that which is only Conditional, be made
sure to some more than to others? Now he presses them to make it sure; to wit,
That they may have the assured knowledge of it; Not that it was not sure unto
God; for as Paul declared, The Foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, etc.

This Text stood directly in his way, and therefore he endeavors the more to
darken it, by the Smoke of his Pit. But this Fallacious and Sophistical
Exposition will not do.

For Peter's exhorting Believers, To give all diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure, shows something on their part to be done, for the
ascertaining it unto themselves; they had it, the Election belonged unto them,
but they could not hold it, nor be assured of their continuance in it unto the
end, nor bind it, nor seal it to themselves, but by a diligent perseverance in
the Fear and Grace of God, adding to their Faith, Virtue, etc. which shows the
performance of some Duty incumbent upon the Elect; something to be done, some
Condition to be observed on their part; the neglect whereof hinders them from
having their Election made sure to them: For we see the Text calls it, their
Calling and Election, to whom it is directed; and though it was theirs [your
Calling and Election] yet something was still to be done to make it sure; which
shows it was theirs, yet not so sure but that it might be forfeited and lost:
For if it had been so sure, when he so exhorted them, there had been no need to
give diligence to make it sure; for that which is already so, needs not still
to be made so; nor can it thereby be made sure, if it were sure before.
Therefore if their Election, to whom Peter writ, had at that time been sure,
his Exhortation had been ill grounded, and in vain.

But he presses them to make it sure, says G. K. to wit, That they might have
the assured knowledge on it. But he might as well have said any thing else; for
there is no more evidence of this being the Apostle's meaning, than that he
meant any other thing; nor can he persuade us, Peter was so incapable or
insincere in his Expression, as to say one thing, and mean another; or that he
meant not as himself says, but as G. K. says for him.

And to this Query, How that which is only Conditional, may be made sure by
some more than others?

I answer, By Performance of the Condition; as if a faithful true Master
promises a certain Reward to each Man, who will do so much Work in such a
time. He that uses diligence, and finisheth his Work in the time allowed,
makes the Reward sure; and such as neglect, and finish not their Work in the
time, lose their Reward. Thus that which is conditional may be made sure, or
may be forfeited.

Further G. K. says, (in p. 12.) The Foundation of God stands sure, etc. And
that this Foundation is God's Everlasting Love in his Son Christ Jesus, who
has loved and chosen them in Him, as his Members, before the World began: And
though they lapsed and fell from Him, their Head, yet he is sent of the Father
to recover and save them all, and every one of them, etc. (to wit, the Elect.)

Here it is plain, G. K. makes only a certain Number, he calls the Elect, to be
loved and chosen in Christ, as his Members, before the World began; and
restricts the Mission and Death of Christ to them; saying, That he is sent of
the Father to recover and save them all, and every one of them, etc. So,
according to this Doctrine, Christ was not sent of the Father to be the Savior
of the World, but to save them, (the Elect) then of consequence he died not for
all People; for he died for none but them he was sent to save; and so, as he
was sent to save but a particular Number, he died but for that particular
Number.

But if Christ died for all Mankind, then either all Mankind were capable of
Salvation, and of being chosen of God in Christ Jesus; or Christ died for some
who were not thus choen of God, etc.

Then I would query, 1. Whether Christ was sent of God, to die for them God had
not chosen? 2. And if Christ died for them, whether it was in order to their
Salvation? 3. And if it was not on that account, on what account died he for
them? 4. And if on that account, then whether, though God have not so chosen
them, they can be Reconciled or saved by Virtue of Christ's Death?


G. K. says (in p. 14, 15.) If God had left Men to their mere indifferent
Choice, to be good or bad, holy or unholy, it might have happened that none had
been good, or holy, and so the Church had ceased in the World.

And he says (in p. 12.) As Christ is the Elect Head, so he has an Elect
Body, and Elect Members, that were given to him before the foundation of this
World; and that many Thousands belong to God's Election, and are his Chosen and
Elect, Elect Stones, Elect Members, etc. who are unconverted, and in a state of
Sin, and Impenitency, and Unbelief.

See here the difference he makes between the Church of God, and his Elect and
Chosen People, Christ's Elect Body, Elect Members, etc.

The Church he says, must be Good and Holy, or it cease to be; but the
Elect, etc. may be of the unconverted, impenitent Sinners, and Infidels, and
such like. Thus he divides Christ Body from Christ's Church, and makes as if
Christ's Body and Members may be Unholy, Sinful, etc. though his Church must be
Good and Holy, or else it cease to be.

Now as concerning his Sinful, Unbebelieving, Impenitent Elect Chosen People,
it is hard to believe they should be Members of Christ, and not of his Church;
and if he will allow them to be of the Church, then it follows not, that though
there had been none Good or Holy, the Church had ceased in the Earth; for it
might have still consisted of those Chosen Impenitent Sinners, and Elect
Unbelievers, who have (in his sense) a preference before any other Infidels
whatsoever.

These his wild Notions, he would prove from Romans 11. where the Apostle Paul
says of some of the Unbelieving Jews, as concerning the Gospel, they are
Enemies, etc. but as touching the Election, they are Beloved, etc.

There is something particular in that case of these Jews, which cannot be made
a common Plea; their Election in Abraham's Seed touching which they were
beloved, was figurative of that Election which is in Christ the Heavenly Seed.
And as the Promises of the First Covenant were to them that were of Abraham's
Seed, so the New Covenant Gospel-Promises are to them that are of Christ's
Seed, in which is the Blessing of all Nations; and it appears not, that all
these Jews, of whom it was here said, As concerning the Gospel, they are
Enemies; that they ever became the Gospels Friend's, or were Reconciled to God,
through the Gospel of his Son.

His next proof is from 2 Timothy 2. where the same Apostle says, He endured all
things for the sake of the Elect, that they might be saved; upon which he
argues, that this proves plainly they are God's Elect before they are saved,
even when they are in a state of Unbelief and Impenitency.

As to Unbelievers, and the Impenitent; I have affirmed, the Universal Love of
God has appeared to all Mankind, as they are his Creatures, and a Day of
Visitation, etc. and I keep to it; and himself owns, God loves all his
Creatures, as they are his Workmanship; but by his Election here, he means
something further than that; to wit, the Selection and Preference of those
Chosen Sinners. And in this Sense I oppose him, that these Impenitent Sinners
should any more belong unto God's Election, than other Impenitent Sinners; and
I find not in the Scriptures, Unbelievers and Impenitent Sinners, called God's
Chosen and Elect People, Christ's Elect Body, Elect Members, Elect Stones, etc.
So for him to call them so, is Unscriptural, and is to raise a Mist.

And if we grant his Argument on this Text, That they are God's Elect before
they are saved; it does not thence follow, as he would have it, that they are
so in a state of Unbelief and Impenitency; for there are many Steps betwixt
this and Salvation with Eternal Glory. Ibid. Verse. 10. They might be in the
Faith, and way of their Salvation, and yet the Apostle endure much Spiritual
Travel and Exercise, on their account, that they might strive lawfully, and be
crowned. Ibid. ver. 5. And it is apparent, that it is of such as were in the Work
of their Salvation, the Apostle here speaks, when he said, He endured all
things for their sakes; and of the other he says, If God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to the acknowledging the Truth, and that they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil. Ibid. Verses 25, 26.

G. K. (in p. 12, 13.) speaks of Souls belonging to Christ, that shall be saved
from the beginning of the World unto the end on it.

And (in p. 14.) of Souls that shall not be saved at any time in this World,
not being given to Christ, as his Members, from the beginning.

So in this Man's Opinion, they that were not given Christ, as his Members,
from the beginning, shall not be saved at any time in this World; and that none
were thus given to Christ, but the Elect only.

And (in p. 18.) that Election signifies a Selection, or Preference of some
before others. But as to those others, that shall not be saved, that had not
this Preference, nor were given to Christ from the beginning, To whom were they
given? Or what was the matter with these poor Souls? It Is sure they had done no
offense to their Maker; for the Beginning was before the Fall, before ever Sin
or Transgression entered, etc. Besides, God has said, All Souls are mine; and
if God's, then Christ's. But this Man tells of Souls that are not Christ's, and
yet that he is well persuaded there is no absolute Reprobation. Contr. 5.

I have sundry times noted to him this Persuasion, i^ seeming to contradict his
Doctrine, and his Doctrine his Persuasion.

But he uses a strange Shift here; for it is of the Children of Adam (or any
Souls of them) he is persuaded there is no absolute Reprobation.

But now he tells us (in p. 14.) That such who shall not be saved, etc. are of
another Stock and Root than that Adam, or Man whom God created in the
beginning, Male and Female, and were not contained in him, nor are his
Branches, Parts, or Members; but are of Adam Belial, and the Seed of the
Serpent, that was fallen from his State of Creation, before Man fell.

This is a strange Discovery of People, not descended from Adam, the common
Parent, and Root of all Mankind; and of an Adam of another Root and Stock, than
Adam of whom Moses tells us; and him to be the common Parent to all the
Reprobate People; a great, though a wicked and wretched Father, etc. and makes
him as old as the World, because of some contained in him that shall not be
saved from the beginning thereof. So it is queryable, whether he makes his
Adam-Belial before the Scripture Adam, as he makes his Fall before his, and
what in the State of Creation he differed from him, the Scripture calls the
first Adam, and not being made Male and Female, how he propagates Posterity,
etc? If as he says (in p. 14.) of the Reprobates, they are of Adam-Belial, and
the Seed of the Serpent; the best Construction I can suppose upon it, though very
improper, is, That they are of Adam, according to Generation; and Belial, or
the Serpent's Seed, according to Degeneration; of Adam, as Men and Women; and
of Belial, as to the Carnal Mind, the Fleshly Birth, etc.

But this sense spoils his design, and brings all Men under the same Category
(in that all have sinned) which he has marked out for the Reprobates only; and
intangles him into this Contradiction, That whereas he affirmed before, of
these Reprobates, that they were of another Stock and Root, than that Adam, or
Man, whom God created in the beginning, Male and Female, etc. and were not
contained in him, nor are his Branches, Parts, or Members, etc. This makes it,
that they are of the same Root and Stock with that Adam whom God created in the
beginning, Male and Female, and were contained in him, and are his Branches,
Parts, or Members, etc.

And if he will have it thus, we must take it in the gross sense as it liess;
and it tells us of another Adam, than the Scripture- Adam, one Adam-Belial, of
another Stock and Root, and yet from the beginning, and who fell before that
Adam of whom Moses writes, and was not created, or made Male and Female; but of
him, and the Seed of the Serpent, after some manner, are the Reprobate People
propagated, and they are of this Stock and Root, etc. And so opens a Door to a
parcel of filthy, polluted Notions, such as Incubism and Succubism, etc.
savouring more of Witchcraft than Philosophy. And this sense may be fairly
enforced upon him, from his words; but I have tried to bring it under another
Construction, and I think the best it would bear, having a mind to help him.

He has told us before of an unhappy mixture betwixt the two Seeds; and now of
the Separation he says, In order to separate the one from the other, (viz.)
the Seed of Man, from the Seed of the Serpent: Christ the Seed of the Woman was
promised, etc. is come, etc. and will perfectly effect that Separation of the
one from the other, before the end of the World.

Observe, The Seed of Man, The Seed of the Woman, The Seed of the Serpent;
these are his Th^^^ (...)By the Seed of the Woman, is meant Christ; by the Seed
of te Serpent, is meant the Serpent; and so I suppose by the Seed of Man, must
be meant the Posterity of Adam, which he makes the right Seed; Wheat, Gold,
etc. The Seed of the Serpent, the bad Seed, Tares, Dross, etc. The unhappy
mixture to be of these two; the bad with the good, the Tares with the Wheat,
the Dross with the Gold; Christ, the Seed of the Woman, to be the separator,
that separates the bad from the good, the Tares from the Wheat, the Dross from
the Gold; and that he will perfectly effect that Separation, before the end of
the World.

Then shall all Men be saved, before the end of the World: He Will gather the
Wheat into his Garner, etc. But he intimates, (in p. 14.) Souls that were not
given to Christ from the beginning of the World, and which shall not be saved;
nay, Souls neither belonging to the First or Second Adam; and tells of some,
who at the end of the World, shall be cast into the lake of Fire, which is the
Second Death, etc. Of some, who after this Separation, are wholly bad, having
nothing of the good remaining in them, being mere Tares, Dross, Dregs, and
Excrement; and some that have nothing of the bad cleaving to them, but are
wholly the right Seed; and this Separation is of the Serpent, from Man. Then
how should some Men be wholly bad, after all that is bad is separated from them?
Is the Man in this case absorpt, and the Serpent put in the Man's Skin? Can the
Wheat be all Tares, after the Tares are all separated from it? Or the Gold all
Dross, having nothing of Gold in it, after all the Dross is pu^^^d from it? Or
shall the right Seed, the Wheat, the Gold, be cast into the lake of Fire? Shall
all Men, before the end of the World, be thus purged, and sanctified, and
washed, as this Separation imports, and yet some Men not be saved?

The preceding Mystery remembers me of a passage met with in a Book, said to be
his, near the beginning of his out-going from the Truth; it was the Passage of
the Cave of Mackpelah allegoriz'd.

The Cave was bought for Four Hundred pieces of Silver, which he says,
signifies so many Virtues; then giving the signification of the Hebrew Words,
he says, mackpelah signifies a double Burial-place, and speaks of the
Blessedness of it, or the Blessed State thereby signified: It was bought of
Ephron the Hittite; and Ephron he says, signifies the Dust-eater; and the
Dust-eater in the Scripture, is the Serpent; it was his doom to go upon his
Belly, and eat Dust. Now what of a Mystery is this? Is it not to send as to see
(...) Happiness of the Serpent, to persuade us the custody of it is (...) with
him? or that being so, he would set no other price (...) Virtue, to make the
ursed Serpent, or Ephron the Hittite (...) Race, the Dispensers of Blessings,
and the (...) to put Antichrist in the place of Christ. This is an odd (...),
and I thought as crazed a one, and that of Adam-Belial, as were to be met with,
and which might well enough stand together; though they are simple, they are
sorting.

And now having done with him, I leave it to every Reader to consider, whether
this his Doctrine of Election is so high and mysterious, so precious and
comfortable, affording unspeakable matter of Praise unto God for his great
Love; p. 14.
and whether it serves to clear to us his Justice, and Divine Wisdom and Power,
to the stopping the Mouths of Atheists, Blasphemers, and perverse Infidels;
and to the affording unto all God's dear Children, most abundant cause of
Divine Consolation, etc? All which, and more, he says of it. Or it is an heap
of broken, inconsistent, irregular, unchristian Notions, contrary to the
Gospel? And whether his Book deservedly bears the Title of Truth Advanced, in
the Correction of many gross and hurtful Errors, which is its self so full of
vile and gross Errors and Contradictions, as are here observed in the Examining
about one Sheet on it?

FINIS.

