The humble Representation of Samuel Lamb of London Merchant.
AS Foreign Traffic and Merchandise is one chief way to make a Nation rich and
flourishing, so the spare Commodities in some Countries, and want thereof in
others, is the cause of such Traffic and Merchandise. In the managing whereof
between England and our Neighbor Countries I have, for the public good,
briefly set down the evils with the Remedies, humbly submitting it to the
grave consideration of this Honorable Comittee.

1. We had Bullion, and did Coin money. Our Neighbors Countries have much of
our money, and now little is coined. 2. We raise woolls, and have fullers
Earth. They drape with our woolls and fullers Earth. 3. We make woollen cloth.
They dress and dye our cloth and undersell us at market therewith. 4. We make
Lead and Tin. They under-sell us at market with our Lead and Tynne. 5. We
have fishing. They catch our fish, and serve most part of Christendom
therewith. 6. We have Coals. They transport and sell our Coals. 7. We decay in
Trading Shipping. They increase in Trading Shipping. 8. We buy Spanish fruit
and wine at a dear rate: They prohibit English manufactures and buy a few
covertly at a low rate. 9. We have no Bank for the furtherance of trade. They
have Banks for their advantage to trade. 10. We have no Courts of Merchants.
They have Courts of Merchants.
First touching Monyes.
Experience tells us that all the severe Laws hitherto made in many Kings
Reigns to restrain transporting it has been of small effect, whose care
endeavored all that could be to increase and preserve it here, but our
Neighbor Princes and States, to gain it from us, have imitated bad neighbors
to private men, who to inveigle away a good servant, do proffer higher wages
than he had of his old Master; so they raise the value of Bullion (the good
Servant to all States) to entice the covetous Merchant to carry it to them,
notwithstanding all Laws and penalties to the contrary, the want whereof
causes deadness and decay of Trade, and hinders levying of it by a Law for
public uses.

The Remedies.
First if a Bank be settled in England, a Law may be made for all strangers to
make receipts and payments therein for all they deal for, and then they cannot
transport it in specie instead of making returns in Commodities.

Secondly to raise the Coins and make our Money as valuable at home as abroad,
for when the cause is taken away there will be less need of a Law for a Remedy
of this evil.

Or by a treaty with other Nations, at least with the Dutch, and French,
thereby agreeing on a settled certain value of the coins respectively to be
continued without alteration.

Secondly for our woolls, and fullers Earth.
Our woolls the material and groundwork of much of our manufactures, for
being wrought into Draperies therein employing many people, as cloth the Turkey
Merchants in return thereof Import Raw si^k, Grograin Yarn, Cotton-woolls etc.
to be also manufactured here, employing multitudes of people, and likewise the
Merchants, trading into other Countries, have made returns in Bullion and
other useful Commodities; therefore very unfit to be transported unwrought;
especially when our Neighbors so much endeavor to exceed us in clothing; But
to the end the English eye should not see it, though posterity may rue it, It
is not Carded, Combed, and privately steeved into Cask also fullers Earth, and
Shipped off by the connivence of the Customer under the name of other goods, and
also in the Fleece by stealth in the night, with the privity, i^ not
assistance, of him that sold it* and do not Packers, and other Agents, buy
cloth and other Draperies and ship them off in their own names for strangers,
against their Oaths and the Laws, to the ruin of their Countrymen, enriching
themselves and strangers.

The Remedy.
Severe letters should be written to the Officers in all Ports, and they also
take an oath that they suffer no exportation of Wool and Fullers Earth beyond
Seas upon pain and forfeiture of their places, and such other punishments as
shall be requisite, That the laws for true making woollen manufactures, be
strengthened, revived, and executed, against transgressors; and that no more
charge be laid on them then the market abroad will bear, to the end the
Merchant may afford to sell them at as low a price as any of the same kind made
in another Country, which will discourage their making any, when we can
undersell them, and encourage the wearer to buy of those made in England,
rather than (...) made in another Country, having as good and better cheap, so
they being taken off from ma^^^^, will neither want nor desire the materials
of wool and fulling earth, and this with a Bank and other good Orders, will
hinder Packers and others in buying Draperies and Shipping them off for
strangers, which neither the Laws nor Oaths can restrain.

That no woollen cloth be suffered to be imported out of Holland, as now is,
nor any other woollen Manufactures.

Thirdly for Cloth.
Those true-made white and undrest Clothes sent into Holland, the Dutch dye,
dress, and strain to such lengths, that by the overpluss of measure they
undersell the English in that cloth, which is dyed and dressed at home, when both
sorts meet at the market, and the same strained cloth being found so deceitful
in wearing, that it not only brings all English cloth into disesteem, because
sold under the English Seal, but hinders the Artist of the manufacture of dying
and dressing all the cloth so Shipped out, and also causes slight making of
other cloth in England that it may be afforded as cheap as such strained cloth
at Market.

The Remedy.
That the fifth or tenth cloth of those white and undrest Clothes transported be
enjoined to be fully manufactured in their dye and dress the first year, and
the like number so perfectly manufactured to be increased every year according
as the State shall direct, until none but colored cloth be sent, by which
means the English Artist will have the dying and dressing of all the cloth,
which used to be Shipped off rough and white, which cannot so well be done in one
or two years time; so the English Merchants trading into other Countries will
not then be hindered by those clothes in the sale of others, nor will the
English cloth be disesteemed by being abused and falsified under the English
Seal when none but true made cloth will be transported.

Fourthly for Lead and Tynne.
They are two Staple Commodities: And as strangers buy our Draperies at the
best hand, by their Packers and other Agents, so they may our Lead, which I
have known to rise at an herring Season or Turkey Shipping about 20. per Cent.
then they buying it at the lowest rate, may afford to sell it at market with
profit, at the price it cost the English Merchants at home; also as they buy
our cloth white and rough, and dye and dress it themselves, and so falsify it
by stretching; that with the overplus of measure they are enabled to undersell
our true made cloth at Market which is dyed and dressed in England. So they buy
our Tynne, part of which they make into Pewter for their own use, and to sell
again in other Countries, as formerly to our plantations, and the rest they
cast again and mix it with an Allay of Lead, and send it into other Countries
by which means they so undersell our fine Tynne.

The Remedy.
First for the Lead; If a Bank were settled in England, it would so much
increase the General stock that the English would buy it themselves at the
cheapest season, and so hinder strangers buying it; or keep the market at a
certain price and then we could not be undersold in it abroad.

Secondly for our Tynne, If the Merchant, the Pewterer, and the Tynner, be
consulted with, much more may be manufactured at home into pewter, and much
less sent abroad in kind; except what is sent into Turkey by the English
Merchants.

Fifthly for our Fishing.
The wonderful providence of Almighty God, storing our Seas with several
kinds in the respective Seasons of the year (for the sustenance of mankind)
may condemn us of slothfullness if not ingratitude, for so great blessings,
when our Neighbors make so great advantage of it beyond our selves that it
proves to them, as our Draperies used to do to us viz. as the West Indies to
the King of Spain, and an East Indies to the Dutch; bringing home, with the
proceed thereof, out of several Countries from Archangell to the Gulf of
Venice, sundry sorts of Commodities bought at the best hand and selling them
again in other Countries at the best price. This noble and profitable work, I
have heard long talk of, but is not yet undertaken, peradventure by reason of
our Domesticke Broiles, but chiefly I conceive, through want of a good Stock to
begin.

The Remedy.
First a considerable joint Stock should be raised and managed, as the
East India Company does theirs, with fitting Orders and Privileges for their
Government and Encouragement, which with Gods blessing will prove very
advantageous to the Nation in general, by increasing Ships and Mariners,
employing many people therein; and profitable to the Adventurers in particular;
my self having gained clear above two of one within one year dealing therein,
and Vessels enough for the work, may be built in New England cheaper than in
Old, and save Timber here.

Secondly, in the mean time, that no duty be imposed upon Fish now taken and
shipped beyond Seas by the English Merchants. And that all Fish be transported in
English Ships, sailed only with Englishmen.

Sixthly for Coals.
The great blessing of God to this Nation, has made the very Bowels of the
Earth, as well as the Waters, to yield us Treasure, if we do but stretch forth
the hand to receive it and improve it to our advantage, this being so useful a
Commodity, that some places in England cannot well subsist without them, and so
much desired in many Countries abroad for their especial usefullness, that
their necessities also cannot well want them, as well those of Scotland, as of
Newcastle and Sunderland.

The Remedy.
That as a greater duty is laid on those transported, than on those spent
within our selves, so none should be transported but in English Ships, sailed
only with English men.

Seventhly for our Trading Shipping.
The losses of our great Ships tradeing to the Southward by the French before
the Peace. And the loss of some such, besides many lesser Ships since the
Spanish War. And so few built in lieu thereof does manifest a very great
decay of Trading Shipping in general, besides the loss every one feels in his
particular that is concerned therein; Therefore to strengthen us, and build up
the Walls of our Land again, to keep off a Foreigne Enemy, ought to be the true
endeavor of every Englishman that is well affected to his Native Country, and
to deny himself the hope of a small profit irregularly gained, which does
enrich and strengthen another Nation, and weaken and impoverish his own, by
subtly contriving how to undermine and abuse the intent of the law for
increase of Navigation.

The Remedy.
To enlarge the said Act, and make it more severe, also to employ only English
Mariners and Ships wholly belonging to Englishmen, in the two last trades
mentioned.

Eighthly for the Spanish Trade at present.
Although it is believed that that trade in time of Peace did vent more English
Manufactures, and did employ as much trading shiping as any one Country, yet
it is as certain that the Spaniards, since the War, have strictly prohibited
all English Manufactures within his Dominions; So that those few that are sold
by connivance, go off at a lower rate than formerly, and not without danger.
And those Spanish Goods imported bought at a dearer rate than usually, and
colourably brought in Dutch Shiping, to the impoverishing our selves and
enriching of our Enemies, many scores of thousand pounds this last year.

The Remedy is short.
That as the Spaniard has prohibited English Manufactures, so we may prohibit
Wine and Fruit, if not all Spanish Goods, till a Peace be made.

Ninthly, touching a Bank.
I have in my Seasonable observations showed some of the benefits the Dutch
have received by the help of their Banks, the prejudice we receive by their
Banks, and the good we may do our selves by settling them in England, which are
very many and exceedingly useful and advantageous to trade, supplying the want
of Money, and increasing the Stock of a Nation, also helpful to many great
undertakings; by means whereof the Dutch have grown to such greatness and
riches, which is believed they have gained by our loss.

The Remedy.
Is to settle one at London, to countermine them in all their tricks and
devices, in governing Exchanges and Trade, which I have in part described, and
have also the Orders of their Banks to produce, when called thereunto.

Tenthly, touching a Court of Merchants.
Which may be also a Council, or Committee for Trade, to continue as well in
the Intervalls as during the Session of Parliaments. And if it be thought fit
to choose such a one as I have described in my Proposalls for a Bank, I humbly
conceive it may be as great an advantage to Trade for the future, as hitherto
it has been hindered for want of one in England. Our neighbors have found such
benefit thereby, as they are unwillng to be without one, as well for their
Advice in regulating Trad, as for their speedy determining Controversies among
Merchants with small charge, who now are often hindered in their trades, if not
undone by following the Law at great cost and charges.

The Remedy.
Is to settle one at London, a Model whereof I have ready to produce, when
called thereunto.

To the Honorable the Grand Committee for Trade, siting in the Parliament House
at Westminster. The humble Petition of Samuel Lamb, of London Merchant.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner lately presented to the Honorable Members of this present
Parliament, a Book touching increase of Shipping and trade, entitled
Seasonable Observations, And your Petitioner understanding that the Members of
this Honorable Committee are the same Members of Parliament which received the
said Book, a Breviate whereof is hereunto annexed, with Remedies to every
Inconvenience mentioned therein, which your Petitioner contrived for the
Public good, and for the better carrying on of so good and public a work.
He humbly craves your advice and furtherance therein, being willing to be
guided by such Order as in your grave wisdoms shall seem meet. And he shall
humbly show his Reasons thereunto when required.

And your Petitioner shall pray etc.

Friday the Fourth of March 1658. At the Grand Committee for Trade.
ORDERED

M. Knightly in the Chair.
THat the Sub-Committee, to whom it is referred to bring in a Bill or Bills, to
prevent the Transportation of Wool, Woollfells etc. be revived, and do meet to
morrow at two of the Clock in the Afternoon at the Treasury Chamber.

The humble Petition and Representation of Mr. Samuel Lamb of London
Merchant. was this day read.

ORDERED

THat the Paper and Representation of Mr. Samuel Lamb of London Merchant, be
referred to the consideration of the said Sub-Committee, and that Mr. Samuel
Lamb do attend the said Sub-Committee.

Ordered that
Sr. Tho. Dickenson. Mr. Topham. Mr. Slingsby Bethell. Captain Lilborne. Sr.
Robert Honywood. Mr. Ramsden Mr. Marshall. Mr. Vincent. Mr. Foley. Coll. Morley
Mr. Long. Mr. Minors. Mr. Creston. Mr. LLoyd. Mr. Delves. Mr. Jackson. Mr.
Collins. Mr. Thompson. Mr. Jones. Mr. Bence. Alderman Rich. Mr. Herle. Mr.
Banks. Mr. Thompson. Mr. Higgins. Colonel Gibbon. Mr. Biddulph. Mr. Kendall.
Mr. Boscawen.
Be added to the Sub Committee touching Wool and Woollfells.

FINIS.

