Mr. LILLIES LATE Prophecy come to pass.

Concerning the present War, and the late Unseasonableness of the weather.

Wherein it is made Manifest, whatsoever he has Prognosticated of the PRESENT
YEAR, 1673.

Is in Great Probability of Proving True, from the Events that have already
been Observed.

Licensed, According to Order, July 10. 1673.





Printed by A. Purslow, 1673.

Mr. LILLIES LATE PROPHECY Come to Pass.
I Hope there is no Englishman so disingenious as not to be sensible how much
our Nation has been obliged to the Judicious and deservedly Famous Mr. Lilly,
for his Restoration of Astrology wherein he manifests himself, not only an
Accomplished Artist, but also an Ingenious Lover, and Well-wisher of his
Country; Every year would afford irrefragable Arguments to the Conviction of
any that should prove so obstinately (...) or so carelessly unmindful to forget
this (...)

However, Since Supiness is a fault too commonly observed in our Nation, I
conceive it proper to refresh the memories of those who are guilty in this
kind, with an account of what Commets h^^^ (...) What Predictions the (...)
upon them and what strange Events and Successes have followed as witnesses of
his Prophetic judgment.

AMongst other h^^ now ^^rified Predictions on that Commet seen in 16^2. (...)
ac^uaint^^ the I^ha^^tants of Europe, that they might again expect to behold a
New Blazing Star about the Year 1672. in which only I instance, because it
being the last, is I suppose the freshest in our memories, and therefore most
suitable to my present Design.

Nor was this Famous man mistaken, though he Prophesied of so dubi^us a matter
^w^nty yea^^ beforehand for accordingly a Commet did manifest it self, and for
many Nights ^o ^^the^ was visible in our Horizon. Nor was thi^ a framed Stor^,
t^ Varni^h any design, neither was it the mistake of a Paper-kite, ignis
fatuus, or false Phoenemenon, but a true and real Commet, as is evidenced by
the Testimony of diverse Worthy persons, more then Ordinary Skilful, and
curiously a^quainted with such matters.

First, Mounsier Hevilius, a person sufficiently known to the Learned World,
attests it in a Letter from Dantziel, to that Illustrious Society here in
England, deservedly Entitled Royal, his Words are these.

There is with us, (says he) a New Commet visible both Mor^ings and Evenings,
it seems at present but little having (...) tail or train not above a degree
and is half long, but it would (...) appear much bigger, if it were not for the
Troy-light and Neighborhood of the Moon: it is now about the Stars in the
Right arm of Andromeda, tending with a direct Diurnal Motion of about two
degrees in it is course, March the 6th. 40 minutes after 7 it was in seven
degrees of Aries, with 25 degrees of North Latitude, etc.

The same was attested also from Paris in several Letters; and at Fl^s^^^e,
from the 16th. of March to the 2^th. successively. But the reason why it was so
carelessly observed, was because for a good while it was near the Sun, and
afterward obscured by the Moon.

But I must bring the matter nearer home, and give you an account of especially
two English Observatours, who have sufficiently witnessed what they plainly
saw, and what they rationally judged would be the sequel of those Celestial
Heralds.

March the 7th. about Eight of the Clock at Night, it was observed by an
Ingenious Gentleman in Hampshire, who communicated his Observations to Mr.
Lilly. It was then (writes he) about the bigness of a Star of the third
Magnitude, solid, but of a Saturnine or Leaden Complexion, its tail very
Conspicuous, but tending Eastward; its first appearance to me was about the
middle of Aries, whence by careful Observations I traced it through Taurus,
till on the twenty first it drew near the beginning of Gemini, but then it
seemed very small, its motion more slow than formerly, and the Moon increasing,
it soon after disappeared.

Mr. Lilly likewise himself, observed it for several nights together, to whom
it seemed bigger then a Star of the second Magnitude, and of a Saturnine, and
Mercurial Complexion; who, after the strictest Observations, he could make of
its Magnitude, Situation, and Pointing, he gives this account of it.

Since Mankind (says he) would not take sufficient warning, either by that
Commet in the Year 1652, or in 1664. behold providence manifests another,
beginning in the first sign of the Zodiac, moving directly according to the
succession of the Signs, sometimes swifter, sometimes slower; as if now the
great God of Nature were angry, and intended suddenly to proceed to judgment
against those People and Nations who have so slighted and contemned his former
admonitons. Let Europe be assured, the Parter^s now signified, will be heavy,
and of long continuance: The actions tending thereunto, or the first causes of
them sudden, violent, unexpected, and surprising: It manifests the beginning
of more Wars, and their sorrowful Effects, Viz. The flight of many from their
proper Habitations, Poverty, S^^den A^^^^s, Astonishments, Piracies, SCARCITY
OF CORN, Sl^ughters of Mankind, D^vastations, and Burning of Cities, and
Depopulations of Countries, and all this when and where least suspected.

Nor does this seem to be a Conjecture at Rovers, such as is made by the Qunch
Astrologers, that either guess so much at random, that if either they succeed,
it is by accident: or Prophecy (as they call it) of Contradictions at the same
time; one of which must inevitably come to pass. But Mr. Lilly given us a
rational conjecture of Events, and a very good reason for that Conjecture,
which he continues in words to this effect.

All these are assured Arguments, and forerunners of Wars, slaughter of
Soldiers and Mankind, Devastation of Towns, Villages; Depopulation of
Countries, Terretories, Cities, Provinces, yea, upon a sudden, when least
expected, or suspected; for both Aries and Leo are violent and furious Signs: A
Comet having apearance in Aries, as the Ancients have delivered; Significat
arm^ru^^ strepit^m, sanguinis prof^sionem, and imperatur is alicujus interitum.
i. e. signifies ^ise ^f Wars, profusion of Blood and the death of some
eminent, Person, or Commander. Viz. Before the effects of the Comet be
determined.

Thus far Mr. Lilly. And if we consider this as a Prophecy in general, made at
least a twelvemonth before there was any thoughts of a War in the European
World: or if we pry strictly into the particulars, and again repeat Wars,
slaughter of Soldiers, scarcity of Corn, etc. Could any man equally manifest
himself to be (as it were) the Secretary and Register of Fate, to whom those
hidden powers seem to have communicated all their secrets? But to come yet
closer, see how he proceeds.

Some of these judgments (continues he) may take place in, or near the Years
1674, 1675, and 1676, or about those Years especially: some may, and will take
place sooner, mutalis, mutandis. For Nature in these Actions proceeds orderly;
and it must be a series of time to manifest her significations. Observe* The
Comets continued many days, and passed through Aries and Virgo; then, and in
that Year, when matter and things are mature, which c^^^^^ be affected (...) a
sudden. But as in Europe there are few Kings, these like Sentences must be
understood, as we said before, of Governors of Towns, Cities, Provinces,
Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Deputy Lieutenants, and
all other persons concerned in any eminent Government, Power, or Authority.

As for the particular Kingdoms, Provinces, Countries, or Cities, which are
menaced from this Comet, they are principally to be signified to belong to
Aries, Gemmini, Cancer, Leo: Unto Aries are generally assigned Germany,
Polonia, Burgundy: (Viz.) all the seventeen Provinces, Denmark, England,
Silesia the higher, with many other Countries, though as yet, not assigned to
that Figure, yet subject to it.

Unto the Sign Gemminibelong Holland and Zealand, Genova, Amsterdam, Venice,
Constantinople, with many other Kingdoms and Provinces, in some of these
Countries Wars is already apparent: what is remaining, the Years subsequent
will manifest in due time. But since we wrote so Copiously of the former Comets
in 1652. and 1664. We cease to write any more of this last Comet, which seems
to be but another Messenger, or Prodromus of the former Comets. Besides we are
partly confined ei^^er into silence, or the Censure of others.

Thus we may observe how Judici^usly Mr. Lilly Prognosticates, and it will
certainly become all the people of whatsoever Nation where a Comet appears to
use their utmost endeavors, either by repentance to divert, or by submission
to mittigate that fury which is threatened them by those Beacons of Divine
Vengeance, and to remember that

Comets, the blazing Beacons of the sky,
Forewarn the sinful world of misery.

FINIS.

