A PROPHECY, Of a Countryman, called Michel Lindeman, being 86 Years of age,
living in the Dukedom of HAGEN; done in the Harvest-time of the Year of our
Lord 1699.
1. THe King of Poland, with the help of the Swedish and Muscovites, shall
bring the whole Kingdom of Poland under his Authority, and shall cause the
Gospel to be preached throughout all his Dominions, and rout and destroy the
Romish Religion throughout all his Realms. 2. Whilst shall the Lion of the
North, or Swedish King, with the Wild-Ox, his Neighbor, or the great Czar of
Muscovie, and the Polish King, descend and come down into Silesia with all
their Forces: upon which the Romanists shall run away with great multitudes,
and then the preachers of the Gospel shall be restored to their former state.
3. And then the Papists will not know where to run or hide themselves, so that
they shall cover themselves with Skins; yea, the Prelate of Hagen, will be
known by a Swedish Soldier; for, finding a soft skin upon his hands, he
understands that it is no Countryman, but a Person of Quality, therefore he
will deal very hard by him. 4. The Swedes and Muscovites shall receive great
help, for the whole German Empire will Join themselves together, and shall pass
thorrow Bohemia, Moravia, and the Empire, marching to the Emperor, to see what
and how he has dealt with the Protestants. 5. Then they will march toward
Rome, for to besiege the Pope; before which place they shall rest three weeks:
But there will be great Thundrings; The fire shall descend from Heaven upon the
four corners of Rome, setting all in fire and flame; and thus Rome, with all
its Cloisters, will be set in fire, and at last the Romish Monarchy will be in
a confusion, and the Gospel shall be preached almost throughout all the World.
6. This shall come to pass in the Year our Lord 1700, or within the time of a
Year and a half. He exhorts all People to be constant and stedfest in their
Belief, and says, that this will come to pass within seven months and a half,
and that they shall see it; and that the Papists, for fear of the Swedish Army,
will run away out of Silesia; and that God shall raise up the Believers of the
Gospel, within a short time again, yea more as they ever were before.
Note. This man undertakes all the Punishments imaginable, in case it does not
come as he has said. He also has foretold the coming of the Turk before
Vienna, at which he was put into Prison, but when the Turkish Army came before
the City, says he, take notice, for upon this very day, about two of the
Clock, in the afternoon, he shall lay his siege. Three days after this his
saying, came the Post where he was imprisoned, and told, that the siege exactly
was laid at the same hour he had foretold, and then the Papists, out of shame,
set him at Liberty: Of this the Gazette made mention at that very time.

He also has foretold, the great persecution which should come to pass in
France, and also the War which followed on the back.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the Year, 1700.


