A RELATION OF THE Proceedings and causes of complaint, BETWEEN The Undertakers
with the Earl of Lindsey, in the Level of Fenns in Lincolnshire betwixt
Bourne and Kime Eae, AND The Owners and Commoners there.
THe Und^rt^kers justify their proceedings to be legal and honest.
The Owners and Commoners about nine years past, before a Committee of
Parliament, ( William Ellis Esquire being Chairman) alleged the illegality of
the Undertakers proceedings, which was referred to Law, and proved it a
Project, maintained and forced on by an Arbitrary Power, which matter of fact
was examined.

Now to relate the Undertakers Allegations, and the Commoners replies for
matter of Law, which was referred to Law.

The Undertakers say, the land was decreed to them by Laws of Sewers, to which
Laws they have the Kings Royal assent, so not alterable, but by Act of
Parliament.
The Owners and Commoners say those decrees were altogether illegal and
corrupt, they having offered many trials at Law, which the Undertakers refused
and stopped, Witness the Orders.
by Orders of the Councel-Table before Parliament, and by Orders of the Lords
House since Parliament, until the House of Commons removed those hindrances,
and left the Law open to us, whereupon we had several Trials at Law against
the Undertakers, Witness the Judgment.
wherein we had Judgment against them, if the decrees be illegal, the Royal
Assent comfirms them, but as they are subject to alteration, by trials at Law,
without a special Act of Parliament.

The Royal Assent was promised before any Law or Decree made, Witness the
Kings Letters.
so that the bargain was made at Court, before the contract in the Country.

The Undertakers say, they were possessed of 14000. Acres of our Commons, by
consent and contract with the Owners and Commoners.
The Commoners say, they had no consent, but of some twenty in many thousands,
some of which was gained by threats and imprisonments; they further deny any
contract with the Undertakers, and desire they may show that contract they
pretend, and declare how they came by it.

The Undertakers say, the gentlemen Commissioners of Sewers were honest,
discreet, knowing men, and would do nothing but what was legal, just, honest
and equitable.
So say the Commoners, that many of them were honest; but yet not well knowing
in that design of undertaking, the Commission of Sewers mentions not such a
Creature or Officer, as an Undertaker, if that Commission had been sufficient
for an Undertaker, the Acts made the 43. of Elizabeth, chapter 11. and the 4. of
James chapter 8. and 13. which directs an Undertaker how to contract for the
draining of drowned grounds, and improving wastes, was unnecessary, but they
were unwilling to be guided by any just known Law, Witness the Verdict, which
sinds the Fens not hurtfully surrounded.
they at the first proceeded by a Jury of five and twenty honest men, which was
somewhat legal, but the Juries Verdict not being answerable to their
expectation, the Undertakers left the Law, the old honest way, and step^ into
bywaies, as thieves do that rob honest men, Witness the Deeds, i^^olled in
Chancery.
and first having bribed the King, with three thousand Acres of our Land, and
the Lords of the Council with other parcells thereof, Witness the Kings
several Letters, and the L^^ds Orders.
they gained the Kings several Letters, and the Lords Orders to direct the
Commissioners of Sewers, (which Power and Acts of State, was got so much above
Law, that (...) often caused Acts to be done by Commissioners contrary to Law,
selling our lands where sufficient distress might have been taken) and thus
they gained their decrees of Sewers, Witness the Commission of Sewers and the
Commissioners.
such Commissioners as saw into the evil of their design, and thereupon did
not act as they expected, were put out of the Commission of Sewers, and
themselves, servants and friends only continued in, whereby they became their
own Lawmakers.

The Undertakers say, Drayning is a good work, and advantageous to the
Commonwealth.
So say the Commoners, but their proceedings were illegal, as we have formerly
proved, not honest, as we shall now prove; for they took the best ground and
left the worst, they judged ground worth a Mark the Acre to be let, hurtfully
surrounded with water, they judged reed ground worth 40. s. the Acre in that
condition hurtfully surrounded, which if it be always dry, will not be worth
13. s. 4 d. the Acres they took half of many of the best Commons, (...) by
their own laws, (...) by diverse Witnesses.
they should a^ the most have had but a third part; they have left the worst
part of the Level to draine, and to take the least part out of; we are willing
and able to draine our own grounds that stand in need thereof, could we have
been enabled thereto by Law, or might we enjoy our Commons in several, what
the Law will not suffer us to do to our own, we hope strangers shall not
force, and be first served, because pretenders for the Commonwealths good, for
their own ends, they destroyed the Navigation of our Towns, which the
Commission of Sewers specially provides for.

The Undertakers deny their undertaking to be a project, and their proceedings
arbitrary.
The Commoners say it is, and has so proved it before the Committee, of which
M. Ellis had the Chair: they say, if their ground were as bad as they report,
Proved by Sir (...) propositions.
yet it ought to have been sold to their best Chapman, which it was not; for
Sir Anthony Thomas, and Sir William Ayl^ffe, with their considerable
Adventurers would have undertaken to have drained the same Fenns for a fourth
part, Proved by the Clerks of Sewers and the Commissioners Orders.
the Commissioners of Sewers then not intending any of them to be sharers, nor
being feared with the Kings Letters, or Lords of Council Orders, thought a
fifth part sufficient for the work doing, and would give Sir Anthony but 24.
hours to consider of their offer, thereupon they treated no further, Sir Robert
Kellegrew, Sir William Kellegrew, and M. Robert Long being in the Country, and
seeing the ground good, and the design advantageous, improved their interest at
Court, of which they were Members, Proved by the Kings Letters.
and gained the Kings Letters to commend them Undertakers to the Commissioners,
but perceiving they could not make their bargain so advantageous as they
desired, seemingly declined to be Undertakers, Proved by the Kings third Letter.
and gained the Kings Letter to commend the Earl of Lindsey a privy
Counselor, and Lord Lieutenant of our County to be sole Undertaker, Proved by
Deeds enrolled in Chancery of bargain and sale, wherein they three join with
the Earl in the bribe to the Lords.
themselves by a secret Contract having equal power and share with him, hoping
thereby with the Kings Letters, Councell-Table Orders, a promise of shares to
some of the Commissioners, and outing of others, to make the better bargain
for themselves, and so did; for at the first proffer the Commissioners then
sitting, offered a third part of the same Lands, without consent of the Owners
and Commoners to the said Earl, for draining of which Lands they would give to
Sir Anthony Thomas but a fifth part: Court power, friendship, self-interest,
and complements, gained a freedom in the Commissioners to give away our Lands,
That Sir Robert, Proved by Sir Roberts Will. and the Deeds themselves.
Sir William Kellegrew, and Mr. Long were secret Undertakers, witness Sir
Roberts last will and Testament, he dying before the contract made with the
Earl; wherein he gives to his two Sons, Thomas and Heary ^wo hundred Acres of
our Commons, a sign they had sh^^ed our Lands at Court, and made the Country
Commissioners confirmers of their project, which two hundred Acres were sold by
the said Thomas, Henry, Sir William and Mr. Long, to one Mr. Richard Read for
twelve hundred pound, before the work of draining was begun, and Mr. Long sold
his share to Sir Edward Heron, a Commissioner before the work begun for fifteen
hundred pound, and Sir Edward to be at all the charge of draining, Mr. Death
bought some upon the same terms, their own acts witness our grounds to be of
some value, before the draining, to bribe with, bequeath, and sell other men's
Lands, without a consideration done or given for them, and to force on those
bribes, gifts, and bargains by the Kings Letters, Councell-Table Orders, Let
all men judge.
and commanded Commissioners of Sewers, is a project and arbitrary.

Again, the Commissioners being some of them interested for non-payment of a
Tax of 13. s. 4. d. the Acre illegally set give the Undertaker half an Acre,
which by their own rates was worth 3. l. and so proportionable most of the
14000. Acres, Proved by diverse Witnesses, and their Decrees.
and at the least they had one Acre in three for three Marks, which Acre at
their own rates, as they sold our Lands before hand, was worth 6. l. So that
not only those that sold the design made a prey of us, but those that laid out
any moneys would have had for every 2. l. laid out 6. l. by their own rates,
and as we value our lands 12. l. Those who legally, peaceably, and honestly
opposed this their project carried on by an arbitrary power, Proved by the
Messengers, Councell-Table Orders, and Cattle Witnesses.
apprehending nothing their own if this power prevailed, were fined,
imprisoned, brought before the Councell-Table, threatened with Star Chamber
Suits, continually vexed with Messengers, their Cattle driven away, sold
without recompense, denied all proceedings at Law, to men's utter undoing,
Proved by the bonds at the Counsell-Table, and the Earls, came Letter.
and forced to enter into bonds, not to complain but to the Commissioners of
Sewers, or Councell-Table, some in the absence of the Earl and the interested
Commissioners, complaining to the other Commissioners of some grievances, in
hope of Justice in the absence of their Lord and Master; there came a Letter
subscribed post, post, post have, from the Earl of Lindsey to the
Commissioners, wherein he intimated, that he was well advised by Counsel at
Law, that they had nothing to do in that business, so knew we very well, but
God knows we were bound from the Law, and so left remediless, being only to
complain to those who neither could or would relieve us.

About June last, 1649, the Undertakers in the Earl of Lindsey's Level
petitioned this honorable Parliament, and got some Sixteen Commoners, some of
whom are ill-affected, others their Tenants, and such a sold the Commoners
cattle, and are sued by them; others, such as beat and wounded the Owners
Tenants; and others that have no stock to put upon the Commons, To petition the
Parliament in the name of the Commoners, being 20000; which Petitions were
referred to a Committee of Parliament, of which John Goodwin Esquire is Chairman.
They and their Witnesses have been heard.

We the Commoners, being many thousands, that entrusted Thomas Hall and
Nicholas Roe, Gent. about nine years since, to petition the honorable House of
Commons against the Project of undertaking in the Earl of Lindsey's Level,
illegally and tyrannically carried on; and having fully proved their Petition,
by Evidences, and at the least of a hundred Witnesses, before the Committee of
the honorable House of Commons, of which William Ellis Esquire was Chairman, That
the House in their Remonstrance dated June 10. 1643, having declared the taking
of large quantities of Commons being taken from the Subjects by color of the
Statute of Improvements, and by abuse of the Commission of Sewers, without
their consents, and against it, amongst other grievances, to be one, and with
them to be the Root and growth of mischievous Designs, do much wonder, that
these offenders, who have continued as they were enemies to the Public Good
and Peace of this Kingdom, should come Eight years after us, and be heard
before us; and that it should be now a Question, after such proofs, Whether
they, or we, who have continued ever faithful to the Parliament, be most
offenders.

The Commoners have witnessed their reality and faithfulness to the Parliament,
by venturing their lives and estates with them. There has been abroad at once,
in the Parliaments service, Volunteers, out of some of these Towns 100, some
60, some 40, some 20, some more, some less; and the Country upon all occasions
ready to rise against the Parliaments Enemies. Few or none served the King, but
those that were engaged by the Undertakers.

Sir Edward Heron's eldest son, having an interest in the Undertaking, and
being a Colonel of the Kings part, brought down twenty Colors of Horse and
Dragoons against those Towns interested in the mentioned Commons, who killed
and wounded diverse of the Commoners, that rose to oppose their entering into
their Country; and drove away thousands of their horses and other cattle, to
their utter undoing. If these our enemies be again brought amongst us, we must
expect no mercy from them.

We hope the Parliament will continue their wonted goodness toward us, and not
hear them whom they have formerly refused to hear, upon the same pretenses, we
mean, to matter of possession, Witness Mr Waltounds Order, dated August 13.
1641.
as appears by the former Orders of the House; they only plotting hereby, if
possible, to render the Parliament as distastful to the people, by entertaining
their Projects, as was the late King. We that have hazarded our lives and
estates, without recompense, hope we shall enjoy what we can maintain to be our
own by Law. And we desire the Undertakers may be referred, as formerly upon the
like complaint, to the Law for remedy, where we will answer them in fair
Trials. Let us, who have been suffering friends, be first relieved; and then be
as merciful to your and our enemies, as possibly you can in Justice.

We desire Master Ellis may report our first Proofs to the House, concerning
matter of Crime; that for our Imprisonments, Woundings, and Losses, we may
receive recompense: the Troubles coming on so fast, that he could not formerly
do it.

But if, notwithstanding all we say, and have proved formerly, we must at our
great charge answer their last Petitions; we thus reply.

The Undertakers say they were legally and quietly possessed of 14000 Acres of
our Commons, almost three years.

We deny it, and say, We have continued, Proved by diverse Witnesses, and Trials
at Law.
and hitherto enjoyed our ancient possessions legally, though they by their
arbitrary power would have forced us out, and did plow some of our Grounds by
that power, notwithstanding we discharged them.

They say, There will be a benefit to the State and Commonwealth by their
Compositions.

We say, It is an abuse to a flourishing, reforming, just State, to make them
so necessitous, as to tell them they can be bettered by a Project, or an
Interest gained by an arbitrary power, otherwise then to return what was so
taken away to the right owners.

They the Undertakers say, The Commoners declined the justice of the House, and
violently entered upon their Grounds, and destroyed their Corn, and pulled down
their Houses.

We desire they may name those that did it: for we the chiefest of the Owners
and Commoners that petitioned the House of Commons, say, We were no ways guilty
of those acts; but justly and legally continued, maintained, and recovered our
possessions Witness the House of Commons Order, dated July 10, 1641. and Sir
Guy Palms, his report thereof.
. We have ever stood for the Privilege of the House of Commons against the
Lords House, and never declined their Justice; which the Undertakers have: for
during our Cause depending in the House of Commons, they petitioned the House
of Lords, preferred Bills, and gained their Order from thence, whereby they
perplexed us with Messengers, Imprisonments, driving, killing and chasing our
Cattle in a riotous and tumultuous manner, desperately wounding many of the
Commoners with Guns and Swords, by French, Dutch, and wandering strangers to
great numbers, and procured Orders to stay our proceedings at Law; Witness Mr
Lister, and the rest of the Gentlemen.
the honest Gentlemen of the Country were put out of the Commission of the
Peace, and their friends put in; and Sir Edward Heron, a Commissioner of
Sewers, and a sharer with the Undertakers, was made high Sheriff; who violently
executed the Lords Orders: And all this was done when our Petition was proving,
and they defending, Proved by Witesses.
in the House of Commons.

Those that pulled down their houses and gathered their corn growing and
standing upon their Commons, say, they were provoked thereto by the Undertakers
and their Agents, they continuing by power of the Lords Order to plow the poor
Commoners ground, after they had discharged them thereof, and by those wandering
strangers before named in a tumultuous and warlike manner, some armed on
horseback, others a foot, great Guns mounted upon Carriages, to force them out
of their possessions, by wounding some of the Commoners, and worrying their
Cattle with Dogs, and driving some of them away in the night, and selling
them, and refusing to obey Replevin, and rescued their own Goods when
impounded; and the honest Gentlemen of the Country being put out of the
Commission of the Peace, So ill did arbitrary power relish with the People.
and their Friends, strangers, put in, with other injustice and violence done
to them, the poor Commoners or Cottagers with strangers, being of weak capacity
and understanding, but what they felt and saw, and fearing a power coming upon
them to destroy and ruin them, pulled down those houses that were forcibly
built upon their Commons, and harbored those strangers and Arms they suffered
by, which Houses was standing until such their usage, and some Trials had at
Law which proved the Decrees illegal, for which Act of theirs they have been
fined and imprisoned, and hope they shall not be twice punished for one crime;
the manner and not the matter being the fault.

The Undertakers say, A good done, deserves Encouragement and a Reward.
So say the Commoners, if legally and honestly done: But they say, To cure a
diseased man by cutting his throat, is a remedy rewardlesse; or to do good in
an evil manner, is both by the Law of God and man unwarrantable, and without
recompense: The undertakers by a pretended good to the Commonwealth, taking
our lands by an Arbitrarie power contrary to Law, though it accidentally prove
a good to some, yet it strangles the Law, the Commonwealths life, and deserves
no other reward then he that cures a disease by throat-cutting: if one may
design the use of another interest, propriety is lost. This Project of
Drayning was condemned in a Parliament prime Jacobi, and thrown out of the
House of Commons with disgrace. Some moved that Sir Miles Sands might have
satisfaction for the money he laid out: Sir Edward Cock replied, Let those pay
him, that set him a work; and further added, That it was just that Sir Miles
Sands should pay damages to the oppressed and injured Countries, for trying
experiments of other men's lands, without and against their consents.

The Earl of Lincoln in Queen Elizabeth's days procured a Commission for
drayning some of the Fens in question, and pretended the work was public,
honorable, feizable, and profitable, and that the people desired it; but when
the Lord Willoughby of Erby for the Country, remonstrated the contrary to the
Queen, she in great passion, resumed her Commission, and left the Country at
liberty to drain themselves.

Which liberty we hope we shall still enjoy, being willing to advance the
Public in any way we shall be enabled to by Law, we having formerly been
interrupted in scowring of our ancient Draines and Sewers by that project of
Undertaking.

Such petitions as are now preferred for the carrying on of the Earl of
Lindseys undertaking, we the Owners there do protest against, knowing them to
be signed only by poor people, who have no Interest there but under us, whose
hands were indirectly gained by two Alehouse-keepers, who went from town to
town, and house to house to gain those hands.

Such Petitions as are for Stinting of our Commons, we declared our
willingness to in the Country, but could not see the Petitions, so that it
was but a pretense to carry on the Undertakers design, in rendering us to the
Poor, and others, as Oppressors of the Commons of the Country.

MICAH 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon
their beds: when the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the
power of their hand. And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and
houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and
his heritage. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family do I
devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye go
haughtily: for this time is evil. In that day shall one take up a parable
against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, and say, We be utterly
spoiled: he has changed the portion of my people: how has he removed it from
me? turning away, be has divided our fields. Therefore thou shall have none
that shall cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the Lord.


FINIS.

