A Short Introduction OF GRAMMAR GENERALLY TO BE USED:

Compiled and set forth for the bringing up of all those that intend to attain
to the knowledge of the Latin tongue.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by JOHN HAYES, Printer to the Universitie. Anno Dom. 1673.

To the Reader.
TO exhort every man to the learning of Grammar that intends to attain to the
understanding of the tongues, (wherein is contained a great treasure of wisdom
and knowledge) it would seem much vain and little needful; for so much as it is
to be known that nothing can surely be ended, whose beginning is either feeble
or faulty; and no building be perfect, when as the foundation and groundwork
is ready to fall and unable to uphold the burden of the frame. Wherefore it
were better for the thing it self, and more profitable for the learner, to
understand how he may best come to that which he ought most necessarily to
have, and to learn the plainest way of obtaining that which must be his best
and certainest guide, both of reading and speaking, then to fall in doubt of
the goodness and necessity thereof: which I doubt, whether he shall more lament
that he lacks, or esteem that he has it: and whether he shall oftener stumble
at trifles, and be deceived in light matters, when he has it not; or judge
truly and faithfully of diverse weighty things, when he has it. The which has
seemed to many very hard to compass aforetime, because that they who professed
this art of teaching Grammar, did teach diverse Grammars, and not one: and if by
chance they taught one Grammar, yet they did it diversely, and so could not do
it all best; because there is but one bestness, not only in every thing, but
also in the manner of every thing.

As for the diversity of Grammars, it is well and profitably taken away by the
Kings Majesty's wisdom, who foreseeing the inconvenience, and favorably
providing the remedy, caused one kind of Grammar by sundry learned men to be
diligently drawn, and so to be set out only, every where to be taught for the
use of learners, and for avoiding the hurt in changing of Schoolmasters.

The variety of teaching is diverse yet, and always will be; for that every
Schoolmaster likes that he knows, and sees not the use of that he knows
not; and therefore judges that the most sufficient way, which he sees to be
the readiest mean, and perfectest kind, to bring a learner to have a through
knowledge therein.

Wherefore it is not amiss, if one seeing by trial an easier and readier way
then the common sort of teachers do, would say what he has proved, and for the
commodity allowed; that others not knowing the same, might by experience prove
the like, and then by proof reasonable judge the like: not hereby excluding the
better way when it is found; but in the mean season forbidding the worse.

The first and chiefest point is, that the diligent Master make not the Scholar
haste too much; but that he in continuance and diligence of teaching, make him
to rehearse so, that until he has perfectly that which is behind* he suffer
him not to go forward: for this posting haste overthrows and hurts a great
sort of wits, and casts them into an amazedness, when they know not how they
shall either go forward, for backward; but stick fast as one plunged, that
cannot tell what to do, or which way to turn him: and then the Master thinks
the Scholar to be a dullard, and the Scholar thinks the thing to be uneasy,
and too hard for his wit: and the one has an evil opinion of the other, when
oftentimes it is in neither, but in the kind of teaching. Wherefore the best
and chiefest point thoroughly to be kept is, that the Scholar have in mind so
perfectly that which he has learned, and understand it so, that not only it
be not a stop for him, but also a light and help unto the residue that
follows. This shall be the Masters ease, and the child's encouraging, when the
one shall see his labor take good effect, and thereby in teaching be less
tormented; and the other shall think the thing the easier, and so with more
gladness be ready to go about the same.

In going forward, let him have of every declension of Nouns, and conjugation
of Verbs, so many several examples as they pass them; that it may seem to the
Schoolmaster, no word in the Latin tongue to be so hard for that part, as the
Scholar shall not be able, praisably, to enter into the forming thereof. And
surely the multitude of examples (if the easiest and commonest be taken first,
and so come to the stranger and harder) must needs bring this profit withal,
that the Scholar shall best understand, and soonest conceive the reason of the
rules, and best be acquainted with the fashion of the tongue Wherein it is
profitable, not only that he can orderly decline his Noun, and his Verb; but
every way, forward, backward, by cases, by persons: that neither case of Noun,
nor person of Verb can be required, that he cannot without stop or study tell.
And until this time I count not the Scholar perfect, nor ready to go any
further till he has this already learned.

This when he can perfectly do, and has learned every part, not by rote, but
by reason, and is more cunning in the understanding of the thing, then in
rehearsing of the words (which is not past a quarter of a years diligence, or
very little more, to a painful and diligent man, if the Scholar have a mean
wit) then let him pass to the Concords, to know the agreement of parts among
themselves, with like way and diligence as is before described.

Wherein plain and sundry examples, and continual rehearsal of things learned,
and specially the daily declining of a Verb, and turning him into all fashions,
shall make the great and heavy labor so easy and so pleasant for the framing
of sentences, that it will be rather a delight unto them that they be able to
do well; then pain in searching of an unused and unacquainted thing.

When these Concords be well known unto them, (an easy and pleasant pain, if
the fore-grounds be well and thoroughly beaten in) let them not continue in
learning of their rules orderly, as they lie in their Syntax, but rather learn
some pretty book wherein is contained not only the eloquence of the tongue,
but also a good plain lesson of honesty and godliness; and thereof take some
little sentence as it lies, and learn to make the same first out of English
into Latin, not seeing the book or construing it thereupon. And if there fall
any necessary rule of the Syntax to be known, then to learn it, as the occasion
of the sentence gives cause that day: which sentence once made well, and as
nigh as may be with the words of the book, then to take the book and construe
it; and so shall he be less troubled with the parsing of it, and easiliest
carry his lesson in mind.

And although it was said before, that the Scholars should learn but a little
at once, it is not meant that when the Master has heard them a while, he
should let them alone (for that were more negligence for both parts) but I
would, all their time they be at school, they should never be idle, but always
occupied in a continual rehearsing and looking back again to those things they
have learned, and be more bound to keep well their old, then to take forth any
new.

Thus if the Master occupy them he shall see a little lesson take a great deal
of time, and diligently enquiring and examining of the parts and the rules, not
to be done so quickly and speedily as it might be thought to be: within a while
by this use, the Scholar shall be brought to a good kind of readiness of
making, to the which if there be adjoined some use of speaking (which must
necessarily be had) he shall be brought past the wearisome bitterness of his
learning.

A great help to further this readiness of making and speaking shall be, if the
Master give him an English book, and cause him ordinarily every day to turn
some part into Latin. This exercise cannot be done without his rules, and
therefore does establish them, and ground them surely in his mind for
readiness, and makerh him more able to speak suddenly, whenever any present
occasion is offered for the same. And it does help his learning more a great
deal, to turn out of English into Latin, then on the contrary.

Furthermore we see many can understand Latin, that cannot speak it; and when
they read the Latin word in the book, can tell you the English thereof at any
time: but when they have laid away their book, they cannot contrariwise tell
you for the English the Latin again, whenever you will ask them. And
therefore this exercise helps this sore well, and makes those words which he
understands, to be readier by use unto him, and so perfecteth him in the
tongue handsomely.

These precepts, well kept, will bring a man clear past the use of this Grammar
book, and make him as ready as his book, and so meet to further things* whereof
it were out of season to give precepts here. And therefore this may be for this
purpose enough, which to good Schoolmasters and ^kilful is not so needful, to
other meaner and less practiced it may be not only worth the labor of
reading, but also of the using.

An Advertisement to the READER.
IN this Impression, for the greater profit and ease both of Master and
Scholar, in the English rules, and in the Latin Syntax, these words, wherein
the force of each example lies, are noted with letters and figures, where need
is: the governor, directour or guider, or that which is in place of it with an
a; the governed, or that which is guided by it with b: Or if there be more
governors, the first with ^, the second with aa; and so if more governeds, the
first with b, the second with bb: and sometimes the order is directed by a, b,
c; or by figures, and words of the same and such like nature, coupled together
with little strokes between, so much as may be. That so in saying the
ensamples, the children may (where or when the Master pleases) render again
only those words which are the ensample; as saying, Quis nisi b mentis a inops
oblatum respuat aurum? may repeat again,a inops,b mentis. So throughout all the
Latin rules, for the better understanding thereof, and for a short repetition,
when the Master pleases, the sums of all the rules are set down, either in the
words before the rule, or in the margin, that so they may be chained together
briefly, and make perfect sense.

The Latin letters are thus written. The capital letters, A B C D E F G H J I
K L M N O P Q R S T V U X Y Z. A B C D E F G H J I K L M N O P Q R S T V V X Y
Z.
The small letters, a b c d e f g h j i k l m n o p q r s S t v u x y z. a b c
d e f g h j i k l m n o p q r s s t v u x y z.



Letters are divided into vowels and consonants. A vowel is a letter which
makes a full and perfect sound of it self; and there are five in number:
namely, a, e, i, o, u; whereunto is added the Greek vowel y. A consonant is a
letter which must needs be sounded with a vowel; as b with e. And all the
letters, except the vowels, are consonants. A syllable is the pronouncing of
one letter or more with one breath; as, A-ve. A diphthong is the sound of two
vowels in one syllable, and of them there be four in number; namely, ae, oe,
au, eu; whereunto is added ei: as Aeneas, coena, audio, euge, hei. In stead of
ae and oe, we commonly do pronounce e.


The Greek letters are thus written.
In capital letters, A G D E TH I K L N X O P P S T Y PH PS O. The small
letters, a b g d e z e th i k l m n x o p r s t u ph ch ps o.


PRECATIO.
DOmine Pater, coeli ac terrae Effector, qui liberaliter tribuis sapientiam
omnibus eam cum fiducia abs te petentibus, exorna ingenii mei bonitatem, quam
cum caeteris naturae viribus mihi infudisti, lumine divinae gratiae tuae: ut
non modo quae ad cognoscendum te and Servatorem nostrum Dominum Jesum valiant
intelligam; sed etiam ita mente and voluntate persequar, and indies benignitate
tua, cum doctrina, tum pietate proficiam: ut qui efficis omnia in omnibus, in
me resplendescere dona tua facias, ad gloriam sempiternam immortalis Majestatis
tuae. Amen.

A PRAYER.
O Almighty Lord and merciful Father, maker of heaven and earth, which of thy
free liberality give wisdom abundantly to all that with faith and full
assurance ask it of thee, beautify by the light of thy heavenly grace the
towardness of my wit, the which with all powers of nature thou have poured into
me; that I may not only understand those things which may effectually bring me
to the knowledge of thee, and the Lord Jesus our Savior; but also, with my
whole heart and will constantly follow the same, and receive daily increase
through thy bountiful goodness toward me, as well in good life as doctrine: so
that thou, which workest all things in all creatures, may make thy gracious
benefits shine in me, to the endless glory and honor of thine immortal
Majesty. So be it.

An Introduction of the eight parts of LATIN Speech.
IN Speech be these eight parts following:

declined. Noun, Pronoun, Verb, Participle,
undeclined. Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.

Of a Noun.
A Noun is the name of a thing that may be seen, A Noun.
felt, heard, or understood: as the name of my hand in Latin, is manus; the
name of an house, is domus; the name of goodness, is bonitas.

Of Nouns, A Noun two sorts.
some be Substantives, and some be Adjectives.

A Noun Substantive is that stands by himself, Nouns of Substantive.
and required not another word to be joined with him to show his signification:
as, Homo, a man: And it is declined with one article; as, Hic magister, a
master: or else with two at the most: as, Hic and haec parens, a father or
mother,

A Noun Adjective is that cannot stand by it self in reason or signification, A
Noun Adjective.
but requires to be joined with another word: as, ^onus, good. Pulcher, fair.
And it is declined either with three terminations: as, Bonus, bona, bonum: or
else with three articles: as, Hic, haec, and hoc Felix, happy: Hic and haec
Levis, and hoc Leve, light.

A Noun Substantive either is proper to the thing that it betokens: Two kinds
of Nouns substantives.
as, Edvardus is my proper name: or else is common to more; as, ^omo is a
common name to all men.

Numbers of Nouns.
IN Nouns be two Numbers, the Singular and the Plural. The singular number
speaks but of one: as, Lapis, a stone. The plural number speaks of more
then one: as, Lapides, stones.

Cases of Nouns.
NOuns be declined with six cases, Singularly and Plurally: the Nominative, the
Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative, the Vocative, and the Ablative.

The Nominative case comes before the Verb, Nominative case.
and answers to this question, Who or What? as, Magister docet, the Master
teaches.

The Genitive case is known by this token Of: Genitive.
and answers to this question, Whose or whereof? as, Doctrina Magistri, The
learning of the Master.

The Dative case is known by this token To: Dative.
and answers to this question, To whom? or To what? as, Do librum Magistro, I
give a book to the Master.

The Accusative case follows the Verb, Accusative.
and answers to this question, Whom or what? as, Amo Magistrum, I love the
Master.

The Vocative case is known by calling or speaking to: as, Vocative.
O Magister, O Master.

The Ablative case is commonly joined with Prepositions serving to the Ablative
case: Ablative.
as, De Magistro, Of the Master, Coram Magistro, Before the Master.

Also In, With, Through, For, From, By, and Then after the Comparative degree,
be signs of the Ablative case.

Articles.
ARticles are borrowed of the Pronoun, and be thus declined:

Singulariter, Nominat. hic, haec, hoc. Genitivo hujus. Dativo huic. Ac. hunc,
hanc, hoc. Vocativo caret. Ablativo hoc, hac, hoc. Pluraliter, Nomin. hi, hae,
haec. Genesis horum, harum, horum. Dativo his. Accus. hos, has, haec. Vocativo
caret. Ablativo his.
Genders of Nouns.
GEnders of Nouns be seven: the Masculine, the Feminine, the Neuter, the
Commune of two, the Commune of three, the Doubtful and the Epicene.

The Masculine Gender is declined with this article Hic: as, Hic vir, a man.

The Feminine Gender is declined with this article Haec: as, Haec mulier, a
woman.

The Neuter Gender is declined with this article Hoc: as, Hoc saxum, a stone.

The Commune of two is declined with Hic, and haec: as, Hic and haec parens, a
father or mother.

The Commune of three is declined with Hic, haec, and hoc, as Hic, haec and hoc
felix, happy.

The Doubtful Gender is declined with Hic, or haec: as, hic vel haec dies, a
day.

The Epicene Gender is declined with one article; and under that one article
both kinds are signified: as, Hic passer, a sparrow. Haec aquila, an eagle,
both he and she.

The Declensions of Nouns. The e be five declensions of Nouns.
THe first is, I.
when the Genitive and Dative case singular end in ae: The Accusative in am:
The Vocative like the Nominative: The Ablative in a: The Nominative plural in
ae: The Genitive in arum: The Dative in is: The Accusative in as: the Vocative
like the Nominative: The Ablative in is:

As in example: Singulariter, Nominat. Haec mensa.
haec Musa. Pluraliter, Nominat hae musae. Genitivo hujus musae. Hic Poeta.
Ge. harum musarum. Dativo huic musae. Hic and haec verna.
Dativo his musis. Accus. hanc musam. Accusat. has musas. Vocativo o musa.
Vocativo o musae. Ablat. ab hac musa. Abl. ab his musis.

Note that Filia and Nata, Note.
do make the Dative and the Ab^ative plural in is, or in abus: Also dea, mula,
equa, liberta, make the Dative and the Ablative case plural in abus only.

THe second is, II.
when the Genitive case singular ends in i: The Dative in o: The Accusative
in um: The Vocative for the most part like the Nomin. The Ablative in o: The
Nom. plural in i: The Genitive in orum: The Dative in is: The Accusative in os:
The Vocative like the Nominative: the ablative in is. As in example.
Singulariter, Nom. Hic vir.
hic magister. Pluraliter. Nomina. hi magistri. Genesis Hic liber.
hujus magistri. Ge. horu^ magistroru^. Dativo huic magistro Dativo his
magistris. Ac. Haec colus.
hunc magistrum. Accus. hos magistros. Vocativo o magister Vocativo o magistri.
Abl. Hic logos.
ab hoc magistro. Abl. ab his magistris.

Here is to be noted, Note.
that, when the Nominative ends in us, the vocative shall end in e: as,
Nominativo hic Dominus, Vocativo o Domine. Except Deus, that makes o Deus; and
Filius, that makes o Fili.

When the Nominative ends in ius, if it be a proper name of a man, the
Vocative shall end in i: as, Nominativo hic Georgius, Vocativo o Georgi.

Also these Nouns following make their Vocative in e, or in us: Agnus, lucus,
vulgus, populus, chorus, fluvius.

Note also that all Nouns of the Neuter. Note.
Gender, of what declension soever they be, have the Nominative, the
Accusative, and the Vocative alike in both numbers, and in the plural number
they end all in a: As in example; Singulariter. Nom. hoc regnum. Pluraliter
Nominat haec regna. Genesis hujus regni. G. Hoc damnum.
horum regnorum. Dativo huic regno. Dativo his regnis. Hoc malum.
Accusat. hoc regnum Accusat. Hoc verbum.
haec regna. Vocativo o regnum. Vocativo o regna. Ablat. ab hoc regno. Ablat.
ab his regnis,

Except Ambo and Duo, which make the Neuter Gender in o, and be thus declined.
Pluraliter, Nominativo ambo, ambae, ambo. Genitivo amborum, ambarum, amborum.
Dativo ambobus, ambabus, ambobus. Accusativo ambos, ambas, ambo. Vocativo ambo,
ambae, ambo. Abl. Ambobus, ambabus, ambobus. Likewise Duo.

THe third is, III.
when the Genitive case singular ends in is: The Dative in i: The Accusative
in em, and sometime in im, and sometime in both: The Vocative like the
Nominative: The Ablative in e, or i, and sometime in both: The Nominative
plural in es: The Genitive in um, and sometime in ium: The Dative in bus: The
Accusative in es: The Vocative like the Nominative: The Ablative in bus.

As in example; Singulariter, Nominat. Hic pater.
hic lapis. Pluraliter, Nominat. hi lapides. Genesis Hic panis.
hujus lapidis. Genesis horum lapidum. Dativo huic lapidi. Hic opus.
Dativo his lapidibus. Accus. Hoc caput.
hunc lapidem. Accusat. hos lapides. Vocativo o lapis. Haec nubes.
Vocativo o lapides. Ablat. ab hoc lapide. Ablat. ab his lapidibus.
Singulariter, No. Hic vel haec bubo.
hic and haec parens Pluraliter, No. hi and hae parents. Genesis hujus parentis
Genesis horum and harum parentum. Dativo huic parenti. Dat. his parentibus. Accus.
Haec virtus.
hunc and hanc parentem. Hoc animal.
A. hos and has parents. Voc o parens Voc. o parents. Abl. Hoc cubile.
ab hoc and hac parente. Hoc calcar.
Abl. ab his parentibus.

THe fourth is, IV.
when the Genitive case singular ends in us: The Dative in ui: The Accusative
in um: The Vocative like the Nominative: the Ablative in u. The Nominative
plural in us: The Genitive in uum: The Dative in ibus: The Accusative in us:
The Vocative like the Nominative: The Ablative in ibus, As in example:
Singulariter, Nominat. Hic Gradus.
haec manus. Pluraliter, Nominat. hae manus. Genit hujus manus. Haec porticus
Genesis harum manuum Dativo huic manui. Hoc cornu.
Dat. his manibus. Accus. hanc manum. Accusat. has manus. Vocativo o manus.
Vocativo o manus. Abl. ab hac manu. Ablat. ab his manibus.

THe fifth is, when the Genitive and Dative case singular do end in ei: The
Accusative in em: V.
The Vocative like the Nominative: The Ablative in e. The Nominative plural in
es: The Genitive in erum: The Dative in ebus: The Accusative in es: The
Vocative like the Nominative: The Ablative in ebus. As in example:
Singulariter, Nom. hic meridies. Pluraliter, Nominat. Haec res.
hi meridies. Genesis hujus meridiei. G. Haec facies.
horum meridierum. Dat. huic meridiei. Dat. Haec acies.
his meridiebus. Ac. hunc meridiem. Accusat. hos meridies. Vocativo o meridies.
Vocativo o meridies. Abl. ab hoc meridie. Ab. ab his meridiebus.

Note that all nouns of the fifth declension be of the feminine gender, except
meridies and dies.

The declining of Adjectives.
A Noun adjective of three terminations is thus declined, Note.
after the first and second declension. Singulariter, No. bonus, bona, bonum
Pluraliter, No. Niger, a, um. Tardus, a, um.
boni, bonae, bona. Genesis boni, bonae, boni. G. bonorum, bonaru^, bonorum. Dat.
bono, bonae, bono. Da. bonis. Ac. bonu^, bona^, bonum A. Satur, a, um.
bonos, bonas, bona. Vo. bone, bona, bonum. Vo. boni, bonae, bona Abl. bono,
bona, bono. Ablativo bonis.

There are besides these, An except.
certain nouns adjectives of another manner of declining, which make the
Genitive case singular in ius, and the Dative in i: which be these that follow,
with their compounds; Singulariter, Nom. unus, una, unum. Pluraliter, Nom. uni,
unae, una. Genitivo unius. Ge. unorum, unarum, unorum. Dativo uni. Dat. unis.
A. unum, unam, unum. Ac. unos, unas, una. Voc. un^, una, unum. Vocat. uni,
unae, una. Ablat. uno, una, uno. Ablativo unis.

Note that unus, Note.
una, unum, has not the plural number, but when it is joined with a word that
lacks the singular number: as, Unae literae; Una moenia.

In like manner be declined totus, Alius has aliud neut.
solus, and also ullus, alius, alter, uter and neuter: saving that these five
last rehearsed lack the vocative case.

A noun adjective of three articles is thus declined after the third
declension: Singulariter, Nomin. Ingens,
hic, haec and hoc felix. Pluraliter, Nom. hi and hae felices, and haec
felicia. Genesis Solers,
hujus felicis. Genesis horum, harum and horum felicium. Dutivo huic felici. Capax,
Dativo his felicibus. Ac. Vetus
hunc and hanc felicem, and hoc felix. Ac. hos and has felices, and haec
felicia. Vocativo o felix. V. o felices and o felicia, Ab. ab hoc, hac and hoc
felice, vel felici. Abl. ab his felicibus. Singulariter, No. Levis and leve.
hic and haec tristis and hoc triste. Pluraliter, No. hi and hae tristes, and
haec tristia. Genit. hujus tristis. Ge. horum, harum and horum tristium. Dativo
huic tristi. Celer celeris and celere.
Dativo his tristibus. Ac. hunc and hanc tristem and hoc triste. Melior and
melius.
Ac. hos and has tristes, and haec tristia. V. o tristis, and o triste V. o
tristes and o tristia. Ablat. ab hoc, hac and hoc tristi. Abl. ab his tristibus.

Comparisons of Nouns.
ADjectives, whose signification may increase or be diminished, may form
comparison.

There be three degrees of comparison: Three degrees of comparison.
The positive, the comparative, and the superlative,

The positive betokens the thing absolutely without excess: The positive.
as Durus, Hard.

The comparative somewhat exceeds his positive in signification: The
comparative.
as, Durior, hardor. And it is formed of the first case of his positive that
ends in i* by putting thereto or and us: as of Duri, hic and haec durior, and
hoc durius: of Tristi, hic and haec tristior and hoc tristius: of Dulci, hic
and haec dulcior, and hoc dulcius.

The superlative exceeds his positive in the The superlative.
highest degree: as, Durissimus, Hardest. And it is formed of the first case of
his positive that ends in i, by putting thereto s and simus, as of Duri
durissimus; of Tristi, tristissimus; of Dulci dulcissimus.

From these general rules are excepted these that follow; Exception.
Bonus, melior, optimus: Malus, pejor, pessimus: Magnus, major, maximus:
Parvus, minor, minimus: Multus, plurimus; multa, plurima; multum plus, plurimum.

And if the positive end in er, Ater.
the superlative is formed of the nominative case, Teter.
by putting to rimus; Acer.
as, Pulcher, pulcherrimus.

Also these nouns ending in lis, make the superlative by changing lis into
limus, as Humilis, humillimus: similis, simillimus: Facilis, facillimus:
Gracilis, gracillimus: Agilis, agillimus: Docilis, docillimus.

All other nouns ending in lis, do follow the general rule aforegoing: as,
Utilis, utilissimus.

Also if a vowel come before us, Igneus.
it is compared by Magis* and Maxim: Impius.
as Pius, magis pius, maxim pius: Arduus* Strenuus
Assiduus, magis assiduus, maxim assiduus.

Of the Pronoun.
A Pronoun is a part of speech much like to a Noun, which is used in showing or
rehearsing.

There be fifteen Pronouns, Ego, tu, There be fifteen pronouns.
sui, ille, ipse, iste, hic, is, meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras,
vestras. whereof four have the Vocative case: as, Tu meus, noster, and nostras,
and all others lack the Vocative case.

To these may be added their compounds, Egomet, tute, idem; and also Qui, quae,
quod.

These eight Pronouns, Ego, tu, sui, ille, ipse, iste, Primitives.
hic, and is, be Primitives: so called, for because they be not derived of
others. And they be also called Demonstratives, Demonstratives.
because they show a thing not spoken of before.

And there six, Relatives.
Hic, ille, iste, is, idem, and qui, be Relatives; because they rehearse a
thing that was spoken of before.

These seven, Derivatives.
Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, nostras, vestras, be Derivatives: for they
be derived of their primitives, Mei, tui, sui, nostri, and vestri.

There belong to a Pronoun these five things; Five things belonging to a
pronoun.
Number, Case and Gender, as are in a Noun: Declension and Person, as here
follows.

The Declensions of Pronouns.
There be four Declensions of Pronouns.

These three, The first declension.
Ego, tu, sui, be of the first declension, and be thus declined; Singulariter,
Nominativo Ego. Pluraliter, Nominativo nos. Genitivo mei. G. nostrum vel
nostri. Dativo mihi. Dativo nobis. Accusativo me. Accusativo nos. Vocativo
caret. Vocativo caret. Ablativo a me. Abl. a nobis. Singulariter, Nominativo
Tu. Pluraliter, Nominativo vos. Genitivo tui. G. vestrum vel vestri. Dativo
tibi. Dativo vobis. Accusativo te. Accusativo vos. Vocativo o tu. Vocativo o
vos. Ablativo a te. Ablativo a vobis. Singulariter and Pluraliter, Nominativo
caret. Genitivo sui. Dativo sibi. Accusat. se. Vocat. caret. Ablat. a se.

These six, The second declension.
Ille, ipse, iste, hic, is and qui, be of the second declension, and be thus
declined;

Singulariter, Nomin, iste, ista, istud. Pluraliter. Nomin. isti, istae, ista.
Genitivo istius. Ge. istorum, istarum, istorum. Dativo isti. Dat* istis. Ac.
istum, istam, istud Acc. istos, istas, ista. Vocativo caret. Vocativo caret.
Ablat. isto, ista^, isto. Ablativo istis.

Ille is declined like iste; and also Ipse, saving that the neuter gender in
the nominative case, and in the accusative case singular makes ipsum.

Nominativo hic, haec, hoc: Genitivo hujus: Dativo huic: as before in the Noun.

Singulariter, Nominat. is, ea, id. Pluraliter, Nominativo ii, eae, ea.
Genitivo ejus. G.eorum, earum, eorum. Dativo ei. Dativo iis, vel eis. Accus.
eum, eam, id. Accusativo eos, eas, ea. Vocativo caret. Vocativo caret. Ablativo
eo, ea, eo. Ablativo iis, vel eis. Singulariter, Nom. qui, quae, quod.
Pluraliter, N. qui, quae, quae. Genitivo cujus. G. quoru^, quaru^, quoru^
Dativo cui. Dat. quibus vel queis Ac, quem, quam, quod. qui Acc. quos, quas,
quae. Vocativo caret. Vocativo caret. Abl. quo, qua, quo vel Ab. quibus vel
queis.

Likewise Quis and Quid be declined, whether they be interrogatives. or
Indefinites. Also Quisquis is thus declined; Nom. Quisquis, Ac Quicquid. Abl.
Quoquo, The compound of Quis.
Quaqua, Quicquid Quoquo.

Where note, Note.
that Quid is always a substantive of the Neuter gender.

These five, The third declension.
Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, are of the third declension, and be
declined like nouns adjectives of three terminations, in this wise:
Singulariter, Nom, meus, mea, meum. Pluraliter, N. mei, meae, mea. Genit. mei,
meae, mei. G. meorum, mearu^, meorum. Dativo meo, meae, meo. Da. meis. Ac.
meum, meam, meum. A. meos, meas, mea. Vocat. mi, mea, meum. Voc. mei, meae,
mea. Ablat. meo, mea, meo. Ablativo meis.

So is Noster declined, and tuus, suus, vester, saving that these three last do
lack the Vocative case.

Nostras, The fourth declension.
vestras, and this noun Cujas, be of the fourth declension, and be thus
declined.

Singulariter, N. hic and haec nostras and hoc nostrate. Pluraliter, N. hi and
hae nostrates and haec nostratia. Genesis hujus nostratis Genesis horum, harum, and
horum nostratium. Dati. huic nostrati. Dat. his nostratibus. Ac. hunc and hanc
nostrate^ and hoc nostrate Ac. hos and has nostrates, and haec nostratia.
Vocativo o nostras, and o nostrate. Vocat. o nostrates, and o nostratia. Ab* ab
hoc hac and hoc nostrate vel nostrati. Ab. ab his nostratibus

Here is to be noted, Note.
that Nostras, vestras, and this noun Cujas, be called Gentiles, because they
properly betoken pertaining to Countries or Nations, to Seas or Factions.

A Pronoun has three persons.
The first person speaks of himself: Persons three.
as, Ego, I, Nos, we.

The second person is spoken to: as, Tu, Thou, Vos, ye. And of this person is
also every Vocative case.

The third person is spoken of: as, Ille, He; Illi, They: and therefore all
Nouns, Pronouns, and Participles, be of the third person.

Of a Verb.
A Verb is a part of speech declined with mood end tense, A verb.
and betokens doing, as, Amo, I love: or suffering, as, Amor, I am loved: or
being; as, Sum, I am.

Of verbs, Verbs Personals.
such as have persons be called personals: as, Ego amo, tu amas. And such as
have no persons, be called impersonals: as, Taedet, It irketh; Oportet, it
behooves.

Of verbs personals there be five kinds; Active, passive, neuter, deponent, and
commune.

A verb active ends in o, Active.
and betokens to do: as, Amo, I love; and by putting to r, it may be a
passive: as, Amor.

A verb passive ends in or, Passive.
and betokens to suffer: as, Amor, I am loved; and by putting away r it may
be an active: as, Amo.

A verb neuter ends in o or m, Neuter.
and cannot take r to make him a passive: as, Curro, I run; Sum, I am. And it
is Englished sometime actively: as, Curro, I run: and sometime passively; as,
Aegroto, I am sick.

A verb deponent ends in r like a passive and yet in signification is but
either active; Deponent.
as, Loquor verbum, I speak a word: or neuter; as, Glorior, I boast.

A verb commune ends in r, Commune.
and yet in signification is both active and passive: as, Osculor a te, I kiss
thee; Osculor a te, I am kissed of thee.

Moods.
THere be six moods: Moods six.
The indicative, the imperative, the optative, the potential, the subjunctive
and the infinitive.

The indicative mood shows a reason true or false, Indicative.
as, Ego amo, I love: or else asks a question: as, Amas tu? Do thou love?

The imperative bids or commands: Imperative.
as, Ama, Love thou.

The optative wishes or desires, Optative.
with these signs, Would God, I pray God, or God grant, as Utinam amem, I pray
God I love: and has commonly an adverb of wishing joined with him.

The potential mood is known by these signs, Potential.
May, can, might, would, should, could, or ought: as, Amem, I may, or can love:
without an adverb joined with him.

The subjunctive mood has evermore some conjunction joined with him:
Subjunctive.
as, Cum amarem, When I loved. And it is called the subjunctive mood, because
it depends of another verb in the same sentence, either going before, or
coming after: as, Cum amarem, eram miser; When I loved, I was a wretch.

The infinitive signifies to do, Infinitive,
to suffer, or to be, and has neither number nor person, nor nominative case
before him: and is known commonly by this sign, To: as, Amare, To love. Also
when two verbs come together without any nominative case between them, then the
latter shall be the infinitive mood: as, Cupio discere, I desire to learn.

Gerunds.
THere be moreover belonging to the infinitive mood of verbs, Gerunds three;
Di, Do, dum.
certain voices called Gerunds ending in di, do, and dum: which have both the
active and passive signification: as, Amandi, Of loving, or of being loved:
Amando, In loving, or in being loved: Amandum, To love, or to be loved.

Supines.
THere be also appertaining unto verbs two supines: Supines two, in um, and u.
the one ending in um, which is called the first supine, because it has the
signification of the verb active; as, Eo amatum, I go to love: And the other in
u, which is called the latter supine, because it has for the most part the
signification passive; as, Difficilis amatu, Hard to be loved.

Tenses.
THere be five tenses or times: Tenses five.
the present tense, the preterimperfect, the preterperfect, the
preterpluperfect, and the future tense.

The present tense speaks of the time that now is: Present tense.
as, Amo, I love.

The preterimperfect tense speaks of the time not perfectly past:
Preterimperfect.
as, Amabam, I loved, or did love.

The preterperfect tense speaks of the time perfectly past, Preterperfect.
with this sign Have: as, Amavi, I have loved.

The preterpluperfect tense speaks of the time more then perfectly past,
Preterpluperfect.
with this sign Had: as, A maveram, I had loved.

The future tense speaks of the time to come, Future.
with this sign Shall or will: as, Amabo, I shall or will love*

Persons.
THere be also in verbs three persons in both numbers: Persons three.
as, Singulariter, Ego amo, I love; Tu amas, Thou love; Ille amat, He loves.
Pluraliter, Nos amamus, We love; Vos amatis, Ye love; Illiamant They love.

Conjugations.
VErbs have four conjugations, Conjugations four.
which be known after this manner.

The first conjugation has a long before re and ris: 1
as, Ama^re ama^ris.

The second conjugation has e long before re and ris: 2
as, Doce^re, Doce^ris.

The third conjugation has e short before re and ris: 3
as, Legre, legris.

The fourth conjugation has i long before re and ris: 4
as, Audi^re, audi^ris.

Verbs in O, of the four Conjugations be declined after these examples.
AMo, amas, amavi, amare: amandi, amando, amandum: amatum, amatu: amans,
amaturus. To love. Doceo, doces, docui, docere: docendi, docendo, docendum:
doctum, doctu: docens, docturus. To teach. Lego, legis, legi, legere: legendi,
legendo, legendum: lectum, lectu: legens, lecturus. To read. Audio, audis,
audivi, audire: audiendi audiendo, audiendum: auditum, auditu: audiens,
auditurus. To hear. Indicative Mood, Present tense
Singular, Plural, I love, or do love, thou love, or do love, he loves, or
does love, We love, or do love, Ye love, or do love. They love, or do love AMo,
amas, amat. Amamus, amatis, amant. Doceo, doces, docet. Docemus, docetis,
docent. Lego, legis, legit. Legimus, legitis, legunt. Audio, audis, audit.
Audimus, auditis, audiunt. Preterimperfect tense singular, Amabam, Docebam,
Legebam, Audiebam,
bas, bat. Plur. bamus, batis, bant. I loved or did love. Preterperfect tense
singular, Amavi, Docui, Legi, Audivi,
isti, it. Plur. imus, istis, erunt vel ere. I have loved. Preterpluperfect
tense singular. Amaveram, Docueram, Legeram, Audiveram,
ras, rat. Plur. ramus, ratis, rant. I had loved. Future tense singular, Amabo,
Docebo, Legam, Audiam,
bis, bit. Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt.

es, et. Plur. emus, etis, ent.

I shall or will love. Imperative Mood.
Love, Love he, or Love we, or Love, Love they, or thou: let him love, let us
love: ye: let them love. Present tense singular. Ama, amet, amato: amato: Plur.
amemus, amate, ament, amarore: amanto. Pl. doceamus, Doce, doceat, doceto:
doceto: docete, doceant, docetote: doce^to. Lege, legate, legito: legito Plur.
legamus, legite, legant, legitote: legunto. Audi, audiat, audito: audito Pl.
audiamus, audite, audiant, auditote: audiunto. Optative Mood.
Present tense sing. utinam Amem, ames, amet. Plur. utin. amemus, ametis, ent.
God grant I love. Doceam, Legam, Audiam,
as, at. Plural. utinam amus, atis, ant. Preterimperfect tense sing. utinam
Amarem, Docerem, Legerem* Audirem*
res, ret. Pl. utinam remus, retis, rent. Would God I loved, or did love.
Preterperfect tense singular, utinam Amaverim, Docuerim, Legerim, Audiverim*
ris, rit. Plur. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. I pray God I have loved.
Preterpluperfect tense sing. utinam Amavissem, Docuissem, Legissem, Audivissem
ses, set. Pl. utinam semus, setis, sent. Would God I had loved. Future Sense
singular, utinam Amavero, Docuero, Legero, Audivero,
ris, rit. Plur. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. God grant I shall or will love
hereafter. Potential Mood.
Present tense sing. Amem, ames, amet. Plur. amemus, ametis, ament. I may or
can love. Doceam, Legam, Audiam,
as, at. Plur. amus, atis, ant. Preterimperfect tense sing. Amarem, Docerem,
Legerem, Audirem,
res, ret, Plur. remus, retis, rent. I might, would, should, ought, or could
love. Preterperfect tense singul. Amaverim, Docuerim, Legerim, Audiverim,
ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. I might, would, should, or ought to have
loved. Preterpluperfect tense sing. Amavissem, Docuissem, Legissem, Audivissem,
ses, set. Plur. semus, setis, sent. I might, would, should, or ought to had
loved, Future tense sing. Amavero, Docuero, Legero, Audivero,
ris, rit. Plur. rimus, ritis, rint. I may or can love hereafter. Subjunctive
Mood.
Present tense sing. cum Amem, ames, amet. Plur. cum amemus, ametis, ent. I may
or can love hereafter. Doceam, Legam, Audiam,
as, at. Plural. amus, atis, ant. Preterimperfect tense sing. cum Amarem,
Docerem, Legerem, Audirem,
res, ret. Plur. cum remus, retis, rent. When I loved, or did love.
Preterperfect tense singul. cum Amaverim, Docuerim, Legerim, Audiverim,
ris, rit. Plur. cum rimus, ritis, rint. When I have loved. Preterpluperfect
tense sing. cum Amavissem, Docuissem, Legissem, Audivissem,
ses, set. Plur. cum semus, setis, sent. When I had loved. Future tense
singular, cum Amavero, Docuero, Legero, Audivero,
ris, rit. Plur. cum rimus, ritis, rint. When I shall or will love. Infinitive
Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect tense. Amare, To Love. Docere, To Teach. Legere,
To Read. Audire, To Hear. Preterperf. tense and Preterpluperfect tense.
Amavisse, To have or had Loved. Audivisse. To have or had Heard. Docuisse, To
have or had Taught. Legisse, To have or had Read. Future tense. Amaturum esse,
To love hereafter. Docturum esse, To teach hereafter. Lecturum esse, To read
hereafter. Auditurum esse, To hear hereafter. Gerunds. Amandi, of loving: do,
in loving: dum, to love, Docendi, of teaching: do, in teaching: dum, to teach
Legendi, of reading: do, in reading: dum, to read. Audiendi, of hearing: do, in
hearing: dum, to hear. Supines. Amatum, To Love. Amatu, To be Loved, Doctum, To
Teach. Doctu, To be Taught. Lectum, To Read. Lectu, To be Read. Auditum, To
Hear. Auditu, To be Heard. A participle of the present tense Amans, loving.
Docens, teaching. Legens, reading. Audiens, hearing. The participle of the
first Future tense, Amaturus, to love or about to love. Docturus, to teach or
about to teach. Lecturus, to read or about to read. Auditurus, to hear or about
to hear.

Before we decline any verbs in or, for supplying of many tenses lacking in all
such verbs, we must learn to decline this verb Sum in this wise following,

Sum, es, fui, esse, futurus: To be.

Indicative Mood.
Present tense sing. SUm, I am: es, est. Puraliter Sumus, estis, sunt.
Preterimperf. tense singular. Eram, I was: eras, erat. Pluraliter eramus,
eratis, erant. Preterperf. tense sing. Fui, I have been: fuisti, fuit.
Pluraliter fuimus, Fuistis, fuerunt vel fuere. Preterpluperf. tense singul.
Fueram, I had been: fueras, fuerat, Pluraliter fueramus, fueratis, fuerant.
Future tense sing. Ero, I shall or will be: eris, erit. Pluraliter erimus,
eritis, erunt. Imperative Mood.
Present tense singular. Sis, be thou Sit Pl. Simus, Sitis, Sint Es, Este, Esto
Esto Estote Sunto. Optative Mood.
Present ten. sing. utinam Sim, I pray God I be: sis, sit. Plural, utin. simus,
sitis, sint. Preterimperf. tense sing. utin^m Essem, Would God I were: esses,
esset. Plur. utin. essemus, essetis, essent. Preterperf. tense sing. utinam
Fuerim, would God I have been: fueris, fuerit. Plural. utinam fuerimus,
fueritis fuerint. Preterpluperf. tense sing. utinam Fuissem, would God I had
been: fuisses, fuisset. Plural. utinam fuissemus, fuissetis, fuissent. Future
ten. sing. utinam Fuero, God grant I be hereafter: fueris, fuerit. Plural.
utinam fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint. Potential Mood.
Present tense sing. Sim I may or can be: sis, sit: Plural. simus, sitis, sint.
Preterimperf. tense singular. Essem, I might or could be: esses, esset. Pl.
essemus, essetis, essent. Preterperf. tense sing. Fuerim. I might, could,
should, or ought to have been: fueris, fuerit. Pl. fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint.
Preterpluperf. tense sing. Fuissem, I might, could, should, or ought to ha^
been: fuisses fuisset. Pl. fuissemus, fuissetis, fuissent. Future tense sing.
Fuero. I may or can be hereafter: fueris, fuerit. Plural. fuerimus, fueritis,
fuerint. Subjunctive Mood.
Present ten. singul. cum Sim, When I am: sis, sit. Plural, cum simus, sitis,
sint. Preterimperf. tense sing. cum Essem, When I was: esses, esset. Pl. cum
essemus, essetis, essent. Preter-Perf. tense sing. cum Fuerim When I have been:
fueris, fuerit. Pl. cum fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint. Preterpluperfect tense
sing. cum Fuissem, When I had been: fuisses, fuisset: Pl. cum fuissemus,
fuissetis, fuissent. Future ten. sing. cum Fuero, When I shall or will be:
fueris, fuerit. Plur. cum fuerimus, fueritis, fuerint. Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperf. tense. Esse, To be. Preterfect and Preterpluperfect
tense, Fuisse To have or had been. Future ten. Fore vel futurum esse, To be
hereafter. Verbs in Or of the four Conjugations be declined after these
examples.
AMor, amaris vel amare: amatus sum vel fui, amari: amatus, amandus. To be
loved. Doceor, doc^^is vel docere: doctus sum vel fui, doceri: doctus,
docendus. To be taught. Legor, legeris vel legere: lectus sum vel fui, legi*
lectus, legendus. To be read. Audior, audiris vel audire; auditus sum vel fui,
audiri: auditus, audiendus. To be heard.
Indicative Mood.
Present tense sing. Amor, amaris vel amare, amatur. I am loved. Plural. mur,
mini, ntur. Doceor, doceris vel docere, docetur. Legor, legeris vel legere,
legitur. Audior audiris vel audire, auditur. Preterimperf. tense singular.
Amabar, I was loved. baris vel bare, batur. Plur. bamur, bamini, bantur.
Docebar, Legebar, Audiebar Preterperf. tense sing. Amatus I have been loved.
sum vel fui, tus es vel fuisti, tus est vel fuit. Pl. ti sumus vel fuimus, ti
estis vel fuistis, ti sunt, fuerunt vel fuere. Doctus Lectus Auditus
Preterpluperf. tense singul. Amatus I had been loved. eram vel fueram, tus eras
vel fueras, tus erat vel fuerat. Pl. ti eramus vel fueramus, ti eratis vel
fueratis, ti erant vel fuerant. Doctus Lectus Auditus Future tense sing.
Amabor, I shall or will be loved. beris vel ere, itur. Pl. bimur, imini, untur
Docebor, Legar, eris vel ere etur. Pl. emur, emini, entur. Audier, Imperative
Mood.
Be thou loved. Let him be loved. Let us be loved. Be ye loved. Let them be
loved. Present tense sing. Amare, ametur, Pl. amemur. Amamini, amentur, amator:
amator. amaminor: amantor. Docere, doceatur, Pl. doceamur. Docemini, doceantur
docetor: docetor. doceminor: docentor. Legere, legatur, Pl. legamur. Legimini,
legantur, legitor: legitor. legiminor: leguntor. Audire, audiatur P. audiamur.
Audimini, audiantur, auditor: auditor. audiminor: audiuntor. Optative Mood.
Present tense sing. utinam. Amer, God grant I be loved. eris vel ere, etur.
Pl. utin. emur, emini, entur. Docear, aris vel are, atur. Pl. utin. amur,
amini, antur. Legar, Audiar, Preterimperfect tense singular, utinam Amarer,
Would God I were loved. reris vel rere, retur. Pl utin remur, remini, rentur.
Docerer, Legerer, Audirer, Preterperfect tense singular. utinam Amatus I pray
God I have been loved. sim vel fuerim, tus sis vel fueris, tus sit vel fuerit.
Plural. utin. ti simus vel fuerimus, ti sitis vel fueritis, ti sint vel
fuerint. Doctus Lectus Auditus Preterpluperfect tense singular, utinam Amatus
Would God I have been loved. essem vel fuissem tus esses vel fuisses, tus esset
vel fuisset. Plur. utinam ti essemus vel fuissemus, ti essetis vel fuissetis,
ti essent vel fuissent. Doctus Lectus Auditus Future tense singular, utinam
Amatus God grant I be loved hereafter. ero vel suero, tus eris vel fueris, tus
erit vel fuerit. Plur. utinam ti erimus vel fuerimus, ti eritis vel fueritis,
ti erunt vel fuerint. Doctus Lectus Auditus Potential Mood.
Present tense sing. Amer, I may or can be loved. eris vel ere, etur. Pl emur,
emini, entur. Docear, aris vel are, atur. Pl. amur. amini antur. Legar, Audiar,
Preterimperfect tense sing. Amarer, I Would, should, or ought to be loved.
reris vel rere, retur. Plur. remur, remini, rentur. Docerer, Legerer, Audirer,
Preterperfect tense singul. Amatus I would, should, or ought to had been loved.
sim vel fuerim, tus sis vel fueris, tus sit vel fuerit. Plural. ti simus vel
fuerimus, ti sitis vel fueriris, ti sint vel fuerint. Doctus Lectus Auditus
Preterpluperfect tense sing. Amatus I would, should, or ought to had been
loved. essem vel fuissem, tus esses vel fuisses, tus esset vel fuisset. Plural.
ti essemus vel fuissemus, ti essetis vel fuissetis, ti essent vel fuissent.
Doctus Lectus Auditus Future tense sing. Amatus I may or can be loved
hereafter. ero vel fuero, tus eris vel fueris, tus erit vel fuerit. Plural. ti
erimus vel fuerimus, ti eritis vel fueritis, ti erunt vel fuerint. Doctus
Lectus Auditus Subjunctive Mood.
Present tense sing. cum Amer, when i am loved. aris vel are, atur. Pl. cum
amur, amini, antur. Docear, Legar, Audiar, Preterimperfect tense sing. cum
Amarer, When I was loved. reris vel rere, retur. Pl. cum remur. remini, rentur.
Docerer, Legerer, Audirer. Preterperfect tense singular. cum Amatus When I have
been loved. sim vel fuerim, tus sis vel fueris, tus sit vel fuerit. Pl. cum ti
simus vel fuerimus, ti sitis vel fueritis, ti sint vel fuerint. Doctus Lectus
Auditus Preterpluperfect tense sing. cum Amatus When I had been loved. essem
vel fuissem, tus esses vel fuisses, tus esset vel fuisset. Pluraliter, cum ti
essemus vel fuissemus, ti essetis vel fuissetis, ti essent vel fuissent. Doctus
Lectus Auditus Future tense singular, cum Amatus When I shall or will be loved.
ero vel fuero, tus eris vel fueris, tus erit vel fuerit. Pluraliter, cum ri
erimus vel fuerimus, ti eritis vel fueritis, ti erunt vel fuerint. Doctus
Lectus Auditus Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect tense. Amari To be Loved. Doceri, To be Taught.
Legi, To be Read. Audiri, To be Heard. Preterperf, tense and Preterpluperf.
tense. Amatum To have or had been loved, etc. esse vel fuisse. Doctum Lectum
Auditum Future tense. Amatum iri, vel amandum esse, To be loved herafter Doctum
iri, vel docendum esse, To be taught herafter Lectum iri, vel legendum esse, To
be read herafter Auditum iri, vel audiendu^ esse, To be heard herafter A
participle of the Preterperfect tense. Amatus, Loved. Doctus, Taught. Lectus,
Read. Auditus, Heard. A participle of the Future in dus. Amandus, To be Loved.
Docendus, To be Taught. Legendus, To be Read. Audiendus, To be Heard.

Of Certain Verbs going out of Rule, which are declined and formed in manner
following.
POssum potes, potui, posse: potens: To may or can Volo, vis, volui, velle:
volendi, volendo volendum: supinis caret, volens: To will, or to be willing.

Nolo, non vis, nolui, nolle: nolendi, nolendo, nolendum: supinis caret,
nolens: To nill, or to be unwilling.

Malo, mavis malui, malle: malendi, malendo, malendum: supinis caret, malens:
To have rather, or to be more willing.

Edo, edis vel es, edi, edere vel esse: edendi, edendo, edendum: esum esu, vel
estum, estu: edens, esurus, vel esturus: To eat.

Fio, fis, factus sum vel fui, fieri: factus, faciendus: To be made, or to be
done.

Fero, fers, tuli far: ferendi, ferendo, ferendum: latum latu: ferens,
laturus: To bear, or suffer.

Feror, ferris vel far, latus sum vel fui, ferri: latus, ferendus: To be born
or suffered.

Indicative.
Present tense singular. POssum, potes, potest. Pluraliter. Possumus, potestis,
possunt. Volo, vis, vult. Volumus, vultis volunt. Nolo, non vis, non vult.
Nolumus, non vultis, nolunt. Malo, mavis mavult. Malumus* mavultis, malunt.
Edo, edis, vel es, edit vel est. Edimus, editis vel estis, edunt. Fio, fis,
fit. Fimus, fitis, fiunt. Fero, fers, fert. Ferimus fertis, ferunt. Feror,
ferris vel far, fertur. Ferimur, ferimini, feruntur. Preterinperfect tense
singular. Poteram, as, at. Plural. amus, atis, ant. Volebam, Nolebam, Malebam,
Edebam, Fiebam. Ferebam, Ferebar, baris vel bare, batur. Plur. bamur bamini,
bantur. Preterperfect tense singul. Potui, isti, it. Pl. imus, istis, erunt,
vel ere. Volui, Nolui, Malui, Edi, Tuli, Factus sum vel fui, tus es vel fuisti,
tus est vel fuit. Plur* ti sumus vel fuimus, ti estis vel fuistis, ti sunt,
fuerunt, vel fuere. Latus Preterpluperfect tense sing. Poteram, ras, rat. Plur.
ramus, ratis, rant. Volueram, Nol^eram Malueram Ederam* Tuleram, Factus eram
vel fueram, tus eras vel fueras, tus erat vel fuerat. Plur. ti eramus vel
fueramus, ti eratis vel fueratis, ti erant vel fuerant. Latus Future tense
singular. Potero, eris, erit. Plur. Poterimus, eritis, erunt. Volam, es, et.
Plur. emus etis, ent. Nolam, Malam, Edam, Fiam, Feram, Ferar, fereris vel
ferere, feretur. Plur. feremur, feremini, ferentur. Possum, Volo, Malo, have no
imperative mood. Imperative Mood. Present tense singular,
Noli, nolito. Plural* Nolite, nolitote. Es, esto. edat, Pl. Edamus, edite,
este, edant ede. esto, estote, edunto. edito: edito. editote: Fito tu: Fiat.
Pl. Fiamus, Fite, Fiant, fito. fitote: fiunto. Fer. Ferat, Plur. Feramus,
Ferte, Ferant, ferto: ferto. fertote: ferunto. Far, Feratur, Pl. Feramur.
Ferimini Ferantur, fertor: fertor. feriminor feruntor. Optative Mood.
Present tense sing. utinam Possim. is, it. Plur. utinam imus, itis, int.
Velim. Nolim, Malim, Edam, as, at. Plural. utinam amus, atis ant. Fiam, Feram,
Ferar, raris vel rare, ratur. P. utin. amur, amini, antur. Preterimperfect
tense sing. utinam Possem, es, et. Plur. utinam emus, etis, ent. Vellem,
Nollem, Mallem, Ederem vel essem, Fierem, Ferrem, Ferrer, reris vel rere,
retur. Pl. utin remur, remini, rentur, Preterperfect tense singular, utinam
Potuerim, ris, rit Plur. utinam rimus, ritis, rint. Voluerim, Noluerim,
Maluerim, Ederim, Tulerim, Factus sim vel fuerim, tus sis vel fueris, tus sit
vel fuerit, Plur. u^inam ti simus vel fuerimus, ti sitis vel fueritis, ti sint
vel fuerint. Preterpluperfect tense sing. utinam Potuissem, ses, set. Pl. ut
in. semus, setis, sent. Voluissem, Noluissem, Maluissem* Edissem, Tulissem,
Factus essem vel fuissem, tus esses vel fuisses tus esset vel fuisset. Plur.
utin* ti essemus vel fuissemus, ti essetis vel fuissetis, ti essent vel
fuissent. Latus Future tense singular, utinam Potuero, ris, rit. Plural. utinam
rimus, ritis, rint. Voluero, Noluero, Maluero, Edero, Tulero, Factus ero vel
fuero, tus eris vel fueris, tus erit vel fuerit. Pl. utin. ti erimus vel
fuerimus, ti eritis vel fueritis, ti erunt vel fuerint. Latus

The Potential and the Subjunctive mood be formed like the optative in voice,
and do differ only in signification and sign of the mood.

Infinitive Mood.
Present tense and Preterimperf. tense. Posse, Preterperf. and Preterpluperfect
tense, Potuisse. Velle, Voluisse. Nolle, Noluisse. Malle, Maluisse. Edere vel
esse, Edisse. Far, Tulisse. Fieri, Factum esse vel fuisse. Ferri, Latum esse
vel fuisse. Future tense sing. Esurum esse. Factum iri, vel faciendum esse.
Laturum esse. Latum iri, vel ferendum esse.

Eo and Queo make Ibam and Quibam in the preterimperfect tense of the
Indicative mood, and Ibo and Quibo in the future tense: and in all other moods,
and tenses are varied like verbs in o of the fourth Conjugation; saving that
they make their gerunds, Eundi, cundo, eundum. Queundi, quendo, queundum.

Of the preterperfect tense of the Indicative mood, Tenses formed of the
preterperfect tense.
be formed the preterpluperfect tense of the same mood; the preterperfect
tense, the preterpluperfect tense, and the future tense, of the Optative mood,
the Potential mood, and the Subjunctive mood; the preterperfect tense, and the
preterpluperfect tense of the Infinitive mood: as of amavi, are formed
Amaveram, amaverim, amavero, by changing i into o short: and, Amavissem,
amavisse, keeping i still.

IMpersonals be declined throughout all Moods and Tenses in the voice of the
third person singular only: Impersonals.
as, Delectat, delectabat, delectavit, delectaverat, delectabit. Decet,
decebat, decuit, decuerat, decebit, decere. Studetur studebatur, studitum est
vel fuit, studitum erat vel fuerat, studebitur, etc.

And they have commonly before their English, this sign It: as, It delights,
Delectat. It becomes not, Non decet.

Of a Participle.
A Participle is a part of speech derived of a Verb: and takes part of a Noun,
as Gender, case, and declension: and part of a Verb, as Tense and
signification: and part of both, as Number and figure.

There be four kinds of Participles: Four kinds of participles.
one of the Present tense, another of the preter tense; one of the Future in
rus, and another of the Future in dus.

A Participle of the Present tense has his English ending in ing; Present
tense.
as Loving: and his Latin in ans or ens; as Amans, docens. And it is formed of
the preterimperfect tense of the Indicative Mood by changing the last syllabe
into ^s: as, Amabam, amans. Audiebam, audiens. Auxiliabar, auxilians. Poteram,
potens.

A Participle of the Future in rus betokens to do, The first Future tense in
rus.
like the Infinitive mood of the Active voice: as, Amaturus, To love, or about
to love. And it is formed of the latter Supine, by putting to rus: as doctu,
docturus.

A Participle of the Preter tense has his English Preter tense.
ending in d, t, or n; as loved, taught, slain: and his Latin in tus, sus,
xus; as, Amatus, visus, nexus; and one in uus, as Mortuus. And it is formed of
the latter Supine, by putting to s: as, Lectu, lectus; except Mortuus

A Participle of the Future in dus betokens to suffer, The second Future
tense in dus.
like the Infinitive mood of the passive voice: as, Amandus, To be loved. And
it is formed of the Genitive case of the Participle of the present tense by
changing it is into dus* as, Amantis, amandus; Legentis, legendus. And it is also
found to have the signification of the Participle of the Present tense: as,
Legendis veteribus proficis, In reading old authors thou do profit.

Of a verb Active, Of an active come two participles.
and of a verb Neuter which has the Supines, come two Participles: one of the
Present tense, and another of the Future in rus; as of Amo, comes Amans,
amaturus: of Curro, Currens, cursurus.

Of a verb Passive, Of a passive come two.
whose Active has the Supines, come two Participles: one of the Preter tense,
and another of the Future tense in dus: as of Amor comes amatus, amandus.

Of a verb deponent come three Participles: Of a deponent three.
one of the Present tense, one of the Preter tense, and another of the Future
in rus: as of Auxilior, comes auxilians, auxiliatus, auxiliaturus.

And if the verb Deponent do govern an Accusative case after him, it may form
also a participle in dus: as of Loquor, loquendus.

Of a verb Commune come four participles: Of a commune four.
as of Largior, comes largiens, largiturus, largitus, largiendus.

Participles of the present tense be declined like Nouns adjectives of three
articles: as, Participles declined like Adjectives.
Nominativo hic, haec and hoc amans, Genitivo hujus amantis, Dativo huic
amanti, etc.

Participles of other tenses be declined like Nouns adjectives of three diverse
endings: as, Amaturus, amatura, amaturum: Amatus, amata, amatum: Amandus,
amanda, amandum.

Of an Adverb.
AN Adverb is a part of speech joined to the Verbs to declare their
signification.

Adverbs some be of Time: as, Hodie, cras, heri, perendie, olim, aliquando,
nuper, quando. Some be of Place: as, Ubi, ibi, hic, istic, illic, intus, foris.
Some be of Number: as, Semel, bis, ter, quater, iterum. Some be of Order: as,
Inde, deinde, denique, postremo. Some be of Asking or doubting: as, Cur, quare,
unde, quorsum number nunquid. Some be of Calling: as, Heus, o, ehodum. Some be of
Affirming: as, Certe, nae, profecto, sane, scilicet, licet, esto. Some be of
Denying: as, Non, haud, minime, neutiquam, nequaquam. Some be of Swearing: as,
Pol, aedepol, hercle, medius-fidius. Some be of Exhorting: as, Eia, age, agite,
agedum, Some be of Flattering: as, Sodes, amabo* Some be of Forbidding: as, Ne.
Some be of Wishing: as, Utinam, si, o si, o. Some be of Gathering together: as,
Simul, una, pariter, non modo, non solum. Some be of Parting; as, Seorsum,
sigillatim, vicatim. Some be of Choosing: as, Potius, imo. Some be of A thing
not finished: as, Pene, fere, prope, vix, modo, non. Some be of Showing* as.
En, ecce. Some be of Doubting: as, Forsan, forsitan, fortassis, fortasse. Some
be of Chance: as, Forte, fortuito. Some be of Some be of Some be of Likeness:
as, Sic, sicut, quasi, ceu, tanquam, velut. Some be of Quality: as, Been,
male, docte, fortiter. Some be of Quantity: as. Multum, parum, minimum,
paululum. plurimum. Some be of Comparison: as, Tam, quam, magis, minus, maxim.
Certain adverbs be compared: as, Docte, doctius, doctissime. Fortiter,
fortius, fortissime. Prope* propius, proxime.

Also the voices of Prepositions, if they be set alone, not having any casual
word to serve unto joined with them, be not prepositions, but are changed into
adverbs: as, Qui ante non cavet, post dolebit, He that bewareth not before,
shall be sorry afterward. Coram laudare, and clam vituperare, inhonestum est,
In presence to commend one, and behind the back to dispraise, is an unhonest
part.

Of a Conjunction.
A Conjunction is a part of speech that joyneth words and sentences together.

Some be Of Conjunctions some be Copulatives: as, Et, que, quoque, ac, atque,
nec, neque. Some be Disjunctives: as, Aut, ve, vel, seu, sive. Some be
Discretives: as, Sed, quidem, autem, vero, at, ast. Some be Causals: as, Nam,
namque enim, etenim, quia, ut, quod, quum, quoniam, and quando set for quoniam.
Some be Some be Some be Conditionals: as, Si, sin, modo, dum, dummodo. Some be
Exceptives: as, Ni, nisi, quin, alioquin, praeterquam. Some be Interrogatives:
as, Ne, an, utrum, necne, anne, nonne. Some be Illatives: as, Ergo, ideo,
igitur, quare, itaque, proin. Some be Adversatives: as, Etsi, quanquam,
quamvis, licet, esto. Some be Redditives to the same: as, Tamen, attamen. Some
be Electives: as, Quam, ac, atque. Some be Diminutives: as, Saltem, vel.
Of a Preposition.
A Preposition is a part of Speech most commonly set before other parts, either
in Apposition, as Ad patrem; or else in Composition: as, Indoctus.

These Prepositions following serve to the Accusative case.
Ad, To. Apud, At. Ante, Before. Adversus, Against Adversum, Against Cis, On
this side. Citra, On this side. Circum, About. Circa, About. Contra, Against.
Erga, Toward. Extra, without. Intra, within. Inter, Between. Infra, Beneath.
Juxta, Beside, or night (...). Ob. For. Pone, Behind. Per, By or through.
Prope, Nigh. Propter. For. Secundum, After. Post, After. Trans, On the further
side. Ultra Beyond. Praeter, Beside. Supra, Above. Circiter, About. Usque,
Until. Secus, By. Versus, Toward. Penes, In the power.
Where note, that Verius, is set after his casual word: as, Londinum versus,
Toward London. And likewise may Penes be set also.

These Prepositions following serve To the Ablative case.
A ab, abs, From or fro. Cum. with. Coram, Before, or in presence. Clam,
Privily. De, Of or fro. E, Of or fro. Ex, Of or fro. Pro, For. Prae, Before, or
in comparison. Palam, Openly* Sine, Without. Absque, Without. Tenus, Until or
up to.
Where note that if the casual word joined with Tenus be the plural number, it
shall be put in the Genitive case, and be set before Tenus: as, Aurium tenus,
Up to the ears: Genuum tenus, Up to the knees.

Note also, that the voices of Prepositions, being set alone without their
casual words be not Prepositions, but are changed into Adverbs: as is aforesaid
in the Adverb.

These Prepositions following serve to both cases.
In with this sign To, to the accusative case: as, In urbem, Into the city. In
without this sign To, to the ablative case: as, In te spes est, My hope is in
thee. Sub noctem, A little before night.

Sub judice lis est, The matter is before the judge.

Super lapidem, Upon a stone.

Super viridi fronde, Upon a green leaf.

Subter terram, Under the earth.

Subter aquis, Under the water.

Of an Interjection.
AN Interjection is a part of speech which betokens a sudden passion of the
mind; under an imperfect voice.

Some are of Mirth: as, Evax, vah.

Some are of Sorrow: as, Heu, hei. Some are of Dread: as, Atat. Some are of
Marvelling: as, Papae. Some are of Disdaining: as, Hem, vah. Some are of
Shunning: as, Apage. Some are of Praising: as, Euge. Some are of Scorning: as,
Hui. Some are of Exclamation: as, Proh deum atque hominum fidem. Some are of
Cursing: as, Vae, malum. Some are of Laughing: as, Ha, ha, he. Some are of
Calling: as, Eho, oh, io. Some are of Silence: as, Au. And such others.
THE CONCORDS of Latin Speech.
FOr the due joining of words in construction, it is to be understood, that in
Latin speech there be three Concords: The first between the nominative case
and the verb, The second, between the substantive and the adjective, The third,
between the antecedent and the relative.

The first Concord.
WHen an English is given to be made in Latin, look out the principal verb. If
there be more verbs then one in a sentence, the first is the principal verb,
except it be the infinitive mood, or have before it a relative: as, that, whom,
which: or a conjunction: as, Ut, that; Cum when; Si, if; and such others.

When ye have found the verb ask this question, who, or what? and the word that
answers to the question shall be the nominative case to the verb; except it
be a verb impersonal, which will have no nominative case. And the nominative
case shall in making and construing Latin be set before the verb; except a
question be asked, and then the nominative is set after the verb, or after the
sign of the verb: as, b Amas a tu? Love thou? b Venitne a Rex? Does the king
come?

Likewise if the verb be of the Imperative mood: as, b Ama a tu, Love thou b
Amato a ille, Let him love.

And sometime when this sign, it, or there, comes before the English of the
verb: as, b Est a liber meus, It is my book. a Venit ad meb quidam, There came
one to me. And that casual word which comes next after the verb, and answers
to this question whom? or what? made by the verb, shall commonly be the
accusative case: except the verb do properly govern another case after him to
be construed withal: as, Si cupisa placereb magistro, a utere b diligentia;
nec sis tantus b cessator, utb calcaribus a indigeas, If thou covet to please
the master, use diligence: and be not so slack, that thou shall need spurs.

A verb personal agrees with his nominative case in number and person: as, a
Praeceptor b legit, z vos vero b negligitis, The master reads, and ye regard
not. Where note, that the first person is more worthy then the second, and the
second more worthy then the third.

Many nominative cases singular, with a conjunction copulative coming between
them, will have a verb plural; which verb plural shall agree with the
nominative case of the most worthy person, as a Ego and tu b sumus in tuto, I
and thou be in safeguard. a Tu and pater b periclitamini, Thou and thy father
are in jeopardy. a Pater and praeceptor b accersunt te, Thy father and thy
master have sent for thee.

When a verb comes between two nominative cases of diverse numbers, the verb
may indifferently accord with either of them, so that they be both of one
person: as, Amantium irae, amoris a redintegratio b est, The falling out of
lovers is the renewing of love. a Quid enim nisi a vota b supersunt? For wh^^r
remains save only prayers? Pectora percussit, a pectus quoque a robora b
fiunt, She stroke her breast, and her breast turned into oak also.

Here note also, that sometime the infinitive mood of a verb, or else a whole
clause afore-going, or else some member of a sentence may be the nominative
case to the verb: as, a Diluculo surgere, saluberrimum b est, To rise betime in
the morning, is the most wholesome thing in the world. a Multum scire, vita b
est jucundissima, To know much, is the most pleasant (or sweetest) life of all.

The second Concord.
WHen ye have an adjective, ask this question who? or what? and the word that
answers to the question, shall be the substantive to it.

The adjective, whether it be a noun, pronoun, or participle, agrees with his
substantive in case, gender and number: as, Amicus b certus in a re b incerta
cernitur, A sure friend is tried in a doubtful matter, a Homo b armatus, A man
armed. a Ager colendus. A field to be tilled. b Hic c vir, This man. b Meus a
herus est, It is my master.

Where note, that the Mosculine gender is more worthy then the Feminine, and
the Feminine more worthy then the Neuter.

Many substantives singular, having a conjunction copulative coming between
them, will have an adjective plural; which adjective shall agree with the
substantive of the most worthy gender: as, Rex and Regina, beati, The king and
the queen are blessed.

The third Concord.
WHen ye have a relative, ask this question who? or what? and the word that
answers to the question, shall be the antecedent to it.

The antecedent most commonly is a word th^^ goes before the relative, and is
rehearsed again of the relative.

The relative agrees with his antecedent in gender, number and person: as a
Vir sapit, b qui pauca loquitur, That man is wise that speaks few things, or
words.

Sometimes the relative has for his antecedent the whole reason that goes
before him, and then he shall be put in the neuter gender and singular number:
as, a In tempore veni, b quod omnium rerum est primum, I came in season which
is the chiefest thing of all. But if the relative be referred to two clauses or
more, then the relative shall be but in the plural number: as, a Tu multum
dormis and a saepe potas, b quae ambo sunt corpori inimica, Thou sleep much,
and drinkest often, both which things are naught for the body.

When this English that, may be turned into this English which, it is a
relative: otherwise it is a conjunction, which in Latin is called quod, or ut,
and in making Latin, it may elegantly be put away, by turning the nominative
case into the accusative, and the verb into the infinitive mood: as, Gaudeo a
quod tu been b vales: Gaudeo a te been b valere, I am glad that thou art in
good health. Jubeo a ut tu b abeas: Jubeo a te ^ abire, I bid that thou go
hence.

Many antecedents singular, having a conjunction copulative between them, will
have a relative plural; which relative shall agree with the antecedent of the
most worthy gender: as, a Imperium and aa dignitas b quae petiisti, The rule
and dignity which thou have required.

But in things not apt to have life, the neuter gender is most worthy: yea, and
in such case, though the substantives, or antecedents be of the masculine or of
the feminine gender, and none of them of the neuter; yet may the adjective or
relative be put in the neuter gender: as, a Arcus and aa calami sunt bona. The
bow and arrows be good: a Arcus and aa calami b quae fregisti, The bow and
arrows which thou have broken.

The case of the Relative.
WHen there comes no nominative case between the relative and the verb, the
relative shall be the nominative case to the verb: as, Miser est a qui nummos b
admiratur, Wretched is that person which is in love with money.

But when there comes a nominative case between the relative and the verb, the
relative shall besuch case as the verb will have after him: as, Felix, b quem
aa faciunt aliena a pericula cautum. Happy is he whom other men's harins do make
to beware.

As the relative may be the nominative case to the verb, so it may be the
substantive to the adjective that is joined with him, or that comes after him:
as, Divitias amare noli, a quod omnium est b sordidissimum, Love not thou
riches, which to do is the most beggarly thing in the world.

Nouns interrogatives and indefinites follow the rule of the relative: as,
Quis, uter, qualis, quantus, quotus, etc. which evermore come before the verb,
like as the relative does: as, Hei mihi! qualis erat? Talis erat, b qualem
nunquam ^ vidi.

Yet here is to be understood and noted, that the relative is not always
governed of the verb that it comes before, but sometime of the infinitive mood
that comes after the verb: as, b Quibus voluisti me gratias a agere, egi, What
persons thou would me to thank, I have thanked.

Sometime of a participle: as, b Quibus rebus a adductus fecisti? With what
things moved did thou it?

Sometime of the gerund: as, b Quae nunc non est a narrandi locus, Which things
at this present is no time to tell.

Sometime of the preposition set before him: as, b Quem a in locum deducta res
sit, vides, Unto what state the matter is now brought, thou see.

Sometime of the substantive that it does accord with; as, Senties b qui a vir
siem Thou shall perceive what a fellow I am. Albeit in this manner of speaking,
qui is an indefinite, and not a relative.

Sometime of a noun partitive or distributive: as, b Quarum rerum a utram minus
velim, non facile possum existimare, Of the which two things, whether I would
with less will have, I cannot easily esteem.

Sometime it is put in the genitive case, by reason of a substantive coming
next after him: as, Ego illum non novi, b cujus a causa hoc incipis, I knew him
not, for whose cause thou beginnest this.

Sometime it is otherwise governed of a noun substantive: as, Omnia tibi
dabuntur, b quibus a opus habes. All things shall be given thee which thou have
need of.

Sometime of an adverb: as, b Cui utruma obviam procedam nondum statui, Whom
whether I will go to meet with, I have not yet determined.

Sometime it is put in the ablative case with this sign then, and is governed
of the comparative degree coming after him: as Utere virtute, b qua nihil esta
melius, Use virtue, then the which nothing is better.

Sometime it is not governed at all, but is put in the abla^ive case absolute:
as, Quantus erat Julius Caesar. ab quo Imperatore, Romani primum Britanniam
ingressi sunt! How worthy a man was Julius Caesar, under whose conduct the
Romans first entered into Britain!

Also when it signifiith an instrument where with a thing is to be done, it is
put in the ablative case: as, Ferrum habuit, b quo sea occideret, He had a
knife, wherewith he would have slain himself.

When a relative comes between two substantives of diverse genders, it may
indifferently accord with either of them: as, a Avis, b quae passer appellatur;
or, Avis, b qui a passer appellatur, The bird which is called a sparrow. Yea,
though the substantives be of diverse numbers also: as, Estne ea a Lutetia, b
quam nos Parisios dicimus? Is not that called Lutetia, that we do call Paris?
or else, Estne ea Lutetia, b quos nos a Parisios dicimus?

Constructions of nouns Substantives.
WHen two substantives come together betokening diverse things, the latter shall
be the genitive case: as, a Facundia b Ciceronis, The eloquence of Cicero. a
Opus b Virgilii, The work of Virgil. a Amator b studiorum, A lover of studies.
a Dogma b Platonis, The opinion of Plato. But if they belong both to one thing,
they shall be put both in one case: as, a Pater meus b vir amat a me b puerum,
My father being a man loves me a child.

When the English of this word res, is put with an adjective, ye may put away
res, and put the adjective in the neuter gender, like a substantive: as, ab
Multa me impedierunt, Many things have let me. And being so put, it may be
the substantive to the adjective: as, a Pauca his b similia, A few things like
unto these. a Nonnulla b hujusmodi, Many things of like sort.

An adjective in the neuter gender, put alone without a substantive, stands
for a substantive, and may have a genitive case after him, as if it were a
substantive: as, a Multum b lucri, Much gain. a Quantum b negotii? How much
business? a Id* operis, That work.

Words importing indument of any quality or property, to the praise or
dispraise of a thing, coming after a noun substantive, or a verb substantive,
may be put in the ablative case, or in the genitive: state the matter is now
brought, thou see.

Sometime of the substantive that it does accord with; as, Sentiesb quia vir
siem Thou shall perceive what a fellow I am. Albeit in this manner of speaking,
qui is an indefinite, and not a relative.

Sometime of a noun partitive or distributive: as, ^ Quarum rerum a utram minus
velim, non facile possum existimare, Of the which two things, whether I would
with less will have, I cannot easily esteem.

Sometime it is put in the genitive case, by reason of a substantive coming
next after him: as, Ego illum non novi, b cujus a causa hoc incipis, I knew him
not, for whose cause thou beginnest this.

Sometime it is otherwise governed of a noun substantive: as Omnia tibi
dabuntur, b quibus a opus habes. All things shall be given thee which thou have
need of.

Sometime of an adverb: as, b Cui utrum a obviam procedam nondum statui, Whom
whether I will go to meet with, I have not yet determined.

Sometime it is put in the ablative case with this sign then, and is governed
of the comparative degree coming after him: as Utere virtute, b qua nihil est ^
melius, Use virtue, then the which nothing is better.

Sometime it is not governed at all, but is put in the abla ive case absolute:
as, Quantus erat Julius Caesar. ab quo Imperatore, Romani primum Britanniam
ingressi sunt! How worthy a man was Julius Caesar, under whose conduct the
Romans first entered into BritIin!

Also when it signifiith an instrument wherewith a thing is to be done, it is
put in the ablative case: as, Ferrum habuit, b quo se a occideret, He had a
knife, wherewith he would have slain himself.

When a relative comes between two substantives of diverse genders, it may
indifferently accord with either of them: as, a Avis, b quae passer appellatur;
or, Avis, b qui a passer appellatur, The bird which is called a sparrow. Yea,
though the substantives be of diverse numbers also: as, ^stne ea a Lutetia, b
quam nos Parisios dicimus? Is not that called Lutetia, that we do call Paris?
or else, Estne ea Lutetia, b quos nos a Parisios dicimus?

Constructions of nouns Substantives.
WHen two substantives come together betokening diverse things, the latter shall
be the genitive case: as, a Facundia b Ciceronis, The eloquence of Cicero. a
Opus b Virgilii, The work of Virgil. a Amator b studiorum, A lover of studies.
a Dogma b Platonis, The opinion of Plato. But if they belong both to one thing,
they shall be put both in one case: as, ^ Peter meus b vir amat a me b puerum,
My father being a man loves me a child.

When the English of this word res, is put with an adjective, ye may put away
res, and put the adjective in the neuter gender, like a substantive: as, ab
Multa me impedierunt, Many things have let me. And being so put, it may be
the substantive to the adjective: as, a Pauca his b similia, A few things like
unto these. a Nonnulla b hujusmodi, Many things of like sort.

An adjective in the neuter gender, put alone without a substantive, stands
for a substantive, and may have a genitive case after him, as if it were a
substantive: as, a Multum b lucri, Much gain. a Quantum b negotii? How much
business? a Id b operis, That work.

Words importing indument of any quality or property, to the praise or
dispraise of a thing, coming after a noun substantive, or a verb substantive,
may be put in the ablative case, or in the genitive: as, a Puer b bona-indole;
or, a Puer b bonae-indolis. A child of good towardness. a Puer b boni-ingenii,
or, a puer b bono-ingenio. A child of a good wit.

Opus and Usus, when they be Latin for need, require an ablative case: as: a
Opus est mihi tuo b judicio, I have need of thy judgment. Viginti b minis a
usus est filio, My son has need of twenty pounds.

Constructions of Adjectives.
The Genitive case.
ADjectives that signify desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, or
forgetting, and such other like require a genitive case: as, a Cupidus b auri,
Covetous of money. a Peritus b belli, Expert of warfare. a Ignarus b omnium,
Ignorant of all things a Fidens b animi, Bold of heart. a Dubious b mentis,
Doubtful of mind. a Memor b praeteriti, Mindful of that is past. a Reus b
furti, Accused of theft.

Nouns partitives and certain interrogatives, with certain nouns of number,
require a genitive case: as, Aliquis, uter, neuter, nemo, nullus, solus, unus,
medius quisque, quisquis, quicunque, quidam, quis for aliquis, or quis an
interrogative: Unus, duo, tres. Primus, secundus, tertius, etc. as, aAliquis
bnostrum, aPrimus bomnium.

When a question is asked, the answer in Latin must be made by the same case
of a noun, pronoun, or participle, and by the same tense of a verb that the
question is asked by: as. a Cujus est fundus? b Vicini. Quid a agitur in ludo
literario? b Studetur. Except a question be asked by Cujus, ja, um: as, a Cuja
est sententia? b Ciceronis. Or by a word that may govern diverse cases: as b
Quanti a emisti librum? bb Parvo. Or except I must answer by one of these
possessives, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester, as, a Cujus est domus? non b
vestra, sed bb nostra.

Nouns of the comparative and the superlative degree, being put partitively,
that is to say, having after them this English of, or among, require a genitive
case: as, b Aurium a mollior est sinistra, Of the ears the left is the softer.
Cicero b Oratorum a eloquentissimus, Cicero the most eloquent of Orators.

Nouns of the comparative degree, having then or by after them, do cause the
word following to be the ablative case: as, a Frigidior b glacie, More cold
then ice. a Doctior b multo, Better learned by a great deal. Uno ^ pede a
altior* higher by a foot.

The Dative case.
ADjectives that betoken profit or disprofit, likeness or unlikeness, pleasure,
submitting, or belonging to any thing, require a dative case: as, Labor est a
utilis ^ corpori, Labor is profitable to the body. a Aequalis b Hectori, Equal
to Hector. a Idoneus b bello, Fit for war. a Jucundus b omnibus, Pleasant to
all persons. b Parenti a supplex, Suppliant to his father. b Mihi a Proprium,
Proper to me.

Likewise nouns adjectives of the passive signification in bilis, and
participials in dus: as, a Flebilis, aa flendus b omnibus, To be lamented of
all men. a Formidabilis, aa formidandus b hosti, To be feared of his enemy.

The Accusative case.
THe measure of length, breadth, or thickness of any thing, is put after
adjectives in the accusative case, and sometime in the ablative case: as,
Turris a alta b centum-pedes, A Tower an hundred foot high. Arbor a lata b
tres-digitos, A tree three fingers broad. Liber a crassus b tres-pollices, vel
bb tribus-pollicibus, A book three inches thick.

The Ablative case.
ADjectives signifying fullness, emptiness, plenty, or wanting, require an
ablative case, and sometime a genitive: as, b Copiis aabundans. Crura bthymo
aplena. aVacuus bira, bbirae, ab ira. Nulla epistola ainanis bre aliqua.
aDitissimus bagri, bStultorum aplena sunt omnia. Quis nisi bmentis ainops,
oblatum respuat aurum? aInteger bvitae, bscelerisque apurus, non eget Mauri
jaculis, nec arcu. aExpers bomnium. Corpus ainane animae.

These Adjectives, Dignus, indignus, praeditus, captus, contentus, with such
others, will have an ablative case: as, aDignus bhonore. aCaptus boculis.
bVirtute apraeditus. bPaucis acontentus.

Where note that Dignus, indignus, and contentus, may in stead of the ablative
case have an infinitive mood of a verb: as, a Dignus b laudari, worthy to be
praised. a Contentus in pace b vivere. Content to live in peace.

Construction of the Pronoun.
THese genitive cases of the primitives, Mei, tui, sui, nostra and vestri, be
used when suffering or passion be signified: as, a Pars tui. a Amor b mei. But
when possession is signified, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, be used,
as, a Ars b tua. a Imago b tua.

These genitive cases, Nostrum, vestrum, be used after distributives,
partitives, comparatives, and superlatives: as, a Nemo b vestrum. a Aliquis b
nostrum. a Major b vestrum. a Maximus natu b nostrum.

Construction of the Verb: and first with the Nominative case.
SUm, forem, fio, existo, and certain verbs passives, as, Dicor. vocor,
salutor, appellor, habeor, existimor, videor, with other like, will have such
case after them, as they have before them: as, a Fama aa est b malum, Fame is
an evil thing. a Malus cultura aa fit b bonus, An evil person by due ordering
or governance is made good. a Croesus aa vocatur b dives, Cresus is called
rich. ^ Horatius aa salutatur b Poeta, Horace is saluted by the name of a Poet.
Malo a te b divitem aa esse, quam haberi, I had rather thou were rich indeed
then so accounted.

Also verbs that betoken bodily moving, going, resting, or doing, which be
properly called verbs of gesture: as, Eo, incedo, curro, sedeo, appareo, bibo,
cubo, studeo, dormio, somnio, and such other like, as they have before them a
nominative case of the doer or sufferer, so may they have after them a
nominative case of a noun, or participle, declaring the manner or circumstance
of the doing or suffering: as, a Incedo claudus, I go lame. a Petrus aa dormit
b securus, Peter sleeps void of care. a Tu aa cubas b supinus, Thou lie in
bed with thy face upward. a Somnias b vigilans, Thou dreamest waking. a Studeto
b stans, Study thou standing. And likewise in the accusative case, as, Non
decet quenquam aa meiere ^ currentem, aut mandentem, It does not become any man
to piss running, or eating.

And generally when the word that goes before the verb, and the word that
comes after the verb belong both to one thing, that is to say, have respect
either to other, or depend either of other, they shall be put both in one case,
whether the verb be transitive or intransitive, of what kind soever the verb
be: as, a Loquor ^ frequens. I speak often. a Taceo b multus, I hold my peace
much. a Scribo epistolas b rarissimus, I write letters very seldom. Ne a
assuescas aa bibere vinum b jejunus, Accustom not thy self to drink wine next
thy heart, or not having eaten somewhat before.

The Genitive case.
THis verb Sum, when it betokens or imports possession, owning or otherwise
pertaining to a thing, as a token, property, duty or guise, it causes the
noun, pronoun, or participle following to be put in the genitive case: as, Haec
vestis a est b patris, This garment is my fathers. b Insipientis a est dicere,
non putaram, It is the property of a fool to say I had not thought. Extremae a
est b demontiae discere dedisce^da, It is a point of the greatest folly in the
world, to learn things that must afterward be learned otherwise. b Orantis a
est nihil nisi coelestia cogitare, It is the duty of a man that is saying his
prayers, to have mind on nothing but heavenly things. Except that these
pronouns, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester, shall in such manner of
speaking be used in the nominative case: as, Hic codex a est b meus. This book
is mine. Haec domus a est b vestra, This house is yours. Non a est mentiri b
meum, It is not my guise (or property) to lie. b Nostrum a est injuriam non
infer, It is our parts not to do wrong. b Tuum a est omnia juxta pati, It is
thy part (or duty) to suffer all things alike.

Verbs that betoken to esteem or regard require a genitive case betokening the
value: as, b Parvi a ducitur probitas, Honesty is reckoned little worth. b
Maximi a penditur nobilitas, Nobleness of birth is very much regarded.

Verbs of accusing, condemning, warning, purging, quitting, or assoyling, will
have a genitive case of the crime, or of the cause, or of the thing that one is
accused, condemned, or warned of: or else an ablative case, most commonly
without a preposition: as, Hic b furti se a alligat, vel bb furto. a Admonuit
me b errati, vel bb errato. b De pecuniis-repe^undis a damnatus est.

Satago, misereor, miseresco, require a genitive case: as, Rerum suarum
asatagit. aMiserere bmei Deus.

Reminiscor, obliviscor, recordor, and memini, will have a genitive, or an
accusative case: as, aReminiscor bhistoriae. aObliviscor bcarminis. aRecordor
bpueritiam, aObliviscor blectionem. aMemini btui, vel bbte, I remember thee.
aMemini bde te, I spoke of thee. aEgeo, or indigeo, btui, vel bbte, I have need
of thee. aPotior burbis, I conquer the city. aPotior bvoto, I obtain my desire.

The Dative case.
ALl manner of verbs put acquisitively, that is to say, with these tokens to or
for after them, will have a dative case: as, Non b omnibus a dormio, I sleep
not to all men. b Huic a habeo, non b tibi, I have it for this man, and not for
thee.

To this rule do belong verbs betokening

To Profit or disprofit: as, Commodo, incommodo, noceo. To Compare: as,
Comparo, compono, confero. To Give or restore: as, Dono, reddo, refero. To
Promise or to pay: as, Promitto, polliceor, solvo, To Command or show: as,
Impero, indico, monstro. To Trust: as, Fido, confido, fidem habeo. To Obey, or
to be against: as, Obedio, adulor, repugno. To Threaten, or to be angry with:
as, Minor, indignor, irascor.
Also Sum, with his compounds, except Possum: Also verbs compound with satis,
been and male: as, Satisfacio, benefacio, malefacio: Finally, certain verbs
compound with these prepositions, Prae, ad, con, sub, ante, post, ob, in, and
inter, will have a dative case: as, Praeluceo, adjaceo, condono, suboleo,
antesto, posthabeo, objicio, insulto, intersero.

This verb Sum, es, fui, may oftentimes be put for habeo, and then the word
that seems in the English to be the nominative case, shall be put in the
dative, and the word that seems to be the accusative case, shall be the
nominative, as aEst b mihi a matter, I have a mother. Non a est b mihi a
argentum, I have no money. But if Sum be the infinitive mood, this nominative
shall be turned into the accusative, as, Scio b tibi non esse a argentum, I
know thou have no money.

Also when Sum has after him a nominative case and a dative, the word, that is
the nominative case, may be also the dative: so that Sum may in such manner of
speaking be construed with a double dative case; as, a Sum b tibi bb praesidio,
I am to thee a safeguard. Haecres a est mihi bb voluptati, This thing is to me
a pleasure.

And not only Sum, but also many other verbs may in such manner of speaking
have a double dative case; one of the person, and another of the thing: as, a
Do b tibi vestem bb pignori. a Verto hoc b tibi bb vitio. Hoc tu b tibi bb
laudi a ducis.

The Accusative case.
VErbs transitives are all such as have after them an accusative case of the
doer or sufferer; whether they be active, commune, or deponent: as, Usus b
promptos a facit. Foeminae a ludificantur b viros. a Largitur b pecuniam.

Also verbs neuters may have an accusative case of their own signification: as,
Endymionis b somnum a dormis. a Gaudeo b gaudium. a Vivo b vitam.

Verbs of asking, teaching, and arraying, will have two accusative cases; one
of the sufferer, and another of the thing, as, a Rogo b te bb pecuniam. a Doceo
b te bb literas. bb Quod b te jamdudum a hortor. a Exuo b me bb gladium.

The Ablative case.
ALl verbs require an ablative case of the instrument, put with this sign with
before it, or of the cause, or of the manner of doing: as, a Ferit cum b
gladio. a Taceo b metu. Summa b eloquentia causam a egit.

The word of price is put after verbs in the ablative case: as, a Vendidi b
auro. a Emptus sum b argento: Except these genitives, when they be put alone
without substantives, Tanti quanti, pluris, minoris, tantivis, tantidem,
quantivis, quantilibet, quanticunque: as Quanti ^ mercatus es hunc equum? Certe
b pluris quam a vellem. Saving that after verbs of price we shall always use
these adverbs. Carius, vilius, melius, and pejus, instead of their casuals.

Verbs of plenty or scarceness, filling, emptying, loading or unloading, will
have an ablative case: as, aAffluis bopibus, aCares bvirtute. aExpleote
bfabulis. aSpoliavit me b bonis omnibus. aOneras stomachum b cibo. a Levabo te
hoc b onere, Likewise, Utor, fungor, fruor, potior, laetor, gaudeo, dignor,
muto, munero, communico, afficio, prosequor, impertio, impertior.

Verbs that betoken receiving, or distance, or taking away, will have an
ablative case, with, a, ab, e ex, or de: as, a Accepit literas b a Petro. a
Audivi b exnuncio. Long a distat b a nobis. a Eripui te b e malis. And this
ablative after verbs of taking away may be turned into a dative: as, a
Subtraxit b mihi cingulum. a Eripuit b illi vitam.

Verbs of comparing or exceeding, may have an ablative case of the word that
signifies the measure of exceeding: as a Praefero hunc multis b gradibus, I
prefer this man by many degrees. b Paulo intervallo illum a superat, He is
beyond the other but a little space.

A noun, or a pronoun substantive, joined with a participle, expressed or
understood, and having none other word whereof it may be governed it shall be
put in the ablative case absolute: as, a Rege b veniente, hosts fugerunt, The
King coming, the enemies fled. a Me b duce, vinces, I being captain, thou shall
overcome.

And it may be resolved by any of these words, Dum, cum, quando, si, quanquam,
postquam: as, aRege bveniente, id est, Dum veniret rex. a Me b duce; id est, Si
ego dux fuero.

Constructions of Passives.
A Verb Passive will have after him an ablative case with a preposition, or
sometime a dative of the doer: as, Virgiliusa legitur b a me. b Tibi fama a
petatur. And the same ablative or dative shall be the nominative case to the
verb, if it be made by the active: as, a Ego b lego Virgilium. b Petas a tu
famam.

Gerunds.
GErunds and Supines will have such cases as the verbs that they come of: as,
Otium a scribendi b literas. Ad aconsolandum b tibi. Auditum b Poetas.

When the English of the infinitive mood comes after any of these nouns
substantives, Studium, causa, tempus, gratia, otium, occasio, libido, spes,
opportunitas, voluntas, modus, ratio, gestus, satietas, potestas, licentia,
consuetudo, consilium, vis, norma, amor, cupido, locus. and others like, if the
verb should be of the active voice, it shall be made by the gerund in di: And
the same gerund in di is used also after certain adjectives: as, a Cupidus b
visendi. a Cortus b eundi. a Peritus b jaculandi. a Gnarus b bellandi.

WHen ye have an English of the participle of the present tense, with this
sign of or with, coming after a noun adjective, it shall in Latin making be
put in the gerund in do: as, a Defessus sum b ambulando. I am weary of walking.

Also the English of the participle of the present tense coming without a
substantive, with this sign in or by before him, shall in Latin making be put
in the gerund in do: as, Caesarb dando, b sublevando, b ignoscendo, gloriam a
adeptus est. b In apparando totum hunc a consumunt diem. And the same gerund in
do is used either without a preposition, or with one of these prepositions, A,
ab, de, e, ex, cum, in, pro: as, Deterrent a a b bibendo. a Ab b amando.
Cogitat a de b edendo. Ratio been scribendi a cum b loquendo conjuncta est.

THe English of the infinitive mood, coming after a reason, and showing the
cause of a reason, may be put in the gerund in dum: as, Dies mihi ut satis sit
a ad agendum, vereor; I fear that a whole day will not be enough for me to do
my business.

The gerund in dum is used after one of these prepositions, Ad, ob propter,
inter ante: as. a Ad b capiendum hosts. a Ob ( vel a propter) b redimendum
captivos. a Inter b coenandum. a Ante b damnandum.

And when ye have this English must or ought in a reason, where it seems to
be made by this verb oportet, it may be put in the gerund in dum, with this
verb est set impersonally, and then the word, that seems in the English to be
the Nominative case, shall be put in the Dative: as, a Abeundum est b mihi, I
must go hence.

Supines.
THe first Supine has his active signification, and is put after Verbs and
Participles, that bet^ken moving to a place: as a Eo b cubitum. b Spectatum a
admissi, risum teneatis amici?

The latter Supine has his Passive signification, and is put after Nouns
Adjectives: as, Dignus, indignus, turpis, foedus, proclivis, facilis, odiosus,
mirabilis, optimus, and such like. And the same Supine may also be turned into
the Infinitive mood passive; as it may be indifferently said in Latin, a
Facile b factu, or a Facile b fieri, Easy to be done. a Turpe b dictu, or a
Turpe b dici, Dishonest to be spoken.

The Time.
NOuns that betoken part of time be commonly put in the ablative case: as, b
Nocte a vigilas. a Luce a dormis. But nouns that betoken continual term of
time, without ceasing or intermission, be commonly used in the accusative case:
as, b Sexaginta annos a natus. b Hyemem totam a stertis.

Space of Place.
NOuns that betoken space between place and place, be commonly put in the
accusative case: as, b Pedem hinc ne a discesseris, Go not thou a foot from
this place.

A Place.
NOuns Appellatives, or names of great places, be put with a preposition, if
they follow a verb that signifies In a place, To a place, From a place, or By
a place: as, a Vivo in Anglia. a Veni ^ per Galliam bb in Italiam. a
Proficiscor b ex urbe.

In a place, or At a place, if the place be a proper name of the first or
second declension, and the singular number, it shall be put in the genitive
case: as, a Vixit b Londini. a Studuit b Oxoniae.

And these Nouns, Humi, domi, militiae, belli, be likewise used: as a Procumbit
b humi bos. b Militiae a enutritus est. b Domi bb bellique otiosi a vivitis.

But if the place be of the third declension, or the plural number, it shall be
put in the dative, or in the ablative case, as, a Militavit b Carthagini, or bb
Carthagine. b Athenis a natus est. Likewise we say, b Ruri, or bb Rure a
educatus est.

To a place, if the place be a proper name, it shall be put in the accusative
case without a preposition: as, a Eo b Romam. Likewise, a Confero me b domum. a
Recipio me b rus.

From a place, or By a place, if the place be a proper name, it shall be put in
the ablative case without a preposition: as, a Discessit b Londino. a Profectus
est b Londino ( vel per Londinum) Cantabrigiam. Domus and Rus be likewise used:
as, a Abiit b domo. b Rure reversus est.

Impersonals.
A Verb impersonal has no nominative case before him; and this word it or
there is commonly his sign: as, Decet, It becomes. Oportet b aliquem esse.
There must be some body. But if he has neither of these words before him, then
the word that seems to be the nominative case, shall be such case as the verb
impersonal will have after him: as, b Me a oportet, I must. b Tibi a licet,
Thou may.

Interest, refert, and est for interest, require a genitive case of all casual
words, except Mea, tua sua, nostra, vestra, and cuja, the ablative cases of the
pronouns possessives: as, a Interest b omnium recte agere. b Tua a refert
teipsum nosse.

Certain impersonals require a dative case: as, Libet, licet, patet, liquet,
constat, placet, expedit, prodest, sufficit, vacat, accidit, convenit,
contingit, and other like. Some will have an accusative case only: as,
Delectat, decet, juvat, oportet. Some beside the accusative case will have also
a genitive, as, bb Nostri b nosmet, a poenitet. b Me bb civitatis a taedet. a
Pudet b me bb negligentiae. a Miseret b me bb tui. b Me bb illorum a miserescit.

Verbs impersonals of the passive voice, being formed of neuters, do govern
such case as the verbs neuters which they come of: as, a Parcatur b sumptui,
Let cost be spared. Because we say, a Parcamus b pecuniae, Let us spare cost.

A verb impersonal of the passive voice has like case as other verbs passives
have: as, a Benefit multis b a principe. Yet many times the case is not
expressed, but understood: as, Maxima vi a certatur; subaudi b ab illis.

When a deed is signified to be done of many, the verb being a verb neuter, we
may well change the verb neuter into the impersonal in tur: as, b In ignem
posita est, a fletur.

A Participle.
PArticiples govern such cases, as the verbs that they come of: as, a Fruiturus
b amicis. a Consulens b tibi. a Diligendus b ab omnibus.

Here note that participles may four manner of ways be changed into nouns. The
first is, when the voice of a participle is construed with another case then
the verb that it comes of: as, ^ Appetens b vini, Greedy of wine.

The second, when it is compounded with a preposition, which the verb that it
comes of cannot be compounded withal: as, Indoctus, innocens.

The third, when it forms all the degrees of comparison: as, Amans, amantior,
amantissimus. Doctus, doctior, doctissimus.

The fourth, when it has no respect, nor express difference of time: as, Homo
laudatus, A man laudable. Puer amandus, id est, amari dignus, A child worthy to
be loved. And all these are properly called nouns participials.

Participles when they be changed into nouns require a genitive case: as, a
Fugitans b litium. a Indoctus b pilae. a Cupientissimus b tui. b Lactis a
abundans.

These participial voices, Perosus, exosus, pertaesus, have always the active
signification, when they govern an accusative case: as, a Exosus saevitiam,
Hating cruelty. b Vitam a pertaesus, weary of life.

The Adverb.
ADverbs of quantity, time, and place, do require a genitive case: as, a Multum
b lucri. a Tunc b temporis. a Ubique b gentium.

Certain adverbs will have a dative case, like as the nouns that they come of:
as, Venit a obviam b illi. Canit a similiter b huic.

These datives be used adverbially, Tempori, luci, vesperi: as, Tempori
surgendum. Vesperi cubandum. Luci laborandum.

Certain adverbs will have an accusative case of the preposition that they come
of: as, a Propius b urbem, a Proxime b castra.

Where note that propositions, when they be set without a case, or else do form
the degrees of comparison, be changed into adverbs.

The Conjunction.
COnjunctions Copulatives and Disjunctives, and these four, Quam, nisi,
praeterquam, an, couple like cases: as, a Xenophon and b Plato fuere aequales.
And sometimes they be put between diverse cases: as: a Studui b Romae and bb
Athenis. Est a liber b meus and bb fratris. a Emi fundum centum b nummis and bb
pluris.

Conjunctions Copulatives and Disjunctives, most commonly join like moods and
tenses together: as, a Petrus and Joannes b precabantur and bb docebant. And
sometimes diverse tenses: as, Et b habetur and bb referetur tibi a me a gratia.

The preposition.
SOmetimes this preposition In is not expressed, but understood, and the casual
word nevertheless put in the ablative case: as, Habeo te b loco parentis; id
est, a in b loco.

A Verb compound sometime requires the case of the preposition that he is
compounded withal: as, a Exeo b domo. a Praetereo b te insalutatum. a Adeo b
templum.

The Interjection.
CErtain interjections require a nominative case: as, a O festus b dies
hominis. Certain a dative: as, a Hei b mihi. Certain an accusative: as, a Heu b
stirpem invisam. Certain a vocative: as a Proh sancte b Jupiter. And the same
Proh will have an accusative case: as, a Proh Deum atque hominum b fidem.

FINIS.
GVILIELMI LILII ad suos Discipulos monita Paedagogica, SEU CARMEN DE MORIBUS.
QUi mihi discipulus Puer es, cupis atque doceri,
Huc ades, haec animo concipe dicta tuo,
Mane citus lectum fuge, mollem discute somnum:
Templa petas supplex, and venerare Deum.
Attamen in primis facies sit lota manusque;
Sint nitidae vestes, comptaque caesaries.
Desidiam fugiens, cum te schola nostra vocarit,
Adsis; nulla pigrae sit tibi causa morae.
Me Praeceptorem cum videris, ore saluta,
Et condiscipulos ordine quosque tuos.
Tu quoque fac sedeas, ubi te sedisse jubemus;
Inque loco, nisi sis jussus abire, mane.
Ac magis ut quisque est doctrinae munere clarus,
Sic magis is clara sede locandus erit.
Scalpellum, calami, atramentum, charta, libelli,
Sint semper studiis arma parata tuis.
Si quid dictabo, scribes; at singula recte;
Nec macula, aut scriptis menda sit ulla tuis.
Sed tua nec laceris dictata aut carmina chartis
Mandes, quae libris inseruisse decet.
Saepe recognoscas tibi lecta, animoque revolvas;
Si dubites, nunc hos consule, nunc alios.
Qui dubitat, qui saepe rogat, mea dicta tenebit;
Is, qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni.
Disce puer quaeso, noli dediscere quicquam,
Ne men's te infimulet conscia desidiae.
Sisque animo attentus: quid enim docuisse juvabit,
Si mea non firmo pectore verba premas?
Nil tam difficile est, quod non solertia vincat:
Invigila, and parta est gloria militiae.
Nam veluti flores tellus nec semina profert,
Ni sit continuo victa labor manus:
Sic puer, ingenium si non exercitet, ipsum
Tempus and amittit, spem simul ingenii.
Est etiam semper lex in sermon tenenda,
Ne nos offendat improba garrulitas.
Incumbens studio, submissa voce loqueris;
Nobis dum reddis, voce canorus eris.
Et quaecunque mihi reddis, discantur ad unguem;
Singula and abjecto verbula read libro.
Nec verbum quisquam dicturo suggerat ullum;
Quod puero exitium non mediocre parit.
Si quicquam rogito, sic respondere studebis,
Ut laudem dictis and mereare decus.
Non lingua celeri nimis, aut laudabere tarda;
Est virtus medium, quod tenuisse juvat.
Et quoties loqueris, memor esto loquare Latin;
Et veluti scopulos barbara verba fuge.
Praeterea socios, quoties te cunque rogabune,
Instrue; and ignaros ad mea vota trahe.
Qui docet indoctos, licet indoctissimus esset,
Ipse brevi reliquis doctior esse queat.
Sed tu nec stolidos imitabere Grammaticastros,
Ingens Romani dedecus eloquii:
Quorum tam fatuus nemo, aut tam barbarus ore est,
Quem non autorem barbara turba probet,
Grammaticas recte si vis cognoscere leges,
Discere si cupias cultius ore loqui;
Addiscas veterum clarissima scripta virorum,
Et quos autores turba Latina docet:
Nunc te Virgilius, nunc ipse Terentius optat,
Nunc simul amplecti te Ciceronis opus;
Quos qui non didicit, nil praeter somnia vidit,
Certat and in tenebris vivere Cimmeriis.
Sunt quos delectat (Studio virtutis honestae
Posthabito) nugis tempora conterere:
Sunt quibus est cordi, manibus, pedibusve sodales,
Aut alio quovis sollicitare modo:
Est alius, qui se dum clarum sanguine jactat,
Insulso reliquis improbat ore genus.
Te tam prava sequi nolim vestigia morum;
Ne tandem factis praemia digna feras.
Nil dabis aut vendes, nil permutabis emesve,
Ex damno alterius commoda nulla feres.
Insuper and nummos, irritamenta malorum,
Mitte aliis; puerum nil nisi pura decent.
Clamor, rixa, joci, mendacia, furta, cachinni,
Sint procui a vobis; Martis and arma procul.
Nil penitus dices, quod turpe, aut non sit honestum;
Est vitae, ac pariter janua lingua necis.
Ingens creed nefas cuiquam maledicta refer,
Jurare aut magni numina sacra Dei.
Denique servabis res omnes, atque libellos,
Et tecum quoties isque redisque feres.
Effuge vel causas, faciunt quaecunque nocentem,
In quibus and nobis displicuisse potes.
FINIS.

