THE EARL OF CRAFORD HIS SPEECH Before the PARLIAMENT in Scotland, October the
25. 1641.

Upon his Examination by the Lords, concerning the late CONSPIRACY Against the
Marquise Hamilton, Earl of Argile, Lord Lowden, and diverse others of the
Nobility in SCOTLAND.

(...)

THE LORD CRAFORDS SPEECH Before the Parliament in Scotland, Upon his
Examination concerning the late Conspiracy, October. 25. 1641.
My Lords,
IT is the part of him accused so far as conscience shall give leave, and
equity permit, to make answer for himself.

J am arraigned here as a Traitor, which title to a noble Spirit* J know
cannot well be degested, neither is it so to my self, where is that man that
striveth to live most uprightly in this world, that has not many enemies,
which J apply to my self, but patience is the commendablest of all the
Cardinal virtues, which J freely embrace.

My Lords, J present my self, nay humble my self to you all, insomuch as
humility becomes a Prisoner, but yet no further then J have been criminous,
your Clemency J have found by the Lycense which has been freely given unto me,
now here at this time to scatter some few words, which shall be as brief, as
spoken from a Loyal Subject.

Long live King Charles our true and Loyal Sovereign, Long live Queen Mary
our gracious Queen, and his Majesty's royal Spouse, Long live Prince Charles,
the comfort of Wales, and hope of Scotland, and the like J wish to all the rest
of his Majesty's Royal offspring, and to all which are true and Loyal
Subjects to our King.

Hitherto my Lords in Speech I hope I have not been prolixious, nor erroneous,
for it shall be my care, as J do my endeavor to defend my self, so that J
offend none of this honorable Assembly.

Now my Lords, J come to my own purgation, that J as a chief Agent in the
matter of the Marquisse Hamilton, and diverse others, was committed, your
commands I obeyed, and freely yielded up my body, not making of the least
disturbance, yet I cannot but admire, why I should be suspected to be a Traitor
to those from whom J never received the least of wrong or injury, why should
the Landlord disturb the Tenant, during the time which he has his Rent duly
paid him, why should two Kingdoms arise and take up Arms one against
another, no occasion being given on either side? Why should the Lawyer sue him
for Fees, which was never a Clyent unto him? Or why should J plot their deaths,
which were never envious to my life, but as J said before, the best man
breathing, lives not without his Adversaries, neither do I, not knowing whom
they be, or for what cause they should thus persecute me, But the Devil has
his wicked instruments, who are the encendiaries and disturbers of Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, like so many Judasses, that studyes nothing but how to
betray their Masters, these are those wicked Hamans that to advance their own
power and greatness, will seek to destroy and root the poor Mordecaies out
of the Land.

It is reported that Caesar being Shipwrackt, was forced to leap out of the
Ship into the Sea, where he did swim for his life, and yet managed his Sword
in one hand, and kept his Book, wherein he writ all his Victories in the
other hand, even so my Lords, although my soul be as it were Shipwrackt within
my body through too much grief of heart, and vexation of mind, yet before
either my honor shall be stained, or my conscience over-burthened, J will
courageously yield my self to Charons Boat, really to enjoy a happy Elysium.

It is a common saying, and as true, that ill will never speaks well, I have
been one, which in many affairs, have been very obstinate, not being willing
to subscribe to that, which others have agreed unto, (for why) because it could
not be Profitable to the common wealth; And for this do J deserve hatred,
have J not been vigilant and careful to defend our friends, and offend our
foes, and for this do J deserve hatred; Then J, who was more willing to have a
peace concluded between this Kingdom and England, and for this do J deserve
hatred; my Lords J petition that my accusers may be produced, and he which is
not found to be more guilty of treachery then my self, let him cast the first
stone at me, J am fully persuaded that if they thought themselves as sure to be
examined as my self, there would scarce be one of them dare show there heads,
Magna vis est conscientia, let them have a care least by their intents to
destroy my body, they do not ruin there own souls, as yet my Lords I hope,
my words being rightly judg^d off, can give no distaste, for whatsoever J
speak is ((...)e defendendo) and for that I was brought at this present time
before your Lordships.

As concerning my Lord Lowden, that I should seek to destroy him, methinks
cannot be conceived by any one to be truth, insomuch as he is one, which my
very sovle has always affected, for rather then a hair of him showld be
diminished by my means J would first prove my own destroyer,

I see my adversaries are at hand, being ready as it were to justify their
black accusations, which unjustly they have imposed upon me, but I am prepared
for patience, deferring all to your Lordships considerations, I doubt not, but
that in this most honorable Senate, Justice shall brightly shine, and I at last
shall be found immaculate, in despite of all those which seek my destruction,
at first I promised brevity and do so intend, being ready as far as God shall
enable me to Answer unto all those particulars which shall be objected against
me.

FINIS.

