A GROATSWORTH OF WIT FOR A PENNY, Or, the Interpretation of Dreams.

By Mr. LILLY

1. How a Man or a Maid by their Dreams may k^ow whether they shall have them
they love or no. 2. How a man may obtain the love of his Mistress. 3. How a man
may get money in hard times. 4. How a man may make choice of a loving Wife. 5.
How they shall continue in amity and never be poor. 6. How to know an honest
Woman from a Whore. 7. How young men and Maids may discover the real^^y of
their Lovers. 8. How they may know what planets they are Born under, what their
fortune will be, and which shall die first either man or Wife. 9. How a Man may
know for each Day in any m^^th of the year, whether himself, Wife, Child, or
Friend, that waxes sick shall live or die. 10. What the appearing of a Comet
or Blazing-star si^^ifies: And how you shall cont^nue a Nightspell to catch
Thieves.
Printed for W. T. and sold by Jonah Deacon at the sign the Angel in
Guilt-spur-street without Newgate.

A Groatsworth of Wit for a PENNY.
How a Man or a Maid shall know by their Dreams whether they shall have them
they love or not.
IF a Maid love a Man, and dream she is going to Church with another man, and
that she run from him, then she will assuredly have the man she desired; but if
she dream she goes into the Church with another man, then she will not have
the man she loves. If the man dream any thing like unto the aforesaid, it does
denote the like fortune as is for the woman.

The Signification of Moles.
IF a man shall have a Mole on the place right against the heart, it denotes
him to be vicious. If a Woman shall have a mole on the left Breast, then
pronounce the same Judgment as if the man. If a man have a mole on the Neck
does promise that he shall become rich: if the Woman has a mole in the same
place denotes the same fortune, and great Riches shall befall her. If a man
shall have a mole behind the Neck, demonstrates that he shall be Beheaded,
except God (through earnest Prayer) prevent the same: If a man or woman shall
have a mole on either of the Lips, does denote that he or she is a great feeder
or Glutton: if a man shall have a mole on the Chin, argues that he shall be
rich, both in moneys and possessions; the Woman having a mole in the same
place, demonstrates that she shall come to the like Wealth as the man, and that
she has, besides the same, like a mole right against the Milt or Spleen. If a
man shall have a mole on any of the Ears, argues that he shall be Rich, and
much Reverenced and spoken of; if the Woman shall have the same, and that in
the like place, denotes the same good hap and Fortune to her: if a man or woman
shall have a mole on the Loins, denotes a weak and poor kindred, as well as
great want; if a mole be seen on the shoulders of a man, signifies
imprisonment, and sorrow of the mind: If a man shall have a mole on the Throat,
imitates that he shall marry both with Rich and Beautiful Women; if a Woman
shall have a mole in the same place, signifies that she also shall marry both
with wealthy and a very comely man: if either in the man or woman's hand a mole
shall appear, denotes prosperous good luck, and enjoyment of Children: if a man
or Woman shall have a mole on the Breast, signify much harm and poverty: if
either man or woman shall have a mole on the bottom of the Belly; argues much
weakness, sickness, and sorrow: if a mole in either man or Woman shall be seen
near the privy place, it denotes unspeakable desirousness and unsatiate; and if
a woman shall have a mole in the right Knee, signifies her to be honest, and
virtuous; if on the left Knee, then she will enjoy many children. If a man
shall have a mole on the ancle of the Foot, denotes that he shall take upon him
the Woman's part; If a Woman shall have a mole on her ancle, she shall take upon
her the man's part; if a man or Woman shall have a mole on the Foot, denotes
that they shall travel in strange Countries, and that the moles seen on the
right side, either of man or woman, denotes honesty and riches, but on the
left side to be armed with Calamities, and continually poor; if a man shall
have a mole in his Forehead, denotes that he shall possess much wealth and
riches, the Woman having a mole on the Forehead, denotes that she shall either
govern, or come to an high dignity; if a man shall have a mole on the
over-brow, let such a person refrain from marriage altogether, for if he marry
be shall have five Wives, in his lifetime; the Woman to have a mole in the same
place, to have so many H^sbands as the man has Wives in his lifetime: if a
man has a mole on the Nose somewhat ruddy; denotes him a person overmuch given
to the Venerial act, if a woman has a mole on the neither Jaw, vindicates that
she shall lead her life in sorrow and pain of body, because she has that
within her body which hinders her from the attaining and bearing of Children,
if the man shall have the form of a mole on the Tongue, demonstrates that he
shall marry both with rich and beautiful Women; if a man or woman shall have a
mole on either of the Lips, denotes that he or she is a great feeder or Glutton.

Here follows the signification of Dreams, what they Signify always the Day
foll^wing, that a man partly knowing of any bad f^rtune that will bef^ll him,
may by praye^ to Alm^ghty God, and keepin^ himself in his Chamber for that day,
he may (th^ou^h Gods assistance) prevent the danger, which otherwise might h^ve
fallen on him.
IF you dream you see men with Bills and swords with writing in their hands,
then beware, of being arrested the next day. If you dream of a Snake or
Serpent, and that they come near to hurt you, then look well to your self for
there are private Enemies seeking to destroy both you and yours: if you dream
you go up to the top of an Hill, then the next day you will put an end to some
great Business which you have long desired to finish, or else other good
fortune will fall out; but if you dream that you fall down again before you get
to the Hill top then your Suit will be lost; if you dream of troubled waters,
and that you fall into the water, than you may look to hear bad news the next
day: if you dream much of fire, you shall hear of hasty news the next day: if
you dream you run swiftly, and like to outrun a Hare, then you will receive a
Letter or Letters the next day: If you dream you are beshitten and are not,
then you will have good fortune in your business the next day: if you dream of
Eggs that are broken, there was much anger portending against you, but it is
past and gone: if a Woman dream of Eggs that are whole, she and her Neighbors
will have a sad bout of scolding the next day; if a man dream that he is lying
with his Neighbors Wife, and is not, then the Devil is doing his best
endeavor to rob him of that he ought not to lose: if a man that is born under
the Planet of Mars, dream that he sees two or three Moons at once, then let
him look to hear strange news from the great ones; It is good to dream of Gold
but dangerous to dream of small pieces of Silver: If you dream that your
friends are dead, it signifies that they are well: If the man or woman dream of
a black Goffin, it denotes that some kindred of theirs are dead: It is bad to
dream of Birds, or cackling Hens, but very good to dream of Bread and Corn. It
is good for a man to dream of his going or climbing up any place, but bad to
dream of his going or falling down any place.

Of the Fortunes and Destinies of M^n and Women born under the 12 Signs, after
the Saying of Ptholomeus.
TO know what Planet a Man or a Woman is born under, it is necessary to
observe; there are 7 in the Sky, which are attributed to the 7 days of the
Week; for every day has its name of the Planet reigning in the beginning of
it. Sol demonstrates Sundays, the cause is that the Sun among the other, is
most worthy, wherefore it takes the worthiest day, which is Sunday; Luna, she
governs the first hour of Monday, Mars the first hour of Tuesday, Mercury on
Wednesday, Jupiter on Thu^sday, Venus on Friday, and Saturn on Satu^day. The
natural day has 24 hours, and in every several hour reigns several Planets;
it is to be understood, that when you begin to reckon on Sunday, ye must reckon
thus; Sol, Venus* Mercury, Luna, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars: and when the number
is out, ye must then begin with the hour which you would know what Planet
reigns; on monday* we must begin at Luna Tuesday, at Mars, Wednesday at
Mercury, Thursday at Jupiter, Friday at Venus, and Saturday at Saturn. Thus
when the number of the Planets are past, ye must begin by order, as aforesaid;
at one of the Clock on Sunday in the morning, reigns Sol, at 2 Venus, and so
by order in every hour: When a Child is born, it is to be known at what hour,
in the beginning, in the midst, or at the end; if it be in the beginning, he
shall hold of the same Planet, and of the other before; if in the midst, it
shall hold the same, and of that next after; nevertheless the Planet which he
is born under shall not rule over the other, and that of the day shall have
most predomination, which is the cause that a Child holds of diverse Planets,
and has several conditions.

He that is born under the Sun, shall be prudent and wise, a great speaker, and
that he praises he attributes to himself. They which are born under Venus,
are loved ^f every man, they are good to Gods word, and shall bear Rule. They
which are born under Mercury are not the most prudent. They which are born
under Luna, has an high forehead, ruddy, merry-vi,+sag'd, shamesac'd, and
Religious. They which are born under Jupi^er, are hardy, fair visag'd, ruddy,
chaste, and Vagabonds: They which are born under Ma^s, are great speakers and
liars, thieves and deceivers, big and old of color.

Of the Four Elements, and of the Four Comp^exions of M^n.
THese 4 are the Elements, A^r, Fire, Earth, and Water; the 24 hours of the Day
and Night rules Sanguine, Choleric, Melancholy, and Phlegm, 6 hours after
Midnight Blood has the Mastery, and 6 hours before Noon Choler reignenh, and
the 6 hours before Midnight reighneth Phlegm* Ptolomeus.

Of the most best and profi^ablest Days that be in the Year 10 let Blood
THe 6 and 10 day of M^rch shall thou draw out Blood of the right Arm, the 11
day of April, of the left Arm and in the end of May, of which Arm thou will,
and that against a Fever; and if thou do, neither shall thou lose thy sight,
nor thou shall have no Fever so long as thou live. Whosoever in the 7 of
M^rc^, is let Blood in the right Arm and in the 11 day of Ap^il, in the left
Arm, he shall not loose the sight of his Eyes: in the 4 and 5 last days of May,
if both Arms be let blood, he shall have no Fevers. Whosoever in the first day
of the month falls into any infirmity, the 3 day e^suing is to be feared,
which if he pa^s* he shall escape till 30 days. Whosoever falls the 2 day,
though he be long sick, he shall be delivered: he that falls sick on the 3
day, at next change shall be delivered: he that falls sick on the 4 day he
shall be grieved till the 28 day, which if he pass he shall escape He that
falls sick on the 5 day, though he suffer grievously he shall escape. He that
falls sick the 6 day, though he seem to be healed, nevertheless in then 5 day
of the other month he shall be dead. He that falls the 7 day without grief,
he shall be delivered: he that falls sick the 8 day* if he be not whole the
12 day, he shall be dead. He that falls sick the 9 day, though it be with
great grief, he shall escape. He that falls sick the 10 day, without doubt he
shall be dead. He that falls sick the 11 day, shall be delivered the next
day; he that falls sick the 12 day, except he be delivered within 2 days, of
the 15 he shall be dead; He that falls sick the 13 day, till the 18 day he
shall be sick, and if he pass he will escape; He that falls sick the 14 day,
shall abide till the 15, and so he shall escape; he that falls sick the 15
day, except he recover within 18 days, he shall be dead; he that waxes sick
the 16 day, he shall be dead: he that waxes sick the 17 day, though he be
grieved 24 days, the 28 day he shall esape: he that waxes sick the 18 day, he
shall dye the 19 day of the next Month. He that waxes sick the 19 day, soon
shall be healed: he that waxes sick the 20 day also shall escape. He that
waxes sick the 21 day, in 5 days shall be well: but nevertheless in the month
following he shall be deap: he that waxes sick in the 22 and 23 days, except
he run into peril of death, within ten days of that other month he shall be
delivered; he that falls sick the 24 day, though it be with grievousness of
pain, in another month he shall be delivered: He that falls sick the 25 day,
in the 27 day he shall be delivered; but nevertheless in the month following he
shall be dead: He that waxes sick the 26 day, though he suffer a little, he
shall escape. He that falls sick the 27 day; though he suffer to the
out-passiing, yet in that other month he shall be delivered. He that falls
sick the 28 day, denotes death; he that waxes sick the 29 day, denotes death:
he that waxes sick the 30 day, shall recover the month following: he that
falls sick the 31 day, whether he escape is doubtful.

a series of 8 five-pointed starsThe appearing of a Comet or Blazing Star, is a
token of a dear year, scarcity of Coals, but happy days for Loyal Subjects,
after ^he Conquest of their Enemies.

A Nightspell to catch Thieves.
This following will drive away any Evil Spirit that use to haunt any house or
place, and having it about one, no Thief can do you any harm; and being used as
directed, it is a certain way, that if a Thief come to rob a Garden, Orchard,
or House, he cannot go till the Sun rises.

Having in every four corners of the House this Sentence written upon Virgin
Parchment, Omnes Spiritus laudet Dominum, mosem habet and prophitas exarget
Deus dissipenter (...)inimicus (...)

But if for a Garden or Orchard, it must be placed at the four corners thereof,
and if to keep one from Thieves, when one rides on the Road, let him have it
always about him, and fear none but God only.

The Author says it will do many more pretty knacks, as keeping a Thief till
the Sun rising and the like.

He that desires to obtain the Love of any woman, let him Court her in the hour
of Venus, and he will obtain more love by far than at any other time.

This Book will teach you to know the hour of every planet; so that you may
have in your Memory to know what Planet reigns every hour of the day and
night without Book.

If it be set in the hour of M^rs, which you may know by this Book what Planet
Reigns every hour of the day and night.

If any think there is any harm in it, let him not make use of it; for my own
part I do not know any at all.

Now will I speak something of the visible Signs of the Head.
1. I Warn you to beware of all persons that have default of Members naturlly,
as if to Feet Hands, Eyes, or other Members: one that is Cripled, and
especially of a man that has no Beard, for such are inclined to diverse Vices
and Evils, and one ought to eschew his Company as a mortal Enemy.

A plain Hair signifies a person piteous, and debonair.

They that have Red-Hair, are commonly ireful, and lack wit, and are of little
truth.

Black Hair is of a good Visage, of a good color, and signifies the love of
Justice: and a hard hair signifies that person loves grace and concord; and
is of a good and subtle wit.

A man that has black hair and a red Beard, signifies to be letcherous,
unjust, and a Vaunter; and one that you ought not to trust.

The Yellow hair and crisp, signifies a man laughing and merry, letcherous and
deceitful.

Black hair and crisp, signifies Melancholy, letchery, evil thoughted, yet
Li^eral.

Hanging hair signifies Wit and Malice.

Great plenty of hair in a woman, does show boisterousness and covetousness.

A person with great eyes is sloathful, unshameful, obedient, and desirous to
know much more then he does; but when the Eyes are mean and not too big nor too
small, it signifies a strong Eye, and a person of a good, loving and courteous
behavior.

Of the Head
The Head being short and round, denotes only to be forgetful and foolish. The
Head long in fashion, to be prudent and wary, and in the forepart of the Head
a hollowness, to be hasty: the head big denotes a dull person, and applied to
the Ass: the Head little, to be foolish, and applied to the Dog: the Head mean
of bigness, does argue a good wit naturally: the Head being sharp, to be
unshamefac'd, a Boaster, of whom there are too many.

Of the Forehead.
The Forehead smooth, to be a Flatterer applied to the Fawning Dog: The
Forehead big and wrinkled to be bold, applied to the Bull and Lion: a high
forehead, to be Liberal applied to the Lion: An over-wrinkled Forehead void of
bashfulness; and puffed up in the Temples, to be high minded, and of a rud^
Wit: the Forehead small, to be unapt to learn unconstant and applied to the
Sow: the Forehead being very big, to be slow and applied t^ the Ox: the
Forehead round, to be of a dul^ apprehension, and applied to the Ass; and being
somewhat a plain Forehead, to be circumspect, and applied to the Dog: a square
formed Forehead, to be bold, applied to the Lion*

Of the Eyes.
The Eyes small and quivering, to be shame faced, and yet a Lover; how much the
bigge^ the Eyes so much the lesser Malice, yet the more foolishness: the Eye
big out to be foolish, fearful, faint-hearted, and unshamefac'd Eyes disorderly
moving, as one while roving another while steadfast, too rash, disquiet, an^
troubled in mind, wicked, and a Bubber. The Eyelid quavering, to be fearful,
applied to the passion; the swift eye moving with a sharp look to be
fraudulent, unfaithful, and a Their, the Eye steadfastly looking, to be troubled
in mind, and a deceiver; the Eye very wide open, to be Impudent.

Of the Nose.
The Nose round, with a sharpness at the end, to be wavering of mind, applied
to the Bird; the Nose crooked, like the Eagles Bill, too bold, applied to the
Eagle; the Nose flat to be letcherous, and full of passion; the Nose big at the
end, to be desirous of that they see; the end of the Nose being sharp, to be
fierce and full of words. In a word, a rouling Eye, a smiling Countenance, and
a scarlet nose, as right as lusty Ro^er, an Artist of the School of Venus, and
a fervent Lover of the Female Sex; To all which,

I wish good Trading and Health,
wherever they live or dwell,
And also much Honor and Wealth,
and these merry Dreams to peruse well.
And those that shall n^w buy them,
to read brave Wit at leisure;
For they signify not only Profit,
but also a great deal of pleasure.
And for all N^ble Sp^rits
that live in City and Country,
Behold a Tree of Loyalty,
and buy a Groatsworth of Wit for a Penny.
tree of Loyalty

FINIS.

