A SERMON PREACHED before the KING, AT St. JAMES's-Chapel, Jan. 19th, 1695/6.

By J. LAMB D. D. Dean of Ely, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1696.

PROVE. iij. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths.


THough God has given the Dominion of this lower World to Man; though He has
endued him with a competent Understanding for the wise and proper Managery of
this Power and Trust, that every individual Person may be happy; yet this
Dominion is not Absolute, but in Conjunction with, and Subordination to the
Donor. He as not made us Independent, but our Grant is limited, and the
Government of our Reason, and our Entire Submission to His most perfect
Counsels, are reserved to Himself.

Indeed, our Nature is so framed that we cannot stand alone, that we cannot be
Happy any other way, but under the Guidance and Direction of our Maker. For
though we know a great many things, and might know many more if we attended to
them; yet our Reason is imperfect at the best; not accurate enough to compare
exactly one thing with another, that we may be sure to choose what is really our
Good, nor piercing deep enough into the Effects of Causes, that we may prevent
those evil Accidents which would destroy our Happiness.

And therefore, if we Separate our selves from our Principle, and lean to our
own Understanding, we deflect out of the way of our Nature, and soon shall find
our selves in dangerous and untrodden Ways: our Ends will be absurd, our
Measures incompetent, and the Event of things will be fatal to us. But if we
adhere to God, if we depend upon His Wisdom, and trust in His Power, He will
not fail to prosper our Designs. For so says the wisest of Men in my Text, In
all thy Ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy Paths.

This Book of Proverbs is a perfect System of Moral and Divine Philosophy, and
proposes so complete, so exact a Rule of Practice to us, which can never fail,
if we carefully observe it, to make us Wise and Happy.

This Third Chapter, of which my Text is a part, insists in special manner,
upon that principal part of Wisdom and Policy, the Resignation of our selves to
God; or an entire Submission of our Opinions, Desires, and Actions, to His most
Wise Direction. That we Judge of Good and Evil by those Accounts which He has
given of it; That we Believe what He Reveals; That we confide entirely in His
Word and Promises, and Do and Suffer cheerfully whatsoever He requires. My Son,
forget not thou my Law, but let thine Heart keep My Commandments, v. 1. Lean
not to thine own Understanding, and be not wise in thine own Conceit; but Fear
the Lord, and Trust in Him with all thine Heart, at the 7th. Verse. Despise not
His Chastnings, for whom He Loves He corrects; And Happy is he who finds this
Wisdom, at the 13th. Verse.

Now my Text resolves these several Particulars, and all other Duties of the
Kind, into this one standing Rule or Precept, In all thy ways acknowledge Him,
and He shall direct thy Paths.

Which Words consist of these two General Parts.

I. The First is an Exhortation or a Duty enjoined, In all thy Ways acknowledge
Him. II. The Second is the Motive or Encouragement to the Practice of it, And
He shall direct thy Paths.
1. I begin with the First of these, the Duty enjoined, In all thy Ways
acknowledge Him. And,

1. First, I shall explain the Nature of the Duty, or what it is, and when a
Man may be said, in his Ways to Acknowledge God. And, 2. Secondly, I shall
consider the Extent and Latitude of the Duty, or the manner how it is to be
performed, not partially, not only in some Particulars, but in All our Ways.
In all thy Ways acknowledge Him.

1. I begin with the First of these, and shall endeavor to explain the Nature
of the Duty, or what it is, and when a Man may be said, in His Ways to
Acknowledge God.

It is very usual, in the Holy Scriptures, by the Metaphor of our Ways, and our
Paths, to express the Designs, the Aims, and Intentions of our Mind, together
with our Actions consequent upon them, or our Prosecution of them in the Course
of our Lives; and thus I shall understand it in my Text, as well with Respect
to the Inward, Previous Motions of our Souls, and to our Visible and External
Actions. For the outward Act has such an Inseparable Connection with the
Principle, or Cause thereof, that it is impossible to give a Rule for the
Regulation of the one, which shall not oblige us also in Respect of the other.
And the Metaphor it self, is as natural and easy, when applied to the Motions
of our Mind, as when it is limited to the Scope and Tendency of our outward
Actions. And, in Fact, it is used indifferently in the Holy Scriptures with
Respect to both, or either, of them. Thy Way is in the Sea, says the Psalmist,
speaking of God Himself; Thy Paths are in the great Waters, and Thy Footsteps
are not known. That is, Thy Secret Counsels, Ps. 77.19.
and Thine External Dispensations, are both of them Inscrutable. And St. Paul
cries out in an Holy Rapture, Thy Judgments and Thy Ways (which are joined
together) are past our finding out; Romans 11.33.
And who has known the Mind of the Lord?

Thus also in Respect of the Actions and Designs of Men; Thou understandest my
thoughts afar off, says the Psalmist, Thou compassest my Path, and my lying
down, Psalm. 139.2, 3.
and art acquainted with all my Ways; that is, with all the Motions both of my
Soul and Body.

If my Steps, says Holy Job, have turned out of the Way, or if mine Heart has
walked after mine Eyes, etc. where the Motions of his Mind, Job 31.7.
as well as those of his Body, are expressed by his Steps and his Walk.

And this is enough to show, that by our Paths, and our Ways, in my Text, we
may fairly understand our whole Capacity of Judging, Designing, Resolving, and
Acting.

In all thy Ways, that is, in all the Deliberations of thy Mind, in all thy
Consultations, Ends, and Actions,

Acknowledge God.

(...), Recognize and Own Him; Remember, and reflect upon thy Relation to Him,
that He is thy God and thy Creator, that thou art of Right, and of Necessity
His Subject, that thou actest merely by His Commission, and by that Power which
He has given thee. Acknowledge Him to be thy Lord, thy Governor and Judge,
that He is always present with thee, and that thou can hide nothing from
Him. Set Him, thus, in all thy ways, before thy face, as the Psalmist phrases
it. Ps. 16.8.
This is the literal Construction of the word Acknowledge Him.

But the Duty, in the Practice of it, extends a great deal farther. For it is
not only an Acknowledgment of the Mind that is here required, but also all such
proper Acts, as such an Acknowledgment, if it be sincere, will direct and
prompt us to.

The Fifth and the Seventh Verses, which with my Text, make one entire and
perfect Period, give us a sufficient Light both into the Sense of the Terms,
and the Nature of the Duty. Lean not to thine own Understanding, V. 5. and, Be
not Wise in thine own conceit, at the 7th. Verse, But, in all thy Ways
acknowledge Him, as in my Text; which is the same as if He had said, Follow not
the Bent and Inclination of thine own corrupt and sensual Will; Be not so
foolish as to believe that thou can stand alone; That by the Strength of thy
natural Understanding thou can make thy self happy; That thou can form such
Ends to thy self, as are every way most proper for thee, and chalk out the Best
and aptest Means whereby thou may accomplish them, Lean not to thine own
Understanding: What then should I do? Why, in all thy Ways acknowledge God,
take His Advice and Direction with thee; be Overruled and Governed by Him.

It is not then a distinct and simple Duty by it self, or that at certain
times, in a solemn manner we recognize the Being, and the Attributes of God;
But in all our Thoughts, Designs, and Actions, we are commanded to acknowledge
Him. It is a Duty that is to mingle it self with all the several Motions of our
Soul and Body. It does not terminate in our Mind or Tongue, but obliges us to
all such proper Acts, as naturally flow from such a Recognition of Him. Is God
our Sovereign Lord and King? Are we of right His Subjects? Do we act by His
Permission? Is He conscious of every Motion that we make? And do we acknowledge
this? Why, then we are obliged by our own Confession, as well as by the Reason
of the thing, to submit our selves entirely to Him; to suspend our Judgment,
restrain our Affections, and forbear the Prosecution of our Design, till we are
first acquainted with the Sense, and Pleasure of God in the Case before us;
till we have prayed to Him for His Assistance, and submitted the Event of all
to His Wisdom and Providence. This is, in our Ways, to acknowledge God.

For as all these several Acts are fairly implied in the Word it self, as it
has been now explained, so there is nothing more usual in Scripture, than to
mention only One, and that perhaps the lowest Act of a general Duty, when all
the rest, that rationally flow from that that is expressed, are implied and
understood. God so loved the World, says our Savior, That He gave His only
begotten Son into the World, that whosoever Believes in Him, St. Joh. 3.16.
should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; but it must be in Conjunction
with such a suitable Conversation, as such a Belief will prompt us to, James
2.19.
because the Devils Believe, but yet they shall never be saved. And, can Faith
save ye? says St. James, That is, it cannot save ye, if it be alone. And again,
with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans 10.80.
says St. Paul; but it implies such a suitable Life as will follow such a
Confession, if it be sincere: For, not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord,
says our Savior, not every one that owns me, or is called by my Name, shall
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father, etc.
Thus here in my Text, in all thy Ways acknowledge Him, the Act of Confession
only is mentioned, when all such other Acts as such a Recognition prompt us to,
are implied and understood. He judged the Cause of the poor and needy, and then
it was well with Him, Jer. 22.16.
was not this, and nothing else without this, to know me says the Lord?

Wherefore then, to Acknowledge God in the Sense of my Text, is to Confess and
Own Him, according to all those several Accounts, and Manifestations of
Himself, that he has given us; that He is our Sovereign Lord and King; that we
are entirely subject to Him; that He has given us a Law, and that we ought to
obey it; that He knows our Thoughts, that He sees our Designs, and will reward
and punish us according to our Works: And that therefore we revere Him
awefully, and submit our selves and our Designs entirely to His Will; that we
make Him always present to us, and never venture to embrace a Proposition,
resolve upon an End or do any considerable Action, till we have first compared
it with the Rule that He has given us; and if we find it is against us, that we
then reject it with all the Cheerfulness in the World, though never so dear, or
never so advantageous to us in Appearance; if we find it is with us, and that
we may safely prosecute our Purpose, that we then proceed with Confidence,
imploring first His Blessing, and submitting the Event of all to His good Will
and Pleasure. This is the Sense of the Words, and the Nature of the Duty, In
thy Ways Acknowledge God.

2. I proceed in the Second Place to consider the Extent, the Scope and
latitude of the Duty, not only in some Particulars, but in All thy Ways
Acknowledge Him.

It is a Duty, indeed, that is not capable of Limitation, for unless our
Resignation shall be Universal, it cannot be sincere. An industrious
Reservation of our own Self-will, in any Instance, destroys our Principle
entirely. For if we were in Earnest; if we Acknowledged God in Truth; if we
believed our Relation to Him, and had made His Will the Supreme and leading
Principle of our Actions, as the Duty requires, we could not presume, in any
instance, to proceed without Him. Because the Principle, wherever it is True,
must needs have the same effect and force upon us in one thing, as it has in
another. No Accidents or Occurrences, no Circumstances whatsoever, can either
alter the case, or Release us from our Obligation. And therefore to pretend to
Acknowledge God, unless we are entirely Resigned to His Will, or so long as we
have any Reserves, is either Self-deceit, or gross Hypocrisy. The Universality
of our Submission, is the only Test of our Sincerity. For if we pick and choose
our Duties, and reject what we please, we do not take our Rule from God, but
have framed it our selves, by our own Corrupt and Private Inclinations.

But let us not deceive our selves, there is no halting between both. Ye cannot
serve God and Mammon, says our Savior; and, St. Mat. 6.24.
He that offends in one Point, says St. James, in the Sense before us, is
Guilty of all. No! we cannot be said to acknowledge Him at all, unless we
submit to His Direction, as well in those particulars, wherein our Temper and
our present Inclinations, are more averse and contrary to His Will, as in
those, where they are more consenting and agreeing with it. The very Life and
Spirit of the Duty is Self-denial, and especially in those particulars where
our Wills are most perverse, and the Bias of our mistaken Interest and
Pleasure are the strongest.

Thus Abnega prorsus, St. Chrysostom. upon St. Mat. 16.24. St. Joh. 12.25. Ephesians.
2.3. St. Luke 14.26. St. Mat. 18.8, 9.
is our Savior's account of the Duty, Deny thy self entirely, even to the
Hatred of thine own Soul; or as St. Paul expresses it, that we Resign the
(...), the things that we love and approve of: Hands and Eyes, Lands, Houses
and Relations; that we submit all these, and whatsoever else shall stand in the
way of our Duty, though we our selves are (...), Col. 1.21.
Enemies at the present in our Minds.

This then is the Sum of the Duty, in the full Extent and Latitude thereof, In
all thy Ways acknowledge God, in every Motion of thy Mind, in every Design you
undertake, and in every action that you do, let the Will of God be the Rule and
Measure of your Proceedings. Move not without consulting Him, do nothing
without His concurrence, Pray continually for His assistance, and cheerfully
submit to such an Event of things as He shall bring to pass. Thus much for the
Duty.

2. I proceed, in the Second place, to consider the Encouragement, or the
Motive that is offered to the Practice of it, viz. That if in all our Ways we
acknowledge Him, He then will direct our Paths.

Two things are chiefly here to be considered: 1. First, The Truth of the
Proposition, or what Assurances we have that God will, indeed, direct the Paths
of those who in all their Ways acknowledge Him. And, 2. Secondly, The Force of
the Motive, or because He will vouchsafe to direct our Paths, that therefore,
in all our Ways we should acknowledge Him.


1. First, I shall inquire into the Truth of the Proposition; or, what
Assurances we have that God will, indeed, Direct the Paths of those who in all
their Ways acknowledge Him. And,

1. First, I shall consider what this Blessing and Advantage means, or what we
are to understand by this Divine Direction that is promised in my Text. And, 2.
Secondly, That God will certainly make good this Promise to us, and Direct the
Paths of those who in all their Ways acknowledge Him, according to the full
intent and meaning of it.
1. First, I shall consider what this Blessing and Advantage means, or what is
understood by this Divine Direction that is promised in my Text, or what we are
to expect from God, when He says, I will direct thy Paths.

We cannot pretend to give an Account of all the Blessings that are contained
in this amazing Condescension, I will direct thy Paths; but thus much, however,
it signifies, at least, that if we Acknowledge Him in truth, if we are Resigned
to His Will without Reserve, we shall have vast advantages, through His
Assistance, in Forming our Designs, Adapting our Means, and Attaining our Ends;
we shall proceed more Wisely, more Securely, and more Successfully than those
who lean to their own Understanding, and are Wise in their own Conceits. For,

1. First, We shall be under the Direction of His Law, that Eternal Law of our
Creation, which He has inscribed upon our Minds. Our Reason shall be Brighter,
and more free from Prejudice; and by this Light, if we had no other, we should
be able to discern, in every case, what is proper to be done, and how we are to
proceed. And in this Sense that of Solomon is understood, in the 11th. Chapter
of his Proverbs, at the 3d. Verse, The Integrity of the Upright shall guide
them, but the perverseness of Transgressors shall destroy them.

But, Secondly, and in a more especial manner, we shall be under the Direction
of His Law Revealed.

This points us plainly to our Duty and our Interest, and shows us, with the
Finger, if there be no Prejudice upon our Minds, what is fit for us to Choose,
to Do, and to Forbear: It takes us by the Hand, and puts us into the way that
we should walk in, and keeps us steady, safe and upright, till our Endeavors
shall be Crowned at last with such a Success as we our selves would wish. He
shall direct thy Paths, is the Promise of my Text; and this is the Way, walk in
it, says the Prophet Esaias, speaking of the Word of God. Isa. 30.21.
And Thy Word, says Holy David, is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my
paths; Psalm. 119.105.
and therefore, I have set thy Law always before my face, I not be moved, and
so, Psalm 16.8.30.3.
in another place, shall my Way be perfect; without any Rub or Flaw, without
any notable Error, or fatal disappointment; my Life shall be Easy, my Spirit
Cheerful, and I shall be as Happy as I can expect.

3. But this is not all the Direction that is contained in the Promise of my
Text. For He has not only given us a Law that is perfect in it self, which, if
we could observe, would make us Wise unto Salvation, and furnish us
effectually, for every good Word and Work; but He will also direct us in a more
Intimate and Immediate manner, how we shall apply this Rule to our proper Case,
and in every Strait or Exigence that we shall happen to be under.

He will Inlighten our Minds, Encourage our Endeavors, Remove Impediments,
Cheer our Spirits, and order all things Opportunely by His Providence, till He
brings us Safe, at last, to our Journeys end.

For a Law, though it be never so Holy, Just and Good, yet it is not a sufficient
Direction to so imperfect a Reason as ours is. For the Way of man is not in
himself, Jer. 10.23.
as the Prophet Jeremy observes, it is not in Man that walks to direct his
Steps. We can do but very little more than Approve, Desire, and Wish, but are
easily enticed, and drawn out of the way.

And therefore, notwithstanding the Plainness and Perfection of the Law of God,
if He did afford us, Phil. 1.19.
also the (...), the supply of the Spirit, the Divine Assistance in a more
Immediate manner; if He did not inject good motions into our Minds Himself, if
He did not nourish and confirm them, if He did not quicken our Understanding,
and blow up the Smoking Flax; if He did not do as much of our Business for us,
as is possible to be done with Safety to our Nature and the Freedom of our
Choice, it would be impossible to keep our Way.

And this Immediate influence of his Power and Wisdom, over our Proceedings, is
that which is principally promised in the words of my Text, And He shall Direct
thy Paths.

2. But this, and a great deal more, that we are not able so much as to
conceive, He will certainly Vouchsafe to those, who, in all their Ways
acknowledge Him.

Such a Consent of Will, such a perfect Resignation, as I have now described,
create such a Sympathy between God and us, that we may be sure there shall be
nothing wanting on His part, to complete our Happiness. Such an entire
Submission of our Will to His, admits us into the Endearments of a near
Relation, and gives us a sort of Unity with Himself, in whom all Fullness
dwells, and from whom it will flow, in an Abundant manner upon us.

But there is no need of arguing from the Reason of the thing, since the Holy
Scriptures, every where, abound with Promises of the Divine Assistance, in this
particular and immediate manner, that we now Assert, and Insist upon. For,

Would you be Resolved, from an honest Principle, what Course you are to Steer
that ye may be happy? Why, Ps. 25.12.
He will teach you the way you shall Choose.

Or, being entered, Are ye afraid lest ye should wander, and turn aside out of
the Path again? Why, Ps. 37.
The Good man's Steps are Ordered by the Lord, and He Delights in his Way.

Or, Are ye afraid of Assaults upon the Road, and do you distrust your own
Ability to Resist them? Why, He will lay no more upon thee than thou art able
to bear, Cor. 10.3.
but will with the Temptation, also find a way for thee to Escape.

Or, Do you meet with Crosses and Afflictions as ye go? Why, God will Hide thee
under the shadow of his wings. Ps. 27.8.46.1.
And, He is a very present Help in trouble.

Or, Do ye find any Difficulties, any rugged Way, in the Road it self, and are
ye afraid of Falling? Why, When thou go, thy Steps shall not be straightened
and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble. And again, He will hold up thy
Goings in thy Paths, Prove. 4.12.17.5.
that thy Footsteps shall not slip.

Or, Do ye chance to fall indeed? (it is incident to the humane Nature, and God
permits it, that we may know our selves to be but Men) yet in sha'n't be fatal;
For, though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, Ps. 37.24.
for the Lord upholdeth him with His hand.

Finally, Are ye faint and weary? Do ye think it long till you gain your point,
and see an Issue of your Labors? Be not sollicitous; All things shall work
together for your Good. Romans 8.28.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, Ps. 37.5.
Trust also in Him, and He will, certainly, bring it to pass.

This is the Promise of my Text; This is the Covenant that God has made with
those who Resign themselves entirely to Him, that He will thus Direct their
Ways.

These Promises, it cannot be denied, are exceeding great indeed; but can we
hope that they shall be fulfilled? Is not Man a voluntary Agent? Is it not his
Essential Property, that He is the Master of Himself, and that all his Designs
and Actions are the pure result of his own Choice? How then can he be acted by
another, and yet retain the Liberty of his Will?

To Reconcile this seeming Contradiction, may appear a Difficulty at the first
View of it; but if we carefully consider it, we shall find that both these
Propositions are equally True, and very consistent with each other. For it is
no where said, that God will act us Irresistibly, or that the Influences of His
Grace shall be a Force upon us; He does not drive us against our Will, but
takes us by the hand we give Him, and only leads the Ductil Temper, and the
Willing Mind. We must Acknowledge Him, before He will direct our Ways; for He
assists the Work of none but those who work themselves, or are willing to be
wrought upon.

It must be allowed that the Communication of Spirits, or the Manner how all
this is done; how God awakens our Understanding, how He changes our Mind, how
He forms new Opinions in us, new Resolutions, Vigor, and Affections, and how
He assists our Endeavors all along, till our Course is finished, is to us
unknown. And, indeed, we have no Reason to be concerned about it; it is enough
that we Believe and Adore, but the manner how it is performed is above our
Understanding, and therefore we ought not to Expect it, or inquire into it.

But the thing it self, or that they, why in all their Ways Acknowledge God,
shall be thus Directed by Him, is evident to the Sense of all Good Men,
asserted positively in the Holy Scriptures, and is no way Repugnant to our
Reason, and that is sufficient.

For since God is Infinite in all Perfections; since He is ignorant of nothing,
Natural or Voluntary, that either is, or shall, or can be; since the Secrets of
all Men's Hearts, and the Operations of all Causes are before His Eyes; it is
easy to conceive, that He may as affectually influence a Rational Agent, as
direct a Subject natural or merely passive.

Since He knows the present Disposition of our Souls, and the Order of all our
Designs and Thoughts; may He not inject His Motives, clear our Reasonings,
prevent Temptations, encourage or dissuade our Purposes, and order all things
opportunely by His Providence?

The Will of Man is wrought upon no other Way, than by the Appearances of
things in his Understanding; and therefore if God has a perfect Knowledge of
all the Motions of our Minds, of all our Doubts, Debates, Intentions and
Designs, He may, without Dispute, according to our own Conceptions, afford us
vast Advantages in Apprehending rightly, in Judging, Choosing, Resolving, and
Acting as we ought to do; and this without any Prejudice at all to the Property
of our Nature, the Freedom of our Choice.

Let it be so then; yet is it such a mighty Blessing to be led by another? Is
there any Inconvenience so great, that a Man would not rather endure than part
with his Liberty? Can there be a more perfect State of Happiness than to be
Masters of our selves, to pursue our Inclinations, and do whatsoever pleases
us? What then, though God will be pleased to Direct my Paths, is that enough to
persuade me to give up my self entirely to Him, and in all my Designs, and
Actions to be governed by Him? Yea, most certainly, it is an abundant
Recompense.

2. And this was the last Particular I proposed to Consider, namely, wherein
the Encouragement consists, and where lies the Force of the Argument; or,
because He will vouchsafe to Direct our Paths, that therefore we should run
unto Him joyfully, and Resign our selves, without Reserve, to His Disposal.

Indeed, if we consider all its Weight and Strength, we shall find that it is
more than an Encouragement, and must, of Necessity, Determine us. For as soon
as we understand who it is that promises, and to whom the Promise is made,
there can be no Hesitation or Doubt upon our Mind; the Case is clear, and we
can do no other than yield to the force of the Motive.

For is it not our greatest Good, our truest Liberty, to be directed by the
most Perfect Being? Are we not ignorant of a thousand times more than we know?
Impatient of Happiness, but doubtful what to choose? Busy and ambitious,
passionate and eager, but not well knowing what we would have? Confident in our
Way, very wise, as we think, in laying our Designs, but almost always Baffled,
for the most part Disappointed? We cannot see far enough into the Effects of
Causes to Prevent Impediments, nor are we strong enough to Remove them when
they do Appear. Where Innumerable Agents have an eye to the self-same thing,
where every one would make his Fortune, and All are running upon the heels of
one another for the Prize, there must be interfering, Tumult, Clashing, and
perpetual Contentions.

And will God, amidst these Difficulties, direct the Paths of those, who in all
their Ways acknowledge Him? Surely we shall embrace the offer, lie down at His
feet, and give up our selves entirely to Him.

1. For now we shall proceed by the Direction of Infinite Wisdom, and the most
Perfect Knowledge. We shall be guided now by one who cannot mistake His Way.
Instead of those Thorns, and Briars, Rocks and Precipices, Passions, Follies,
Mistakes and Troubles that we have led our selves into, we shall now be put
into a Road that is straight and Easy, that is Broad and safe. Ps. 119.
We shall be directed now to the best and Wisest Ends, and proceed Securely in
the ready Way that will lead us to them.

For His Understanding is Infinite, says the Psalmist, and, By Him all Ways are
trodden in Heaven, Ps. 147.5.
in Earth, and in the Deep.

He sees the Working of all men's Minds; All things lie before Him naked as they
are; and therefore His Judgment cannot be imposed upon and His Directions must
be certain and Infallible.

2. And Now that His Wisdom has put us into the proper Way, His Infinite
Goodness, Love, and Pity, will guide us softly to our Journeys end.

We shall not be hurried by the Insolence of a Tyrant, but Gently led, Ps. 23.1.
Is. 49.15.
with the watchfulness of a Shepherd, and the tenderness of a Mother.

He will suit His Directions to our Abilities, and give us such Commands as
will improve our Nature, and advance our Interest. He will consider our frame,
and Pardon our Deflections, put us again and again into the Way, and Restore us
to His Favor upon Repentance. And thus, His Arm shall support us, Ps. 23.2.
and His Rod shall Comfort us. And therefore His Saints and Servants Bless Him,
says the Psalmist, they Rejoice under His Guidance, and are satisfied with His
Conduct of them. Ps. 144.10.


But His Wisdom to direct us, and His Goodness to take care of us, tho they are
indeed very great Advantages, yet would hardly determine us to Resign our
selves entirely to Him, unless He has also Power enough to defend us under all
Assaults, and deliver us from all our Enemies; unless He can remove
Impediments, assoil all Difficulties, and bring our Ends and Designs to pass.

3. But His Power as well as His Wisdom, and Goodness, is Infinite and without
Control.

And this complears the Qualification of a Guide, and even forces our entire
Submission to His Will. For He does not only show us our Good, but will also
certainly invest us in it. For, His Dominion Rules over all. There is no End
of His Greatness; And, He does whatsoever pleases Him, in Heaven and in Earth.

And indeed, this Argument is oft'ner urged, in the Holy Scriptures, to our
present purpose, (as being more plain and sensible, than any other.) Trust in
the Lord for ever, says the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 26.4.
Why? because in the Lord Jehovah is Everlasting Strength. My Soul, says the
Psalmist, wait thou still upon God; Why so? Ps. 62.5, 6.
because He only is my Rock, my Refuge, my Defense, and my Salvation.

These are the Qualifications of our Guide; Infinite in Wisdom to Direct us,
Compassionate and tender to Assist us, and of uncontrollable Power to
accomplish our Designs.

These Eminent Qualities, no where to be found but in Himself, will both
Justify and Reward our most entire Resignation of our selves to be Governed by
Him. For here we have all the Recompense that we can either ask or think of,
for the Submission of our Private Will, which would undo us, to the most
Perfect Will of God, Who can do no other than Order all things for the best.

This then is the Blessing, and this is the Encouragement to pursue it. No
other Method of proceeding can pretend to the like Security. And therefore
common sense, nay, the first and most obvious Principle of Self love and
Preservation, obliges us to embrace it.

1. For now we shall be always Fixed, Resolved and Steady; We shall be free
from anxious doubts, and cross Deliberations, and all our Thoughts shall glide
on smoothly, in a calm and even Current.

We shall not Stagger, like a Drunken man, and be at our Wits end, as the
Prophet describes the Misery of the Wicked, Ps. 107.27.
and Self-willed. We shall not wander in the dark, being destitute of God, and
not know where to set our foot, as the Philosopher expresses it. Hier.
But we shall proceed with Confidence, and Certainty; one steady Principle, or
the Will of God, presides and Rules over all our Thoughts, Designs and Actions,
and we shall seldom be to seek, in any case, what is fit for us to do.

Or if, through our own unwariness, we chance to doubt, we shall never fail of the
Divine Assistance; for, Thou meetest Him, (thou art always present to His help)
who considers Thee in Thine own Way. Is. 64.5.


2. Now shall we be Sedate and Quiet, without Anxiety or Fear.

The Wicked travel in Pain, says Holy Job. They are not Equal to the business
they propose; Job 15.20.
They put to Sea without a Pilot, and are liable to continual Storms and
Wrecks. The World is their All, and Experience shows them that they cannot
Command it. Their Affairs are Subject to innumerable Contingencies, and
therefore they are always in Apprehension of unexpected Accidents: And, which
is worse, they have no other Stay to depend upon, no Refuge to betake them to.
If they lose their present Aims, which is impossible for them to secure, they
are utterly undone. And who can live under the Burden of such a slavish Fear?

But they who are Resigned to the Will of God, are free from gnawing Care, and
anxious Solicitude. They have put their Affairs into the Hands of the Wisest,
and most Faithful Friend, who knows what is best, and can do what He will; no
Impediment can Stop Him, no Accident can Cross Him, and therefore we are sure
that that which comes to pass is, upon the Matter, fittest for us; and no Man
can be afraid who is thus secured. (...), etc. Dare then to lift up your Eyes
to God, says the Philosopher, and say, Guide me by thy Counsels whithersoever
thou will; Arrian in Ep.
I am of the same Opinion with thy self, I will do and suffer whatsoever
pleases Thee; and this shall give Thee Steddiness and Immobility. When thou
lie down, says Solomon, thou shall not be afraid, yea thou shall lie down,
and thy Sleep shall be sweet, Pro. 3 24.26.
for the Lord is thy Confidence.

3. Now shall our Lives be easy, and we shall enjoy the most perfect Peace and
Pleasure that we are capable of on Earth.

Briars, Thorns, and Difficulties on every side, are in the way of the Wicked;
Their Spirits are hurried by continual Cares and cross Events; their Minds are
troubled with corroding, sharp Reflections upon themselves, with inward
Upbraidings of their Rashness, Follies and Mistakes.

But he who has submitted his Affairs to the wisest Judgment, and put them
under the conduct of absolute Power, and the most perfect Goodness, has nothing
left to trouble himself about.

He is satisfied in his Guide, and waits the Event with an humble, dutiful
Indifference.

He proceeds upon such certain grounds, and such a sufficient warrant, as will
bear him out against himself; and there will be no room in his Breast for
anxious Reflection, or Repentance. He acts according to the Law of his
Creation; he is always in his proper Place, and doing his proper Work, which
gives him a Share in that Delight and Harmony that arises from such an
Obedience to our Principle, such an entire Consent of Will with God. All
perfect Beings, says the Philosopher, incline to their Author, Porphyr.
and to embrace Him is agreeable, natural, and easy to us.

4. Finally, they who are resigned to God, shall, for the most part, be
successful in their Undertakings; they have far more Reason to expect it in
this, than in any other way whatever.

The Wicked are so Eager in their Pursuits, that their Reason is clouded, and
they run before their Judgment. They aim at things which are out of their
Reach, and pursue them with equal Ignorance, and Zeal. And thus, Ps. 5.10
His own Counsels, says the Psalmist, make him fall.

But they who in all their ways Acknowledge Him, shall, most commonly, attain
their Hopes. They propose such Ends as are within their compass, and their
Applications will be Regular and Effectual. Their Minds are Clear and Easy,
which will give a Just and Proper Life, and Spirit, to all their Motions.

Besides the Supernatural assistances of God, who is concerned for their
interest in a more immediate manner; who has promised to take care of the very
hairs of their head, St. Mat. 10.
and will certainly bring their Designs to pass, if it be for their Good.

Upon the Matter then, to Acknowledge God in all our Ways, is not so properly a
Duty, as a Privilege. For what can we desire or wish, that we may not obtain,
if we take this Method of proceeding? Are we full of Defects and Wants, in this
Imperfect State? they will all be supplied by the Wisdom and Power of God. Is
our Judgment uncertain, and our Reason fallible? Are we long before we
understand, and do we presently decay? Let us but resign our selves to God, and
He Will make up whatsoever is wanting to us.

Oh stupid senseless Man, that art so hardly persuaded to be happy! Are not
steddiness of Mind, and Content in our Station, inward Satisfaction, and a sure
and certain Refuge in distress, rather to be chosen, than to be vexed from
within and from without? to be Harrass'd by continual anxiety, and worn away by
the effects of our foolishness, and the overruling Power of God?

Look no more abroad for the Spring and Fountain of your Misery; Cry out no
more upon the Malice of the Wicked, or that Fortune is unkind, and Friends
forsake you; but turn your Eyes within, and know that all your Misfortune is
from your selves. We cannot be perfect upon Earth, but we may be Easy, if we
please.

Let every one of us then, look to our own particular Ways, and in all our
Designs and Actions have respect to the Will of God; so shall we have Wisdom
from above; so shall we have a certain Knowledge of our Interest, and shall
manage our Affairs with that Sobriety, that Faith, that Trust and Hope in God,
as will Issue in Success and Happiness on Earth, and Eternal Blessedness in the
World to come. To which, may God, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

