A LIST OF Several Ships Belonging to ENGLISH MERCHANTS, Taken by French
Privateers, since December, One thousand six hundred seventy and three.

ALSO A brief Account touching what Applications has been made for Redress, at
the Council Board, and with the Committee of Trade.

AMSTERDAM, Printed in the Year, 1677.

At the Court at White Hall, the 4th. of August, 1676.
Present, The KING'S Most Excellent Majesty in Council.
The Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee of Trade did this Day present
unto his Majesty in Council, a Report touching the Injuries which his Subjects
did sustain by the French Capers, in the Words following.

May it please your Majesty,
THere was presented unto your Majesty in Council, on the 31st. of May last, a
Petition in the Name of all the Merchants of London, and other Places,
concerned in the several Ships Taken by the French Privateers, and carried into
several Ports of that Kingdom; And their Complaints consisted of the Points
following.

1. That the Ship and Goods of your Subjects though Manned according to the Act
of Navigation, and furnished with all necessary Passes, were daily seized
carried into Dunkirk, Calais, Sherbrook, and other Ports, the Masters and
Mariners kept close Prisoners, to force them by hardship to abuse their
Owners, or else for Relief of their own necessityes (being commonly striped
and plundered) to enter into the Privateers service, which great numbers have
done, with very pernicious effects.

2. That the delay and charg of Prosecuting the Law in France, does commonly
make the Owners to become Loosers of half the Value, when ever they are most
Successful.

3. That there is no Reparation ever gotten from Privateers, for what they
plunder and imbezzle, which makes them freely seize upon all they meet, and
perpetually molest the Navigation of your Subjects.

Wherefore, your Petitioners humbly imploring your Majesty's Protection and
releife, Your Majesty was hereupon graciously pleased, out of a Sense of your
Subjects sufferings, to command that some Frigates should sail forth to clear
the Coast of those Privateers, to seize them, and bring such as had offended to
make Restitution. And your Majesty did further Order, That the Committee of
Trade, should as well take notice of the particular Cases and Complaints
depending, that such of them as were of Weight and Merit, might be fitted to
receive your most gracious Recommendation for Relief, as to Survey, the whole
number of Seizzures, which have been made on your Subjects, in Order to lay
before your Majesty what hardship have been sustained at Sea, and what sort of
Justice has been administered in France, with their opinions of what is fit to
advise your Majesty therein.

In Obedience to which Command, we have hereunto annexed a List of such Ships
as have been seized, to the Number of 53. And the Cases wherein the Owners have
repaired unto your Majesty, either in your Council, or by your Secretary of
State for Relief. Which, as in the general it supposes a Justice in such
Complaints, so, it leaves a suspicion of great hardship in the Methods of
Redress. And the number of Captures is no small proof of the facility of
Condemnation.

How many other helpless men there have been (besides the said Cases) who have
not had ability to prosecute, or how many of these Cases have been favored
with Redress, we cannot certainly understand, till the Information we have
sought for, come from Paris, which may also enable us to complete their
circumstances of every Case.

But in the mean time, such of all the Instances of Redress, as are come to
our knowledge, we have not failed, in the Margin, to make mention of them,
being in number Seven.

While we were in the midst of this Prosecution, Mr. Secretary Coventry, does
on the sixth instant, present unto the Committee a Paper, which he received
from the French Ambassador, Monsieur Courtin, relating to these matters, and
the Contents thereof were as follow.

An Extract of a Letter from Monsieur Colbert to Monsieur d' Pompone, written
the 28th. of June, 1676.

FOR what concerns the Prizes it would be a difficult matter to Answer to all
the Cases contained in Monsieur Courtin's Letter; What I can say, is,

That the Council for Marine Affairs, Sits every Friday at St. Germans.

That all Privateers and Reclaimers know it.

That Sir Ellis Leighton, nominated by the English Ambassador has always
notice of it, and is always present at it.

That not a Week passes, but I give him two or three Audiences, and oftentimes
I send for him on purpose.

His Reasons are all Reported, Read and Examined.

As likewise are all Petitions of Reclaimers, and I shall tell you more, I
acquaint him with the Reasons upon which Judgment is given.

In giving Judgment all Vessels which have any Appearance of being English
are Releast, and very often, and almost always, although we are satisfied that
the Ships are Dutch, yet they are released because there is some appearance of
their being English; And every thing is Judged favorably for that Nation; And
it is true that all Ships that are taken are of Dutch built; That they never
were in England; that the Masters and all the equipage are Dutch; That the
Documents are for persons unknown, and which are not oftentimes so wuch as
named; That they carry with them only some Sea briefes from Waterford or some
other Town of Ireland or Stotland; That the whole Ships Company Deposes, they
were sent to Holland; That we have found on Board three or four Vessels, Bills
of Accounts, by which is seen the English take two three and four, Per Cent.
For Owning of Ships; And although it is impossible to avoid confiscateing them,
yet these are the Ships which make such a noise in England.

In Answer to which Remarques; though it be true that all respect imaginable
ought to be given to what Ministers of that Consideration do pronounce, Yet
there being some difference between them who feel the smart, and those who feel
it not; we shall insist on some particulars, that your Majesty may discern
whether your Subjects are so fortunate in their freedom of Trade at Sea, or in
the helps of Justice when they are seized, as the Report and Information of the
Letter would seem to make out. For as it magnifyes the favor which is
exercised in France, the facility in all Addresses, and the tenderness to
relieve English men in all Complaints, so we cannot on this Subject but own to
your Majesty the very different Resentments we have thereof, for we understand
that when English Ships are brought into the Ports of France, many of the
Mariners complaining of ill Treatment, and some of Torment, their Papers being
seized and their Persons in restraint, till all Examinations are prepared, Then
are all the Writings sent up to the Privy Council at St. Germans, and there
Judgment definitively given; Seldom are any of the reasons of Condemnation
mentioned in the Decree, and never any Appeal or Revision admitted of (So at
least it was until the 20th of June last) And whether this be the tenderness
or the Justice which is mentioned we do not know; But we are well assured, that
the Methods of your Majesty Clemency, and Justice on like occasions, have been
far otherwise. And we appeal to the present Ambassador, Monsieur Courtin, if
almost in all Cases, that he or any other of the Ambassadors thought fit to own
(when his Excellency was here before, and your Majesty in War with Holland,
seizing many Ships as Prize, and under great suspicion claimed by the French)
whether it were not very customary, to have a short Reference, and a summary
Examination of all Papers by the Judge of the Admiralty in his Chamber, and
that if any thing appeared fair in the Case, whether the Ships were not
immediately Released without Law, charge or delay? And 'twil not be out of
season, we hope, to annex hereunto the Copy of an Order of the 22th. of July
1665, Signed by the then Lords Commissioners of Prizes, where it will appear,
That Eighteen French Ships (which were Laden with Wine and Brandy) being at
Dover, and detained as Prize, were all Eighteen by one Order discharged,
without any Law, or even the Ceremony of the Judges Examination, being singly
on the Credit of the Ambassadors Word, affirming that they belonged unto the
French.

And as for the matter of Revisions or Appeals, after Sentence in the Court of
Admiralty here; We know his Excellency will also remember, that never any man
was denied his liberty therein, but on the contrary, your Majesty gave a
standing Commission for Appeals in all Cases of Prizes, and filled it with the
Lords of your Council only, that every Case might receive a candid a^ well as
unquestionable determination.

We might also put your Majesty in mind that during the whole term of your
late League with France, when ever any French Ships were seized by the
Hollander, and afterward retaken by his Majesty's Frigates, such French Ships
were always restored on demand, no consideration being had of the time they
were in possession of the Hollander, Whether a Month, two, or three as some
times they were, and when the French owner as it has happened knew not of such
retaking, but that the Ship was according to Law, condemned to your Majesty and
sold with other Prizes, yet the Claimer appearing, your Majesty has ordered
the Money and product of the Ships to be restored unto him.

Such Various Methods of Justice and of Clemency, might have entitled your
Majesty to a different acknowledgment, and more advantageous effects.

As to the other part of the said Paper, It seems to contain very harsh
imputations on the Trade of your Majesty's Subjects, and from some ill practice
perhaps found out (as every where there may be Instances of the like) General
Rules are made, and severe Impressions taken, which having entered the thoughs
of some eminent Ministers we must not wonder (how frequent and how multiplied
soever your Majesty's Recommendations for Justice are) that the Events of
Trials prove so unfortunate, If your Mujesty will but Vouchsafe to cast your
Eye on the Cases here annexed, You will soon see.

Whether (as is imputed) all the Ships taken are Dutch built?

Whether they are all such as never were in England?

Whether all the Masters and all the Mariners are Dutch?

Whether the Documents be for persons unknown and oftentimes not named.

Whether in the whole List there be more then one Ship from Waterford and but
six from the rest of all Ireland, but from Scotland not so much as one?

Whether it is credible all the Ships Company do swear they are sent to Holland
when so many are taken even coming from Holland?

Your Majesty may see how many Ships in the List are English built taken with
English Colors, English Mariners, English Owners, some of them known to your
Majesty, and to whom the best Papers your Majesty or your Ministers can sign
or the Treaties do require, are given, but all in vain.

So that if the Case be in the General quite different from what in the General
is represented we hope it will be no crime for your Majesty's Subjects to make
some Noise in England, when they are hurt and when they see their goods taken
from them by Violence, and that Violence rather Justified then redrest by Law.

It Is not for the Condemnation past on those very ill cases ennumerated that
your Subjects do complain, for it were to their Advantage if all such were
Punished and deterred from Trade, who by collusion take share in that Profit
which the favor of the present conjuncture seems wholly to appropriate to this
Kingdom.

And surely your Majesty and the whole Kingdom did reckon upon this advantage,
and the Extent of Trade that would naturally slow in as one of the greatest
friuts and blessings of your peace, so that your Majesty being sensible of
great decay and loss of English trading Ships in the late War, did think it
advisable to admit your Subjects to repair themselves on the sudden by
purchasing of foreign Ships, and your Majesty by your Authority made them
free, and fit to partake in the benefit of English Ships, to the diminution of
those higher Customs, which otherwise such Ships were obliged to pay. And
while your Subjects with these and with their own home built Ships are in
prosecution of the said Advantages, while every man is invited by the
Conjuncture to venture more and to enlarge his Trade, while by a general trust
in the peace and alliance your Majesty holds with all your Neighbors round
about, they are lead to go abroad unarmed and without defense, we cannot but
lament it as a great misfortune and disappointment to observe how these your
Majesty's Subjects are frequently made a Prey of and very evilly treated both
at Sea and Land.

Wherefore considering that the Root of all this disorder arises from the
violence and rapine of the French Capers, who ought to be looked on as
disturbers of the public quiet, and Enemies to the good freindship between the
two Crowns, We are humbly of opinion, That your Majesty has just occasion from
the Injuryes past, and those which are now depending and which do every day
increase, to make a very serious representation of all unto his most Christian
Majesty; And not only press for some better method of repairing the grievances
mentioned, But earnestly to insist on the calling in of all Privateers. Or else
your Majesty must do Right, and give Defense to your Subjects from all the
Insolences which they so frequently meet;

All which is most Humbly submitted.

Council Chamber, 31th. July 1676. Anglesey, Bath, Craven, J. Ernle, Finch, C.
Bridgwater, H. Coventry, G. Cartret. Robert Southwell


HIS Majesty taking into his serious Consideration the daily Complaints of his
Subjects, and having a great Sense and Resentment of their ill Usage, has
thought fit to approve the said Report, and is therefore Graciously pleased to
Order, as its hereby Ordered, accordingly.

That the Right honorable Mr. Secretary Coventry, do immediately transmit to
his Majesty's Ambassador at Paris, a Copy thereof, that so the evil and the
unhappy state of these things may be made known in that Court, and the Remedies
pressed for in his Majesty's Name; which are proposed by the said Report. And
Master Secretary is also to attend the French Ambassador here, with the same
Representation, and to expostulate upon all these hardships, and the little
Remedy given to his Majesty's Subjects, either on the Merits of their Causes,
or the Recommendations of them by his Majesty. That so his Execllency being
made sensible of his Majestys displeasure herein, and the reasonable discontent
of his Subjects there may be, by his care, such lively impressions hereof fixed
with the King his Master, and the Ministers of France as may Redress the
Evils, that are complained of, and obtain the just Remedies which are
proposed.

Philip Lloyd.

A LIST of Several SHIPS belonging to ENGLISH MERCHANTS, Taken by French
Privateers, since December, One thousand six hundred seventy and three.
ALSO His MAJESTY'S Orders for Redress, bearing Date as follows.
June 3d. 1674.
THE Pelican and Hopewell, two Ketches English Built, Masters and Mariners
all English, Laden at London, by Merchants of the Place, all English and their
Owners, Bound to Bilbo, and configned to their own Factors. They were taken at
their entering to Bilbo, by Le Moine a Privateer, Commander of the Renoune, and
carried to Creswick.

November 4th. 1674.
The Lady of Verginia and Saint Joseph a Spanish Built Ship, bought by Mr. Tyte
and Mr. Hutchins both Englishmen, in 1673, when his Majesty did tolerate a
trade with foreign Ships and Mariners, and upon the breach betwixt France,
and Spain, this Property was notified at the Admiralty Office at Bayon, and at
the General Office of Marrine at Paris. She was Laden in the Canaries by Sir
Arthur Ingram Knight, and Richard Owen, now English Consul there, with Wines,
to the Value of 1050 l. at first Cost; She was taken in December 1673, near the
mouth of the Channel, by John de la Roche, de Fontaine, carried by him to the
West Indies, and not heard of in a year.

May 19th, 1675.
The John and Sarah, of 120 Tun, English Built, William Button Master, he and
his Mariners English, Abraham and Francis Jaggard English Owners of the Ship,
Laden with Wool at Bilbo for account of George Banon of London, and Robert
Hutchins of Exeter; she was in her Course to Hamborough whither she was bound,
and the Goods consigned, seized in the Bay of Biscay, on the 4th of Ostober
1674, and by Michael Gauvaine a Privateer of Porto Lewis, carried into Rochel,
where notwithstanding her Cockets and Bills of Lading, she was condemned for
want of a Sea-Brief.

November 20th, 1674.
The Oak, John Symmons Owner, Sir John Frederick and other Englishmen Laders;
They had Cockets and Bills of Lading, but seized and carried in about the same
time, for want of a Sea-Brief.

November. 20th, 1674.
The Orange Tree, Andrew Squash and Copartners Laders and Owners, taken about
the same time, and carried in, having all Papers necessary except a Sea-Brief.

January 27th. 1674.
The Great Duke of Tuscany, an Italian Ship, Laden with 4000 Holland Cheeses,
upon the account of William Welsh Merchant of London, to be sent to Rochel, is
seized on in Tor-bay, by a French Caper, and carried to Creswick.

March 29th, 1675.
The Postilian of Cadice, a Dutch Ship, John Simpson Master, being run into
Tor-bay and within half a Harsers length of the shore is seized on by Boats
sent from the Ships of some French Men of War, and particularly the Chevalier
de Reynold.

March 3d. 1675.
His Majesty's Packet Boat is by Anthony Vander Tyden, a Caper of Dunkirk,
plundered of Jewels as she was passing into Holland.

August 4th. 1675.
The Unity, 250 Tuns, John Shipey Master, wholly Manned with his Majesty's
Subjects, provided with all Passes and Testimonials, by the Treaty required,
and belonging to William Welsh Merchant of London, is in her Course from
Lisbone to Rotterdam, seized by two French Capers, and carried into Saint
Malloes.

September 28th, 1675.
The Golden Sun of Bremen, Burden 100 Tuns, Egbert Coster Master, richly laden
with Drapery and English Manifactures, by Edward Smith, and a great number of
other Merchants of London, as by Bill of Lading, and Depositions taken before
the Lords of the Committee of Trade and Plantations appeared, she was in her
Course from London to Hamburgh, in September 1675, Taken by a French Privateer,
carried to Dunkirk and condemned, though Bremen be under the protection of the
Swede. The parties appearing before the Lords of the Committee; swore the
Principal costs of their goods was to the Vallue of 3092 l.

September 28th, 1675
Content of Yarmouth, English built, Robert Williams Master, and half Owner,
manned with his Majesty's Subjects, and provided with Passes. The other half,
and the whole of the Lading, belonging to Simon Francia, who is naturalized. As
the Ship was Sailing from Rotterdam to Falmouth, and so in her Course to the
Canaries, is seized in September last, by a French Privateer, carried into
Calice, the goods condemned, and the Ship restored, yet the Master swears his
Losses amount to 996 l. 8 s. and 6 d. And the said Francia his unto 3975 l. 2
s. 3 d.

December 1st. 1675.
Elizabeth of London John Job Master, Manned according to the Act of
Navigation, Francis Terence an English man the Owner, and he, with others of
his Majesty's Subjects, Proprietors of the Lading, in her Course from Rochel to
Rotterdam, is seized and carried into Calais.

October 17th. 1675.
The Contents of Bristol, Walter Hide Master, James Whitwood Owner, bound from
Bristol to France, was near Vsshen in November 1673, Run wilfully under Water,
by the Chevalier de Betune, in the Ship L'Orislam, the Master and Mariners
swear that they saved themselves in the Portholes and Ladders of the French
Ship, had no help from the French to save them, but being on board, for a
month, and were grossly abused. The loss upon Oath, amounted unto 1100 l.

January 30th, 1675.
The James of Dover, bound for Bilboa; Anthony Andrews Master, Nicholas Cullen
of Dover, and other English Merchants are Oweners. The Ship is taken by the
French Privateer out of Tor-Bay, and carried into St. Maloes. Restored.

February 23d. 1676.
The John and Elizabeth, English built, Thomas Rising Master, and part Owner,
the Mariners all English, John Smith, Edmund Smith of Rye, and the Master, all
Subjects of his Majesty, Owners of the Cargoe: She was in her course from Rye
to Rotterdam, in December 1675, seized within Pistol Shot of Dover Peer, by
Nicholas Botfel, a French Caper, the Master much abused, and one of the men
shot through the body, for no other reason then not striking the Top-sail, as
the Caper has been examined by the Judge of the Admiralty, in March last.

Feburary 23d. 1675.
The Resolution Frigate, English built, John Aden Master, belonging to James
Littleton and Edward Nelford of London Merchants; she was bound from Bilbo to
Amsterdam, Laden with Wool and Iron, for the sole accounts of the Kings
Subjects. she had her Pass and Bills of Lading, yet seized by two Privateers
and carried into Dunkirk. Restored.

March 3d. 1675.
The Society of Boston, Thomas Edwards Master, Laden with Provisions by Edward
Sanders of London Merchant, in her course from New England to Jamaica, is
seized by Mounsieur Osserune Governor of the French Tartugas, and the
Provisions taken out.

March 8th. 1675.
The Catherine Galliot, Adrian Chapmotts Master, Henry de Wild Owners, his
Majesty's Subjects, Notwithstanding a Pass from the Lords of the Admiralty,
she is in her Course from Yarmouth, at Roane taken, and carried into Dunkirk.

April 7th. 1676.
The New Exchange, Walter Peace Master, Will. York, Henry Glover and other
Merchants of Lymerick, his Majesty's Subjects Owners of ship and goods; she had
Passes in due form on Board, as also an Order from the Court of France for her
Release upon a former Capture, by a Privateer of Calice, but is taken by
Charles Landschooter of Dunkirk, and there condemned as Prize.

April 19th. 1676.
The Abraham of London, John Petersonpitts Master, Thomas Ball of London
Merchant is Owner, ^s appeared by Bill of Sale, she had a Pass, and ^et in her
Voyage from Zeland to England was carried into Dunkirk.

April 28th, 1676.
The Green Dragon, James White Master, being laden at Lymerick with Beef,
Butter, Tallow, Salted-Hides, and other Commodities of the Country, and bound
for Ostend, was on the 15th. of April last seized by Captain Juny, and carried
into Cherbrook Road; all the Ships papers taken away, and the Master and
Mariners forced, by torture, to sign a paper, acknowledging that the ship
belonged to Ostend, though she belongs to Patrick Rochford of Lymerick,
Merchant; and had all necessary Sea-briefes and Passes, and the Ladeing belongs
to Sir John Frederick and others; all his Majesty's Subjects. The Master and
three fourths of the Mariners were his Majesty's Subjects.

May 19th. and June 30. 1676.
The Elizabeth of London, English built, burden about 80 Tuns, John Ranger
Master; manned with English men, having a Pass from the Lords of the
Admiralty, and a Port-Pass from Dover being laden with Merchandises at the
Terceraes, partly on the account of Abraham Chapman of London Merchant, and the
rest for English and Portugeses, and bound for Amsterdam, was seized by the
Chevalier de Beaumont a French Caper, on the 14th. of May; near Portland, and
carried into Cherbowrne, where the Master had been ill used, and the Ship and
Goods, threatened to be Confiscated.

May 5th. 1676.
The Saint John, John Saint-John Master; Laden with Wine, Brandy and Rozen;
coming from Bourdeaux to England, was seized by James Swan, his Majesty's
Subject, serving by French Commission, and carried into Dunkirk; Notwithstanding
the Ship and Lading did belong to the Lord Bullinbrook and other his Majesty's
Subjects. Restored.

May 5th. 1676.
The Nicholas of Dover, Nicholas Bernard Master; Laden with Barley at Marenes
in France, by John Callens of Rochel for account of English, who afterward
entered the said Barley in the Custom-House there, as bound for Middlebourg,
where it was Consigned to an Englishman, he paid the Duties, and made Oath
that no prohibicion was there given against Transporting Corn into an enemies
Country; Yet, on this pretense, was the said Ship, in the Course of her Voyage,
taken and carried into Calais. Restored.

May 5th. 1676.
The Susanna of London, Cornelius Cariens Master, William Welsh of London
Merchant, sole Owner, Laden with 44 Chests of Sugar, with 24 Pipes of Pickled
Lemmons, besides other goods which belonged to the Subjects of Portugal; she
had all necessary Passes and Sea Letters, as well from the Lords of the
Admiralty, as the Town whence she set out; she was in her Voyage from Lisbon to
Rotterdam, taken by David Brizon his Majesty's Subject, sailing by French
Commission, and carried into Bulloigne.

May 19th, 1676.
The Peace of Dublin (Burden 150. Tuns) Paul Hayes Master, William Williamson,
William Martin, and Samuel Martin of Dublin, all Subjects to his Majesty and
Owners; In her Voyage from Amsterdam to Bourdeaux she is, on the first of
April, seized near Dover Castle, and notwithstanding her Passes, and all other
necessary Papers, was carried into Calais.

May 26th. 1676.
The William of London, John Cornelioson Master, a Denizon of Ireland, William
Galt the Owner, a Merchant of London, and natural born Subject; She was in her
Voyage from Rochel to the Sound, taken in April last, by one Captain Anthony,
and carried into Calais, all his Papers taken from him, also their goods and
cloths, the Master stripped naked, he and several of his men, put in Prison, and
there detained, till they had signed such Papers as were tendered to them, being
not allowed an Interpreter, by the President of Calais, as was Sworn by the
said Master, before the Lords of the Commit of Trade.

June 7th, 1676.
The Hope of London, English built, Richard Milborne Master; All the Mariners
but one, Subjects to his Majesty, had Passes and Sea briefs, Yet as she entered
into Dover, (within Gunshot of the Castle) was seized by Captain Bowen, a
Subject of his Majesty's, sailing by French Commission, and carried into
Dunkirk.

June 7th, 1676.
The Pelican of London, John Sanderson Master, William Welsh and John Swinton,
who are his Majestys Subjects, Owners of Ship and Lading, is come from the
Terceras, and being bound to Amsterdam, she is taken and carried into Dunkirk.

June 14th. 1676.
The Agatha, Foreign built, 250 Tuns, Laden with Deals, at Waterwick in
Norway; the Masters name John Peter's, a free Denizon, and the Ship and Goods
belonging to John Doril and other Merchants, who are English. But in her Voyage
to Amsterdam, is taken as Prize.

June 21th. 1676.
The James of London, a free Ship, John Williamson Master, the Owners all
English, manned with 12 English and two Strangers, with a Pass from the Lords
of the Admiralty, and other necessary Testimonials. She was Laden with Salt and
Setubal, and coming to London, was on the 28th. of May, within Gunshot of
Dover Castle seized and carried into Calaice, the Ship run a ground, the Back
broke, and Men abused, and their Papers taken away.

June 25th. 1676.
The Patrick of Waterford, a Pink of 70 Tun, John Tucker Master, She was in
October last taken by a Priviateer of Ostend from the French, carried into the
Groine, condemned as Prize, bought by Phillip Stafford an Englishman and there
laden by him with Vinegar, Lemons and Oranges, and being sent to Rotterdam, is
taken near Dover Castle and carried into Calais, to his detriment of 484 l. as
is sworn before the Lords of the Committee, by Thomas Rosseter, his Majesty's
Subjects and servant to the said Stafford.

June 28th. 1676.
The Resolution of Poole, English built, Anthony Heart Master, laden at Pooll in
May last, with Wheat, Barley and Rye, of the growth of the Kingdom, by John
Welchman of Christ Church Merchant, sole Owner thereof, to be delivered to his
son at Rotterdam. She was taken in May by Oliver Compin, and carried into
Dunkirk, though he were English built and English Mariners aboard, had a Pass
according to the late Regulacion and the Ship belonging to the Master, and one
Thomias Barefoot, and the parties concerned being Subjects to his Majesty, all
which has been proved by authentic attestations, and upon Oath before the
Lords of the Committee.

June 28th. 1676.
The Peace of Dublin George Adrianson Master, belonging to William York, and
Andrew Joyce, his Majesty's Subjects, and by them laden at Gorway in Ireland,
with Raw hides, Tallow, Leather, and other things, of the grows of that
Country, consigned to William Eaton of Dover Merchant; had Bills of Ladeing,
Sea-briefe, and other necessary Papers aboard; Yet in March last, was near
Dover seized by Captain William Bowen, Captain Peter Vermill, and Sacret
Longschooten; she is carried into Dunkirk, to the Owners detriment of 1000 l.
And the Ships Company were stripped, plundered, and exceedingly abused by the
said Bowen.

June 6th. 1676.
The Margaret of London, 320 Tuns, foreign built but made free by warrant of
the 14th. of June 1674. belonging to Chamberlain Done Merchant of London,
manned with Englishmen, all except two, and the Master, John Chrisman a free
Denizon, she is laden with Salt at Rochel, by order of Chrysostom Hamilton,
and being bound for Dantzick, had a Pass under the Kings hand, Countersined by
Mr. Secretary Williamson; Yet she is taken, and carried into Calais, the 24th.
of June last.

July 6th. 1676.
The Judith of Dover, belonging to Abram Stock Merchant of the place, is taken
by Privateers of France, and carried into Dunkirk.

July 14th. 1676.
The St. George of London, Henry Fairweather Master, laden at Christiana in
Norway, by order of George Turfrey Merchant of London, sole Owner of the Ship
and goods, and his Majesty's natural born Subject, she was in her Course to
London, met by the Boyall of Dunkirk, Rifled and Plundered of what could
readily be taken away, the papers seized, and all carried into Dunkirk, where
they were run a shore, and the Ship in Danger to be Split on the first change
of weather, and the men very evilly treated.

July 20th. 1676.
The Sheperdesse of London, 280 Tuns burden, Tyant Fecks Master, a free
Denizon, had his Majesty's Pass, and sailing from the Fly to Norway, was taken
and carried into Calias. That the Ship and about 60 l. in money belongs to
Cornelius Van Alderwelt, as is sworn by the said Fecks, and made out by all
papers found in the said Ship.

July 10th. 1676.
The Swan of London, John Richardson Master, Laden with Salt, Wine, Brandy and
other Merchandise at Nantz, and bound for the Balltick. The Ship and Goods,
soley belonged to John Eyers, and Robert Tigh Merchants, his Majesty's natural
born Subjects. She was seized by Captain Duranto, carried into Cherbrook, her
bills of Lading, her Sea brief, and other papers torn from them, the Ship
plundered to the vallue of 250 l. in Goods, the Mariners imprisoned 16 days,
all which is deposed by him and others.

July 11th. 1676.
The Orange Tree of Topsham, Samuel Syntall of Topsham Master, Trading (for
these 14 years) as a free Ship of England; and so entered in the Custom House
of several Ports, and did belong to Andrew Quash of Exeter, and other Merchants
of that place; All the Mariners English, yet as she was coming homwards from
Rotterdam, was on the 12th. of July 1674, met near Portland, by Captain
Bodwyne, and carried into Sherbrook. That besides the Loss of Ship and Goods
the Mariners are damnified to the vallue of 200 l. and the Loss of three of
their Lives.

July 14th, 1676.
The Margaret of London, burden 200 Tuns, William Lambert a free denizon, and
Inhabitant of Dover Master, having a Pass from the Lords of the Admiralty, and
manned according to the act of Navigation, in her Voyage from Rochell (where
she took in her Lading of Salt) was on the 15th of June last, taken by a French
Privateer called the Geometry, Peter Minack Commander; and carried into St.
Maloes, where she is detained and the Master, and Seamen beaten and abused. All
which is represented by James Thierry of London Merchant; his Majesty's Subject.

July 14th, 1676.
The Welcome of London English-built, whereof James Thierry of London Merchant
is sole Owner, and Zacharias Barton Master, both his Majesty's Subjects, having
taken in her Lading at Santo Cruz in Barbary, of Copper, Wax, and Almonds, on
the account of Gomes Rodrigues, his Majesty's Subject and an Inhabiant of
London, was on the 9th. of June last, within five miles of Dover, taken by one
Aren Johnson a French Privateer, and carried into Dunkirk, where they are still
detained. The said Ship had a Pass from the Lords of the Admiralty and a
Sea-briefe from the Major of Southampton, and manned with his Majesty's
Subjects, one excepted, all which has appeared by Oath and Certificates.

June 28th. 1676.
The Charity of London, a Prize Ship made free, Robert Cotton Master, Navigated
by English men, was fraighted with a parsell of Salt at Dartmouth, by Master
Tucker of Lyme Merchant, and confined to his brother Samuel Tucker at
Rotterdam, and on her Voyage thither, about the 14th of April last, near
Dungenesse, she was seized, by a French Caper, one Gellitan Commander, and
carried into Dunkirk, That the said Vessel appertains to the Lady Holeroft,
his Majesty's Natural born Subject, as also are both the before named Tuckers.
And the said Cotton deposes that he believes no stranger driectly or
indriectly, had any Interest in the Ship and Lading, when she was seized.

June, 3d. 1676.
The Two Brothers of London, Thomas Peachy Master, burden 100 Tuns, belonging
unto William Miles, and Edmond Peachy of London Merchants, was Laden with Corn
at Bordeaux, for the proper account of James Versprect, and Francis
Vandenbrack, also of London Merchants, and in her Voyage from thence to
Rotterdam, she was taken at Sea near Dover, about the 12th of December last, by
Captain John Pollet of Calias, and carried in there, notwithstanding her Passes
from the Lords of the Admiralty, the Lord Mayor, and the French Admiral of
Bundeaux. That also the said Vessel, and Lading, was after three months suit
discharged, yet the Interessents are really damaged, through the perishing of
their Corn, and all other Charges, to the value of 759 l. as appeared on Oath
taken before Sir Robert Viner.

An additional List of Ships belonging to English Merchants, and taken by
French Privateers, touching which Application has been made to Mr. Secretary
Goventry only.
THE New Exchange of London, Foreign built, but belonging to William York, of
Lymrick, Anthony Vernier Master, in her Course from Bourdeaux to Dunkirk, was
taken and carried into Calais.

The Charles of Dartmouth, Andrew Hocker Master, belonging to John Whitethrow
of Dartmouth Merchant; She was laden with Corn, bound to Saint Sebastian, but
taken and carried into Saint John de Luz. Restored.

The Ship North Caper of Rotterdam, Laden with Timber, on account of some
Merchants in Dublin, taken within the Bar of Dublin by a French Privateer of
Breast, called Gellin, and carried thither.

The Ship, Young William, Foreign built, Burden 100 Tuns, Thomas Vough
Master; belonging to William York of Lymerick, bound for Bilbo, manned with his
Majesty's Subjects, having a Sea-brief on Board of her, taken and carried into
Breast, by a Privateer of that place. Restored.

The James, belonging to Sir Thomas Allen and others, burden 30 Tuns, Robert
Dilworth Master, bound from Bourdeaux to Amsterdam, provided with sufficient
Certificates, all her men English, taken and carried into Calais. Restored.

The Kings Fisher Dogger, English built, John Johnson Master, taken by Peter
Casteau, and carried into Dunkirk.

The May-Flower, Simon Corben Master, belonging to George Tyte, Benjamin Peak,
and others, Merchants of London, and though she had a Pass, from the Lords of
the Admiralty, was English Built, and manned with English, yet she was taken
and carried into Cherbrook.

Continuation of a List of Ships belonging to English Merchants, and taken by
French Priviateers, touching which Applycation has been made to the Lords of
the Commitee for Trade.
August, 3d. 1676.
THE Sherwood of Boston, Matthew Burchinal his Majesty's natural born Subject
Master, bought at Amsterdam about April last, and being bound from thence to
New Castle, was, about the 20th of July last in her course thither, taken by a
French Priviater, Nicholas Hayes Commander, and carried into Dunkirk, where she
is detayned, and threatened to be speedly confiscated, notwithstanding that, by
the bill of sale and other papers, which the said Caper is now possessed of, it
does evidently appear that the said Ship does truly belong to the Lord
Sherwood, Charles Bertice Esquire, John Wood and other his Majesty's Subjects
and to no Foreigners.

August 3d. 1676.
The Success of London, Stephen Holden Master, being bound from Rochel to
Riga, was lately seized on by a French Privateer, belonging to Calais, and
carried into that Port, where she is still detained, although she be a free
Ship, and was Navigated wholly by Englishmen, and furnished with a Pass
according to the late Regulation, and together with her Lading does entirely
belong unto Thomas Kayton, William Riden, William Prescot, Edmond Belitha, Mr.
Benjamin Ayloffe, and Henry Houswel, and others of his Majesty's Subjects.

August 8th. 1676.
The Hopewell, Valentine Archer Commander, was on the 12th, of May, 1674, met
by a French Privateer called la Renown, Monsieur le Money Commander, who took
out of her diverse Commodities of a considerable value, belonging to Brune
Ryves and Richard Barker, who after much charge and trouble got a Sentence in
France for the Restitution of their Goods, but could never obtain Execution
thereof notwithstanding their constant endeavors and application,

August 3d. 1676.
The Golden Lion of Syrdam a Dutch Ship, having on Board 309 Hogsheds of Sugar,
belonging to Rowland Simpson his Majesty's Subject, was in December 1674. taken
by a French Privateer called the Golden Fleece, Bernard le Moine Commander, and
carried into Milford Haven, where by a Warant out of the high Court of
Admiralty, the prize was taken in arest, and in custody of the Officers of the
Admiralty; But the said Bernard Le Moine did, by Violateing the said Arrest,
and the protection of his Majesty's Port, make Prisoners of the Officers, of
the Admiralty, and carried the Prize, together with the Sugars belonging to his
Majesty's Subjects into France, where he disposed thereof at his own will and
pleasure.

August 3d. 1676.
The Lilly Dogger of London, John Fisher Master, his Majesty's Subject, in
return from Virginia was met by two French Ships which without respect to the
English Colors there flying, fired several times on the said Doggar, and
afterward going on Board plundered to the value of at least 1000 weight of
Tobacco, and then dismissed the Dogger, with this insolent expression, Go and
tell your King of it.

August 8th, 1676.
The Mary of Leverpool, an English Ship, Thomas Blunden Master, fraighted by
Thomas Nisbet Merchant of York, and consigned from Narva to his Factor at
Rotterdam, was in her Course thither, taken by a French Privateer, and carried
into Dunkirk, where she is still detained with the Lading, notwithstanding she
was furnished with a Custom-house Pass, and a Pass in pursuance of the Treaty
of Denmark, dated about the 10th. April last.

A LIST of other Ships taken by French Privateers.
July 6th. 1676.
THE William of Yarmouth, John Littlewood Master, whereof James Symonds is sole
Owner, being bound from Hambrough to Bourdeaux, was about the 20th, of May
last, taken by a French Privateer, whereof one Captain Duranto was Commander,
and carried into Cherbrook.

August 13th. 1676.
The Barbados Merchant of Bristol, whereof Abraham Sanders, John Walter, and
other Merchants of Bristol, are Laders and Owners being bound from thence to
Bilboa, was about the first of June last, seized by French Privateers of Bayon,
and carried into that Port, notwithstanding the said Ship is English built, and
was wholly Navigated by English men, bore an English Flagg, and was furnished
with all necessary papers and Passes pursuant to the late Regulation.

August 31th. 1676.
The William of London, belonging unto William King and Robert de la Maine, in
her Voyage from Southampton to London, about the 16th of July last, near Bench,
was by Captain James Martyne, a French Privateer carried into Facan in
Normandy, and is there detained; notwithstanding the said Ship was provided
with a Pass from the Lords Comissioners of the Admiralty, the Owners have
deposed the Ship and Goods to be worth, at least 800 l.

September 4th, 1676.
The Mary Pink of London, whereof John Gibbs, Nicholas Kempstone, and other
English Merchants Owners, having been lately built at Shoram, and manned with
all English men was carried into Dunkirk on the 6th of August by a French
Privateer.

September 4th. 1676.
The Little Samuel of London, whose Owners and Laders are all his Majesty's
Subjects, was in her Course from Rouen to London, on the 14th. August last, met
by a French Privateer, and carried into Calias, allthough the said Hoy was
manned wholly with English (except one French boy) and had a Pass from the
Lords of the Admiralty persuant to the late Regulation.

September 4th. 1676.
The Endeavor of Plymouth, Thomas Rowse Master, belonging together with her
Lading to his Majesty's Subjects, was on the 15th. August last in her Course to
Amsterdam, taken by a French Privateer, called the Brave, whereof one La Lander
is Commander, and Carried into Dunkirk.


