A LIST of the Names of those pretended Judges who Sat, and Sentenced to Death,
our Sovereign King CHARLES the First, in the Place which they called the High
Court of Justice, January 27, 1648. And also of those 35 Witnesses Sworn
against the said KING: The Sentence read against him: With the Catalogue of the
Names of those that Subscribed and Sealed the Warrant for his Execution; and
the manner of his Cruel Murder.
The NAMES of the said pretended JUDGES, who gave Sentence against the late
KING, January 27, 1648.
LXXII in NUMBER.
JOHN Bradshaw, Lord President. Oliver Cromwell. Henry Ireton. Sir Hardress
Waller. Valentine Walton. Thomas Harrison. Edward Whaley. Thomas Pride. Isaac
Ewer. Lord Gray of Grooby. William Lord Mounson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Thomas
Maleverer. Sir John Bourcher. Isaac Pennington. Henry Martin. William Purifoye.
John Barkstead. Matthew Tomlinson. John Blackeston. Gilbert Millington. Thomas
Chaloner. Sir William Constable. Edmund Ludlow. John Hutchison. Sir Michael
Livesay. Robert Tichburne. Owen Roe. Robert Lilburne. Adrian Scroop. Richard
Dean. John Okey. John Harrison. John Hewson. William Goffe. Cornelius Holland.
John Carew. John Jones. Thomas Lister. Peregrine Pelham. Thomas Wogan. Francis
Allen. Daniel Blagrave. John Moor. William Say. Francis Lascels. John Chaloner.
Gregory Clement. Sir Gregory Norton. John Venn. Thomas Andrews. Anthony
Stapley. Thomas Horton. John Lisle. John Brown. John Dixwell. Miles Corbett.
Simon Meyne. John Alured. Henry Smith. Humphrey Edwards. John Frye. Edmund
Harvey. Thomas Scot. William Cawley. John Downs. Thomas Hammond. Vincent
Potter. Augustine Garland. Charles Fleetwood. John Temple. Thomas Wait.
Counselors Assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
KING, were
Doctor Dorislans. Mr. Ask. Mr. John Cook, Solicitor. Sergeant Danby,
Sergeant at Arms Clerks to the Court. Mr. Broughton, Mr. Phelpes,
Colonel Humfrey, Sword Bearer.
Messengers, Door-keepers and Cryers, were these;
Mr. Wa^^ord. Mr. Radley. Mr. Pain. Mr. Powell. Mr. Hull. Mr. King.
The SENTENCE against the said KING, January the 27th, 1648. Which was read by
Mr. Broughton, aforesaid, Clerk.
WHEREAS the Commons of England in Parliament, have appointed them an
High-Court of Justice for the Trial of CHARLES STUART, King of England, before
whom he had been Three times Convened; and at the First time a Charge of
High Treason, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors was read in the behalf of the
Kingdom of England, etc. as in the Charge; which was read throughout.

To which Charge, he the said CHARLES STUART was required to give his Answer,
but he refused so to do; and so expressed several Passages at his Trial in
refusing to answer.

For all which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does adjudge, That the said
CHARLES STUART, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public Enemy, shall be
put to Death, by severing his Head from his Body.

The Sentence ( says the President) now read and published, is the Act,
Sentence, Judgment, and Resolution of the whole Court. To which the Members of
the Court stood up and assented to what he said, by holding up their Hands.

The KING offered to speak, but was instantly commanded to be taken away, and
the Court broke up.

THE ROYAL MARTYR UPON THE Scaffold at WHITEHALL.


The true Manner of proceeding to Murder the KING, according to the Sentence
given, as aforesaid.
SIR Hardress Waller, Colonel Harrison, Commissary General Treton, Colonel Dean
and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for the
Execution of the KING, according to his Sentence, given by the ( pretended)
High-Court of Justice.

Painted-Chamber, Monday, January the 29th, 1648.
UPON Report made for the Committee for considering of the Time and Place of
the executing of the Judgment against the KING, that the said Committee have
Resolved, That the open Street before Whitehall is a fit Place: And the said
Committee conceive it fit, That the KING be there executed the Morrow, the KING
having already Notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and ordered a Warrant to be drawn to that Purpose;
which Warrant was accordingly drawn and ag^eed to, and ordered to be Engrossed,
which was done, and signed and sealed accordingly; as follows.

At the High-Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of CHARLES STUART,
King of England, January 29, 1648.
WHEREAS CHARLES STUART, King of England is, and stands Convicted, Attainted
and Condemned of High Treason, and other Crimes; and Sentence on Saturday last
was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by severing his
Head from his Body, of which Sentence Execution yet remains to be done. These
are therefore to will and require you, to see the said Sentence executed in the
open Street before Whitehall, upon the Morrow, being the 30th Day of this
instant Month of January, between the Hours of 10 in the Morning, and 5 in the
Afternoon of the same Day, with full Effect; and for so doing, This shall be
your sufficient Warrant: And these are to require all Officers and Soldiers,
and other the good People of this Nation of England, to be assistant unto you
in this Service. Given under our Hands and Seal.

The NAMES of Thirty-five Witnesses produced and sworn in the said pretended
Court, to give Evidence against the KING.
HENRY Hartford of Stratford upon Avon in Com. Warwick. Edward Roberts of
Bishops Castle in Com. Salop, Ironmonger. William Brains of Wrixall in Com.
Salop, Gent. Robert Lacie of Nottingham, Painter. Robert Loads of Cotram in
Com. Nottingham, Tyler. Samuel Morgan of Wallington in Com. Salop, Feltmaker.
James Williams of Rosse in Com. Hereford, Shoemaker. Richard Pots of Sharpreton
in Com. Northumberland, Vintner. Giles Grice of Wallington in Com. Salop, Gent.
William Arnop of (...) John Hudson of (...) John Winston of Dornotham in Com.
Wilts. George Seeley of London, Cordwainer. John Moor of Cork in Ireland,
Gent. Th^mas Ives of Boyset in Com. Northampton, Husbandman. James Cresby of
Dublin in Ireland, Barber. Thomas Rawlins of Hanslope in Com. Bucks, Gent.
Richard Bloomfeild of London, Weaver. John Thomas of Langallan in Com. Denbigh.
William Lawson of Nottingham, Maltster. John Pinegar of Damer in Com. Derby,
Shoemaker. Humphrey Brown of Whitsundine in Com. Rutland, Yeoman. David Evans
of Abergeveny in Com. Monmouth, Smith. Robert Holmes of (...) Robert Williams
of (...) Samuel Woorden of Lineham in Com. Wilts, Gent. Thomas Read of
Maidstone in Com. Kent, Gent. George Cornwall of Aston in Com. Hereford,
Forgeman. William Jones of Uske in Com. Monmouth, Husbandman. Arthur Young,
Citizen and Barber-Surgeon of London. Diogenes Edwards of Carston in Com.
Salop, Butcher. John Bennet of Harwood in Com. Ebor. Glover. William Cutburt of
Patrington in Holderness in Com. Ebor. Gent. Richard Price of London,
Scrivener. Henry Gouch of Gray's Inn, Gent.
To Colonel Francis Hacket, Colonel Huncks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phayr, and
every of them. Sealed and Subscribed by,
John Bradshaw, President. Thomas Gray. Oliver Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John
Okey. John D^nvers. Mich Lives^y. John Bourcher. Henry Ireton. Tho. Maleverer.
Jo. Blackeston. Jo. Hutchison. William Goffe. Tho. Pride. Henry Smith, Vincent
Potter. William Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. William Cawley. John Barkstead.
Isaac Ewer. Val. Walton. Peter Temple. Tho. Harrison. John Hewson. Per. Pelham.
Richard Dean. Rob. Tichburne. Hum. Edwards. Din. Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will.
Purifoye. Adrian Sc^oop James Temple. Aug. Garland. Edmund Ludlow. Henry
Martin. Jo. Alured. Rub. Lilburne. William Say. Anthony Stapley. Gregory
Norton. Tho. Chaloner. Tho. Wogan. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton. Jo. Jones. Jo.
Mo^r Ha^dress Walter. Gilb. Millington. Chapter Fleetwood. Jo. Venn. Greg. Clement.
Jo. Downs. Tho. Wait. Thomas Scot. John Carew. Miles Corbet. In all Fifty
eight.
Ordered, That the Scaffold on which the KING is to be executed, be covered
with Black.

The Warrant for executing the KING being accordingly delivered to those
Persons to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him according to
the Tenor thereof, about Two a-Clock in the Afternoon, of the said 30th Day of
January, 1648.

The Fatal Day of the said Execution being Tuesday, January the 30th, 1648.
HIS Majesty continued in Prayer all the Morning, and received the Sacrament
just at Ten a-Clock before Noon, he was conveyed on Foot from St. James's
Palace to Whitehall, guarded by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before, part
behind, with Colors flying, and Drums beating, his private Guards of Partisans
about him, and Dr. Juxon (Bishop of London) next to him on one side, and Col.
Tomlinson on the other: Being come to Whitehall, he continued in his
Cabinet-Chamber at his Devotions, refusing to dine, only about 12 a-Clock, he
eat a bit of Bread, and drank a Glass of Claret Wine; from thence he was
conveyed into the Banqueting House, and the great Window enlarged, out of which
he ascends the Scaffold; the Rails being hung round, and the Floor covered with
Black: His Executioners disguised with Vizors, yet was his Majesty not
affrighted: He showed more Care of his People living, than of himself dying;
for looking round about upon the People, whom the vast Guards of Soldiers kept
a great Distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by them, omitting
(probably) what he proposed to have said to them; therefore turning to the
Officers and Actors by him, he addressed himself in a short (but excellent
Speech) which being ended, he then went to Prayers; and after some heavenly
Discourse between him and the Bishop, having prepared himself, he lifted up his
Eyes to Heaven, and praying to himself, he stooped down to the Block, and most
humbly bowed his generous Neck to God, to be cut off by the vizor'd Executioner
(...) done at one Blow. So fell King CHARLES, and thus all (...) with him.


