A LETTER OF ADVICE To a young GENTLEMAN Leaveing the UNIVERSITY, Concerning
his behavior and Conversation in the World.

By R. L.

Dublin, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer, to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook, in Castle-street, 1670.

AN ADVERTISEMENT From the PRINTER.
THe Gentleman concerned in this Paper being assured, that he is not the only
one, that needs these instructions, and that the benefit he reapes by them,
would not be the less by their being public, has so far befriended the world
as to expose them to the view of all: but it being the peculiar fate of
Letters, to be at the dispose of those to whom they are sent, this has not
perhaps those advantages and accessions which would have been given it, had the
Inditer been the Publisher: yet as it is, all kind of Readers will be
entertained, from the usefullness of the Subject, the variety of matter, the
freedom that is taken, and the conciseness of the Suggestions, which will
further oblige them to measure the words, not by their number, but weight. If
this be perused by men that live up to the advises proposed, they cannot but be
confirmed and gratified, to find themselves so luckily transcribed: and if this
falls into the hands of Novies (and such are all once, if experience must make
men wise) this little Vade mecum shall suddenly enrich them with a Treasure of
observations, which they may hourly employ, and continue to do so, even while
they ^^ve: nay all must be gainers here, when they find the good Christian
reconciled to the good Companion, and the ^^^olar taught to be a Gentleman.

It has been observed that elaborate studied discourses have not been so
contributive to wisdom, as the Memoires and private remarks of eminent and
conversing persons, and it is to be wished that they would Communicate their
experiences a little more, and that some would insist on this Subject so
minutely, as to descend to the particulars of behavior that befits men in
their several qualities and professions, this would be a greater kindness to
all Societies, then that which is intended them from the experiments and
modern improvements that are now the boasts and triumphs of some Virtuosi.

To J. L. Esquire at Oxford.
Sir.
YOu have been infinitely advantaged by your Education in the University, which
will have a perpetual good effect upon you, and give you Luster in the eyes of
the world: But that you may be further useful and acceptable to mankind, you
must pare off something you have contracted there, and add also to your own
stores from Observation and Experience, a way of learning as far beyond that
by precept, as the knowledge of a Traveller exceeds that which is gotten by the
Mapp.

An Academick life is an Horizon between two worlds, for men enter upon it
children, and as such they must judge and act, though with difference according
to their own pregnancy, the ingenuity of their teachers, and the manner of
their being taught, and when they pass from thence, they launch into a new
world, their passions at high water, and full of themselves, as young men are
wont to be, and such as are dipped in unusual learning, and if they go on so,
they are lost: Besides that, there is a husk and shell that grows up with the
learning they acquired, which they must throw away, caused perchance by the
childishness of their State, or the Formalities of the place, or the ruggedness
of retirement, the not considering of which has made many a great Scholar
unserviceable to the world.

To propound many Rules for the manage of your self were to referr you back to
the book again, and there is even a native discretion that some are endowed
with, which defends them from Gross absurdities in Conversation, though there
be none but may be helped by some admonitions.

I suppose you to understand the nature of habits and passions; I suppose you
likewise what I know you to be, to be advisable, observant and of a sedate
temper; Therefore you will be sufficiently instructed with a few Intimations:
For he that reflects upon himself, and considers his passions, and accommodates
himself to the world, cannot need many directions. I suppose you also to be
principl'd with Religion and Morality, which is to be valued before any
learning, and is an ease and pleasure to the mind, and always secures a firm
Reputation, let the world be never so wicked: No man ever gains a Reverence
for his vice, but virtue commands it, Vicious men indeed have been popular, but
never for being so, but for their virtues annexed, they administer their
Employments well and wisely, they are civil and obligeing, they are free and
magnanimous, they are faithful and courageous. It is always some brave thing
that recommends them to the good opinion of the world.

The advices I here lay down are rather negative then positive; For though I
cannot direct you where you are to sail throughout your whole course, yet I
may safely show you where you must not split your self. And the first Rock I
discover on which young Scholars shipwreck themselves is Vaunting of the
persons and places concerned in their Education. I therefore advise you to be
spareing in your Commendations of your University, College, Tutor, or the
Doctor you most there admire, for either all is taken for granted, or you only
betray your affection, and partiality, or you impose your Judgment for a
standard to others, you discover what you think, not what they are, an early
kindness may make you as blind as an unjust prejudice, and others will smile to
see you confident of that which it may be they know they can confute. This
holds in all kinds of Commendations, which should be modest and moderate, not
unseasonable, not unsuitable, not hyperbolicall, for an excess here, creates
envy to the person extolled, and is a virtuall detraction from others you
converse with, and your own understanding is measured by it. Nay it is a
presumption in some to commend at all, for he that praises another, would have
him valued upon his own judgment.

Therefore it is a disparagement to be commended by a fool, except he concurs
with the Vogue, or speaks from the mouth of another; you must indeed when you
speak of men's persons (which without provocation should never be) represent
them heartily and fairly, and you are bound to give your friend his due Elogy,
when his fame is concerned, or you are required to do it, or may do him a
kindness in it. But remember that when you give a person a particular character
it receives its estimate from your wisdom, be temperate therefore as well as
just.

When you come into Company, be not forward to show your Proficiency, nor
impose your Academicall discourses, nor glitter affectedly in terms of Art,
which is a vanity incident to young men that have confidence and heat of
temper. Nor on the other hand must you be morose or difficult to give an
account of your self to inquisitive or Learned men; let your answers be direct
and concise, It is both your Wisdom and your kindness to come to the point at
first, only in conferences or debates, speak not all you have to say at once
in an Entire Harangue, but suffer your self to be broached by degrees and keep
an Argument for Reserve; What you say at first may perhaps give satisfaction,
however you gain Respite for Recollection, and when all is out at last, you
will be thought to have more in store.

And because the mouth is the fountain of Our Weal or our Woe, and it is the
greatest instance of prudence to rule that little member the Tongue, and he
indeed is a perfect man that offends not in word, for all our follies and
passions are let out that way, there are many things to be observed in the
manageing of discourse, I only say in General, that you must not speak with
heat and violence, nor with Reflection upon men's persons, nor with Vanity and
self-praise: No man therefore should be his own Historian, that is talk of his
own feats, his travells, his conferences with great men etc, nor boast of his
descent and alliance, nor recount his Treasure, or the manage of his Estate,
all which wears out the greatest patience, and without a provocation expresses
an intolerable Vanity, and implies a beleiving that others are affected and
concerned in these things as much as himself. The like weakness is talking of
ones Trade or profession to those that neither mind it nor understand it.
Indeed if the company be all of one piece then debateing any thing that Relates
to all may be useful, but it is impertinent in mixed company to betray only
your skill or inclination. In like manner he is not to be brook't, that over a
Glass of Wine will turn Statesman or Divine, perplex good fellows with
Intrigues of Government, cases of Conscience, or School controversies which are
too serious, and too sacred, to be the Subjects of common talk? Let no man's
Vice be your Theme, nor your Friends, because you love him, not your Enemies,
because he is so, and in you it will be expounded partiality and revenge, not
of any other, because you are certainly unconcerned in him, and may possibly be
mistaken of him: Let not the Lapses or ridiculous accidents or behaviors of
men that are in drink or in love be taken notice of after, or upbraided to them
in jest or earnest, for no man loves to have his folly remembered, nor to have
the consequences of Wine or passion imputed to him, and he cannot but like you
worse, if he finds they have left an Impression upon you. Every man's fault
should be every man's secret, as he sins doubly that publishes his own shame,
for he adds scandal to the sin, so does every man increase the scandal that
is the propagator of it.

When you carve out discourse for others let your choice be rather of things
then of persons, of Historical matters rather then the present age, of things
distant and remote, rather then at home, and of your Neighbors, and do not
after all these Restrictions fear want of discourse, for there is nothing in
the world but you may speak of it Usefully or pleasantly, every thing (says
Herbert) is big with jest and has wit in it if you can find it out.

As for Behavior, that is certainly best, which best expresses the sincerity
of your Heart, I think this rule fails not, that that kind of Conversation
that lets men into your Soul, to see the goodness of your Nature, and the
Integrity of your mind is most acceptable, for be assured, every man loves
another for his honesty, to this every knave pretends, and with the show of
this he deceives, Nay the sensual love of bad men is founded upon this;
Nothing loves a Body but for a Soul, nor a Soul, but for such a disposition,
as answers to that Idea of goodness which is in the mind.

This is that, that reconciles you to some meens at the first congress, for
usually you read men's Souls in their faces if they be young and uncorrupted,
and you for ever decline some countenances which seem to declare that some Vice
or Passion has the mastery, and though some times you are deceived, yet you
persit in your prepossession till the behavior does signally confute, what the
countenance did threaten.

This makes a starcht formal behavior odious, because it is forced and
unnatural, and assumed as a disguise, and suffers not the Soul to shine
clearly and freely through the outward actions.

First then your actions must discover you to be your own Master, for he is a
miserable slave that is under the tyranny of his passions: And that fountain
teeming pair Lust and Rage must especially be subdued.

That of love (to give it the milder name) so far as it is vicious, I take to
be seated principally in the Fancy, and there you must apply your Cure, for I
ascribe its vehemence not so much to the constitution, as the pampering of the
body, and men's letting loose their Eyes and Tongues and Imaginations upon
amorous Incentives, and not keeping a sense and awe of Religion upon them. For
if you live in an age and place where shame and eivill penalties have no force,
you must have recourse to Religious means and the Grace of God for restraint:
Lust is more distinctly forbidden by our Christianity then any other thing;
Therefore it ought more Sacredly to be avoided.

If you grow troublesome to your self, In Gods name make use of that Honorable
Remedy he has provided, and in the Interim, if you can allay your fancy, and
keep your Inclinations undetermined, I think a promiscuous conversation is the
safest: for many that have lived in the shade and retirement, when they came
abroad were ruined by doting on the first thing they met with, and this is often
the effect of distance and caution.

The other Spring of mischief is anger, which usually flames out from an
untamed pride, and want of manners, and many other untollerable infirmities, so
that there is no liveing in the world without quenching it, for it will render
you both troublesome and ridiculous, and you shall be avoided by all like a
Beast of prey. The Stoics pretend to be successful Eradicators of this
passion, and their Books may be usefully read for tameing it. But themselves
have retained many ill humors behind, which are worse then a transient Rage,
and are most abhorrent from all Society, as Moroseness, Fastidious contempt of
others, Peevishness, Caption, Scurrility, wilfullness etc, which issue from
some tempers, and some principles which men are apt to suck in to feed their
natural dispositions with, whereas the world is not to be entertained with
frowns and dark looks, Be as severe ad intra as you will, but be wholly
complaisant ad extra, and let not your strictness to your self make you
censorious and uneasy to others, thus many mortified men have been very unruly
to the great scandal of what they professed.

Avoid therefore going to Law at your first setting out, for that will teach
you to be litigious before your temper is well fixed, and you will contract an
habit of wrangling with your Neighbors, and at last delight in it like a
Sophister with arguing in the Schools, you may observe many who have entered
upon entangled Estates to become vexatious, and have quite lost the
debonairness of their dispositions.

Be always mild and easy to those that are about you, your Relations and
servants, not only for their sakes but your own, if you be displeased at every
peccadillo you will become habitually froward, which you cannot put off when
you appear abroad, and remember that if you be easy to your self you will be so
to every body else, and you will be welcome every where.

This produces comity and affability which is a great Ornament of Behavior,
this argues you well within, and that you are a lover of mankind: It is a
mixture made up of civilities and freedom, suited to the condition of the
person you converse with, a quality as to modes and circumstances we fetch from
beyond the Seas, for the mere Englishman is supposed to be defective in it: as
being rough in address, not easily acquainted, and blunt even when he oblidges,
though I think it not worth the charge the Gentleman is at that travailes for
it: Nay I am sorry for the poor returns many make, that import hither the air
and carriage, and assurance of the French, therewith quitting their own staple
native commodities of much greater value, the sincerity and generosity of the
English disposition. None is more melted with a civility then an Englishman,
but he loves not you should be verbose and ceremonious in it, take heed
therefore of overacting your civilities to men unconcerned in you, that must
conclude you impertinent, or designing. Freedom is likewise acceptable, and a
great advantage to a converser, We commonly make it the effect of familiarity,
but it should be the cause of it, but prudence must bound it and apply it. Be
free when you speak, when you give, when you spend, when you allow your time
and Company to your friends, let nothing of confinement, formality, or
difficulty be discernd: If you can do a kindness do it at first, that is a
double obligation, and evidences that it was in your heart before it was
suggested to you, the return of thanks will be but cold, if the oblidged finds
that Importunity, necessity, or after reasonings did extort it from you.

If you would have an Interest where you live, there must be legible in all
your actions Justice in your dealings between man and man, this is the cheapest
and the greatest policy, and this alone will secure your Reputation with the
populo, to this purpose I only advise two things.

1. You must be an exact keeper of your word: a promise is a debt which you
should pay more carefully then a Bond, because your honesty and honor are the
security. Be punctual even in small matters, as meeting a friend, restoreing a
book, returning a paper etc. for faileing in little things will bring you to
fail in great, and always render you suspected, and you shall never be
confided in, even when you mean most heartily.

2. Have a special care of your debts, I know scarce any can always avoid
contracting them, but he that neglects them is profligate and undone as to the
world: If you would eat in quiet never run in debt for what you daily consume,
he that is necessitated to this is the proper object of an Alms: when you
borrow, choose rather a rich creditor, and a great debt, then many trifling
debts dispersed among poor people, a poor man's little debt makes the greatest
noise; Deferr not therefore to pay Mechanics etc. their utmost dues, for they
are craveing and clamorous, and confider only your condition in the world and
not your present Exigence.

Prudence must be discernable in your actions as well as justice, and that will
appear in nothing more then in the choice of confidents and dependants; your
most diffusive love to mankind cannot be extended very far, for the Verge of
your knowledge is not, and need not be great, out of acquaintance you choose
Familiars, and out of these you pick friends, and you must not expect them to
be such as are described in books and talked of by Philosophers, that's a
Romantic thing only to be found in Vtopia or the new Atlantis: If any such
are, they must be in a Monastery or Recess, where business and understanding
are in a little compass: It is sufficient for you to find the effect of one
such friend in many. You may cull one out of each of those Eminent professions
that you may be concerned in, and make them your confidents in their several
spears. You go not to a Lawyer for Physic, nor to a Merchant to be resolved
in a case of Conscience, though both do love you and serve you in what they may.

Make no man your friend twice, except the Interruption was through your own
mistake, and you have done penance for it. Every well wisher is not capable of
being made your friend, nor every one that you think is honest and faithful,
there must be a suiting your humor, and a mutual serviceableness, and ability
to give advice and to take it, and such a proportion of temper as that he shall
not, through vanity, or levity, or uncertainty, betray himself or you. He that
is not stanch in preserveing of secrets cannot be a friend, such is a talkative
man that uses his mouth for a sluice to let out all that is in him, this argues a
great weakness in the head, for a shallow understanding presently judges, and
passes sentence, and is positive in it.

Never tell any man you have a secret but dare not tell it, you should either
go further or not have gone so far, and press no man vehemently to keep
concealed what you have committed to him, for that implies you suspect what you
have done, and that you diffide in his prudence: It discovers your value of
things, and provokes him to incontinence and breach of trust, for there is an
Itch in mankind to be greedy of those fruits that are most zealously forbidden,
and some prohibitions do even excite desire.

Reservedness by some is accounted an Art and a virtue, I think it is a fault,
and the symptom of a sullen or stupid nature, and I know it to be unwelcome to
all Societies: I like a plain communicative man, he is useful and acceptable
to the World, and be assured that a dark close reserved man shall never have
friends, no man will take you into his heart that cannot get into yours: let
your Intentions be never so sincere; and I know not what a good man need be
afraid of, if no hurt be in him, no hurt will come out of him.

It is true openheartedness has a Latitude, and discretion must bound it, and
assign its degrees, according to your kindness to them, or their nearness to
you, and none should see all within you, for it may be, infirmity, vice, or
discontent lies at the bottom. Nor is it fit to rush into discourse before
superiors, this is a greater Rudeness then to deny them their place and
respect, the like Reverence must be had to the aged, and most experienced, and
such as speak out of their own profession, neither would I have a man lie open
to the scrutinyes, and pumpings of every pragmaticall Inquisitor: such assaults
must be managed by Art, you must put by the thrusts, by slight rather then
strength, for no force must be discerned, in such cases he that drolls best
evades best; but when a man demurrs at an easy question, and is shye of
speaking his mind, and passes into another shape, when the matter inquired for
is common to all, or prejudicial to none, and when he delivers any thing it
must be received as a great secret, though not fit or worthy to be kept, It
argues him weak and formal, and by his rarities he lays up you may guess at
all his Closet.

From all this you may infer, how far the reporting of news may be
convenient, If you would be popular you must indulge this humor of mankind,
though the young man is not so much the Athenian in this as the aged. If you
live remote from the City have all public occurrences as early as you can, you
oblige your Neighbors by it better then with the greatest entertainment: some
are terrified from speaking what they hear, because it is the trade of
seditious men to spread Rumors and false Reports, I think there needs not such
caution, if what is related be somewhat at distance, or a common concern, or
not evil in it self, and hurts not the fame of others.

Tell no news to one that pretends to be a statesman, and ask none from him,
not the first, for he will seem to know it before, or be angry his Intelligence
was no quicker, not the last, for he thinks secrecy becomes him, and he loves
not to be an Author.

You may guess men's tempers by the strain of their Intelligence. Converse not
therefore with mutinous dispositions, and besure you represent the actions of
your Superiors Heartily, as peace and charity and obedience does oblige you:
let your errors be always on the right hand, for every good child is so far
from exposeing, that without beholding, he endeavors to cover the nakedness of
his father.

It is the method of nature, and all common wealths, that there be a dependence
of the lesser upon the greater, the weak upon the strong: therefore if you aim
at Employments, you must lean upon some besides your own virtue, and have
patrons and assistants to advance you: I know no greater advantage for a
qualified man then to stand in the way, for every man must let out his
affections upon some, and have his creature, and that is chosen by chance or
Fancy. You see when friends meet, their presence does excite a chearfullness
and Vivacity with which they entertain one another, and this speaks their
sincerity better then any words they can utter, this holds proportionably in
all degrees of conversation, take notice therefore of your first accosting any
person, he will be presently inclined to like or dislike, and he cannot but
give some indications of it.

Observe then the eye rather then the tongue, and apply not your self where you
was at first discouraged, if the circumstances of your affair did not cause
it: If you prove the favorite of a great man, desire not the Monopoly of his
Ear, for his mis-adventures will be imputed to you, and what is well done will
be ascribed to himself.

Allow your self some time for business every day; no man should be in the
world that has nothing to do in it, yet never proclaim your self very busy,
for a little hint will serve any that is not much Impertinent, and the less
busy you seem, the more you are admired when your work is dispatched.

Recreation is as necessary as business, which should be rather of the Body,
then the mind, because that suffers most in Sedentary Employments; In this you
must have Respect to the place where you live and your associats there: In some
parts of this Kingdom many of the Gentry understand nothing beyond a Horse or
a Dog, and can talk of nothing besides it, Therefore if you be not a Huntsman
or a Faulkoner you cannot converse with them. Yet this is really better then
the Effeminate divertisements of the City.

Take heed of playing often or deep at Dice and games of chance, for that is
more chargeable then the seven deadly sins; yet you may allow your self a
certain easy sum to spend at play, to gratify friends, and pass over the
winters nights, and that will make you indifferent for the event. If you would
read a man's disposition see him game, you will then learn more of him in one
hour, then in seven years conversation, and little wagers will try him as soon
as great stakes, for then he is off his Guard. Equanimity at play which is not
the effect of use, argues a man manageable for any thing, he that crows and
insults with success is passionate, and is usually the same that fretts and
Quarrels at misfortunes.

All Society is linked together with some common thing that entertains them,
thus eating and especially drinking is become the Ligament of Conversation. In
this you are daily concerned in some degree, let this be with a visible
chearfullness and pleasantness, for that is wholesome both for body and mind,
as Physicians and Divines will inform you. It will make you welcome to all,
and by this many accomplish their ends upon the world.

Be not over critical about eating, for an Epicure is very troublesome; though
this Luxurious age bath made it a piece of learning, yet me thinks it is much
below a brave man to be anxious for his palate and to have his thoughts and
pleasures confined to a dish of meat. Judge rather for health then pleasure,
and disquiet none with disparageing the food, or niceness about it, and be not
much afraid of the unwholesomeness of what is set before you except it be your
constant diet, for usually you see nothing but some will commend it, and our
common tables furnish us with nothing that a temperate eater may not eat with
safety.

Confine none when you drink to your Measures, and expect not that others
should do as you do, it is both uncivil and unreasonable to impose on Company,
nor yet must you seem to be under any Restraint by them, But be flexible to the
Inclinations of the whole and that with readiness. Every man should keep a
stint, he that palliates it, is most pleasant, yet if you publicly declare
your resolution not to trespass beyond your measures, when you are found to
command yourself, you will not be solicited any further, when you have come up
to your standard, recede silently, and do not magisterially oblige the Company
to break up with you, much less stay to be an unconcerned Spectator of their
Levities, but give others the same liberty, your self desires to take.

I might extend such kind of observations to many other Subjects, but I must
desist, begging your pardon for playing the Dictator, and being so dogmaticall
in what I utter, I know they will not fit all men, nor do they pretend to cure
all faults, nor are they designed to express your needs; But they may prevent
Inconveniences, and help you to read men, and discover where they fail, and
let you see what Relishes with the world. They are obvious and easy in
themselves, for nice and subtle things do not guide mankind, but plain and
common Rules, and by Analogy with these laid down you may judge of other
matters as they Occurr. And I cannot but acquaint you, that they are the effect
of your worthy Fathers Influence on me, who, extending his paternall care to
all Circumstances for your good, engaged me upon your Quitting your Academick
station, to propound to you some directions concerning Conversation. And I have
pitched upon such as are grounded on virtue, yet tend to render you acceptable
even to the worst, and he has done me honor in judgeing me capable of speaking
to this Subject: If they accomplish not the utmost I intended, at least they
will do no hurt, but discover my own private sense, and be a testimony of that
kindness which is oweing to your Relations, by

Your unfeigned friend and Servant. R. L.


