A LIST Of the Persons Intercommuned and declared Fugitives, since the year
16^4. for not compearing before the Council, or Commissions of Council, to
answer for Conventicles and such like Disorders: Whose Names are appointed to
be affixt by Sheriffs and other Magistrates, upon the publict places of
Judicature, that they may not have the benefit of the Lw in any Process; and
who are to be seized upon, and secured until they submit themselves to the
Laws, and be relaxed from the Horn.
Follows the Names of such as are Denounced and Intercommuned.
Ministers Intercommuned, are,
Mr. James Kirktoun. Mr. Alexander Lennox. Mr. John Rae. Mr. David Home. Mr.
Edward Jameson. Mr. Robert Lockhart. Mr. John Walwood. Mr. John Weir. Mr.
Andrew Donaldson. Mr. Thomas Mcgil. Mr. James Wedderburn. Mr. Thomas Douglas.
Mr. Francis Irwing. Mr. Alexander Bartrim. Mr. Alexander Wilson. Mr. David
Williamson. Mr. Alexander Moncrief. ^ Mr. Thomas Hog in Ross. Mr. George
Johnstoun. Mr. Robert Gillespy. Mr. John Ross. Mr. Thomas Hog in Stirling
Shire. Mr. William Erskin. Mr. John Mckillikin. Mr. James Donaldson. Mr. Andrew
Anderson. Mr. Andrew Mortoun. Mr. Donald Cargil. Mr. Robert Maxwels, elder and
younger. James Frazer of Braes. Mr. John King.
The Persons underwritten, Intercommuned, for the most, part dwell in Fife.
Sir John Kirkaldy of Grange elder. (...)Hamiltoun of Kinkel. John Arnots of
Pitgruvies elder and younger. Archbald Arnot in Newburgh. Mr. Thomas Arnot in
Collessie. Andrew Arnot Merchant in Kirkaldy. Thomas Schaw elder, of Gospitry.
David Schaw his son. Hary Schaw in Balgony. William Shithrum in Lundymilne.
John Miller in Dinork. Andrew Kinneir Merchant in St. Andrews. John Thomson in
Fawfeild. (...)Douglas portioner of Colsey. Thomas Blyth Heretor in Kenoway.
(...)Weims Lady Colvil of Cleish. John Adam Bailie of Stramiglo. James Pride in
nether Urquhart. David Covintry in Arlary. John Henderson there. Robert Stark
in the Milns of Forth. William Page in Couper of Fife. John White there.
Richard Clidesdail there. (...)Lady Balcanquel. Colonel Robert Halket. John
Smith in Dundie. John Balfour in Lethum. (...)Wardlaw, Heretor in Kirktoun.
(...)Colvil Lady Bailie in Dinno Paroch. James Grieve in St. Andrews. Mr. James
Bonnar of Greigstoun. John Scot in Lathons. (...)Riddel Lady Collerny. David
and Alexander Campbels in Kirkaldy (...)Simmer of Brathness. William Crawfurd
of Powmiln. John Lundy in Baldestard. Mr. James Lenthron and Hellen Ingles his
Spouse. John Colveer of Lochgelly. Dame Anna Riddel Lady Collerny. (...)Ladys
Unthanks elder and younger. John Balfour of Kinloch, in Collasy Paroch. Danse
Margaret Ferqultard, Lady Halhill.
The persons underwritten, Intercommuned, are residenters in the Shires of
Stirling and Linlithgow.
William Livingstoun of Green Yards. (...)Ferquharson of Sheilbrae. James
Somervel at the boat of Cardross. Hary Dow of Wester-polder. John Doik
portioner of Murdistoun. The Lady Pittendreich in Logy Paroch. James Mure
portioner of Burdistoun. John Starks elder and younger of Balknok. Francis
Galloway of Tode-hauch. Simon Alexander Fewar in Kirklistoun. James Wilkie
tenent in Cliftounhal.
The persons underwritten, for the most part are residenters in Fife, and are
denunced, but not intercommuned, viz.
Robert Sands in Malmuth: James and John Ures in Blairgoth: David Shanks in
Culross. William Burn Merchant there. David Mitchel Chamberlain there. Robert
Blae Maltman, late Bailie there. Hary and James Gallotries there. William Adam
Merchant there. Gilbert Nidrie there. Adam Pearson Maltman there. Margaret
Anderson Relict of Robert Sands there. James Cowie and his spouse there. Thomas
Mitchel and his spouse in the said Paroch. Richard Bennet Baxter there, and his
spouse. James Layng in Balquharn. John Paterson in third part. Patrick Mcrae in
Balquharn. Matthew Provan in Dalmuir. John Henderson in Kilbin. The Lady
Mengertoun. William Fairsoul in nether Pratus. James Miles in Kilme^ie. Henry
Corbie there. James Thomson, Alias Stirling in Kirkaldy. Matthew Anderson
there. James Miller there. Adam Findlay in Kirkady. Thomas Kirkaldy in Grange.
Katherin Mitchel Spouse to Balbedy. John Ross and his Spouse in Bruntisland.
Grizel Orrok Spouse to John Angus there: Elpeth Allan Spouse to John Allan
there: Margaret Melvil Spouse to Thomas Dewar there: Isobel Mitchelson Spouse
to Magnus Ayton there: Mr: Thomas Nairn, Margaret, Jean, and Mary Nairns there:
Margaret Phin in Abe^dour, Margaret and Ann Barclays, her daughters: Andrew
Turnbul in Broomhall: John Wilkie Tailor in Dumfermling: William Bruce merchant
in Culros. James Graige there: Mr: James Wedderburn in Couper: Mr: Alexander
Wilson there: Thomas Scot in Pendreich: William Scot in Easter Fordel: David
Edward in Pittulloch John Mowbray in Strathmiglo John Henderson in Arlary:
James Rodger in nether Raderine: James Adam there: John Ramsay in Weitfoot:
Hary Halkertoun in Greigstoun: John Henderson in Pitcothie: George Heining and
Agnes Russel his Spouse: Thomas Wilson and Robert Watt: Alexander and James
Balfours in Gilstoun: John and John Hendersons in Stentoun: Michael Henderson
and John Morison: James Ireland and James Ness: David Reid and John Murray: Mr:
David Watson and Euphan Mortoun: Mary Greig and Agnes Steinson: Mr: James and
Margaret Allanes: Lowrance Hay: Thomas and James Weddels: Margaret Sibbald and
Robert Horn: John Miller in Magus: Andrew Trail in Ceres Town: Alexander Farin
in Tesismilne: William Beaty in Ceres miln. David Edward tennent in Pittulloch.
(...)Lindsay elder and younger of Dowhil. Umphray Murray in Aughtermughty.
Mistress (...) Colvil in Balvaird. George Simson in the Man. James Reid in
Tullirie. Mr. John Gray, late Minister at Orwel. William Duncan called Barron.
Alexander and John Thomsons in the mains of Cleish. Robert Barclay in the town
of Culross. David Barclay in Kininmont. James Barclay in Beeth. Robert
Robertson tennent to Balbedie in Bingrie Paroch. James Reid tennent there.
Robert Meldrum there. William Paton tennent to the Lady Colvil of Cleish. David
Lundy in Cuthil in Orval Paroch. George Gibson in Bingrie Paroch. James Nory in
Tilliboil Paroch. James Badie, tennent to the Lady Colvir^ In Cleish. Andrew
Beatson in that Paroch. Henry and John Bennets at the Bridge-end of Cairny. Mr.
Samuel Nairn brother to the Lord of Sunfoord: Mr: James Rimer in Pitlethy:
James Thomson tennent to Lathallen: (...)Miller Limegrieve at Pitlessie:
William Beatie in Ceeresmiln: Thomas Ness in Cessintully: James Ness in the
Tesis: John Wishart in Calrinch: David Reddy, lymer in Radernie:
List of Persons declared Fugitive, in the Shires of Lanerk and Dumbarton.
Robert Hamiltoun of Ardry: George Pollok in Water-foot: John Bogle younger in
boglesholl: Robert Hamiltoun in Spitle of Camslaing: John Sprewl, apothicary in
Glasgow: John Iohnstoun elder, merchant there. Robert Guiding maltman there:
John Baxter in Keppok: Steven Rowand elder, in the west end of meikle Govan:
John Drew merchand in Glasgow: Thomas Blakwel merchand there: William Stirling
merchand there: Patrick Brice maltman there: Andrew Scot merchand taylour
there: Cuthbert Campb^l merchand there: Mr: Thomas Smith apothicary there:
Patrick Thomson merchand there: John Balmanno candlemaker there: Matthew Cumine
merchand there: James Boil merchand there: John Peddy merchand there: Iean
Stirling Relict of Achintoshan: Archbald Calhoun in Kilpatrick: Gavin
Walkinshaw in Cothney: John and Robert Mcraes in Balwhanry: Patrick Laing in
Kilpatrick: George Mcnair in Dalmuir: James Mcldoe in Kilpatrick:
List of Persons declared Fugitive in Galloway.
Mr. William Gordon of Earlstoun William Gordon of Holm: John Gordon of
Over-bar: (...)Neilson of Corsack: George Mccartney of Blaiket: (...)Maxwel of
Hill: Thomas Hay of Park: Patrick Mcdowgal of Freuch: (...) Mcdowgal of (...)
James Iohnstoun sometime Provost of Stranvairer: William Spittle at the port:
(...)Iohnstoun, Collector there: Mr: William Cathcart: The Lady Cranfurdstoun:
Mr: Thomas Vernor, sometime Minister at Balmaclellan:
List of Persons declared Fugitives in Linlithgow and Stirling Shires.
James Dalein there: Thomas Mowbray in Carloury: William Carmichael: David
Lindsay: Alexander Reid younger: Alexander Jaffray: Patrick Listoun: James
Lindsay: James Tennant: William Lin and Margaret Clerkson:
All Residenters in and about Kirklistoun.
John and Andrew Buchannans. James Foster in blairquarter. David Robertson in
Dashers. James Mitchel in Gargunok. Arthour Dowgal in Armannel. Mr. George
Barclay Minister. Robert Forrester of Bankheid, alias thretty aikers. Adam Bad
in Carbrok.

