A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, July 26. 1668.

In Defense of the LITURGY of our CHURCH.

BY RICHARD LINGARD, P.P. D.D. And Dean of Lismore.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Duck-Lane, 1668.

II CHRON. XXIX. 30. Moreover Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the
Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the words of David and of Asaph the
Seer: and they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their Heads and
Worshipped.


THAT the Structure of the ensuing Discourse may be advanced upon a good
foundation, it may be worth our while to determine, how far the abrogation of
the Jewish Religion does extend, and what are those Rites and Usages which we
Christians may safely transcribe from thence, without Judaizing and endangering
our Profession: This will be resolved by observing, that there was a twofold
service of God among the Jews, Ceremonial, and Moral; the Ceremonial consisted
in Sacrifices and Offerings, etc. and all that Digest of Mosaical Rudiments, a
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, which Moses did particularly
delineate according to the pattern in the Mount; and was to be managed only by
the Sons of Aaron, and was to be confined to their Tabernacle or Temple, in the
place that the Lord their God should choose; and nothing here was left to the
discretion of the Church and succeeding Ages, but was to be observed most
punctually as Moses had commanded, without any accession or diminution.

Now this being Figurative and Typical, representing (...) things to come; and
being protestations of Faith in a future Messiah, they were to expire when
Christ came; and therefore de jure were cancelled at Christ's Passion, being
nailed to his Cross; and the whole body of them were de facto buried at the
Destruction of the second Temple, never to be raised again, but to be left with
Christ's Grave Clothes in the Sepulcher; so that a re-calling them out of those
Ruins, a raking them out of the ashes of the Temple to observe them, would not
only be dangerous, but deadly; a protestatio facto contraria, a pregnant denial
of Christ's being come.

The Moral service of God consisted in Prayers, and Praises, in Benedictions,
and Vows, and Adorations, which Nature teaches every rational Creature should
tender unto his Maker; and the obligation to this is immutable and perpetual,
by virtue of that (...) (as Hierocles speaks) that Oath of Allegiance and
Fealty that Men make to God as soon as they are made.

Now the manner of performing this among the Jews, was much distant from that
of their other service, as being supposed by Moses, and to be but collected
from him; and though it was darkly insinuated by him, yet (says Maimonides)
Invocation and Prayer was primariae intentionis, principally intended, as being
more grateful to God, Psalm. 69.30, 31. I will praise the name of God with Song,
and magnify him with Thanksgiving; this shall please the Lord better then a
Bullock that has Horns and Hoofs. However, it was left to the Prudence of the
Church, and the Jews say, it was founded only on that general precept, to serve
the Lord with all the heart, Deuteronomy. 11.13. Cultus cordis est precatio; but the
number, and the form, and the time was not specifyed; therefore the management
of this was the peculiar Province of their Prophets and Wise Men; it was their
work to instruct the People, and reprove their sins, and press them to
Spiritual Obedience, at such times when the People might repair to them, 2
Kings 4.22. to praise God also with Psalms and Songs, and to pray with and for
the People, so Genesis 20. 7. 1 Kings 18.29, 36. 1 Samuel 12.19.23. And all this was
not confined to the Temple, but was performed in their high places, the Schools
of the Prophets, their Colleges and Synagogues: so that this service, having it
forms and determinations, its parts and increments from Prophets and inspired
persons, could not but be consonant to the divine will: thus David's introducing
of Music into this service, was owned for the Commandment of the Lord by his
Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 29.25.

Admitting therefore this distinction of the service of the Tabernacle, and of
the Synagogue; the first was entirely abolished, but the usages and customs of
the second were not so destroyed or disturbed, but might remain as patterns to
be assumed still, so far as they fitted the ends of Christianity. Thus when
Christ introduces his own Scheme of Reformation, like a true Reformer he does
not widen the breach, but reduces the differences into as small a compass as
may be, and was therefore willing to retain such Rites and Observations as
contradicted not his economy and dispensation.

Thus learned men do declare, that the Government of the Christian Church was
modeled according to that of the Synagogue, that our practice of
Excommunication does correspond with the Jewish, that our blessed Lord did
elevate and adopt his Sacraments out of their Institutions; Baptism being
derived from their manner of initiating Proselytes; and in the Lords Supper,
that the whole action of Christ's, was in pursuance of the Jewish Rites, is so
certain, that I think no learned man at this day does doubt of it.

So here it was not intended by Christ and his Apostles to baulk their example
in celebrating of praises and prayers to God; for seeing the Moral service of
God is to be the constant employment of all Christians, and in the manner of it
the Jewish Church is a laudable president, it is but reasonable for us to serve
God in that way, which we are sure was once acceptable to him. And thus I come
to the Text, wherein we have a Service,

1. Imposed and commanded by Authority, Hezekiah the King, etc. commanded the
Levites to sing praise.

2. Composed and prescribed in it self; they are to sing praise, with the words
of David and of Asaph the Seer. And therein consider it, 1. As a determined
form, 2. In the manner of its administration, and this will be a competent
justification of the Service of our Church;
for none ever quarrelling with the matter of it, as if it contained any thing
contrary to the Christian Faith, the exception must be, 1. That it is a set,
solemn, and composed form, or, 2. That the manner of performing it is
inconvenient: therefore if any here with the Jewish Children shall say, What
means this Service?
what is the ground of this procedure in your holy Offices? it will be
sufficiently defended to be (as S. Paul speaks, Romans 12.1.) a rational Service,
if I can demonstrate that by these measures God was worshipped among the Jews,
and that the Christian Church did, and always intended to follow the Example.

Consider then the words of David and Asaph, 1. as a form of serving God; and
of this I shall give account in these ensuing Propositions.

1. The serving God by prescribed forms of prayer and praise, has been the
constant practice of the Jews ever since they were a Church; for not to enquire
into the Invocations of God in the time of Enos, and the occasional Devotions
of the Patriarchs,

1. When the Jews came to be formed into a Church by Moses, they had their
forms. Moses was a Prophet as well as a King, and the Chair of Moses was a
Chair of Doctrine as well as Government: he makes a prayer fitted for the State
of the Jews in the Wilderness, Psalm. 90. and a Form of Thanksgiving, Exodus 15.
and a Song which he spoke in the ears of the people, Deuteronomy. 32. unto verse. 44.
thus there is a form of prayer at presenting the First Fruits, Deuteronomy. 26.5. at
paying the third years Tyth, Deuteronomy. 26.13, 14. for expiation of uncertain
Murder, Deuteronomy. 21.7, 8. at removing and resting of the Ark, Number. 10.35, 36.
There was also a precise form of benediction from which the Priests must not
vary, Number. 6.23, 24. On this wise shall ye bless the people, etc. It determines
the manner (say the Rabbis) as well as the words, on this wise. 1. Standing
up, 2. In the holy Tongue, 3. Their hands lifted up, and their fingers spread
abroad, 4. With a loud voice, 5. Their faces toward the people, 6. And with
the Name Jehovah, if in the Sanctuary, and still with the same words without
addition or alteration.
They were to have prayers also attending their Sacrifices, solemn confessions
of sin over the Scapegoat for the people, and over the sin offerings for the
Priests: the high Priest was to make confession of his own sins, and another
for the sins of the Priests, Lev. 16.6.21. All which were in solemn forms, to
be found in the Jewish Writings, and are set down by P. Fagius on the Chal.
Paraphrase.

2. Proceed we on to the time of David, and then we find considerable
improvements made in this Service, all prescribed; for he joins the moral
service of God with the legal: the Levites who had had nothing to do when the
Ark and the Tabernacle were now fixed at Jerusalem, were appointed by course to
stand every morning and evening to thank and praise the Lord, at all burnt
Offerings, Sabbaths, and New Mons, and set Feasts, 1 Chro. 23.30. and 16.4.
And the Sons of Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun were appointed to prophecy with
Harps, and Psalteries, and Cymbals, and were instructed in the Songs of the
Lord, 1 Chro. 25.1.6, 7. These Songs were composed by David and Asaph, and
those Singers that had the Spirit of Prophecy, and they became the fixed Liturgy
of the Church. So 1 Chro. 16.7. there is the first Psalm that David delivered
into the hand of Asaph, and the rest were directed to the chief Musician; and
though the titles of many are hard, as signifying probably the names of the
Instruments or Tunes to which they were sung; yet there are that signify also
the purpose of their inditing, so the Psalm for the Morning, Psalm. 22. and the
Sabbath, Psalm. 92. and those of degrees, which, say the Rabbis, were sung on
the fifteen steps that went up to the court of the Priests; and in the ordinary
course, on the first day of the week was sung the Psalm. 24. on the second day,
Psalm. 48. on the third, Psalm. 82. on the fourth, Psalm. 94. on the fifth, Psalm.
81. on the sixth, Psalm. 93. and on the seventh, the Song for the Sabbath day,
Psalm. 92. What was thus ordained by David, was confirmed by Solomon, 2 Chronicles.
7.6. and revived by Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. etc.

3. Let us come at length to Ezra, and the second Temple, then this was
likewise practiced; for Ben Syrach most punctually describes the service,
Ecclus. 50. and when the Foundations of the second Temple were laid, Ezra 3.10,
11. and Nehemiah 12.45, 46. they sung by course, For. his mercy endures for
ever; and the Singers kept the word of their God, according to the Commandment
of David, etc. I shall add two things concerning their Prayers then; [that]

1. The People returning from the Captivity, by conversing with strangers had
broken and corrupted their Language; had therefore certain forms of Prayer
devised by Ezra, and enjoined by the Sanhedrim, which then consisted of
Prophets and Good Men, and were constantly to be used by the People, as preces
officii necessario praestandi, and these were called the eighteen Benedictions;
so styled, because their Prayers began usually with (Blessed be thou O Lord God
King of the World) the three first, and the three last related to the Glory of
God; the other twelve requested humano generi necessaria, good things fit for
all Men: these, by all Jews are ascribed to Ezra, and it is acknowledged by our
Adversaries, afterward the number did increase; Gyamaliel adding one, and
others more, till at last they are swollen up to the number of an hundred
Benedictions, which are to be repeated every day by every Jew; and this is
practiced to this day amongst them, as Buxtorf witnesses in his Jewish
Synagogue. 2. The People used forms of Prayer in the Temple; for that being an
house of Prayer, and there being hours appointed for Prayer, there must be
Prayers appointed for those hours; thus the People were Praying without at the
time of Incense, Luke 1.10. vid. Rev. 8.3, 4. Now that these were common and
prescribed, we are assured from the Rabbis, who are the most competent
witnesses of their own Religion; for they say, that beside the repeating the
Decalogue and their Philacteries, they had Prayers, particularly three, which
were to be used at the time of Incense, called Emeth, Gnabodah, and Shem
Shalom, because they began with those words; they are set down by Lightfoot in
his Description of the Temple-service, Cap. 9.
Seldom indeed from Maimonides acquaints us, that there was precatio ultronea,
as well as imperata, but so qualifyed, as highly confirms our present purpose;
as,

1. Those voluntary Prayers were not to be on Sabbaths and Feasts, because the
Law had provided for them, and nothing that was arbitrary was then admitted. 2.
They were not to be admitted with appointed Sacrifices; for they had set
Prayers, but voluntary Sacrifices; Free Will Offerings might have free and
unprescribed Prayers. 3. The whole Congregation might not use these arbitrary
Prayers, and Maimon. gives the reason, because by the Law the whole Assembly
could offer no Sacrifice but what was prescribed. 4. This arbitrary Prayer
seems not to be of present Conception, but as was the Sacrifice, so was the
Prayer, prepared, though not prescribed. A Prayer is the better for being
considered of, it cannot be the worse: Such was the Prodigals Prayer, he comes
with a set speech, Father I have sinned against Heaven, etc. he had digested,
and considered before what he should speak, and he delivers the very same
words, Luke 15.18. So says God, Take with you words, and turn unto the Lord,
and say, take away iniquity, receive us graciously, and so will we render the
calves of our lips, Hosea 14.2.
2. Prop. Christ himself did approve of, and conform unto the Jewish practice
in this particular: sure none can imagine that he would have kept to the Jewish
forms if they had been faulty; when he delivers the Doctrine of Prayer, he
reprehends the Heathens for Battology, and the Pharisees of vainglory in their
Prayers, but decries not their forms; he was present at the Temple, and in
their Synagogues, not only at their ordinary service, but at their Sabbaths and
Festivals, without any dislike: He prescribes a form of Prayer to his Disciples
for their use, as well as imitation. Concerning that Prayer, observe two things,

1. Observe that the expressions of this Prayer are taken out of the Jewish
forms: Drusius, Capellus, and our Gregory, collect the words of this Prayer out
of Sepher Tephilloth, and Musar; their Prayer-Books borrowed not from Christ,
but it was usual with him to use their known Phrases and Forms of Speech; so
far was he from affecting any unnecessary novelty.

2. Remember that this Prayer was in express words twice given his Disciples;
Mat. 6. he delivers it in the Sermon on the Mount, when discoursing on Prayer;
but Luke 11. it was at another time, on another occasion, at the request of his
Disciples, teaching them to Pray as John taught his; and he gives not only the
Heads of Prayer, but a Prayer it self, and so it is not only a rule to Pray by,
but a form to Pray in.

Christ's own practice also speaks his approbation; he Sang an Hymn with his
Disciples Mat. 26.30. supposed to be the great Hallelujah, from Psalm 113. to
Psalm 119. however it was a known Form that his Disciples knew to join in: so
when he Prayed most earnestly, he used the same words thrice, Mat. 26.44. his
complaint on the Cross was from Psalm 22. and when he gave up the Ghost, he
commended his Spirit in a Form of words, from Psalm. 31.5.

3. Prop. While the Apostles lived, there was in the Church an extraordinary
gift of Prayer that supplied the place of stated Forms; for among the spiritual
gifts that were then poured out, there was (...), says Saint Chrysostom, a gift
of Prayer, a branch of the gift of Tongues; and he that had it, prayed for the
rest, and (...), taught others to form Prayers; and this was praying in the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude v. 20. thus he understands, Romans 8.26. The Spirit
helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should Pray for as we ought. 1
Cor. cap. 14. there is a full account of these inspirations in the Christian
Assemblies; and there is mentioned, praying in an unknown Tongue, and pray with
the Spirit, and bless with the Spirit, v. 14.15, 15. For all the parts of Gods
service consisting in Prayers, and Prophecyings, and setting forth Gods praises
by Psalms, all these were performed by extraordinary Inspirations, and are
there enjoined to be done orderly, and for edification; and it was certainly
then most fit they should be guided as infallibly in their Devotions, as in
their Faith.

4. Prop. But as these Inspirations withdrew, so set composed Forms succeeded
in the Church, according to the Jewish President; for if the Apostles
themselves had this extraordinary gift, because they were not fit to be trusted
with their own natural endowments, when these gifts surceased, every Man was
not to Pray in public as he pleased, but Liturgies were provided by the
Governors of the Church, Apostolical Men that had benefited under the Prayers
of those that had the gift, and remembered some passages, at least the order and
manner that had been used by them. Therefore I lay no stress on the supposed
Liturgies of St. Peter, St. Mark, and St. James, though some expressions from
them might have caused such imputations; and the body of those offices were
used in the Churches where those Holy Men Presided as Bishops. But when St.
Paul directs Timothy to provide that Supplications, and Prayers, and
Intercessions, and Thanksgivings be made; he intends that public offices of
Devotion should be constantly used, for averting evil, and for procuring good
things; interpellations for others, and returning acknowledgments for mercies
received, 1 Timothy 2.8. which St. Austin applies to the Eucharist, and the Prayer
that then was for all estates of Men, which we still retain in that for the
Catholic Church: This was from the beginning, and is mentioned in the
Constitutions called Apostolical (which though not so ancient as they pretend,
yet certainly describe the first Ages of the Church) particularly Kings were
there Prayed for, that God would grant them in health and wealth long to live,
vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum
fidelem, probum populum, orbem quietum, Tert. and whatsoever are the wishes of
Prince or People.

We find Forms for the Sacraments, besides the words of Institution; in Baptism
there are known Forms of Interrogation and Abrenunciation, Constitut. Apost.
Tertul. Cypr. and in the other there is, solennis benedictio, Cypr. which
always had the Lords Prayer annexed to it: So there were also Forms for several
sorts, Catechumeni, Hearers, Penitents, etc. and Believers had their regular
Prayers with which they besieged God, quasi mann facta, as with an Army,
Tertul. This was (...) in Ignatius, (...) in Justin. Mart. (...), in Origin.
Con. Cells. l. 6. p. 302. and it must be remembered that these Prayers were
performed by the Deacon: from whence a most judicious Man well infers, that
they were set and prescribed, and not left to the discretion and ability of
those in so mean rank, it being no ways fit that they should direct the Prayers
of those that presided in the Church.

I need not therefore take Sanctuary at the Laodicean Canons, nor the after
Liturgies of many Churches; nor will I argue that set Forms are helps to the
weak and bashful, that cannot or dare not express their minds in public;
Directories to regulate our requests, and keep them from Temerity, Error, or
Impertinency, preservatives of Unity and Unanimity in the Church; when with one
lip we call upon God, all speaking the same thing, being perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. but I urge,
that when it appears Gods Ancient People have had set Forms, and they are
approved of by Christ, and introduced into the Christian Church, and admitted
in all places, and rejected in no Ages; nay, their convenience never doubted or
disputed of till this last Generation; it is the greatest wilfulness, or the
greatest weakness, not to submit unto them.

2. Consider this Form in the manner and circumstances of its Administration;
the first I shall mention is found in the Text, 1. Singing Praise unto the
Lord. Thus Hymns are defined by St. Austin, to be Cantus concinentes laudem
Dei, they must be Praise, they must be of God, and they must be Sung. That
Singing and Music in Gods service was the Jewish Practice, none can deny; that
Christians did derive this from them is very evident, for besides the example
of the Angels, Luke 2.13. and Christ, Mat. 26.30. and the Saints that Sing the
Song of Moses and the Lamb, Rev. 14.3. and 15.3. it was the Christians Practice
when the Inspirations lasted, 1 Cor. 14.26. and they are enjoined to teach and
admonish one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, Col. 3.16. Thus
the Jews had [Mizmor] a concise verse, called here a Psalm [Tehillah] Praise,
which is here the Hymn, and [Shir] a Canticle, which is here required to be
Spiritual in opposition to the sensual Songs and Drolleries of the Heathens in
their Bacchanalia; and they are mentioned in the most Ancient Church-Writers,
as a special part of the Christian service; and this is testified by Pliny to
Trajan, that in their coetus antelucani, they were wont to sing Hymns to
Christ, as to God, and for this they are quarrelled with by Paulus Samosatenus
in Eusebius, l. 7. c. 29. Afterward in the Loadicean Council, there are
authorized Canonical Singers, that shall sing at the Desk out of the Parchments
and Rolls of the Church, Can. 15. and when they were thus regulated, Holy Men
composed Hymns, and Anthems, as St. Hillary, and St. Ambrose, to the great
comfort and edification of the Church.

I shall leave these Memories with you concerning this Practice.

1. There was a degree of Inspiration peculiar to this among the Jews, when Men
were Transported to endite Psalms, and speak the Praises of God, and Divine
things to his Glory, without any ecstasy or abolition of sense; this is called
the Holy Spirit. Thus Saul, the seventy Elders, and Eldad, and Medad
Prophesied; and hence the word Prophecy came to signify the Singing of
Psalms, and all that proportion which in the division of S. Scripture, is
called (...), was endited by this Inspiration: this David had, 2 Samuel 23.2. and
prayed should not be taken away from him, Psalm. 51.11.

2. Those things that were thus uttered, were often in the Form of Poems, and
confined to number and Meter; thus Moses his Songs were in verse and measure,
and though I do not ascribe the beginnings of Music to him, Genesis 4.21. Job 35.
10. and 38.7: yet, as he first found out the use of Letters, so I make him the
first Poet in the World. Thus also the Songs of Solomon, and David, and the
Book of Job were metrical; so Josephus says of David(...), he composed Verses
in several kinds of Meter, some Trimeters, some Pentameters, Antiq. 7.10.

3. The same expressions would be often insisted on, and there might be an
elegancy in the Music or the Verse to repeat the same: if in our Prayers,
using of Ingeminations, and enforcing the same Petitions, when we importune
Heaven, and would excite our Devotions, and the sense of our Condition, be a
commendable piece of Rhecorick, much more in Hymns and Anthems: so Psalm. 136.
David uses twenty six times the same words [For his Mercy endures for ever] in
Deborahs Song, Jud. 5.27. At her Feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down, at her
Feet he bowed, he fell, where he bowed, there he fell down Dead; a like
instance is Psalm. 47.6, 7. Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto
our King, sing praises: For God is King of all the Earth, sing ye praises with
understanding. And there might be a great Grace and Elegance in dwelling upon
the same words, though we that Trade in Translations may not perceive it; for
they, like Arras, with the wrong side out, discover only some great lines, but
the gloss and beauty cannot be discerned.

4. The matter of these Psalms were not always of the same Nature, not always
depredications of Gods Name; but sometimes things Doctrinal, and for
Instruction, and some things for Consolation, Confessions of Faith, and
Confessions of Sin, as well as Confessions of Praise, Petitions and
Supplications. Therefore Singing Prayers ought not to be strange; for the
Penitential Psalms, and the Titles of many others, as Psalm. 86. and 102. and
142. and the Psalmists frequent addresses to hear his Prayers, abundantly
confirm this; so that it is not the matter that distinguishes them from the
other parts of the service, but the manner of performing them.

5. The Music with which they were managed, must answer the ends of Religion,
and be for Edification; all wanton Music therefore that tends to effeminacy,
and softning Men's Minds, such as the Phrygians used, called (...), is to be
banished: Mutata Musica mut antur mores; itaque curandum, ut Musica quam
gravissima and sedatissima retineatur, says Tully. For this reason St. Austin
commends the Chanting at Alexandria, that pronuncianti vicinior esset quam
canenti.

What it was with the Jews is not easy to determine; I find there could be no
less then twelve voices, one Cymbal, two Harps, and nine Psalteries, but there
might be many more: As for the Trumpets, which might be 120. I conceive they
were no part of the Quire, there could be no Singing to them, for (as the
Jewish Doctors inform us) there were three rests or intermissions in the
Singing of every Psalm, and at each of these pauses the Trumpets sounded, and
the People Worshipped; so the Trumpets sounded not but when the Quire was
silent.

6. Remember that all this Music and Singing is, propter carnales in Ecclesia,
non spirituales, rather for the weak, then for the strong, Isidor. The design
being, ut per oblectamenta aurium animus in affectum pietatis a surgat, Aug.
That by delighting the Ear, the Heart may be affected, and devotion advanced.

We sing therefore not for Gods sake, but our own; not to work on him, but on
our selves: the Angels in Heaven need not these spurs to Devotion, they utter
the Praises of God at a rate beyond our apprehensions, and the more spiritual
we are, the less we require them; but yet he that is not moved in some measure
with them, forgets he is flesh and blood. St. Austin had many tears pumped out
by them (quantum flevi in Hymnis and canticis tuis, suave sonantis Ecclesiae
vocibus commotus acriter) the melting of the Soul, the thawing and entendering
the affections, the exorcising the evil spirit out, and fitting us for Divine
Thoughts, and Heavenly Impressions (which are vast advantages, considering the
stupidity of our Hearts) makes them useful instruments in Religion: and sure we
should be glad of any Crain or Pully, any Device or Engine to elevate our
Souls, and bring us nearer Heaven, seeing we labor under so great a chilness
and heaviness in the service of God.

2. Another circumstance is the interest the People had in the service by way
of response or alternation; which practice I shall not derive from St. Ignatius
his Vision, nor Flavianus, Damasus, or St. Ambrose, when it is founded on Holy
Scripture: thus was Sung the Song of Moses, by Miriam, and the Women that went
out after her, Exodus 15.21. and so often the Psalms of David, for it appears that
some Psalms are Dramatick, and the Persons changed, Psalm. 118. and the Burdens
at set Periods are repeated, Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31. This Calvin and Molerus
do acknowledge, and it is expressed, Ezra 3.11. that they Sung together by
course: so the Seraphim in Isaiahs Vision, cried unto one another, Isa. 6.3.
this cried to this, holy, holy, holy, etc. Thus the People were to bless God in
the Congregations, which could not be by a bare Amen, 1 Chronicles. 16.35, 36. and
29.20. and 2 Chronicles. 7.3. Nay (they say) they were not to say Amen within the
Mountain of the Temple, but, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from
everlasting unto everlasting, Psalm. 72.19.

So in the Christian Church the People were not to be Spectators, and not
Actors, but had their shares in Prayers and Praises, which Saint Paul allows to
Women, 1 Cor. 11.5. and he assigns the Laity their place, the room of the
unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.16. though at the Eucharist they said but Amen at
Consecration; which Justin. testifies, was with a loud voice; ad similitudinem
coelestis tonitrui populus reboat, Hierom. And this is heard as far as Heaven,
if it be not a faulty Amen; Amen pupillum, surreptitium, sectile, when the
Prayer is not understood, not finished, not minded; but (say the Jews) he that
says Amen with all his might, the Cate of the Garden of Eden shall be open unto
him, this is Amen justorum.

But this was not all; for in the first inspired Prayer that we find, after the
gift was poured out, the whole company lift up their voice to God with one
accord, and Prayed, Acts 4.24. not that they were all inspired with the same
words, but joined with him that was; vocally repeating after him, as we now
follow the Minister in the Confession.

So in the Psalms the People repeated, sometimes the (...), sometimes whole
Verses, whole Parts, by Courses, or whole Quires, and tot pene Psallentium
chori, quot gentium diversitates, Hier. different Countries had their different
Modes The words of Tertullian found this way, sonant inter duos Psalmi and
Hymni, and mutuo provocant quis melius Deo suo cantet. Tert. ad Uxon. And that
of Pliny signifies no less, that the Christians were wont, carmen Christo ut
Deo dicere secum invicem.

Let me add two Instances for farther proof of this.

1. The sursum Corda [ Pr. Lift up your Hearts. Ans. We lift them up unto the
Lord. Pr. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God. Ans. It is meet and right so to
do.] mentioned by St. Cyprian, and Constitut. Apostol. and found in all Ancient
Liturgies just where we place it, and believed by Saint Austin to be, verba ab
ipsorum Apostolorum temporibus petita, a sure proof of Forms, and the Peoples
part in them.

2. The other is of the (...), or allocutions made by the Deacon to the People,
in behalf of Hearers, Penitents, etc. mentioning the particulars to be prayed
for, and at the end of each, the People responded (...), which justifies Forms
by Letanies, and biddings, or Exhortations to Prayer.

3. A third Circumstance I may call the interruption of the service, from, 1.
The shortness and conciseness of the Prayers, 2. The mingling of them with
Psalms. 3. The interposing of portions of Holy Scripture to be read. 4. And
lastly, The placing the Homily or Sermon within it.
I shall not encroach on your Patience by dwelling on these particulars, seeing
they may be easily defended from the grounds already laid, and have the
concurrent practice of Jews and Christians to vouch for them; but shall close
up all with a double expostulation.

1. To those that own not our service, but prefer a present conception before
the issue of the gravest deliberation, the private spirit of a single Person,
before the public spirit of the whole Church; that are content the People
should be tied to the Prayer of the Minister, but not the Minister to the
Prayers of the Church; nay, will run all hazards of Impertinency, Nonsense, or
Blasphemy, rather then join in those Prayers where their Faith and Religion is
secured, and to which they can safely say Amen.

What would these Men be at? Would they manage all by immediate Inspirations
like the Apostles? Then let them speak with Tongues, reveal Secrets, design
Ministers, decide Controversies by Inspiration, and we will admit of their
Prayers in behalf of the Church: or if they cannot give these proofs of Christ's
speaking in them, let them at least demonstrate by distinctive Characters, that
their words cannot issue from wit, or passion, or natural Enthusiasm; but are
of a different stamp from that fervent, confident, fluent pouring out of Divine
things, which has been observed in the worst of Men.

Do they think these Forms are contrary to the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit,
and the gifts of Prayer? For my part, I wish with Moses, all Gods people were
Prophets, and that every one had the gift and the grace of Prayer: But I cannot
understand that the assistance of Gods Spirit excludes those other means
whereby his gifts and graces are enlarged, or that it is of a different nature
from that which we expect, or find in other Holy Duties; much less that the
Spirit is the praying person, or that he is a Mercury, a god of Eloquence, that
suggests words or matter, or delights in Rhetoric and abundance of Speech; he
lodges not in the Tongue, but in the Heart, by affecting it, by enlivening it,
by enlarging it, which may be by old accustomed words, as well as those that
are minted from the most extemporary fancy.

Or will they have their God to be tired with the often repeating the same
Prayer? Alas! what thoughts have these Men of the Majesty of Heaven, and the
Nature of Religion? Is not this an express transforming God into their own
imaginations, a measuring him by the infirmities of flesh and blood? For new
Prayers can only delight us, as they gratify the carnal Palate; as there is a
sensual Pleasure in the variety, like the change of diet which ministers not to
health, but wantonness, or curiosity. And if this be a distemper to be
mortifyed and subdued in us, rather then encouraged, let not God be charged
with it. Is it not the scope of Devotion to speak great things of the name of
God, and little things of our selves? to ascribe all the Glory to him, and
shame to our selves? and may all things be the same but the words? Sure if they
be acceptable once, they may be so twice, and I know not how they can be worse
for wearing.

I here pity some, that through education are misled in this particular; of
some have compassion (says the Apostle) making a difference; but if men shall
refuse to be instructed, and disown our Communion, and not join with us in
those Offices by which we stand a visible Church, let them look to themselves
how they can answer at the Tribunal of Heaven for their contempts, and
scandals, and incurring the horrible crime of Schism.

2. To those that pretend to own it, but either neglect attendance on it, or
join in it only proforma, drawing near with the Mouth, when the Heart is far
from God. I am ashamed to take notice that Men professing Christianity, shall
yet think the duties of it a drudgery too ungentile for them; they would manage
their Spiritual Estates by Stewards, be carried to Heaven as in a Coach or
Chair, with the pains of others, themselves minding or intending some other
thing: or if they afford God their outward presence, they think they honor him
sufficiently with an implicit recital of the holy offices of the Church,
whilst Formality eats out the Devotion, the Prayers dropping from them in such
a languishing manner, as if their Souls were not awake. Is this the storming
Heaven, the vis grata Deo, Tert. The holy violence and importunity by which we
should wrestle and prevail with God? Cursed be the Man that does the work of
the Lord negligently. But if any Man serve me, him shall my Father Honor, John
12.26. Being fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

If we consider how miserably we have degenerated from the first Ages of the
Church, and that little Profession that is left, is dwindling into Atheism, and
a contempt of all Religion: if no more reverence can be had for this poor
despised service [almost the only thing wherein we Symbolize with the Primitive
Christians] it is an indication of Gods Spiritual Judgments upon us, it sounds
like a migremus hinc, and bodes no less then a quite removing the Candlestick.

We are yet happy, if we knew our Condition; for we have not Prayers locked up
from us in an unknown tongue, nor are we locked up from them, by being denied a
daily and public access to them; and there is no Church in the world has all
the Offices and Sacraments so Administered, conformably to the best precedents,
in words understood, without any mixture of Dangerous or Superstitious
encroachments, and with that Gravity, Decency, and Solemnity, that befits the
service of God.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things,

2 Timothy 2.7. Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits upon
the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever,

Rev. 5.13. FINIS.

