ENGLANDS APPEAL FROM THE Private Cabal AT WHITE HALL TO The Great Council of
the Nation, THE LORDS and COMMONS IN Parliament ASSEMBLED. By a true Lover of
his Country.

Anno 1673.

Phaedrus Lib. 1. Fab. V.
Nunquam est fidelis cum potente societas.
Testatur hac fabeulla Propositum meum.
VAcca and Capella and patiens Ovis injurice,
Sosij (...) cum Leone in saltibus.
Hi cum copiss^^^ Cervum vasti corporis.
Sic est Locutus, partibus factis, Leo:
Ego primam tollo, nominor quia Leo:
Secundam, quia sum fortis tribuetis mihi.
Tum quia plus valeo, me sequetur tertia,
Malo adficietur, si quis quartam tatigerit.
Sic toram preedam Sola Improbitas abstulit.
Anglice,
ENgland this fable plainly Shows,
A strong Alliano Partner know's.
THe BVLL the GOAT, and Patient SHEEP one day,
Leagued with the LION, sought a Common prey;
A Prey they took an high and mighty Heart;
Of which each thought to have his equal part:
Soft, quoth thy LION, I the first share claim,
'Cause LION King o'th Forest is my name;
The second you shall give me as my due,
'Cause I am valiant, able to subdue:
The third I take by force, and for the rest
Touch is who dares; yield it all, you had best.
THis is an Age of wonders: And if with a considering eye we take a careful
view of Europe, we shall find that some years last past have presented us with
as many things worthy of admiration as any former age has afforded to our
forefathers. The Revolution of Portugal, and the wonderful secrecy with which
it was carried on, is not to be matched in any Age. The Tragy-Comedy of
Massauello looks more like a Poetical fiction then a real truth. The Deposing
of Kings, and (which is much more strange) their Voluntary resignation (of
which the Annals of Ancient times furnish us, but with very few Examples) are
become the common Theme of our Journals, and if from the rest of Europe we
turn our eyes toward this Island, our surprisal will increase, and we shall
find that this little British World is a small Enchiridon or Epitome of all the
stupendous events that ever happened in the great one. We have all seen or had a
share in those passages which Posterity will hardly give more credit to, then
we do to what is said of King Arthurs Round Table. And it is not improbable that
some hundred years hence the History of our late revolutions will be ranked
among the fabulous Romances of Gildas, and such other Writers.

But it may be among all our unexpected changes, revolutions and Counsels,
there is scarce any more justly to be wondered at, then the present alliance
with France, and the war we have undertaken, and do still persist to prosecute
against Holland, in so dangerous an association with the French. It was
undoubtedly above the reach of an ordinary understanding to imagine or suspect
(in the least) that a Protestant Kingdom, without being compelled to it by some
urgent and unavoidable necessity, should ever fight with so much fierceness for
the destruction of the Protestant interest: or that English Counselors should
advise his Majesty to run the fortune of a French King without a rational
prospest of advantage to himself. Would any man that judges of things
according to the ordinary rules of prudence, have thought that in order to the
making good our Title to the Kingdom of France, we should able their present
King to invade all Christendom, and to extend his Empire without bounds, or
that to secure to our selves the sovereignty of the Seas, we should with so
much industry endeavor to force all the Dutch Ships, with all their Naval
Power into the French Arms, and rejoice at their Victories, as if by conquering
the Land, they did not Master at the same time their Havens, their Rivers, and
their Fleets? We have been often told of brisk messenges sent formerly to the
French Kings, as soon as they did but lay the Carkase of some pitiful Ship upon
the stocks. But we did never so much as dream that Vice Admirals, and other
considerable Sea Officers should be sent to the French Court to encourage and
promote the setting out of their Fleets: That pitying their want of experience
in Sea Affairs, we would out of Compassionate and Brotherly love lead their raw
Seamen by the hand, Train them up in our Fleets, and amongst the best of our
Seamen, teach them what Skill we have learnt in a long and dear bought
experience. And to Crown all, even fight for them, and interpose between them
and danger with so good success (as it proved) that the French Squadron (as if
the engagement had been only designed for an entertainment and diversion to
them) came off as fresh and as whole as when they first sailed out of their
Ports. The surprising novelty and strangeness of these unexpected Councils has
occasioned the following reflections. And all men being equally concerned in the
preservation of the Ship they sail in, though all do not sit at the Helm, it is
every ones duty as well as their undoubted right to prevent as much as they are
able, a fatal running upon Rocks, which may chance not to be discerned by
others, upon this just and well grounded confidence, I presume to direct these
papers to the real Counsel of the Nation, humbly begging that they be read with
an unbyassed mind, and truth weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary. Before
all I must premise I do not intend to write an Apology for the Dutch, nor to
justify all their proceedings, much less to increase the number of the
scurrilous Pamphlets against them, which I am confident will affect no sober
man in the Nation, and need only to be read to be confuted. I Will only say that
since all Christians should above all things enquire into the justice of their
Arms before they either take them up, or refuse to lay them down. It will
become the wisdom and prudence of both houses to hear what the Dutch may say
for themselves, and to take into their serious consideration the protestations
they make both in public and in private, of their unfeigned desires as well as
readiness to give England all possible satisfaction, and buy his Majesty's
Friendship at a more then ordinary Rate.

But my present design being not to enter further into these particulars, not
to examine the Justice or Injustice of this War, but rather to consider and
quere (supposing it had heen never so just at first) how far it may be
advisable to continue it, I will with as much clearness as I am able, and in as
few words as the matter will bear, confine my self to these following heads.

1. A Short account of the Crown with which his Majesty is entered into League.
2. The necessity and unavoidable Consequences of this War. 3. Some general
reflections upon the whole, with some Account of the manner and steps by which
this War was both promoted and begun.
1. All those who are not altogether Strangers to the World will easily grant
that of all the Kingdoms of Europe there are none but may be said inferior to
France in some respect or other, and to want some advantages which France
enjoys in a very eminent degree. The greatness of its Territories, the
Populousness of it, the number of their Gentry and Nobility. Their natural
courage; together with the advantage of being trained up either to Military
Actions or to Warlike Exercises, ever since the Foundation of their Monarchy,
the situation of their Country, and the opportunities they have by it to annoy
their Neighbors upon all occasions. The fruitfulness and riches of the Soil,
together with the prodigious quantity of all sorts of Commodities manufactured
and unmanifactured with which they supply their neighbors. And lastly the
great Revenues of their Kings, who governing of late without control or check,
are so much the more able to oppress their Neighbors; All these Advantages
meeting together, they have in all Ages had aspiring thoughts, and under
Charlemain had erected a new Western Empire, which in all likelihood would have
proved of longer continuation, had not those great Dominions been shared and
divided between the said Charlemains Children, which in the succeeding Ages
proved an occasion of many great and bloody Wars.

2. A Second and memorable stop to the increase of the French war, when by the
ambition of Hugh Capett, who aimed at the Crown, to usurp it with less
opposition, and to draw the Grandees into his party, he made all their
governments hereditary, and erected them into a kind of Principalitys held in
Capite, from thence sprang so many great Famylies able afterward to wage War
against the French King. And whilst they were thus in a kind of Minority, the
House of Burgandy having joined with England, brought that Kingdom to the Low
condition, every one knows.

Lewis the 11th. was the first who after the English had lost not only their
new Conquest, but also what they had possessed of old in France, raised the
French Crown to a greater height, and his Son Charles the 8th. besides the
acquisition of Brittany, frighted all Europe by his surprising conquest of the
Kingdom of Naples.

This occasioned a general confederacy of all neighboring Princes against him,
whereby he soon lost what he had gotten. But still the ambitious thoughts of
his Successors would have much endangred the liberty of Europe, if the Austrian
family (raised on a sudden to a vast Grandeur by the occasion of an innumerable
number of Provinces united in Charles the 5th.) had not carried the Imperial
Crown from Francis the 1st. who stood with much Eagerness for it, and had
already engaged several of the Electors.

This having over balanced the French power, the said Francis the 1. though
helped several times by the great Solomon Emperor of the Turk, was at last
forced to yield to the victorious Arms of Charles the 5th. who took him
prisoner and forced him to buy his liberty with a very disadvantageous peace.

But his Son Henry the second had better success, and amongst other advantages
he added to his Dominions three very fair Imperial and Episcopal Towns, and was
likely to have gone further had he not been prevented by a sudden death, England
all this while (true at that time to their own interest) with a skilful hand
holding the balance and keeping the contesting parties in as great an equality
as their own occasions would permit.

Under the minority of his Children, the bloody Massacres and civil Wars,
begin, which lasted forty years, and would have put an end to that Monarchy if
the Ambition of Philip the second would have given way to the dividing of it
into the several Principalities, which the respective Grandees aimed at.

But Henry the 4th. strengthened by the divisions which grew between the
Spaniards and the holy League, having won many Battles, made his Title to the
Crown good, by the success of his Arms, and not long after concluded peace with
Spain to gain time to breath, and to recover new strength.

No sooner was he at rest, but he bent all his thoughts upon a project as vast
in the design of it as Extraordinary in its nature, intending no less then to
cast Europe into a new Mould, and to reduce all the Kingdoms and Common
Wealths, that were in his time to a certain number, and to bring them within
such bounds as he should prescribe to them, being sure however in this
Marshalling to take such shute to himself as would have enabled him (or or
least his Successors) to grow into an universal Monarch.

To effect this he had already made choice of his Generals and other great
Officers, and was preparing both Arms and money when a sudden and unexpected
death puts an end as well to his undertaking as to his life.

The beginning, and in truth the greatest part of the Reign of Lewis the 13th.
his Son was much disquieted by intestine broils and Civil Wars, during which
the house of Austria was very near bringing all Germany under their subjection,
and after the Battle of Prague stood very fair for the universal Empire. But
France having at last quieted all at home, did (under pretense of opposing the
Austrian Family, and whilst they were courted by several Princes to assist and
protect them against the Emperor) vastly increased their own power, and
conquered new Provinces, and considerable Towns in Spain, Italy, Germany, and
the Low Countries, which raising new jealousy in their own Allies occasioned
the peace of Munster to frevent their further progress.

About the same time the new Civil wars which broke out in France under the
minority of the present King, gave opportunity to Spain to recover part of
their Losses, till the (sat) Protector of England joining with the French (for
the advancement of some private ends of his own, and by a policy from which the
destruction of Europe may chance to take its date before we are much older)
brought them into a decaying condition, and made the Pyrenean Peace (after the
death of Cromwell) most welcome to them.

Before we go further and come to give a more particular account of the present
French Court, I will beg leave to stop here a while, and desire the Reader to
take along the following inferences, from what has already been hinted, a more
full knowledge thereof being left to the perusal of their Histories.

1. That no greater proofs can be given of the internal strength of the French
Nation, then their overcoming the many dangerous convulsions of state, they
have from time to time strugled, with which in all appearance would have
destroyed any other Nation.

2. That in all Ages, as soon as their intestine troubles have been over, they
have still out of a restlesh Warlike humor endeavored to encroach upon their
neighbors, and to increase their own Dominions, laying hold of all
opportunities to disturb mankind, and having never able as yet to set bounds to
their Ambition.

3. That this Ambitious humor of theirs, supported by the greatness of their
power would long before this time have brought all Europe under their
Subjection, if their own division and private quarrels had not from time, to
time, put back their designs for many years, or their greatest Princes been cut
off before they cauld finish their intended work.

4. And Lastly as a consequence of the three former, that it was eever, and
will be still, the true interest of Europe to oppose the French designs, or if
there be any occasion of making use of them against somer other oppossers, not
to accept of their assistance, longer or further then public utility requires
it, nor to suffer them to proceed after the danger is over, as it was practiced
in the peace of Passaw, in the the time of Henry the 2. and that of Munster, in
both which the French were stopped in their full carreere by their own Allies,
though they still came off with profit.

The French having thus in the last Wars, added many fair Provinces and Tows to
their Territories, this present Court had no sooner made Peace with Spain, but
they thought of laying the foundations of a vaster Empire than ever. And
perceiving that since the discovery of the Indies, and increase of Trade, Naval
strength was the most important of all others, and Navigation and commerce the
greatest (if not the only) supporters of it. They first erected and encouraged
several Trading Companies, and in the second place they spared no cost and
stuck at no charge or expense, to purchase a considerable Fleet of men of War
wherein they have been so successful. That I fear their Fleet (excepting the
true courage of our Seamean) is not much inferour to that of his Majesty's, as
incredible as it may seem at first, considering how few years they have applied
themselves to it.

But whilst they were thus intent upon the increase of their interest at Sea,
they let no opportunity slip, of enlarging their Empire at Land, for during the
late War with Holland, they invaded in (1667.) and mastered a considerable part
of the Spanish Low Countries in 1669. they hunted the poor Duke of Lorrain out
of his Duchy, and to this day possess it all, and now this last year they have
conquered the half the United Provinces, much less then all this was more then
sufficient to awaken all Europe; and his Majesty above all others being out of
his Princely wisdom very sensible that the keeping a true balance between the
Princes and other States of Europe, was the only security of all, and that by
a timely stop to the French Conquests he would reap an infinite Honor and
Profit. As Soon as the French King fell upon Flanders, he begun to think of
applying fit Remedies to so dangerous a Disease, and having concluded a Peace
at Breda with the Hollanders, he sent them in private in January 1668. Sir
William Temple, who was then his Resident at Brussels, to propose a nearer
Alliance with them, and to take joint measures against the French.

No small Argumet by the way, of his Majesty's aversion to the French designs,
and of the fear he had of their increase, since to prevent it, he went so far
as to seek the Hollanders first, and to propose stricter Alliances with them
after so fierce and Recent a War ended with the unpleasant circumstances of
Chatham.

Sir William Temples Proposals having been entertained with all ready
compliance by the Dutch, he waited on his Majesty to give him an account of his
Negotiation, and within five days after he was sent back to the Hague with all
necessary powers and instructions, by virtue of and in conformity to which he
concluded and agreed upon, two several Treaties with the Dutch, the one a
defensive and stricter League than before between the two Nations; and the
other a joint and reciprocal Engagement, to oppose the conquest of Flanders,
and to procure either by way of Mediation or by force of Arms, a speedy peace
between France and Spain, upon the Terms therein mentioned, and because Sweden
came unto the same Treaty very little after, from the three Parties concerned
and engaged, it was called the Triple League. In pursuance of this, the Treaty
of Aix la Chapel was forced upon the French, and in some manner upon the
Spaniards, who were very unwilling to give away by a solemn Treaty so great a
part of their Country. But both his Majesty and the Hollanders thought it a
very great and good work, and judged it a great happiness not only for Spain,
but for all Europe to come off with a broken Pate, and to have at least for
that while kept France from going further.

This represented to the Parliament with all the advantages of Language, and
nothing omitted in the respective Speeches of his Majesty himself, the Lord
Keeper, and many private Members, that could make both Houses (and with them
the whole Kingdom) sensible of the great Service done to England, and in a
manner to all mankind, by chaining up a devouring Lion, who was never satiated
with prey.

This Triple League grew so famous that it proved the politic Institute of our
Justinian. In the name of the Triple League, and of the Treaty of Aix la
Chapel, several subsidies were both demanded and granted, for 2. or 3. Sessions
together, the Triple League stoped or annulled all Impeachments: for its sake
Inquiries into Miscarriages were laid aside. And the Parliament did conceive
they could neither give nor forgive too much, if by their compliance they could
but contribute some what toward binding the French to their good behavior.

Besides this to tie the Knot faster, and take even the very thoughts from the
French King of ever stirring, or being troublesome to his neighbors, his
Majesty sent an Extraordinary Envoy to several Princes of Germany, to invite
them into a Triple League: His Minister to persuade them to it, laying open
with no less heat than plainess, the danger all Europe was in. The
insensibility of most Princes, and their carelessness, the watchful ambition of
the French, the greatness of their Forces, and the little reason one had to
trust them. In fine, omitting nothing that could Alarm all the world, and
procure a general consederacy against the common Oppressor. Nay, to evince and
demonstrate (besides all we said now) that this Triple League was not entered
into out of a particular respect, or personal kindness to the Spaniard (not to
speak now of the Misunderstanding and Jarring between England and Spain in the
West Indies) the Spaniards being very much wanting to themselves, by their
backwardness in the payment of the Subsidies promised to Sweden. His Majesty
not to be wanting to Europe, and consequently to his own Kingdoms, out of the
deep sense he had of the necessity or preserving the Triple Leagues entire, and
being not without fears, the Swedes might fall off, unless the Money agreed
upon was paid them, without further delay; he offered in September or October
1668. to advance himself part of it, and had accordingly done it in case the
Dutch would have advanced the rest.

All this does abundantly show what opinion his Majesty and his Council were
used to have of France as well as both Houses, and the rest of the Nation: And
therefore without considering how things came to be altered (which we may take
hereafter some notice of) we may lay down as an Undeniable English Pri ciple,
and a Maxim never to be swerved from: That France is no ways to be suffered to
grow great, much less to have their designs promoted, as it is plain to all
man kind they are now.

But we must go somewhat further, and there being nothing more dangerous then
to join in any ambitious design with a Prince against whom we can no ways
secure our selves, in case he break his word to us, it will not be amiss to
consider how far one may rely upon the Candor and in egrity of the French
Court, and what may rationally be expected from their generosity.

In Order to this, since the heart of man is not known otherwise then by a
careful observation of their Act ons, and that we cannot judge of things to
come but by Inferances and Arguments drawn from those that are past; the best
way to satisfy our selves is to take a short survey of the carriage and conduct
of the French Court for these last 13. Years, during which they have had still
the same Ministers, who are not like to Act henceforth upon any other
Principles, or by other Methods then they have done hitherto, and they having
been brought up in so good a School as that of Cardinal Mazarine whose motto
was that an honest man ought not to be a slave to his word, it must not be
wondered at, if they do still as much as they are able, influence their present
Master and endeavor to persuade him that.

Si Violandum est jus, Reguendi causa Violandum est. The first proof of the
honesty both of the Cardinal himself, and of his Disciples, is their Carriage
in the Pireneam Treaty and their performance of what was most Essential in it,
wherein is to be observed that.

By the endeavors of the Queen Mother of France, a peace being promoted
between the two Crowns, with a Marriage between the French King and the Infanta
of Spain, the whole Treaty was grounded upon two considerable points, which
till granted by France, had still hindered the conclusion of that great work,
the one, was the forsaking of Portugal, and the other a renunciation of the
Infanta, (consented to and ratified by the French King) of all her present and
future Pretenses, Titles or Claims whatsoever to the Spanish Monarchy and
Dominions thereof, or to any part of the same:

Lest, says the Treaty, The Glory of their respective Kingdoms should come to
decay, and be diminished if by reason and through the said Marriage they came
to be united and joined, in any of their Children, and Posterity, which would
occasion to the Subjects and Vassals, such troubles and afflictions as might
easily be imagined.

As to the first, viz. the exclusion and forsaking of Portugal. The words of
the Treaty are these, His said Majesty (the French King) will indermedle no
further in the said Business, and does promise and obliege himself upon his
honor, and upon the faith and word of a King, both for himself and his
successors, not to give neither in common nor to any Person or Persons thereof
in Particular of what Dignity, Estate or Condition soever, either at present or
for the future, any help or assistance, neither public nor secret, directly
nor indirectly, of men, Arms, Munitions, Victualling, Vessels nor money, under
any pretense, nor any other thing whatsoever, by Land or by Sea, nor in any
other manner, as likewise not to suffer any Levies to be made in any part of
his Kingdoms, and Dominions nor to grant a passage to any that might come from
other Countries to the Relief of the said Kingdom of Portugal.

I suppose all the World will grant, it were hard for the wit of man, to find
out, or so much as imagine stronger words, or fuller expressions in a Treaty,
to prevent what the Spaniards were so much afraid of, viz. the Assistance of
Portugal, Let us now see how it was performed.

As soon as this was agreed on, and before the Treaty was signed Cardinal
Mazarin (still resolved as well in this as upon all other occasions, not to be
(Esclave De sa parelle) sent privately the Marquess the Choupes into Portugal,
to assure them that in Order to the conclusion of the Treaty then on foot with
Spain, they were forced to leave them out, and to engage not to assist them:
but that whatever they promised they would never forsake them, and would still
protect them against Spain as much as they had done before. The truth is, they
kept their word to Portugal, much better then they did to Spain. And the Peace
was no sonner made, but they sent them the usual supplies of Men, Arms and
Money, And a while after notwithstanding their former Treaty with Spain, and in
the view of the whole world, they entered into an Offensive League with that
Kingdom against all their Enemies, whereby, amongst other things, the French
were to have all the Sea-Towns that should be taken from Spain delivered to
them. All which with many other particulars, too long to be inserted in this
short discourse, may be seen more at large, in the incomparable Books of the
Baren de Iss^la; entitled the Buckler of State and Justice which to this day
could not be answered by the French though often challenged (and so much
concerned in honor) to do it.

The other security of the Pirenean Treaty as to Spain, and that without which
they could never have given their consent to their Marriage of the Infanta, was
the Renunciation before mentioned, And whoever read it will be apt to think, a
General Council of the Civilians was called, to outdo all former Expressions
used in such contracts, and to find out new binding Clauses, to take of all
possibility of Evasion. And to make it more sacred yet and more inviolable,
There being no greater tie upon Sovereign Princes then that of Public and
solemn Treaties, the Act of the Renunciation was incorporated into the very
Treaty of Pe ce, to make up of both of them but one body; though digested unto
different Instruments as is expressly declared in the 33. Article of the Treaty
of Peace, wherein speaking of the Contract of Marriage, to which they refer
themselves, these words are added, which though it be separated has the same
force and vigor with the present Treaty of Peace, as being the principal part
thereof, and the most precious pawn of its greater security and lasting.

But the French Lawyers preferring the little quirks of Law before public
faith; And pretending they might bring the Authority of solemn Treaties (which
are the true, and indeed the only Law between Sovereign Princes) under the
Cavil of Municipal Laws, and Local Customs, endeavoring to persuade the World
that their Master was not bound to stand to what he had so solemnly promised
and confirmed by sacred Oaths: And the French King after the death of the late
King of Spain, claimed (notwithstanding the said Renunciation) a great part of
the Spanish Low Countries, as being devolved to him in right of his Wife, by
the Municipal Laws of those Countries; And to back his unexpected Claim with
more effectual means, he Invaded the Country with a powerful Army.

This Invasion, so contrary to his Engagements, and so destructive to the very
essence of the P^renean Treaty, was attended with some circumstances no less
surprising than the breach it self.

The one was what passed at Paris between the French King himself, and the
Marquess De la Fuente Extrordinary Ambassador from Spain; And the other, what
the French Ambassador (the Arch Bishop of Ambrun) declared at Madria in his
Masters name.

As to the First, The said Marquess De la Fuente being upon his Return into
Spain, after the Death of the late King his Master, and being not without
apprehension and jealousy, the great preparation, made in France were intended
against the Queen his Mistress, and the King her Son, was very earnest with His
Most Christian Majesty, to give some new and greater Assurances to the Queen of
Spain, of the reality and sincerity of his intentions to quiet and settle her
mind, against all the contrary advices, she received from all parts; whereupon
the most Christian King did, with all possible Asseveration, engage his Faith
and his Royal Word, to the said Queen, that he would Religiously keep the
Peace, and continue a faithful friendship both to her and to her Son.

And the Arch Bishop of Anbrun, after the French Army was already in the Field,
and had possessed Charleroy, some four or five days before the News of it came
to Madrid; did in Verbi Sacerdotis, and upon all that is most sacred amongst
the Roman Catholics, protest and vow to the Q even, that his Master intended
nothing less, than what was reported of him: And would never break with the
King of Spain, or invade his Dominions as long as he was under Age.

But the March of the French Army, and the Hostilities they committed, agreeing
so little with their promises, and the same being complained of; They answered,
it was no Breach, and that they only went to take possession of what belonged
to them.

This War, or as the French term it; this friendly possessing themselves of the
Spanish Dominions, ended by the Treaty of Aix. After which, contrary to the
Treaty it self; they first dismantled all the strong Places and Holds of the
County of Bargundy! carried away all the Munitions out of the Country, and
would have destroyed the rich Salt Pits of that Province, had not the powerful
interposition both of England, and Holland prevented that spoil.

Notwithstanding the same Treaty of Aix, they exacted great Contributions from
the Dutchyes of Lymbourg, and Luxembourg: They lay a new claim to some Towns,
as important as any of those that have been granted to them by the Peace: They
have confiscated the Estates of the Subjects of the King of Spain, that would
not forswear their Allegiance; and have not spared the very Royal House of Mary
Mont: Nay, as if these infractions were not sufficient and still to encroach as
far as they were able, they forced their way with great quantities of
Merchandise through the Spanish Territories without paying the Customs, and not
long after endeavored to surprise the Town of Hainault.

Thus they have dealt with Spain ever since the Pyrenean Treaty.

Let us see now how other Princes have fared with them; we will begin with the
Duke of Lorrain.

By the Pyrenean Treaty, the said Duke was to be restored to his Duchy of
Lorrain, with all the Places and Towns which he had possessed in the
Bishoprics of Mentz, Toul, and Verdun. But France after the execution of the
other Articles of the said Treaty, deferred as long as they could the
performance of that part, which related to the Duke, and refused still to
return him his Country; till they had brought him to make another Treaty with
them, whereby he was forced to part with several considerable places over and
above what had been granted to them by the general Peace; Then after a year and
an half of an unsettled possession, during which under several unjust
pretenses, new quarrels were picked every day: They forced him with a
considerable Army, to give them his Town of Marsal.

And not long after, they again compelled him to sign a new Treaty, more
disadvantagious yet then the two former; since which he could, as little as
before have a quiet enjoyment of that little they had left him. They every day
encroached upon his Jurisdiction, the Limits of his Territories, and his
Sovereignty it self; They laid enormious Taxes upon his Subjects: They caused
him to disband his Forces, and to raise new men again as they thought fit, they
kept him from revenging his own quarrels, to take part in that of others, they
let loose all his Enemies against him, and stopped the Progress of his Armies,
as soon as he had the least advantage: And in few words he was all that while
more a Vassal to France, then a Sovereign. But yet all this while would not
satisfy the French Court: And taking it ill that his Obedience was not
altogether so blind as they would have it, they ordered one of their Generals
to seize his Person, and to bring him either dead or alive, as it was very near
being effected. A new way of dealing with a Sovereign Prince, not known yet in
these parts of the World, and which may give some hopes to Europe of seeing ere
long the West Governed by Basshaws as well as the East.

The Kingdom of Poland comes next, which has lain a bleeding ever since they
have had a French Queen, and which is at this instant in an eminent danger of
being conquered by the Turks, through the means of the French Cabal, who having
called into the Kingdom the Enemy of the Christian name merely because they
could not have a King either of French blood, or of French interest.

The Duke of Newburg was not much better used, and whilst they caused him to
engage the greatest part of his Estate almost beyond redemption in hopes of the
Polish Crown, which they had promised to raise him to by the help of a strong
party they had made in that Kingdom. They underhand contrary both to their
Treaties (as well with the Elector of Brandenburg as with himself) and to their
reiterated promises and vows both by word of mouth and in writing, did by their
Creatures and Agents Oppose the said Dukes pretentions, and endeavored with
all industry to have the Prince of Conde preferred before all his Competitors.
A particular deduction whereof will (if ever published) without any other
instance be a sufficient warning to all Princes, and give them a perfect
Character of the French Court.

The Emperor has as little reason to thank them, and at the very time the
most Christian King sent him Forces to join with his Army aagainst the Turks,
they begun to settle a Correspondence with the Count Serin, Franchipaeny,
Nadasti, and Tottenback, from whence they so well known Conspiracy has since
broken out, as has appeared by the depositions and confessions of some of the
Accomplices who had been instrumental in carrying both Money and Letters, from
the French Minister at Vienna to the said Conspirators.

Not to speak now of what arts they used to hinder his Election at first, and
since that to lessen his Authority and disturb all Germany by their Intrigues
and private Treaties, with several Privacies, contrary to the Treaty at Munster.

To which may be added, that one of the great Motives of bringing the Turks
into Poland was the marriage of the Emperors Sister with their King.

Yet it must be owned also that the French seem to have repented their
pernicious intrigues and Caballing in that Kingdom, for when they saw the
Emperor preparing in Earnest to assist the Dutch, to diswade him from that
design, and to engage him (if it had been possible) not to concern himself or
take part in the Quarrel, they very fairly offered him to put into his hands
and deliver him all the Original Letters they had from their Creatures and
Friends in Poland. To the end both his Emperial Majesty and the King of Poland,
his Brother might take what course they thonght fit with those Rebels: A fair
warning to all those that prefer French money before their Loyalty, and the
true interest of their Country.

Nay I doubt the Swedes, their good Friends have not always been pleased with
them: And they cannot to this day forget that some ten Years since, having made
a Treaty with the French whereby they were to receive, by way of Gratuity or
Pension, Sixteen hundred Thousand Crowns, the French (upon second thoughts)
finding their Treaty with Sweden of little use to them refused to ratify it,
and sent them Monsieur de Trelon, who without more words told them in short,
that the the King his Master declared it to be void. A fine Court style for one
Prince to use to another! And a short Majestic way of Rescinding all Treaties.

It were both needless and tedious, to examine now how well they have observed
their Treaties with Holland, since they cannot so much as assign the least
Cause of the War they make now, and in their Declaration tell us only of a
Mauvaise satisfaction, of their being ill pleased, which would tend to the
Diminution of the glory of a most Christian King, unless to please himself
better, he put Europe in a Flame, and endeavor to bring all under his
subjection.

But it may be thought all other Princes and States have had much cause to
complain of the French not to say worse, his Majesty has been hitherto either
more fortunate or more beholding to their generosity and kindness. This must be
now inquired into. I will not insist much upon the expressions of their
kindness to his Majesty's Person, whilst he was abroad, since they may pretext
the interest of their Kingdom, and palliate their duress and inhumane dealing,
by a necessity of preserving themselves. But I hope no such necessity compelled
them to oppose his Majesty's happy Restoration with so much violence as they
did, and to Cabal with his greatest Enemies to keep him out of his Kingdoms,
which his Majesty was so sensible of, that upon his coming into England he
commanded away the French Ambassador Bordeaux, and would not suffer him to
come into his presence.

Since that time they have often endeavored to ingratiate themselves, and have
made great protestations. But after several propositions of Leagues, and many
Arts used to raise Jealousies between us and the Hollanders (Dreading nothing
more then a durable and firm friendship between two Nations, who if united
might easily set what bounds they pleased to their ambition) they at last sided
with the Dutch, though with no other intention then to see us destroy each
other, or at least so far weaken and exhaust our selves, that they might with
less opposition invade their Neighbors, and increase their Naval strength, nay
their policy went further, and in the very heat of the War they still kept
Negotiations on foot, and made Overtures and Proposals of Peace by means of the
late Queen Mother, whom in the end they deceived so far, as to assure her (and
by her his Majesty) that the Dutch would set no Fleet out (that Summer, the
Peace was concluded) whilst underhand they pressed the said Dutch with all the
Vigor and Earnestness imaginable to fit out their Ships, with a promise of
joining theirs to them.

Upon this Paroll of the French Court, it is too well known we had no Fleet out
as well as what followed upon it, when the Dutch meeting with no opposition,
entered into the River of Chatham; so that though the French had no other hand
in it, they had been still the true cause of that unhappy accident: But withal,
it is more then probable they were themselves the Authors of that Counsel, and
most certain it is they knew of the design before the attempt was made: As
might be proved by several instances if necessary:

After this, the Peace being concluded at Breda; the French were by the Treaty,
to return us St. Christophers, in the manner and form therein expressed. But
instead of performing it according to the true meaning (and the very Letter of
the Article) they have still from time to time, upon several unjust and
frivolous pretenses, put off his Majesty's Commssioners that went to receive
it; till seeing a necessity of complying with us in so a small matter, whilst
we were preparing to run so great a danger for their sake; they delivered it at
last to Sir Charles Wheeler, somewhat above a year since. But before the
delivery of it, they destroyed all the Plantations, plundered and carried away
all that was portable; laid the whole Country waste, and left it in a much
worse condition, than if it had never been Planted. And as if the detaining of
his Majesty's Territories had not been sufficient, they interrupted the Trade
of his Subjects in those parts; and assuming to themselves the Sovereignty of
those Seas; they would not suffer any Ships but their own, to Sail by, or about
their Islands. And in Truth upon no other Ground, have brought in as Prizes,
and confiscated several Vessels. Not to speak now of the great discouragement
our French Trade has many years since lain under; through their unjust
practices and manifold devices, which have been such, that we do not of late
send into France the fourth or fifth part of what Goods and Commodities were
formerly sent over.

This late carriage of theirs in America brings us to their present Alliance
with his Majesty. And as the greatest care of those that have advised the King
to this League, have been to keep from the view and from the knowledge of the
World, what Articles are agreed upon; it is not to be expected we should
instance in the particular Breaches of what we are all Strangers to. For
Example, we cannot tell whether it was agreed the French Squadron should fight,
and so dare not assure they have broken their Treaty by not fighting. But I
suppose there are very few, but have heard of the Wager laid by the Spanish
Ambassador in the beginning of the War; and how far the French Conduct agreed
with his Predictions. I would not neither impeach any man upon general Reports
and Rumors, but however it is observable, that the greatest number of the Dutch
Commanders are of Opinion, and have often publicly declared, that the French
Ships were thus kind-used by theirs out of particular respect De Wits Brother
had to them.

If from the Sea we come ashore, we will find (as far at least as they came to our
knowledge) most of their promises deceitful; all the Art imaginable used to
ensnare his Majesty.

And lastly, a perfect and reiterated Breach of tho essence of their Treaty,
whatever the words may be; all those that have been never so little conversant
at Court, may remembered that one of the great Arguments used and suggested by
the French, to make the conquest of Holland appear both safe and easy; was
that his most Christian Majesty had assurances from all the great Princes in
Europe, they would no ways concern themselves in the Quarrel. Spain would be
glad to see their old Rebels Chastised. The Emperor had his hands full, and
durst not stir if he would for fear of the Turks. Brandenburg should demand his
Towns, and the Northern Crowns, would either sit still or endeavor to have a
share in the spoil. And then this was so readily embraced, that even after the
Exchange of the Ratifications of the Treaty betwixt Spain and the United
Provinces; they would not own there was so much as any agreement. And for a
good while we flattered our selves that the Leagues with the Catholic King and
other Princes, were surmises of the Dutch, to raise their Reputation, and quiet
the minds of their People. But when this was past denying, they came off with
slighting Discourses of the Forces of the Dutch Allies; and Monsieur de Turenne
would cut them all to pieces, if ever their Temerity did brings within his
reach.

At the Rate the Alliance with France was discoursed of before the War broke
out-standers by could not but think (and I believe if Truth were enquired into,
it will be found his Majesty intended no more at first, and was engaged no
farther) the French should be the Principal in this War, and England join their
Forces with them as Auxiliaries, to have in case of need, a safe and honorable
Retreat in their Power. But as soon as the French thought his Majesty could
not well go back nor take new Counsels; they openly declared it was none of
their Quarrel, and that they only engaged in it to assist his Majesty, out of
respect to his person. By which means his Majesty was persuaded and induced to
declare War first, and to expect afterward the assistance of the French.

I suppose his Majesty will not thank them neither forgiving out in all Roman
Catholic Princes Courts, That this is a War of Religion, undertaken merely for
the propegation of the Catholic Faith, and as the French Minister at Vienna,
expressed it in a solemn Speech to the Emperors Counsel, which has been since
Printed in French, that the Hollanders being Heriticks, who had forsaken their
God; all good Christians are bound to join and unite to extirpate them and to
implore Gods blessing upon so good a work. Nay to confirm this the more they
have lately declared and assured many Princes, that to let Europe see how far
they are from any such design as have been laid to their Charge; and to
satisfy all the World they entered into this War out of a Religious Zeal; and
for the Glory of God, they are ready to part with all their Conquests, and
return to the Hollanders all the Towns they have taken from them; if they will
but re-establish the true Worship they have banished from their Territories.

How far now this may be agreeable to his Majesty's Interest, or to the XXXIX
Articles, let any unprejudiced man judge.

But an undeniable proof of the uprightness of the French Court, is their
carriage in the Negotiations of Peace with the States. In short, the matter of
Fact is thus:

The passage of the Erench Army over that Branch of the Rhyne, called the Waal;
having caused a general consternation all over the Country, and the confusion
they were in, being such, that they could hardly resolve whether to yield or
defend themselves.

The States on the 11th. of June, named several Deputies to be sent, some to
his Majesty, and the rest to the French King; to know of them both upon what
terms they would be willing to agree and come to a Peace.

Those that came to his Majesty, were met upon the way as far as Graves End, to
forbid them the Court, and were conveyed to Hampton Court; there to continue in
an honorable confinement, till we could hear from the most Christian King, and
know of him whether the said Deputies might be admitted; his Majesty being
unwilling to give the lest offense to the French; And not thinking it either
lawful or convenient (without their participation) so much as to hear what the
Dutch Deputies Errand was.

But the other Deputies came no sooner to the French Court, but two Secretaries
of State were sent to them, and without further delay, desired to know first if
they had full Power to Treat; and in the next place, what the States could
propose in order to a speedy Peace. The Deputies answered, they were only sent
to know his most Christian Majesty's Pleasure, and that their Masters had
thought it a greater respect to him to receive his Proposals then to offer any
Conditions themselves, with this answer: the French Ministers went to their
Masters and came back immediately to the Deputies, to let them know, it was
expected the States should make the Proposals, and that the most Christian King
could not enter upon any Treaty unless they had full Power. Telling them withal
(to quicken them and to hasten the conclusion of the work) that they were to
consider, That whatever his most Christian Majesty had Conquered, was already
his own; and therefore he could no ways part with it, unless they gave him an
Equivalent, as well for what he might Conquer farther, before the Conclusion of
the Treaty, as for what he possessed at that time: Whereupon Monsieur de Groot
(one of the Deputies) being gone to the Hague, he was sent back with all speed,
and Authorized in a very ample manner together with his Colleagues to treat and
conclude a Peace with the French.

Upon the return of the said De Groot, with the Powers after some conferences
(part of them with De Groot alone) Monsieur de Louvoy, one of the Secretaries
of State) gave the Dutch Deputies a project of a Treaty, or rather the
pretentions of the King his Master: Upon the granting of which, he was both
willing and ready to return to his former Amity with the States, and conclude a
firm Peace with them.

Whereupon two things are to be observed; The one that the Conditions were
such, that (if granted) would have made the French King as perfectly Master of
the Country, as if he had conquered all by the Sword: and the other, that in
all the Articles (which are still in being, and may be produced if need be)
there was not the least word relating to England; and no more notice taken of
his Majesty, or greater care of his interest, then if he had not been concerned
in the War, or in no League with the French. So that if by a wonderful
providence of God, the said Treaty, had not been unexpectedly broken off,
Europe had in one day lost it is Liberty; And all we could have expected
afterward, had been the favor Polyphemus showed to his Guests.

And to demonstrate further, that the intention of the French Court was not his
Majesty should be a gainer by the War, Monsieur de Groot (whose word if he be
not very much wronged ought to go a great way when he speaks of the French)
declared at his second coming to the Hague, with the before mentioned Articles
that the French Ministers had answered him, the States his Masters might deal
as they pleased with England, and come off as cheap as they would, because (as
they pretended) they were not bound or engaged by their Treaty to procure them
any advantages. A happy thing in the mean while to be engaged in such a War,
with so Generous an Allie.

While this negotiation was on foot, and before the Treaty could be Concluded;
the Prince of Orange was miraculously restored to the dignity and Authority of
his Ancestors, which having altogether Eclipsed the party that was inclined to
treat with France upon almost any Terms, and the rest of the Country being all
under Water, the French lost at once both their hopes of carrying the whole
matter by a Treaty, and the opportunity of making a further Progress by their
Arms.

At the same time My Lord Duke of Buckingham and my Lord Arlington went into
Holland. And the French who knew already they could neither bring the Dutch to
a compliance, nor Swim over to the remaining Towns. And with all being full of
Apprehensions and fear that by the Authority of the Prince of Orange, and
through the interest he was like to have in his Majesty (chiefly if their
practices and honest dealings came to be discovered) a Separate peace might be
made between England and the United Provinces, they Acted their part so
succesfully with our Plenipotentiaries, that they persuaded them to enter (in
his Majesty's name) into a new engagement, not to treat or conclude with the
Dutch any Peace or Truce without them: For as to their promising the like, it
was a perfect mockery on their part, since they had already done their utmost
to Treat without England, and that after they had miscarried in the attempt,
nothing could secure them but his Majesty's refusing to accept of what
conditions the Dutch would be willing to grant Him.

After this new Contract made, our Plenipotentiaries together with the French
Ministers sent their joint demands, and proposalls to the Dutch, to be granted
in Ten days or else no Peace to be made, which was the next Masterpiece of the
French, for it is to be observed, first that the French Demands were in
substance the same as they had made at first in their negotiation with Monsieur
de Groot, And since they were so unjust, and so Enormious, that the best
friends they had then amongst the States could hardly swallow them themselves,
(much less to bring the generality to give their censent) without some
Modification. It was not to be expected that the Government being since the
late Change, much more avers to the French then before, the same proposalls
again, should be better entertained, which was rendered the more improbable by
the addition of the English demands.

Secondly, The French, by the excessive height of their demands, seemed to have
encouraged (if not persuaded by some more effectual means) the said
Plenepotentiaries not to come much short of them, which was attended with Two
Fatal consequences, the one, that the War was certainly, by it, entayled upon
his Majesty; And the other that it was a means to alienate the minds and
affections of the Dutch, who were then inclined to give those advantages to
England, which cannot rationally be expected hereafter.

Thirdly, Though the respective claims of the Two Kings had been singly
tolerable; yet the joining of them together made it impossible for the Dutch to
grant either. From whence the French (and very rationally) conceived hopes that
the Dutch finding themselves over balanced by the joint power of their
Enemies, and seeing no way to come out of so destructive a War, and to have
peace (and not a firm nor a durable one neither) without dividing their Country
into a hundred pieces, and cutting of all their Sinews, had rather cast
themselves into the Arms of their Conqueror, and laying aside all thoughts of
Sovereignty, live in an entire Body under the French Domination. At least it
were some comfort, if the French Court had but kept to this last agreement,
which in so many respects was advantageous to them. But that they have not done
neither: And as soon as they saw most Princes in Europe begin to be in Earnest,
and that great succors were preparing for the Assistance of the Dutch, besides
what forces were already in the Field, They underhand made new overtures of
Peace, and have still to this day been sending private Messages to the Dutch,
wherein they take no greater care of England than they had done at Vtrecht. And
if the Dutch had not persisted in their refusal to Treat without their Allies,
the French had long since concluded without theirs, and that upon very moderate
Terms, as to the Dutch.

I suppose this will seem very strange, and will hardly be credited, but since
as long as I am under this disguise, I cannot justify it as fully as otherwise
I might do it. All I can say at present is, there are those in the Kingdom that
know the truth of it as well as my self, and I hope the world will not be long
without a full discovery of it. And thus I end the first part of this discourse
which has swelled unawares into a greater bulk then I intended at first,
though the matter would bear a great deal more without being exhausted.

II.
Let us now come to the Second Head, and examine what the issue of this War may
prove, and what may rationally be expected it will come to.

Were it either possible in nature, or so much as to be imagined that Holland
might be turned into a new Lake, their Towns burnt and depopulated, and their
Inhabitants either destroyed or Transported into remote Colonies, or part of
them brought into this Kingdom, to increase the Number of our People; I fear no
Arguments drawn from either natural Justice or Christian Charity could be
forceable enough to put a stop to such a design: And in the case it would be
hard for the ingenious and worthy Author of the Interest of England stated (as
unanswerable as his Arguments are) to persuade men either Biassed, or not very
well acquainted with the state of Foreign Affairs, That it must be the chief
Interest of England to support the present Government of Holland.

But such a destruction being not to be thought on, or expected by any man that
is in his Wits; and since the Situation of the Country, and its Commodiousness
for trading in many respects, together with the Natural and Laborious Industry
of the Inhabitants, will still continue under any change; To satisfy our selves
how far we may be gainers by this War, we must consider in order to the general
events that may be looked upon as in any degree of possibility.

In order to that I conceive all men will grant one of these four things must
be supposed.

First, The absolute conquest of the United Provinces by the French. Or,

Secondly, Our Conquering of them.

Thirdly, A Division and Sharing of the Country between us and the French.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The Dutch recovering their losses, and with the help of
their Allies, their withstanding both England and France. Of each of them in
Order.

The absolute Conquest of the United Provinces by the French, and their being
brought under their subjection, is a thing of that dreadful consequence, that
the very thoughts of it must needs raise the blood of al true English men And
there is hardly any remedy too violent for so desperate a cure or means that
could be called unjust, if necessary to prevent so great an evil, And therefore
instead of losing time to prove what is so manifest and so obvious to the
meanest capacities, I only beg of all my dear Countrymen to lay the present
state of things to heart, and humbly move both Houses to consider, whether we
be not already too near that evil day, and how far it is consistant with that
Interest, with which they are entrusted, to hasten it by unseasonable and
pernicious compliance.

Secondly, As to our Mastering the Low Countries, it can be but one of these
two ways:

First, Our subduing of them by a Landing; and withal, beating the French out
of what they possess already: Or,

Secondly, Their voluntary yielding to us, and submiting themselves to his
Majesty.

The first can hardly be so much as supposed or imagined by any Rational Man:
For 1. If in the midst of their late distractions and the unspeakable
confusion, which was in every part of the Country, no opportunity of Landing
could be found though often attempted: How can it be expected it should be
practicable by the next Summer, now they are all United and strengthened by the
assistance of their Allies. 2. How can it be thought possible to Land an Army
considerable enough to take all their Towns, and Conquer the whole Country;
Nay, to Conquer the Conquerers themselves, and beat the French out. 3. Granting
that the approach of our Fleet, would occasion a great disorder and
consternatian in the Country; and that the Dutch should not prove able to
oppose our Landing; and at the same time to keep the French out, and defend
themselves to the Landwards, what would the consequence of this be, but only to
enable the French to Master the whole Country, whilst the Dutch should divide
and draw off their Forces to oppose us? It being much easier for the French who
are already in the Country, to Ma ch with all their Forces to Amster am, and to
the rest of their Towns, before we can Land; then for us to prevent them by our
Landing. 4. Lastly, if the French Ships are to have a share in the Expedition,
what Security have we, their men will promote our own ends, and not their
Masters; and that they shall not rather turn tail against us, if occasion be?

And as to the voluntary yiedling of the Dutch, and their giving themselves up
to us; I may say it is as irrational and as fond a conceit as the other: And
which therefore does hardly need being confuted. But because some of our great
men, have (even in Print) made use of this as of an Argument, both to justify
the War in point of prudence, and to persuade the Nation to join and concur
with the Cabal in their dark Counsels: It will be necessary, and we owe that
respect to their quality, as to lay the matter open and unfold it with a little
more care.

Were the United Provinces still entire, and untouched and they in an election
to join with and submit themselves (upon terms) either to France or England, it
would be no hard matter to demonstrate and make it to appear that the balance
of true policy and reason should weigh down by much on the French side. And
that the best part of their Trade would soon, if incorporated with us run out
of their Channels into ours; which all understanding men amongst them are so
sensible of, that in Case this were in agitation, the interest of Religion
(which besides they could secure some other way) should hardly carry it against
profit and self preservation. But not to multiply debates, and granting now
that in such a Case, the Ducth would prefer our Domination before that of the
French; Let us not examine what might have been if our suppositions were true:
But what is like to be De facto, and may rationally be expected as the Cause
stands..

First it must be observed that though their Maratime Provinces be far the most
considerable, and those which have made that Commonwealth so powerful and so
famous all over the World, yet their Inland Provinces are of no less
importance to the preservation of the whole, and are the Bull-works and
Outworks of the other, without which the main Body would be soon streigtned
and brought in a little time to the greatest extremities,

For this Reason the Spaniards never offered Peace to the Dutch, nor could they
have accepted of it if offered, till being Masters of Seven Provinces, and
having withal conquered several Towns in Brabant and Flanders, to be a fence
to their out Provinces, their Territories proved of a Competent extent to Lodge
and Maintain upon their Frontiers the greatest Armies. And by removing the Seat
of the War from their Trading Provinces, be so much the more able to continue
it, rather with advantage to them, then with the least inconvenience or trouble.

2. The Second thing we must take notice of is, that the greatest advantage of
the Situation of the United Provinces lies, in that several of the greatest
Rivers in Europe not only run through their Country, but disimbogue into the
Ocean within their Precincts. This opens them an easy and an advantageous
Trade into most parts of Germany, the Spanish Low Countries, and some Provinces
of France, and makes a Reciprocation of commerce, and as it were an Ebb and
Flow, between their Rivers and the Ocean, being enabled by the first to carry
at a cheap rate to the furthest parts of the world what goods and commodities
the above mentioned Countries afford, and to return them by means of the same,
the Richest spoils of the East and West.

These natural Advantages accrewing to the Inhabitants of these respective
Provinces, by their being all United under the same Government, do link and tie
them so fast together, that nothing but an external and irresistible force can
divide them; and who ever comes to be Master of the Rivers, must needs in a
short time either be beaten out of his Conquests, or else bring all the Havens
and all the Inhabitants Bordering upon the Sea, under the same subjection? The
Sea Ports without the Rivers, and the Rivers without the Ports, being
altogether useless, and a Foundation for an Endless and Destructive War.

This being premised, the Conclusion will easily be drawn, and since the French
do already possess half of their Country, and are Masters of their chief
Rivers, if the Dutch come either to lose the Ambition of Ruling, and being a
Sovereign State, or else are brought to the necessity of choosing a Master: It
is plain they will rather submit themseves to the French King, who has half
conquered them already, and has in his own hands that part of the Country
without which they cannot subsist, than by giving up the remaining part to
England to entail a War upen them, which besides their subjection to a
Foreiner, as well as if they were under the French, will exhaust what Treasury
they may have lest, and from a Flourishing Estate bring them to perfect Beggary.

To sum up all: It cannot be supposed the Dutch will ever choose a Master, and
submit themselves to the Government of a Foreign Prince, unless they are driven
to it by an unavoidable necessity. This necessity cannot proceed but from the
sense they may have of their own weakness, and of a desire to live in peace,
and free themselves of a War which is so destructive to them. Now if they do
submit themselves to England, in opposition to the French, the Peace they seek
will be further off them then ever, and their remaining Country will be the
seat of an endless War; whereas, if they give themselves up to the French, they
will be United again in an entire body, enjoy rest and peace, and live under
the Protection of a Prince, who of all Princes in Europe is best able to defend
them against all their Enemies, and whose interest will be to give all possible
encouragement to their Trade, and to make their Country the Nursery of his
Seamen, and in all other respects the support of his Naval Strength. Not to
mention that if they must be slaves, first, they might rationally hope to have
the satisfaction afterward, of lending a helping hand to bring their
Neighbors, and in truth all Europe into the same condition with them.

Thirdly, We come now to the dividing and sharing of the Country with the
French, which by what has already been said will appear either impracticable,
or rathor hurtful than advantageous, for this sharing must be either by a
Conquest on both sides, as the Duchies of Cleve and Juliers were formerly, when
Prince Maurice and the Marquess of Spinola entered at the same time into those
Countries with two great Armies, and took each what they could, the one on the
behalf of the Elector of Brandenburg, and the other of the Duke of Newburg, or
else that the French having Conquered and possessed all, should give us part of
their acquisition.

The first cannot be supposed as long as we have no Army in tho Country. And in
truth can bring none able to match that of the French, and to Conquer as fast
as they, though they had not a foot of Ground in the United Provinces: But as
the case does now stand, it is plain, they would be Masters of all before our
long Boats could come on Shore.

And as to their giving us a share, after an absolute Conquest, there are three
things to be considered, 1. It is worth the inquiry, how far they are engaged
by their Treaty, and what share we are to have: for all appearances are very
deceitful, if the French have promised to give any thing more then a fair leave
to take what we can. 2. It is apparent by what has been said before, at what
rate their promises and other such engagements are to be valued. 3. The nature
and constitution of the Country being such that it cannot stand divided,
without not only very great inconvenience to both parties, but the destruction
of one of them. The French King, what ever he had promised, cannot be willing
to give us such a share as would bring his own under the Enulish subjection.
And if his Majesty should have but an inconsiderable part of the Conquest, he
could neither reap any benefit by it, nor protect it against the French power
without exhausting both his Treasure and his Men. Nay it may be said further,
and all that know the Country will grant that unless Amsterdam with the Zuyder
Sea were split, and all the shipping divided to have each one half of the
whole, no true division can be made: And whoever is Master of that Town will
soon or late subdue all the rest.

It is true, if we had some Sea Towns, and the French had nothing to do with
the rest, it might be for a while a Curb to Holland and procure us some
advantages in Trade. But if the French possess all the Country, what proportion
can there be between the acquisition and ours? And after the accession of so
great a power to their Empire, can any rational man imagine some few places they
should give us, would be a balance to their Forces, or a secure Fence against
their Ambitious and aspiring thoughts?

To clear this further, and to demonstrate how dangerous it is for England to
destroy the balance of Europe, in hopes of having a share in the spoil, and of
increasing our Dominions. It is to be considered that in the perusal of our
English Histories, we find all our Foreign Conquests either unfortunate in the
end, or an unprofitable charge to the Kingdom; whilst to maintain them, the
Seas must be perpetually crossed, for supplying them with Men, Money, and
Necessaries. Nay, after the Conquest of the best part of the Kingdom of France
we could not defend it long against the remaining part, and even lost what
belonged to his Majesty's Royal Ancestors by right of Inheritance, after a
quiet and uninterrupted possession for some hundreds of years. Since that time
what new acquisitions has been made, has likewise been returned either for
considerable Sums of Money, or upon some other considerations relating to the
State of Europe in those days.

And least it might be objected, That those former Conquests were either less
prudently undertaken, or harder to be kept than these we seem to go upon now:
It is observable first that our Forefathers either undertook alone the said
Conquests, or else if he joined with any other Prince (as when they were
assisted by the House of Burgundy) they still had kept to themselves the
greatest and most considerable share. Secondly, That it was ever the interest
of some of the Neighboring Princes; England should preserve some part (at
least) of the said Acquisitions, and have still a footing on the main, for the
Common safety and for the speedier and easier relief of our Allies. And yet
though these two Conditions met together, either the essential difficulty of
the thing it self, or our natural unaptness to preserve what we have once
gotten, has made all European Conquests unsuccesful, and in truth prejudicial
to us.

But the Case being thus, what Judgment can we make, and what can we
rationally expect or promise our selves of our intended joint conquest with the
French, where those Conditions before mentioned are are altogether wanting? And
where first far from Conquering our selves we only countenance and promote (by
our strieghtning the Dutch by Sea) the Invasion of a Country, which even whilst
it was nothing near so considerable as it is now all Europe has looked upon,
not only as a fair step, but as the best part of the way to the Universal
Monarchy: And which did once occasion so great a confederacy against the House
of Austria to wrest those Provinces out of their hands. 2. It is as plain, it
is not the French Kings Interest to give his Majesty a considerable part of the
Conquests, nor to let us enjoy long what he might peradventure give us at first
for some other ends of his own. And to secure this unknown share to us, I do
not see we have now any Talbots or Earls of Bedford at the head of our
Victorious Armies to set up his Majesty's Standard in the Conquered Towns, and
leave English Garrisons in them. But instead of that whilst the French march
on, and do enlarge their Empire, we please our selves with calling the French
Forces our Forces, And endeavor, if not to persuade our selves, at least to
persuade others, All this is done for the honor and glory of the English
Nation, for the Advancement of Trade, for the safety of his Majesty's Person,
the support of his Royal Authority, and the happiness of his Kingdoms. It is
true, we do not well know as yet (what) we are to have, but somewhat wel'e have
however (say our Great men.) And we will not believe the French King shall let
us go without a reward, for the pains we take in raising him, as much as in us
lies, to the Throne of the universal Monarchy. Nay, supposing the worst (says
a great and noble Champion for the French, in a Printed Letter to Sir Thomas
Osborn) that we should be so ill advised, as to let the French take all and
leave us nothing, yet even in that Case, the French King would rather make
their strength at Sea inconsiderable, by their being subject to him, than his
own more formidable, by his being their Master.

I confess this is a now Demonstration in Poiticks which few men would have
dreamed of: and if that be all our safety, I hope no true English man will be
swayed by the authority or quality of those who go about thus to argue the
Kingdom out of its liberty, and turn England into a French Province.

Fourthly. The extreme danger and fatal Consequences of some of the former
suppositions, and the impracticableness of the other, being thus (and I hope
clearly) demonstrated; we need not loose much time to press that increase
(which is the only possible event that remains) the Dutch shall recover
their losses, and with the help of their Allies be able to deal both with
England and France. It cannot be his Majesty's interest to continue a War which
will miserably impoverish his Kingdoms, and by the continual Losses the
Merchants do and are like to sustain, bring the Trade of the Nation into such a
decaying condition, as will not be repaired in many years of Peace. Especially
if Spain be further provoked to proceed to an open Breach with us, as it is
more than probable, they will ere long be forced to do.

But because I see many are apt to look upon this War through a kind of Cloud,
and seem to be unwilling to have a distinct Notion of the ill consequences with
which it is attended, but reflect only in General and confusedly upon a
supposed destruction of the Dutch, and seem imaginary Advantages accrewing to
us by it, which yet they cannot instance in; much less demonstrate upon any
Rational Grounds: I think it necessary to add what we have said already, some
few Considerations relating both to Spain and the Empire.

As to Spain, it is first well known what that Crown is to expect from France,
as soon as these may have any opportunity of destroying them. And I suppose no
body doubts but that the Spanish Court will by all possible mears oppose the
Increase, and stop the Progress of the greatest and formidablest Enemies they
have.

2. It is as plain, that in Case the French come to be Master, the United
Provinces, the Spanish Netherlands will of Course and unavoidably fall into
their hands, notwithstanding the famous Triple League which by the way will be
Triple no longer, when the Dutch Common wealth is gone.

3. Although the Crown of Spain had no Domions in the Low Countries, It would
be as much their interest to preserve the United Provinces entire. And in true
policy, they ought to venture all their Kingdoms: and to the very last of their
men to prevent if it be possible so formidable an accession of Naval Power to
the French, after which no Plate Fleet or Gallions could ever come safe, nor
consequently their Monarchy stand much Longer.

4. The Emperor being already engaged, and hostilities begun between him and
the French, Spain can no longer stand out, and they are bound to run the same
fortune as well by late and private Treaties as by the Joynt-interest of their
Family.

5. And lastly Spain having already by their Assistance given to the Dutch,
whereby all the considerable Towns in Brabant, where preserved, and by the late
Attempt upon Charleroy so highly incensed the French against them, they cannot
venture nothing more by an open Breach, it is much safer for them to declare
whilst the hands of the French are full, then to be exposed to their fury after
their Conquest ended. From all this it plainly follows, that a breach between
Spain and France is not to be avoided. But the same Arguments prove likewise,
that, in case we do persist in our Alliance with the French, they must break
with us as well as with them: And since they are so far concerned in the
preservation of the Dutch, they cannot think themselves safe if the others are
destroyed.

It is their Interest by making this War as destructive to us as they can, to
persuade us more effectually, than they could do hitherto into a friendship
with their Allies, for to say they dare not proceed to a breach; they are
afraid of us, and we know how to Order them in the West Indies: This were good
if their All did not ly at stake, and if by their breach with us they could
endanger more then the same All, Whereas to the Contrary by venturing all, they
may, and will in all likelihood, save both themselves and all Europe.

This being Granted (as it must needs be, if truth do in the least prevail with
us;) I need not use many words to make all England sensible of the sad
consequences of a Spanish War; I Will hint only those that are undeniable: As
first, the seizure of all our Merchants Estates, amounting in the whole to a
vast Sum. 2. The loss of our Trade with them, which of all other is the most
beneficial to the Kingdom; And without which our Woollen goods must lie upon our
hands, and half of our Weavers, Spinners, etc. go a begging. 3. The
Interruption of our Levant and Plantations Trade, which cannot in case of
Breach be secured by ordinary Convoys. And (not to mention the Spanish Men of
War which both as to number and strength are sufficient to cruise in the
Streights) With what either encouragement or safety can our Traders venture
abroad; if, besides the Dutch Capers, the Seas come to be infested with
Ostenders, Biscaines, Majorcans, and Minorcans? Who are none of them inferiors
to the Flushingers, and are as well Skilled as they are in the Art of Piracy;
Nay, did not these very men without any help take above fifteen hundred Ships
from us, in the late Spanish War, when Spain was at the lowest; and sought
alone against us and France. 4. By the loss or at least the interruption of our
Trade, his Majesty's Customs, which is the considerablest Branch of his
Revenue, will come to little or nothing; so that to support the War, new Taxes
must be raised in lieu of it: And proportionably so much greater Subsidies
granted to his Majesty.

If from Spain we come to the Empire; we find the Emperor himself and the
Elector of Brandenburg, already engaged in the quarrel, and many other Princes
upon declaring, so that it is now high time both for the Parliament and all
true Englishmen, to look farther then we have done yet, and to examine with
more care the consequence of this War. For the Fire, which both we and France
have kindled, is like to consume all Europe, if we do not make have to quench
it, and by a timely Retreat give way to safe Counsels. And for a close to this
second Part of our Discourse, I desire the following Considerations may be
seriously Debated and weighed.

First, What horrid spilling of Christian Blood we will be the occasion of, if by
our wilful promoting of the Ambitious designs of the French (even so palpable
against our Interest) we force all the rest of Europe to take up Arms in their
own defense, and to unite all for their Common safety, and for the preservation
of that Liberty which (as though we were led by Witchcraft) we merrily go about
to destroy.

2. How prejudicial this War will be to us, in case the confederate Princes do
overbalance the Power of France; And by raising the Reputation and the Credit
of the Dutch (which last is the only thing they want) enable them not only to
pay their Land Armies, but likewise to set out as great and considerable Fleets
as ever. And I do not see that either of them ought to be looked upon as very
improbable; since first it is very certain, and all those that knew the Country
will grant, That if the Hollanders had but some prosperous success (either by
their own Armies, Or by the help of their Allies) they will be able to take up
without trouble, and in a very short time, as much Money as they may have
occasion for. And in the second place it seems pretty rational to judge that
the house of Austria with the conjunction of many Potent Princes, will struggle
a while for their lives, and may be hard enough for the French

3. But how much greater will the danger be if neither Germany nor Spain are
able to stop the Progress of the French? And in case they must all yield, and
submit themselves to the Victorious Arms of the most Christian King, what will
become of Poor England? must his Majesty, (I speak it with due respect to his
Royal and sacred person) be Tenant at will? or else Do we presume so far on our
own strength as to imagine we may do what the rest of Europe cannot? And that
though the French had conquered all, we should not fear them the more? and
could still defend our selves against them? Let those that have Advised his
Majesty to this War speak, they must now pull their Vizard off, they must
appear in their true shape; and tell us plainly whether they are paid for
making the French King the Universal Monarchy, And whether to bring down new
Golden showers into their Laps, England must at Least be made Tributary to the
French, some few Hackney writers will not serve the Turn now, And twenty silly
stories against Holland, cannot make it advisable for us, to join with the
French King against the Greatest part of Europe. When this War was entered upon,
no Enemies were thought on, at least spoken of, besides the Dutch. This was the
only game we followed at first, And we expected no other prey to divide between
us and the French. But now, supposing that we had taken never so much care for
an equal sharing of the United Provinces, concerning which we refer our selves
to what has been said before, will our great men assure us further, That the
Lines are also fallen to us in the pleasant places of Europe? And that his
Majesty is to share the Universal Empire with the most Christian King. I grant
the Dutch have offended us, And that our War against them is not unjust. But is
it Just therefore to destroy so many Princes who cannot Subsist without them,
and who for their own preservation are forced to Venture all to preserve the
United Provinces? In few words; the Scene is altered: And though our infinite
charity leads us, not to suspect the sincerity of the French or fear the
increase of their power, most Princes of Europe are of another mind; And
whatever comes of it; they are resolved to stand by and protect the Dutch, as
long as they are able to protect themselves; so that to conquer Holland All
their Allies must be destroyed first: And the French King must needs be Master
of the best part of Europe before we can have to our share either the Briel or
Flushing.

I might Add several other considerations (And perhaps of no less weight then
the former) to evidence the fatal consequences of this War. But by reason they
do relate to the safety and preservation of our Laws (as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil) I forbear, least it should be thought I go about (or intend in the
least) to raise a Jealousy between his Majesty and his people: leaving it
wholly to the care and wisdom of the both Houses to provide against it, by
those means, and ways as to them shall seem meet and necessary, and as the
Importance of the thing it self requires.

III.
So far I hope we have made good what we have said in the beginning of this
Discourse; That this was an age of wonders, and that of those wonders the
greatest was the present Alliance with France, And our prosecuting the War in
so dangerous an Association. But since there are no effects so rare or so
wonderful, as well in the Civil Government as in the Course of Nature, but have
proper Agents to produce them, it is very fit to enquire into the causes of our
Misterious Councills, the better to judge of their true nature.

In order to that, It will not be amiss, to look a little abroad and consider
whether the Policy of some other Princes, who are engaged in the same Alliance
with the French may not be a Leading case for us And help our discovery at home.

Those Princes are the Bishop of Munster and the Elector of Collen, And as to
the first, All the world knows and we have had a sufficient experience our
selves how far Money will go with him. Nay he is so far honest in this, that he
does think it no shame to own and profess it openly, He is but a Tennant for
life, And whatever fills his Coffers, that he takes to be his true interest.
The Universal Monarchy does not entrench upon the Soverainity of either, his
Brothers or Nephews, And a considerable and rich Legacy is the only
Principality he can leave them; Whilst his present Subjects are destroyed, he
hoards up Treasuries for his Family, And let the worst come. Some rich Abbeyes
in France will bring him more Revenues then his Bishop-rick, As lately a
Northen King did for the like, exchange his Crown, so that the case is clear
with him. And if the States would out bid the French, his Highness would soon
forget his Old Querrells, and prove the best of their friends.

The next is the Elector of Collen, who (to do him right) is a Religious and a
worthy Prince, And one who in his own nature, is a great lover of peace: But
how could he be persuaded then to make his Country the Seat of War? To give his
strong holds to a Forreigner? And to expose his Subjects to all the Calamities,
which the inquartering of an Insolent Army does bring along with it. To this
the answer is plain, The Softness of his nature, and the Easiness of his
disposition, has made him devolve upon his Chief Ministers the whole
Government of his Dominions, and the absolute direction of his Counsels. His
great favorite (another Bishop) is of the same Religion and Principles which
that of Munster and the Debonarity of the Master, is no fence against the
corruption of the Servant. Quid vultis mihi dare and tradam eum vobis? Nay if
the Bishop of Stratsburg (the said Favorite) does stick at any hard thing, and
is at any time somewhat troubled in his mind; for the undoing of so many
thousands of Fam lies, and for betraying his Trust so shamefully, he has his
Brother at his Elbow the late Bishop of Ments a sworn Champion for the French,
and of whom they used to say in jest (that he was a dear friend to them) ready
to comfort them upon all occasions and to spur him on with more fury. Thus if
you ask, where the Interest of the Archbishop of Collen lies in this Alliance
with France, And how comes it he will suffer his Country to be laid as wast, as
if the Turks had over run it? Let it not be wondered at, The French Pensioners
will have it so, And the two Brothers Furstenburgs are paid for it.

The Case being thus abroad, I wish our Island might boast of the same
happiness as to corrupt Counselors, Which Ireland injoyeth in their being free
from all Venomous Creatures, And that no politic Vipers might be able to
breath in our English Air without soon breathing out their lives, But alas! our
Chronicles do furnish us with two many Instances of the contrary, And without
looking any further back for Presidents his Majesty himself, and this Very
Parliament have (not many years since) sufficiently expressed how far they are
of opinion, that Great Ministers may betray their trust.

On the other side, because some have been guilty, they must not be all
indifferently condemned, And we ought to have a great care not to pass a rash
Verdict upon Persons whom his Majesty has irradiated with so many Illustrious
beams of his Princely favor. The safest way then not to wrong neither the
Cabel nor the Truth, is to take a short survey of the Carriage of the chief
Promoters of this War, Leaving the Judgment of either their Innocence or their
Guilt to the unprejudiced Reader.

1. I will not insist much upon some whispers (come too loud talking of late)
of the wonderful effects the French Kings Liberality had (almost four years
since in converting the strongest opposers of his Interest, and though there be
many od passages in it which are come to the Knowledge of several considerable
members of both houses) yet being not able my self to lay the whole matter
open, and having it only at the second hand, I leave the full discovery of it
to the party Concerned, who (I am informed upon the least encouragement, and
provided he may do it with safety to his Person) will at any time be ready to
trace out (in the view and to the satisfaction of the whole world) the first
steps toward our undoing, and to show plainly when the foundation of this
Mystery of iniquity was laid.

2. But howsoever whether all that is reported of this be true or not, I
suppose it is not usual to see so great a familiarity (as has been observed
long since between Foreign Ambassadors and First Ministers of State, Continual
treatings and frequent goings to Country Houses, there to stay several days,
and weeks, is a new thing in the World. And an Ambassadors using so Noble a
House with so much freedom, gave a just cause to all observing men to conclude
he had paid dear for it. I am sure his Majesty himself was not very well
pleased with it at first, Though they have proved pretty successful, in the Art
they have used since to reconcile him to their intrigues.

3. We have seen in the first part of this discourse, how far not only his
Majesty, but his Great men likewise thought it necessary to keep a true
balance between the respective Princes and States of Europe, and to stop the
progress of the French. What Steps where first made in order to it, and how the
Dutch were Courted into an Alliance with us; jointly to allay the Storms the
disturbers of mankind had raised, and Quench their devouring Flames. Nay, we
made it appear the Tripple League was not entered into, out of a personal
kindness to the Spaniards, but only for self preservation, and to prevent the
overrunning of Christendom. Whereupon it is worth the while to enquire of the
same parties, and desire them to inform both Houses, and the rest of the
Nation, which way the balance of Europe came to be so much altered; And what
has made the French since the Treaty of Aix (...) formidable than before? has
the House of Austria had any new accession of Power? or did the Invasion of
Lorain weaken the most Christian King? Could we value our selves four or five
years since, by raising some few Bancks against some few French Waves, and now
be as proud again of letting in their whole Ocean? The Jeopardy Europe was
supposed to be in was (most certainly) infinitely increased, And the same
Hanibal is now much nearer our Gates than ever he was, And yet we never thought
our selves so secure; and whilst the Ship of Europe is near sinking, the
Cabballe (which is the Measure of their faith) no not apprehend the least
danger. Happy men who can so suddenly be transformed into new Creatures! Who
would not wish to have a share in your enlightening Graces?

But to the matter of fact, by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle all Princes in
Christendom were invited into the garently for the greater security and
strengthening of the Agreement then made between Spain and France. Pursuant to
this (as we have said before) his Majesty sent a Minister to the Protestant
Princes in Germany to invite them into the Garenty of the said Treaty of Aix,
or in other words, into the Tripple League. And not long after, upon the same
Grounds Proposals were made to several other Princes, to draw them into the
same League; To which, the Duke of Lorrain (with some other that had promised
to come in) being very much inclined, and the thing being brought very near a
conclusion, the most Christian King (who by that time was most manfully working
under ground to destroy the Tripple League, and who dreaded nothing more than a
faster trying of that Gordiun knot) to prevent the Association, did very fairly
invade Lorrain, and was near taking the Duke himself Prisoner.

In this Invasion, there are three or four things that are observable. 1.
Besides the scandal of such an unjust oppression, and the indignation it ought
to have raised in all Princes, to see a Sovereign Prince thus ^ranted out of
his own Dominion; nothing could ever give a greater insight into the Ambitious
Designs of France, nor discover more fully their Intentions; none but an
Universal Monarch, can pretend to a right of displacing Princes, and disposing
both of their lives and of their Territories, and therefore nothing could
deserve a higher resentment, nor a more vigorous opposition from those that had
appeared so lately the Asserters of the liberty of Europe. 2. This Violance was
an open breach of the Pirenean Treaty, and consequently of the Treaty of Aix la
Chappelle, which was a renewing and a further confirming of the other. And so
far the Tripple League was concerned in it. 3. It was destructive to the very
end and scope of the said Treaty of Aix, which was to put a stop to the
progress of the French, and to the increase of their Power, the Addition of
that fair Dukedom, being as considerable, if not more, than their Conquest in
the Spanish Netherlands, and with all part of the Spanish Dominions, either
blocked up and Besieged by it (as Luxemburg) or cut off from the rest, and all
communication taken from them, as the County of Burgandy. 4. The great Zeal
which the Duke of Lorraine had expressed to join with the other Princes engaged
in the Tripple League, was the true cause why he was thus persecuted; though
some other unjust and frivolous pretenses were used.

Upon all these grounds, the Duke of Lorrain was in good hopes the Tripple
League would protect his innocence, and not forsake Europe by forsaking him.
And to quicken them, he sent some of his Servants to the respective Courts of
the Parties Engaged. Whereupon our great Men advised his Majesty not to concern
himself in the Quarrel, though his own inclinations and love to Justice, led
him not to refuse his Assistance to a Prince who had laid upon him many great
and high Obligations, and especially in an occasion wherein the Liberty as well
as the Honor of Cristendom was so far concerned. But the Ministers it seems,
carried it against their Master, and the Duke of Lorrains Envoy was sent back
with a Complement, and many expressions of kindness, but told withal, the
French Invasion was a Torrent not to be stopped at that time. A Torrent not to
be stopped at that time! And what was then the use of the Tripple League? what
will become of all the fine Speeches made in its Commendation? and was it
harder to oblige the French King to return Lorrain, than to force him to
restore the French Count, as he was by the Treaty of Aix; in case we had been
still true to our interest, and had been swayed by no other consideration? Idem
manens idem, semper facit idem.

About the same time, whereas we had sent to several Princes to invite them
into the Tripple League, the Emperor who might as justly have expected the same
Complement, did by a letter to his Majesty invite himself, and in conformity to
one of the Articles of the Treaty of Aix desired to be admitted into the
Garanty.

Upon the receiving of the Letter (his Majesty upon whose goodness some of our
great Men had not had time to work yet) assured the Spanish Ambassador (who had
delivered the Letter) he was glad his Emperial Majesty was so ready to come
into the League, and told him he would cause an Instrument to be prepared in
order to the said Admission. But when the resolution was taken, and Orders
given for preparing the said Instrument; It was first moved that Mr. Secretary
Trevor (who was not initiated in their holy Mysteries) might not have the
drawing of it though it was his proper Province, And then having made
themselves the sole Masters of the thing, a tolerable and reasonable honest
draught was first brought in, but before it was perfected, they acted their
part so ingeniously (with the help of Monsieur Colbert) that in the end they
possessed his Majesty with the opinion, that the admitting of the Emperor,
would be attended with very dangerous consequences; and that in case he came
into the League, his Majesty would be engaged in all his Quarrels, and bound to
make his Forces March (as the before mentioned Author of the Letter to Sir
Thomas Osborne expresses himself) into the farthest part of Germany, as often
as it should happen to be Invaded by the Great Turk. The late Secretary Trevor,
opposed this as much as he was able, and endeavored to satisfy his Majesty,
that the Garanty of the Tripple League, as well as of the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle, related only to the Agression and other Hostilities from either
France or Spain; Propteria (says the Treaty) by reason of the said Alliance.
But the wary cautious men (as well as of the greater number) carried it, And
the Emperors proffer was rejected.

Nay, as soon as some of our Semi Gods, had cut the fatal Tripple Knot, with
the Diamond Sword of their Alexander, the poor now, but formerly vaunted
Tripple League, was trampled under foot, turned into Ridicule and less vallued
than a Ballade: His Majesty and they themselves since the Treaty of Aix, had
thought it very rational and very necessary withal, to invite other Princes
into the said League, or in other words, into the Garanty of the Treaty of Aix:
pursuant to the VII. Article of the said Treaty, whereby all Kings, States, and
Princes, are invited into it. But as if they remembered neither his Majesty's
sending of Envoyes to the Princes of Germany, nor the words of the Treaty it
self: They tell us now (in the same Printed Letter) That the necessity of
inviting all Princes into the Tripple League, is a Maxim much in vogue with
some who looking very grave, do therefore take it very ill if for that reason,
you will not allow them to be infallible: And afterward because the Tripple
League is often mentioned, without mentioning the Garanty of Aix, (which is in
truth the thing meant by it) to say (says the Author) we should invite them
into the Tripple League -- That, if you mark, is such a kind of Figure in
discourse, as commonly is called a Bull. Fidem vestram, Dij imortales.

4. We have gone yet farther than all this, And the civil applications of the
French, and their kind entreaties, did so prevail with us, that loathing the
very thoughts of the Tripple League, and hating almost any thing that related
unto it; we sufferd an Agent of ours, one Marsilly, whom we had sent to the
Switzers to invite them into the Garanty of Aix (and who was intercepted and
taken Prisoner by the French, whilst he was very busy in the execution of what
commands he had received not many Months before from our Great-men) to be
broken upon the Wheel at Paris, although one single word from us would have
saved his life. Neither did we take it ill (such is our good nature) that upon
the very Scaffold, twenty Questions were put to him relating to his Majesty's
Person. And (in that public and infamous Place) a strict enquiry made into the
particulars of what had passed between him and the King of England, for thus
was his Majesty often mentioned and named.

5. But to take off somewhat of the wonder and strangness of our neglecting,
and forsaking our Leagued Friends for the most Christian Kings sake, we soon
showed as much self-denial in our own concerns and grew civilized to
admiration, by our inward converse with the Monsieurs, whereof we'll give only
three Instances.

The first is that whilst we stormed against the Dutch, for not promoting as
for as they were bound, the coming away of some Families that would leave
Suranam. we found no fault with the French, their keeping us above four years
out of St. Christophers, No more than with their destroying, in the mean while,
that part of the Island which belonged to his Majesty's Subjects. And we would
have thought it a rudeness in us, to have pressed too hard on his most
Christian Majesty for a speedy or punctual performance of his Articles. Nay if
the French Commanders in those parts are to be believed, there was very good
understanding in relation to the said Island, between some of our Grandees and
the Erench Court, as does appear by the Narrative my Lord Willoughby delivered
to the Council of Plantations, and which is Entered in their Books.

The next is, That by any Ordinance of the French Privy Council, (which is now
the Statute Law of that Kingdom) all their Sea and Land Officers, and
Commanders in the Islands of America being strictly enjoined and required to
secure their Master the Sovereignty of those Seas; the said Ordinances having
been brought in by a Person of Quality to the Cabinet Council, it was at first
to be declaimed against, but soon buried in oblivion, and put up amongst the
useless Papers, though the French Pursuant to it, has since much interrupted
our Trade, and have proved infinitely vexatious in so much (as I am credibly
informed) that the present Governor of Jamaica has sent word since his being
there) that notwithstanding their old Quarrel with the Spaniards it would be
much easier to keep a good Correspondence with them than with the French our
dear Allies.

And for a last Instance of our more than ordinary civility to the French
several Traders in London have prepared a Petition to his Majesty in Council,
to complain of the oppression their Factors and Agents lay under in France,
with a true state of their Case, and a short account of their grievances, this
came to the knowledge of some of our Great Ministers, and they having had the
perusal of them before the delivery of it, stopped by their Authority all further
prosecution of the matter, and put off the said Merchants with a promise they
would acquaint the French Ambassador with their Complaints, and see it should
be redressed through his means. How far they have been encouraged in their
Trade since that promise, they are best able to judge, but however it was not
fit the Nakedness of our dear Friends should be thus exposed to the whole view
of the whole Council Board.

And the foregoing particulars are more than sufficient to satisfy any
impartial and understanding Reader, how far the French have influenced our
Counsels; and withal they give us a great light, and help us much to discern,
whether in truth we have broken the Tripple League (or at least let it fall,
and dissolve of it self) for no other reason, but because we are constrained to
fall out with the Dutch, and to defend our selves against their oppression as
the so often cited noble Author would persuade us, or else if it may not be
said rather (and upon much better grounds) that because it was not the French
Kings Interest the Tripple League should subsist, we have therefore resolved to
break with the Dutch, Thus to be subservient to the ends of his most Christian
Majesty.

But by reason this might seem somewhat harsh at first, and be looked upon as
too severe a construction of our Great men's intentions, it is necessary to
evidence further, how industrious the Caballe have been in their endeavors to
make this War just (or to be thought so at least) after they had once resolved
to make War.

Thus they first made a great noise of infamous Libells, horrid Pictures,
Pillars set up and Medalls coined; to the infinite dishonor of his Majesty's
Person, and of his Royal Dignity, whereas to this day, none of those Libells or
Pictures could be produced, And the Pillars had never any being but in the
imagination of those who made it their work to raise a Jealousy between the
Two Nations, and set Europe in a Flame. It is true there was a Medal Coined
which might have been spared; but as soon as it was known in Holland, some
exceptions were taken at it, the Stamp was broken in pieces, and withal, all
impartial men that have seen it, could not discern any thing in it which could
give so much offense, or that looked like an affront intended to his Majesty.

Besides this, thinking it very material to have in this, as well as an the
late War, if not the clamor, at least the concurrence of the Traders; they
sent for several of them, and endeavored to draw from them some complaints
against the Dutch for the strengthening of the Good Cause. Wherein it is very
observable, that the Committee of the East India Company, being (amongst
others) desired to bring in their Grievances, they answered and gave it under
their hands, they knew of no wrong done to them by the Dutch since the Traty at
Breda. (or words to that effect) But it seems the Compiler of his Majesty's
Declaration was better informed, and knew more of the Companies concerns than
their Committee.

But all this not serving the turn, the difficulties which did arise in the
performance of the Conditions of the Surrender of Suranam, must be improved to
the height, And even after Secretary Trevor had adjusted the matter with the
States, and had received from them the Orders which were agreed upon, Banisters
going was retarded, and Sir John Trevors agreement (as if he had not faithfully
discharged his trust in it) submitted to the censure of the Counsel of
Plantations, where at last the said Banister pleaded so well his own and
Secretary Trevor's cause, that with much a do the one was cleared, and the
other dispatched away, though with many devices and tricks (too tedious to be
inserted here) which (if not prevented) might have made his Voyage altogether
unsuccessful: But we must not forget, that, the very men who found so much
fault with what Mr. Secretary Trevor had done, were themselves satisfied with
much less, before they had harkned to new Counsels: And were not a little Angry
with Colonel Banister for desiring more than the States were willing to grant.
What (was it said at that time) do you think we must make War for you: Or that
We are bound to procure you whatsoever may be advantageous, to your self, and
to your fellow Planters? Quantum mutatus ab illo.

Their next work and (in truth) Great Master Piece, was the sending the Yacht,
with Orders to Sail through the Dutch Fleet, and require striking to his
Majesty's Flag. And I am so far from justifying or excusing in the least the
refusal which the Dutch Admiral made to pay what respect was due to the English
Colors, that the States themselves do not own it, and are ready to enter into
any new Engagement for preventing the like for the future. But there are
several circumstances in it which are worthy of Observation: as, That the Dutch
Fleet was then at Anchor not far from their own Coast, and in a Station which
by many Geographers is accounted no part of the British Seas.

2. That the Dutch were out at that time in pursuance of the Tripple League,
and to be ready upon occasion to relieve the Spanish Nether Lands which were
threatened by the French, who were then in March with a considerable Army, and
came as far as Dunkerk, which one would think was a very unfit time to send out
on purpose to pick a Quarrel with them: And the rather because we had promised
the Dutch to set out a Fleet as well as they, to join with theirs, for the
common safety. 3. That the Pensionaire De Wit who Governed Holland at that
time with a more than Ministerial Authority, took a pride in standing in
punctillioes in all things relating to England, which makes the Common Wealth
it self to be less guilty of any disrespect showed, either to his Majesty, or
to the Nation, through the haughtiness and private animosity of their Minister.
And truly I must needs say, that of all the things that are laid to the said De
Wits charge, there is hardly any which would make me apt to believe there was
a Private understanding between the French and Him, than his carriage in this
business, and his demurring so long upon the satisfaction, which the greatest
part of the States were willing to give to England, whilst he knew full well,
that it was a Quarrel sought by our Ministers, who wanted some popular pretense
to make War, and keep their word to the French King. 4. That we stayed several
months before we demanded satisfaction, least if we had demanded it too early,
it had been granted us too soon. 5. That when Sir George Downing was sent over,
he was bound by his Instructions not to accept of any satisfaction from the
Dutch after a certain number of days which were prescribed to him, which is a
very irregular and unusual of proceeding in Embassyes, and much less
practicable in Holland than any where else, It being impossible to have the
resolutions of their Towns, and afterward of their Provinces without a
considerable time. 6. That this was made so much the more difficult by our
demanding not only the usual striking, which (though ever practiced and due to
England) was first Nationally agreed upon, in 1654. and confirmed by the two
Treaties with his Majesty in 1662. and 1667. But also a new kind of
acknowledgment of the Sovereignty of the Seas, which is not mentioned in the
said Treaties. So that by joining them both in A memorial, if the Dutch did
demur upon the second and so delayed the Granting of the first, it was a ready
way for us to clamor and possess the whole Nation, the Dutch had broken their
Treaty and refused to Strike to the English Flagg. 7. That after the Dutch had
given their answer to the said Sir George Downings Memorials, he refused to
receive it, and came away without it, against a second Order he had received
under his Majesty's own hand, for which also he was Committed to the Tower. But
not to wrong the Gentleman, we must also own, that though he had a positive and
latter Command from his Master, which did so far rescind his Instructions, yet
his friends have whispered in his behalf for his Justification, that he had
received at the same time Letters from some of our Great Ministers, who
conjured him as he tendered his own good to follow his Instructions and keep
close to them. 8. Lastly it is very observable that the Dutch having sent an
Express, the Answer, Sir George Downing would not receive, we first replied it
was dark obscure and insufficient. Upon which they sent an Extraordinary
Ambassador who jointly with the Leiger Ambassador told our Ministers, that his
Masters intentions and desire to give his Majesty all possible satisfaction in
the business of the Flagg, they both Ordered and Empowered him, to clear what
might be obscure or dark in their Answer, and supply what was insufficient, and
therefore desired them to instance in what they did not approve of, or did
think amiss, or else that they would be pleased to draw up themselves after
their own Method and way what Article they thought necessary for the preventing
of the like inconvenience. They Answered, the States with their Ministers knew
best how to Frame and Word their own Answers, neither could it be expected they
should draw up papers for them. Whereupon the Dutch Ambassadors brought them a
Project of an Article to be agreed upon concernig the Flagg, and asked them
whether it was Worded to their mind, and if that would satisfy them. To which
they gravely answered, that when they had signed and delivered it they would
tell them their mind concerning it. And the Ambassadors refusing still to
design it, unless they knew before hand it was Satisfactory, their conference
thus broke off, yet upon second thoughts, the Ambassadors having resolved to
sign the said Paper, and to deliver it at a venture, they demanded a New
Conference, which was promised them, and Seven of the Clock at night appointed,
on the Sunday after the Engagement with the Smyrna Fleet. But on the very same
day least the Dutch might comply further with us then we desired, our Grandees
did prevail with his Majesty to call extraordinarily a Counsel and to have
without further delay the Declaration of War, read and approved. So that when
the Ambassadors came at their appointed time, with their Paper ready signed,
they were told in short they came too late.

7. I might Add as many and as considerable instances of what Arts and Policy
our great Men have used to deceive his Majesty; And to bring him by degrees
into a liking of their War. But this matter being so ticklish and nice, That I
fear I should not be able to go through with it (although I took never so much
care) without exposing my self to the censure of the World, and having either
my intention or some of my expressions misconstrued. I think it much safer and
more prudent to draw a Curtain over that part of the Ministry of the Cabal, and
leave their Reputation so far untouched, since they have had the fill to weave
it (as it were) in more then one place into that of their Master.

8. For a farther clearing of this, and to satisfy our selves, as far as we
are able, whether the Construction we do seem to make of the Carriage and
Designs of the Cabal, be not to partial. It will not be amiss if we endeavor
to discover what their own Opinion was of it at first, and how far they were
persuaded themselves, their New Counsels were agreeable to the true Interest of
England, which will best appear by the two following particulars.

The first is, Their great care of not trusting with their Mysterious
Intrigues, persons, whose either quality natural Courage, Honesty, or
Experience, made them suspect they would be either too inquisitive, before they
would join and concur with them, or else too resty and froward, if they chanced
to be of another mind. And upon these fair and honest Grounds, they reformed
their Cabinet Counsel; and turned at once out of the Commitee for Foreign
Affairs, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Keeper, and the late
Secretary Trevor: This being the first Secretary of State that was ever kept
out of a Commission of that Importance. Not to mention several other eminent
and considerable Privy Counselors, who till then had been Commissioners in all
Negotiations and Treaties with France.

Now in case the Cabal had no Designs but what were for the Honor and the
Safety of the Nation, why they should so industriously to conceal it from
persons that have deserved so well both from his Majesty, and from the whole
Kingdom, is what passes my poor understanding: and whoever is able to unriddle
this, Erit mihi magnous Apollo.

But if this be convincing Argument, The next I hope will be somewhat plainer;
And both Houses are best able to judge, whether their sitting was so dangerous:
or how faithful those Counselors must be who could advise his Majesty to
Prorogue so often upon the French Kings desire; A Parliament whose Loyalty and
Zeal for their Sovereign, is not to be matched in no former Age. We do not hear
that either the Cecils or Walsingham ever advised the Queen their Mistress not
to call her great Counsel, or suffer them to meet, when she was preparing to
assist the Protestants in France, or to Protect the United Provinces against
Philip the Second. King James had no reason to fear his Parliament, who if they
came together, would not oppose the assistance of the Palsgrave. And his
Majesty now Reigning, has in the former War against the very same Enemies, had
a sufficient experience of the readiness of both Houses, to promote as far as
they are able, any design which they conceived may tend to the honor and
safety of his Government, and the prosperity of the Kingdom. Why then should
our Great men obstruct the cheerful Compliance of his Majesty's faithful
Subjects. 3. Why not to call upon those whose Assistance was so necessary, and
who never denied it when demanded? Let us not condemn them before we have all.
Parliaments (I speak it with due Reverence) are now and then Peevish things
that will not be satisfied with fair Words, and pry too far into Secrets that
are not to come to public view. Our Grandees were afraid, if so many
clear-sighted men came together; some one or other would spy out the Snake that
lay in the Grass, and if their mine had once taken vent, the whole Design had
miscarried. No, no, we will do better (says the Cabal) we will be wiser than to run
that hazard; we are resolved to make War, and will not be crossed in it by any
Parliamentary Clamours. If for want of a Parliament, we can have no English
Subsidies, we will make a shift with French Supplies: And if that does not serve
the turn (observe the Gradation,) we will shut up the Exchequer. In the mean while
the Smyrna and East India Fleets, will fall into our hands: And when we have
all that Treasure; who shall dare to find fault with us?

Having brought the Cabal thus far, we must before we part, wait once more on
some of them as far as Holland, and so take our leave of them.

We have already given some account in the first Part of this Discourse, of the
new Agreement entered into with the French King, by our Plenipotentiaries, and
demonstrated the fatal consequences of the same, what follows will clear it
farther.

The wonderful Progress of the French having surprised and frighted all Europe;
Our Court (who knew what slender provision was made for England in that
Conquest) was little less Alarmed than the rest: And our Grand Ministers were
dispatched in Post haste, both to the Dutch and to the French, their greatest
fear, when they went, being left they should come too late, and find the whole
Country under the French Subjection. After their Arrival in the Hague, they
begun their first Complements to the States Commissioners, that were sent to
wait upon them with all the Expressions imaginable, both of kindness to
Holland, and of concernmant and trouble to see the French so far advanced.
There they received an account of Monsieur de Groots Negotiation, and of the
great care the French took of his Majesty; which raised such an Indignation in
them, that nothing would serve their turn, but destroying out of hand, or at
least Mastering the French Fleet. And from thence removing to the Prince of
Orange his Camp; they renewed their kind Protestations: Assured his Highness,
That his Majesty's intention had never been to give way to the Conquest of the
United Provinces: The most Christian King himself, having often times declared
he only intended to humble their Commonwealth, neither was it fit to suffer
the French should go on at that rate. In the end they took upon them, and
engaged to do their utmost to bring the French Court to be Satisfied with
Maestricht, and the right of keeping Garrisons in the Towns upon the Rhyne,
that belong to the Electors of Brandenburg and Collen. And that in Case the
French refused to accept of those terms, they would then take new measures with
the States, and consider jointly of the best ways, to prevent the destruction
of their Common wealth, as well as the dangerous increase of the French.

With these fair promises and friendly assurances, they proceeded on their
Journey to his most Christian Majesty, who was some few hours riding from
thence; having behind them an infinite satisfaction in the minds of all
Persons, with great expectation of a happy Change, through their zealous
interposition. But what may not the Royal Eloquence of a most Christian King
do? What, will not his Golden Word persuade, after our Grand Ministers had been
some few days in the French Army, they found they were not mistaken before,
and began to have a clearer apprehension of things. The Negotiation of De
Groote, with the particulars imparted to them at the Hague, was a mere slander;
for so the French Court told them. The increase of the French Power was not to
be suspected or feared; they were too generous to abuse it. And therefore after
they had left the Prince of Orange, three or four days without News from them,
they at last sent him word, The States were to give satisfaction to both Kings
jointly: And that neither Crown could or would treat seperately. This
unexpected Message did infinitely surprise as well the Prince of Orange, as the
States. And his Highness (who had full power given him by the States to Treat
and conclude with England) not to be held longer in suspense answered the Pl
nipotentiaries, he desired to know what would satisfy both Crowns, and what
their respective demands were? Whereupon they sent him the joint Proposals
before mentioned, together with a Copy of the new agreement they were entered
into; concerning which we will add only to what has already been said, these
following Queries:

1. Whether they were sent only to promote the French Conquest; and if not how
they could think it advisable, by making the Peace impossible, to force the
Dutch (as far as in them lay to cast themselves into the Arms of the French
King, and submit themselves to his Domination?

2. Whether they can deny they knew the joint Proposalls tendered to the Dutch
should not be granted, since the French demands alone had been unanimously
rejected, and in that case, how agreeable it was to the Interest of England to
make it impossible for the Dutch to give his Majesty any satisfaction.

3. Whether, they had not received, as well from the Prince of Orange as from
the States Commissi ners, all possible Assurances of the infinite desire they
had to see his Majesty return to his former Amity with them, and of their
readiness to purchase it, at any rate, that the Condition they were in would
bear? If so how faithfully the Plenipotentiaries, discharged their trust in
neglecting those proffers, and entering into a New Engagement, which was so
Prejudicial to England as we have made it appear?

4. How far those that were joined in Commission with them did concur with them
in their Judgment, and whether all those considerations, with man other, were
not represented to them; And urged by some who had no other end, but to serve
their Master faithfully?

5. Whether or no it was for that Reason, they opposed so fiercely, My Lord
Vicount Hallifax (who came a day or two after them) his appearing and acting
jointly with them, though Commissionated in as full and as ample manner as
themselves.

6. Who were those (after my Lord Hallifax could be kept out no longer) who
went privately to the French Camp under several pretenses, and had still
Negotiations of their own on foot?

7. Whether they had Order to call the French King, the King of France, and to
name him still before his Master, as well as to set in the first place the
French demands before those of their Majesty; As all this was done in the
Copies of the Agreement they had made, and of both Kings pretensions which they
sent together to the Prince of Orange by Sir Gabriel Sylvius: And to which we
may appeal if the truth of this be doubted?

8. And Lastly, how far their Instructions will justify their standing in the
behalf of the French, upon a Public Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion
in the United Provinces, the Churches to be divided, and the Romish Priests
maintained out of the Public Revenue? As is set down more at large in the
second Head of the French Demands?

Having thus in all uprightness of heart stated as clearly as I am able the
present Grand case of the Nation, wherein I may truly say before God and his
Angels, I have Averred no one thing without Good Vouchers, (and such
respectively) as the nature of the thing does bear, I Will end with a few Summary
Hints of what we have discoursed at Large, and laying in all Humility both my
self and these reflections, as well at his Majesty's as at his Great Councills
Feet, I beg of them to take into their Serious considerations.

1. The Natural solid Greatness of the French Monarchy.

2. Their Ambitious and aspiring thoughts in all ages with the consequences of
the same.

3. The great Increase of their power under their Present King, both by Sea and
Land.

4. How far it was, not long since, thought fit to stop their Progress; And
what steps were made in Order to it, as well as the zeal, with which it was
carried on.

5. The carriage of the present French Court, and how they have dealt with most
Princes of Europe.

6. How kindly they have used both his Majesty in particular, and the whole
Nation.

7. How true they have been to their word, and to their reiterated promises and
other Engagements.

8. How faithfully they have performed Articles hitherto. And what security we
have, they shall be still ready to do worse.

9. The necessity of keeping a true Balance between the European Princes.

10. How dangerous it is to alter that Balance, when once settled on a solid
Basis.

11. The dreadful consequences of the Conquest of the United Provinces by the
French.

12. The unpossiblity of our Conquering them.

13. The Impracticableness or Disproportion of the supposed sharing and
Division of their Country, with the little advantage and benefit which at the
best would accrue to us.

14. How prejudicial and hurtful, would to the contrary, any possibility and
practicable sharing prove, the same being in truth no other than an absolute
French Conquest in a disguise.

15. How destructive the present War must needs be in the end, in Case the
Dutch shall be enabled by the assistance of their Allies, to recover what they
have lost, and to come out with as considerable a Fleet as ours.

16. How considerable these Allies are, and how much Christian Blood will be
shed by our wilful adhering to the French.

17. How unavoydable a breach with Spain will be, in case we persist in our
Alliance with France.

18. And how fatal the consequence of a Spanish War.

19. How much greater the danger will prove if the French be able to conqu^r as
well Germany and Spain as the United Provinces, and that no Confederacy of
Princes, how great and how powerful soever be a sufficient Balance to their
Forces.

20. And lastly, How faithful our Ministers have dischrged their Trust in these
great Emergences. How free they have been from dependences upon Foreign Courts.
How far they have been Jealous of their reputation in that particular. What
great care they have had of keeping up the Credit and the Reputation of the
Triple League, and of their own Masters with it. Their Backwardness (not to say
worse) in redressing, or at lest declaring against all the wrongs done by the
French, as well to his Majesty himself as to his Subjects. Their industrious
endeavors and various Stratagems to engage his Majesty, and the Nation in this
War, their Engrossing all business of concernment, and concealing the most
Important debates and resolutions from his Majesty's Privy Council. Nay their
keeping it unseasonably from his great Council, and putting off their Sessions
lest they might cross their designs. Lastly, the carriage of some of them in
Holland, and of the care they took of the Interest both of England and of the
Protestant Religion.

Now I call Heaven and Earth to record this day that I have set before you Life
and Death, Blessing and Curssing; Therefore choose Life, that both you and your
Seed may Live.

FINIS.

