LAMBETH FAIRE'S ENDED. OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE BISHOPS HOLY CHOST lately set
to sale at Lambeth Fair.

The Faeire is ended, all their trinkets sold,
The Holy Ghost remains, for that no Gold,
Could buy't, at which Dame Fortune she,
Spurns down the Prelates climing up her Tree.


Printed in the year, 1641.

LAMBETH FAIRE'S ENDED.
A Fair at Lambeth late the Bishops kept,
Where all their purtenance to sale was set,
Their Rochets, Tippits, Gowns, Cassocks and Hoods,
Lawne sleeves, slippers, Caps, all spiritual goods,
The wonder of the World, their great Library,
Containing prayers, as good as Ave Mary,
Teaching how Priests and Deacons may be made,
How they or any fool may work o'th Trade;
But that which is most strange of all to tell,
'Twas said they had a holy Ghost to sell,
The rarest thing that e're was set on sale,
It Is breathed with th'Bishops mouth, not with his tail,
The news whereof being blundred every where,
Has brought a Chapman to the Town I hear,
Would give five pound at least this Ghost to buy,
If first to him some friend would but discry
The properties thereof, and whence he came,
What fears and works a man may do by the ^ame;
To satisfy him herein, as I may,
One word or two thereof I mean to say:
The witch of Endor had a Ghost we know,
That secret things unto the witch could show,
Secrets as great as those this Ghost can tell,
He knows Belzebubs mind what is done in hell,
This makes our Bishops and each Jesuit
To know such depths because they have this spright.
Laud, Wren, and Waller nere had been so wise,
But that this Ghost did each of them advise.
This Ghost is not more wise then he is meek,
He looks not like a wolf, but like a Sheep,
He Will neither bite nor scratch except a Scot,
Or factious puritan, I had like forgot,
For faction yet this Ghost could nere abide,
There Is always peace where this strong man does guide,
The broiles in Scotland late had never been,
Had this Ghost still been harbored therein.
This holy ghost in England was not known,
Till Austin Monk was hither sent from Rome,
Therefore he brought it with him men conceive,
And when he dyed, at Lambeth did it leave,
Providing then, that each of his successors
Of this his holy ghost should be possessours,
Wherefore so soon as bishops there are seated,
With this his holy ghost they are completed.
The feats which by this holy ghost are done,
Are easiest seen if that we look upon
The reverend rout, in whom this ghost does dwell,
And mind how they in feats all men excel,
Sir John the least and meanest parish priest,
VVha^ by this ghost he does thou daily see,
Matt^ns and Even-song how fine he chanteth,
Which none besides can do this ghost that wants,
A Sow-gelder or Cobbler may have skill,
To read the same in some place if they will,
Within a bulk or chimney by the fire,
But to the pulpit, they may not aspire;
A button-maker happily may attain,
To say a preach or homily amain;
But what of this we see all men repine
Thereat, he wants this Ghost, he is no Divine.
Cannot each little boy, if there were need,
Say all verbatim which sir John does read?
When he in marriage N. and E. does join,
Yet little boys thereby can get no coin:
None but sir John by reading this can merit,
Cause he alone injoyes the bishops spirit,
The difference thus twixt Laity and priest,
This holy ghost does make hereby thou see.
This ghost yet further that we may applaud,
Lets leave sir John and come to little Laud,
This worthy wight has well become his place,
Since first he was partaker of his grace,
Which will be true by every man's confession,
If Land agree with those of right succession,
Compare him then with the first of Lambeth race,
Austin the Monk, Lord Canterburies grace,
who in the least this pope did not excel,
His Ghost did rule this pope hereby we spell,
What did that Monk that any man can name,
That this pope does not do the very same,
This ghost that Monk then of the church made head
This ghost set up this pope late in his stead,
That Monk by this ghosts help then priests did make
This ghost this pope herein did never forsake;
This Pope has made as many good Divines,
As any that Monk made in former times:
That Monk for worship then set up the Mass,
This ghostly Pope has brought the same to pass;
That Monk by this Ghost; help Canons did indite,
This Ghost did teach this Pope to make the like;
That Monk for any thing that I can hear,
Made none more good then this Pope made last year,
Such as that Monks Canons would not obey,
By his Ghosts means their lives were taken away;
This Pope in that Monks rode has rid full trot,
To take away both English lives and Scot,
Because the Scot his Laws would not accept,
And Protestants in England them reject,
This Pope that Monk in some things does outstrip,
That Monk had neither Pillory nor whip,
This Pope has both to curb and keep in awe,
Such elvish folks as will not keep his law;
That Monk had but two ears for ought I know,
This Pope had 6. or 8. at least to show;
Hereby since 'twas that Bensteeds drum did beat,
This Ghostly Father did so quickly hear't.
Yet more of late, no man durst speak for fear,
This Holy Father was so quick o'th ear,
And all was from this Ghost, deny't who can,
For since't has left him he is like another man.
Another man said I, stay there, I doubt,
Benedicite, he walks not now abroad, sure has the gowt
Whether in his head or toe I am not sure,
But it is reported that he is grown past cure.
And more then this, at which he cannot laugh,
To save his life his toe or head must off.
What shall I say this Ghost more to extol,
Ask Doctor Wren, he will say it is all in all.
Would any one o'th holy Order be,
Get but this Ghost, o'th Company he is free.
If any one desire great wealth to get,
Buy but this Ghost he will their humor fit?
Would any live in pomp, state, pride, or ease,
Procure this Ghost, he will your fancy please?
In Cassock, Gown and Tippit would you flant it,
Purchase this Ghost, and then you shall not want it,
If these should chance now to grow out of wear,
He has something else will fit you do not fear;
Would you in each man's purse still have a hand,
Then gain this Ghost, and none dare you withstand
It is no theft, robbery, nor cheat,
Having this Ghost, you each man's field may reap?
Would thou have all winds to blow in thy gain,
Once get this Ghost, and this thou shall obtain,
For this is clear for all to see that will,
All winds do turn these Ghostly fathers mill,
Has any one a Christen soul to make,
The Holy Priest therein will have a Stake,
This Christen soul if next day chance to day,
This Holy Priest will find no cause to cry;
Is any one disposd a wife to wed,
Sir John must have ten groats fore he be sped,
A Spit in Lent turns not in any fashion,
Without these Ghostly Fathers approbation.
How come the Hood and Surplice to be holy,
Its from their Ghost we know they have it wholly:
And if I fail not in my observation,
Without this Ghost no holy consecration,
Of Temples, Altars, Crucifix, or Tables,
Of Fonts, or Bells, or any the Popes bables,
Without this Ghost a Bishop knows not how,
To make a Priest more holy then a Sow,
And were it not for this unholy spirit,
What parish Clarke could holiness inherit.
But for this Ghost I pray you tell me when,
Our Correstors would become holy men.
A hundred other things this spirit does,
Which this time to declare I Am very loath.
This that is writ may please the Chapmans mind,
He may imagine the rest which is behind,
Hereby to him it plainly does appear,
He cannot buy this Holy Ghost too dear,
But if he think herein I do but scoff,
Ask Sir John Lamb, he will swear all is true by's troth.
FINIS.

