Miracles of the B. Virgin.

OR, AN Historical Account OF THE Original, and Stupendous Performances OF THE
IMAGE, ENTITLED, Our Blessed Lady of Halle.

VIZ. Restoring the Dead to Life, Healing the Sick, Delivering of Captives, etc.

Written Originally in Latin, by Justus Lipsius; afterward translated into
French, then into Dutch, and now rendered into English.

Ecclesia Catholica and fundata est Miraculis, and Conservata. Costerus in
Ench. Cont. p. 102. London, Printed in the Year 1688.

To the Reader.
THose of the Roman Communion, have imposed on the belief of Mankind such
Fabulous Legends, and Ridiculous Stories, that I think it a sufficient Antidote
against their Errors, to expose some of these pretended Miracles to the view of
the World; it is to this that I have Transloted the following Relations. It
will not be amiss to give my Readers some account of the Book, from whence I
Translated these Relations, which I shall do as briefly as I can. Justus
Lipsius published a Book in Latin, in the year 1604. Entitled Diva Virgo
Hallensis Beneficia ejus, and Miracula, Fide, atque Ordine descripta. This
Treatise was Licensed and Approved by Gulielmus de Berghes, Archbishop of
Camerick, Valerianus Flossius Vicar General, and Gulielmus Fabritius, the
Censor of Books. It was Translated into French, and augmented by Claudius
Maillard a Jesuit; it was Translated into Dutch by Philip Numan, and again into
French by Ludovicus du Gardin a Physician; it was afterward again rendered into
Dutch, with Maillards Additions, by N. N. a Jesuit, and Printed at Brussels
Anno 1657. It is Licensed by the Censor of Books, but there is a Caution in the
Licensing of it, which was not made use of in the Latin Edition of Lipsius; and
it is, That none of these Miracles shall be received upon the Credit of the
Church, unless, at least, they be attested by a Bishop, but shall be taken upon
the Credit of the Faithful Historian; and this was in obedience to the two
Bulls of Pope Urban the 8th. to that purpose. It seems that they began to blush
at these Ridiculous Stories, but yet they would have the Commonalty believe
them, though not at the expense of the Public Faith. I have in this
Translation most followed the Dutch Edition, which is divided into three parts;
the first is spent in the Description of the City of Halle, and the Image;
which I have rather abridged than translated. All that I have taken from this
part, is comprised in my first Chapter, and is (tho an abridgment) in the
Authors own words for the most part; the Miracles make the second part, which
is subdivided into two parts; the first whereof contains all the Miracles that
are in Lipsius; it is this that I have taught to speak English. The third part
is an account of the gifts offered to the B. Virgin; Lipsius's Treatise met
with some opposition in the World, and was defended by Anastasius Cochelet, a
Camelite, and D. D. of Paris, and by Carolus Scribanius a Dutch Jesuit.

Because I would not give the least opportunity to the Romish Calumniators, to
traduce me as a false Translator, I have rendered it almost verbatim, though I
am not Ignorant that it is esteemed to be an Error by the best Translators.

CHAP. I. Of the Original of the Holy Image; a short Description of the noble
Descent and Virtue of the Holy Elizabeth.
IN order to a clearer prospect of the Original of this Holy Image, Hist. Hall.
Lips. c. 2. ad P. Maillard, c. 6.
it seems necessary to enquire into the royal Pedigree, and constant Virtue of
the pious Elizabeth.

Andreas II. surnamed Hierosolymitanus, the third Son of Bela III. King of
Hungary; after the Death of his Brothers, inherited the Kingdom of Hungary,
Anno 1201. His Queen was Gertrude, Daughter to the Duke of Mernhem, Krenten and
Istrien, by whom he had three Sons and one Daughter, viz. Bela IV. Celomannus,
Andrew and Elizabeth. Andrew being desirous to advance himself, traveled to
Venice, and there married a rich Wife, by whom he had a Son named Marcus.

Marcus not being contented with the Estate his Father left him possessed of,
went to Picardy, and there married Catharine de Croy, legal Heiress of the
House of Croy, descended from the Palsgraves of Hungary, and Wittenberg; from
this Marriage sprung that illustrious Family of Croy.

Elizabeth (which most serves our Design) Daughter, as above, of Andrew II.
King of Hungary, and Aunt to Marcus; at the Age of three Years, was by
Ambassadors betrothed to Lewis Son of Hermon, Landgrave of Thuringia and
Hassia, descended from Charles the Great. At the Age of four Years she was
conveyed to Thuringia, to be educated in her Bridegrooms Fathers Court. It
would be tedious to relate the Signs of a Pious Disposition, visible in her
Infancy.

It shall suffice to remark, That being then a Virgin, and afterward both Wife
and Widow, her virtuous Deportment in all these Estates rendered her Famous:
The Painters and Carvers represented her with three Crowns on her Head;
intimating that she had merited a Crown from each State. At the Age of
fourteen, she was married to Lewis, and had Issue by him, viz. Hermannus (who
did not live long) and Sophia, also another Daughter of the same Name, or
according to some, her Name was Gertrude; she left this World for a Cloister.

Lewis accompanying the Emperor Frederick, to assist in the conquest of the
Holy Land, dyed in Apulia, or as some affirm in Sicilie. His Body was sent to
Elizabeth, who with extraordinary Grief interred it. Henry her Husbands
Brother, after many Injuries offered to her, not only bereft her of all her
Estate, but banished her so hastily, that she could hardly find a Place of
Ropose for herself and Children. She retired to Marpurg in Hassia; where after
having spent four Years in all manner of virtuous Exercises, by the Assistance
of one Conrad, a religious Man, she departed this Life, being but twenty four
Years of Age, Anno 1231. Her Sanctity and Miracles caused Pope Gregory IX. to
add her to the number of the Saints, Anno 1235.

Sophia her eldest Daughter, and Heiress rather of her Virtue than Estate, went
into the Netherlands, where she was married to Henry II. Duke of Brabant. He
had Henry III. by his first Duchess Maria van Swaven, Daughter to the Emperor
Philip. He had also by Sophia another Henry, surnamed The Brabander: He with
the Assistance of his Mother, made diverse Attempts for the acquisition of their
Inheritance, which the strength of the adverse Party rendered ineffectual: But
at last he regained Hassia, and lest his Posterity possessed of it, more by the
Prayers of Elizabeth than the Assistance of his Mother. But leaving this
neighboring History, let us come to those things for which cause it was
related.

Sophia, Inheritrix of her Mothers Piety, being willing to follow her Example
in all things, was strongly inclined to the Veneration and Love of our B. Lady.
It Is really believed, That her Mother bequeathed her some Images of the B.
Virgin, which in remembrance of her, she loved and esteemed more than ordinary;
whereof she gave one to the Cloister of Carmelite Nuns at Vilvord, which has
been anciently as famous for its Miracles as of late; its title is, Our B. Lady
of Consolation; intimating that several Persons have there been delivered from
their Maladies, and acquired ease both of Body and Mind. She gave three other
Images to Mechtildis, Sister to Duke Henry, her Husband, who being a Widow had
married Florentius IV. Earl of Holland and Zealand, from which Nuptials sprung
the honored William II. who was in the contention chosen Emperor of Germany.

Mechtildis's reception of these Images of Sophia, in process of Time had a
better Effect than could have been, if she had received them from Elizabeth her
self, who had been long dead; and the great Distance that was between their
several Habitations, might have prevented any Acquaintance between them.
Mechtildis not long before her Decease, distributed the Images in diverse
Places: She placed one at Gravesand, Lips. his. Hall. c. 3.
an ancient though small City of Holland, situate near the Cloister of
Loosduynen, which she had founded, and where after her Husbands Death, she
piously and chastely spent the remainder of her Life. She gave another to the
Carmelites Church at Haerlem. And the third (which is our Image) she bestowed
at Halle in Henegow: But why was this placed there? I believe because her
Daughter Adelheydis was married to John of Avennes, Earl of Henogowe, some
Years before her Death. To which we may add, Die A. 1267. geschiedenis. Lips.
c. 3.
That she had a Daughter of her own Name, who being married to the Earl of
Hennenberg, had at one Birth 364 Children, which were baptized altogether by
the Bishop of Vtrecht: An Event that looks more like a Fable than a true
History, did not our Annals so firmly and unanimously assert it. But to return
to our Design, as the stubborn were apt to calumniate, so the Religious admired
by what means the Holy Elizabeth collected so many Images of the B. Virgin.
Both which may be satisfied by Haraeus, who says, Tom. 1 Ann. l. 12
That she her self, or some Body for her, received them from her Aunt, the
religious Heduwigis, (Wife to Hedricus Barbatus Prince of Slesia and Poland)
who knew the virtuous Disposition of her Niece. The Reason of this Conjecture
might be, That in her life time, she was found to have a great quantity of
Images of the B. Virgin, which she very much reverenced: She kept a small one
commonly in her Hand, as well to excite her Devotion with the sight of it, as
to bless and heal the Sick: Nay, which is more, she so venerated that Sacred
Image, that she dyed with one between her Fingers, and was in that Posture
interred. Some Years after her death, her Body was found consumed, except the
two Fingers, which with their former Vigor graspt the sacred Image. This is the
Reason why the Painters represent her with an Image in her Hand.

To speak more particularly, This holy Image is composed of Wood, it is about
three Foot high, sitting on a Chair and offering her left Breast to the Child
to suck, the Clothes and other Ornaments veil it from our Eyes: It is not
esteemed for its composure, nor the Matter whereof it is composed, (that being
slight and common) nor its black Color, caused by its Antiquity, and the Smoke
of Lamps; but there is a more than Human Majesty attends it, because it
represents the B. Virgin, who is so honorable, and has done so many Miracles,
and does daily. That Character, Nigra sum, sed formosa, might here take Place!
This Meanness of the Image, ought not to diminish Wisemens Devotion, nor the
Veneration of the Simple and Illiterate. Here that falls in very opportunely
which Wichmans remarks, viz. Brab. Mar. l. 1. c. 37.
That amongst all the miraculous Images of the B. Virgin (especially those that
were found in the Netherlands) there was none whose matter was sumptuous, or
composure elegant. Therefore they would not be esteemed, were not their worth
enhanced by Faith; which neglecting the Curiosities of the Image, fixes it self
upon the mighty Power of God, which appears through the Images in the Operation
of Miracles. This gives us a clear Prospect of the Divine Providence, in
bereaving the World of all Occasions of Idolatry by this meanness of the
Images; for on the contrary, had they been elegant and costly, the unthinking
Vulgar would have appropriated their Honor and Veneration to their Splendour;
and the Obstinate would think and affirm, That we therefore honor the Type,
but not for the Sake of the Prototype: Yet we ought not to hinder the making of
costly Images in honor of the B. Virgin, for they represent her as well, nay
better than the meaner, if they be miraculous.

The B. Virgin began to be honored in this Image, and to perform various
Miracles about the Year 1267. in the time of Nicholas de la Fountain the fifty
first Bishop of Camerick, Beverlink theat. L. E. V. Epus.
a Man of extraordinary Piety and Virtue; and as his Suffragan Thomas
Cantipratanus (who was born at Leew near Halle) affirms, a great Honourer of
the B. Virgin, a worthy Scholar to Albertus Magnus, and School-fellow with
Thomas Aquinas, all ardent Lovers of the Mother of God.

CHAP. II. The Blessed Virgin defended the City of Halle from the Power of her
Enemies.
LEt us now with a thankful Acknowledgment relate the wonderful and memorable
Actions, which the Queen of Heaven, and Mother of Mercy has performed to so
many afflicted and comfortless Persons. And here we must not omit, That the
wooden Image, which is several hundred Years old, and yet is so far from the
usual Concomitants of Antiquity, that it is not in the least injured by Time,
nor the frequent Fires, which the Neighbors affirm have consumed the adjacent
Houses.

The B. Virgin has not only preserved her Image and Church from the impetuous
Flames; but has several Times defended the City against the Power and Force of
its Enemies

Philip Cleve, in the Year 1489. (chief of the Enemies of Maximilian I. and his
Son Philip) seeing that Halle was a Thorn in the Foot of the Brussellers,
treacherously bought some of the Burghers to his side, that when he should
come, they should give him entrance into the City; he was on his March with
6000. Men, and had surprised the City, had not a Burgher of Brussels, by chance
(why say I by chance, it was by the appointment of the B. Virgin, who watched
over her City) been imprisoned, who discovered the Plot: The Burghers made use
of this Discovery, and let Philip of Cleve march on with his Army, pass the
Moat, and climb the Walls, and then with an extraordinary Courage forced him to
retire with Shame and Dishonor.

Philip seeing the ill Success of his first Assault, having procured more
Strength, and armed himself better, made a second Assault; he had now 10000.
Men, his Design was carried on with such Speed, that he surprised twenty
Soldiers in the Fields without the City; the City was guarded with no stronger
a Garrison than 250. Men, which rendered his Dishonor the greater. He planted
his Ordnance, and battered down so much of the Walls, that three Wagons could
go in abreast; others shot with Bombs so violently, that many Houses were in
Danger of burning. In this apparent Danger, the Burghers were thunder-strook
with Fear and Astonishment: All human Helps were ineffectual, which caused them
to rely on the Goodness of Heaven. They applied themselves unto the Blessed
Virgin, and being encouraged by an Expectation of her Help, and accompanied
with spiritual Assistances, they resisted so stoutly, that by Sunset, the
Enemy having lost his Men and Courage, was forced to raise the Siege, openly
proclaiming, That it was more than human Power that vanquished him. During the
Fight the Women were very busy in quenching the injected Fire; there was ten
Women in one House, so much endangered, that all people thought they had been
choked or burned; but they were delivered without any great Damage, and went
each of them to her own House.

There was none in Halle, whose countenance did not express an extraordinary
Joy, and there was a joyful and universal Thanksgiving to the B. Virgin. On the
next Day the Enemy being resolved to hazard another Assault, there arrived a
Messenger from the valiant Prince Charles of Croy to the Burghers, promising
them his Assistance within three Days: This caused an extraordinary Joy to
possess the Citizens Minds, which showed it self in beating of Drums and
ringing of Bells: This unusual Triumph raised a Suspicion and Fear among the
Enemies, which hurried them to so hasty a Flight, as forced them to leave their
Dead and Wounded, and Appurtenances behind them in the City-Moats, and in the
Way. In Remembrance of this great deliverance, there was reserved one hundred
Iron and Stone Bowls, weighing some thirty, others forty, and some sixty Pound:
By this we may see the Strength of those Cities (though weakly fenced) which
the B. Virgin has chosen to govern.

For the Remembrance of this Victory, the Burghers spend the Even of the tenth
of July in all Expressions of Joy, and the Morning in Devotion; they sing a
solemn Thanksgiving-Mass, and carry the Host in Procession along the Streets
and Walls.

CHAP. III. The Punishment of two Blaspheemers.
WE will descend a little to our Times, and by an Action worthy of Derision,
evince the Power and Praise of the B. Virgin.

In the Time of the bloody Netherland-Wars, 1580.
Oliver vanden Tempel had the chief Charge of the Magazeen in Brussels. The
City of Halle, as also Henegow and Artois, put themselves under the King of
Spains Protection: This so enraged Oliver, that he marched twice courageously
against the City, thinking that none of the neighboring Cities (which were all
his Allies) would hinder his Design: There was scarce forty Soldiers in the
City, the Citizens young and inexpert; for all this he was courageously beaten
off the first Day: Then under Pretense of a feigned Retreat, he sent presently
for all the Soldiers out of the neighboring Cities, and came again before
Halle with more Strength, before they knew of it. His Soldiers being on their
March, heightened the Valor of each other with courageous Speeches; amongst
the rest, one John Swickius an impious Fellow, said, He would cut off the Nose
of our little Lady of Halle (so he called the B. Virgin). They came before the
City, and when both Sides began to Shoot, a Musket-bullet took off Swickius's
Nose, (it was undoubtedly directed by the B. Virgin.)

But John Risselmans was more insolent and rude: This Villain said, That he
would carry the Image of the B. Virgin to Brussels, and make a Bonefire with
it. This Impious Calumniator thought not of the approaching Fire that shortly
after reached him; For a Cannon-Bullet hit him, and carried his Jaw along with
it, which was the Cause of his Death shortly after. This was the Fortune of
those that came to fight against the City of Halle, that is against the B.
Virgin.

CHAP. IV. A Servant having lost his Masters Falcon, and being upon the Ladder
to die for it, was delivered from his approaching Death, by the Assistance of
the B. Virgin.
THe following Relation is attested by ancient Records, and an old Wooden
Image, although Time has bereft us of the Year when it was done, and the Names
of the Persons. The Dutch Nobility (before they were destroyed by War) were
great Lovers of Hawking and Fowling; for this End they had diverse expert and
costly Hawks brought unto them from the North. A Nobleman, whose Severity is
better known to us than his Name, was addicted to this Exercise, and had a
Falcon which he highly esteemed; this Falcon, either by an unhappy Chance, or
the carelessness of the Falconer, flew away past recovery: The Nobleman
understanding his Loss, was so enraged that he swore, If his Servant did not
find his Falcon within five Weeks, his Head should satisfy the Loss. He made
all possible search in Woods and all other likely Places, but in Vain, the
Falcon was irrecoverably lost: At the five Weeks end, he could not prevail with
his Lord for one Weeks Respite, but he still persisting in his Resolution,
caused a Gallows to be immediately erected before his House, the Executioner
bound his Eyes and led him up the Ladder, standing with the Rope about his
Neck, he remembered Halle, And your Mercy, O Blessed Virgin! which he shortly
after experienced, yea it even met his Devotions; for while he was at his
Prayers, and directed his Heart to You, he thought that he heard the clapping
of the Wings of a Fowl, which gave him some Hope, he desired his Master that
his Eyes might be unbound, that he might send his Prayers to Heaven with a
Freedom of Sight; his Request was granted, then renewing his Invocations of the
Blessed Virgin, the Falcon flew swiftly toward the almost dying Person, and
settled upon his Shoulder. Some affirm, That the Falcon came not until he had
been turned off the Ladder; but this is not attested by the Image which he
offered. All the Spectators congratulated his Preservation, and wished him all
Felicity, and he rendered Praise and Honor unto the B. Virgin. His Lord might
with his Falcon catch Partridges, but on that Day the B. Virgin caught the best
Prey.

CHAP. V. One was delivered from Drowning.
THat the Mercy of the Mother of God is more abundant than the Waters, Paslinus
shall evince, 1380. 1 August.
who was a Burgher of Enghen in Henegow. In August in this little City, arose
such a grievous Tempest, mixed with hard Thunderbolts, dreadful Lightning, and
thick black Rain, that the swelling Springs, Stone-ways, Houses and
Water-mills, were washed away by the prevailing Stream, and turned the Land
into a Sea; all now sought some Refuge, one got up on high to preserve himself
from Water, another crept into a Hole for Shelter against the Lightning.
Paslinus betook himself to his Cellar, as well to preserve himself, as some
Victuals, and Household Stuff; as he was busy there, he was overrun with
Water, there was no Opportunity of Flighht, nor Hopes of human Help: He
resolved in this extreme Necessity with a Prayer to commit himself to the
Charge of the B. Virgin; and immediately he found help, for he espied a little
above a Door, which he caught hold of, and hung there two Hours, yet the Water
was up to his Chin, and sometimes it rise above his Head, but did not continue
so any Time; the approaching Night filled him with dismal Apprehensions of its
length, and made him renew his Supplications to the B. Virgin, who cast forth
her bright Beams, and considerablely increased his Strength, inabling him to
keep his Hold at the Door until the next Day, and his Deliverance appeared, for
on the Morning the Waters were sunk; yet he understood, to his great Grief,
that his Wife and Child were drowned in the Inundation. He offered a
Waxen-Image in Honor of the B. Virgin, and came accompanied with seventeen
Witnesses to return her Thanks; for it was she alone that kept him from his
approaching Death.

CHAP. VI. A drowned Child restored to Life.
A House accompanied with many Children and much Water, fills the Parents
Hearts with Fears. A young Child unhappily evinced the Truth of this, to his
Fathers Grief, and the Glory of the B. Virgin. The Father missing his Son,
after having spent two Hours in a vain Search for him feared that Misfortune
which afterward happened; for he found him drowned in a Pool, his Head in the
Mud, and his Feet out of the Water; he drew him out, but found no Sign of Life
remaining in him: After he had lain thus a full Hour the Father cast a
sorrowful Eye toward his Child, and sent a Prayer for Mercy to You, O Blessed
Mother! His Thoughts had hardly reached Halle, before the Child was restored to
Life and began to stir, and to rise up, and walked home with his Father. The
Waters of Death abound in all Places, but in Halle there flows a Fountain of
Life.

CHAP. VII. A Person possessed by the Devil, was dispossessed.
IF an ill Guest be a great Burden, how bad must it then be for a Man to
harbor his worst Enemy, not only in his House but in his Body. Reynier
Willegem a Burgher of Oudenaerde, a stout Man and of a robust Body, was after
our Ladies Ascension-day possessed by the Devil; this hellish Spirit seized him
as follows, He raved and foamed, and tore himself and others, his Countenance
sufficiently evidenced the Malignity of his Guest. His Friends knew no better
Remedy than to invoke the Aid of our Lady of Halle; their Prayers were heard,
the Devil ejected, and Reynier regained his pristine Liberty. That hellish
Serpent might well fear, That our B. Lady would not spare his Members, whose
Head she had broken.

CHAP. VIII. A Child being Blind and Diseased was cured. This in the Original
is in Verso.

THis Child's Name was Nicholas, his Father lived at Liege: This Nicholas was
not only Blind but very Weak and Infirm; The Fame of the Blessed Virgin of
Halle having reached that place, the Father addressed himself to her in behalf
of his Son; who had both his Sight and Health restored unto him, and offered a
Silver-Image in Honor of the B. Virgin.

CHAP. IX. Some delivered from Shipwreck.
WE have hitherto confined our Discourse to the Land, let us now plunge our
selves into the midst of a horrible Tempest, and there behold the Star of the
Sea, the B. Virgin shooting the Beams of her Mercy. 1405.
A Ship which departed from Holland being bound for Antwerp, encountered a
dreadful Storm on its Way thither, and the approaching Night doubled the
Danger, and the Fears of those on Board her, and the Pilot told them the Ship
was lost, also that he had done all that he could, and advised every one to
think upon his Soul, that they might reach the Heaven of Felicity. This made
them fill the Air with Lamentations and Cries, and Prayers: One of the Seamen
said unto them, Wherefore do we not betake our selves to the B. Virgin of
Halle? They immediately followed his Counsel, and presently a bright Light
visible above the Ship dispelled the Clouds of Night from their Eyes, and those
of Fear from their Hearts, and conducted the Ship to its desired Key. The
Master with some of the Men (like another Noah) went to Halle, to present his
Thank-offering to the B. Virgin.

CHAP. X. A Gentlewoman was delivered from her Distraction.
HE that has the Use of his Senses enjoys many Blessings that are not taken
notice of, but the want of them renders a Man poor. 1407.
This was exemplified in a young Gentlewoman of the House of Angerelle, who
being very Beautiful, and of a healthful Constitution, became Distracted; her
Mother spared neither Labor nor Charge for her Curing, although it proved
Ineffectual; she then had Recourse to Halle, and by an ardent Prayer,
recommended the miserable Estate of her Daughter to our Lady, and whilst she
was at her Devotions in the Church, the Mother of Mercy performed a Miracle at
Home, for her Daughter was cured at the very same Time.

She came to thank the B. Virgin, and offered a Waxen-image of 110 l. weight
correspondent to the Weight of her Daughter; but the Miracle can never be
overweighed.

CHAP. XI. A Boy was delivered from Drowning in the Maze.
AT Hocy five Boys went into a Boat, 1408.
they lanched into the River and wantonly played together in the Boat; but
their Sport had not continued long, ere the swelling of the Maze and Strength
of the Winds interrupted it, and tossed the Boat so violently, that they could
hardly get to the Shore: But as soon as they were got to Land, four of them
leapt out of the Boat, and with their leaping made the Boat fly back on the
Water, the fifth, who was about fourteen Years Old, remained in the Boat;
immediately the Wind and Waves tossed the Boat aloft, and presently plunged it
into the Deep, and turned it upside down so violently that the unfortunate Boy
was thrown out amongst the Waves; the four that had leaped Ashore, by their
Cries drew the People to the Waterside, and amongst the rest the Boys Mother:
What could she do? she said, O B. Virgin who art honored at Halle, I promise
that I will come thither with my Son to serve you, if it will please you to
deliver him from his approaching Death. The Vow was hardly uttered, ere he was
driven toward the Bridge by the mighty Force of the Waters, he passed the
Arches of the Bridge uninterrupted, and floated along amongst the Waves about
the space of half a Mile, to a place where the overflowing River softly laid
him down.

O wonderful Goodness! the Boy wrestled with the Waves, and was as it were
carried in the soft Arms of the blessed Virgin.

CHAP. XII. A Child which was Strangled was restored to Life.
IN the City of Bins, 1419.
there was a poor Chair-Woman, by name Catharine; she had a small Child whose
Name was Christopher; being gone abroad to work on Easter-eve, one of her
Neighbors knocked at her Door, and finding it slightly shut entered the House,
poor People who have nothing to lose have no Cause of Fear: This Woman found
the Child hanging out of the Cradle and strangled; it is probable that the
Child in the absence of his Mother, turning it self to and fro, rolled out of
the Cradle, and remained hung in the Swathing-band. The Woman seeing this, fell
to crying and calling, which brought several people thither; as also the Mother
of the Infant, who being astonished and frighted at the accident swooned away,
but the bystanders brought her to her self again, and encouraged her, and
advised her, to offer up her Child to our Lady of Halle, which she did with a
good courage, and distinct words: And behold the Child which was stiff, and had
been above three hours dead, immediately revived, and eat and drank that which
was given to it. The Mother afterward offered it up to the blessed Virgin of
Halle, according to her promise; being accompanied with the noble Lady of
Scarsinne, and other creditable Persons at Halle. And should not the B. Virgin
cause such a grieved Mother, and her Infant, to rejoice, who as on the day
following had received an unspeakable Consolation, by the Resurrection of her
Son.

CHAP. XIII. A Girl that was drowned in a Well, was restored to life.
IT is a Proverb, The deeper the Well, 1419.
the clearer the Water; to which I add the more excellent Miracle. This was
obvious in the Castle of Ligny, and evinced in the Person of Johanna Mallart,
who went to draw Water for the use of the Family, out of a Well about 40 foot
deep, and the top was laid round with Bricks, having before it a great Stone,
against which people leaned. As the Girl was drawing up a Bucket, this stone,
and she with it, fell into the Well, and was drowned; in this fall there was
another Evil, for in the Well there jetted out a piece of a Rock, upon which
she fell with such a force, that not only wounded her Head, and her Arm, but
which was worst, she so hurt her Leg, that it was swelled as big as her Body:
She remained half an hour in the Water before she was drawn out; she was dead,
her countenance being very black and filthy. She was in this condition 3 hours;
her Mother was a sorrowful Spectotor all the time: But a Ray of Consolation
displayed it self, for as soon as she (by the advice of the bystanders) had
offered up her Prayers, and her Daughter, to our Lady of Halle, Joanna revived,
regained her former Color, and her Wounds were healed. Her Mother and she came
to Halle to return thanks to the B. Virgin.

Here also I should add a Relation of a little Boy, which ^ years before was
drowned in a Well at Obbrussel, and through the compassion of the Mother of
Mercy revived. May not the B. Virgin then say in the words of the Wise man,
Prove. 8. He that finds me finds life, and Wells of Salvation from the Lord.

CHAP. XIV. A Child after it had been three days Dead and Buried, was restored
to life. the Original.

AT Seneffe, a Village of Brabant, not far from Halle, (as is asserted by
unquestionable testimony) there was a Child still-born; it continued in that
state three days, and was also buried. The sorrowful Mother had spent a whole
day in Tears, and in the evening she thought she saw a Woman of an honorable
Miene, and cheerful Countenance; who told her, If she would make a vow to our
Lady of Halle, her Child should live: The Mother promised that she would go to
Halle to serve the Blessed Virgin, and being comforted by this Woman, would
have the Child taken out of the Grave, which was done, and the Child laid Dead,
and stiff in its Mothers Lap: Presently the pale Color began to vanish from
its Cheeks, and the Child revived, and was baptized; and at Noon it died again,
and its Soul went to the Celestial Court; to render Honor and Praise to the
Blessed Virgin.

CHAP. XV. Two Dead Children restored to Life.
ANother Child at Cantimpre, 1427. March 7.
unhappily lost and killed its self; his Fathers Name was John Bidans, who with
its Mother, the Family and Neighbors spent two days and a night, in a vain
search after the Child; the Father very zealously vowed to go on Pilgrimage to
our Blessed Lady of Halle, and renewing their search, they found him smothered
in a Muddy Pool; and trusting upon the mercy of the Blessed Virgin, they laid
him upon her Altar; the Corpse feeling the power of that adjacent Mother, which
bore unto us eternal life, revived, spoke and walked, in the presence of
Nicholas Lord Bishop of Cantimpre, and a great multitude of people. The Father
coming to Halle, might joyfully say, My Son was lost and is found, was Dead,
and is risen again.

But that which I am about to add, is more stupendous. At St. Hilaries, a
small Village near Camerick, 1428.
lived one Stephen Morel, and his Wife Fermine, who was delivered of a Dead
Child, which the Midwife, and all the rest of the Women present at her delivery
attested: They had now no more to do but to Bury the unbaptized Child in
unhallowed Earth; which they performed. In this condition it remained fifteen
days, and was forgotten by all but the Mother, in whose thoughts it was deeply
impressed. It troubled her most that her Child was not only bereft of this
short, but an Eternal Life.

This raised such a commotion in the mind of the Religious Mother, (Religious I
say, because she came every year to serve our Blessed Lady of Halle) that she
made a Vow, and daily renewed it, her Faith encountering the ordinary course of
Nature. Things continued in this posture until the fifteenth day from her
unhappy Delivery, when she was assured by a Vision, that her Child was alive;
she forced her Husband and some Women to go to the Grave, to examine the truth
of it: They dug up the Earth 3 foot deep, for so deep the Child lay, and
behold! (Oh stupendous Miracle!) they found the same Child living, and as
fresh as a Blooming Rose.

They acquainted the Parish Priest with this Miracle, who found their Report to
be true, for he saw in the Child clear evidences of life; but because the Child
was Dedicated to our Lady, he advised them to carry it to Vertigneuil, a
neighboring Village, where our Lady was very much honored. The Midwife and
the Women, with other people, went thence on the Evening; the Village was
situate two miles distant; the Prudent Mother gave them a piece of a hallowed
Candle, to put into a Lanthorn to light themselves along. And behold another
Wonder! That small piece of Candle, not two Inches long, burned from six of the
Clock in the Evening, until the next day, without the least diminution. In
their Journey, a third Wonder appeared, before them it was light as the Day,
but behind them a very dark Night. They set out so late, and walked so slowly,
for fear of injuring the Child, that it was late in the Night e're they arrived
at Vertigneuil. It Is to be supposed that they lodged there, burning in the
interim the hallowed Candle by the Child. The next morning, as soon as it was
perfect day light, they went to the Priests Lodging, but not finding him there,
they heard that he was gone to the Castle of Vertain, upon some affair. The
Father and the Churchwardens Wife went presently thither, when they came there
it was Noon, and they found all the Gates shut; they knocked, but in vain, for
no body opened them. Behold now a fourth Wonder! The Portal of the first Gate
opened its self, also the Portals of the second and third Gate, opened of their
own accord; and they came into the Chamber where the Governor, the Priest, and
others were, without the knowledge of any in the Castle. Henry Damman, who was
Governor of the Castle, began to demand whether they were Friends or Enemies,
and run at the Porter with his Sword, to Revenge the Treachery he thought him
guilty of; but having with astonishment heard the reason of their coming, and
the opening of the Portals, he and the guests, about twenty in number, would
accompany the Priest to the Baptizing of such a Child. When they came where the
Infant was, they saw in it remarkable Tokens of life, it bled at the Nose,
opened its Mouth and Eyes, it sighed, and wept great tears. This firmly assured
the Priest, and all the Spectators, that it was alive; the Priest Baptized it
in the Presence of almost Seventy Persons.

And presently after (is not this the fifth Miracle) they saw it evidently wast
and decay like Snow; it died there, and was Buried in Sanctified Earth. The
same hour the Mother Firmine felt her Breast to dry, which before was full of
Milk. This Miracle was seen, and attested by two whole Villages: Oh wonderful
thing! What can Impudence? Yea Calumny its self, say against these Miracles?
Blessed be thou, O Blessed Virgin, which bore in thy Womb everlasting life, and
through thy Mercy and Intercession gave life, both of Soul and Body to the
Dead, and made him partaker of eternal life. Keep in us the life of Grace, that
we may enjoy a happy Death, a joyful Resurrection, and everlasting Glory; and
live in it with thee, and thy Son for ever.

CHAP. XVI. An innocent Man wonderfully delivered from the Gallows.
IF the Mother of God be ready to help the impious, how can she then neglect
the innocent seeking her aid, it is far from her mercy and goodness so to do.
This was exemplified in the person of John Sampenoy; who, 1405.
coming from Aspernay in Champagine, to Halle, to offer his Devotions to the
Blessed Virgin, on the way he got two Treacherons companions, Nicholat Barren,
and Peter Le Norman, who understanding the cause of his Journey, told him that
they also were going to Halle, but not for the sake of Devotion, but profit,
for they were Merchants.

These two were pursued, and taken at Avennes for Thieves, and Legally
convicted of Robbery: They were put upon the Rack, whereupon they confessed
that they had stole, and Sold four Silver Cups, and withal accused Sampenoy of
being Guilty with them of the Theft; and receiving a third part thereof; also
they said that they had Murdered a Man on the way, and Sampenoy had assisted
them, hereupon they were led to Execution, but Nicholas upon the Gallows
cleared Sampenoy, and recalled his false accusation; but Peter Le Norman
persisted in his acccusation, affirming that John was alike guilty with him,
and that he would confirm this with his Death. The Judge proceeded, and hanged
Sampenoy with the other two, notwithstanding his constant assertion of his
Innocence; the Judge exhorted the people to hear a Mass for his Soul, to which
Sampenoy replied, No my Lord, I had rather they would recite a Pater Noster and
an Ave Mary, in honor of the Blessed Virgin of Halle, to whom I was going, and
because my innocence cannot help me here, I appeal to her, and desire that she
would please to defend me. He was then turned off the Ladder, but still
continued alive, the Executioner in a passion leapt upon his shoulders, that he
might strangle him with his weight: but for all this he remained alive, seeing
clearly, (as he after related) a Beautiful Woman, of a Majestic aspect, who
embraced him, and took him into her protection. More than an hour had been
spent on this manner, to the amazement of all the spectators, when John de
Selles, a Gentleman, came riding with full speed to thither, and said to the
Judge, My Lord, I desire that you would please to give me this innocent man, or
rather give him to our Lady, in whose name and was by whose command I came
hither. Sampenoy was immediately cut down, and released, and began to thank the
Gentleman; but he told him, that it was the Mother of God which had wrought his
deliverance, whom he was obliged to go Halle to serve. It is Proverb, That a
man had better be given over by ten Physicians, than be condemned by one Judge;
but they that hide themselves under the wings of the B. Virgin, need not fear
the one, nor the other: For Sickness and Death are in her power, to inflict or
restrain them.

CHAP. XVII. A Person delivered from his Imprisonment in France.
THE Holy Angel delivered Peter out of Prison, but the Queen of Angels, 1428.
delivered the Person whereof I am about to write: William Mostier traveled
from Picardy, his own Country, toward the Province of Poictiers (there was
then a sharp War between Charles the 7th. King of France and the English) he
unfortunately fell into the latter, and was led Captive to the City of St.
Michael, where he was imprisoned in a deep Dungeon, and had two Irons put upon
his Legs! He remained there ten Months, because he could not raise a ransom of
Eighty Golden Crowns. Being in this condition the Blessed Virgin of Halle came
into his mind, whose name and worship was then famous in Picardy, he prayed
heartily that by her assistance he might be delivered from this filth and
darkness. Hereupon he fell into a sweet sleep, and waking in the Morning (oh
wonderful thing!) he found himself not only out of the Prison, and free from
his bonds, but three Miles distant from St. Michael. Whilst he being
astonished, stood contemplating of his deliverance, there was some English
Troopers came thither, and amongst them Captain Turnbul, who immediately
knowing him, said unto him, Are not you our Prisoner? how came you what power,
or Subtilty, did you get out of Prison. To which he answered, Sir I Will tell you
the Truth; I was not delivered by humane power or craft, but my deliverance was
performed by a higher hand, by the B. Virgin, whom I invoked; she brought me
hither unknown to my self, when I was asleep; I beseech you that you would, and
I trust that you will further so good a Work. The Captain and his Companions,
being moved by this Relation, and assured of the truth thereof, gave him a
Passport, wherein they testified this Miracle; which Pass Willier Mostier
brought to Halle, and with Thanksgiving offered it up to our Lady, well-knowing
that he was delivered out of the Prison, and from the Iron Bands, but was bound
in other obligations to the Blessed Virgin.

CHAP. XVIII. A Woman wonderfully preserved from Death, under a Wheel of a Mill.
AND had not Catharine, the Wife of John Massart, great reason to thank the B.
Virgin? John Massart was both a Carpenter and Miller, and lived near the Abbey
of Lobes, in Henegow. He went to work abroad, and left the charge of the Mill
to his Wife; she perceiving the Mill to go slowly for want of Water, drew up
the Sluice, and let in a rapid Stream, to turn the Wheel more swiftly. The Plank
whereon she stood broke from under her, and she was presently driven under ^he
Wheel, by the force of the Water; where she re^^^^ed. We must not omit to
remark that she was (...) Child, and her time almost consummated. In (...) up
her heart to the B. Virgin of Halle, and found that a secret friend is a strong
bridge; for the Mother of God preserved her half an hour, not only from
drowning by the Water, but also from the crushing of the Wheel. By this time
her Husband came, who by his complaints summoned to his aid, and for Witnesses,
the Neighbors, the Chief Magistrate of the place, and some Religious of the
Abbey of Lobes. They drew her out of the Water, not expecting to find her alive,
but she came out alive and very well, thanking a thousand times the B. Virgin,
who had so preserved her, that a few days after she was Delivered of a
Beautiful Child, to the astonishment of all that heard of it; that under so
heavy a weight the Child was neither bruised nor wounded.

CHAP. XIX. A Tailor having swallowed his Needle, was delivered from the danger
attending it by the Blessed Virgin.
BArtholomew Broeck, a Tailor of the City of Denremonde, being busied about his
work, put his Needle and Thread into his Mouth, that he might have his hands
free; being intent on his work, and forgetting his Needle, he unhappily
swallowed both that and the Thread. Afterward he complained to his Wife, who
consulted the Physicians and followed their advice, but in vain: After it had
remained in his Body four days, he went to Mechlen to his Brother, who was a
Physician; but he could not force it out of his Body by any Drinks or Purge. It
happened that on a Saturday his Brother made a small Feast, to entertain his
sorrowful Guests, which being done, the Bell Rung to that service which is
called the Praise of the B. Virgin; his Brother went unto the Church, but
Bartholomew stayed behind: As he was musing, our Lady of Halle came into his
thoughts, he presently sent a servent Vow unto her, and immediately he selt
something between his Teeth, and pulled out the Needle and Thread. He joyfully
showed his Brother this great Miracle, and thankfully visited the B. Virgin of
Halle; and he had great reason so to do, for his life had hung many days upon a
Needle and Thread.

CHAP. XX. A Nobleman preserved from Death, upon the Sea.
THE Ship that carried Caesar and his Fortunes, was not so prosperous as that
wherein a Burgher and Nobleman of Monick, in Bavaria, was returning from the
Hely Land. Being upon the Mediterranean Sea, he sell sick of a dangerous
disease, which in the judgment of the Seamen was incurable: They had resolved
to throw him overboard for food for the Fishes. Another Nobleman perceived
their design and was very sorry for it; he went to the sick Person, and sound
him not only speechless but almost senseless; he comforted him as much as he
could, and told him that in the City of Halle the B. Virgin was worshipped,
that she had done many good Offices for men, and was a public resuge, and
common defense to the afflicted, advising him to trust in her; and if he could
not with his mouth, he should at least in his heart make a vow unto her; and
told him that he should immediately regain his health. The Nobleman
understanding him, sighed from the bottom of his heart, and prayed unto her,
and at the same time he saw a company of evil Spirits hovering over the Ship;
also he saw besides a Woman of an honorable Miene, and a beautiful
Countenance, standing before him, having in one Arm a little Child, and in the
other hand a burning Candle; which she had hardly showed before the Spirits
betook themselves to flight. He felt the influence of her presence, for his
speech returned, his distemper abated, and his strength was augmented to his
great comfort, and the astonishment of the Seamen; in short, he was restored to
his Health, and returned to his own Country. Then it was his first and
principal care to perform his obligations to the B. Virgin; to that end he and
his Servant went to Netherland, with Testimonies of an extraordinary devotion,
for he came and returned barefoot that long way, which is almost as broad as
all Germany.

CHAP. XXI. A Carman falling into the Water with his Cart was delivered from
Death.
ALthough Salt is an Emblem of Wisdom, 144^.
yet here comes a Carman with a whole Cart-load thereof; who was not wise
enough to foresee his misfortune, much less to prevent it: But I believe this
danger befell him, that the Name and Praise of the B. Virgin might be the more
spread in Long-Champ in Walsch Brabant.

This Carman being driving his Cart over a Bridge in Long-Champ, it fell in, he
seeing the fall approach, endeavored to support the Cart, but the weight
thereof forced him along with it, and Horse, and Cart, and he under it, fell
into the River: God ordered it so that there was a Girl near to the place, who
seeing the accident, called for help; but it was a long time e're she could get
People enough together. The Magistrate himself, and several beside, run to the
place, and got out the Horse and Cart, and found unexpectedly the Carman, who
had laid under it; they all thought that he was as well stifled by the weight
of the Cart, as drowned by the Water. They carried him to the Magistrates
House, where they stripped him, but he was so far gone that he did not feel them;
no symptoms of life appeared in him. One or two of the Spectators, out of a
Christian Compassion, recommended this poor man to our Lady, making some Vows
at the same time.

This Devotion, although it came from persons uneoncerned, was acceptable to
the Holy Mother of God, and found a return of Mercy; for the Carman came to
himself, and a little while after unloaded his Cart. He also went to Halle to
thank our Lady for this benefit. This Carmans mean Cart, by this Miracle was
rendered more Illustrious than the Triumphant Chariots of Rome.

CHAP. XXII. A Person preserved from several dangers, in and after Battle.
WHat will you see in the Shunamite, but Hymns of Armies (said the Bridegroom)
that is Thanksgivings to the B. Virgin for Victories, and deliverance from
Dangers, in the midst of Enemies. A Wonderful History which was acted in
Picardy, will confirm this. The Earl of St. Paul (famous of that time for his
Valor and Noble Descent) was to go from Chastelet to Campaign, to the Daulphin
of France: There being then War between the French and the English; on a
Saturday in the morning, he sent his Cook, Steward and Quartermaster, to
provide Lodging, and to prepare for his Reception. These three discovered a
Party of the Enemy, sixty or seventy in number, that were stealing the Cattle:
They returned speedily, and advertised the Earl of the danger; he being a stout
man, caused his men immediately to Arm themselves, and mount their Horses; he
being the most forward, rid out before, with John de Gertru, a trusty Servant,
in such haste, that John was not well Armed; the rest followed them by one or
two at a time; their whole number being about Eighty. They pursued the Enemy,
but they found them together with those which came out of their Ambuscade, to
be 1500 strong. John first perceived their number, and desired his Master (who
burned to fight them) to return, whilst he would detain them with Skirmishing:
The Earl would not consent to that, but fell upon them, and they upon him; John
was shot in his Arm by two Cross-Bow Arrows; and looking about him, once more
to admonish his Lord, a third Arrow hit him on the Head, upon which he fell
from his Horse. The Earl seeing that the Enemy was too unequal, and knowing
that delay would but inflame the Enemy, put spur to his Horse, and endeavored
to reach the next Town.

The Earl here was troubled at nothing so much as the loss of such a trusty
Servant, thinking that he certainly died of those three wounds; but the
goodness of God, and the mercy of the B. Virgin preserved him, contrary to all
expectation, yea even beyond belief; for whilst he lay among the men and
horses, he had continually in his mouth the B. Virgin of Halle, praying that
she who assisted so many, would not forsake him in this apparent danger; he
crept upon his hands and seet unto the next way, where he lay very feeble Here
again arose a new difficulty, for three of the Enemies party came to plunder
the Dead, and finding this miserable Man, they took his Money, Rings and
Clothes, and cleaved his Head with a Sword. Being thus wounded, he still
retained his life and hope, again beseeching the B. Virgin, as also St.
Barbara, that they would be so gracious as to afford him an opportunity of
Confession: This Prayer so moved the Soldiers themselves, that they served him
in this request, for they seeing by chance a Priest, called him to the wounded
person, that he should prepare him for death, for they intended to kill him. As
it also happened afterward, one of them endeavoring to cut his Throat, but
the B. Virgin so averted the Blade, that only the Collar of his Shirt was cut.
The Priest did his best endeavor to beg his life of them, whereupon the
Soldiers retired, and the Priest got him to an adjacent Barn, dressing his
wounds, as much as the time would permit. There came also another Party of the
Enemy, but there was amongst them some Honorable Soldiers and Commanders, but
they did not meddle with them. At the approach of these the Priest had run
away. After they were gone the three Villains came again, and seeing him alive,
struck him a very hard blow, by which they thought they had killed him, as
indeed they had, without the assistance of the Mother of God. Going on their
way, they drew the body in a great rage to the River: The B. Virgin comforted
him, and advised him to seign himself dead; here they threw him into the Water,
and because they would be sure to kill him they pricked him with a Lance. The
B. Virgin also averted this push, and carried her Servant unto a small dirty
Island, that jets its Head a little above Water, where he lay three hours; the
coldness of the water, and his loss of blood by nine mortal Wounds rendered him
quite stiff. The Priest which had heard his Confession, like a good Samaritan,
out of compassion, went to seek him, and following the track of his blood, came
to the water, where, to his great grief, he could not find him. I desire that
the Courteous Reader would not be offended with the length of this Relation,
but that he would please to search after, and exalt the powerful arm of the B.
Virgin Mary, with Patience and Astonishment. The Priest standing here
comfortless, cast his eyes toward the little Island, where he saw something,
but he could not discern whether it was a man or some evil Spirits; arming
himself with the sign of the Holy Cross he called aloud, I conjure you in Gods
Name, if you are a Christian, to speak or make some sign: Hereupon John lifted
up his arm and satisfied the Priest, who went up to the Neck in water, and
brought him to a dry place, and immediately run to the next Town to procure a
Wagon, and some men, to carry him thither, where he was cured, and came in
person to the B. Virgin of Halle, with his mouth full of Thanksgiving, and yet
the thanks was beneath the benefit which he received; for he was four times
preserved from death, and consequently gained four lives.

CHAP. XXIII. A Gentleman was delivered out of Prison.
PHilip of Cleve, a young Gentleman, naturallly, though illegally descended
from that Illustrious House, lived at Dijon in Burgundy, and was very much
addicted to War and Arms, but he was not so fortunate as valiant, for he was
taken by the French, and imprisoned at Vaucouleur in Lorrain, in a Tower 80
Cubits high; his Ransom, being a Gentleman, was 500 Crowns, which being too
great a sum for his Estate, caused in him not only a grief of mind, but a
bodily disease also. Once when his dinner was brought unto him, he fell into a
sweet sleep which continued until the next day at Noon, and then he was awaked
by the Keeper of the Prison, who admonished him to eat the portion of Meat
which was allotted him; but the delight which he had received from a Vision in
his sleep, averted his appetite from it. His Vision was as follows: He
thought that he saw himself lying upon the steps of our Ladys Chapel, pouring
his fervent prayers out before her Image; which were heard; for the B. Virgin
gave him hope of an approaching deliverance. Being alone, he fell upon his
knees, beseeching the B. Virgin that this dream might proceed to a happy event.
Hereupon he took a bone from the Beef which was allotted him, and used it
instead of a File, and touched therewith the Irons that were about his Neck,
Hands and Feet, and broke them. He tied his Linen and Clothes together, with
which he let himself down from the Tower, but it was not long enough; he
ventured a steep fall without any damage. Now to finish happily that
deliverance which was begun, he hid himself in the next Wood, and made use of
the darkness of the Night to fly in; his flight continued three days, and at
their end he came hungry, disfigured, and naked as he was, to thank the B.
Virgin of Halle.

CHAP. XXIV. A Servant was delivered from the Gallows.
ALthough (according to the Heathens) Bellona is the Goddess of War, yet she
must lay her Arms and Laws at the foot of Mary; and those which she has
ordained to death, 1604.
the B. Virgin can preserve alive. As it happened in Weerdt, where the Mutiners
were 5000 strong, and had retired to a place very well fortified. These men,
although they had trodden under feet all Princely Laws, and Obligations of
Obedience, yet they could not effect their design, without establishing new,
and more severe Laws. They forbid the hindering, or injuring of those which
brought and sold Provision upon pain of death. A Young man of Luxemburgh, whose
Name was John, went to the Market to buy Herrings; as soon as he had received
the Herrings he intended to have paid for them, but he was driven from his
place by the crowd, before he could give the seller his Money: A Trumpeter saw
this, but knew not that it was innocently done; and being allured by the 25
Crowns which was promised to the discoverer of any breaker of this Law, he
denvered, and accused him to the Officers; who in a Council of War unanimously
condemned him. Guilty or not guilty, he must now be hanged. Seeing that there
was no Justice on Earth, he sent his Prayers to Heaven for Mercy, and said, O
Mighty Queen of Heaven, which art worshipped at Halle, as thou have several
times defended the Innocent, so defend my Innocence; and immediately he
received a strong confidence in her Mercy. He was led by the Executioner to the
Gallows, tied up, and turned off the Ladder. He was also hanged with a double
Rope; one Cord broke, and the other was likely to break. Although the
Spectators esteemed this to be a Miracle, yet the Executioner leaped upon his
shoulders to strangle him; a Soldier seeing this, ran up the Ladder, and cut
the Rope with his Sword. Thus John was delivered, and came and bowed his
condemned Head before the B. Virgin of Halle, and thanked her for the
deliverance.

CHAP. XXV. A Nun cured of a Convulsion of the Sinews.
ADriana Serraets, 1602
a Noble and Religious Nun of Vorst, being about 22 years of age, and in very
good health, was suddenly taken with a Convulsion of the Sinews; this tormented
her so grievously, that she could not rest by day nor night, neither the
Ingenuity of the Physician, nor the Experience of the Surgeon could afford
her any redress; an evident sign that all humane help must give place, that we
may ascribe the Glory to the B. Virgin only. To that end (with the Approbation
of her Abbess) she sent a Pious Woman in her stead to Halle, who in her Name,
and for the regaining of her Health, should offer up a gift, and cause the
Sacrifice of the Mass to be recited. Oh wonderful, but true event! At the same
time that the Woman offered the gift, at the very instant, when the Priest was
serving for her at the Altar at Halle, her health was restored her upon the
Quire at Vorst; she was then employed according to her custom, in praising of
God; having regained her Health, she caused a joyful Te-Deum to be sung.

The Dutch Author relates some Miracles which are testified by the
Inscriptions, and Paintings of the Chapel, but they being not so fully related
as the precedent Relations; I shall only conclude with one of the Inscriptions,
which is as as follows.

D. O. M. and M. M. V. HEnricus ab Etten Antwerpiae, mense Octobri Anno 1575.
Pestilenti febri laborans, destitutus a Medicis, cum peregrinationem ad aedem
Deiparae Hallis Sacram vovisser, praesenti coelestis opis miraculo, inox cadem
levatus, hanc tabellam tanti beneficii grati memorem, tantae misericordiae
palam testem humile devotione collocat, consecratque. FINIS.

