White Hall Sept. 19. 1667.
Let this TRANSLATION be Printed.

By the Appointment of the Right Honorable the Lord ARLINGTON, His MAJESTY'S
Principal Secretary of State. Joseph Williamson.

THE BUCKLER OF State and Justice Against The DESIGN manifestly discovered of
the UNIVERSAL MONARCHY, Under the vain PRETEXT OF THE QUEEN of France HER
PRETENSIONS.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most
Excellent Majesty. 1667.

THE Preface.
WHILS'T we rested quietly under the shade of Peace, and the faith of the
Promises very lately renewed by France not to break it, the noise of a mighty
Preparation for War in our Neighborhood unexpectedly struck our ears; a
Conspiracy was detected, through the indefatigable pains of our The Marquess of
Castel-Rodrigo.
Governor, upon one of our The City of Luxemburg.
principal Places; which hastily awakened us out of this Repose: and scarce
were our eyes opened, but diverse Libells (the usual forerunners of War) were
spread up and down promiscuously amongst the Nobility and Common people, to
seduce his Majesty's faithful Subjects, under color of some Pretensions of
the most Christian Queen upon all these Provinces. One whereof is entitled, A
Dialogue on the Subject of the Rights of the most Christian Queen. The next
has for Title, A Treatise of the Rights which the most Christian Queen has to
sundry Estates of the Monarchy of Spain. And the third goes by the Appellation
of Threescore and fourteen Reasons, which prove as clear as the day, that the
Renunciation made by the Queen of France is null, etc. These Pretensions tend
only to sap and undermine the foundation of the Pyrenean Treaty, by
overthrowing the most Christian Queen's Renunciation (which she so solemnly
swore to observe in favor both of the Peace and Marriage) of all Rights that
might belong to her, and stretch themselves to no less then the Duchy of
Brabant with its Appurtenances, the Seigniory of Machelen, Antwerp, the upper
Gelderland, Namur, Limburg, and the united places beyond the River of Maes,
Hainault, Artois, Cambray, the Free County of Burgundy, the Duchy of
Luxemburg, and one of the principal parts of the County of Flanders.

After I had curiously read over the Contents of these Libells, at first I
could not be persuaded that such Writings were authorized by the Court of
France, and looked upon them a great while as passevolants, and the effects of
some idle Pens, which out of wantonness affected to make themselves remarkable
by wittily maintaining a Paradox: and indeed their proceeding was too
irregular, the matter too brittle, and the form too unhandsome, to believe with
any ground of likelihood that they leaned upon public Authority. For I
supposed, and with Justice enough on my side, that what Pretensions soever the
most Christian King could have upon a Prince united unto him by so many ties of
Kindred and Amity, he would never have begun by the way of Execution, and the
exciting of his People to Rebellion; but that the voice of the Cannon should
have been the last made use of to plead his Cause, having before made trial of
all other means. This opinion was confirmed to me by the continual Assurances
and positive words which his most Christian Majesty has often sent to the
Court of Spain by his The Archbishop of Ambrun.
Ambassador there, and by the Spanish Ambassador in France.
Marquess de la Fuente, That nothing should be able to hinder him from
observing religiously the Peace. In which belief he still fortified us by
Propositions of Leagues, and of Mediation, and by reiterated Promises of an
inviolable Friendship, not sparing any care to dissipate all the Suspicions
which his powerful Arming might justly have made us conceive.

Our own Consciences also did oblige us not to doubt of the sincerity of the
Promises of France, and the scrupulous care which we took to avoid the giving
them any cause of displeasure, even to the rejecting (for their respect) the
means which were offered us from all parts for our safety, gave us cause to
believe, that such a Comportment as this was, being so neat and obliging,
should not only stop the effects of their Arms, by taking away all the Causes,
but should also have touched them with tenderness for the Innocence of an
Infant, a Cousin, and a Brother-in-Law, to let him pass his younger years in
the quiet of a Peace, which the King his Father had so dearly bought for him.
And though the Succors which France sent from time to time into Portugal (and
that too before they could pretend to the effect of this imaginary Devolution)
were manifest discoveries, that the Faith of Treaties and of Oaths were much
inferior to the Interest of State; yet we flattered our selves, that the
longanimitie of our Patience might shelter us from receiving new injuries at
their hands, by dissembling our sense of the first, and that they would be
ashamed to heap so many without interruption the one upon the other.

But having heard that the same Libells had been solemnly presented by the
Monsieur de l' Estrade.
French Ambassador to the States of the United Provinces, and to the Imperial
Diet, and diverse Princes of Germany; I thought that I should be wanting in all
that I owe to my King, my Country, and the Public, as well as to my self, if
I did not employ the little knowledge and light which God has given me,
toward the removal of the false Impressions which the artifice of a slight
Eloquence, much more then the solidity of Reasons, might produce in the opinion
of credulous spirits, not thoroughly versed in our Laws and Customs. Besides,
methought that I owed this Consolation to the afflicted people, and this
satisfaction to the neighboring States, to let them evidently understand, that
all the Pretexts with which the French do labor to disguise the vast Designs
that they have in hand, are but false colors to mask the true Spring which
gives the Motion to this Machine, and to make an Ambition which goes at a great
pace to the Universal Monarchy pass under the veil of Justice.

Which consideration has induced me seriously to weigh these Writings, and
maturely to examine all the Reasons, Ends and Circumstances of them: And after
having carefully turned over all the Acts, (as much as the shortness of time
and the confusion of the present Troubles would give me leave) and examined the
Treaties of Peace and Marriage, with the Act of Renunciation, and consulted the
most expert Civi^ians that are amongst us in the Practick and Customs of
places; I found, without any preoccupation of mind, these Pretensions not
only to be contrary to public Right, to the Customs in Sovereign
Successions, and the sincere Faith of Treaties, which are made betwixt Crown
and Crown for the Tranquillity of the People, and the Conservation of
Monarchies; but even to that particular Right which regulates private Families,
and those Municipal Customs which every Nation does prescribe unto it self, by
the will or permission, either express or tacit, of their Sovereigns. I have
besides observed so many evident Falsehoods in the matter of Fact, so many
insupportable Invectives against the Person of the PHILIP the Fourth.
late King of most Glorious Memory, so great a number of malicious Artifices to
pervert the people, so many hyperbolical Exaggerations to cast dust in the eyes
of the neighboring Princes, and so many pernicious Maxims, which draw along
after them a train of Consequences most dangerous for all Christendom; that I
had a great deal of difficulty to conceive how people, who make profession of
Learning and Knowledge of the Affairs of the World, durst expose to public
censure things so ill digested: which has the more encouraged me to undertake
this Work, by reason that I foresee how much it imports, not to suffer a
boldness (which so freely abuses the patience of the Readers) to pass
unchastised; and the Interest which all States have in this Affair makes me
assuredly believe, that I do plead in this the Cause of the whole World. It is,
I confess, a matter of trouble to see my self obliged to reduce to the terms of
litigious pleading a Difference between Sovereign Princes, so solemnly decided
by a public Treaty, upon the Faith whereof all Christendom did solely found
their Quiet. But as a good Cause fears no Judge, nor a good Conscience any kind
of Censure; I will freely enter the Lists, and shall be overjoyed to have as
many Witnesses of the Justice of our Cause, as there be reasonable and
disinteressed persons in the World.

Though we cannot doubt of the Approbation which the most Christian King has
given to those injurious Writings, I cannot yet be persuaded that he ever took
the pains to read them over, and will rather believe (to his honor) that his
weighty Affairs, and his great application to this lofty Arming, have so taken
up all his time, that he had none to spare to cast his eyes upon works which
have so little sympathy with his Genius and Quality. It is much easier to
believe, that trusting in this to the faith of others, he has abandoned
himself to his natural propension to immortalize his name by Arms and
Conquests, and to the Suggestions of those who desire nothing more then to see
him encumbered abroad for their self ends. In effect he has too much
Generosity, and Love for the Queen his Consort, to suffer that any should so
unworthily defame the Reputation of his Father-in-Law; he is too much concerned
in the common Cause of Kings, to endure that his Scribblers should attempt upon
Royal persons; he has too much Justice, to permit that they should make the
most tender Father and best of Kings pass for a Tyrant, constraining his
Daughter, by a barbarous Disinheriting her, or a Cheater, who assigned her
only an Imaginary Portion; he has too great a mind, to approve of trifling
upon Jewels, or to desire that an account by way of Inventory should be given
him of all the Knacks which belonged to the Queen his Mother-in-Law, and that
all the Earth should be alarmed about a Domestic concernment, which the
relations of the parties would decide without noise amongst mean Citizens: he
knows that the Bounty of the King his Father-in-Law toward a Princess whom he
loved more then himself did not restrain it self to Notaries Clausules; that
both before and after the Marriage he ceased not to load her with his Benefits;
and that he has freely bestowed his Provinces and Dominions, to set upon her
Head one of the fairest Crowns in the World. In fine, he has too much Prudence
and love for Truth, ever to consent to the publication of so many false
Allegations so inconsiderately packed together one upon the back of another;
not questioning at all, but if that he had attentively considered them, they
would have touched him with just indignation against those who have so
impudently abused his Name, as to engage maliciously his Reputation and his
Arms in an Enterprise so ill grounded.

Which makes me hope that (having established his Majesty's Rights upon
unquestionable Foundations) the soliditie of our Reasons will not only conduce
to fortify the People, and persuade the neighbour-Princes, but even pierce the
heart of the most Christian King; and that yielding to the strength of their
Evidence, he will resolve henceforwards to propose juster and more plausible
matters to himself, whereby to make his Name famous, when in the unworthy
Oppression of a Pupil King; or at least that he will contrive sweeter and more
honest ways in order to his full information. But if by secret Judgments of God
we cannot obtain by this means that which we ought to promise to our selves
from the Prudence and the Equity of so Great a King; I shall yet have this
satisfaction, to have omitted nothing on my part that might contribute toward
the dissipation of this Tempest, which threatens all Christendom; and having
overcome by Reasons, we hope that the Arbiter of Sovereigns and supreme
Protector of Justice will not let us sink under the weight of his Arms.

To make fully known in the eye of the Sun the Deformity and bad Connection of
those seditious Writings, it would be necessary to anatomize them, and examine
every piece apart. But as that design would engage me to a large Volume, and
that time for the present is too precious; I have thought that it should now
suffice to collect only the principal Points, to destroy their Grounds, and
establish contrary Foundations, and to go (without stopping at a thousand
Superfluities, which they have alleged out of all season only to make the
bulk of their Books bigger, and to embroil the mind of the Reader) directly to
the substance and the heart of the Difficulty in question. This shall be my
endeavor; and in this I require in the Readers an attention void of interest,
if yet they can be without interest in a Cause which so nearly touches them by
an inevitable reflection.

Though I have proposed to my self in this Writing all the Moderation and
Sweetness which decency and inclination toward Peace does require; yet the
matter is of it self so very sharp, that it is almost impossible to give it a
form that shall not participate of its roughne^se. It Is here intended to make
the whole World see, That a War is unjust, the Ground of it ruinous, the
Reasons for it vain Pretexts; That the Apparences cover vast Designs; That the
Allegations are false, the Proceedings violent, the Ends naught, and the
Consequences dangerous. The necessity of a just Defense does oblige us to
bring to light all these Truths: and I defy the most dexterous Pens to be able
to express them in terms void of some Bitterness, or to apply the Razor to the
bottom of the Wound without Pain to the Patient. I wish I were able to make
things understood without naming them, and to color them with obliging terms:
but this cannot be done without destroying the Substance; and this Mask of
words would pass for a jearing sharper then single Expressions. I beseech the
Reader to be persuaded that my only drift is, to speak of Things without
touching of Persons; and if my Subject does forcibly draw me into complaints
and some reproaches, I do here solemnly protest, That I pretend the most
Christian King's Sacred Person to be excepted; and that I do ascribe all the
Evils which are intended toward us only to those mean Incendiarie Writers,
who, out of a desire of Noveltie, and perhaps with purposes more dangerous to
their own King then to ourselves, have so lightly and unseasonably sounded to
horse.

THE CONTENTS.
I. Of the Ends which France does propose unto it self in this War, and in
these Libells. II. That the Entry of the King of France into the Estates of the
Catholic King in the Low Countries is an evident Rupture. III. That this
Rupture is unjust, admitting the Right of the Queen of France were well
founded. IV. That the Renunciation of the French Queen is just, irrevocable,
necessary, and useful to the Public good, nor contains in it self any cause
of Nullitie or Laesion, and that the Queen of France has been duly Doted. V.
That the Succession of the Soveraigntie of the Duchy of Brabant, and the other
Provinces which are specified in these Libells, ought not to be regulated by
the particular Customs. VI. A Discourse of the Interest of the Christian
Princes in this War and of the precise Obligation which the Estates of the
Empire have to warrant the Circle of Burgundy.
THE BUCKLER OF STATE and JUSTICE AGAINST The Design manifestly discovered of
the Universal Monarchy, under the vain pretext of the Queen of France her
Pretensions.
ARTICLE I.
Of the Ends which FRANCE proposes unto it self in this War, and in these
Libells.

THE Author of these Libells employs a great deal more of care and art to
color the Designs of his Party, then to establish the Grounds of his imaginary
Right. In this last his Pen is both dry and crawling: In the other it does
spread it self with a pleasant stream of words into a Thousand superfluous
expressions, endeavoring as much as it can to present without discovery a
false Light, hoping to change the Nature of things by changing only their
Names. He extolls the love which his Master has for Peace, at the very instant
when he is breaking it; he complains at the same time when he strikes; he takes
away by violence, when he asks; he pleads and decides at once; he requires
Peace, and brings War; attaques without Rupture, forces without constraint, and
plays with so much contempt upon the Ignorance and Credulity which he supposes
to be in the Judgment of his Readers, that he will needs have the way of Fact
to pass for Justice, Violence for Moderation, Usurpation for Title, and Defense
for a Crime: and so he can but only take away the odious name of War from the
Attempt which Frame is now making, he thinks that she may freely practice all
manner of Hostilities under that of Peace: Which is the effect of the excellent
opinion they have of the abilities of all other Nations, whom they esteem
barbarous or simple enough to believe things of this nature, and afterward
glory in their jesting, (according to their obliging custom of turning into
ridiculous the most Illustrious Nations) That they took us for Germans.

This dull conceit tends evidently unto two Ends: The one, to extenuate a
little the ugliness of their Enterprise, and the Scandal and Confusion which
they foresee it will produce throughout all Europe: and that they may make all
the cares which we shall take for our Defense pass for as many Contraventions
of the Peace; and by this means get some pretext whereby either they may press
their Allies to join their Arms to theirs, in favor of their Design, or else
may one of these days bring the War upon themselves, for having failed in
performing the Obligation of their League of Warrantie. By which it is obvious
to all sorts of capacities, that the Absolute Empire which they do equally
affect over their Friends and Enemies makes them act so Magisterially both with
the one and the other: So that to keep Peace with them, it is requisite to give
them all that they require; and to satisfy the Alliances made with them, it is
necessary to help them to take all.

But to judge of the injustice of this Pretension, it is sufficient to read
over the Treaty of the Peace of the Empire, in the Article of Warrantie, and
that of the League of the Rhine: and then it will be clearly seen, that the
Obligation of reciprocal Succors does extend no farther then to those Lands
which France did possess in the Empire at the time when these Leagues were
concluded; that they do not reach any new Conquests or Claims, and ought not to
be understood but against Aggressours: Else the Princes of the Empire had
imposed an horrible Servitude on themselves, to be the Ministers and
Instruments of the Ambition of an Allie, to enlarge his Limits at the price of
their blood and of their own safety, and to be bound to take arms into their
hands as often as the Writers of France should think fit to put their hand to
the pen, to frame to their Crown some new Rights.

It is not enough to understand the cunning of the Ends of their proceeding,
but it concerns all the World to penetrate farther, even into the bottom of
their Designs. If we will take it upon their faith, they have no other End but
an honest Accommodation with Spain; They themselves invite Foreign Princes to
intermeddle in it; They protest that they will suffer themselves to be brought
to moderate Conditions, That they do make War against their stomachs, That they
would lay down their arms with pleasure, That they would submit themselves to
the Judgment of those who are willing to employ their pains in it. Let us see
then whether their behavior does suit with their words. -- Spectemur agendo.

All their Actions and Motions tend toward a vast and deep Design. This proud
arming, this prodigious expense, this excessive profusion in their foreign
Negotiations; this forwardness in making of Leagues, to gain Ministers, to keep
them in business who may give them jealousy; the reiterated instances and the
large offers which they have tendered to the Swedes to embroil the Empire; the
extraordinary application to force the Polanders by corruption and violence to
choose a Successor contrary to their Fundamental Laws; are proofs capable to
convince the darkest understandings, that all this immense Preparation of Arms
and Intrigues has something in it of greater extent then the bare Conquest of
some Provinces, (which our overmuch Credulity has exposed to them as a prey)
and ends not in a simple desire of tearing away a few pieces of them by a
Treaty. These huge Mountains are not to bring forth Mice, but to vomit out
Flames as the Vesuve, to set the whole neighboring Countries on fire.

The first The Bishop of Rodes.
Governor of the most Christian King has given him for a Model the Life and
Designs of his Grandfather Henry the Fourth, as may be seen in the Book which
he has published. This Prince, as well by his own Genius, as by the happy
success of his first Undertakings, has relished such Instructions, and has
solelie proposed to himself this Example for the Rule of his Actions. The
History of this Great King has been his most ordinary study: He has, in
imitation of him, taken great care to accumulate much Treasure, sought for
Alliances abroad, and at length has raised most powerful Armies. We must
therefore conclude, that he acts upon the very same Draughts; and that all we
see at present are but renewed Projects, and the effects of those Impressions
which he has sucked in with his milk. To draw the Consequences from these
Principles we need only read the Memorials of Henry the Fourth, those of the
President Jannin, and of the Bishop of Rodes; and conclude, that whatsoever
that Potent King had conceived in his imagination, this King intends to bring
forth by the power of his Armies. But as the desire of Glory has no bounds,
and that his years and present condition put him in a capacity to run a longer
course then Henry the Great; so we cannot reasonably expect that the swiftness
of the Rhine shall be able to stop him.

His Writers have taken a great deal of pains to nourish him in these thoughts:
and as that sort of men have no other study but to observe the weakness of
their Prince, the better to insinuate their Flatteries, they have freely
sacrificed their mercenarie Pens to tickle this natural desire of Glory which
they have discovered in him. The Rewards they have received are authentic
marks of his Acceptance; and this acknowledgment in a young spirit, that
believes himself to be in a posture to execute all that pleases him, and
which has drunk in this Maxim, That to take possession by the Sword any Title
is sufficient, must needs be esteemed a dangerous forerunning Sentence against
all those upon whom he shall believe that he has any thing to pretend.

Which yet more clearly to make appear to us, we only need read the printed
Books which have lately been dedicated unto him, and principally one above the
rest, which carries the Title of THE JUST PRETENSIONS OF THE KING OF FRANCE TO
THE EMPIRE; where having laid down for a Ground, That the Dominions of
Sovereign Princes have always been the Dominions and Conquests of their
Estates, and, That the Dominions and Conquests of Crowns can neither be
alienated nor prescribed; he adds the two Articles following: 1. That the
greatest part of Germany is the Patrimony and ancient Inheritance of French
Princes: 2. Charlemagne did possess Germany as King of France, and not as
Emperor.
I leave to those who will vouchsafe to read over this Treatise, to form the
Consequences from such Premises.

If one may judge of what is to come by what is past, all Europe will have
cause enough to stand upon her guard, if it does but reflect upon the conduct
of France since the close of the Pyrenean Peace till this minute. Hardly did we
see that Treaty established upon the most religious and inviolable Laws that
humane Prudence could devise, when presently, upon a small punctilio of
difference for the precedence of Ambassadors, (which had been always in
dispute, and was left undecided by the Peace) they proceeded to the uttermost
extremities against a Father-in-Law, at the same time when they suffered
without murmuring the unheard of Indignities which the Grand Vizier at
Constantinople caused to be committed against the Royal Person of the most
Christian King in that of his Ambassador; and when they did admit, without
taking the least offense thereat, the Competition for place betwixt the Swedish
Ambassadors and theirs: which is so much the more remarkable, that even in the
Pyrenean Treaty the two Crowns marched equally hand in hand together; and that
in one of the Instruments thereof Spain was the first nominated, and in the
other France. Why then did they conclude the Peace with this Equality, if they
were resolved to break it afterward upon the point of Competition? Which makes
it evidently seen, that from the very day of the Peace they have always watched
for the occasions of War, and concluded this Treaty only to take a little
breath to settle their Revenues at home, and make an end of reducing their
people under the yoke.

The Bonesires which were every where kindled for joy of the Peace were not
quite extinguished, when an evident breach of the Treaty was seen by the
Succors which France sent into Portugal; at the beginning under the name of
the Marshal of Turenne, and a little while after without any kind of disguise.
A Sedition which happened at Rome, to the great displeasure of the Pope, by the
Soldiers who were provoked with an infinity of Insolences committed by the
French Embassador's Family, The Duke of Creqny.
was near putting all Italy again into Combustion, had not the tears of his
Holiness stopped it, by sacrificing his own Kindred, and erecting a Pyramide to
France for an unworthy Trophie of the spoils of the glory of the Vicarie of
Jesus Christ, and the common Father, of whom they style themselves the Eldest
Sons.

A little after they obliged the Duke Charles of Lorrain to sell them his
Duchy, to the prejudice of the lawful Successor: and the Contract not being
valid, they forced him with violence to put the only place which was left him
into their hands; by means whereof (revoking their Bargain) they got the thing
without paying the price.

The Bishop of Munster, who was included in the League of the Rhine, seeing
himself attaqued in the Empire by the States of Holland, in vain implored their
assistance, by virtue of the Warrantie: but when he began to resent it, he was
straight assaulted by the French Troops: and if his own Enemies had not shown
more moderation toward him then their Allies, his Country (which is of the
Patrimony of the Church) had been at present totally reduced into Ashes.

The War of England against the States of the United Provinces, which was
raised by the French practices, and fomented by their industry, in giving the
counterpoise to him who for the time appeared the weaker, has sufficiently
instructed all the World, that the Game of France is to depress all Powers
which are capable of obstructing the torrent of their Enterprises.

But to stray no farther from the matter which I have in hand, I will be
contented to note only two plain Arguments, which evidently prove that their
Design is to drive on their Conquests as far as ever the fortune of War will
suffer them, and that those Overtures of Peace which they do make are but to
amuse the neighboring Princes, and to bridle their own Subjects; believing
that the first will not have recourse to Arms for hindering their progress, so
long as they have any hopes to get it done by Negotiation; and that the others,
terrified with the apprehension of the quick end of this War, shall not dare to
make use of any occasion which they will hold to be uncertain and staggering.

The first Argument is, That at the instant when they profess to seek Peace,
they have laid an essential Obstacle in the way, by concluding a League
offensive with Portugal for ten years; by the which they bind themselves not
to treat, unless the Portuguese may be entirely satisfied. They are not
ignorant how exorbitant the demands of that People are, and that this is to
touch Spain in the apple of the eye, and put the same stop to the Peace which
was the principal Difficulty in the Debates of the Pyrenean Treaty. The same
League carries (as it is written from Lisbon) that all the Harbors which the
Portuguese shall take in Spain, either upon the one or the other Sea, shall be
put into the power of France: which directly corresponds to the Design which
they have of late framed, to make that Kingdom absolute Mistress Of the Article
England had need take care.
of the Trade. All this has no connection with their Claim to Brabant and the
other Provinces: and if they had no other Design then to take possession of
their pretended Goods, without breaking the Peace, they would not contrive the
acquisition of Ports where they themselves confess that they have nothing to
pretend.

The second is, That at the same time when they protest they have no design to
break the Peace, they labor to destroy the Foundations of it, and to take away
all hopes of a Reconciliation, by annulling the Queen's Renunciation, upon
which the whole Pyrenean Treaty does so lean, that in case this Basis shall be
overturned, of necessity the whole Fabric must fall. If this Renunciation does
not subsist, there is no way left for an Accommodation, nor means of finding
any security necessary to it. The Peace which shall be made cannot be but the
seed of a new War; it will be impossible to cut the evil by the root. It Is here
where the Mediators shall find themselves puzzled: and if all their Pretensions
be granted, then will they be absolute Masters of the Netherlands, and in a
condition to take possession by the same Title not only of that part of
Brabant of which the States of the United Provinces stand possessed, but also
of all the rest of their Countries, as I shall make appear more at large in the
Fifth Article. If they adjudge unto them that part which we hold, they give a
previous Sentence against themselves, and will be condemned by their own
Decree. But if France content it self with a part, it will be needful that the
Queen should pass a new Act of Renunciation touching all the remainder, which,
according to their Principles, must be subject to the same causes of Nullity
that the first is; if it be true that Princes can never lawfully renounce their
pretended Rights: And I do not see how they can find new Clauses nor new Oaths
to make this Act more irrevocable then that which they seek to destroy.
However, though all they ask at present were granted them, nothing could be
solidly treated of, because by annulling the Renunciation we should open a door
unto them to bring in a new Pretension upon all the Monarchy; and then must
the Peace needs be as brittle as is the life of a young Infant, who has yet a
thousand dangers to go through before he can reach to those years in which he
shall be able to secure the Succession in his own Line, and cut off the course
of the vast hopes of those who build the design of an Universal Dominion upon
his Death. In a word, it is superfluous to reason by Arguments, when the things
do speak of themselves. The most Christian King had the goodness to undeceive us
in the vain hopes of a Peace, by a Letter written by his order to the Marquess
de la Fuente, upon the Offer made by his Excellency the Marquess of
Castel-Rodrigo in most respectful terms, to enter into a Treaty of
Accommodation, and remit the business to the Arbitration of the neighboring
Princes; by his Answer he does not only reject the Proposition, and look upon
it as an injury, but be frames to himself a voluntary impossibility of a
Peace, which he establishes upon the Reply of our Queen to the Marquess de la
Fuente, in prosecution of a Discourse which the Queen of France had slightly
intimated to the said Marquess by way of Conversation, and strives to settle
upon so weak a groundwork not only the Justice of his Arms, but also an
essential Obstacle to a Reconciliation.

By all these palpable Verities, which cannot be called in question, it is
easy to discern, That France, employing her endeavor to render the Peace
impossible or unsure, aims absolutely at the entire Destruction of a Monarchy
which is the Bulwark of all the rest, that she may attaque them with less
trouble, having thus beaten down their Flankers. It is left to wise Politicians
to make necessary reflections upon a matter of such high concernment.

ARTICLE II.
That the Entry of the King of France into the Low Countries is a true Rupture.

THe French Academy has of late taken a great deal of pains in the polishing
of their Language, and has given it self the liberty to reform in it many
words, to add some, and to enrich it with many graceful expressions: But I
never could find that ever it called War by the name of Peace. The Latins
indeed, by an Ironical Figure, have named War, Bellum; and it may be in
imitation of them this ingenious Writer would make us believe that Hostilities
are Gallantries, and the preparation for a great Army but a Turnament.

Conjugium vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culpam.

I desire very much that he would explain unto us what he means by the word
Rupture, and how he can reconcile a violent Intrusion by the power of men and
Cannons with the due observation of a Treaty, which in the first place does
prohibit all manner of such armed attempts, and which is instituted to no other
end but to hinder them. I would know how he can make the Peace subsist with the
most lamentable effects of War; and how that by the only defect of the
formalitie of sending a Herald at Arms to denounce it, it loses all its
bitterness and injustice. For my own part, (who use to reason more dully) I
have always held that to be a Rupture which is inconsistent with the essence of
Peace, which overthrows the foundations and troubles all the harmony of it.
There are certain Attempts which may alter a Peace, and yet not break it, which
be rather Contraventions then Infringings, and which do not give the parties
injured the right of Revenging themselves by Arms, but only to pretend
Reparation by more gentle means. The Turks do not esteem to be a Rupture the
Incursions which are made by the one or the other party in times of Peace,
provided they be not accompanied with Infantry and Cannon. But when one does
act by open force with the full bodies of an Army, followed with all the Train
necessary for great Enterprises; that Subjects are solicited to rebel against
their Prince, and that they are compelled under the penalty of the Confiscation
of their Goods to take an unjust Oath, without process and without form of
Law; I do avow that I am ignorant what either Peace, War, Treaties, or Ruptures
are, if all these things can have any compatibilitie together at the same time.
It is a new knowledge in Law whereof the Ancients were ignorant, who have left
us an Instruction totally opposite to this doctrine: Philo de Legious.
Hosts non solum existimantur qui jam navali aut terrestri praelio certant,
sed pro talibus habendi and qui machinas admovent portubus aut moenibus,
etiamsi nondum pugnam incipiunt.

But that we may be the more able to judge in this business, it is necessary
that we examine all the terms of the Treaty of Peace, and consider the nature,
the effects and the ends of the same; to conclude that if all those be
destroyed by this Invasion, it cannot be called by any other name then by that
of a manifest Rupture.

The motive Cause of the Peace was, The desire of the good, quiet and ease of
their good Subjects: The Object was, To put a period to so many mischiefs: The
Effect, To forget and extinguish all the causes and motives of the Wars past,
and to establish a sincere, entire, and durable Peace betwixt them and their
Successors. All these are overthrown by this present Attempt, which does
trouble the good and tranquillity of the people, renew the public misfortunes,
rekindle and resuscitate all the causes and motives of the Wars past, and
raise new ones. I do not see how one can conceive that Peace should subsist
with an Invasion, which ruins it in its Cause, in its Ends, and in all its
Effects.

Moreover, if the Entry of the most Christian King into these Provinces be but
a simple taking of possession, yet is it altogether illegal, contrary to the
Laws of Nations, and to the customs and practice of the Civil and Municipal
Laws, as I will make appear in the Article following; and what color soever
these do put upon it, it cannot pass but for the way of Fact, which is never
permitted except by the Law of War. So that by endeavoring to take away the
name of War from this Invasion, they do deprive it of that Veil which was able
to cover it at least with the false appearance of the Right of Arms, and
manifestly conclude, that if it be not a Rupture, it is a violent Intrusion; if
it be not a War, it is a Depredation and Piracie; and if it be not an infringing
of the Peace, it is an unjust Attempt, which gives a shock to all Laws and
Forms. Thus are the French entangled in their own Nets, and thinking to make
their Cause plausible, or less odious, by a Subtlety which has neither body
nor substance, they destroy the principal Foundation of it, and take from
themselves the means of establishing their Conquest upon the right of War, by
declaring that they will Conquer without breaking the Peace. L. Hosts, de
vern. signif.
Hosts sunt qui nobis, aut quibus nos public Bellum decernimus: caeteri
Latrones aut Praedones sunt.

We do ordinarily distinguish betwixt Contravention, Infringing, and Rupture.
The first is but an Abuse either in action or omission contrary to some
particular Condition, which hinders not the existence of a Treaty in its
integrity, and only affords the parties concerned a right to pretend that the
Damage be repaired. The second shocks the substance of the Peace, overthrows
the Groundwork of it, and gives a right to pursue satisfaction by Arms, if it
cannot be obtained by any other way. The third consists simply in those acts of
Hostility which are incompatible with Peace, which is in one word when one
pursues his Right by force: And War, according to the opinion of Civilians, is
nothing else but A Contention by strength of hands and by violence of Arms.
Others take the word Rupture more at large, and extend it to three cases: The
first, to every Act which is against the nature and ends of Peace: the second,
to the committing or omitting of something which is contrary to the express
tenor of the Treaty: the third, to the making of some Attempt which brings
Consequences along with it incompatible with all that can be understood by the
name of Peace. Grotius lib. 3. cap. 20. These three Conditions meet here: there
is open Force; there is an express Contravention to the most essential
Articles; and Consequences which induce an irreparable Damage.

The Contravention to the Treaty on the part of France may evidently be proved
by a multitude of Acts repugnant to the sincerity of that Friendship which the
two Kings promised each other, which is the chief End of this Peace, and which
overthrows the Conditions agreed on betwixt them. The secret practices, both
within and without the Realm, have never ceased since the Peace; thus to keep
the Monarchy at a check, and to raise enemies and enviers to it from all parts.
The Portugueses have almost totally subsisted ever since upon the provision of
Corn which has been sent them out of France; and in all the Debates which have
happened either touching the Execution or the Interpretation of the Treaty, or
the Purchase of Dunkirk, they have always alleged unto us their Will in place
of all other Reason, offering to give us the Law even in our own houses, and to
forbid the reparation even of our own Chanells; so that upon the least
difference wherein we did not yield unto them without reply whatever they
asked, they have presently returned the bargain in our hand. If any Leagues
were proposed for our Defense only, instantly they thundered out against us
menaces of War; which was a word so frequently in the mouth of the Archbishop
of Ambrun, that upon business of no value, and between private persons, he
instantly made a public concernment. In fine, they have made use with so much
exorbitancie of the strong Inclination which they observed in us for the
preservation of Peace, that they have still employed, upon the slightest
occasions, the Scarecrow of War, thinking thereby to pull from us all that
their humor made them desire.

Though our condition were very unfortunate to live in this continual Disquiet,
to see the Sword always hanging over our heads, and our Repose tied to so
small a thread: yet the remembrance of our former Sufferings, and the
apprehension of what might come hereafter, made us prefer an uncertain and
tottering Rest before those inevitable Confusions and Troubles which a Rupture
would produce; and expect that our Moderation might touch their hearts, or that
the Divine Providence would by some other means provide for our safety. But
this Patience of ours has served them for a Ladder whereby they have mounted
to open Infringings of the Peace, which cannot admit of any Interpretation or
Extenuation: And I defy all the subtlety of the Gallicane litigious Cavills,
to palliate them with the least pretext or meanest appearance of Justice. It Is
here that I do entreat the Reader to show me no favor, but to divest himself
of all kind of Complacencie which perhaps he may have for us, to retain all his
Partiality (if any he have) for our Enemies, and to judge of our Cause with
the uttermost of Rigor.

The Abandoning of Portugal is one of the essential Foundations of the Peace;
without that it could never have been treated of nor concluded: France does
declare it by these words, in the LX Article of the said Treaty: For as much
as we have foreseen and apprehended that such an Engagement might be an
Obstacle not to be surmounted in the conclusion of the Peace, and consequently
reduce the Two Kings to a necessity of perpetuating the War. And a little
beneath in the very same Article it goes on in these terms: In fine, in
contemplation of the Peace, and seeing the absolute necessity wherein his most
Christian Majesty finds himself, either to perpetuate the War by a Rupture of
the present Treaty, which he perceives to be inevitable, in case he should
have persisted to obtain in this Affair from his Catholic Majesty other
Conditions then those which he had offered, etc.

It Is clear in the second place by the same Article, that to oblige France to
this Abandoning, the King of Spain refused from the most Christian King the
Restitution of all those places and Dominions upon which the Arms of France had
seized during the War. The terms are clear in the same Article: Offering,
besides the places which are to be restored unto his Catholic Majesty by the
present Treaty, to render unto him also all the other Conquests in general
which his said Arms have made in this War, and entirely to restore the Prince
of Conde; providing, and upon condition, that the Affairs of the Kingdom of
Portugal should remain in the state in which at present they are.

It Is likewise out of controversy (every way) that this Abandoning of Portugal
was covenanted and promised by France, so authentically and in such clear and
special terms, that it cannot be called in question, nor be made subject to any
Interpretations contrary to the true sense and intention of the Parties
contracting. Here you have the terms: His said Majesty shall meddle no more
with the said Affair, and does promise and oblige himself upon his Honor, and
in the Faith and the Word of a King, for himself and his Successors, not to
give unto the aforementioned Kingdom of Portugal, neither in general, nor to
any person or persons of it in particular, of what dignity, estate or condition
they way be, neither for the present nor hereafter, any Aid or Assistance,
public or secret, directly or indirectly, of Men, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals,
Ships or Moneys, under any pretext, nor of any other thing that is or can be,
by land nor by Sea, nor in any other farshion: as likewise not to permit that
any Leavies shall be made in any of his most Christian Majesty's Kingdoms and
Estates, nor grant free passage to those which may come out of other Countries
to the help of the aforesaid Realm of Portugal.

It Is no less evident that they have failed in every point and every
circumstance of this Promise; That from the very beginning they secretly
conveyed Troops into Portugal in several bodies; That at the self-same time
when, upon the complaints of the Marquess de la Fuente, they sent public
Orders to the Governors of their Ports, that no Soldiers should be suffered
to imbark for Portugal, they did not abstain from making them pass underhand
and by connivence; That a little while after the Marshall of Turenne publicly
made Leavies for their assistance; and that the Marquess de la Fuente having
represented that this was a direct Contravention to the Treaty of Peace, they
paid him with this cold and disdainful Answer, that it was a particular act
of the Marshall of Turenne's, in which the Court of France had no hand; That
they continued to provide them with Corn and all other sorts of Ammunition for
War: And all this whilst the effect of the pretended Devolution was yet
uncertain, and could no ways operate even among private persons, unless the
Daughter did survive the Father, and before ever the French made any Instance
or Overture touching that Pretension.

We have in our hands the Letters intercepted, which make faith that the Court
of France has ever since the Peace fomented the Obstinacy of the Portugueses,
that she has hindered them from accepting the advantageous Conditions which
were offered them, animating them by a hope of mighty Succors not only for
their own Defense, but also for carrying an Offensive War into the very heart
of Spain: We have many Letters of Monsieur de Lionne and the Archbishop of
Ambrun to Monsieur de Shomberg, which prove the continual Correspondence which
was betwixt them, for the direction of that War. No body is ignorant how the
Duke of Beaufort the last year came with his whole Fleet upon the Coasts of
Portugal, where he spent a part of the Summer, to the great prejudice of his
Allies, only to secure the passage of Victuals and Ammunition, whereof the
Portugueses were in extreme want; and that at the same time when they were
offering us their Mediation to work an Accommodation with Portugal. All the
World knows that Monsieur Colbert privately made several voiages thither, to
encourage them, and contract a secret Alliance with them: That the Sieur
Courtin, a little while after the close of the Pyrenean Treaty, went expressly
into England, to move the King of Great Britain not to abandon the Portugueses.
We intercepted in a French Bottom, which came from Portugal, the account of the
Expenses and the Succors which France has given without intermission to that
Kingdom since the Conclusion of the Peace; whereby it is clear, amongst other
things, that the French have always entertained Troops at their own charge to
uphold this War.

And for the Masterpiece of all these unjust proceedings, France it self
cannot deny, but that it has lately concluded a League offensive with that
Kingdom against all its Enemies. The principal Conditions of this League are:
That they shall be the Friends of their Friends, and the Enemies of their
Enemies, excepting England: That France shall furnish them with as many men as
they need, to carry on an offensive War in Spain both by Sea and land; shall
advance unto them by way of loan the half of their Pay; for the entertainment
of Auxiliarie Troops; and that they shall furnish them every year, under the
same title of Loan, with the sum of three hundred thousand Crowns: That all the
Ports which they shall take in Spain, either upon the one or the other Sea,
shall be put into the power of France: That they shall not treat, neither of
Peace nor Truce, without common consent: That this League shall last for the
space of ten years.

By the clauses above specified of the Pyrenean Treaty it may be seen, that
the Abandoning of Portugal was both an essential and fundamental point of the
Peace: That his Catholic Majesty preferred that Interest before all the
Provinces, Estates, Dominions and strong Holds which he quitted to France, and
which he might have recovered, if he would have yielded in the Affair of
Portugal. So that France does not justly possess so many places as have been
made over to her, but in so far as she has satisfied the Condition in
contemplation whereof they were given, and without which all would have been
restored to us.

Whereby it is proved, that the public and secret Aids which France has given
to that Kingdom, and particularly the League offensive which she has
concluded with it, are not simple Contraventions or Infringements, but an open
Rupture of the Treaty of Peace, which restores his Catholic Majesty to the
just right of pretending to and redemanding of whatever has been accorded to
France by virtue of this same Treaty, and all the Expense and Damages which
the continuation of this War, and the impediments which France has brought to
an Accommodation, have occasioned to the Crown of Spain. This Conclusion is
founded upon three invincible Reasons.

The first is drawn from the Third Article of the Instrument of Peace, whereby
it is agreed, That, to avoid the Differences which may afterward happen
between some Princes or Potentates, Allies of the said Kings, etc. if they
cannot reconcile them by their Interposition, and that the said Allies shall
therefore take Arms, every one of the said Kings may help his own Allie with
his forces, without coming to any Rupture betwixt their Majesty's by reason of
such Assistance.

But in the end of the same Article Portugal is expressly excepted. From whence
may be deduced this evident Consequence, That if the Treaty does allow the two
Kings to assist their Allies, without breaking of the Peace, Portugal excepted;
it must follow that France cannot assist Portugal without Rupture, since that
Kingdom is excepted by a clause restrictve of the general provision which is
made for all the other Allies.

And in the close of the same Third Article all manner of Succors is generally
prohibited to be given to the Subjects which might hereafter revolt against
either of the said Kings, to limit the permission contained in the said Article
of assisting the Allies without Rupture, only to Lawful Princes and
Potentates, with an absolute exclusion of all Rebels.

The second is, That the Treaty is truly broken, when by an Attempt of one of
the Parties it is reduced to such terms in which it could never have been
concluded nor commenced: Lege quod ab initio, F. de Reg. Jur. It is certain by
the LX. Article above cited, and by the proper Declaration of France, That this
Engagement with Portugal was an insuperable Obstacle to the Conclusion of
Peace. It is then clearer then the day, that since the Peace could never have
been made without the Abandoning of Portugal, it cannot subsist with those
Succors nor with that League.

The third Reason is, That by the League offensive with Portugal they do
declare themselves Enemies to the Enemies the one of the other, England only
excepted. It follows then manifestly, that the Crown of Spain not being
excepted, but on the contrary this League being directly against it, his most
Christian Majesty has declared himself an open Enemy to Spain, by concluding
it with this Condition.

Let us add to all this the Hostility already begun against those of
Armentiers, the Detention of the Governor of that place, the Massacre o^ the
Soldiers of the Garrison; the Conspiracy against the Town of Luxemburg; the
Contributions which they have demanded from those very Provinces that are not
comprised in this Pretension, to save them from fire and pillage; the Invasion
of Charleroy, which they fortify; the sacking and burning of diverse Villages,
even in the Country of Liege; the profanation of the Churches and Holy
places; and the taking of Berges S. Winox: And if all this cannot be called
War, Rupture, and an Infringement of the Treaty of Peace, I see not what names
henceforth can be given to things to express their nature.

After all this, the Latin Translator of this Libell sports himself wittily
with these majestical Hyperboles: Rex Invictissimus Galliarum, non proferendi
Imperii cupiditate, aut gloria Bellicae laudis, sed communi utilitate and
Officii Religione compulsus, etc. And farther, Neque enim is est qui de
inferenda finitimis cogitet injuria, aut in rem suam aliena convertere, aut
aliorum demum invadere velit Imperia: unam praeter caeter as Virtutes colit
Justitiam; huic Coronam Sceptrumque submittit, etc. He believes that to
persuade his saying is sufficient, that his single words shall be able to give
the lie to all the contrary effects, and that Christendom will give more
credit to their Ears then to their Eyes and to their Experience.

ARTICLE III.
That this Rupture is unjust. admitting that the Rights of the most Christian
King were well founded.

THE Injustice of the Rupture, and the infringing of the Peace by the Succors
which France has sent into the Kingdom of Portugal, and by the League newly
concluded with them, is so manifest of it self and so clearly proved, that it
were to have an ill opinion of the sufficiency and the Judgment of the Readers,
and to abuse their leisure, to employ time or Reasons to render it more evident.

But to give our Enemies yet a larger Carreer, and fight with them with less
advantage; I am content for once to tie my hands, and shut my eyes to all our
Rights, and grant them by a false supposition (which I reserve to be destroyed
in the following Articles) that their Pretensions are Just, and grounded on
solid Foundations. I will also for this time afford them the liberty of
deciding this Question either by public Right or Municipal Customs: Though in
the sequel I will make them see, that it is solely the Treaty of Peace which
ought to be the Judge of this Process. And after I have granted them (of my own
accord, and without prejudice) all those advantages which may seem to give them
the gain of the Cause, my only aim in this Article is, to demonstrate That
this Invasion and Rupture is unjust, contrary to the Laws of Nations, and void
of all those forms which are necessarily required to make a War lawful; That
the Oath which France does exact from the People without discussing the Cause
is unjust, inconsistent with the Divine Laws, with the obligation of their
Consciences, and drawing after it most pernicious Consequences against all
Princes, to render the Fidelity of their Subjects exposed to all Winds; and in
conclusion, That the care which they take for their Defense is a precise and
undispensable Duty, and cannot without Calumny be termed by the name either of
Rebellion or Rupture.

If we consider this business according to public Right and the Law of
Nations, all Statesmen and Lawyers will agree, that to a just War the
subsequent conditions are necessary; Sovereign Authority, a just Title, a
preceding Requisition of that Satisfaction which is pretended, joined to an
obstinate and invincible Refusal by the contrary party, in such sort that the
Damage cannot be otherways repaired but by Arms, and finally a legal
Denunciation of War formally intimated by a solemn Decree to the Party.

Here it might be said, that the most Christian King does not act in this
occasion in the quality of a Sovereign, and ought not to be considered but as a
particular Pretender in matter of Succession, in regard he grounds all his
Right upon the Provincial Customs established between private persons by their
own consents, without interposition of the supreme Authority so much as by a
Decree of simple Approbation, and which by consequence cannot give him any
right to make War. But I reserve this matter to be treated of more fully in
another place.

The just Title is wanting. Though we should suppose that his Right were well
grounded, (which notwithstanding is controverted) the contrary party is in
peaceable Possession, founded upon the common Right of sovereign successions,
upon a Treaty of Peace, upon an authentic Renunciation, upon a Testament, and
upon a continual Custom. In doubtful cases the favor of the Laws is for the
Possessor: It is the part of the Actor to prove and verfie his Right. The
Judges themselves cannot pronounce sentence without duly hearing of the
parties: Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, etc. It is much more unjust
that the parties should do Justice to themselves without form of Process. If
it were permitted to Kings and Potentates to right themselves instantly, and to
seize by force of Arms whatsoever they believe they may have cause to pretend
to, there would be no Possession secure in this world. If it be sufficient to
have made a Book be composed by an Advocate to justify a Right, and to be able
thereafter to prosecute it by force; if no Treaties nor Renunciations nor
Prescriptions are able to stop the current of it; there is no more security in
the world for England, Germany, Holland, Lorrain, Italy, Corsica, and
Castile: all the Preparations are already framed for their Ruin, the Books are
already composed, the Cause is judged in the Tribunal of France, the right of
War is established, the Arms are ready, there wants nothing but an Occasion to
take possession of their Estates by a Right proved by the same forms, and
adjudged by the same Authority which has determined their Pretensions against
us. Cassan, Aubery, Arroyus, Peter du Puy, and the nameless Author of the
Treaty of the Interests and Maxims of Princes, with an infinity of other
turbulent spirits wherewith France does abound, are as competent Arbiters in
this point, as the Writer who forged the Rights of the Queen. France, by the
same moderation which it uses toward us, void of Ambition to extend its
Limits, of the desire of Glory, of the intention of Rupture, but only for
public good, and Officii Religione impulsa, may drive them out of their
Possessions, to establish her own, and yet they should not be able with reason
to complain of any Injustice, if they should suffer them freely to introduce
this dangerous Prejudication. If the Propositions of these Scribblers be true,
That all that has been acquired by the Kings of France has been united to the
Crown; Arroy, fol. 90. That the Authority of Charlemagne which was over
Germany, Italy and spain, ought to be in Lewis the Just, and consequently in
Lewis the XIVth; Arroy, fol. 86: If this Right be unalienable by virtue of the
Salique Law, which they would have pass for Divine; idem, fol. 81: In fine, if
the greatest part of Germany be the Patrimony of the Kings of France; Auber.
Lib. 2. page 93. Can a juster Title be required to take possession of it? And
will he not have much better ground to redemand his own Patrimony, then he
believes to have now to pretend to a foreign Succession?

It is not enough to have a legal Pretext and Sovereign Authority to render a
War just; there must be some fault, and an invincible obstinacy on the other
side: Vt seilicet illi qui impugnantur propter aliquam culpam impugnationem
mereansur; D. Thom. 22. Quaest. 40. Art. I. which he establishes upon the
Doctrine of S. Augustine in lib. 83. super Josue Quaest. 10. Si gens vel
civitas plecl enda est, quae vel vindicare neglexerit quod a suis improbe
factum est, vel read re quod per injuriam ablatum est. Whence it may be
inferred, that the Injury must needs be very great to deserve so violent a
Reparation, and that it must be irreparable by any other way, that it may be
lawful to come to the last remedy. All War that is not absolutely necessary is
against the Law of God and Nature, as the same S. Thomas does explicate it in
the same place, and is not permitted but as the last means, when all others are
found to be ineffectual. Extrema primo nemo tentavit loco. To judge from these
grounds of the Justice of this War, we must examine by parcells the proceeding
which France has held in seeking Satisfaction, and it will clearly be seen,
that she has carefully shunned the true means of obtaining it by lawful
courses; that she has provoked us with diverse Injuries, as I showed before;
that not only her first end and sole design has been to renew the War, but
also to surprise us by a false pretext of Peace and Friendship.

The Conduct which Decency and the Law of Nations seemed to prescribe to them
in this occasion was, to advertise the Queen presently, after the death of the
late King, by an authentic and legal way, (according to the Custom amongst
Monarchs) as by some Envoy, or by their ordinary Ambassador at the Court of
Spain, to acquaint her with the subject of their Pretensions, and to show The
QUEEN-Regent of Spain.
her the reasons and instructions of them, to require Satisfaction, or else to
propose ways of Agreement: in case of refusal, to declare solemnly, that they
should be forced to take Arms, if they could obtain nothing by Reason and fair
means. After all this it became them, according to all manner of Law, to have
had recourse to the immediate Lord of those Fiefs to which they pretended,
either for submitting themselves to his Arbitration, or at least for seeking
his Interposition, and laying open their Rights before him.

But far from all this they began with Leagues, with Aids sent to the
Portugueses, with secret Practices amongst our People, and a thousand unworthy
Intrigues, forerunners and evident discoveries of a formed Design of War; and
in place of all intimation or seeking after amicable ways, they have contented
themselves with a simple familiar Discourse which passed in Conversation
between the Queen of France and the Marquess de la Fuente.

Here it is wherein evidently does appear a proceeding full of Artifice, which
cannot tend but to two ends; the one, to have in time and place a fitting
occasion to bring War upon us, and in some kind to justify by that Demand the
Violence which they did resolve to found upon our Refusal; the other, That they
might be able to surprise us, and make us neglect the care of our Defense and
Safety, and might avoid those Obstacles which by the good offices of the
neighboring Princes, and interessed in the Cause, they foresaw would certainly
have been employed from all parts to prevent a War, from which they would not
be diverted by any manner of Agreement. They feared that if they had observed
all the Formalities which I have above related, they should have given us an
Alarm out of season, and have awakened us out of that profound Sleep into which
our confidence in their Treaties and words had lulled us: They judged
reasonably enough, that all the neighbour-States would sufficiently apprehend
the Consequences of this War, to make use or all their care and power to
terminate this Difference by an Accommodation: They saw that an express
Declaration of their Design might open the eyes of all the World; and that, on
the other part, a sudden Invasion without any preceding Formalitie would bring
an universal blame upon them, and convict them of manifest Injustice: They have
chosen this weak middle betwixt those two extremes, to throw in the air an
empty Proposition without matter and without form, to the end they might take
the advantage of our Answer when their business should suffer it; knowing very
well, that upon such a weak ground we were not able to make any Reply to their
full satisfaction: They believed that by this cunning they should have
wherewithal to convince us without giving us the Alarm, and wherewith to prove
their Moderation without being obliged to desist from their Violences. But God
is not so cheated, nor men of sound understanding: these are Spiders webs,
which are good for nothing but to catch flies. Yet of those things do they make
the Frontispice of their work and the Foundation of their Building: they do
move and bestir themselves upon them with that life which is so natural unto
them, imagining that having this Shield, we shall not carry in a stroke upon
them which they shall not be able to ward.

To judge well of the matter, we must enter upon the truth of the Fact, which
the Author of these Libells falsifies in all its circumstances. The very first
words of his Preface contain a palpable Untruth; which is, A little after the
deceased Queen Mother had paid to the Memory of the Catholic King, her
Brother, all the Duties and all the Civilities which are usual in such
occasions, she sent to call the Marquess de la Fuente, etc.

It is certain by the Relation of the Marquess de la Fuente, and by the date of
his Letters written to Spain, that the Queen Mother held this discourse with
him on the 13. of August; and all the world knows that the King died not till
the 17. of the Month following.

It Is a thing of bad presage to the success of this Writing, that the first
words of the Preface should begin with so notable a Lie, which gives just cause
to believe that the Conclusion of the same Work, which promises to our people a
Haven of Benedictions, if they will come under their power, shall be of the
same nature, and that the Epilogue will correspond to the Exordium, by the just
Conformity which such a great Orator, without doubt, ought to have observed
in all the parts of a Piece which he began to meditate from the very day of the
Peace; since in effect he is not ashamed to avow, that they did not consent to
the Act of Renunciation but with a formed design to break it.

Thus all that he does alledgin consequence of that Commission which the
Queen Mother gave to the Marquess de la Fuente to write to the Queen of Spain
on this subject, is but a weaving of the same Untruth, since no body can be
ignorant that the Queen had no hand in Business whilst the King lived, and that
she would by no means have intruded in a matter whereof she had no manner of
knowledge, and which was not then within the extent of her Sphere.

That he may not give himself the lie, he continues still to accumulate Lies
upon Lies. The Discourse which the Queen Mother held with the Marquess was
altogether of another strain then that which he cites. This wise Princess, who
considered the Peace as her own work, and who knew the unquietness of the
French humor, and the desire of Glory which boiled in the heart of her Son,
thought fit to declare confidently her thoughts of it to the Marquess de la
Fuente, that they might search jointly for some means to stay his Impetuositie.
She ingenuously represented unto him the trouble which the bad Suggestions
which were infused into her Son upon vain pretensions did occasion to her, and
she entreated him to advertise the King her Brother thereof, that he might make
such Reflections thereon as were necessary; that she would wish, that after he
had given so much for the Peace, he would yet yield in something to preserve
it, and stop the mouths of all such as carried on the King her Son to violent
Resolutions; that for her part she would inculcate all the Moderation that she
did wish in him. Thus did that Royal and prudent Princess speak, and witnessed
sufficiently by her discourse that she had in horror a Pretension which she
did not sustain but by the fear of a greater evil. The Marquess de la Fuente
did never charge himself with this Commission, (contrary to what this Author
does relate with the same fidelity that he has done all the rest) for it is
clear by the Relation which he sent into spain upon this subject; and all those
who are but a very little versed in the management of public affairs will
judge that he could not do it, without he had been ignorant of the Duty of an
Ambassador; (which cannot be presumed of a Minister of so long experience, and
who deserves the general applause by his good behavior in so many great
Embassages.) He knew too well that, being the Catholic King's Minister, he
might not act as solicitor for the most Christian King; that he could not enter
into a Negotiation upon a matter of this importance without an express Order;
that the sole end of his Embassage was, to cause the Treaty of Peace to be
observed in every point, and not to overthrow the Foundations of it; and that
the very discourse of the Queen was not sufficiently authorized, to frame an
authentic Proposition to his Master, or to open a Negotiation. He satisfied
himself then by remonstrating to the Queen Mother, in the freedom of the same
familiar discourse, the Reasons which ought to divert the most Christian King
from such thoughts, and did beseech her to employ her endeavors to infuse into
him juster and more moderate ones. Notwithstanding, as Ambassadors are bound to
give their Masters an account even of the smallest circumstances of things, he
could not omit to inform the Court of Spain of all this little Intrigue by way
of Relation, and not by way of Proposition, and to entreat them to instruct him
how he should behave himself, in case that they should make more legal
Instances unto him upon this subject. The King was yet alive when this Letter
came; but falling sick at the same time of the disease whereof he died, the
Confusion Wherein things were then afforded not leisure to make much reflection
upon a Narration which had nothing of authentic in it: and they were content
only to give him order, that if the Queen Mother should again debate upon that
business, he should inform her fully touching the Rights of his Majesty, and
let her know, that the Queen being neither Arbitress nor Mistress of those
Affairs, she could not of her self dispose of them during her Regencie.

To this Answer no new Instance was made, no Proposition, no Complaint.
Monsieur de Bellefond was sent to Madrid to complement the Queen, without
making the least overture unto her touching this Pretension. His most Christian
Majesty has not ceased ever since that time to confirm unto the Marquess de
la Fuente the assurances of a firm resolution to continue the Peace, without
ever so much as once naming to him the name of this pretended Devolution. The
Archbishop of Ambrun (as I have already said) has ever since that time acted
the part of a busy man, by proposing of Leagues and Mediations, and labored
to make those be looked upon as turbulent and seditious spirits who would have
framed the least scruple against the assurances which he gave. And in these
last months passed the Marquess de la Fuente taking leave of the King to return
into Spain, he positively charged him to engage his Faith and Word to the
Queen, that he would keep with her and her Kingdoms a constant Amity. Which
Promise was not restricted by any Condition; it was full, free, and universal,
without any intermixture of Complaints or Pretensions, which might have given
occasion to second thoughts.

After all these things the Court of Spain had just cause to believe that the
apprehensions of the Queen Mother were but panick fears; that an excess of her
love of Peace gave her vain suspicions of things more remote; or that her
Tears, her Reasons, and the Supplications which she tendered to the King her
son when she gave him her last Embraces, had mollified his heart; or that the
prudent Answer of our Queen had convinced him; or, at the worst, that he would
have the patience to stay till our young Monarch were in a condition to
understand and dispose of his Affairs, that they might agree as
Brothers-in-Law, Kindred, and Friends, upon a Difference which could not so
easily nor so securely be ended during his Minority.

From this sincere and true Narration all men who are not prepossessed may
easily judge, that the discourse which the Queen held with the Marquess de la
Fuente cannot be taken for a Denunciation, nor so much as for a Proposition, or
a Demand, or a simple Overture of Negotiation. The reasons whereof are beyond
reply. First, Because she did it not in the name of the King, and did not avow
so much as that he had any knowledge thereof; and that she had no more any hand
in the Regencie, nor in the Administration of public Affairs. But so it is,
that a Denunciation cannot be either legal or authentic, unless it does
proceed from a Sovereign Authority. Grotius lib. 2. de Jure Belli. Secondly, It
was spoken merely by way of discourse, and advertisement, by an anticipated
foresight of the ensuing dangers, and not as a formal Proposition duly
authorized. Thirdly, That the Case was not yet in being, wherein the pretended
Devolution could have any effect. Fourthly, That it was not accompanied with
any Instructions, nor specification of Reasons, of Titles, and not so much as
with the names of the Provinces to which they pretended; which was absolutely
necessary, to the end a Categorical Answer might have been given, the Case
being understood. Fifthly, That it was addressed to a Minister no ways
commissionated to receive it, nor to enter into the matter of so new a
business, so surprising, and of so great importance. Sixthly, That the most
judicious Answer of the Queen did not stop the course of Negotiation, but on
the contrary afforded them conveniencie to propose their Reasons, to let her
see, that by yielding up of those Provinces which were devolved unto them by so
clear a Right as they would persuade it to be, she did not alienate any thing
of her Son's Estate, but performed an act of Justice, which would shelter his
Minority from a dangerous War.
But they were cautious enough not to enter into the particulars of the
business, they shunned all clearings, they would not urge that which they
feared they should obtain; and to make way for their more vast Pretensions by
the Right of Arms, it was requisite to open the passage to them by that of the
Devolution. Consequently all those pretty Reasons which are now alleged to
make the Queen's Answer be esteemed an absolute Refusal, and an invincible
Obstacle to all Accommodation, behoved to be carefully reserved, that they
might not be presented to the world but only by the mouth of Mortar-pieces and
Cannons.

Meanwhile it is left to the judgment of the Readers, whether the Queen could
have given a more equitable, moderate and prudent Answer. Hardly were her first
Tears dried up which the death of her dear Husband brought so abundantly from
her eyes, scarcely had she taken the most summarie informations of the Affairs
of the Court and Kingdom; when, instead of the Assistance which she ought to
have expected from a Prince so nearly allied, she saw her self entertained in
place of the first Complements by a Proposition without form, which was not
addressed unto her, which was introduced by an indirect and unwarranted way, by
which they required from her Provinces without naming them, without specifying
the Causes, or backing them with other Reasons then those of Buying the
Conservation of a Peace, whereof the purchase had been sold unto us at so high
a rate. What other Answer could she make, but that she was not informed of that
Right, that she was but a bare Regent, and had no power to alienate any of her
Son's Dominions?

Was it not incumbent to France to let her see the Grounds of this Pretension,
and that she should not alienate any thing by restoring to every one his own?
Do they think that this was a Process which could summarily be decided by Bill
and Answer? and that upon their single assertion denuded of all manner of
Evidences she would out of a frolic throw at their faces Eight of the most
flourishing and rich Provinces of the ancient Patrimony of her Family?
Meanwhile upon this they raise the Hue and cry, they take her Reasons for
Refusalls, they do not reply to them but by Arms, and let her not know what it
is they pretend, until they find themselves in a posture able to snatch it
away by force. It is farther to be observed here, that this Answer was not
addressed to the Queen, nor given in form of a Resolution, but only in the
simple terms of an Instruction to the Marquess de la Fuente, in order to his
particular Direction, that he might try by his prudence gently to divert by a
Reason so solid the mind of the most Christian King from a thought so little
suiting with his own Glory.

For the last condition of a just War, all Lawyers do require a solemn
Declaration by a public Decree legally intimated to the parties. It is an
essential condition which the Law of Nations does prescribe, and all Wars
destitute of this Formalitie are Robberies, except the urging necessity of
repelling force by force shall dispense with us therein by the Law of Nature.

It seems that France, not to forget any thing which might render her Attempt
more unjust and scandalous, would needs omit this Formalitie, to make her
acting the more unseemly, by publishing in her Declarations, that she had no
design to break the Peace, at the same time when she did make us feel all the
effects of a War. From whence it must be concluded, that in regard this Answer
cannot be interpreted a Refusal, since there was no form in the Demand, and at
the most cannot pass but for a simple exception of Right, which the Queen did
object to defend that of her Son, there cannot be in it any title for a just
War; seeing the Laws do not permit even bare Reprisals, but when the party
required does shut up all the ways by which Justice can be obtained. L. Vlp.
ff. de cond. indeb. And since they have been answered by a juridick Reason, it
was the part of the most Christian King to overturn it by a stronger, before he
come to extremities.

This Denunciation is not only necessary and requisite by the Law of Nations,
but also is expressly stipulated in the XXVI. Article of the Treaty of Peace,
wherein it is agreed, That if any Rupture shall afterward happen betwixt the
two Crowns, (which God forbid) there shall always six months time he given on
the one part as well as the other, to retire and transport their goods and
persons, etc. Which of absolute necessity requires a legal and precedent
Denunciation, without which they can never be able to know when it shall be
time to retire themselves, and shall find themselves involved in an unforeseen
War.

It is not sufficient to be endued with Sovereign Authority, that he may have
right to make War in all cases; but the action he does intend to pursue by Arms
must be of such quality that he may act in it as Sovereign, that is, that he
act on the behalf of some public Interest which concerns the Sovereigntie; and
in this case his power is to be regulated by the nature of the Sovereigntie, or
of that Right whereby he acts: so that if in this action he depends upon the
Civil Laws, and be subject to a superior power, what Sovereigntie soever he
does otherwise possess, he has not the right of making War, but ought to have
recourse to those Tribunals before which the Cause is to be decided, and is not
in this respect considered but as a private person. Grotius lib. 2. cap. II. de
Jure Belli. Experience confirms this every day. It is for this that the Fiscal
is instituted, principally to defend and pursue the particular Actions of Kings
by the ways and forms of Justice: and this Custom would be unprofitable, if
Princes were both Judges and Executors of their own Causes. They themselves
plead every day against their own Subjects, they submit themselves to the
Decrees of their Tribunals; and if they do observe this Justice toward their
Inferiors, they are much more obliged to keep it toward the direct Lord of
those Fiefs which they do claim. The reason is, because that War is of the Law
of Nations, and such like Actions are of the Civil Law; That the Magistrates
and Tribunals are established to hinder particular Violences, which otherwise
would reign in the World, if it were indifferently permitted to seek
satisfaction by Arms: From whence it follows, that when the way of Civil Law is
open, and that he who intends the Action is subordinate in this particular case
to a Superior Authority, he has not the right of Arms in his power, and
cannot of himself have recourse to the Right of Nations, nor act as a
Sovereign, in regard he is none in this case.

Now in this Action the most Chrian King (as the Libell it self does declare)
does act in no other quality but as prosecuting the Actions of the Queen his
Wife, and consequently cannot have in that any other Right or quality then
that which is competent to her self. Therefore in this quality either he does
proceed as actual Duke of Brabant, and Prince of the other Provinces, which he
claims by a real Action, as Lord of those Lands by virtue of a devolved
Succession; or only as having a Right to claim them. In both cases it is
certain that he is not Possessour, that his Right is not without controversy,
that another is in the peaceable possession, founded upon very plausible
Titles, and that if even the most Christian King had by violence thrust him out
of his possession, the Judges could not pronounce any thing in the principal
matter, unless the business were restored to its first condition. This is a
Principle in Law which no Lawyer will call in question.

It is likewise most certain, that in the quality of Duke of Brabant he cannot
claim his Right by Arms against a peaceable and ancient Possessour, seeing he
depends upon a Superior Power, to whose Judgment he is bound to submit: That
his Action being a Right undecided and in controversy, he cannot take
possession without a decisive Sentence, nor consequently establish fully his
Jurisdiction in that Duchy without doing Homage to the direct Lord, and
taking the Investiture from him.

France it self will not deny that the Duchy of Brabant, and the most part of
the other Provinces which she pretends to, are Fiefs depending upon the Empire,
which she her self does seem of her own accord to acknowledge very clearly by
these words, which she has inserted in the end of her Preface; That his
intention is to possess the Estates which are fallen to the Queen in the
Low Countries, by the same Title by which the Catholic King has possessed
them in reference to the Empire. She declares it yet more openly in the same
Libells, wherein for a principal foundation of the pretended Devolution of the
Sovereigntie of Brabant, she alleges the Decree of the Emperor Henry, in
favor of Prince Henry, against his Father. Though I shall answer this
Objection in its proper place, for the present it is sufficient I draw this
advantage from it, that she does acknowledge the Emperor for the supreme and
lawful Judge of the Differences which may arise for the Sovereigntie of
Brabant, and even in this particular case, which they draw by the hair to that
of the Devolution; and that the said Emperor did prohibit the Duke to
undertake any thing in it to the prejudice of his Children. Whereby the Author
of this Writing pretends fully to establish the Emperor's Right of Judging,
pronouncing, and interdicting, which are all effects of a Supreme Authority.
And though in that there may be many exceptions and limitations, without
farther examining the matter, we will be content in this place to make use of
their own Allegations', to fight them with their own Weapons; so much the
rather, because the Privileges granted to the Dutchies of Brabant, Limbourg,
and the other Provinces of the Netherlands, by the Emperor Charles the IV,
Sigismond, Maximilian, and others, evidently confirm that a part of Brabant and
of the other Provinces hold of the Empire: besides, it is set down in express
terms, that the said Provinces are Fiefs of the Empire. No person is ignorant
that they compose one The Empire is divided into Circles.
Circle of it, and consequently that for what concerns public Right they are
subject to the Laws, reserving nevertheless their particular Privileges and
Jurisdiction.

It is out of controversy that all the Processes and Differences which arise
touching Successions, Investitures, Rights, and Pretensions upon Fiefs of the
Empire, depend of the Supreme Jurisdiction of the direct Lord, and that no
Prince of this great Body can seize the Estates of another by way of fact, what
just Pretension soever he may have, without contravening the Order and Imperial
Constitutions, and obliging all the other Princes to take Arms against the
Aggressour. Experience shows us this in an infinity of Processes of this
nature, which are still depending before their lawful Tribunals. As also no
body will deny but that the Treaties of Munster and Osnabrug are made use of at
this day as a Fundamental Law to regulate the Affairs of the Empire: And this
is expressly declared, Inst. Pacis Germano-Gall.. Pro majori; Sit haec
Transactio perpetua Lex and pragmatica Imperit Sanctio. And France is so much
the more obliged to conform it self to this Rule, because it has reaped most
abundantly the chiefest Fruits of this Peace. It is also unquestionable, that
by the same Treaty the Circle of Burgundy is expressly included in these
words,. Vt eo sincerior; Circulus quidem Burgundicus sit maneatque Membrum
Imperii post Controversias inter Galliam Hispaniamque sopitas hac Pacificatione
comprehensus: and by consequence it ought to enjoy all Rights, Immunities and
Prerogatives of the Circles of the Empire specified in the. Vt autem, and in
the following, and of the general and reciprocal Warrantie expressed in the
same Instrument of Peace. In the. Tam univers. are infringed and annulled all
attempts and ways of fact formerly committed, or which shall be commenced for
the future, quae nullo praecedente legitimo Juris and Executionis ordine fieri
attentarive poterunt. And in the. Vt autem provisum sit, it is provided that,
to avoid new Controversies, all the Princes of the Empire shall remain in the
peaceable possession and enjoyment of their Rights and Prerogatives, ut a nullo
unquam sub quocunque praetextu de facto turbari possint.

In the. Pax vero conclusa, it is expressly ordained against all ways of Fact;
Et si quid eorum a quocunque violari contigerit, laesus laedentem inprimis a
via Facti dehortetur, causa ipsa vel amicabili Compositioni, vel Juris
disceptationi submissa. And in the. following, the term of three years is
appointed to terminate the Difference either by the one or the other way: And
in case that without having recourse to or putting in practice the one or the
other of these means, any one before the said term of three years do undertake
any thing by the way of Arms; teneantur omnes and singuli hujus Transactionis
consortes, junctis cum part laesa (that is to say, he who is attaqued by
force) consiliis viribusque, Arma sumere ad repellendam Injuriam a passo
moniti, quod nec Amicitiae nec Juris viae locum invenerit. By which it is
clear, that it is not permitted to any to take up Arms until he has tried for
the space of three years the means of Accommodation, or of Justice. The words
that follow in the same. do yet more clearly explain it: Et nulli omnino
Statuum Imperii liceat Jus suum vi vel armis persequi; sed si quid
Controversiae sive jam exortum sit, sive posthac inciderit, unusquisque jure
experiatur: secus faciens reus sit fractae Pacis.

Either then the most Christian King will act in this Cause in the name of the
Queen his Consort as she is a Princess of the Empire, or as a private person by
virtue of the Municipal Laws of Brabant. In the first case he ought as a Vassal
to have recourse to the Sovereign Tribunal where the Controversies about the
Ducal Succession are tried: In the second case he ought to submit himself to
the Judgment of the Feodal Court, which is the only Interpreter of the
Customs of the Country, and the supreme Judge of the particular Actions
touching Fiefs.

As to the Declaration which they do make in the same Writing, that they will
possess these new Conquests under the same Laws and Dependences on the Empire
whereby our Kings have held them; It is a Protestation contrary to the Act, and
their proceeding does destroy it absolutely. How can it be hoped that they I
subject themselves to the Laws of the Empire in the fruition of those Estates,
when they do violate them all by the Invading of this Circle? All the
Pretensions of the Princes of the Empire one against another have always been
left to the Supreme Judicatory; they have ever been begun by some Process: And
those who, wearied with their tediousness, have labored to right themselves,
have still found opposition, and been discountenanced by the Which is the
Imperial Diet.
General Diet. Even they who have carried Arms against the Empire have never
been condemned, nor exposed to the Imperial Outlawrie, but according to the
forms of Justice. This course is so regulated and so confirmed by Custom, that
amongst so many Differences of which Germany is full, and in the numberless
multitude of noble Families which compose this great Body, not so much as one
is to be seen which has strayed from this Highway without punishment. France
alone, which is yet but upon the Threshold of the Door, will already command
within the House, and without any form of Process erects to herself a Tribunal
of her Throne, Advocates of her Army, and Judges of her own Power. What can the
Empire expect from her Submission when she is Mistress, if she make such use of
it when she is but a Pretender? And how should one promise to himself the
Fealty of Vassalage from those who commit an act of Felony to acquire it, and
will not enter but by the oppression of Laws and Justice?

From all these Principles, which are clearer then the day, this Conclusion may
be drawn, That the Oath and the Acknowledgement which they exact from his
Catholic Majesty's Subjects is a Seditious practice, contrary to the Right of
Nations, which shocks both their Duty and their Consciences, and which no body
can take without making themselves guilty of a Crime against God, of Rebellion
against their Prince, and of Baseness as to themselves; though we should
continue still in the supposition that the Pretension of the most Christian
King were equitable. I shall prove this by five convincing Reasons.

The first is, That they are at present tied to the King of Spain by a solemn
Oath with which they cannot dispense of themselves. The second is, That this
Oath is valid and lawful, being founded upon the authentic Titles of the
perpetual order of the Succession of their Duchy, upon the Imperial
Investiture, upon the Queen's Renunciation, upon the Pyrenean Treaty, and upon
the Testament of the late King. The third is, That it has been tendered since
the Case of the pretended Devolution happened, without any Opposition made by
the most Christian King, or Protestation to the contrary, which might have put
them into the least doubt of the validity of their Oath: And in such like
public Acts which are of consequence the ordinary Rule is, Qui tacet,
consentit. The fourth is, Because there is neither previous Judgment nor
Sentence to the contrary, which can dispense with them in their natural
Obligation. The fifth is, That what Pretension soever may be moved against a
Prince that is in actual possession, the Subjects are not Judges in this Cause,
but are bound to keep their Fidelity to him to whom they have sworn it, either
till he himself dispense with them, or that some superior Authority decide the
matter: otherwise it would be a Levity of most pernicious example for all the
Subjects of other Princes, if upon the simple Assertion of the first comer they
might have liberty to renounce their Faith, and blindly to give themselves to
whoever should challenge them to be his. It would likewise be an intolerable
Arrogance in Subjects, which would overthrow all the Order of Polity and of
humane Society, if they would attribute to themselves the power of Judging
Causes of Sovereignties: that same would not be endured even in private
Successions, in which the Subjects ought to remain under the Obedience of their
Masters, so long as they are not exempted from it by a superior Decree. We
could, according to this wicked Maxim, by a more specious Right solicit the
Subjects of the Dutchies of Burgundy and Bretanny, and also, with a far juster
Title, all those of the Places resigned by the last Peace, which France has so
frankly and lightly broken, to renounce the Duty which they have promised to
him who possesses them. We should be grounded in our Pretension to the Duchy
of Burgundy on a solemn Treaty of Peace, and for that of Bretanny, on the
Right of a lawful Succession: And I am certain that if the decision of this
Process were referred to the people, they would not hesitate to declare in our
favor.
It Is a Question which the Great and Supreme Arbiter of the World, our SAVIOR,
decided in the same case, upon the captious propositions of the Pharisees:
Though the Right of the Romans, and particularly Caesar's, was subject to many
Exceptions, and that his Possession was not by much so well founded as ours is,
yet he ordained notwithstanding that the Tribute should be paid to the present
Possessour; to teach the people, that it did not belong to them to judge of the
Right, but to yield Obedience to the party who was in actual fruition of the
Sovereignty, who bore the marks and the Character, and exercised the
Jurisdiction thereto belonging.

ARTICLE IV.
That the Renunciation of the French Queen is just, irrevocable, necessary, and
useful to the Public good, nor contains in it self any cause of Nullity or
Laesion; and that the Queen of France has been duly Doted.

HAving made known the Injustice of the Proceeding; it remains to make evident
that of the Pretension. I shall conform my self upon this Subject to the Method
which they have observed in their Libells, that I may not lose sight of them.
Before they do attaque the Strength of the place, they have employed all their
force to take the Outworks: and seeing that the Renunciation of the Queen of
France was a Barricado which hindered them in their approches unto it, they have
employed their most powerful Engines to blow it up; without considering that
by destroying that Work, they overthrow the Foundation of a Treaty which has
given them such great Advantages over our Monarchy, and deprive themselves of
all the Rights to those Provinces which by this Peace they had acquired, so
that they can neither possess nor retain them henceforwards without manifest
Injustice, unless they acknowledge the Principles on which their Possession was
established; their own Mine does fall back upon themselves. If the Renunciation
should be null, the Pyrenean Treaty must be so too; every thing must be
brought back to it is primitive Integrity: They can no longer make use of the
Instrument of Peace, to secure and render their Conquests lawful; they
repossess us again in all our Rights; and all the Fruits which they have
gathered from that Tree, of which they endeavor to cut up the Root, are but so
many goods ill purchased.

Here it must be acknowledged that the Flattery of those Writers is very
inconsiderate, and that they have applied themselves more to a petty litigious
Interest then to the Glory of their Prince; they cannot controvert upon the
Queen's Renunciation without calling the sincere Faith of their King into
question. The Marriage was concluded upon the ground of the Renunciation, and
the Peace upon that of the Marriage: all these things have an inseparable
connection. His most Christian Majesty was assisted in this occasion by the
most expert and the ablest Ministers of his Kingdom, who could not be ignorant
whether the Infanta had power to renounce lawfully or not: This Work was
premeditated, debated and concerted amongst the Parties by a long Negotiation,
which gave occasion to all the reflections upon Law and Policy which the
clearest Wits could frame in so important a matter. If then they discovered
that Truth which since they would make pass for so clear and palpable, That
this Act of Renunciation could not be valid, either they must confess that they
have been the authors of a signal Cheat, by Treating upon this Foundation,
approving it, accepting it, and inserting it into the Treaty of Peace by an
express Article, promising to cause it to be Registered amongst the Acts of the
Parliament of Paris, and authorizing it by their Oath; or else they must accuse
themselves of Ignorance, in not having understood before they concluded the
business those Nullities which at present do appear so evident unto them. To
what condition go they to reduce the Affairs of the World, if the solemn
Treaties made betwixt such Great Monarchs, for the universal Benefit of
Christendom, the Repose of the People, and the Security of the neighboring
States, are found exposed to mental Reservations, and all the Subtilties of the
Bar? And if ordinary Merchants, only for the good of their Commerce, have the
liberty to form to themselves a Right, and particular style, which shelters
them from the Intrigues of the Palace; would it be convenient that Sovereign
Princes in public Treaties, which do concern the public good, should not be
exempt from that subjection? If this pernicious Maxim be once established, of
reducing the public Right to the condition of private Right, we shall quickly
see as many Wars arise amongst Princes as there be Suits of Law amongst
Citizens.

To discourse to the bottom upon this matter, we must deduce some circumstances
of Fact, which are most necessary to give it a full clearing.

When France, rather wearied then satiated with War, did resolve to listen to
the Propositions of the Peace, and that their domestic Disorders did oblige
them to clear themselves from foreign business, that they might reform those
Abuses which undermined them at home, the wisest Statesmen both of the one and
the other side did conceive by a prudent foresight, that nothing could be
solidly and durably treated of, This is proved by the Instrument of Peace, and
the Article of Renunciation.
if the Root of the Mischief were not pulled up, and if some effectual means
were not found out, not only to stifle all the Differences past, and prevent
those to come, but also to extinguish, by a real and undissolvible Union, the
ancient Emulation of the two Crowns, and the natural Antipathy of the two
Nations: that all other Dressings could never reach the bottom of the Wound,
and would prove but Lenitives to mitigate the pain for a time, without taking
away the Cause of the Evil. Having long searched for Expedients answerable to
the importance of the Design, none was thought proper but that of a Marriage
between the most Christian King and the most Serene Infanta Mary Teresa, to
join the Seal of the Sacrament to that of the Treaties, Love to Concord, and
Alliance to Reconciliation.

Spain, which desired the Peace, but yet withal wished to have it firm and
inviolable, judged, with reason, that this was the only mean to remedy all
those Mischiefs which the continual Opposition of those two great Poles of
Christendom had occasioned for the space of so many years: but in this she
found an essential Difficulty proceeding from the Contrariety of the
Fundamental Laws of the one and the other Realm in two principal Points. Though
those of Spain do always prefer Males in the Succession, they do
notwithstanding leave the Gate open for Daughters, failing the Heirs Male in
the same Line. Those of France, quite contrary, do perpetually exclude the
Females, and to their prejudice make the Right of Succession pass even to
Strangers.

The second is, That one of the most ancient Constitutions of the Monarchy of
Spain, on which they lay all the foundation of their Government, is, that their
Kingdom is not Alienable, that they live always under their own peculiar Kings,
and that their Crown can neither be annexed nor incorporated with any other.
That of France, on the contrary, does arrogate unto it self this Right, (as it
appears by their Writers and Lawyers) That whatsoever is possessed or acquired
by the Kings of France by any kind of Title does fall to the Crown, is the
proper Dominion of it, and can never more be dismembered from it, and ought to
be subject to the same Laws and form of Government as their own Kingdom, as
well in relation to the sovereign Succession, as to what concerns the public
State. So that in case the Monarchy of Spain should fall by Marriage or
otherwise under the power of a King of France, she would become a member and an
inseparable Accessorie of France; she would be reduced to the same condition
with Bretannie and other Provinces, and failing of lawful Successors in her
Line, it would pass to the Collaterals, and to all those who should attain to
the Throne of the Flower-de-luces.

All Frenchmen are so unanimous in this Pretension, that it would be
superfluous to prove it to them; though it would not be hard to impugn it. But
it is a Maxim received amongst them, of which they have put themselves in
possession by a long abuse, and which they are resolved stubbornly to maintain
in all manner of Rencounters.

This Incompatibility held for a while the Council of Spain in suspense; they
wished Peace, yet would not buy it at the price of so hard a Servitude; and the
Directours of so many Kingdoms could never have persuaded themselves to become
Subjects of another Realm, nor to see their Ruling Crown reduced to a Province.

The Queen Mother of France, who with the tender feelings both of a Mother and
an Aunt passionately and with ardour wished so fair and so fitting an union of
two Persons which were so dear unto her, applied all her cares to remove those
Hindrances, and this temperating mean was found out to secure the reasonable
Doubts of the Council of Spain, That by the Contract of Marriage, the Infanta
should absolutely renounce all kind of Rights which she might ever pretend
either upon the whole or the parts of this great Succession, under any Title or
Pretext whatsoever which at any time she might have thereunto, to the end that
in no case the Spanish Monarchy might either be subject or dismembered.

And both sides the willinglier consented to this Expedient, in regard that the
way had already been beaten by the example of the Queen Mother of France, and
that in effect the Renunciation which she made was of the same nature with this
present one, both in the form and in the substance, as being founded on the
very same cause of the Incompatibilitie of these two Successions. This
Marriage, and consequently this Renunciation, which was the ground-stone of it,
has been so much celebrated by the French Authors, that in the Book of James
de Bie of France Metallic is seen engraven on the backside of a Medall of Gold
Lewis the XIIIth holding Elizabeth of Austria by the hand, with this
Inscription, AETERNAE FOEDERA PACIS. But the rapid motion of France is
inconsistent with the fixed point of Eternity.

Spain, which presupposed the same Sincerity to be in others which she found
in her self, gave ear to this Offer, believing that by this Precaution the Laws
of Spain might be reconciled with the Salique Law, and the Liberty of their
People and the Authority of their ancient Government be fully secured. France,
It is certain by the Act of Renunciation, and by the Contract of Marriage, that
in Agreement be^^^^t the two Kings did precede the said Renunciation.
which acknowledged that the thing was just, and had been formerly in use, put
her hands fully to it, because of the great good which would redound unto her
by a Peace which did establish her in so many Conquests. The Instrument of it
was drawn by common Consent, and the most Christian King obliged himself to
Ratify it, and cause it to be Enrolled in the Parliament of Paris, presently
after the Marriage. And this Agreement was all the Foundation of the Peace,
which was immediately thereafter concluded.

Things being thus concerted between the Parties, the King, who had a Passion
for this Princess which surpassed all the Reasons of State, would conclude
nothing without her Approbation, and therefore did put into her hands the
decision of her Fortune: On the one side he represented to her the Crown of
France, and the Person of the most Christian King, with all the Advantages
which do render him so worthy of esteem; and on the other side a doubtful
Succession (which indirectly looked toward her,) to one of the greatest and
most powerful Monarchies of the World; Made known to her those irrevocable
Laws, which could not suffer that these two Kingdoms should be united into one,
and did not permit that she should retain her hopes and her Rights in the one,
if she preferred to it the possession of the other; That he left it to her
entire disposition, to choose of these two incompatible things that which she
should find most agreeable to her Genius, and most suitable to her Fortune.

This Generous Princess, who had been educated in an Inclination for France,
and had a sufficient esteem for the Person of the most Christian King, to
prefer it before all the Kingdoms of the World, and who, stung with a very
noble Ambition not to despise so beautiful a Throne as that of France, did not
stick to embrace the better and the more advantageous Bargain: She freely
renounced what could never be hers, but by the death of those whom she loved as
much as her self, to accept of a Good much more precious in her esteem then
that which she abandoned; she quitted the doubtful and the future for what was
certain and present, hopes for realities, and renounced most generously those
Pretensions which she abhorred, since they were but impediments to the
accomplishment of her desires and to her good fortune. Nor can it be doubted of
without doing her injury, but that if it were yet at her election to reenter
again into her Rights by quitting the Good she does possess, she would as
willingly ratify this Act to keep and enjoy it, as she did freely sign to
obtain it.

Upon this true Narration, and upon the Act of Renunciation, as also upon the
XXXIII. Article of the Treaty of Peace, diverse Reflections may be made, and
Principles established, which will overthrow from the foundations all those of
the contrary party.

The first is, That this Treaty of Marriage, and this Renunciation, is an
essential member of the Peace; and though they be digested into different
Instruments, they do all notwithstanding make up but one Treaty, as it is
expressly declared in the said XXXIII. Article, wherein speaking of the Contract
of Marriage to which they refer themselves, these words following are added;
Which though it be separated, has the same force and vigor that the present
Treaty of Peace has, as being the principal part thereof, and the most
precious Pawn of its greater security and lasting.

Secondly, That as well the said Treaty of Peace as that of the Marriage are
Contracts of sincere Faith, and not of strict Law; and that for the rule and
ground of their subsistence and Interpretation, we must refer our selves to
the Causes and Ends which both sides did propose to themselves in Treating, and
the Utilitie which arises from thence to the public good.

Thirdly, That these are Treaties betwixt two Great Monarchs, who are not
subject to any particular Laws, It is clearly explained in the Act of
Renunciation.
nor dependent on the Customs of Places: That they are fundamental Laws of the
one and the other State, which are not to be measured but by the Laws of
Nations; it is a natural Obligation which they contract, which cannot be broken
by any Civil Law; I. Jura naturae de Reg. Jur.
it is properly the indispensable Law of Sovereigns, which they can never
violate nor alter without Injustice, nor correct but by common Consent. They
are above particular Laws, they can change and augment them at their pleasure,
as the Codes Henry and Lewis: But these which tie them to an Equal with a
reciprocal knot, and which are the foundation of the public Tranquillity, can
never receive any other form then that which the public Seal has imprinted
upon them.

The Princes who are absolute Sovereigns, when they do act as such, have but
two ways to terminate their Quarrels, Arms and Treaties. The first is but a
means to attain to the other: but if the latter have not a solid and immovable
foundation, and if it be permitted to break it upon the least Subtilities of
private Right, there is no more Security in the World; and it is to reduce it
to its first Confusion, which gave occasion to the bringing in of Kings and
Magistrates, to hinder that force might not be the sole Arbiter of Differences.
Now as Princes are established to remedy this disorder among their Subjects, so
are Treaties likewise introduced to work the same effect among Princes; so they
are their Judges and their Magistrates, to which they ought entirely and
absolutely to submit themselves, as they pretend that their proper Subjects are
submitted to them. France admits of no Prescription to the prejudice of the
Royal Domaine, she receives no Judges nor Processes; there is nothing then but
public Treaties which can bound her Pretensions, which do extend themselves
almost over all Europe. If she be suffered to exclude even this, there will be
no other means remaining but that of Force, which silences all Laws, and Kings
shall put themselves absolutely out of all Commerce.

Fourthly, That this Renunciation is the Soul and the inseparable Condition of
this Treaty of Marriage, without which it had never been either designed or
concluded, nor consequently the Treaty of Peace; as is expressed in the
Article before cited.

Fifthly, That it proceeds not from the bare motion of the deceased King, or a
particular inclination of his toward the Children of the Second Bed; but out
of an inevitable Necessity flowing from the Salique Law, and the unjust
Extention which France does make of it to all the States which Fortune has put
into her power: this Necessity, and the other of the Public good, with the
conservation of this August Family, reduced the Infanta to the condition of
never being able to be Queen of France, but by this Renunciation.

Sixthly, This is evident by the Act of Renunciation, fol. 17.
That there is no constraint nor violence on her Father's part, whose Sweetness
and natural Moderation have so eminently shined throughout the whole course of
his life, not only toward his faithful Subjects, but likewise toward his
Enemies and Rebels, that many conceived it did reach unto excess. It is not to
be presumed that the same heart which had in it an inexhaustible treasure of
Bounty toward all the rest of the World, should have nothing but Rigor and
Hardness for a Daughter who was the Center of his choicest delights. If there
had been any Constraint, the effects would have been seen by some Complaint or
Action of the Infanta's; and if her respect to her Father did hold them up, her
Discontent would have appeared in her eyes and in her face: the troubles of the
Soul, what care soever is taken to hide them, do imprint a character outwardly
which betrays the secret of the Heart. Never was any seen to go to a Wedding
with more visible signs of satisfaction: She signed this Act with so pleasant a
Resolution, that it was easy to observe she much more esteemed what she was to
acquire, then what she lost thereby; and the Tears which she shed at this day
for this War, of which, against her mind, they do make her the innocent
Pretext, witness sufficiently that she disapproves of the Cause of it as much
as she detests the Effects, and are authentic ratifications of the free
Consent which she gave to this Renunciation. If she had done it unwillingly,
she would not have failed to have made Protestations against it, as soon as
ever she found her self in a condition to declare without fear and with the
applause of all France the true thoughts of her mind. She her self will
confess, without doubt, that it was neither Respect, nor Obedience, no nor
Complacencie, but the free choice of her own Inclination and Prudence: That the
King her Father neither employed his Paternal power, nor Royal Authority, nor
Command, nor Threats, nay not so much as Persuasions, to induce her thereunto;
but that he satisfied himself by proposing nakedly the state of Business to
her, that he might leave to her self the entire decision: That of the two parts
she made choice of the most advantageous, and the most fitting: That she never
repented of this Choice, and would to day do the same thing again without any
kind of hesitation, if she were in the same condition in which she was then.
From whence it may be concluded, that this Act having been made without any
kind of Fear or Violence, it cannot be called in question by reason of any
exception of the Civil Laws. Qui metum non intendit, Promissio valide fiet; nec
scrutabimur quid aut quatenus ejus intersit, quae Juris Romani sunt
subtilitates. Grot. lib. 3. cap. 19. de Jure Belli.

Seventhly, That there is no Laesion, seeing that she acquires a greater
Benefit then that which she has renounced, not being able to possess them both
together by an irremediable repugnancie. It was then a kind of Permutation,
rather then a Cession, because she gave to obtain, and quitted to get. The Laws
give no rise to an entire Restitution, where the condition of the Minor is
rendered more advantageous by the Contract, and do permit in this case
Alienations even of the Goods of Pupills. It is almost impracticable in the
Contracts of Kings, to prove the Laesion, and determine the legal Portion with
its just weight, which cannot be verified but by the valuation of the Goods;
the inevitable Expenses must be deducted, and the necessary Charges: their
affairs are involved into so many Intrigues, charged with so many Obligations
and Costs, that to consider it in its rigor there remains very little unto
them whereof they can freely dispose; and by the ordinary Rules it is
impossible to set a price upon their Estates. It is for this reason that they
are accustomed, by a practice received among Monarchs, to give unto the
Daughters a certain sum of Money, which serves instead of a legal Portion,
without ever coming to any other rating of Goods, which cannot be justly
valued. The most Christian Kings do practice this toward the Daughters of
France. He of England used the same way toward the Duchess of Orleans; our
King toward his: The Princes of Italy and Germany have the same Custom,
without ever speaking of Supplements, legal Portions, or Laesions, which are
properly the Actions of private persons, unworthy the Greatness of Monarchs,
who never act for Profit, but for Reason of State.

Moreover, we must consider (as I have said) this Marriage not as a private
Contract, but as a Member of the Treaty of Peace, which necessarily relates to
all the other Conditions. By the said Treaty, and consequently in
consideration of the said Marriage, are granted unto the most Christian King a
great quantity of Provinces and States, which do so notably increase his
Dominions, much exceeding the value of whatever the Queen of France can pretend
for her legal Portion: and this Concession does redound to the advantage and to
the Greatness of the Queen of France, by that inseparable conjunction which
unites all her Husband's Interests with hers. Whence it follows, that this
Cession ought to suffice her in the place of her legal Portion, since the
Marriage was made in favor of the Peace, and the Peace in consideration of the
Marriage, and that they are two indivisible things, which could not have being
the one without the other, and so strongly chained together, that the
Conditions of the Marriage are included in the essence of the thing, if the
Cause, the End, the Effects and the whole Context of the Negotiation be
considered.

It Is in vain that they allege that they have acquired them by the right of
Arms, and that they were in a condition to drive us to Extremities, and would
have us esteem it a grace to have spoiled us but of a half: it is too much to
presume on their good fortune, and to dispose too absolutely of the success of
Arms, of which God alone has reserved the events to his Providence. All the
world knows that if the necessity of our Affairs had obliged us to take the
resolution of treating with Portugal, we could have had means enough to oblige
France (at the least) to have shared equally the fear and the danger with us.
Their People, wearied with the War, and overwhelmed with Taxes, waited only
for a turn of the Tide to take off the Masque: the neighboring Princes were
resolved not to suffer them to enlarge their Conquests any farther. The Tyrant
of England, who made that Kingdom act against its own Interests, in favor of
France, was already removed by death, and the common voice of the Nation in
order to the Reestablishment of the Lawful Successor, enlightened with so many
knowledges, and endued with such vigor and experience, that it was not to be
doubted but that he would soon put the Counterpoise upon our side, by joining
to his Interests the resentment of a multitude of Wrongs: We were powerfully
armed in all places, and in those very Summers which preceded the Peace we were
in a condition to carry the War home to them. The most penetrating among them
know the secret motives which obliged the Cardinal Mazarin to make this Peace,
and that the apprehension of what was to come more then any Moderation was the
first mover of it.

But setting all their Boastings apart, is it not a considerable advantage for
them to have established by a Treaty what they had conquered by Arms, to have
acquired by a just Title that which they could never have retained without
Usurpation, and to have freed themselves from all the dangers and expenses
which were inevitable to them in keeping them?

But if it be true, as they do pretend, that they were in a condition to
dispossess our King of his Throne; they must confess two things which are
extremely against them: The one, That the Marriage and Renunciation were the
Safety and Deliverance of the Monarchy; and that the King could not only have
made the most illustrious Infanta renounce all her Rights upon this
consideration, but that he was bound so to do by a strict Obligation, since
the Goods of private persons belong to the Public in case of such necessities:
Arist. l. 1. cap. 10.
that the public good is greater and more divine then the private: that this
last, by obligation of Conscience, is bound always to yield to the other,
according to the opinion of all Doctors: and that even the Infanta her self,
Sakes populi s^p^ Lox.
giving her remote and uncertain Pretensions to the common good of both the
Crowns, has done an heroic Action, whereof France would now obscure the
Glory.

The other is, That she has not only done good to the Public, but also that
without betraying her self she could not refuse to give her consent to this
Renunciation: her Rights and Pretensions should have been swallowed up in the
public Shipwreck; in vain had she reserved to her self Titles, if the Arms of
her Enemies were upon the point to take all from her. So that very far from a
Laesion, she may reckon for a new Purchase all that she has been able to save
from this Wreck. Her Portion had been very ill assigned, in case her paternal
Goods had fallen into hands which cannot dismember, alienate, nor restore one
inch of Land. And in this case it is very probable that the most Christian King
would have despised the Alliance of a poor exiled Princess, who would not have
had any other provision but her Virtue; and she her self would not have had the
heart to cast her self into the arms of him whom she found laden with the
Spoils of her Father. She has redressed all those inconveniences by this
Renunciation, and opened to her self the way to this Crown, to which we now see
her so worthily elevated. What Laesion then can there be pretended, when these
two Conveniences, de damno vitando and lucro captando, do meet so perfectly
united?

Eighthly, It Is an affected ignorance both of Fact and Law, to alledg that the
Queen was under age when she passed this Act. No body can doubt but that the
Princes and Princesses of Spain are out of Minority before the age of Twenty
years, as it is expressly declared in the Renunciation; And as by the grace of
God I do find my self to be in the age of Major, and more then twenty years
old. Royal Persons are held to be out of Minority as soon as they have attained
to the years of Youth. And though one should consider the Infanta as a private
person, and that this were to be regulated by the Laws and Customs of private
Successions; it is a certain truth, that by the Local Customs upon which
France does found her Right, both Sons and Daughters are Majors at the age of
twenty years, and may freely dispose of their Fiefs even in relation to their
own life, without any Dispensation from the King, or authority of a Guardian.
L. Scio, ff. de in inc. rest.
And if she were under age, there must first be some enormous Laesion caused by
the Facility of her who renounces, or by the Deceitfulness of the other party.
Auth. Sacramento pauperum, C. Si adversus vead.
But here is neither Laesion, Weakness, nor Deceit; and in the end the
privilege of Minority serves them for nothing, where the Deed is confirmed by
Oath. It is certain that if in this age she had attained to the Succession of
the Kingdom, or the Provinces which they say do belong unto her, she would
have had no need either of Tutors or Governors: This Law supposes, that Nature
and Education do sooner produce in the minds of Princes those fruits of
Prudence, which do not grow ripe in others but by time. And if the Civil Laws
dispense before the time prescribed by Municipal Laws, touching the subjectings
to Minority those, who by industry and assiduity have rendered themselves
capable to govern their own and other peoples business; it is much more just
that such as the public Laws admit without limitations and dependences to the
Administration of Kingdoms, may uncontrouled dispose of their own concerns,
though the Custom which restricts private persons to the age of Twenty years
should not be considered. And since she was in a condition to enjoy the
privilege of Reigning without an Overseer, it is evident that she had no right
to enjoy the benefit of Reparation; forasmuch as the French Civilians hold for
an indubitable Maxim, that he Daughters which are capable of Marriage are also
capable of any other kind of legal Deed. Du Moulin on the Custom of Blois,
Art. 161.

Ninthly, It is an insupportable Injury to the Memory of the late King, to
accuse him to have disinherited his Daughter the Infanta. On his part there was
no positive Act, more then a simple consent and authorizing of the free
Renunciation made by this Princess, who by a voluntary choice did prefer the
Crown of France before that of Spain, which she looked upon as very remote. The
Testament of the King is nothing else but a Confirmation of this same Deed,
which he supposed to be Legal, being framed upon the platform of those things
which were established by the Peace. And if the Renunciation be just, it must
of necessity follow that the Testamentarie disposition, which is but a
consequence of it, is so likewise. All the vain Exclamations which the Authors
of these Libells do make upon that Subject are but the extravagant digressions
of an affected Eloquence to astonish the people. It Is the like too of all those
majestical Consequences which they draw from thence to exaggerate the Injuries
which have been done to his Successors. If the thing be just in it self, and
received in the person of the Mother, it cannot be unjust in her Successors,
who have no Right but what they derive from her. And if it be permitted to
private persons to make Entails to the exclusion of Daughters and their
offspring, in favor of collateral Lines; if the Salique Law may perpetually
deprive them and all their Descendants of an Hereditary Kingdom; what
Injustice can be found in this, that Spain has desired this Renunciation, to
the end they fall not into the Dependencie upon a stranger-Kingdome? The
Daulphin of France had never been in the world, nor had any share in the Crown
of France, if the Queen had not renounced: and if he cannot be at one time King
both of France and Spain, he must lay the fault on the Salique Law, which
devours all that it possesses, and obliges all other Kingdoms to provide for
their own safety by fitting Precautions, and by the natural Law, quod quisque
Juris.

The source which they leave for the Queen to re-enter into her Rights, in case
that God should afflict her with a Widowhood without Children, is an effect of
the Fatherly Tenderness and Justice, which would needs establish her Happiness
in all cases, by putting her in a condition either to reign gloriously in
France by her Fruitfulness, or to have wherewithal to comfort her in case of
Barrenness, by re-entring into her Rights to the Monarchy of Spain. This does
clearly show that in this Renunciation her Person was not regarded, but only
the Obstacle inconsistent with the Reason of State, which did suspend the
effects of that Love which they had for her; and that renders the Renunciation
the more valid, because it is not absolute, and leaves the Gate still open for
her Re-entry as often as the essential Impediment shall not come in the way;
far from wishing her Barrenness, or exclusion of her Offspring, whenever they
may be received without subjecting the Kingdom. Instrument of Renunciation,
fol. 13.
The way is opened to place her and her Successors upon the Throne of Spain;
If for public Conveniences and just Considerations she should marry with the
consent of the Catholic King, and the Prince of Spain her Brother. Whereby it
is manifest, that the fundamental and sole cause of this Renunciation is, to
exclude France from the right of being able to annex the Monarchy of Spain to
his Realm and Laws, and not to deprive the Queen or her Issue of it, when no
other thing shall hinder them from being admitted. Meanwhile upon this the
French do make a great noise, they convert the Honey of this Deed into Poison,
and make an Injury of a Benefit; and testify thereby that it is not the love
of the Queen, but their own Covetousness to devour all, under color of her
Rights, which does throw them into this inordinate passion.

Upon these indubitable Principles it will not be difficult to establish and
ground in Law the validity of the Queen's Renunciation upon the following Rules.

1. It is lawful for Princes to resign and renounce their Hereditary Kingdom
in favor of the next Heir. The example of Charles the Vth, Philip the IId, and
the Queen Christina, does evidently prove it. And even in Elective Kingdoms,
where it seems that the Obligation to reign is more indispensable and less
capable of being retracted then in those which be Hereditary, because it is
established by a reciprocal Covenant, and by an Obligation which such Kings
have willingly imposed upon themselves, we have seen Henry the IIId renounce
openly by his flight. And if the French themselves could constrain Childeric
the IIId and some other of their Kings to throw themselves into Monasteries,
and make them renounce their hereditarie Crowns even in favor of Strangers;
why shall it not be permitted to Princes to divest themselves thereof
willingly, to obtain a greater benefit, or for the simple desire of Quietness?
Genesis 3.
John King of Armenia quitted the Kingdom to his Nephew Leon, Clem. 5. Greg.
11.
to enter into the Order of Saint Francis. A great many Princes and Princesses,
lawful Heirs of Hereditary Kingdoms, have validly renounced them, either for
the Public good, or their private Tranquillity, to embrace Religious or
retired life; as Saint Bridget in Sweden, and others in Hungary, Germany, and
Spain. France also furnishes us with examples of this kind: Carloman, the
eldest Son of Charles Martel, parted with his Kingdom to his Brother Pepin,
that he might wholly dedicate himself to the Service of God. What those Princes
have been able to do, either out of Devotion, or the love of Liberty, the
Infanta might do with a juster title for the good of the Peace of two
Monarchies. The Fundamental Law which called her to the Succession was in her
favor, and not for constraining her: It is a Right that is given them, but not
a necessity imposed upon them: it is not a forbidding Law, which we cannot
renounce. The King her Father could not without the consent of the States
exclude her against her will, or make her incapable of the Succession; but she
might voluntarily renounce, for her greater good, and for that of the State it
self, and that too with the general applause of the people over whom she might
have been Queen. 2. Though the ancient Laws were in some kind against the
Renunciation of future Successions, the practice of them is now abolished for
this respect, and the contrary so well established over all the World, that the
French Laws do unanimously agree unto it, and even that He who has renounced
some future Succession, cannot recall by the happening of Children what he has
quitted; Epeisses Tom. 1. page 407. The Constitution of Pope Boniface, Con. ad
cap. Quamvis, p. 3. Constable. Bon.
which the Author of these Libells cites on this Subject, determines it
clearly; the practice of it is commonly received in Spain, In Brabant, and in
all the King's Dominions; and since he himself does nor disagree with it, I
think it would be superfluous to seek any greater proofs. 3. That the Right of
Devolution according to the Custom of Brabant being neither Succession nor
Propriety, nor a real assured Estate, but casual and in suspense, it may be
validly renounced; and that the use of it is common throughout the whole
Duchy. Wamesius, Kintschot, Christin. Mean.
These three conditions of the Right of Devolution are clearly proved in that
learned and solid Treatise which the Counselor Stockmans has lately published
on this Subject, and all the Authors of the Country who have written upon it do
unanimously agree with him therein.
As to the first Point, that the Devolution is not a Succession, it is easily
proved by the Customs of the Places where this Right is in force, and by the
Effects both of the one and the other, which are totally different. Succession
supposes Death, and Devolution does begin from the moment of the Dissolution of
the first Marriage. L. qui supustitis, ff. de acquir. haered.
There can be no Succession to a living person, that were to bury the Fathers
before their decease, and make Children succeed one another in the Father's
lifetime, to change a Succession which is direct in its own nature into a
collateral one: The Grandchildren (whose Father died before their Grandfather)
would be wholly excluded from the Inheritance; for they cannot enter by way of
direct Succession, because it would be fallen to their Uncles or to their
Aunts; nor by collateral, because they would be of an inferior degree, and
that the Feodal Custom of Brabant does not admit of Representation in indirect
Successions: so that if it were a true Succession, it might happen that an Aunt
would totally exclude the Son of her elder Brother, which would overthrow the
whole order of the Succession, and the first Institution of the Fiefs of
Brabant, where the Males of the First Bed and their Descendents are always
preferred to the Females. It is to no purpose that the Authors of these Libells
will make use upon this subject of some ill-conceived terms, and improperly
applied in some one of the Feodal Customs, by which it seems that they give the
name of Succession to Devolution: for the same Feodal Customs of Brabant which
he cites were never decreed nor approved, and those which we find in print are
for the most part but the Projects of the Lieutenant of the Fiefs of Brabant,
and of some Practitioners who have not reflected upon the force of the words,
but having been presented to the Governor to be examined and decreed, the
Approbation of them was refused, in regard they were conceived in terms not
very proper. But however it be, when the Law and Custom is contrary, and that
the intention of the Law or of the Custom is manifestly known, it is a
ridiculous thing to prefer the words before the substance, so much the more,
because the same Customs do explicate very clearly the Equivocation in other
places. In the XXV. Article it is said, that If the Fiefs come from the first
deceased, the Propriety succeeds to the Children: which evidently expresses
by this distinction, that they do not succeed in the Propriety of the Goods of
the Survivor; and that the one is Succession, and the other Devolution. In the
XXXVII. Article also it is said, that Feodal Successors do not ascend, but must
always descend: so that were the Devolution a Succession, it would pass
immediately unto the Children of the Second Bed, in case those of the First die
without Issue: whereas it is certain by the XXIII. Article, that they do return
back to the Fathers, or rather that they remain free and relieved of the band
by which they were tied, which is rather a Settling, then a Return of the
Propriety. Otherwise a great absurdity must follow, which is, That the father
would succeed as representing his Son, and so would be obliged to renew his
Investiture, and swear Homage anew; which has never been practiced. Although
that the enacted Customs of Lovain speak very uncorrectedly, and seem in some
places to confound the Devolution and the Succession; nevertheless it may be
seen by the coherence, that they ought to be understood with different
relations, and that the word Succession ought to be applied to an Estate
already fallen by the death of one of the Parents, and that of Devolution as
relative to the Goods of the Survivors; since the Custom in this place treats
of the one and the other, and in others it calls the Father the Proprietarie of
the Use or fruits, and that they treat distinctly and in several Articles both
of the Succession and Devolution, as matters of a different nature in their
Cause and in all their Effects. This Question is so plainly handled in the
Treatise of the Sieur Stockmans, chap. 5. de Jure Devol. that the Reader
therein will find wherewith to satisfy himself fully touching this
particular, if he has the curiosity to run it over.

As for that which concerns the Propriety, the Children of the First Bed do
not possess any effect thereof whilst either of the espoused are living, as
having neither the use of the fruit, nor the testamentarie disposition, nor the
right of Alienation or of Engagement, nor any other of those Actions which by
Law do belong to the Proprietor: and if they chance to die before their Father,
they fall from it totally. So that all their Right consists in a simple
assurance that those Goods shall not be alienated, and in a hope to succeed one
day thereunto, in case they do outlive their Father. If they were Proprietors,
they would be obliged by the same Custom Article LII. to take the Investiture
from the direct Lord during the life of their Father; which has never been
practiced. The Father on the contrary has all the effects of the Propriety,
with this limitation only, that he cannot alienate to the prejudice of the
Children of the First Bed: that excepted, he enjoys, he possesses, he governs,
he acts juridically in his proper name; he is not bound to make any Inventory,
nor liable to give an Account, and has all the real Actions, which of right
cannot belong to a simple Usufructuarie, and are necessarily annexed to the
Propriety. He is not so bridled, but that the Alienations which he makes are
valid in themselves and subsisting, if the Children come to die before him;
though they be subject to Rescission, if they survive him. In a word, the
Propriety by this Devolution cannot be attributed to the Children by any of
the Titles of Law by which Domains are acquired: they cannot pretend to it by
way of Succession, as I have already shown; the Devolution gives them not any
effect, nor any Title; and the Father has not lost it by any of the ways of
Alienation which the Civil Laws have prescribed; the Death of his Wife cannot
take from him the Domain of his Goods, L. nemo, ff. de Reg. Jur.
which cannot be lost but by a voluntary act, as of Donation, Sale, Cession, or
Crime. Whence it ought to be concluded, that the name of Propriety, without
abusing the word, cannot be given to that which has neither the effects nor
the cause thereof; and the Custom cannot, without injustice, denude a Father
absolutely of the Propriety of his Goods before his Death, without his own
Consent. All these Truths are confirmed by solemn Decrees, and by the unanimous
Opinion of all the Doctors of the Country, as well modern as ancient, who have
treated of this Subject.

By all that I have said it is easy to infer, that by renouncing the
Devolution we do not denude our selves of our proper Goods, we do not part with
a Succession already acquired by us, but deprive our selves only of a hope,
whereof the event is no less uncertain then the hour of our death; which is
properly to renounce only a future and doubtful Succession, which is permitted
by the Laws, and is in use in relation even to those Goods devolved in all
places where the Right of Devolution is received.

If the Queen of France might lawfully renounce, I do maintain that she was
bound to do it by a strict Obligation, for the good of the two Kingdoms, for
her own good, and by a principle of Thankfulness for the Kindness of the King
her Father.

She her self professes in several places of the Deed of Renunciation, that the
Motives which induced her to do it are, the Acknowledgment of the numberless
Benefits which she had received from the King her Father, the good and
conservation of his August Family, and the love of the Safety and Quietness of
the State. And I persuade my self that she suffered a great deal less Damage
and Grief by denuding her self of this Right, then she undergoes now by the
Avidity of those who would re-establish her in it against her will. In effect,
she sees her self reduced to the necessity of deploring the Misfortunes of a
Brother, or of a Husband; to see her Family overthrown, or her Throne
destroyed: and that to which of the two sides soever Victory does lean, it
cannot be but fatal to her Glory, or to her Affection.

Against the evidence of these Verities the Scribbler forms diverse Objections,
which are all founded upon false Suppositions in matter of Fact and Right. He
cites one only Article of the Treaty of Marriage, and draws out of it one
Member to make up the whole Body of his Discourse, without citing any thing of
the Act of Renunciation. The two Reasons which he presses most are these: That
it is of the essence of a Renunciation, that a Daughter should be endowed; that
the Law in Spain is express for it; and that if the Father gives less to his
Daughter then her Legal Part, the Renunciation is null; and that it is
requisite that her Endowment should be constituted out of the Father's Estate.

Upon which he makes two Arguments. The one is, That the Infanta has not been
endowed, because the King owed to his Daughter eleven hundred thousand Crowns
of Gold of the Goods belonging to her Mother, and has promised her but five
hundred thousand for her Portion, obliging her to renounce that which he was
indebted to her.

The second is, That these five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold were not paid
within the Term prefixed; That a Portion promised and not paid is not a
Portion. From whence he will infer, that by this deficiencie the Renunciation
is annulled.

These two Propositions, which he endeavors to prove by a rabble of unuseful
Allegations, are not comprehended within the Fact, of which he does craftily
omit the principal Circumstances, and touches not the essential point of the
Question: so that if we should agree with him in his Principles, yet he could
not draw from thence any Conclusion to our disadvantage.

In the first place he abuses very improperly the terms, and the substance of
the Laws, when he strains himself to prove that the Portion promised and not
paid is not a Portion; which shocks all the doctrine of the Law, it being
indubitable that it is truly a Portion as soon as it is promised, for it
induces a real Obligation upon him who did make it: Et qui habet Actionem ad
Rem, Rem ipsam habere dicitur, when the Debtor is sufficient. This Question is
to be found very clearly decided in Tiraquel, and the Texts of the Law and
Authors which he cites, in his Treatise of Retract. Convent. 8.7. ad fin. tit.
Gloss. 2. number. 32. and seqq.

In the second place he mistakes himself, by intending to make this
Renunciation pass for a private Deed, which ought to be regulated by the Civil
Laws. I have shown before that it is a public Deed, an essential Member of the
Peace, and an Obligation which has for its Cause the Fundamental Laws of the
State, and for its End the Conservation of it: and I affirm farther, that it is
a Law and a Pragmatick Sanction, established by common Consent between the two
Crowns, and by the general desire and wishes of the People, expressly derogating
from all particular Laws, as it is evidently set down in the Deed of
Renunciation; speaking of the Agreement made betwixt the two Kings for the
Treaty of Marriage, it expresses it self in these words: And that in the V.
and VI. Articles of the said Treaty it is resolved and settled by common
Consent, (that is to say, of the two Kings,) and by the same will, and as a
thing most convenient, after having attentively considered it, etc. that I, and
the Children which God shall give us of this Marriage, shall remain unable and
incapable, and absolutely excluded from the Rights and hope to succeed to any
of the Kingdoms, Estates and Seigniories, etc. And a little lower it proceeds;
Condescending to this with the common desire and wish of their Subjects,
Vassals, and natural Lieges, who will that it have the force and vigor of a
Law and pragmatick Sanction, and that it be received and observed as such. And
some few lines after in the following. it is added; It shall be agreed by
Covenant, that their Majesty's will that it have the strength and vigor of a
Law established in favor of their Realms, and of the public Interest of them,
etc.

Three lines above this he does specify the Causes: Regard being had to that
which imports to the public State, and their Preservation, (he speaks of the
two Crowns) that being so great they come not to be joined together, and that
the occasions be prevented that may afterward happen of joining them together,
etc. He expresses himself yet more clearly two pages below: Having jointly
regard to the Public and Commons of the Realms of which God has given him
charge, the which and those of the Crown of France are equally concerned that
the Grandeur and Majesty which they have sustained and preserved for so many
years, with such good fortune and glory to the name of their Kings Catholic
and most Christian, may not be diminished nor decrease, as necessarily it would
diminish and decrease, if by the means and by reason of this Marriage they
should come to be joined and united in some of the Children or Descendents, the
event whereof would occasion to the Subjects and Vassals the Discontents and
Afflictions which may be considered: and subsequently makes report of diverse
public utilities which arise from this Agreement, and places it as the
essential Foundation of the Peace and of its continuance. And to facilitate for
the future the Alliances betwixt the two Crowns; which otherwise the pretended
Salique Law would render always dangerous and not to be practiced, unless they
had agreed amongst themselves upon this Remedy, whereupon there are many
things to be considered.

1. That it is an Agreement made betwixt the two Kings, for the good of their
Estates; that this Renunciation is relative to the V. and VI. Articles of the
Treaty of Marriage which was concluded with the most Christian King, wherein
he intervened as the principal party, as is certain by the Narrative at the
beginning of the said Deed. It appears also by the Obligation which he imposes
upon himself to ratify it: because if he had not acted in this Renunciation
but in the quality of a Husband, and not of a party promising and accepting in
his own name, he could not nor ought not to have ratified it, but only to have
authorized it; though he has ratified it, as the Author himself does
acknowledge, and that the Ratification of the Treaty of Peace did necessarily
include all that to which it was relative. Now it is uncontroverted that the
two Kings by common consent, at the desire of their People, had power to
derogate from Laws of private concernment, in regard they made them, and have
the right of repealing them; that the Kings of Spain and France, for causes of
less importance, do not only derogate, but change every day their
Constitutions and Laws: and therefore that which they do for the private
respects of civil Justice, they have much more power to do for the common good
of the State: otherwise if they should not have the power to derogate from
Laws, to extinguish Actions, and stop the Proceedings of civil Justice by
public Treaties, they could grant no Amnesties, nor hinder the Right of the
Fiscall in the punishment of Crimes, nor of private persons for the Restitution
of what they have taken the one party from the other, nor impose silence to
parties contending, nor restore the Goods given upon just Confiscations, nor
other things of the like nature, which fall out in all Pacifications, and which
make it appear that the necessity and the utility of the Public good may
derogate from Laws when it pleases the Sovereign. As it is certain that they
have had the power, it is also clear by the same Instrument that it was their
will, and that such has been their intention. Without having regard to the
said Laws, Customs, Ordinances and Dispositions, by virtue whereof they have
succeeded and do succeed to all the aforementioned Kingdoms, etc. And
thereafter; To which and every one of them their said Majesty's ought to
derogate in so far as they shall be contrary, etc. And more below; And that it
is understood by the Approbation of this Treaty, they do derogate and hold
them to be derogated. And in the V. Article it is said; With Derogations and
Abrogations of all and whatsoever Laws, Vsages and Customs, etc. from which
their Catholic and most Christian Majesty's ought to derogate, and shall be
understood from this present to remain derogated from, etc. But that which is
yet of more efficacy and more considerable is, that in the Ratification of the
Treaty of Peace on the part of the most Christian King this very Derogation is
expressly contained; Derogating to this end as we do derogate from all Laws,
Customs and Dispositions to the contrary.

2. It is certain by the Author of the Dialogues own confession, that the most
Christian King has ratified this Agreement: it is in page 30. As to the
Ratification of the most Christian King, it might be of some consequence, if
there were not other Nullities in the Queen's Renunciation then the defect of
the Authorization of the King her Husband. Here he does avow the Ratification,
though in the same passage he will needs make it pass for a simple
Authorization: but it is perspicuously seen by all the Clauses of this
Instrument, that it is an Agreement in which the most Christian King enters as
the principal party, and that the Renunciation of the Infanta has its
beginning and source from this Agreement, to which she did willingly consent:
so that he must of necessity acknowledge either that the Kings of France have
not the power to exempt themselves and free themselves from the Civil Laws in
public Treaties, nor to hinder the effects of them in what concerns
themselves, (which is directly against the uniform opinion of their Doctors,
and offends even common sense;) or that he grant that the most Christian King,
nor the Queen his Consort, cannot make use to their own advantage of those
Actions which Law might give them, after they have derogated from them by a
solemn Treaty. Otherwise men must renounce the faith of Treaties, and no Peace
shall ever be secure, if in it the Actions competent to Parties can by no means
be extinguished, and if still a gate be left open to the Exceptions in Law.

3. That these Writers do suppose a false Principle, that the Renunciation was
made only in contemplation of the Portion: the Clauses above cited do
evidently show that they are mistaken. Things must be looked upon in another
light to judge soundly of them. The Right of Succession was an essential
Obstacle to the Marriage, which is certain throughout the Text of the
Renunciation: The Marriage was a necessary means to the Peace; I have already
proved it by the same Instrument of Peace: The only remedy against all
Pretensions was the Renunciation: to conclude the Marriage, the Obstacle was to
be removed. Let us acknowledge then that the Renunciation ought to hold the
first place, as the Dispositions ought to precede the Form; that it is
independent of the Portion, as having different Causes and Ends; that it ought
to have been stipulated before the Marriage was ever spoken of or the Portion.
The whole Text of this Instrument shows that the Portion is in favor of the
Marriage, and the Renunciation does regard the good of the two Monarchies; the
one being founded upon the love and natural obligation of Fathers, and the
other upon public benefit: The one is a pragmatick Sanction, and the other
not. It is agreed that the King my Lord (because and in respect of this
Marriage, and to the end that I might carry to it my Portion and proper Goods)
has promised that be will give me five hundred thousand Crowns. It says not
that because and by virtue of the Renunciation five hundred thousand Crowns
shall be given, but in regard of the Marriage, which supposes that the
Impediment of State should be removed by the Renunciation: and thus the Cause
of the assignation of the Portion is the Marriage; the End, that she may carry
her Portion to it. But the Cause and the End of the Renunciation is, For the
public good of the Kingdoms, the conservation of the Greatness and the Glory
of their Majesty's; to avoid the Discontents of the People, and the Damages
which might arise from thence; and to facilitate thenceforwards the Marriages
between the Children and the Descendents of the two Kings; and lastly, to avoid
the Hinderance which Reason of State brought to this Marriage, and consequently
to the Peace. All these Causes are in their own nature irremoveable,
unalterable, and of absolute necessity, nor can be tied to a private Deed, as
is the payment of the Portion, nor limited by any restrictive Conditions: and
on the contrary the obligation for payment of the Portion may depend as to its
execution upon many Conditions, and the effect thereof may be suspended for
just causes. In the Renunciation the Infanta has obliged her self to the whole
State; in the Assignation of the Dowry the King has obliged himself to the
most Christian King, as the future Spouse of his Daughter. The delay in the
payment of the Portion is a prejudice in a pecuniarie matter, which may easily
be repaired by paying the Interest which the Civil Law does appoint after the
term of payment is past; to show that deficiencie in the payment does not
annull the Contract, since the Law has provided for it by another remedy. But
the defect of the Renunciation would bring along with it a damage which could
never be compensed nor repaired; whereby it may be judged, that it has not nor
could not be the intention of the Parties to tie the Renunciation to the
payment of the Portion, and make so necessary a thing depend upon one so
casual, that it may be retarded by a thousand accidents. The Renunciation also
is conceived in terms of doing presently, and the payment of the Portion in
these of doing hereafter. And from this present time I do hold my self content
and entirely paid all that belongs or may belong unto me. And as to the payment
of the Portion, it is said; And this Sum shall be paid in the manner
following, etc.

It cannot likewise be conceived how this Scribbler dares to publish, that the
Spaniards did make the Infanta ratify it posteriourly to her Marriage, by some
secret Acts which France has never seen; seeing he himself does acknowledge
that the most Christian King did ratify it, and that it is expressly set down
in the VI. Article of the Contract of Marriage, that the Queen should pass an
Act of Renunciation before she shall marry in words importing the present time,
and afterward shall approve and ratify it jointly with the most Christian
King, as soon as she shall have celebrated her Marriage. And though France had
never seen those Articles, she cannot pretend any cause of ignorance of any of
the Clauses contained therein, seeing that by the same Article of the Treaty
the most Christian King does consent that this Renunciation should be made in
the most effectual and fitting form which could be for their validity and
firmness, with the Clauses, Derogations and Abrogations, etc. To which in the
same Article he consented, and has approved them as if they had been already
made: They are held already made now for then by virtue of this Treaty.

But the Subtlety of this Writer, who seeks by all means to fasten himself
upon such smooth ice, leaves all the Substance of the Case behind, to take hold
of one word of the same Article, which is, providing the payment, etc. and
would infer, that this Renunciation is absolutely relative, not only to the
payment of the money, but also to the terms of the payment designed in the
Second Article; which cannot subsist without altering the whole nature of the
Treaty, and giving a violent interpretation, and opposite to the sense and to
the conception of this Article, and of the Renunciation: because it is not said
in this place, that in case of payment she shall renounce, but that she shall
be content with the said Portion; which declares no other thing, but that when
her Portion shall be paid, she shall be content therewith, it being certain
that she could not be satisfied in this respect before she should be paid. So
that the defect of payment within the terms mentioned gives her a just right to
pretend to it with the Interests, which run from the time limited by the Laws,
(if some just cause do not hinder) which regularly would not be due without an
express Promise, unless that it were in favor of the Portion, and cannot be
extended farther. L. 1. ff. de Usutap.
And albeit there should be in that some obscurity of terms, it is certain that
in the Interpretation of such Treaties which are of upright Faith the Intention
of the Parties is only to be respected: so that the Scruples which may arise
from the Ambiguity of the words may not prejudge the principal end. L. 1. de
Legatis. And it is the more manifest in this case, because the Renunciation
ought to be made in present and positive terms before the terms of payment
should have been run out. Wherefore to put the Queen in the right of re-entring
into all her Pretensions by defect of punctual payment, they should have
declared it by an express Clause, which should have reserved those Rights to
the Queen in case of failing; the rather, because in the same Renunciation they
do specify two other cases in which she may be re-established in her Rights.
If the intention of the parties had been to extend it to this, they would not
have failed to explain it as clearly as the rest, being that it was as
important and as likely to happen. By which it may be seen that this word
[providing] is no restrictive Condition, which suspends the Act of
Renunciation, or which can annull it, because it is not said, that in case of
payment she shall renounce; (for in that case she would not have been obliged
to renounce till after the payment, or at least under the same condition:) but
thereby it is only meant that she shall content her self. And he subjoyns the
cause independent of the Portion; By reason she ought to remain excluded of all
of whatsoever condition or nature, etc. which cannot signify any other thing
but that by a preceding Agreement between the two Kings, for the Reasons of
State above mentioned, she was to remain excluded. In effect, there can be no
probability that for five hundred thousand Crowns of Gold she would ever have
renounced the hopes of so great a Succession, if some other more powerful
Motive had not given the weight to this Resolution: and albeit even the payment
of the Portion were one cause of the Renunciation, they cannot deny but there
are others more principal and superior, which do concur thereunto; and in
this case respect is to be had to the chief and predominant, and to the End
that was proposed in this Deed.

In truth it is a thing which occasions pity to see this Question moved
between Kings, and that the ground of a War is laid upon a Subtlety which
private persons durst not dispute in justice. It is certain in Law, Argumento
L. 2. Cod. ff. Quando liceat ab empt. disc. that regularly Contracts are not
annulled by the defect of accomplishing the Conditions within the time, unless
there be some express and particular Clause annulling them in that case,
otherwise the Action, competent to the Actor by virtue of the Contract against
him who has not performed it would be extinguished: which is certainly false;
for he who has sold an Inheritance, L. n. ff. de Art. empt.
and has not received the Price, has right to pursue his payment and
damages, but not to retract the Bargain; and he that has not paid within the
time ceases not to have a legal Action to pretend to the Inheritance by
fulfilling the Contract, L. 14. Cod. de resc. vend.
and repairing the Damage occasioned by the delay. It is the same of a Husband
who demands the Portion, L. 19. ff. de obl. and act.
who is of the same condition as a Purchasour. In this point the French Lawyers
do agree; and also upon the particular case of Renunciations made simply in
contemplation of the Portion, they hold that the defect of payment does not
annull them: and the general Rule is, That as the sole Consent of the Parties
constitutes the essence of Contracts, it is also their Consent alone which is
able to dissolve them; L. 1. cod. quando lec. ab emp. disc.
which has no place neither but when things are still in their integrity.

When the Portion has not been paid, L. 1. cod. de dot. caut. non nuw.
no person has right to demand it from the Husband, though in the Instrument
(as it happens oftentimes) it be inserted that it has been received. Lib. 3.
cod. cod.
And in this case the Husband may propound his Exception, non numeratae
pecuniae; of which he would have no need, if by the default of payment the
Contract were annulled.

All the Allegations which he cites upon this Subject are out of the Case, or
else make against himself. That which he urges out of Baldus may help us to
convince him of his error; Bald. in l. neque matter.
Pater dotavit Filiam de bonis Vxoris: numquid ista Filia habebit regressum ad
bona paterna? Respondeo quod sic, quia ista non est cum effectu a Patre dotata.
He does not say that she is not endowed, but only that she has not received
the effect of her Portion; and this Recourse which he leaves her to the Goods
of the Father for her Portion shows that it is truly settled, since the has
right to pretend to the effect of it. But that makes nothing to the prejudice
of the Renunciation; on the contrary it confirms it, by leaving her the right
to pursue for the Portion. It is the same of the Allegation which follows in
the Dialogue. Bened. in Cap. Raynut. in verb. Duas habens uxores.

The Laws which he cites to prove that the Portion is not constituted if it be
not paid, L. 1. ff. de dot. L. dotale, ff. de fun. dot.
and all the others, are evidently understood of the effects of the Portion,
which fall to the charge of the Husband; it being unjust that be should be
charged with a thing which he has not received. If pains be taken to examine
these Laws, it will be found that they cannot be interpreted in any other
sense, and in effect the Portion must needs be constituted, since it is due,
and that the Husband has right to pretend unto it. A thing which is not cannot
produce an Action. The Law which he cites, Traject. ff. de Obl. and Act. is
altogether out of our case, and applied beside the purpose: It speaks only of
Contracts wherein a Penalty is expressly stipulated against him who fails to
satisfy, L. traject. ff. de Obl. and Act. Poena (uti assolet) ob operas ejus,
qui eam pecuniam peteret, in stipulationem erat deducta.
and concludes no other thing, but that he is obliged to pay the Penalty, if
he cannot show that the defect came not by his fault, the Contract as to the
remainder continuing in its full vigor.

But when the Debtor has failed to satisfy through the fault of the Creditor,
who has not accomplished on his part the essential Conditions of the Contract,
then it is out of controversy that the delay ought not to be imputed unto him,
Argumento L. 23. ff. de Act. and Obl.
and that he is not obliged, neither to the Interests, nor the reparation of
any Damage, although there were a Penalty expressly stipulated in the Contract.

If we would reduce this business to the rigours of the Civil Law, we should
have a fair field to prove by their own Principles, that all the delay in the
payment of the Portion ought not to be imputed to any other party but France
it self, if it be true (as they say, and we strongly do deny) that the
Renunciation is founded solely upon the Portion, that they are Inseparables,
and necessarily depending the one upon the other. It follows then by a clear
consequence, that the King neither could nor ought to pay the Portion, until
he had gotten all the Securities which were by the same Treaty promised to
establish absolutely the Renunciation. Wherein they must needs agree, that in
the IVth Article of the Contract of Marriage it is expressed in formal terms
that the most Serene Infanta, after the Act of Renunciation which she shall
pass before the Marriage, shall make just such another jointly with the most
Christian King, as soon as she is married with his Majesty, which shall be
Registered and passed in the Parliament of Paris in the form and with the
Clauses accustomed, etc. This Act not only has not appeared, but likewise
they make use of their own omission against us for one of the proofs of the
Nullity; they complain that since the Marriage the Queen was made pass a secret
Act which France has not seen. But he does profess it more clearly in the 23.
page, where, albeit he has elsewhere confessed the King's Ratification, he
does not stick to call it in doubt again in these words: But after all this,
Spain having made the Infanta renounce posteriourly to her Marriage by secret
Acts, which the Spaniards never durst let come to light, who is it that can
imagine that the most Christian King has validly ratified what he never saw,
etc? All this discourse contains as many Untruths as words: but we must judge
them from their own mouth. The most Christian King and Queen were obliged by a
Contract of Marriage (which is a Member of the Peace) to make a new
Renunciation in the same form as the precedent, as soon as the Marriage was
accomplished, and cause it to be Registered in the Parliament of Paris: He
denies that this was done, and declares that the King never saw it: He
maintains that the Portion was necessarily and inseparably tied to the
Renunciation; they have not satisfied this necessary and inseparable Condition,
and for their failing to have satisfied, they will needs impugn the
Renunciation because of the delay of payment, which could not be accomplished
until that they had given the Securities requisite for the Renunciation. We
leave it therefore to be judged of, to whom the delay of payment is justly to
be imputed, which has been offered diverse times, and is offered to them at
present, if they would but perform the Condition which was promised.

Moreover it is clear in Law, that the payment of a Debt may be retained by way
of compensation o^ another liquidated pretension. And so was it practiced at
the payment o^ the Portions of the two Princesses Anne Infanta of Spain and
Elizabet^ of France, married to Philip the IV^^ and Lewis the XIIIth. It is
certain that in the VI. Article of the Peace his Majesty does absolutely
renounce all his Rights and Pretensions upon Alsatia. This Renunciation is
founded upon a Proviso much more efficacious then that which is contained in
the Queen's, which cannot be imputed to any other cause then that which is
expressed in the words following; By means of which Renunciation his most
Christian Majesty offers to satisfy the payment of three millions of livers,
which he is bound to pay unto the Archdukes of Inspruck.

This Obligation is contained in the same Instrument of the Peace, which is all
but one Deed with the Treaty of Marriage and Renunciation, by which the
Portion is promised: the one and the other are equally obliging. If the most
Christian King have been able to dispense with himself without breaking or
annulling the Treaty, he cannot pretend that the delay in paying of the
Portion is more rigorously interpreted. There was no cause on our part which
hindered him from satisfying this Obligation. It serves for nothing to say that
it was not the King to whom he owed this sum, since it concerned the King
that it should be paid, that it is he who has renounced, and that it is he to
whom the Promise was made in the Treaty; and consequently it is to him that
the most Christian King has contracted the Obligation to satisfy the most
serene Archduke.

By these Principles the second Objection falls to the ground of it self:
Though we should acknowledge that the Infanta has not been endowed with her
Paternal Goods, the Renunciation would not cease to remain in its force, as
being established upon more powerful Foundations then that of the Portion; and
at the worst the Queen would not have in this case any other right then to
pretend a Legal Portion.

But to show that our Right abounds in Reasons, and that on which side soever
it be attaqued, they can find no weakness in it; I will briefly demonstrate
that all this discourse which he urges so strongly is built upon a false
Supposition.

The Queen was provided not only according to the practice accustomed to the
Princesses of Spain, but much beyond that, as it appears by the very Deed of
Renunciation, in these terms: It is a very competent Portion, and the greatest
which has yet been given to any Infanta of Spain, and this in consideration of
the Person of the most Christian King. Portions, as I have already said, are
not regulated betwixt Kings by the estimation of the legal Portion, but by a
Custom which they establish in their Royal Families, which passes in ordinary
style, and is subject to no Controversy: else to take it in rigor, the
Princesses of France would have been very ill provided with five hundred
thousand Crowns. The essential reason of this Custom is, because the Princes,
who are the Authors and Interpreters of Laws, consider the Soul more then the
Body, and without staying upon words ought solely to take hold of the Reason
from which they have taken their first beginning. Now it is certain that the
Portion given in Marriage is instituted to help the Husband to undergo the
charges of the Marriage, and the Legal Portion to keep the Children out of
necessity, and after the death of the Father to supply the defect of the
Aliment which he did owe them whilst he lived. All these Reasons do cease
amongst great Monarchs, whose high Fortunes shelter them from ordinary Wants,
and who ought to propose unto themselves in their Marriages more noble and
solid Interests then that of a petty sum of Money. This is the reason why
they do rarely come to the discussion of Goods, the supplement of Legal
Portions, Inventories, and other such ways of redress which are introduced in
favor of private persons, and are in respect of them but mere Trifles; but
rather content themselves with that which the Custom of those Courts with
which they treat has established for this purpose, esteeming it to be much
below their Honor to cheapen a Wife, and to make it appear that they seek any
other thing in her but Greatness and Virtue. In fine, the most Christian King
did content himself, the Queen remained satisfied with it. All this did pass by
a Treaty of Peace into the strength of a public Law; there is no more any
remedy.

I say yet farther, that she has been endowed with her Paternal Goods in two
sorts. The one, because all which was granted unto the most Christian King by
the Treaty of Peace was done in contemplation of the Marriage, as the Marriage
was concluded solely in order to the Peace. It is a reciprocal Relation, an
inseparable Connection, one and the self-same Treaty, Cause, and End; they
cannot possibly be divided without overthrowing the whole foundation of the
Peace. His Majesty has sacrificed so many fair Provinces to the Satisfaction
and Good fortune of his Daughter, and the Infanta gave up her Pretensions for
the good of the State, to the Happiness of this Marriage, and to the Gratitude
which she owed to the Bounty of her Father. The Renunciation was reciprocal;
that of the most Serene Infanta to her Pretensions was accompanied also with
the King's to so many rich Domains, and even to the Right which he had to
Alsatia. Nor can it be presumed with any appearance of Reason, that he would
have divested himself with such facility of so great an Estate, if he had not
been invited thereunto by the Love of his Daughter, and the desire to see her
reign happily, by heaping Benefits and Satisfactions upon the King her Husband.
And if there remained any doubt or ambiguitie as to this, the presumption is in
favor of the Father.

Before I do enter into an exact Account with such severe Merchants, 1. Fin.
Cod. dot. prom. Alex. in ad Bart. in d.l... in l. 1. ff. Soluto Mat.
I must first declare that the specification of the Portion contained in the
Treaty of Marriage was not the square of the late King's Bounty, and was thus
expressed only to satisfy the Forms used in the like Treaties, according to
the style of the Court; but it has extended it self far beyond that, to
considerable sums of money which he gave her in Jewels, Plate, and Silver, and
to what else could be found rarest in all his Kingdoms: and that she her self
does avow in the Renunciation, that in consideration of so many Bounties, she
did renounce with all her heart all her Maternal Goods, not only by way of
Renunciation, but also of Donation amongst the living, regard being had to all
those Benefits, In the Act of the Renunciation page 14.
and because he desires and procures her Satisfaction and Advantage with so
much love, having a joint regard to the Public, etc. This Renunciation was
covenanted and agreed with the King of France preliminarilic, and before any
other Condition was treated of. This is evident, because the Marriage could not
be treated of until the Obstacle was removed: from whence this consequence is
drawn, That whatsoever the King endowed the Infanta with by way of Portion was
purely out of his own Stock.

However, if it behaved us to come to a Citizen-like Account, one might deduct
with Justice from the Maternal Goods all that was expended for her Maintenance
ever since the death of her Mother, being certain that whenever the Maternal
Goods do exceed the value of the Portion, the Father is really obliged to
supply it out of his own: but he may deduct the Aliments, which he is not
obliged to give when the Daughter is endowed with her own proper Goods. Bart.
ad L. libertis, 1. number. 3. ff. de Alim. L. si quis, si vel parens, ff. de Lib.
Agn.
If we would draw this into an Account, it would be found that what has been
already received does far exceed the Debt. The King did inherit from Prince
Balthazar: his Son all his Maternal Goods, which, according to the Law of
Spain, ought to return to the Father. The Law which deprives the Fathers and
Mothers of this Succession in case of Second Marriages is reproved by the
Canons; it never had other cause or reason, then to put a bridle upon Marriages
which are made out of Covetousness to the prejudice of the Children of the
First Bed. But the Second Marriage of the deceased King was an inevitable
Necessity of State, the universal desire of the People, and a precise
Obligation which he owed unto his Subjects and his House. Monarchs should act
by Principles quite different from those of the vulgar; and if one would tie
them in public Acts to the ordinary Laws, all their Conduct would be
disordered, by rendering of them incapable to provide freely for the public
Necessities. Possibly the Jewels were not delivered in specie to the most
Serene Infanta; but threefold more at the least has been given her. It is not
the custom of Kings to take Acquittances, nor to keep Registers of all that
they bestow upon their Daughters; they pour out upon them with full hands,
without account and without measure: they are not accustomed but to Treaties
depending upon sincere faith, justly scorning those little Formalities which
are not established for them.

But though all this were not so, is it a matter which merits all this stir,
that all Europe should be troubled, and a War raised again, which has cost so
much blood, so many tears and Desolations to Christendom? Though the most
Serene Infanta could not have renounced her Maternal Rights, all she could then
pretend would be to be repaired upon this Head, L. 1. ff. sed mihi de verb. obl.
Vtile per inutile non debet vitiari. We see it almost in all Contracts which
have any defective part, the Body does not cease to subsist though some Member
of it be cut off, providing the substance of the Contract be not altered. This
is a general Rule which can suffer no exceptions? but when the two Members,
whereof the one is defective and the other legitime, L. 7. ff. d Arb.
are so inseparable that the one cannot subsist without the other, or that the
Parties have expressly and necessarily joined them together in the Treaty by
some particular Clause. But in this present case these are two things of a
different nature, which have nothing of common to both; the one is a Right
acquired and present, and the other an uncertain hope; they are derived from
two several fountains; they concern different matters, and of great inequality
as to their importance; the one does not destroy the other: the one is a
principal, and the other accessory; the one a Domestic, and the other a matter
of State: in a word, they cannot be mixed without bringing all things into
confusion.

He cites two Texts upon this Subject which do make absolutely for us: Bened.
in cap. Ray^ul. in Ver. Duas hab^ns uxores:
Non excluditur per Renunciationem nisi a successione dotantis; unde si de
propriis bonis Filia suerit dotata, non est exclusa: His meaning is, that she
is not excluded from her Maternal Goods although she have renounced them, but
that the Exclusion remains firm as to the Goods of him by whom the Portion is
constituted, against whom she has an Action to make him pay it out of his own
Estate.

The other passage which he alleges out of Covarr. does yet better explicate
the former: Erit intelligenda haec Conventio in hunc modum, ut mill aurei sint
dandi ex bonis Paternis, non ex Maternis. Whereby it is seen that the
Renunciation is not annulled, but that the Daughter has only recourse for the
Portion promised her against the Father's Goods. He limits farther even this
Decretal, when the Daughter has confirmed the Renunciation by Oath; unless
there be Fraud on the part of the Father, or some notorious Laesion on the part
of the Daughter: and we have made it clear that they cannot here oppose to us
either the one or the other.

It would require great Volumes to make appear by parcells the Falsities it
matter of Fact, the Allegations out of season, the captious Sophisms, and the
continual Cavills which are packed up into this Work: It is a business of more
time and leisure then the trouble in which they have put us does allow. I think
I have said enough upon this Subject to convince all reasonable understandings:
and to make an end of confounding our Enemies, I will content my self by
concluding with this Argument: That if they will reduce, against all manner of
Reason, the public Treaties made between Kings to the Forms and Subtilties of
litigious Pleading, they ought to follow the same Rules in their Proceeding; if
they do intend to make a Process of it, they should not make it a War. Never
yet was it seen that Legal Portions or Reliefs were pretended to with a Dagger
at the throat, nor Contracts rescinded by stroke of Sword, nor the first
Citations made by forty thousand men. Either let us decide this matter by
public Right, and by the Faith of a solemn Treaty made betwixt Crown and
Crown; or if they have a mind to bring it to the formalities of the Bar, let
us not stray from its style, which does not permit Violence to usurp upon
Justice: and that which the Kings of France do not practice toward their own
Subjects when there is any Difference between them to be decided by the Civil
Laws, they ought not to attempt it against a Monarch who does not hold of them,
and who is ready to refer his Cause to the Judgment of all the Princes of
Europe. But they are far from this thought, they will have no other Arbiter but
Arms; and if in appearance they do sometimes call for the assistance of
Justice, it is but to make it serve as an instrument of their Violence: They
make use of her own Laws against her self; they make her raise Difficulties,
but will not suffer her to resolve them; they are content she plead, but not
that she decide; and at the same time when they make her enter into Combat,
they tie her hands, they shut up all the approches to her, they will not permit
her to pronounce, and do so pervert the whole order of things, that to
establish a Chimerical Right, they make it a private Business, and that they
may put it in Execution, they make of it a matter of State.

ARTICLE V.
That the Succession of the Sovereignty of the Duchy of Brabant, and other
Provinces specified in these Libells, ought not to be regulated by particular
Customs.

THE essential Sovereignty is in God, as in its source; those which we do
reverence here below are Rivolets that flow from thence: It descends from
Heaven to Earth, and spreads it self in diverse fashions amongst the Creatures,
according to the Subordination which is necessary for the Government of the
World. It communicates it self in the ordinary way principally and immediately
to Monarchs, to Princes, and sometimes unto the whole Body of the People, which
remits it voluntarily to those Magistrates whom they choose, and reduces it into
the form of Government which seems to be fittest for their happiness. Some of
these are absolute, and hold it of God solelie; others are Sovereigns in regard
of their Subjects, but with some tie of Dependencie upon a Superior Power: and
as those do derive immediately from the Infinite Power above; so these do
proceed gradually through the Chanel of that Sovereignty to which they are
subordinate; this is its Rule and origin, having no other Power nor
Jurisdiction then that which is conveyed unto it through this Organ, because
being nothing of it self, but according to the will of the Instituters, it can
exercise no other Right then what it has so received from it. If Sovereignties
were regulated by Local Customs, it would be as monstrous a thing as if Kings
would prescribe limits to the Providence of God, or as to see Streams run back
upon their Fountain: The Order of the World, which subsists only by these
degrees of Dependencie of the least upon the greater, must be absolutely
overthrown: the Servants would become Masters, the Sovereigns should be
Subjects, and the hereditary Sovereignties be in the same condition with
Villages and Farms. The Eternal Law, which is the very Wisdom of God, is the
rule of all Laws: and as that is properly the Idea of the Law of Sovereigns, so
that of Sovereigns is the Model of particular ones, which take from it all
their strength and vigor. If an Equal cannot have any command over his Equal,
it would be much more unreasonable that the Inferior should have it over him
whom he acknowledges for his Master, and that the particular Customs
established between Subjects should prescribe unto their Sovereigns the order
of their Successions. All that there is of Jurisdiction and Power in subaltern
Fiefs, is found in a more excellent manner in the commanding Fief: But all that
there is of Servitude, Dependencie and Subjection in them, regards not the
Sovereignty, and cannot reflect upon it from beneath upwards; these are
Restrictions and Limitations which cannot proceed but from a more elevated
Power. So that the Sovereign Fiefs which hold of a higher Jurisdiction can
receive no limits to their Authority but from the direct Lord, who is also to
regulate himself therein according to the extent of that Power which he has
over them, and according to their first Institution; for he may not impose new
burdens upon them farther then those upon which from the beginning they did
agree in the regulating of the Fief.

To discourse solidly of this matter, two things must be carefully examined and
taken from their true foundation.

The one is the nature and the first Origin of the Duchy of Brabant, and of
the other Provinces to which France does pretend: the other is the Origin, the
quality, the end, and the extent of the Local Custom, which has introduced the
Right of Devolution.

As to the first, it is out of controversy that a part of the Duchy of
Brabant, though Sovereign in it self, does in some sort hold of the Empire; I
say, in some sort, because as well by its own nature, as by its Privileges, it
is exempt from many Subjections which are proper to other Imperial Fiefs,
though Sovereigns and Lording. This then must be considered in two manners; the
one in the Dependence which it has of the Empire, and the other in the
Sovereignty which it has over its Subjects. Touching the first, it cannot
extend beyond the terms which are expressly prescribed by the Investiture. So
that it cannot receive from any thing else any other restriction of its Power,
unless it does voluntarily impose it upon it self. And for the second, it
belongs to it to establish Laws, and communicates its Power to its Inferiors
as much as shall be thought good, and restrains it within just limits.

Moreover, although these be Sovereignties in themselves, they must also be
looked upon as chained together by an undissolvible tie, and as annexed to the
Body of the Monarchy of which they are the Members and the Parts.

If we consider them in themselves, we shall find that in their Successions the
Males ought to be preferred to the Females; and that this Order has been so
regularly observed in all times, that not so much as one example can be shown
where the Daughters have succeeded to the exclusion of the Males of the same
Line; as may be seen in the Genealogical Table of the Trophies of the Duchy
of Brabant, written by Christopher Butkens. I say more, that the primitive
Institution of the particular Fiefs of Brabant was made in favor of the Males,
and that the Right of Devolution was afterward introduced among them for
particular Ends; so that if the Devolution does hinder them from Alienating, it
is but an Obstacle introduced by private persons, which has insensibly gotten
the force of a Custom among them; and being only a particular Right, it can
neither tie the Prince nor the Sovereignty, because it comes but from a simple
Custom and Consent of the Subjects, who have no Jurisdiction over the
Superior Power. So that to judge of the Right of Succession of the Lording
Fief, one must look into the first Original thereof, and into its proper nature
independently of all that is inferior to it.

If we consider the principal End of this ordinary Custom, which preferrs the
Males before the Females even in the Succession of particular Fiefs, we shall
find that it is for the conservation of Noble Families, for fear their Estates
should pass to and be confounded in some other House, to the prejudice of them
who are able to uphold the Splendor, maintain the Name, and perpetuate the
Line of them. Though this benefit in some sort do redound to the good of the
State, it is but by an indirect reflection, and by the relation of the private
to the public; and it is for this that it may be derogated from in
consideration of another private good, if it be esteemed to be equal or of
greater importance then the other. But the conservation of Sovereignties is a
good which directly concerns the State, against which no private Reason can
prevail; otherwise what Disorder would it be in the World, if we did see
Sovereignties liable to the change of Masters every moment, and pass under
another Dominion? How many causes of War and Revolutions would arise from such
a strange Constitution, which could not but offend all Laws and good Polity?
How unworthy a spectacle must this be and what an heartbreaking to faithful
Subjects, to see their Princes and all their Line reduced to poverty, whilst a
Daughter should elevate to their Throne some Stranger-Prince? If these
inconveniences be compared with the particular good which arises from the
Devolution, it will be found that the one is but an Atome in comparison of the
other; and that there is no kind of appearance that the very People, though it
had been in their power, would ever have been such enemies to themselves, as to
have exposed themselves to all these dangers, by subjecting their Prince to
their Custom, and taken pleasure to live under a Dominion suspended in the
Air, and exposed to all Winds. On the contrary, Sovereigns in one thing seem to
be in a worse condition then private persons; because in the greatest part of
States which are well governed, they cannot alienate any parcel of their
Dominions, they are in some kind Slaves to the Public good, they cannot do
advantage to a younger Brother to the prejudice of the Elder, and are
ordinarily so tied to the regular order of Succession, which preferrs the Males
and the Eldest, that they cannot follow the motions of their Affection to the
prejudice of this Rule, which the Safety of the State renders not to be
dispensed with: how then can it be overthrown and destroyed by a local Custom,
instituted to an End which cannot be put in the balance with the Utilitic which
proceeds from this public Law? In effect, If we look upon the order of the
Successions of the Dukes of Brabant, and of the Princes of the other Provinces
in the Netherlands, it will be found that they have always descended from
Father to Son, as long as that could be had, and that in no case they have been
divided nor shared among many Children, though there have been often sundry
Males of the same Bed. Butkens, page 107, 113, 133, 204, 270, 232, etc.
As is seen in Godfrey the First, who left two Sons of his first Marriage,
Godfrey and Henry; Godfrey his Son succeeded singlie to the Duchy: and of
three Sons which he had, Godfrey the Elder, styled the Third, succeeded alone:
he had two Sons by his first Wife, Henry and Albert; the Elder only succeeded
to the Duchy, as Henry the Third had done; and the same throughout the whole
Succession. From whence I draw two Consequences: One, That the Sovereign Fief
is by its nature indivisible; which shows that the principal end is to conserve
it entire in the Family, which were unusefull, if it must descend to the
Daughters of the First Bed, to the exclusion of the Males; for in this case it
would import very little that it were dismembered, and it would be more just and
more covenient to divide it, at least among the Children of the same Bed. The
other is, That by this Indivisibilitie it is different from particular Fiefs,
which, according to the Feodal Customs, are partable beyond the Forest at the
choice of the Eldest; and on this side, though there were but one Fief, the
Eldest has but two Thirds, and the rest belongs to the Brothers, excepting to
the Eldest the Castle, and a Capon's flight: which being unpracticable in a
Sovereign Fief, Chap. 21. of the Feodal Customs of Brabant.
it is evident that there is a manifest difference, and that the one has for
its end only the particular good of Families, and the other the good of the
State, which chiefly consists in keeping the Sovereignty as long as is possible
in the same Line, that it may not be exposed to continual Changes. So that
being of a different nature, we cannot draw any consequence from the Fief to
the Crown, nor subject the Lording Fief to the Local Customs, which be of
another nature and for other ends. This difference is the more remarkable, by
reason that the subservient Fiefs which Princes do possess are of another
nature, and subject to other Laws then the Sovereigntie, and do not depend of
one and the same Jurisdiction; as is to be seen in Butkens, in the Charters of
the year 1222. And it is out of doubt that these may be divided, and the other
not, as is clear by the XXI. Article it self, which I cited before: and even
the Customs of Lovain were decreed with this Clause; Without prejudice to the
Rights and the Superiorities of the King. Which clearly demonstrates, that in
the toleration or approbation of these particular Customs, the Sovereigns never
meant to subject their Sovereignties; and that the Consequence which they draw
from the one to the other cannot be of validity betwixt two such
disproportionate things. In the Customs of Brabant and the other Provinces,
which the King has approved, this Reservation is ordinarily found, Without
prejudice to our Rights and Authorities. A notable difference is yet to be
observed here, which is, that private persons may derogate and do daily
derogate from the Devolution by their Treaties of Marriage, or by Testaments,
to preserve the free disposition of their Goods to themselves, and to hinder
the Daughters of the First Bed from coming to exclude the Sons of the Second;
which Princes have never practiced, though much more concerned in conserving
their Successions in the Masculine Line, and would not have failed to use those
Precautions as well as private persons do against this Custom, had they
believed that they were subject unto it as others are.

We shall be yet more confirmed in this opinion, if we consider that, far from
having a mind to dismember any of those Provinces by virtue of such a Custom,
they united them together by an inseparable Concatenation, by a Sanction
established by the Supreme Authority, and received by the universal Consent of
all the People: so that it has passed ever since that time, and is still held
at present, to be a Fundamental Law. I will satisfy in the following part of
this Article some light Scruples which the Author of this Writing forms
thereupon: In this place it shall suffice me to deduce from it an evident
Argument, that the intention both of the Sovereign and the People has been
much opposite to that of subjecting them to Customs, which would expose them
upon all moments to the danger of being dismembered and distracted into other
Families.

In fine, they are Members of the Monarchy of Spain; and though they do live
under their own Laws and particular Customs, and enjoy peaceably their own
Privileges; they are notwithstanding Members of it, and depend upon it as Parts
of the Whole: so that if there were no Law nor Custom established for the
Succession of their Sovereignties, it would be much more just and convenient to
regulate it by the Law of the principal Kingdom whereunto they are Accessories,
The Dialogue, page 39.
then by a Local Custom, which has no place but among Subjects: and if this
same Author does avow, that where there is no Law established for the
Succession of a Sovereign Fief, it may be regulated by the Laws of the
neighboring States; we ought here with a far juster title to conform our
selves to the order and practice of other Kingdoms to which they are united,
and under the support and the protection of which they are maintained.

Here may be observed (in passing) the incompatibilitie which we meet with in
the Discourse of this Writer: He will have it that the Sovereign Succession of
these Provinces is so to be subject to the Local Custom of the Devolution,
that it can no ways be dispensed with, neither for the good of the State, nor
by the Renunciation of her to whom the Right is devolved, making a simple
Custom of private persons pass for a Fundamental Law of the State: but by the
same Discourse it evidently follows, that these Provinces neither can, nor
ought ever to fall under the Dominion of France, because the Salique Law, by
virtue whereof they do pretend that all their new Acquisitions must be
submitted to the same Rule to which the ancient Dominions are subject, would
pull up by the root this very Devolution, which at present they will have to be
unalterable, and also totally exclude Women from the Right of Succession,
though they were the sole Heirs: so that they will establish this particular
Right in our Provinces, but only to destroy it by Incorporating them instantly
into their Kingdom. They make use of it to acquire them, and will presently
overthrow it to conserve them; and do erect this Right in their own favor, but
only to annihilate it afterward to our damage. This is an effect of their
Nimbleness, which knows how to apply wittily all the Laws to their own use,
that they may make them serve as Instruments to their Ambition.

It remains now at present that we look into the nature and quality of this
Local Custom, which it is certain is not of the first origin of Fiefs, since
the disposition of them in favor of Males is directly opposed thereunto.

It is yet more certain that it does not flow from the Sovereign, because he
himself in many places has not approved of it, and that the same Approbation
which the People have required of him is a sure mark that it has taken its
beginning elsewhere then from him; nor can it be said that it has been formed
upon the model of Sovereign Succession, which of its own nature was purely
restricted to Males, and has not been extended to Females, but by a privilege
limited only to the deficiencie of Males. It is then to be concluded, that it
has insensibly slipped in by a Custom which some particular Conveniences have
introduced. Neither is it universal, nor every where uniform, even in Brabant:
many Districts are totally exempted from it, and others have received it with
diverse Limitations. The City of Bruxells, that of Antwerp, with the Country of
Ryen, the Territory of Turnhout, Hoochstraten with its District, a part of the
Country beyond the River of Maese, and the whole Quarter of Nivelle, are not
subject to the Devolution. And this proceeds from no other cause, but that they
have not received this Custom; which in it self is of such a nature, that it
is of no force but in those places where it is approved of by the Consent of
the People. How then can any extend to the Sovereigntie, without the Consent of
the Prince, a Custom which does not oblige the Subjects but in so far as
they have expressly desired? How can a public and Fundamental Law be made of a
Custom which is not universal, nor established by the Sovereign, and which is
tied to the particular circumstances of Goods and Places? And if the Authors
of the Dialogue and the Treatise of the Queen's Rights do avow the Devolution
to be a kind of Penalty, Fol. 50.
how can it be conceived that the Prince should be subject thereunto? and that
the Fiefs subservient can impose by the example of their Custom a Servitude on
the Crown? Never in good Logic can the Argument conclude de minori ad majus,
unless it be in matters of Favor.

This Custom then cannot pass for a Law, because it does not proceed from the
express Ordinance of the Prince, but only from the tacit Consent of the
Subjects, who had no other object therein but their proper Interests. The
Prince contributed nothing toward it but a simple Toleration, and, far from
intending to oblige his own Sovereignty to it, he has not absolutely approved
of it, nor generally in all places. The Feodal Customs of Brabant, be it either
for such Fiefs as are on this side the Forest, or them which are beyond it,
and which depend upon the Feodal Court of Lothier or of Genap, were never
approved nor decreed, although they were presented to the Governor to that
purpose: and in some others which are approved, the Prince, as I said before,
does expressly except his Rights and Preeminences, reserving to himself the
power to change, alter, and innovate them as he thinks fit; which he could not
do without the consent of the States, if it were a Fundamental Law which did
tie up his proper Sovereigntie. And though by way of supposition we should
acknowledge that this Custom extends it self to the Sovereigntie; it were
ridiculous to pretend that he may not abrogate it in his Family, since he has
the right both to change and innovate it in those of his Subjects.

But if it were granted to them that such like Customs do reach unto
Sovereignties, they would give us a just Right to pretend unto Bretanny and the
Duchy of Burgundy, where Women ought to be admitted to the Succession of
Fiefs, not only by the Custom of the people, but expressly also by the Law of
the State, in regard of the Sovereigntie it self: to which purpose it will
avail nothing to allege the Salique Law, which is Apocryphal among the most
learned, and which at most cannot transcend the limits of the ancient Domains
of France, nor can change but by unjust Violence the nature of the Provinces
which they do annex to their Crown; but if that might be done by virtue of the
Salique Law, why should it not be lawful for our King to impose on those
Provinces which he has acquired the same Law which he does practice in Spain?

Having manifestly proved by so palpable Reasons that the Local Customs as well
of Brabant, as of the other Provinces pretended to, cannot be the Rule of
Sovereigntie; it remains that we take notice by what other legal ways they may
be regulated: and this cannot be by any but only the following.

1. By the nature of the said Sovereign Fiefs, and their first Institution. 2.
By the ordinary Custom of the Sovereign Fiefs of the Empire, of which some of
these Provinces do hold. 3. By the End for which they are established, and by
the Reason of State, and the public Interest. 4. By the ancient and continual
Practice in the like Successions.
As to the first, it is undoubted that the Sovereign Fief of Brabant in its
first beginning, and by the Establishment of the Emperors, was only
restricted to the Males, to the entire exclusion of the Females; and that
since, by the concession of the same Emperors, it was extended unto Daughters,
but only in default of Heirs-male, as it is expressly recorded in the Imperial
Constitution.

But that of the Emperor Charles the Vth, made in the year 1549, Corst. Phil.
Romans Reg. An. 1204.
does entirely stop the current of all the Difficulties that could be formed on
this Subject, by the indivisible Union which he established among all the
Provinces of the Low Countries. It is here where the Authors of these Libells
lose the Card of their Compass, and blunt the points of their darts,
endeavoring all in vain to shoot against this Rock. This Constitution is both
of the Emperor and of the proprietarie Prince; it is universal, and comprehends
all the Provinces; it is solemn and authentic, by the general Consent of all
the Estates, and the subscription of all the Grandees, of the principal
Officers, and the most illustrious Nobility; it is established, because it was
not only received, but also earnestly solicited by the common wishes of the
whole People: it is a public Law, which proceeds from the Sovereign Authority,
it concerns the Crown immediately, it is founded upon the public Utility, and
has for its chief End the Preservation of all these Provinces under one and
the same Lord: The terms are clear: Desiring above all things to provide for
the Good, Quiet and Tranquillity of our Countries on this side, and to keep
them together in one body, and that they may be inseparably possessed by one
Prince alone. Behold a public, necessary, and inviolable Cause, which directly
regards the Principalities. But, on the contrary, the Custom of the Devolution
is conceived in terms that cannot be otherwise applied then to private ones; If
either a Man or a Woman have Children, etc. Were the Prince comprehended, it
would have been expressed in words of more reverence, and clearer: but the
notice of the Custom expressly says, that it comprehends nothing but the Fiefs
which hold of the Duke of Brabant, and (as the Writer himself confesses) it is
made in favor of the First Marriage, and out of the hatred to Second Beds,
which ought rather to be favored then discountenanced in the person of
Sovereigns, chiefly when they are destitute of Heirs-male. But let us go on
farther to the terms of the conclusion of this same Sanction: We do enact and
decree, that in all our said Countries Representation shall have place in what
touches the Succession either of Prince or Princesses being capable to succeed.
All this Clause must necessarily be referred to the former, as built upon this
foundation, To conserve these Provinces in one Mass together, etc. Both the one
and the other do totally exclude the Devolution, if it be to be understood in
that form which these Writers do pretend. Moreover, it is evident that this
Union of Estates cannot consist with the Devolution, because that this Custom
is not generally established in all the Provinces which are comprehended in
this Union, whereby it might fall out that the Daughters of the First Bed
should carry away a part of them by the Devolution, and the Males of the Second
Marriage by the Law of the Country should possess the other; and by this means
the order and the end of the Sanction should be absolutely overthrown.

I do profess that, reflecting upon all these things, I find my self seized
with prodigious astonishment, to see that these Writers do not blush at the
liberty which they have given to their pens, in contradicting of Truths so
manifest and so generally received, and that they are so effronted as to dare
vent unto their own King and to the eyes of all Europe these extravagant
Propositions: Dialogue, page 46.
That there is nothing more contrary to History, nor to the desires of all the
Provinces, then this Sanction which unites all those Provinces together; That
this Emperor had truly thoughts of doing of it, but that he found so open a
Repugnancie against it, and so invincible a one in the inclinations of the
Country, etc. That he quitted it very soon, etc.

Nothing can be more falsely alleged: This Sanction was received, and is to be
seen still Registered in all the Chambers of Accounts in the Low Countries. But
the Author takes up a mistake, or else will impose upon the Readers who will
rely upon his faith; he confounds another Design of Charles the Vth, from
whence he desisted, with this of the Pragmatick Sanction, which he finished
without contradiction. It is true that this Prince had some thoughts of
erecting all these Provinces into a Kingdom, to the same Custom and Polity;
but having met with great difficulties about the diversity of Customs,
Privileges, Seals, and Measures, he held it not fit to put it in execution: but
as to the Union contained in the Pragmatick Sanction, the diversity of Laws not
extending it self to the Sovereigntie could not hinder the Union, seeing that
in France it self, where all the Provinces are inseparably united to the Crown,
they do notwithstanding live under their particular Laws, which in many places
are very different; and when we say they are united, we do not therefore
pretend that they are reduced into one Province, but that they compose all
together one aggregate of many Bodies, which cannot be disjoined. So that it is
properly to distribute Gape-seed, and amuse all Europe with the tricks of
Jugglers, in alleging for the proof of the contrary, that the King in his
qualities uses all the Titles of these Provinces severally; as if by having
united them he had lost those Titles, and were less Count of Hainault for
having rendered it inseparable from the Duchy of Brabant. If the Divisibility
could be inferred from the difference of the Titles, it is clear that how
succinct soever those of the most Christian Kings be, it might be concluded by
the same reason, that that part of Navarre which they do possess might be
separated from France, whereunto notwithstanding they will never condescend.
The passage of Grotius which he alleges, but does not quote, is not to the
purpose, and touches not the fact in question, but only the Design of Charles
the Vth, which presently I have related. He speaks of the change of the state
of the Government of the Country, and not of the Union and Indivisibility of
the Provinces, which may be established among them without any alteration in
the Form of their Government, and without changing any thing of the particular
Customs, unless it be in what they have of inconsistent with this Union.

It is with the same confidence that he presumes to say, that this Pragmatick
does not contain in its dispositive one word of this Union. And what would then
the first Clause which I cited operate, which is not only dispositive, but the
ground of all the other Dispositions which are contained in the same Law? It is
the Cause and the End of it; and the sole Reason why the Emperor established
the Representation is, to preserve the Countries in one Mass, and that they be
inseparably possessed by one Prince alone. This Representation, in which he
labors to lodge solely all the Dispositive, is but a pursuit and a means to
attain to the principal End which he has proposed to himself of the
Indivisibility: but by the discourse of this Author, the Cause would be of
less strength then its Effect, the Accessory would have the place of
Dispositive, and the Principal serve only as a simple Narration.

This Truth is confirmed by the Constitution of Charles, An. 1549. whereby
though he does confirm the Succession of the Daughters for want of Heirs-male,
he supposes notwithstanding for the ground of the Sanction, Nos per Pragmaticam
Sanctionem super Jure Successionis universalis harum Provinciarum Inferioris
Germaniae patrimoniali ac haereditario Jure ad nos pertinentium providere
velle, quod scilicet eaedom Provinciae nostrae in una Massa deinceps beneficio
Repraesentationis generaliter in Successione Principis locum recipientis
serventur, nec amplius unquam ab invicem separentur. And to show that it was at
the desire of the People, he adds, Id quad jam antea a Statibus Geldriae
petitum. Whereby two things are clearly seen: The one, That the Representation
was not introduced into this Sanction, but as a means for attaining to the
principal End of the Indivisibilitie: the other, That when he admitted the
Daughters in the defect of Heirs-male, he would yet preserve in them the same
Indivisibilitie, and that they might not be divided even among many Daughters,
as is certain by the words following: Ne scilicet a Ducatu nostro Brabantiae
and Comitatu Hollandiae (in quibus Foeminae ex antiqua consuetudine
succederunt) distraherentur. And in the dispositive Clause wherein he confirms
the Succession of Women he does expressly add this Restriction; non
exstantibus Masculis haeredibus succedere possint. Whereby it is seen that in
no case they can succeed, so long as there are any Heirs-male.

I should never have done, if I would stop at each of their Cavills: The
Declaration which he does allege of Philip the Second is one, but so ill
fitted to the purpose, that it makes me pity them. He says that in the
Confirmation which he made of the Privileges of Brabant, he declared, that the
only Estates that should be united for perpetuity with Brabant were Limbourg,
Antwerp, and those beyond the Maese. Here by the way it is to be observed that
Limbourg was never united to Brabant, as Stockmans does note, fol. 174. But
what Union soever there might be, should they be so ill Logicians as to infer
from thence, that the other Provinces are not indivisibly united with Brabant?
Should it be possible that he should hope to throw dust in our eyes with this
petty Equivocation, by the which he confounds and improperly applies the word
Union? Antwerp, as he says, was united to Brabant as to a principal Body, to
enjoy with it the same Privileges and Seals, and to make up together the
Jurisdiction of one Council: We never pretended that by the Sanction of Charles
the Vth the other Provinces were united after the same manner, nor that they
ought to participate with them in their Privileges. See, I beseech you, what
force this Argument has: Antwerp alone and Limbourg were united to the Duchy
of Brabant, to enjoy the same Privileges; therefore the Sanction of Charles the
Vth never intended that the other Provinces and Brabant it self should be
preserved in a Mass, to be inseparably possessed by one Prince alone. Antwerp
and Limbourg only shall enjoy the particular Privileges of Brabant; therefore
all the other Provinces shall be untied from all Union, and may pass under
different Masters. Philip the Second prohibited the Infanta Isabella to divide
the Provinces; therefore they were not united. On the contrary, this very
Prohibition must suppose that they were united, since nothing can be divided
but what is united. It makes my heart bleed to see poor Aristotle so often
buffetted, and the whole form of right Reasoning, which he so ingeniously
invented, overthrown, On the contrary, the Prohibition of Philip the IId is a
Confirmation of the Sanction of Charles the Vth. And if the Discourse of this
Author could take place, all the Commandments of God and of Kings might be
destroyed: When a Father commands his Child not to be a Murderer, it might in
the same manner be inferred that God has not forbidden Murder; when a King
exhorts his Subjects to Fidelity, a consequence might be drawn from thence,
that they are not obliged to Fidelity by natural Duty and by their Oath; then
which nothing can be more irrational.

He goes astray after the same manner by taking the Effect for the Cause, when
he says that this Sanction was only made to introduce the Representation into
the Succession of the Sovereign. Whereas, quite contrary, it appears by the
terms before alleged, that the Representation is introduced only to establish
the Indivisibilitie, which he himself acknowledges two lines thereafter, Dial.
p. 4^.
by a terrible Giddiness of head, when he mentions the Cause which gave
occasion to this Representation: To hinder that all these Estates, which the
want of Representation exposed to too frequent Changes, should not be so easily
separated by the diversity of Customs. We have now no more need of witnesses;
habemus fatentem reum: and we ought also to infer thereupon, that the Right of
Devolution being much more subject to produce these over frequent Changes then
the want of Representation; since that the Sanction would introduce the latter
for this cause only, it is not credible that its intention was that the Prince
should be subject to the other, P^g. 163.
being the same Reason does more powerfully serve to destroy the Devolution in
the Sovereign Succession, then it does to establish the Representation in it.

In fine, they stumble at every step, and it would require an Herculean pains
to help them up again every time that they fall. It seems that they have had no
other care, but to make up a heap of Arguments, without discretion and without
choice, to dazzle rather then to persuade, and to obtain by their number that
which they can never hope for from the strength of their Reasons.

The Author of the Rights of the Queen follows the same track, and loses
himself in his own Labyrinth, who is not ashamed to utter this Proposition;
That if the Prince be ancienter then the Custom, Fol. 168.
nothing can be more glorious for him then to submit himself unto it, etc.
since it is certain that, in this case, the Custom is but an Emanation of the
particular practice of the Sovereign Family.

Here are as many Errors as words. It is certain that most of the Customs take
their beginning from the desire of the People, and from their private
advantage; they do frame to themselves their own Custom, of which afterward
they desire the Prince's Approbation, who grants or refuses it as he thinks
good: but by approving it he does not subject himself to it. Nor is it less
evident that diverse Customs are convenient for the People, which would be most
prejudicial to Sovereign Families; as in effect that of the Devolution would
be. It is certain likewise that if the Prince be ancienter then the Custom, he
has already the Right and the Form of his Succession regulated before the
Custom, and this Regulation, being a Sovereign Law, can never be altered by a
particular and inferior Constitution. He does profess in another place, Page
166.
that the Sovereignties have particular attributes which do distinguish them
from other Goods. And in what ought they to be more distinguished then in that
which regards the Succession, which imports more to the subsistence of
Sovereignties then any other thing? He himself does acknowledge it in the same
page, as their being Independents; and yet notwithstanding he will make them to
depend upon the Custom: Vnalienables; yet he will subject them to a Right
which at every moment would be the occasion of their Alienation: and
Indivisibles; yet he denies that the Emperor Charles the Vth had any power to
unite them together. He adds, that notwithstanding this difference, they have
many things common. I do agree with him; but that which they may have of common
does not proceed from the particular Custom. The Comparison of which he makes
use to prove it is ravishing and marvellously well applied, it is of a Man, who
participates together both of the Animal and Reasonable nature. See then
according to my apprehension how he pretends thereupon to form his Argument. As
Man, though superior to Animals, does participate of their Nature, and has
something in him which is common to them: so the Prince, notwithstanding he is
elevated above the People, yet does not cease to be subject to their Local
Customs. Risum teneatis Amici? But to demonstrate by this Principle that the
Prince is subject to Local Customs, we must by a Moral which is altogether new
establish this foundation, That the Senses ought to give law to Reason, and
that the Sensual appetite must govern the Will; otherwise all this discourse
would prove nothing: this strange Doctrine would make all the Schools rage, and
would not take but among the false Sectators and the bad Interpreters of
Epicure. Let us say then, the better to conform our selves to a more regular
prudence, that if Man in some occasions ought to raise himself above the
Senses, and free himself from the subjection of the inferior part; it is
principally in those Actions wherein the eternal Succession is concerned, which
is his principal and last End: and that to descend by this Rule from the moral
to the politic part, it must be concluded that there is no case wherein the
Sovereign ought to be more independent of popular Customs, then in those of the
Sovereign Successions, which ought to constitute the Felicity of the State,
and to establish a little kind of Eternity in his Family.

But I perceive that I my self do go astray by playing the Philosopher with
these Sophisters, and that I depart insensibly from my first design of
destroying their Maxims in one bulk, without tying my self to every parcel of
their works. Let us pass then to the second Rule by which those Sovereign
Successions are to be measured which do hold of the Empire, to wit, by the
usual Custom in the Imperial Fiefs.

It was never heard of in the Empire that any Sovereign Fief should be
regulated by the Local Customs, that it should be subject to the Right of
Devolution; and even the greatest part do totally exclude Daughters, and pass
to the Collateral Lines in defect of Heirs-male.

I have already shown that the Cause and the principal End of such Successions
is an essential Reason of State, which absolutely requires, for the good of the
People, and the conservation of great Families, that the Sovereignties should
be maintained as long as possibly may be in the same Line; and that the
practice of the contrary would expose the States to continual Revolutions: that
this End is incomparably more noble, more elevated, and more necessary, then
that which does prefer in some places among private persons the Daughters of
the First Bed before the Males of the Second: that the Reasons which in some
sort may make this Custom tolerable among the Subjects, does no ways concern
the Prince nor the Sovereignty: that Second Marriages, which be oftentimes the
cause of the ruin of private Families, are ordinarily the prop and
sustentation of Princes Houses: that that which others do voluntarily with an
intemperate Incontinencie, these are obliged to do it by an absolute
necessity, for the good of the State and their Family: that the Reasons which
have given occasion to this Custom have no manner of relation to the
Sovereigntie; from whence it must be concluded that the Custom can take no
place in the case where all the causes for which it was introduced cannot
concur, and where all the advantages which arise from it are counterbalanced
by greater Inconveniences.

It remains to see what was the ancient practice, and received in all times and
without interruption. The Authors of these Libells, having consumed their
spirits in seeking from all parts materials to make their Volume big, could not
yet find one single Example which is truly comprehended within the fact in
question: Let us try if we shall be more successful. The Sieur Stockmans
cites some very convincing, to wit, Stockm. de Jure devol. cap. 21. nu. 9.
the Surrender which Charles the Vth made to his Son Philip the Second of the
Estates of the Low Countries, calling thereunto, failling of him, the Heirs
which he should have of his Second Marriage, to the exclusion of Charles the
Son of Philip and Mary of Portugal of the First Bed; to whom nevertheless as
well as to his Father, because of the Widowhoods of Charles and Philip, the
right of Succession had belonged, if the Devolution could have taken place in
the Sovereign Succession. As also the Donation that Philip the Second made to
his Daughter, the Infanta Isabella, under Restrictions which were altogether
inconsistent with the right of Devolution, and which could not have been
inserted to the prejudice of the Duchess of Savoy and her Successors. And if
the Devolution had taken place in Sovereignties, the Pretension of the Queen of
France would have been at this day annihilated by that of the Duke of Savoy,
who would be the true and lawful Successor to it. He cites also other
Examples, which the Reader may see in the same Chapter: but, because they are
all of Charles the Vth downwards, I will resume the business from a higher
source, that I may be the abler to prove the Antiquity and the Continuation of
this Custom.

William, Butkens Troph. de Brab. fol. 627.
Son of Godfrey the IIId Duke of Lothier and Brabant by Imaine de Los his
second Wife, and Brother to Henry the Son of the same Godfrey of a former
Marriage by Marguerite of Limbourg, had for his share the Lands of Perweys,
Ruysbroeck, and others; which Godfrey could not have done if the Devolution had
taken place, since by the death of Marguerite all the Right must have entirely
been devolved to Henry, the first, and all manner of Alienation prohibited to
the Father, to the prejudice of the first Son.

The same Godfrey, after the death of his Wife, Idem, fol. 129, and 130.
the case of the Devolution (if it had taken place in the Sovereigntie) having
of necessity happened, married Henry his eldest son Duke of Brabant to Matilda
the Daughter of Matthew of Flanders, Earl of Boulogne, in the year 1179, and
there were inserted into the Contract of Marriage Clauses altogether repugnant
to the Devolution: viz. That Godfrey, who then was a Widower, gave to his Son,
to endow his Spouse, Bruxells, Vilvorde, Vccle, and Ruysbroeck, upon condition
that if Henry deceased before Matilda, she should enjoy the use and profit of
those Lands during her life, whether she had any Children by him or not; and in
case Matilda came to die before the said Henry, without leaving any Issue
behind her, then the Earl of Boulogne, her Uncle, should hold Bruxells until
that he was re-imburst of her Portion. If the Devolution had taken place, the
Father could not have disposed of those Lands, nor assigned Portions out of
them to the Princesses Uncle, to the prejudice of his Son and of his Children,
to whom the Right would have been devolved by the death of Henry, unless that
in the same Treaty of Marriage they had expressly renounced the Devolution, of
which notwithstanding no mention is made in the Contract.

Here we must also observe, that in the same Contract the said Godfrey does
appoint his Son Henry to succeed to him as his Heir in the Duchy, and his
other Lands and Possessions. This appointment would be superfluous and
ridiculous, if the Right had been already fallen to him by Devolution. And,
which is yet more remarkable, he does appoint him with a Reservation too of the
District of Dorten and the County of Arescot, and excludes even the Sons which
shall be born of this Marriage: which destroys from the very foundation the
pretended Devolution in the Sovereigntie, and is directly repugnant to the
Interpretation which the Authors of these Libells do make of this Custom:
because if the Devolution be a true Succession, and do attribute the Right of
Propriety to the Children during the Father's life, Godfrey could not have
appointed his Son in the Succession as Heir after his decease, because he
should have already been so during his life. And much less could he have cut
off from a Succession already acquired and devolved to him two Portions so
considerable as the District of Dorten and the County of Arescot, nor have
reserved to himself the disposition of them in favor of others.

The same Godfrey consented to a Donation which Gerard his Son of the Second
Bed had made to the Abbey of Everbode, Butkens, fol. 131.
of certain Lands situated in the Parish of Tessenderlo; and he himself gave to
the Abbot of St. Sepulchers at Cambray certain Lands situated in the Land of
Bierbeeck, for the founding of a Provostrie; which he could not have done, to
the prejudice of the Prince of the former Bed, if the Devolution might have
taken place in relation to Sovereigns, and if this Right had been a true
Succession: nevertheless the said Donations have remained inviolable, without
the intervening Consent of Henry, and without being subject to any Recoverie
either on his part or his Successors.

The same Trophies of Butkens will furnish us with other Examples of this
nature; which by Consequences and necessary Inductions show that neither
Princes nor their Sovereignties were ever subject to this particular Rule, nor
that in reference to them the pretended Sentence of the Emperor Henry was put
in practice.

But let us come to the Donation of the Low Countries made by Philip the Second
in favor of the Infanta Isabella. All its Clauses and all its Circumstances
are directly opposed to the Right of Devolution. Philip the Second could not
have given what was not his own; a Donation supposes the Propriety to be in
him who gives: the Consent of the Prince his Son would not have been required,
nor ought to have been passed, as afterward it was on the 6. of May 1598, if
the Right of the Succession and of the Propriety had been fully devolved to
the Infanta's his Sisters. This Donation, which was contrary to the Devolution,
and also to the prejudice of a third person, would not have been received in
that quality by all the Estates, as it was the 21. of August of the same year:
Philip could not have assigned them in Portion to his Daughter, as it is
certain he did by the same Act, and that the Archduke Albert accepted and
possessed them by this Title.

To get out of this bad way, they have recourse to two Shifts, which serve only
but to discover their Weakness. They acknowledge that Philip gave these
Provinces to his Daughter, Dialogue fol. 55.
but that it was to do himself honor by an Imaginary Liberality. The Duke of
Savoy ought not to have liked this Game: whence came it then that he did not
oppose himself to this Imaginary Liberality, which was really destroying all
his Right? Is it likely that all the Estates of the Country and the Tribunals
of the Provinces would have approved a Chimerical Surrender, and connived at
this Cheat, and under the sole Title of a false Donation tendered their Oaths
for the whole to her who should not have been Heir but of a part?

The Archduke Albert's Treaty of Marriage with the Infanta Isabella does not
only confirm this Donation, but is also an evident proof, that the sole End of
the Pragmatick Sanction of the Emperor Charles the Vth above mentioned was the
Union and the Indivisibilitie of all these Provinces. It may be seen in the 21.
Article, And forasmuch, etc. toward the end, where he speaks in these terms:
Provided always to be kept and observed inviolably all and every one of the
Conditions above specified, and the Pragmatick made by the Emperor, my Lord
and Father, of Immortal Memory, who may he rest in Glory, in the month of
November Anno 1549. concerning the Union of the said Low Countries, without
consenting or granting any Division of them, or Separation, for what case
soever, nor in any manner of ways whatsoever. And a little beneath this in the
same Article he does oblige both the Archduke and the Infanta, to sustain,
carry on, and maintain all and every the Rents, Pensions for life, and all
other Gifts whatsoever, which we and our Predecessors have given, assigned, or
granted. He speaks all along therein as true Proprietor; he grants these
Provinces with those things charged upon them, which he could not have imposed
if the Right of Devolution did reach the Sovereigntie; and much less oblige the
Infanta, to whom the Right had been devolved. In all the other Articles he
speaks as absolute Master: Item, upon condition, and not otherwise. How can it
be imagined that the States would have approved so many Clauses contrary to the
Devolution, if they had believed that it had place in reference to their
Princes?

I believe that they shall have nothing to reply, if I make them see that Henry
the Great (whom the most Christian King has chosen for his Illustrious Model)
did authorize this Donation by a solemn Treaty, and did acknowledge that
Philip the IId was the right Proprietor of these Provinces, and could dispose
of them, either by last Will, Donation, or in any other manner. This great
Monarch and his wise Ministers knew perfectly the nature, the use, and the
extent of the Devolution in Provinces so near adjacent to France. If they had
conceived that it had had any place in the Sovereignties, they would have been
careful not to have treated upon any thing of that kind, which might have
prejudged a Right to which the Kings of France might sometime have acquired
some Interest. Those who treated in the King's name were too circumspect, and
too well versed in the practice, to suffer that any Clause should be inserted
in a Treaty contrary to the Customs, and which one day might prejudice their
Crown. From whence it is to be concluded, that the previous Acknowledgment
which they made of this Donation which Philip the II. designed even at that
time to make, is a manifest confession of their real sense, that the Right of
Devolution had no place in the Sovereignties, as may be seen by the VI. Article
of the Treaty of Vervins: It Is also mutually agreed and consented to, in case
his Catholic Majesty should either give or transfer by Testament, Donation,
or in any other way, under any Title whatsoever, to the most Serene Infanta
Isabella his eldest Daughter, or to others, all the Provinces of the
Low Countries, with the Counties of Burgundy and Charolois, that all the said
Provinces and Counties shall be comprehended in the present Treaty, etc. In
this Article France does acknowledge that not only Philip the IId might
surrender, give, and transfer them to his eldest Daughter, but also to
others. Likewise the said Infanta, or he in favor of whom the said Lord the
King should dispose thereof, etc.

The Authors of these Libells must needs accuse not only one of the greatest
Kings that ever reigned amongst them of a most gross Ignorance, but also the
ablest Ministers that have governed their Affairs, to wit, Monsieur de Belieure
and de Sillery, or they must confess that nothing they have alleged against
this Donation has any subsistence but in their own imagination.

The same, in the same page.
But the States of the Duchy (as the Authors of these Libells do pretend) did
protest that that Donation should not prejudice their Rights, Customs, and
Privileges. In these few words there be two evident Untruths. The first is,
That there will never be found, neither in the Annals nor the Archives, any
Protestation of the States against this Donation; and the very texts which he
does cite do clearly show that they accepted of it in the quality of a
Donation. Scripto Ordinibus caveat, duodecimum Cessionis Articulum Belgicarum
Provinciarum Libertati and Privilegiis nihil derogatum aut detrimento fore.
This cannot be called a Protestation against the Act, but only a simple
Reservation of their Privileges, under which they accept the Surrender, and
qualify it even by this Title; which they would have taken good heed not to
have done, if it had been their intention to except the Right of Devolution,
which must have been destroyed by this word of Surrender, and consequently the
acceptance would have been contrary and prejudicial to the Reservation.

The other is, That in the same Declaration there is no mention made of the
Customs, as the Writer does artificially add of his own head, by a privilege
which such Authors possess by a prescription of many Ages, to say whatever
they please without fear of punishment. Nothing is said in the passage which he
cites, but, de Libertatibus and Immunitatibus, and lower, de observandis
Patriae Privilegiis. Now he himself confesses that the Right of Devolution is a
kind of Penalty introduced out of hatred to Second Marriages. It is not then
probable that they meant to comprehend under the name of their Privileges and
Liberties a burthensom Restriction which bridles them, and against which they
themselves do every day seek after Precautions and remedies in their
Testamentarie dispositions. The Reservation of the States to preserve their
Privileges and Immunities was not done either to oppose or contradict the
Surrender, which they did freely accept, but only to hinder lest by that
Cession they should fall to be in a worse condition then that in which they
were under Philip the IId, and did not go farther then to oblige the person to
whom the Surrender was made to the same conditions to which the Surrenderer was
bound.

The Author of the Queen's Rights does yet run out with more license upon the
same Subject, Page 206.
by falsely citing of Meteren in his History of the Low Countries. To make this
Historian speak to his fancy, he adds to his Narrative a mere Fiction,
contrary to the sequel and to the sense of his story. Those of Brabant (says
he) were so afraid lest it should be thought that the Infanta Isabella, to whom
this Duchy belonged by the right of Devolution, should be conceived to hold it
by virtue of the Donation, because no mention was made of any Right. In the end
he applies to this false Preamble that which Meteren relates of the
Protestation made by the States, that this Donation might not hurt nor
prejudice their Rights and Privileges; wherein also he does maliciously change
the terms of the Protestation, which speaks not of the Rights of the Duchy,
as he alleges with his accustomed ingenuitie, but only of their proper Rights
and Privileges, de observandis Patriae Privilegiis, as the passage it self
expresses, which he has cited elsewhere. But at the bottom there will nothing
be found in Meteren that can either directly or indirectly prove, that the
States of Brabant made the least reflection upon the Right of Devolution, nor
that they refused to accept the Donation in this quality; but, on the
contrary, that they admitted it under the same Title, as also the Consent of
the Prince Philip, which was contrary to the Right of Devolution, and that the
repugnancie which this Historian says diverse showed in this rencounter was
founded on other causes, viz. That it would be held strange, that the Eldest
Daughter should be bestowed upon a The Archduke Albert whilst he was a Cardinal.
Prince who was provided of many Ecclesiastical Estates, and to prefer him
before the Elder Brothers, as the Emperor was. Which he delivers as discourses
and popular Reflections, according to the style of Historians; and would not
have omitted to have spoken of the Devolution, if it had been but mentioned
among the ordinary reasonings of the people. Even the States of the Province
(as this same Author reports) never resolved to mingle the Devolution among
those Causes which they alleged for the aversion which they had to the change
of a Master, but, Meteren l. 9. fo. 412.
on the contrary, they produce other Reasons which seem to destroy the
Devolution. Their principal Reason was, Because they had lived so many years
under the just and equitable Government of so good a King, and that remembering
so many Favors, they conceived that it was not possible to quit their
Obedience to him without a continual remorse of Conscience. Which shows that
they acknowledged him for their true Proprietor, else what remorse of
Conscience could they have had for going to their lawful The Infanta Isabella.
Heir by the Right of a Succession Devolved? of which, according to the French
doctrine, the King his Father possessed but the bare use and profits, whereof
he might have denuded himself without giving them any cause to think strange of
it, since that is ordinarily practiced by the Fathers in the Marriages of their
Children, to release unto them the enjoying of those Proprieties which they
have acquired. What follows renders the business much more evident. They
submitted themselves nevertheless (notwithstanding the considerations which
they had to the contrary) to the will of the King, and alleged this Reason for
their so doing, viz. to give them for their Princess, his most dear Daughter,
of whose goodness and Virtue they had heard so much, and withal for coupling
her with a Husband, etc. They do consent in consideration of the goodness and
Virtue of the Princess, and the great Qualities of the Husband, at the same
time when they profess that he gives her unto them for their Princess; they
acknowledge her not to have been so before: and if it is the King who gave her
unto them, it cannot be the Devolution that placed her in the Throne. It is for
this that in the Consent which they gave to it they say, that it was to conform
themselves to the will of the King, and provided that his Majesty would
command them so to do: which they would never have said, if so be that they
had held the Infanta for their lawful Princess by a Right already devolved.
This Consent clearly expresses, that it was in the quality of a Portion and
Donation that the States did receive the Infanta to be their Mistress, as is
manifest by the relation of the said Historian; and that they themselves
required the Consent of the Prince her Brother, in which he does declare that
he was induced thereunto for certain great Reasons and respects of the Common
good, and to the end that his Sister might he provided for according to her
quality and great merit: he he qualifies it also with the title of Donation.
All this is so contrary to the Devolution, that I cannot admire enough the
blindness of this Writer, in having touched upon this string so palpablie out
of time.

But though by an excess of Indulgence all that they allege were granted to be
true, they are not able to draw any other consequence from it, but that the
States, by accepting of this Surrender, did pretend that they were to remain in
their ancient Rights and forms of Government: and this cannot be understood of
any but those Rights which relate to themselves, without pretending thereby to
touch those of the Prince, nor to subject the Sovereignty to their Customs,
since in effect that would have been an unjust and ridiculous Pretension, and
which would have made to their own Disadvantage.

Let us remove from this point to that of the Surrender and perpetual
Alienation made in favor of the Estates of the United Provinces, by Philip the
IVth, Which was done at the Treaty of Munster in the year 1648,
of one part of Brabant and some other Provinces. This Donation ought to be
null according to all the Rules of these Writers, not only for what concerns
the Lands where the Devolution has place, but for all the others likewise. As
to the first, it is certain that the Case of the Devolution was already come to
pass in favor of the Prince Balthazar, and, failing of him, in favor of the
Queen of France, when they were surrendered: If this Right be a present and
certain Succession, if it be a Propriety which can never validly be renounced,
it is the duty of the States of the United Provinces to think either handsomely
to restore them, or else to defend their possession by the Sword: the Sentence
is already pronounced, The most Christian King, not out of a covetous desire to
conquer, but according to the precise obligation of his Duty and Conscience, is
reduced to the necessity of entertaining them in the same fashion as he does
us; he cannot abandon the Rights of his Wife, without failing in what he owes
unto her, and what his own proper reputation requires of him.

As to the other Lands, if it be true, as they affirm it to be, that
Sovereignties are unalienable; that Princes cannot renounce their Rights in
prejudice of their Successors, even by public Treaties; that those are Rights
of Blood, inseparably tied to all the posterity; that they may pretend Relief
even against Treaties of Peace upon the score of Laesion; in fine, if no
consideration neither of Advantage nor of public Faith can prevail against the
rules of litigious wrangling; behold the Treaty of Munster, concluded with the
States of the United Provinces, reduced to the same inconveniences with the
Pyrenean.

Some Objections remain to be satisfied in particular, which I have not yet
touched but very superficially, though they be sufficiently repelled by the
Principles which I have established.

They oppose to us in the first place the Sentence of the Emperor Henry in the
year 1230. The same Counselor Stockmans has very pertinently answered it in
the 21. Article of his Treatise; to which I will only add, that this Sentence
can have no relation to the Right of Devolution, for these following Reasons.

1. The first is, That the whole Narrative on which he founds the Decision of
the Emperor is merely the Invention of this Scribbler, in regard that neither
the Sentence nor the History do mention any such thing, and that it is
repugnant to the Text even of the Sentence, which speaks not of the Propriety,
but only interdicts the Alienation, which in it self was not permitted to him
without the Consent of the States: and what he adds in the Sentence, Matrem
habuerit, and illa fit mortua, shows that it ought not to be understood of the
Sovereigntie, but of some patrimonial Goods belonging to the Prince which might
have been affected with the Portion of the deceased Mother. For if this
Sentence were founded upon the Right of Devolution, he would have made of it
some express mention, as well as have alleged another cause for it: besides
that, as I have already made appear, the Devolution does not absolutely hinder,
and does not annull the Alienation, but renders it only subject to be
rescinded after the death of the Father, remaining notwithstanding valid in
case the Son comes to die before him. 2. This Sentence would be unjust and
contrary to the same Custom, if it were founded upon the Devolution, because
this Right does not give the Children that horrible power presently to seize
upon the Goods of the Father in his lifetime, because of a simple Alienation,
but gives them only a hope to enjoy them after his death, and the right to
pretend Relief, and to re-demand what has been alienated during his life.
Otherwise, it were to authorize an unjust Violence, which would stifle the Law
of Nature; it were to make Children Curatours to their Fathers, and to give
them an opportunity to drive them from their Throne. From whence it is
necessarily to be concluded, that the Sentence of the Emperor ought to have
some other motive, which can be no other then that which I have related. In
effect, seeing that it is not founded but upon the Death of the Duchess, it
must needs have had some other cause then that of Devolution, in regard the
Emperor's Argument would not be concluding, The Duchess is dead, then her
Husband cannot Alienate; it being certain that he may not only in some cases,
but that the Duchess also her self might have renounced this Right by a
Disposition amongst the living, or by one relating to her death. 3. If this
Sentence did concern the Goods of the Sovereigntie, it would determine nothing
at all, by reason that by their own nature they cannot be Alienated without the
Consent of the States, who themselves would have been the first to have opposed
this Alienation; unless their Assent had been required, and that they had
judged it to be founded on the benefit of the State; in which case the Emperor
with Justice could not have hindered the effect thereof. 4. This Sentence was
given in favor of an Heir-male, and does not infer that the Daughters of the
First Bed ought to exclude the Sons of the Second. Indeed it is horrible and
repugnant to Reason, only to imagine that such a case should ever happen,
whereby we might see a Daughter upon the Throne to the exclusion of her
Brother, and the Son of a Sovereign become Subject to his Sister: this shocks
Nature, which has given the preeminence to Men, and the rights to command, by
reason of the excellency of their Sex. The Author of the Dialogue strives to
get out of this difficulty by restricting this general inconvenience to the
particular fact which is actually in question: Fol. 52.
but he runs from the Lists, and eludes the point in controversy. He speaks
thus: The Catholic King shall command in his Estates, and the most Christian
Queen in hers, without either of them having any Jurisdiction over the other.
This Subterfuge is very pleasant and most handsomely fansied; at present he
changes the person of an Advocate into that of a Politician, and makes use of
the Expedient when he finds not his advantage in litigious wrangling. It is
happy that Philip the IVth left unto his Son other Estates: But if he had been
only Duke of Brabant, or Prince only of any one of the other Provinces to
which France does pretend, and that the Devolution had place as to
Sovereignties, the case had happened wherein the Prince his Son had become a
Subject to his Sister. And when we speak of the Monstrousness which this
Custom would produce in it self, and the Inconveniences which may generally
arise from thence, we do look upon the thing purely in it self, and not in the
present circumstance, which is out of the case of the Question, and holds no
manner of similitud^ ^^th it; because if the Duke of ^^abant do possess other
Kingdoms, it is a thing merely accidental in respect of the Duchy and of its
Customs.

In fine, all that is to be gathered from this Sentence is, that the Emperor
would not permit the Duke to alienate his Goods to the prejudice of his Son. We
cannot infer from thence any thing in favor of the Devolution, since there be
a thousand Imperial Sentences of the same nature for Fiefs, in which the right
of Devolution never reigned.

The second Objection is drawn out of the alleged and ill-applied Opinion of
some Doctors, who do maintain that when any difference about Feodal Customs is
in agitation, it is not to be regulated by those of the Lording, but by those
of the Serving Fief.

It is certain that all of them do speak in this place of those Differences
which arise upon the Serving Fiefs, which being neither so absolute nor so
privileged as the Lording, ought not to be measured by the same Rule: and this
makes altogether in our favor, to show the advantageous difference which there
is of the greater in regard of the lesser. Meanwhile they turn the Argument to
the opposite way, and in stead of acknowledging that this Reason is sufficient
to demonstrate the disproportion betwixt the one and the other, and that they
cannot be made equal, they will yet make use of it not only to equalize the
Lording Fief with the condition of the Serving, but even to subject it to and
regulate it by the same Custom; although the contrary does evidently appear
by the very Texts which they cite, and very falsely interpret. The Example is
most clear in the Citation which they do produce of Molina in his Treatise of
The Majorasque in Spain is the Eldest Son's Title.
Majorasques.

They wrest this passage many ways; the Dialogue drags it thus by the hair:
That the Crown of Spain being the first Majorasque of the Realm, Treatise of
the Rights of the Queen of France, fol. 170. Dialog. fol. 40.
it ought indispensablie to conform to the Laws which the Customs of the
Country have introduced for Majorasques. To discover the false artifice of this
Discourse, there needs no more then to confront it with the Text; and then it
will be seen that it is far from subjecting the Sovereignty to Local Customs in
order to the Majorasques; he wills, on the contrary, that all others should be
regulated according to the practice of the Crown: Ab eoque (he speaks of the
Kingdom) caetera primogenia tanquam a capite derivari, succedendique rationem
accipere: from whence he concludes, that every Process which arises from the
inferior Majorasques, sit secundum Leges ad Regni Successionem institutas
decidenda.

I cannot wonder enough at the blindness of this Author, who puts into our
hands the titles which condemn him, and yet presumes to turn them into a sense
altogether opposite. The Sovereign Fief, according to this Text, is the Rule of
all the rest: how can he then pretend that the particular Customs of other
Fiefs should be the Rule of the Sovereign? The Author of the Treatise of the
most Christian Queen's Rights makes use in substance of the same Subterfuge,
but with a little more modesty: Fol. 171.
he proves by the Authors which he cites, that the Majorasques of Spain were
instituted after the example of the Royalty; but he slips in something of his
own, that the Rules introduced for the Succession of the one were also
introduced for that of the other; though it be certain by all this Text, and by
what follows of Covarr. whom he cites, that the Sovereign Fief gives the Law to
all inferior ones, and consequently cannot receive it from their particular
Customs. But as he does falsely cite to us the Spanish Authors, to reduce the
Sovereignties to the Customs of the Country; let us see whether their own
French Authors will agree in this Maxim. Behold what Peter du Puy, Du Puy in
the Treatise of the Rights of the King t. c. on the Duchy of Bretannie.
very famous and of great credit among them, says upon the Subject of the
Succession of the Duchy of Bretannie, which makes altogether for our purpose.
If this Difference were among particular persons and inhabitants of a Kingdom,
it seems that the Infanta of Spain might have some appearance of Right by means
of the Custom, of which she will make use: but it being all public, and all
Royal, decided by the public. Rights of France, known to all the World, we may
justly be astonished how they have dared to prefer to them Local Customs,
which regulate nothing but Differences among private persons. Can any thing be
clearer then this? The Counselor Stockmans cites Molineus, and other Authors
both French and Germans, on this Subject, who confirm the same thing in such
express terms, that they leave no matter of doubt. The Reader may see them
cited in the 21. Chapter, and have recourse, if he think fit, unto the fountain.

The Author of the Dialogue is admirable in all, but he surpasses himself in
prettiness, when, outvying Pythagoras and Ovid in the changes of Forms, he
makes the Sovereigntie to appear under diverse Metaphysical Abstractions,
whereof Lawyers till now have been ignorant. At first he represents it like a
Queen, and in a moment after like a mean Citizen: one while he brings it upon
the Stage as a married woman, and then again as a Widow: he kills it, and
raises it to life again; exalts it, and debases it; and into what posture
soever he puts it, he has the dexterity to make it still act its part
handsomely. When it is needful to pursue the Cause by Arms, then (forsooth) is
it a Sovereigntie that holds of none but God, and that may admit of no other
Judge: when he will dispute it in the Quiddities of Law, it is a simple
Inheritance, subject to the Law of the People. When the Renunciation is treated
of or the Testament, he places it above Kings and Reason of State: but when he
brings the Devolution into play, he ranks it among Slaves. When it is his
pleasure, the Prince must be the Soul of the Customs: and when he finds it more
to his advantage, he subjects the Prince to it. And after all these long
windings, he finds at the end of his reckoning that he has fought only
against his own Shadow, and that all this Gallimaufrie tends to reduce the
Sovereign Successions to the low condition of private Fiefs.

Sovereignties do never die, according to the opinion of all the French
Doctors, their Rights and Prerogatives subsist still during the Interregnum,
changing of Masters alters nothing in their Jurisdictions and Preeminences.
This distinction is of no use where we handle the Right of Devolution, since
that it falls even whilst the Father lives: so that if the Devolution has
place in Sovereignties, and if this Right, as they pretend, be a true
Succession and Propriety, the Father in effect is no longer Sovereign, because
the Right of the Sovereignty is properly and radically affixed to the
Propriety, and not to the Prossessour of the Rents and Fruits. So that in
reference to the Sovereigntie the Prince is to be reckoned of as dead from the
first moment in which he is a Widower; he cannot be any more the Soul of the
Customs, since he has no more in him the principle of politic Life, being
deprived of the Propriety of his Dominion; and his Life might be called an
Interregnum, and his Sovereigntie a vacant inheritance. But what would follow
upon all this? Would this Sovereigntie without Master cease to be a
Sovereigntie? and though it could not establish new Laws, would it fall from
its ancient and natural Prerogatives? shall it be reduced either by the natural
or the civil Death of the Prince to the measure of the Successions of
Burgesses? would it become inferior to its self? If that were true, it would
follow that it is the Person of the Prince only which makes it Sovereign:
whereas, on the contrary, it is the other solely which puts him into the Rights
of Sovereigntie. Page 172.
In truth all the discourse which he makes on this Subject is so confused, that
it is not possible to comprehend what advantage he seeks from thence.

The third Objection is founded upon the Instrument of the Treaty of Marriage
of the Queen of France, in which Spain has covenanted a formal and express
Derogation to all contrary Customs: from whence he will infer this Consequence,
That if the Customs did not affect those Goods, Spain had never sought to be
disingaged of that whereby it was not bound. How can men who affect to be
thought Wits dare to fill Volumes with such Trifles as these be, without
apprehending the censure of honest men? The Derogation which was made to the
Customs is reciprocal, as much on France's side as on Spain's: and if the
Argument which he takes from it had any kind of force, it would conclude
against France, and render subject to the Customs of Bretanny and other
Provinces, as well as Spain to those of Brabant. But who does not see that this
Derogation does stretch it self only to such Customs which may tie the
Sovereigns, or serve as a pretext by right or wrong to form new Pretentions
against them? Experience teaches us that we cannot be too circumspect against
such turbulent spirits, and that it was not enough to take away the Root and
the true Causes of the evil, but that also it was necessary to cut off the
Shoots and Branches, and not only remove the Causes, but even the Pretexts and
Apparences.

Although the other Reasons which they do allege to establish their pretended
Right to the other Provinces, in which the Devolution is unknown, be entirely
ruined by this one Principle, which I think to have sufficiently proved that
Sovereign Successions neither ought to be nor can be regulated by Local
Customs; I will not omit to add one word more by the way touching this matter,
till such time as the Lawyers of those places, who are better versed in the
nature of their particular Customs, shall be able to give to the public a more
exact account of them.

He strives to prove by three Titles, that the Seigniourie of Mechlen belongs
to the Infanta by this same Right of Devolution. The first is the Custom,
which, as he pretends, has introduced the Devolution into that Land. I have
already shown that this does not concern the Crown. The second is the Union
which was made of this Land to the Duchy of Brabant by Philip surnamed the
Bold, and confirmed by the Emperor Charles the Vth. This Union does not render
it dependent upon Brabant, as it is really notorious that it does not. The
third is the established Practice, that all moveable Fiefs of Brabant are to be
regulated by the Feodal Custom of that Duchy. He does here contradict
himself, seeing that a moment after he has raised this Lordship to the degree
of a Sovereigntie, he will make it to depend on the Duchy of Brabant; wherein
he is grossly mistaken, being it is certain that it does not hold of it in any
kind. After he has declared it to be inseparable from Brabant, he will make it
subject to the Feodal Custom, by virtue whereof it might be alienated as well
as all the other particular moving Fiefs of the same Jurisdiction, which are
every day parted and divided among the Successors, as I have already made
appear. Let us say then, that they are Sovereignties united under the same
Privileges, but Independent of one another, which may have, and have in effect
different Customs; and that Sovereignties, as I have already proved, not being
subject to Devolution, that of Mechlen cannot have been made liable thereunto
by this Union, which takes nothing from it of its proper Sovereignty.

All that he alleges touching the Upper Gelderland, the County of Namur, and
the Duchy of Limbourg, seeing it is only grounded upon the Devolution, and
their Union with Brabant, falls of it self, I having before destroyed all the
Foundation. But he falls also here into another Error, supposing, either out
of a real or an affected Ignorance, that Gelderland and Limbourg are united to
Brabant, which will never be found.

The other Rights upon Hainault, Luxemburg and Burgundy, are almost of the
same nature, and founded on this false Principle, That Sovereignties ought to
be regulated by the Local Customs: wherein he falls into a new contradiction.
For in the Treatise of the Queen's Rights, Fol. 166.
in the place above cited, he confesses that the Prerogatives which the
Sovereign Fiefs have above others are, that they are unalienable, and
indivisible; and yet notwithstanding, by subjecting Luxemburg and Burgundy to
the Local Custom, he makes them both liable to division, Burgundy into three
parts, and Luxemburg into two: which renders yet more manifest what difference
there is betwixt the Lording and the Serving Fiefs, and the Prerogative which
the first have over the others by his own confession. And it cannot be
comprehended which way he pretends to reconcile these two opposites, that the
Sovereign Succession is indivisible in its own nature, and yet subject at the
same time to a Custom which would make it divisible. But finally, both in
Burgundy and in Luxemburg it is permitted unto Fathers to make Testaments and
Substitutions, and the most part of the principal Fiefs are provided to the
Eldest Sons by the dispositions of private persons: If then they will reduce
the Prince to the condition of a private person, and the Sovereigntie to the
practice of Local Customs, they should at leaft do him the favor to make him
equal in every thing with his own Subjects, and should not rob him, as they do,
of the power which the meanest Citizens enjoy, to dispose of their Goods by
Will as they think best themselves, without being obliged to leave any more
unto their Daughters then barely their Legal Portion. But the very Reason which
they do allege to overthrow the deceased King of Spain's Testament, does
plainly show the preeminence of Sovereign Fiefs, and that they are so
unalienable, that the Princes themselves have not the right to dispose of them
at their pleasure, to the prejudice of the Supreme Law of the State, which
being above the Prince himself, would be too much humbled if it were made
inferior to the Custom of Subjects.

It will be found throughout all the Annals, and by the course of Successions
in all these Sovereignties which they pretend to, that they were never
dismembered nor divided, though there have been frequently many Brothers and
Sisters, who, according to the particular Custom, might have had right to
pretend to the Division of them, if these Sovereign Fiefs were of the same
nature with the others.

Philip and John, Dukes and Earls of Burgundy, Mary, Charles his Grandchild,
Philip the Second, Third, and Fourth, left many Children; and yet this County
was never subject to Division, which the Author of this Libell labors to
extend from private Fiefs to Sovereignties. And if we will look yet higher into
the matter, it will be found that this Rule has always remained inviolable in
the Succession of its Princes.

Whereupon several Observations may be made. The first, That this order of
Succession has been common in all the Provinces to which France does pretend,
and that this shows that of their own nature they have always been indivisible.
2. That the Males have ever succeeded, to the exclusion of Daughters. 3. That
all the Local Customs which these Authors do allege have never taken place in
all these Sovereignties. 4. That the Right of Devolution never had effect in
reference to Princes on any occasion; otherwise Catharine Duchess of Savoy
had succeeded Isabella her Sister, and so much the rather because she had not
at all renounced.


It seems that he seeks only to divert himself in all the discourse he makes
touching the County of Hainault, The Treatise of the Queen's Rights, page 365.
and that by the Examples and Allegations which he produces he will set forth
his Memory to the prejudice of his Judgment. It is not here the place to
dispute whether Hainault be a Fief or a Freehold, since in the one as well as
the other Title the Right of the Queen is equally ill founded. The Sentence
which he cites in favor of Jaqueline Countess of Hainault against the Bishop
of Liege is wholly from the purpose, seeing it is out of controversy that the
Daughters do succeed in this County, failing of Heirs-male of the same Line.
The Point in question was to prove that the Daughters of the First Bed did
exclude the Males of the Second in the Succession of this County: yet of this
he is altogether silent, and all the remainder of his discourse is but a
straying and a vain Caracole out of his course; and after he has run himself
out of wind, without being able to make any Conclusion upon those Grounds which
have cost him so much pains to establish them, he retires like a Cacus into his
den of the particular Customs, which is his only refuge.

But it is here where he has lost all manner of Modesty, when he dares affirm
that the Custom of the place prefers the Daughters of the First Bed before the
Males of the Second. If he had consulted the Practitioners of the Country,
they would have informed him of the Use inviolably observed among them, and
founded upon their Custom, which gives the preference to the Males without any
distinction of Bed in the Succession of Fiefs; they would have let him see, in
the 13th Chapter Article 6. of their Customs, that the Daughters of the First
Bed should remain without any part in the Fiefs of their Fathers, and that the
Males of the Second should absolutely carry them by the disposition of the
Custom, according to their ordinary Rule; if the same Custom had not permitted
the Fathers and Mothers to provide a remedy in this by a special Disposition.
These are the very words of the Custom: Two Conjuncts having only one
Daughter may make and pass advice to her profit out of their Fiefs and Allodes
and main Farms, either wholly or in part of them, even by charging one piece or
more of the Rents hereditarie, or Viageres, revocable or irrevocable, as if
they had many Children; to the end that if from the said Conjuncts, or from
other subsequent Marriages, Sons should come, the said Daughter may have a
Portion. It is clearer then the day that the End of this Custom is, to give
the Fathers a remedy against the practice and the general Custom which prefers
the Males of the Second Bed, to hinder that the Daughters may not be left
without any part at all, as it would happen if the Parents did make no
disposition to the contrary. It is also seen by the same Text, that regularly
the Parents had not the power to make even this Disposition, and that they did
receive it only by this Custom, may make and pass advice: Therefore they
could not do it if this Custom did not give them the power, otherwise it
would be superfluous and without effect.

The 7th Article of the same Custom does so neatly interpret the preceding,
that if the Writer had but taken the pains to read it, he would not have so
inconsiderately hazarded upon a Proposition which tends to destroy all his
credit, the terms whereof are these: And though by the Law, if there be no
advice, the Fiefs patrimonial of the Survivor belong to the Son of the Second
Marriage, when there is only a Daughter of the First Bed; nevertheless the
said Fiefs being ordained by advice to the Daughter, (as in the preceding
Article) or to many of the former Marriage, such an Ordinance shall take place,
to the exclusion of the Son of the Second Marriage: which is in the public an
universal practice, and without contradiction throughout all this Province.

As to the Country of Namur, though particular Goods there be subject to the
Devolution, it is as true that the Sovereigntie is exempt from it; that it is
seen at this hour by the Contract of Sale which the Earl John made to the
behoof of the Duke of Burgundy in the year 1421. that he parted with the said
Country to this Duke upon Conditions which are inconsistent with the
Devolution, having sold it to him for himself and his Heirs which should be
Earls of Flanders, without ever being able to be separated from that County.
This Inseparabilitie does necessarily exclude the Devolution, and the rather,
because the County of Flanders to which it is united does no ways acknowledge
this Custom.

As for what concerns Artois, the Custom which he cites is not received; and
the disposition of the 27th Article which he alleges extends no farther then
to the Goods that are situated within the Sheriffdom of Arras, as is clear by
the preceding Articles, and in the Text of the same Custom, which cannot only
not be a Law to the Sovereigntie, but cannot so much as be a Rule to the other
Lands of the Country, which has its general and received Customs, failing
whereof it has recourse to the written Law. And though this Custom of Arras
gives some right to the Children upon the Goods of the Survivor, it is
notwithstanding far different from the Devolution in all its effects, as those
may observe who shall have the curiosity to read it. And it is so limited to
the place, that though it affects the Movables, yet those cannot be seized on
which are out of the Sheriffdom. But by the general and the received Custom of
this Province, there is neither Devolution nor Intervestiture, (as they call
it:) on the contrary, by the 139. Article the Survivor inherits one half of all
the Movables of the first deceased, and by the 134. the Husband has the
Administration of all the Goods of his Wife, and can alienate the Unmoveables
without her consent; which is altogether opposite to the Intervestiture. The
176. Article, which is urged against us, concerns not the Children of the First
Bed, so much the more, because that in the 94. the Eldest carries away all the
Fiefs without distinction of the first or second Marriage, and succeeds for his
share with the Children both of the one and the other Bed.

The Texts which he alleges against this drawn from the 4th Article, Chapter
105, and from the 3d Article, Chapter 91, and others, are applied by this
Author directly against the true sense, and the ordinary practice of the
Custom: For if we consider Hainault as a Fief, it is out of doubt that the
Males of the Second Bed do exclude the Daughters of the First; of which the
practice is so regularly observed in all the Tribunals of that Province, that
it is to go directly against a known Truth to bring this Question so much as
in Controversy. From whence it follows, that the Customs which he cites cannot
be understood in reference to Fiefs, but where there is a concurrence of Male
against Male, or of Daughter against Daughter, of two Beds; in which case the
Male of the first Marriage carries it before those of the Second Bed, and the
same does the Daughter of the First Marriage before those of the Latter: But
when the Question is betwixt Male and Female, the thing is out of all debate in
favor of the Male. But if, on the contrary, they will make Hainault pass for a
Freehold, it is indubitable that the Father may dispose of it by Advice and by
Testament, and also by Substitution; as is certain by the 6. Article of the
same, Chapter 105. The 9. Article of the 94. Chapter which he cites speaks
only of those Fiefs that come by Collateral Succession, and cannot be made a
Precedent in relation to Free-holds, which the Parents may dispose of: and that
which he adds, that according to the same Custom the direct Donations do pass
for Purchaces, is absolutely false, when the Donation is made under the Title
of a Portion: and it is a monstrous thing, that they should offer to make pass
for a Purchase the Reversion of those Provinces in the person of Philip the
IVth, since it was expressly provided in the said Donation, and that King
Philip the Second and the Prince his Son had never consented to it but under
this Clause of Reversion: so that in the recovery of these Fiefs they are
returned into their first nature, of being the Legal Patrimony of the Line of
Philip the IId; and they did always remain such, notwithstanding the Donation,
and chiefly in what relates to Hainault. For if it be considered as a Freehold
having been given with a Clause of Reverting, it stays always in its quality
of Patrimony; and if it be a Patrimonial Fief, it is in the same quality
likewise that it returns back again to the Giver. We might also say that as
being a Fief it could not be legally given away, since it is certain that the
Fathers in the County of Hainault may not dispose of them by Advice, but by way
of Disinheriting: so that on which side soever it be taken, it is impossible
France should find their advantage. But it is to dwell too long upon these
Customary practices, and to injure Princes, to weigh their Rights in so weak
and so unequal a Balance.

I cannot here omit, in passing, to desire the Reader to observe one notable
Artifice by which France would give a false weight to her bad Cause by begged
Authorities, and subtilie stolen by a witty Surprise. The Author of the Queen
of France's Rights makes his great Battery thereof, and thinks to confound the
Readers with these specious words, of Universities which France has consulted,
of Doctors from all parts who have subscribed to their Opinions; and, if we
will believe him, our Condemnation is decreed by the unanimous consent of all
the most renowned Lawyers. But because he is in possession of never reporting
matters of fact in their true circumstances, his bad memory ought to be a
little helped, and he made remember, that they have indeed attempted some
Universities and particular Doctors to maintain these Opinions, of which some
have fallen into the Trap, and now detest their inconsiderate Lightness; others
have had a sharper sight, and would give no Decision upon so indeterminate a
fact and ill explicated: The Question has been proposed to them under borrowed
names, without reducing it to the terms of the true Fact whereof at present we
are treating; they never mentioned to them that Sovereignties were the thing in
question, whereof some are Fiefs of the Empire, and others independent; they
concealed the Act and the Clauses of the Renunciation, as well as its Causes
and the End thereof; they never knew that it was covenanted by a Treaty of
Peace between two Kings, and agreed to by a Contract of Marriage inseparable
from that of the Peace; they were never told of the causes which France had
given to the delay of the Payment of the Portion; they took a great deal of
care not to make it appear that the Goods which they pretended to were
inseparably united among themselves by a Fundamental Law of the State; and
without furnishing them with any of those instructions which might have been
useful to them in the framing of a solid judgment, they satisfy themselves
with the mere questioning them upon the right of Devolution, and with the
inquiring of them whether a Father could alienate his Goods to the prejudice of
a Right devolved to his Children, If a Daughter might renounce a Succession
which was fallen to her, If a Minor might be relieved against an enormous
Laesion, If a Renunciation made purely in contemplation of the Portion ought to
hold, when the Portion has not been assigned upon the Goods of the Father, and
that the very payment had not its effect; and so of the rest. They have
answered to these Propositions according to the disposition of Common Law and
the practice of the Local Customs. But from whence comes it that the French
Writers, who have stuffed their works with so many unusefull Allegations, durst
never produce any of these Consultations, which, no doubt, (had they touched
the Case) would have been of more force then all that they have alleged in
their works? The cause of this silence is easily to be divined: It is by reason
that they could not spread them abroad without discovering at the same time the
vain illusion of their captious proceeding, and overturning all the strength of
these same Authorities, by detecting that they were all surreptitiously
extorted.

But to put the business home to them, we shall willingly consent that the fact
be reduced to its true Species, and that it be referred to the Judgment of the
most famous Universities in Europe, excepting only those who by preoccupation
of mind, or by the common subjection of their Country, are not in a condition
to think that which they ought, nor to utter ingenuously that which they think.

Let us conclude this Article then with a Dilemma, which proves demonstratively
that the Queen of France has no manner of Right, which way soever this
business be looked upon. For either the Devolution has place as to the
Sovereignties, or not. If it be received in them, then the The House of Savoy.
Successors of Catharine are the lawful Lords of all the Lands which are
subject to this Custom; this is unquestionable. But if the Devolution be of no
force in relation to Lording Fiefs, all the Pretensions which France does build
on this Title are annihilated. So that all this great heap of Titles and
inventions, which he has with so much solicitude gathered together to uphold
the Right of the Queen of France, cannot operate (though it were approved of)
but in favor of a third party; and thus thinking to plead the Cause of the
Queen, he has acted only for the Duke of Savoy.

ARTICLE VI.
A Discourse touching the Interest of Christian Princes in this War, and the
precife Obligation of the Estates of the Empire for the Warrantie of the Circle
of Burgundy etc.

THere are two Motives of different nature which ought to incite the Princes of
Christendom to undertake the defense of our Cause; the one is the Interest of
State, the other is a strict Obligation of Justice. The first regards generally
all the Potentates of Europe; the second is particular only to the Princes and
States of the Empire: the one depends upon their foresight and their wise
Conduct; the other is joined to the duty of the last, to the Fundamental Laws
of their State, to the Treaties of Peace and Warrantie, and to the reciprocal
bond which unites all the Members of this vast Body, which makes all its
Greatness and Glory, and which is the only foundation of its Quiet and Safety.
We will begin with the first, as being more universal, and more considered at
this day in the World; and that will guide us insensibly to the second; to let
both the one and the other see, that our Business is theirs, that our Commotion
is their Trouble, and our Fall their own Ruin. It is our business here to
uphold the Law of Nations which is common to all, and to hinder that Maxims
may not be introduced into the World which would destroy the whole Commerce of
mankind, and render humane Societies as dangerous as the company of Lions and
Tigers. Here it is our design to defend the public Faith of Treaties against
the Subtilties of litigious Pleading; to preserve the Law of Arms within the
Rules and Formalities which the universal Consent of all Nations has
established; and to remove out of the sight of Christendom a scandalous
Example, which by its lamentable consequences would expose the weakest to the
discretion of the more powerful, and would make Force the sole Arbiter of all
Processes. We treat of the way to stop the course of a rapid Torrent, against
the Impetuosity whereof Peace, Marriage, Oaths, Blood, Kindred, Friendship, and
Condescensions are not Banks strong enough to keep it within its Chanel. It is
our purpose to defend the common Bulwark against a vast Design, which has for
its cause nothing but the predominant desire of Conquests, for its end
Dominion, for its means Arms and Intricacies, nor for its limits any thing but
what Chance will prescribe. In fine, we are here to decide the fortune of
Europe, and to pronounce the Sentence either of its Freedom or Slaverie.

Here I resolve to shake off all manner of interessed thoughts which I may have
for my party; I will consider my self in this Article no more then as a simple
Citizen of the World: and to shelter my self the better from all suspicions of
Partiality, I will found my Discourse on no other Principles but those which I
shall draw out of French Authors.

Since the Providence of God was pleased to raise the most August House of
Austria to this high pitch of Greatness which has dazzled the eyes of Envy, we
have seen growing in the heart of France the lamentable seeds of this unjust
Emulation, which for so many years together has produced all the Misfortunes
and Troubles of Christendom. The principal Game of the French has been, to
diffuse this Jealousy everywhere, and to render its Jaundice contagious,
representing unto all the other Princes the Power of this August House as a
fearful Phantasm which would swallow them up, and giving themselves out for
the only Perseus's able to deliver fettered Europe from the fury of this
Chimerical Monster, whereof they had made to them a vain Bugbear. But
experience has made it known, that they only did render our Power suspected,
to raise their own; that they did fright others with us, only to make
themselves necessary; and did not offer them their protection, but to become
their Masters, and make them the Instruments of their Ends. Many have blindly
fallen into this snare, and, to avoid an imaginary Danger, have thrown
themselves into a real Precipice. This Artifice was so successful, that a part
of Europe put it self in Arms against the Valor and Good fortune of Charles
the Vth, and the profound Wisdom of his Successor: and all this Commotion was
founded upon one only Principle of State which the French Writers have
established with an extraordinary diligence, and upon which the Duke of Rohan
had made roll all his Treatise of the Interest of Princes; That there are two
Powers in Christendom which be like the two Poles, from whence all the
Influences of Peace and War do descend upon the other States.

From whence he draws this Maxim to regulate the Conduct of all other Princes,
That their principal Interest is to hold the Balance so equally betwixt these
two Great Monarchies, that neither of them, either by the way of Arms or
Negotiation, may ever come to prevail notably; and that in this Equality does
solely consist the Repose and Safety of all the rest. Though he does apply
this Maxim very ill to the particular use of France, and artificially serves
his turn with it as of a false Lure, insensibly to draw all the other
Potentates into the French nets; it is notwithstanding very wholesome in it
self, and if it had been managed with all the vigor and prudence which was
necessary to render it useful, Europe at this day should enjoy a perfect
Tranquillity. But many have been mistaken by a false supposition, that the
Power and the Designs of Spain were more to be apprehended then those of
France; and that by this very Reason of State they were obliged to put the
Counterpoise into the French Scale of the Balance.

It Is easy to believe that at present none will be found not fully undeceived
of this error in matter of Fact, which hitherto made them abandon their true
Reason of State. But to examine this Question in its fountain, and in every
circumstance belonging thereunto, it will be to the purpose to compare the most
flourishing State of the House of Austria under the glorious Reigns of Charles
the Vth and Philip the IId, and the Maxims of these two Princes, with the
present state and manner of acting of France; and then it will be clearly
discerned by this parallel, that all which was apprehended from us at that time
by a Panick fear, now is to be feared and prevented in regard of the French, by
the solid principles of a true Prudence.

To discourse well of this, we must consider the Situation both of the one and
the other Monarchy, the Genius of the Princes which govern them, and the
Inclinations of their People, the Maxims of their Government, and the
circumstances of their Conduct both passed and present. This would require a
large Discourse; I shall content my self only to touch, in passing by, the
Essentials, and leave the Consequences to the consideration of the Readers.

The Monarchy of Spain is a large Machine which cannot easily be shaken, but
which cannot likewise move with the Agilitie which is necessary to foreign
Enterprises. The Situation of this Monarchy is advantageous for its own
Defense, being compassed with the Sea and the Pyrenean Mountains: but it is
inconvenient for invading other States, because of the defect of a nearer
conjunction betwixt the Members thereof, which cannot hold any Communication
with one another but by the large Channels of the Ocean and the Mediterranean
Sea, which do expose their Designs to all the injuries of Weather, and to the
inconstancy of an Element on which no just measures can ever be taken. The
Union of the Empire to the power of Spain in the person of Charles the Vth was
rather a step to the design of becoming greater, then any addition to his
power: he espoused with the Empire all the Quarrels of Religion and of State
which the conjuncture of those times had stirred up in that great Body, which
did take up, in favor of others, the most part of his care and forces. In a
word, this powerful Monarchy seems to have been raised by God to be the
Bulwark of the rest, against the Turk in Hungary and in Italy, against the
Moors in Spain, and against France both in the Low Countries and in Italy: But
the neighborhood of these three Powers by which it is environed is a strong
bar to stop its Designs, if it should endeavor to form too vast ones.

The Genius of its Princes is suitable to its Situation; They are naturally
Courteous, and inclined to Virtue; and if they have exceeded in any thing, it
never was but in Goodness. Charles the Vth loved noble Glory; but he had so
little Ambition, that he resigned the Empire to his Brother, and all his
Kingdoms to his Son, and used his Victories with so great Moderation, that he
reaped no other benefit thereby, then the Honor to have overcome, and the
satisfaction to have preserved his Realms.

Philip the Second, according to the confession of the Duke of Rohan himself,
had no inclination at all to Arms, nor ever took them up but for his Defense,
or out of necessity to humble those who fomented Rebellions within his
Kingdoms.

It is to join two inconsistent things, to represent him in one and the same
time as an enemy to War, and yet ardent to obtain Conquests. His Successors
have been endowed with so rare Clemency, that their activeness had never
appeared to the eyes of the World, if the necessity of their defense had not
excited and in a manner constrained them to show themselves. The people of
Spain, and of the other Kingdoms which live under the same Dominion, are
naturally friends to Quietness, enemies to Noveltie, satisfied with their
present Condition, and have not the least propension or itching to trouble
their Neighbors. But if we consider the Maxims which these great Princes have
followed, we shall find that the principal to which they have most adhered are
directly opposite to those of Conquerours.

The first is, To keep inviolably the Faith of public Treaties, which are
powerful bridles to the Ambition of a Prince who desires to extend his Limits,
and do put great obstacles to his Designs, by making him a Slave to his Word.
It cannot be found in all the Lives of these Monarchs, since the Emperor
Charles the Vth till our time, that ever they have broken or prevaricated in
any Treaty, nor began a War for the enlarging of their Limits.

The second, To prefer Religion always before Reason of State; which is
directly contrary to the Rule of Conquerours, who do dexterously make use of
all sorts of Sects to compass their own Ends.

The third, Not to make use of their Victories, and the Advantages of their
Arms, nor of those of their Allies: for we find that in all the Actions of
those Charles the Vth, Philip the IId.
two great Monarchs, they never applied any one of their Conquests to their own
particular benefit, except what did belong unto them by just Successions.

The fourth, To rule according to the Laws, and leave their People in the
peaceable possession of their Privileges; which amongst Conquerours would pass
for an essential fault, against the first Principles of their Politics, which
require before all other things, that they make themselves absolute and
independent at home, and that they break all the Chains of Domestic Laws which
might hinder their actings abroad.

The fifth, Never to admit neither League, nor Alliance, nor Commerce, nor
Peace with the common Enemy of Christendom. This is a bad undertaking of the
Design of rendering themselves Masters of Europe, when they draw upon themselves
the emulation and the hatred of the Tyrant of Asia. Let us add to all these
things the mature Circumspection which they observe in their Counsels, which
renders their Resolutions more slow, and less active, then is requisite to a
Conqueror, who ought to give more to Fortune then to Prudence. This made a
famous French Author say, Malherbe in his Epistles.
If it were true that Spain aspired to the Universal Monarchy, he would advise
them to desire God to grant a respite of the end of the World.

France is a Kingdom that has all its Parts united, abounding with Men,
industrious in Commerce, which gains with their Baubles and their Modes the
money of all other Nations, which has considerable Harbors upon the Ocean and
the Mediterranean Sea, and in their neighborhood no considerable powers to
fear but that of the House of Austria,

The Genius of the Nation is naturally inclined to Arms, full of heat, unquiet,
lovers of Novelty, desirous of Conquests, quick, active, and inclinable to all
manner of Expedients which they conceive to be advantageous to their particular
Ends.

The Maxims of their Government (according to what may be gathered from their
Conduct both passed and present, by their own Writers, and by the same Treatise
of the Duke of Rohan) are the following.

First, To entertain always War abroad, and exercise their young Nobility at
the expense of their Neighbors.

This is a most politic Maxim, and most suiting with their own utilitie, but
most troublesome to all the rest of the World. In effect, it is certain that the
Genius of the Nation is such, that it cannot endure to subsist long in the
Idleness of Peace; there must: be Aliment for this Fire, and if some were not
given it from abroad, it would form to it self matter at home. To this natural
Propension must yet be added the Custom of most part of their Provinces, and
the particular Dispositions of Noble Families, which give so great advantages
to the Elder Brothers, that they leave almost nothing to the younger but their
Industry and Sword: and as they do not cultivate Letters, and their Quality
suffers them not to apply themselves to Mechanic Trades; there is nothing left
to them but the Wars or Robberies, to preserve themselves from Misery. Whence
it comes that this Kingdom always finds it self filled with an idle and boiling
Youth, ready to undertake all, and which seeks employment for their valor, at
whose cost soever it be. The liberty which they had heretofore of voiding this
Bilious humor, and of running to supposititious glory by single Combats, is at
present taken from them by just Decrees: the little shifts of Industry by which
formerly they sheltred themselves from want are now severely prohibited: But at
the same time that all ways are shut unto them, whereby to open their spleen in
their own Country, the Politicians of France held it necessary to furnish them
with another gate by which they might evaporate this Flame, which would gnaw
their own Bowels if it did not find another vent.

Moreover, as the greatest Revenues of the Crown of France consist in the Purse
of the People, and that the excessive Contributions cannot be exacted in times
of Peace, without making a great many Malcontents; it is necessary to feed
them with the smoke of some Conquests, and always to have pretexts to remain in
Arms, and maintain by force the Royal Authority, which has so strangely
overflowed the limits of their Fundamental Laws.

As it is impossible for them to satisfy all the Princes and great men of
their Realm, and that ever since the Reign of Henry the IIId they have taken it
for a Rule of their Conduct, to bring them low so far as they can; it is
extremely convenient to hold them employed in foreign Wars, and to incite them
to glory, that they may be consumed in ruinous undertakings.

Their second Maxim is, To enter into all sorts of Affairs either by right or
wrong, and everywhere to make themselves the Arbiters either by violence or by
cunning, by Authority or by surprise, by threatenings or by friendship, and to
get in as Mediators even into those Treaties of Peace wherein they are
interessed as Parties; as they pretended to do in that of the Bishop of
Munster, and do actually practice in the Assembly at Breda. In all the
Differences, either past or present, they have never doubted to take Party;
there never yet was Quarrel in which they had not dexterity enough to form
unto themselves some kind of Interest, and some Rights; nor did ever any People
show the least inclination toward Rebellion, but instantly they made them
their Allies. But experience has made it visible, that they never entered into
any War but to exasperate it, nor into any Peace but to sow the seeds of new
Disputes. It would be superfluous to number them, since there is no body so
little versed in the ancient Story who does not confess this truth, and that
the modern Examples have made us know it sufficiently. In the last Troubles of
Germany, into which they thrust themselves at first under the color of
Protection, with a thousand specious protestations that they would never
pretend any thing for themselves, but barely the satisfaction of their Allies;
when the business came to its full Crisis, they dismembered Alsatia from the
Body of the Empire, by the same Artifice with which they had dissolved from it
Metz, Toul, and Verdun.
three Bishoprics under the Reign of Henry the Third.

The third Maxim is, To have for their only Rule the Interest of State, so
that the Faith of Treaties, the good of Religion, or the ties of Blood and
Amity cannot hold them. It Is this that the Duke of Rohan puts for the
fundamental Principle of all his Work; The Princes command over the People,
Interest commands over Princes. All that the Turks have done in Christendom
since Francis the First to our time, they owe it to the Alliances of the Crown
of France with the Ottoman Port, and to the Diversions which they have made in
their favor against all those who have desired to undertake something against
this Common Enemy. And though that the Protestant Religion is beholding to it
for a part of its progress; yet France does not therefore desist from giving
secret intelligences to the Catholics, to make them consider its power, as the
only, which being tied by no Capitulation, is therefore in a condition to
reduce all Sects under the Obedience of the Church. In a word, for the erection
of their Monarchy, they do imitate and apply to ill uses the Maxim which St.
Paul practiced for the enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ, Factus sum omnibus
omnia: and as this Apostle complied with all sorts of spirits to gain them to
the Church, weeping with the afflicted, and taking part in the consolation of
those which he found to be satisfied; these, by a wrong Imitation of this holy
Conduct, conform themselves to the Interests of all the World, to make them
serve theirs, and sacrifice Religion as often as it comes in competition with
the Interest of State. The examples are so fresh, that we need not make any
enumeration of them: and many things might be said on this subject, in
reference to the last War against the Turks, if Modesty did not oblige us to
suppress them.

Their fourth Maxim is, To keep as much as they can foreign States occupied
and divided at home, or else engaged in some external War. England, the Empire,
Italy, Denmark and Spain have had a sad Experience of this; and now both
Poland and the States of the United Provinces do resent the deplorable effects
thereof.

All these Maxims are proper to Conquerours, and as many infallible marks of a
vast and profound Design long ago contrived. The Predecessors of the most
Christian King could not bring it to perfection, because the Civil Wars, the
power of Spain, and the just Limits which the Royal Authority then
acknowledged, were powerful Bars to stop them: but at present, having imposed
at home an absolute Law over all their Subjects, and having put Dissension
amongst all Strangers, there remains nothing but that they overcome the third
Impediment, by completing the overthrow of the Monarchy of Spain, that they
may pass upon our Ruins to the Conquest of all the other States. To attain
this, it was necessary they should full us asleep with the Assurances of Peace,
and Propositions of Leagues and Union: The War of Portugal was carefully to be
nourished, to consume by a slow fire this Monarchy, and keep at the same time
Portugal in their Dependencie, by the necessity of their Assistance: A War must
be raised between England and Holland, and prolonged by a thousand Artifices,
to get themselves elbow-room to Invade the Low Countries, whilst these two
great Powers should be drowned in Blood to their reciprocal Ruin. It was held
requisite to sow the Seeds of Division in the Empire by the means of particular
Leagues, which, under color of the Good of the Peace of Germany, have no other
End then to facilitate the Invasion of it, and hinder Assistance to be given to
one of its most precious Members. A powerful Faction likewise was to be raised
in Poland, to keep all the Princes of the North under check, and a part of the
Emperor's Forces unusefully employed in the Guard of his Frontiers. To seem
indifferent to both Religions, it was necessary one while to assist the Elector
of Mentz against those of Erfort, and then the Elector Palatine against Mentz;
and to seek everywhere their Advantages in the Troubles of others.

I cannot here omit one fresh Example which makes much to my purpose, though I
foresee that it will occasion as much horror in the Reader as it has done to
my own Pen. France, by virtue of a Treaty of Warrantie with the States of the
United Provinces, after diverse unusefull Requisitions made by the said States,
found her self at last obliged, by her Interest, to make some show of an
inclination to embrace their Defense against England. This Treaty of
reciprocal Warrantie expressly contains, that the Allies should not so much as
treat, and much less conclude any Peace with the Common Enemy, or Truce,
without the consent of the other, and without procuring the same Satisfaction
for their Allie which he should obtain for himself. The States of the United
Provinces did so scrupulously adhere to this Obligation, that notwithstanding
the little Reality of the French Succors against England, and the considerable
Advantages which they could have found by Treating apart, they would never lend
an ear unto any Proposition of this nature. France, on the contrary, always
held a Negotiation open by the means of the Earl of S. Albans: and upon the
just Suspicions which they gave unto the said States, by the frequent goings
and comings, and the flux and reflux of Courriers, continually passing betwixt
Paris and London, the Court of France did so authentickly confirm to them their
Faith, and gave them so positive words, that they would never hearken to any
Proposition but in the common Assembly for the General Peace between all the
Allies, that even they ordained the Count de l'Estrade, that in case credit
were not given to what he assured in the quality of Ambassador, so good an
opinion have they of the honesty of their Ministry) he might divest himself
of his Character, to assure them of it in his own name. A great honor indeed
for Monsieur de l'Estrade, which shows that he is not capable of deceiving but
in the quality of a Minister of France, and that the Probity of his Person
exalts the Dignity of his Charge. Notwithstanding, if he had been so unadvised
as to have engaged himself in this Surety, he would at this day have found
himself liable both to the Principal and the Interest; it being out of doubt
that England has had the dexterity to engage France in this Quagmire, to
conclude a secret Treaty of Peace with them without the Consent, nay without
the Knowledge, of their Allies, without making any mention of them or of their
Interests, and without any reservation of or relation to the General Peace. But
that which is yet more astonishing is, that after this Peace was concluded,
notwithstanding the Promise made to the English not to use any Hostility
against them, France used all its endeavors with the States of the United
Provinces to put out their Fleet speedily to Sea, binding themselves to join
their own Fleet with it, and agreeing with them upon all the Conditions
necessary for this effect. If this proceeding does not open the eyes or all
Europe, they will have no cause to complain of the Calamities which they are to
suffer by France, which takes so much pains to undeceive them.

All the Maxims which I have above related are those of Conquerours; but their
manner of executing them is so much the more to be feared, as it consists
altogether in Quickness and Activity, and that no Reason of Justice, nor any
Condescension to the Interposition of Neighbors, and of their own Allies, is
able to stop the current of it. It is no more now the fear nor the jealousy of
the Power of the House of Austria, which served them for a Pretext in their
former Wars, that makes them act at this day; they dare no longer make use of
that ridiculous Scarecrow of the Universal Monarchy aimed at by the Spaniards;
they have no occasion from the Discontents of the Protestants of Germany, and
their Alliances with the United Provinces; they can no longer cloak with the
Interest of others the Itch which they have to conquer: there remained nothing
else for them to do, but to go seek the occasions of War in the very
Sanctuary of Peace, and to form the project of it upon a Marriage, which they
themselves do avow was made for no other End but to render the Union eternal
and inseparable.

It may be judged by all this discourse, that these great Designs must needs
have a vaster Idea then the Conquest of the Low Countries; that they are the
first attaqued as the Outworks, to the end they may lodge themselves without
impediment in the Body of the place they have Pretensions to, the greatest part
of Gemanie, as an ancient Domain of France, which could not be alienated. They
are going to form to themselves a Precedent against the States of Holland, by
the Annulling of all the Royal Surrenders, and the Establishment of the
Devolution. They covet Harbors in Spain, Leagues in the Empire, Factions in
Poland, Wars in England, and Holland, Passes into Italy, and the Sovereign
Arbitrage everywhere. Their Quiet consists in the Trouble of all others, their
Glory in Conquests, and their Advantage in the public Calamities. In this they
follow their sole and supreme Rule of Interest. It is the part of all others to
take their measures from this, and to think seriously of prosecuting their own.

There remains something to be said of the particular Obligation of the Empire
for the Defense of the Circle of Burgundy. I shall pass but lightly over this
matter, because it is already decided by a solemn Act of the Chancerie of the
Empire; and that he who has written on this Point at Ratisbon has penetrated
in few words so thoroughly into the Bottom of this Affair, and so drained it,
that he has left nothing to be added, no more then to be replied thereto. In
effect, I never read any thing more cold nor weak then the Answer which was
long since published on the behalf of France against this solid Writing: It is
filled with an unusefull heap of words, shuns the Lists everywhere, strays from
the Question, omits the principal Objections, and supposes the Point still in
controversy to be a thing already proved. It inlarges it self into great
complaints, because by this Writing it appears as if people would doubt that
the most Christian King had a design to Invade the Circle of Burgundy. They
could not more palpablie manifest the Injustice of this War, then by taking for
an Injury the bare Suspicion which we conceived thereof. But what will he say
at present, when all Europe sees that our Fears were a prudent Foresight, and
that the Event has verified our Conjectures? Can he to day make that pass for
an act of Justice, which he detested before as an Attempt which we could not so
much as foresee without offending them? Will he not blush for shame at the
Exclamation which he has made, Aut quasi Christianissima Regia Majestas in
animo haberet eundem Circulum denuo Armis aggredi, and invadere? It was then a
Crime but to think that this could happen; and now it is a greater, it seems,
with them, to wonder that it is come to pass.

But in the end, no man doubts but that the Circle of Burgundy is a Member of
the Empire: the Author of this Answer grants it to be so himself, and thus
dispenses with my pains to prove it.

He knows also that as such it is obliged to assist the Body in case of
necessity, and all the Members of the Empire, and to furnish its proportion of
the Contributions which are necessary to the Defense thereof; which the King
has exactly and superabundantly accomplished on all sorts of occasions, both
before and after the Treaty of Munster. And by the rule of Law, he that is
obliged to all the Charges, ought likewise to participate of all the
Advantages: otherwise the Union of this Circle with the Empire would be a
Leonine Society. All the World knows that this Warrantie is reciprocal, and
that it must equally hold on both sides; so that he who is bound to succor the
Empire against all, and on all manner of occasions, ought also to receive the
mutual Assistance of the Empire against all those who do invade him.

It is likewise certain, that by the Treaty of Munster it is included in that
Peace as a Circle of the Empire, and that by this inclusion it ought to enjoy
all the Rights and Prerogatives which appertain to the other Circles, and all
the effects of the Peace, by which the common and reciprocal Defense is
established.

Against which they have nothing to oppose but an Article ill understood, and
worse interpreted, of the Treaty of Munster, de mutuis Hostibus non juvandis,
by which the Empire and France do reciprocally oblige themselves not to give
any Assistance to their respective Enemies.

France has directly contravened this Article by the Assistance which she sent
against the Bishop of Munster, which effectually did enter into the Lands of
the Empire; and by the Counsel she gave to reduce this Bishopric into Ashes,

But for the better understanding of this Article, we must observe that it is
concluded betwixt the Body of the Empire indivisibly on the one part, and
France on the other, which do reciprocally promise not to assist the Enemies of
each other. Here the Empire with all its Members is reckoned but one Party
contracting, and France the other: so that when it is said that it shall not
assist the Enemies of France, it should be understood of Enemies abroad, and
cannot concern the Members of the Empire, which in one Body are the same
Parties which have treated with her, and to which all the Body owes defense, by
an original, natural, and undispensable obligation. Were this otherwise
understood, it might be inferred by the same Argument, that in case the Empire
did assault any Province belonging to the Crown of France, the other Provinces
of the same Realm could not go to their Assistance without violating the
Article de non juvandis Hostibus. If France does reply, that those Provinces
make up but one Kingdom, we shall also say, that the Ten Circles do constitute
but one Empire; so that when France has War with any one Circle of the Empire,
it is a War made against the whole Body: And the word mutui hosts cannot be
interpreted but of Strangers; else the Body of the Empire had obliged it self
not to assist its Members against France, and by consequence to abandon it
self, and to see it self dismembered by parcells, while the Parts of this great
Body should not dare to stretch forth their hands to the help of one another.
But in this case it is not to give Assistance to the Enemies of France, but it
is to defend the Empire against France, which does invade it. If this Clause,
de mutuis Hostibus non juvandis, be universal, and do comprehend all those with
whom France has any debate, it would operate against all the other Circles, as
well as that of Burgundy, and there shall be no Member of the Empire which may
hope for any Relief from the other Circles in opposition to the Invasions of
France. But if they will apply it particularly to the Circle of Burgundy, they
must prove, by the same Instrument of Peace, that although it be a Member of
the Empire, it is of the number of those Enemies which it cannot assist against
France; and that the other Circles are excepted out of this general Rule, or
that they have some particular Privilege above that of Burgundy. But neither
the Treaty of Peace nor the Imperial Constitutions making it to be in a worse
condition then the others, and on the contrary including it in the same Peace
and the same Rights which the other Circles do enjoy; it follows, that the
Clause de non juvandis Hostibus ought to be extended to the Ten Circles, or
that it ought not to comprehend that of Burgundy. The Imperial Capitulation,
which is formed upon the Idea of the same Treaty of Peace, does yet more
clearly explicate all the Doubts which may be raised touching a truth so
palpable, by the reservation of the Article of Warrantie contained in the
Instrument of Peace: which shows clearly that the Obligation not to assist the
Enemies of France cannot derogate from that which all the Circles of the Empire
have reciprocally to assist each other. All that the Writer of France alleges
against this in his Answer is but a frothed Cream, and is so strongly refuted
in the Reply which of late has come to light, that it were lost labor to
endeavor to give it any farther clearing.

The Electors, Princes and States of the Empire, are fully persuaded of these
Truths; they are not unsensible of the Contempt done to their Jurisdiction
openly violated by this Attempt; they are not blind to the Dangers which
threaten them by our Oppression: but as they never go from the ways of
Moderation, they would not imitate France, by beginning, after their Example,
the Process by the Execution, judging that it behoved them to try the means of
Gentleness, Reason, and Remonstrances, first, before they should recurre to the
last remedy. But they are too sharp-sighted to suffer themselves to be dazzled
any longer with void and undetermined Answers, by which France, under the
general expression of a seeming desire of Peace, obstructs all the passages by
which they might enter to an exact discussing of the Business. In effect, to
the Suspension of Arms which they have proposed, they have had no Return but
that of a disdainful Refusal; to the Mediation which they offered, a doubtful
Hope; and to the Time and Place of the Treaty, a Silence full of Artifice.
They will see full Commissions before they declare themselves as to other
circumstances, which (according to the order of all Treaties) necessarily ought
to precede the sending of Plenipotentiaries: They take great care to persuade
that our Queen has cut off all kind of approches to an Accommodation: They do
of purpose conceal from their Deputies her last Answer, by which she offers to
send her Ambassadors to the place which shall be agreed on, and to refer all to
the Arbitration of the Mediators which should be chosen. They will have nothing
of all this: a full Power must needs precede, without knowing whither the
Plenipotentiaries shall be sent, or to whom they will refer themselves. So soon
as this shall be consigned, they will form Scruples upon every syllable; if there
wants only a Comma, Spain shall be presently judged as an enemy to the Peace.
In the mean time they go on always gaining ground, they render from day to day
the Calamity more incurable; and whilst they labor by this Juggling to stop
the just Assistance of the Empire and of the other Princes, the progress of
their Arms advances without check, and they labor to put themselves in a
condition to render all those Helps unprofitable which justly we may expect,
and to deal so, that our Friends shall not be undeceived, till their Succors
can no longer hinder our Ruin.

The only Remedy is, quickly to embrace Maxims proper for countermining
theirs. They have a Kingdom united in all the Parts of it; let us unite our
Affections and Powers. Their Quietness depends upon our Trouble; let us seek
our Safety by the abating of their Pride. They act by way of Fact; let us
repel Force by Force. They dally with us by vain hopes of Peace; let us put
our selves in a condition to make them desire it seriously. In a word, they
have a design upon us all: let us make then of this Cause a Common Interest,
and not anchor all our Deliverie upon the favor of the Cyclop; which was
indeed profitable to Ulysses, but by a good fortune which in reason he ought
not to have expected.

FINIS.

