SAD MEMORIALS OF THE Royal Martyr: OR, A Parallel betwixt the Jews Murder of
Christ, and the English Murder of KING Charles the First: BEING A SERMON
Preached on the Solemnity of His Majesty's Martyrdom. In the Cathedral-Church
of Sarum, An. Dom. 1669.

By T. L. (M. A.) Prebend of the Cathedral Church of SARVM.

(...);

Jo. 19.15. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn for Robert Clavel, and are to be
Sold at the Gun in Ludgate Street, 1670.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
WHo is there that does not observe, that store and abundance is an usual means
to depreciate any thing; and that that which is most frequent is generally most
slighted; as Common-ways are most trodden and trampled on: so that there is no
very great cause to wonder, that Israel it self should then loath Manna, when
Manna lay in heaps in the Camp; or that they should grow weary of Angels-food,
when Angels-food was their constant dish. And truly, this is as visible in this
preaching-Age, wherein (to the discredit of this Nation be it spoken) I know
not whether is greater, the industry of the Preachers to convince, or, the
industry of the Hearers not to be convinced of their wickedness. And therefore
when there is on one hand a plenty to satiate, and, on the other, corrupt
humors in the Patients to make that Diet become nauseous; it may be admired
what there could be, to invite me to put such a thing as a Sermon, into the
sight of the World. I must confess, had there not been some other kind of
inducements, besides the good opinion of that City for whom it was composed,
and of that Congregation to whom it was preached; I should hardly have inclined
to have published so plain and unpolished a Discourse. But this I must say,
that I look on that place as a Society of the greatest Loyalty and candor in
the whole Kingdom, and consequently (although they have also their share in
the guilt) that most places of this Nation, have much more to answer for, and
repent of, in relation to the Blood of the Royal Martyr King Charles the First,
than they; And I cannot doubt but that the same Spirit of God that made those
so passionately resent this Charge laid on them, may make the Sermon, now it is
written, become that to others, that it was to them when it was preached. But
one thing it was above all that tempted me to this course, and that is, The
Hint that I have given of a great and National sin and infelicity, that has
too generally passed without any notice or observation; and that is, the
unconscionable carelessness or grounds on which the People of this Kingdom
trifle away the peace and security of the Church and State, in popular
Elections; sometimes inconsiderately siding with imposing Landlords, sometimes
as rashly running with an unwary rabble, to depute insufficient, and many times
ill-principled Persons to be their Representatives in the great Council of this
Kingdom; from whom what can be expected to come, but desperate and
mischievous, or at the best, crude and immature Counsels. Of what consequence
this very thing is to our perpetual Peace, or Distractions, I believe no
discreet Person can doubt; and I shall amply obtain my desire, if any ingenuous
and well affected Person that has the leisure, shall ever take the hint, and
bestow on his Country, a just Discourse and state of the cases and obligations
that lie on all Persons, and Societies, to make conscience of their proceedings
in an Affair of this Importance. For I think, if some course be not taken to
awaken the common People, to consider what they ought to do, and to represent
unto the present Parliament in what condition several Corporations stand by
means of many disaffected Persons re admission into those Societies, out of
which for disloyalty they were within this six or seven Years cast; All the
courses that this great and loyal Council shall take to secure our prosperity
will signify nothing; but that, on the calling of new Councels (which will
surely be for the most part answerable to such Men's interests, passions, and
Principles) all shall be immediately battered down, and demolished; and within
this ten or twenty Years, this Nation must infallibly come into the same state
and condition, that it was in, Anno 1642. For although they take the same
strict and solemn Oaths, and are admitted under the same conditions and
subscriptions that other Men are, yet I appeal to all men living that have
opportunity to observe their actings, whether they make any conscience at all
of vow-breach and perjury; and whether they become not the sly, if not the
open countenancers of all the factions and seditious Persons in the Nation. Nor
do I think that any prudent Man that has his Eyes abroad with him, can choose
but see, how the sottishness and poverty of some places and Persons make them
easy to be imposed on, and neither think nor care whom they elect to
Parliament; and how the faction and purse of others, make them as active and
powerful to pervert such Electors. And is not this of a sad consideration, that
little Feasts and entertainments, or little fears or brow-beatings, should
engage the majority of Buroughs for this or that Person, whatever his
principles or qualifications are; and consequently that the foundations of our
Laws should be laid on Rundlets of Wine, on Barrels of Ale, or on the humors
of discontented Fanatics? Is it not a miserable thing, that those that are
honest and peaceable Men, should be slack and negligent of appearing at
Elections, when to be sure the turbulent and seditious shall be industrious and
eager? I think we ought to remember, that as our ill choice has heretofore
drawn so great sins and vengeances on our heads, so our more faithful and
careful Elections, are the only means to secure and perpetuate our peace and
prosperity, and to keep us from such sins, from such shames, and from such
miseries; which shall for ever I hope be both the Prayer and serious endeavor
of my considerate Reader, and my self. More than this, we cannot wish; and less
than this, our affection to our Native Country cannot exact at our hands.

SAD MEMORIALS OF THE ROYAL MARTYR, etc.
Act. ij. the xxxvij. and part of the xxxviij. Verse. Now when they heard this,
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest to the
Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do?

Then Peter said unto them, Repent. --


IT has been often my extreme wonder to consider the different effects of the
Apostles preaching to the first Christians, and of our preaching to the last
Christians; the easiness and seriousness of their repentance, and the
difficulty and perfunctoriness of ours; how easily their eyes melted into
Tears, and how much more readily our hearts turn into Rocks: and yet all this
while, there are the same crying sins; the same glorious Gospel; the same light
within us, our reason and conscience; and the same impulse from without, the
Holy Spirit of God; Religion has still the same Embassy and Ministration; the
World has the same needs; Vice and Sin has the same baseness; the Rule has
the same perfection; and the Holy Ghost has the same efficacy. But I conceive
the reason of the so great difference arises principally from these two
things. 1. From the different temper of the hearers then, and now. 2dly. From
the different way of working, preaching, and ministration then, and now. As for
the temper of the Primitive hearers, this is certain, They were more simple,
serious, and sincere; Religion to them was a thing in earnest; the interest of
their Souls, and eternal salvation or everlasting Death, was that which their
hearts had a most awful regard to; and you meet not the sowrest knot, the most
neglectful unbeliever among them, but when these things were urged, his heart
was smitten with consternation and amazement; From which, neither glory, nor
riches, nor throne, nor honor, nor tribunal could ever shelter him. St. Peter
's preaching, wounds the Jews; and at St. Paul 's Act. 24.25.
preaching, Felix trembled. As for the heartiness and sincerity in the
Converts, two things there are that put it out of all question; the first is,
Act. 4.34.
The devoting of their whole Estates to the service of the Church and Religion;
and the other is, Their free and penitent cap. 19.18.
confession of their sins. And without all controversy, He that forsakes this
Worlds good, that gives up his Estate for Religion, and the Kingdom of God's
sake; and that confesses his faults with tears in his Eyes; is in earnest. On
the contrary, the Hypocrisy of our Religion is made as conspicuous, in that we
are so far from parting with any thing to religious, or charitable uses, that
we pant after the Estates that are so given by others, and are so far from
being ashamed of profaneness and impiety, that we Esa 3.9.
boast and proclaim our sin as Sodom, and make our Phil. 3.19.
glory of that which is indeed our shame. The second difference, the different
way of preaching, and ministration between them and us, is as visible and
conspicuous. We want that heroical Spirit, and courage in the cause of God,
that plainness, and zeal in our Ministration, that they always used; they
called incest Incest, and murder Murder without mincing of crimes; they most
sharply reproved where the sins were great; their hearts were above all base
despondencies; they neither feared the frowns of Greatness, nor the tumults of
the Multitude, but spoke out with all severity; they were not so weak to
imagine that the most headstrong Beast was to be best managed with the loosest
Rain; No, they pleaded the cause of God with rigor and sharpness, as we may
see in St. Stephen's discourse with the Jews: Act. 7.51, 52. O ye stiff-necked
and uncircumcised in Heart, and in Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; As
your Fathers did, so do ye; Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers
persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before, of the coming of the
just One, of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers. They feared not
life, they could not debase themselves to soothing and flattery, because
Fawning became Dogs, better than Shepherds. On the contrary, we deal with
smooth Hands, and oily Tongues; we reprove with Figurative weapons; we use
Metaphorical conviction only, and then our hearers think that they have nothing
to answer for, but metaphorical sins, and why should it then be thought
strange, that we should work nothing in them, but a metaphorical repentance. We
imagine we have well performed our duty, when we have done it neatly, and
conceive sin is duly chastised, when our hearers think that we do not mean
them. Believe me, Brethren; I have too much affection for my people, and
particularly for this Assembly, to deal so treacherously with you, but am
resolved, that I shall then have best performed the office of this Day, when I
shall have left this glorious Martyr's Memory in your minds, as a Miracle of
Men, as a Mirror of Princes, and convinced you that Charles his Blood was
enough to sink a Kingdom, and the least drop of it to damn this whole City.
It Is the repentance of the guilty I seek, and if any Man be discontented at
this, I have but little cause to be troubled at it, If I can pronounce peace to
my self. Ezekiel. 3 19.
Liberavi animam meam. I have freed mine own soul.

The Apostle's Charge on his Auditory, is couched in the 22. and 23. Verses of
this Chap. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, JESUS of Nazareth, a Man
approved of God amongst you by Miracles, Signs, and Wonders, which God did by
him in the midst of you, as ye your selves also know, Him have ye taken, and
by wicked hands have crucified and slain. I will but a very-little vary the
words, and lay the very same Charge on the greatest part of this Assembly. Ye
Men of this City, hear these words; CHARLES the First, King of England, a Man
approved of God amongst you, by a just and righteous Title unto these Kingdoms,
by a Princely clemency, by an incomparable piety, by a most innocent and a
virtuous life; by a flourishing estate which God wrought by him in the midst
of you, as ye your selves also know; Him have ye by rebellious and treacherous
hands delivered and taken, and in a most barbarous and cruel manner murdered
and slain. The least that can be said of this Wickedness, is this, that it is a
public and a National Sin, and cannot be expiated, but by a public and a
National Repentance; And this the service of this Day confesses, where we
deprecate this Blood from our selves and posterities for ever. But because you
will never be able to proportion your grief as you ought, till you have a full
sight of your guilt. I shall endeavor to make you more sensible of that, by
paralleling the Sin that is before us, of Murdering King Charles, with this
History of the Jews murdering of Christ: Nor do I find in the whole Scripture
any Case so near alike as this. We read indeed in some places of great
Calamities, and in some too of calamitous Deaths, that have fallen on many
eminent Persons; and of some that have dyed for Righteousness sake, as Mat.
14.10.
John the Baptist, by Decollation for reproving Herod, but he was a Prophet,
not a Prince; Act. 7.59.
St. Stephen stoned to Death, but he was a Disciple, not a King; Saul was a
King, and he dyed by the Sword, but he neither lived a good life, nor dyed by
the hands of others; David was a king, and yet a man of great Sorrows, a Type
of Christ Himself; and yet, although he was a Confessor, he was no Martyr, but
dyed in his Bed. But now, The Murder of King Charles is like the Murder of our
Lord Jesus Christ: in several Relations and respects; only let it be remembered
that Christ was a spiritual Savior too, and, so, far beyond all Earthly
Princes: because Mat. 14.33.
he was the Son of God, as well as the Son of Man; However, if we shall see
that this horrible wickedness, is much of the same nature, with the murder of
these execrable Jews, you will have the same reason to be wounded in your souls,
and to consult your safety, as these in my Text did; When they heard this, they
were pricked to their hearts, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the
Apostles; Men and Brethren, What shall we do? Now the Cases are, though not
equal, yet alike; in these two generals. 1. In the quality and condition of the
Persons that suffered; The Servant was like the Master, King Charles like Jesus
Christ our Lord, as far as by the Divinity and Godhead of our Savior, who had
the Spirit without measure, and by the frailty of a mere Man there could be a
likeness. 2. There is a great deal of likeness in the guilt that the English
have contracted by this Murder, and the Jews by the Murder of Jesus Christ.


1. As for the First: the likeness between the Persons, it consists in these
particulars; 1. In their Birthrights. 2. In their Unction or anointing. 3. In
the Innocence of their lives in some proportion. 4. In their Patient Deaths. 5.
In the Indignities that they suffered. 6. In the likeness of the Cause;
for it was in Both, the cause of Religion, and for Righteousness-sake.

1. First, for their Birthrights, they were Both, ad Sceptra nati, both born
to Kingdoms; Christ to the Kingdom of Judea, as appears by his Genealogy, Mat.
1. springing in a direct Line from the Loins of David; and although he did not
exercise a temporal jurisdiction, because Gen 49.10
the Scepter was departed from Judah, and in the hands of Herod, when Shiloh
came; yet a greater, a spiritual Kingdom he exercised. Charles also, descended
from an ancient Race of British Kings that were the rightful Governors of these
Countries. Nay, it is very observable, that their Descent, in respect of the
distance from their originals, was very much alike; from David that settled and
established the Kingdom of Israel to Christ, were just Twenty-Seven of the
Royal Line, and from Edward the Confessor, that enfranchised and settled this
Kingdom, Charles I. was the Twenty seventh Monarch. 2. Both were inaugurated by
unction or anointing, the one by the outward Oil of Consecration; the other
with the inward anointing of the Holy Ghost. and because of this anointing the
Scripture calls Christ's Name on all that are anointed. Ps. 105.15.
Ne tangas Christos meos, Touch not my Christ's, and do my Prophets no harm;
Both were anointed, but Christ has in this the Prerogative above all Earthly
Princes, that Heb. 19.
He was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows. 3. Alike they
were, though not equal in Innocence, and a virtuous Life. This Martyr went
close after the Footsteps of Jesus Christ, although he could not overtake-him;
Phil. 3.14.
He pressed toward the Mark of the high Prize of God. Christ indeed was
Innocence it self, and as righteous as the Law; This righteous Man was as
innocent as was compatible with mortality and common frailty. In all his
Relations, he was a most eminent example; to his Children, the most tender
Father in the World; to his Queen, the most constant and faithful Husband, in
the Earth; to his Servants, the most obliging Lord; to the Church, a most
blessed and zealous Patron; to his People, Pater-Patriae, a Father of his
Country. He was so far from Tyranny, that he could not entertain jealousy; so
far from severity and harshness, that he could not think ill of his subjects,
when they dealt never so basely with him; of such clemency and pity, that he
was so far from punishing those that hated him, that he most commonly took them
into places of particular favor and trust, and so hoped that his kindness and
Princely favors should do on them, what other Princes do by severity and
punishment. But the returns of that ungracious People, has taught the World
this Maxim of Government, that, Pardon of offenders before their repentance, is
but an ill guard to a Prince's Person. To God, he was a most devout and sincere
votary, a Person of an admirable zeal and delight in Religion; to Men, a most
exact pattern of Justice and Equity. A Prince he was, so extraordinary enricht
with grace, that temptations seemed to assault him, to no end but to be
defeated: Though he had but three Kingdoms, he deserved four Crowns; but the
most splendid of all, for his absolute Empire over himself: for, self-denial
which is the task of all other Men, and the most harsh Discipline in the School
of Christ, seemed to him but recreation: He was Snow in the amidst of Flames,
and Fire in a Mass of Ice; He was sober in the midst of Youth, when all
others are loose and wild; Spotless in despite of Sanguin; he was humble in
the glories of a Court, which usually make others giddy and vain; abstinent in
the midst of Feasts where Luxuries have their dominion, chaste in his very
embraces: He reconciled the honor of the Cross, to the splendour of Crowns; the
Grandeur of Purples to the severity of Jesus, the glories of Kings, and the
mortification of a Christian together; and continued a zealous protestant in
the Court of Spain it self. 4. He imitated Jesus Christ in the patience of his
death: That he could so discernably foresee his approaching Fate, did evince
him a Person of no narrow or common apprehension; they are his own words;
(...). Medit. 28.
I know that there are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes.
Yet even then, Luk 21.19.
With what patience did he possess his Soul? With what a great temper and
calmness of Spirit did he fit himself for his end? To which, when by sad stages
he still drew nearer, and nearer; by serious and frequent Prayers, and by
eating the Passe-over, by communicating the Lord's Supper in imitation of
Christ his great Pattern, he disposed himself to his end; and when it came,
drank the Cup without murmuring or repining: He forgave all; prayed for his
Enemies; kissed the rod, and Esa. 53.7.
as a sheep before the Shearers, he opened not his mouth, or if he opened his
Lips, it was like the opening of the Gates of the Temple, nothing but odors and
perfume, nothing but Light and Love, nothing but holy and Christian counsels
and blessings came from thence. 5. Alike they were in the barbarous indignities
that were offered to them; they both, suffered the scoffs and taunts of wicked
Men; both, Heb. 12.3.
endured the contradiction of sinners; Christ from his own Creatures, and
Charles from his own Subjects; Christ Jesus suffered by the insolence of the
Jews, and Charles by the insolence of the English; Christ was charged as a
Traitor to the State, and so was Charles too, even by those very Men, who if
they had had no other crime, were themselves Traitors in the highest degree for
that very Fact; Christ had obliged His Persecutors, and Charles had obliged
his: and yet, Christ was put to Death on a pretense of Jo. 18.14.
saving the Nation, to whom His Blood became an utter ruin; and on the same
pretense, was Charles murdered too; Sed Deus avertat omen. 6. They were alike
in the cause of their Death, both for Religion and for righteousness sake.
Christ dyed to fownd and to save his Church, Charles, because he would not
betray it; Christ to save all the World from Eternal slavery, Charles to
deliver the Kingdoms from illegal Tyranny; one from the dominion of the Devil,
and the other from the power of devilish Men: And it is certain, if he would
have yielded to the subversion of the Laws, the ruin of his Subjects, and the
overthrow of the Church, he needed not to have dyed: On these terms, Heb.
11.35, 38.
He would not accept deliverance, nor was the World worthy of him.

2. Again secondly: The ways by which the Men of this Kingdom, have contracted
the guilt of the blood of this pious Prince, are much of the same nature, and
manner, with those ways by which the Jews have contracted the guilt of the
blood of Jesus Christ; which will be very discernable, if we inquire, what the
Guilt of the Jews was.

1. Some Jews contracted the guilt, by direct persecuting, apprehending,
condemning, sentencing, and executing of Christ. 2. Some contracted the guilt
of his Blood, by prosecuting of him, and soliciting his Death. 3. Some by
consenting to it, and delighting in it. 4. All of them by two ways. 1. By not
hindering of it as much as they were able. 2. By being liable to the Acts and
Consultations of their Representatives and Proxies in those great Counsels.

1. Some by direct persecution, apprehension, condemnation, sentence, and
execution. Thus were the High Priest, and Sanhedrim, guilty, when they combined
against him, Mat. 26.3. The chief Priests, and the Rulers, and the Elders of
the People conspired against him, to take him by subtilty, and to kill him.
They resolved to put him to Death, before they apprehended him; But because
they would delude the vulgar, and not be thought to do any thing unjustly,
after Caiaphas had examined him, he calls for the suffrages of the Council,
verse. 66. What think ye? And they said, He is guilty of Death. Thus these were
guilty of his blood by condemning of him; Judas by betraying him; Pilate was
guilty by sentencing of him; and others guilty by executing of him.

2. Some became guilty of Christ's blood by soliciting of his death, when Mat.
27 22, 22.
Pontius Pilate asked the Multitude, what he should do with Jesus, their answer
was, Let Him be crucified, let Him be crucified; And when he (according to that
ceremony usual in the Law) had washed his hands, thereby (as he thought)
acquitting his conscience; they take all the guilt of it on themselves and
their posterities; Verse. 25.
Let his blood be upon us, and our children for ever.

3. Some became guilty of the blood of Christ by consenting to it, and that
either, a priori, or a posteriori: Either 1. before the fact, by approving the
proceedings, by being pleased with the sentence, or execution; As Acts 22.20.
St. Paul became guilty of the murder of St. Stephen by holding the Garments of
those that stoned him. 2. Some became guilty of his death, ex post-facto, by
taking content in the thing done; by being enemies to the good way that he
preached and dyed to build up. Saul was a Persecuter of him after his death,
because he was about to apprehend the Apostles, and hinder his word. Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4.

4. All the Jews were guilty of this Murder by these two ways. 1. Because they
did not Voluntas est cause peccati per accidens, non impediendo, vel non
reprimendo cum possit. Aq. Sum. 22and. q. 15 ^. 5.
hinder this horrible Murder as much as they were able. Justice and
righteousness does exact, that according to our power, we defend the innocent,
and plead the cause of the oppressed, whereas they tamely connived at the
burden of that impious sentence, Qui non vetat peceare cum possit, jubet.
although he spoke as never man spoke, and did Miracles in their sight, which
none but God could do. 2dly. But however, they were guilty in the very Fact and
condemnation of the Sanhedrim or great Council, because it was a Council
delegated by themselves, Franc. Jun. Analytic. expos. Number. 12.
chosen out of their Tribes, Six out of a Tribe, by the Elections and Voices of
the People.
And truly, since those Tribes made no more conscience what kind of Persons
they did elect, it was most equitable that the guilt which their
representatives had contracted, should fall on the whole Nation. And these I
apprehend to be the principal causes and reasons, why, when the Apostle
charge Christ's murder so directly, so determinately on the Jews, the whole
Multitude of the Jews promiscuously: there is not any that opens his Mouth
against it; there is not one Person that does at all object; there is no Man
that does deny, or that does attempt so much as to excuse, or extenuate the
Fact; but they acknowledge it to be a great and a fearful truth; the
remembrance of it is bitter unto them; and they consult their safety, and the
expiation of it, When they heard this, they were pricked to their hearts, and
said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall
we do?

Truly the same several ways, and many more are the English guilty of the Blood
of this Incomparable Prince.

1. Some, By direct and point-blank-fighting against him, to conquer him, to
kill him, to imprison, to implead, condemn, sentence, and execute him; and thus
were all those guilty of his blood, that ever lifted up their hands or tongues
against him; thus was every Man guilty, that ever drew a Sword in that cause or
quarrel against him; the question of the Prophet David is impossible to be
eluded. 1 Samuel 26 9
Can any Man lift up his hand against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless?
that is, No Man can ever lift up his hand against the Lord's anointed, and be
guiltless. And therefore such have no way to reconcile themselves to God for
it, but by a real and perpetual Sorrow, and Repentance, as long as they live,
and by the satisfaction of Christ's blood; But especially those bloody and
barbarous Regicides that sat as Co-Assessors at his condemnation, or as
Assistants at his Execution.

2. Some contracted the guilt of his blood by soliciting his death, and thus
did the blind and ignorant Rabble, by the instigation of the principal Rebels
and Incendiaries, petition and clamor for his blood, under the specious Name
of Justice.

3. Some of you were guilty by consenting to this horrible Fact, and that
either a priori, while your thoughts took any pleasure in the practice of this
execrable deed, whatever temptations you had to desire it. And some of you, ex
posifacto, when you took any satisfaction in the thing done; while you
apostatized from your own reason and principles, and associated your selves to
those Regicides, while you became voluntary assistants to execute their
commands, or any way instrumental to help them defend that interest that they
had grasped unto themselves, by the Murder of this Holy Man out of any base
Fears, or greedy Hopes.

4. All were guilty of this blood, that did not, as much as they could, hinder
the effusion of it, while they looked on it with an indifferent eye; while they
sat still at their case, without endeavoring to prevent, or reverse that
cursed sentence. For I must tell you, that that Maxim of Self-preservation,
when the life of our Prince is at stake, is but a mere Sophism, in the School
of Christ. He that preferrs any Member to the Head, must needs be very
unskilful in the necessities of a Natural Body; and he that preferrs his own
condition, before the condition of his Prince, is altogether an unprofitable
Member of the body politic, and falls below the faith and loyalty of the very
Infidels themselves. And I appeal to your own experience, whether Those that
are so much Gods to themselves, are, not Devils to all others.

However, remember that the grand Factors in this bloody business, were your
Delegates; that they did act at all, was by your Elections and choice; The
consciences of those Men were such as you did approve of, or else they would
never have been chosen into that great Council of the Kingdom by your Votes;
Peccatum contingit in aliquem Dupliciter vel in se qu^ad actum peccati; vel in
sua causa. Aq. Sum. 22ae. q. 154.5.0.
so that their Acts became your own. And if you had not wilfully resolved to
have had such counsels and events; Why did you choose Persons of so desperate
and destructive Principles; some of them being generally known, and some of
them stigmatized, for turbulent and factious Persons, Men that were Enemies to
peace and order. These were your Patriots; and you see, into what condition
their Counsels and Acts brought you to. Nor is it to be wondered at. For who
ever knew the Soul taken away, and the Body not suffer convulsions? So that
there remains no more excuse for you, than for the Jews; nor are you any more
able to deny or extenuate the Fact, than the Jews could deny, excuse or
extenuate, the Murder of Christ. Nay farther; even those Persons that thought
that they had defended this Prince, have too much of the guilt and stain of his
Blood on their Garments and Souls, as I shall make appear Anon.

In the mean time, let us consider what this Sin of Murder is. A Crime it is of
so heinous a nature, that if it were but casually and accidentally committed,
it was death by the Judicial Law, if the criminal were taken before he came to
the City of Refuge. Number. 35. But if wilful and presumptuous, he must dye,
though he came thither. Exodus 21.12. Thou shall take him away from mine Altar,
that he may dye. The Altar it self shall not protect him. Nor did the guilt of
Blood extend only to Persons; But it polluted the Land, Number. 35.33. Although it
were involuntarily spilt: But, for the wilful Murder, no expiation admitted.
The Land mourns for such, and therefore thine Eye shall not pity him, that it
may go well with thee, when thou shall have put away from Israel the guilt of
Innocent Blood. Deuteronomy. 19.11, 12, 13. The Psalmist pronounces an heavy sentence
on such Offenders. Psalm. 55.23. The bloody and deceitful Man shall not live out
half his Days; or if he do live longer, better it were for him that he did not:
for he does but accumulate and heap up, as well as protract vengeance; he does
but Romans 2.5.
treasure up wrath, against the Day of Wrath, and increase his fearful account,
till that time surprise him, wherein the most righteous and impartial Judge
shall come in Flames of Fire to make Inquisition for Blood. God consulted and
took deliberation, when he made Man, Genesis 1.26. Let us make Man after our own
Image, after our likeness; And he takes deliberation likewise in sending
Judgments to destroy Man; as he extinguished the Canaanites by little and
little. Psalm. 103.14.
He knows whereof we are made, he remembers that we are but dust; and yet he is
a Lord of a most infinite and an absolute power; and surely, it is very
unreasonable for the choicest buildings to be cast into rude hands to be
demolished; he is most skilful to pull down that raised the Fabric, and to him
it is most reasonable to be committed. A Sin directly against the command of
God; a command in force in all Ages, a command, against which there shall never
be a counter-mand. Before the Moral Law: He that sheds Man's blood, by Man
shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. Repeated at Mount Sinah. Thou shall do no
Murder, Exodus 20. No Murder of any sort, or any degree. Expounded most strictly
by Christ. Thou shall do nothing that may tend to murder; Mat. 5.22.
Thou shall not be angry without a cause; Thou shall be so far from killing
deliberately, that thou shall not do it rashly; nay, thou shall be so far from
doing of it rashly, that thou shall not begin the least heat, that may tend to
so bad an end. A sin it is, clamorous to Heaven for vengeance; so does the
first blood from the Earth, Genesis 4.10. And so do the Souls from under the
Altar, Rev. 6.10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O God,
holy, and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood on them that dwell on
the Earth? But to sum up all the evil that can be thought of, or spoken against
this sin, I shall need do no more, than add the commentary of the beloved
Disciple, St. John, on that Command. 1 Jo. 3.15. You know that no Murderer has
Eternal Life abiding in him.

But this Wickedness that we now treat of, was the most horrible Murder that
ever was committed. A rasing of Adam's Image, and God's too. A parricide, a
killing of our Father. A Regicide, a Murdering of our Prince; a violation of
all bonds of Honor, Faith, and Allegiance; a desperate and wilful Perjury, and
breach of your Oaths of Fealty.

Obj. You Will say, Alas! It was far besides mine intent, that ever so vile and
cursed a thing as this is, should have come to pass; so that although I were a
casual, I was not an intentional Instrument; Although I was an accessory, I was
far from being a principal in this heavy Tragedy.

Answ. Be not mistaken, this is no excuse at all; For in case of Treason, there
is no Law in the World that accounts any Agent an Accessory only; they are all
Principals. Nor was ever any thing in the Earth heard of, that in every
circumstance had more of baseness, than this Murder: For first, it was
leisurely and deliberately plotted and contrived, and so could not have the
excuse of heat or passion: It was acted against the most known and public
Person of the Nation, and so could not have the excuse of ignorance: It was
done in the most open and impudent manner, in the sight of this Sun; and so
could not have the shelter of modesty and concealment: It was acted against our
King, and our Governor, and so could not have any excuse from sub ordination or
co-ordination; For, The King is Supreme, 1 Pet. 2.13. And then it will
naturally follow, than none can question him: Job 34.18. Who can say to a King,
thou art wicked? and to Princes, ye are ungodly? It was done upon our Governor
and our Master: and then remember the question of that Woman, 2 Reg 9.31.
Had Zimri peace who slew his Master? It was done out of a perfect effront and
contempt of Religion; for the freedom of the Gospel was pretended, for that,
which was most expressly against it; For you know who has said, Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers. Nay it was done under the
covert of God's Ordinance, and so God's own honor was prostituted to
countenance this horrible Villainy; his glory made to lacquey-after the
practices of desperate and unnatural Rebels; So that, as the Casuists say of
Incest; If it be committed without marriage it is a great sin; but greater if
under marriage, because God's holy Institution is made to mask uncleanness; so
say I, To have murdered our Prince was a transcendent and horrible impiety;
but, To do it under the pretext of God's Ordinance, and under the Formalities
and Ceremonies of Justice, is intolerable; It was as much a mockery of God, as
it was an abuse to the King. Nay, the Form of proceeding was as contrary to all
Rules of Equity, as the matter of Fact was execrable. It is an equitable Maxim
in all Laws, Justian. Institut.
Ne judicet pars, Let not a party be the Judge; and yet, Who were the
Prosecutors, but his own Enemies, that were parties, and in actual Arms against
him? Who witnesses, but those very Rebels that were parties in the quarrel, and
whom he attempted to have chastised? Who were his Judges, but those very
parties and enemies that had continued a most barbarous War against him? and
when their own Villainies had put them out of all hope of Pardon, they knew not
how to secure themselves from the Punishment that they had deserved, but by
inflicting an ungodly Sentence on Him: Though he knew how to forgive, they knew
not how to trust.

To be short, They had no color of wrong; For, by the Law, Cook on Littleton.
Lib. 1. Fol. 19.
The King can do no wrong. They could not urge against him, as the Jews did
against Christ, That he was an enemy to Caesar; Jo. 19.12.
For here was no other Caesar but himself. They could not believe (if he had
been a Subject, and not a Prince) that their proceedings were Legal; For, it
was a way of Trial, studied after the Fact; so that this most unheard of
Murder, was a violation of all that was good, civil, just, equitable, or
sacred; a breach of faith, honor, law, equity, and gratitude; a prostitution
of religion, justice, and even of common humanity it self; So impudent, so
fowl, so bloody, so merciless, and barbarous it was!

And now methinks, Brethren; when any distress, when any calamity or National
Judgment comes on us, our disquieted consciences should immediately fly in our
Faces, and put us in mind of the condition of this unfortunate, but excellent
Prince; As the Brethren of Joseph did, in their intricacies and dangers, call
to mind the cries, and the blood of their Brother, Genesis 42.21, 22. For, when
that fearful Famine fell upon them, so that they were forced into Egypt to
keep themselves and their Families from perishing, and, instead of finding
provision and relief, were all like to be put into Prison; they presently
apprehended this to be, Nemesis a tergo, Vengeance pursuing them at the heels;
and had instantly these sad reflections on their own hearts. They said one to
another, Verily we are guilty concerning our Brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his Soul, and when he besought us, we would not hear him, therefore
is this distress come upon us; And Reuben answered and said, Spoke I not unto
you, saying, Do not this sin against the Child? and ye would not hear,
therefore also behold his blood is required. So had it been most reasonable for
you in any of those National Judgments that have of late Years worn out the
strength and glory of this Nation, to have cast your Eyes on this Bloody Fact.
When that fearful and devouring Plague cast down all before it; How most just
had it been for you to have accused your selves, and said, We are verily guilty
concerning that most pious Prince, in that we saw the most barbarous
indignities, and the base usages that were offered unto him, and we either
assisted in the Tragedy, or stirred not to prevent it. When that Foreign War so
much baffled and defeated the Force of this Kingdom; How natural had the
Inference been? Now is the Blood of CHARLES required of us, and therefore does
vengeance pursue us. Or when that fearful Fire had wasted and consumed the
Capital City, and made it a confused Heap of Rubbish and Stones; How proper had
it been for us, and them, to have said, Was not the Anointed of the Lord taken
in our snares? and how just is it, that when we made no conscience to
extinguish 2 Samuel 21.17.
the light of Israel, we our selves should be extinguished. And the Messengers
of the Lord, from this place (as they have done heretofore) have just reason to
urge against you, as Reuben did; Spoke we not unto you, saying, Do not this sin
against the Lord's Anointed, and against this pious Father of this Church and
Kingdom: but ye would not hear; therefore behold his Blood is required of you.

But because there is in Men different degrees of guilt, according, as some
have been Instrumental and Active in this Murder; as some have been consenting
to it; as some have been neutral, cold, and asleep; when it might have been
prevented: I had need accordingly to apply my self severally unto them; and I
shall hope that God's Holy Spirit will so enforce it on all your consciences,
that no Man may depart hence without a wounded and a sad heart, no Face without
paleness, no Eye without a tear, which is most proper and suitable to the
Solemnity of this black and sad Day.

But first, For those that rebelliously unsheathed the Sword, pretending to
plead the cause of God, against GOD's Viceroy; Let me persuade you to think
seriously with your selves, Who those are, to whom God has shared his Name,
where he gives this character of them, I have said ye are Gods, and all of you
Children of the most highest, Psalm. 82.6. And withal, do but imagine with your
selves, what kind of Persons those are, that the Apostle describes, Jude Verse.
8.11. that despise dominion, that speak evil of dignities, that walk in the way
of Cain, the first Murderer; and perish in the gainsaying of Corah, the most
obstinate Rebel in the World; and bewail your condition. O remember how many
sad Widows curses, how many Orphans tears your Swords have drawn on your
Heads, and how many ruined Families groans attended your successes. Remember
the Blood of your Fellow Subjects, that were Defenders of the Laws, and so more
righteous than your selves, 1 Reg. 2.5.
That, you put on the Girdles that were on your Loins, and into the Shoos that
were on your Feet; and be sure of this, Iam. 5.2, 3, 4.
That the Gold and the Silver that you have gathered, by such violence, and
desperate courses, shall contract a rust, and canker, that shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat out your Flesh, as it were Fire; you have heaped
treasure together for the last Days, and that which you have gathered does cry,
and has entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath; and Mat. 23 32.
to fill up the measure of your sins always, you have at last mercilesly and
cruelly cut off the Lord's Anointed, of whom we said, Under his shadow shall we
rejoice. Suppose you should now hear the dreadful Alarm of that last Trumpet,
and that fearful Voice of the Archangel; Arise ye dead and come to Judgment:
Suppose you should now see this glorious and beatified Prince coming amidst the
Army of Martyrs, with his Lord Christ to Judge the World; and that he should
show unto you his Blood, that you regardlesly spilt, like Water on the ground:
What have you to plead for your selves before the righteous Judge? The Act of
Indemnity? Alas, that is a very poor means to wash away the stains of Blood;
there is great difference betwixt Reason of State, and the proceedings of the
Supreme Judge; that which can quiet a Kingdom, is far enough from calming and
quieting your Consciences; It can be nothing but your strict and unfeigned
Repentance, that can gain you the pardon of this Sin. But I tremble to think
how far, generally, this kind of Sinners are from this grace, which only can
expiate their Guilt; it grieves me to remember how few there are, that when
they have once come to this impudent height, have ever been renewed again by
repentance. Which is very evident, if you will call to mind these two remarkable
things. The first is this: How many have we known that have been reputed
enemies, and persecuted, and undone for preaching this Doctrine of Repentance
to them? So far from repenting of their Wickedness, that they were ready to
Murder any Person that should tell them the truth. The second is this: How few
were there of the Members of that Abaddon, that when they came to public
infamous ends for this Murder, that ever repented them of this deed. So that we
may conclude, that Rebellion is indeed as the sin of Witchcraft; 1 Samuel 15.23.
as impudent, and as unnatural; as hateful to God, and as far from Repentance;
and truly we may then expect a great number of penitent Witches, when we hear
of penitent Regicides. But the Spirit of God can do the Miracles that we cannot
think, and therefore to him we commit this great work. Do thou, O God, break
the Rocks of their hearts, and make them truly sensible, how difficult it is to
obtain the pardon of so great a Sin.

As for you that have consented before, or afterward to this bloody Fact, Deal
faithfully with your own Souls; make not less of it, than indeed it is; 1 Cor.
11.31.
Judge your selves, and ye shall not be judged, condemn your selves, and ye
shall not be condemned; make your peace with God before Amos 6.3.
the evil Day comes; Leave not this Guilt on your Houses, nor this Pollution,
like the Leprosy of Gehazi, on your Posterities for ever; Do you lament and
deplore the deed, and teach your Children to abominate the practice; make them
to understand the nature, and the experienced consequents of Rebellion; And let
us all bewail this Murder, and supplicate God's pardon for it. Joel 2.15, 16,
17.
Gather the People, sanctify the Congregation; Assemble the Elders, gather the
Children, and those that suck the Breasts, let the Bridegroom go out of his
Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; Let the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People O
Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach; Wherefore should they say among
the Heathen, where is now their God? As for you that were Neuters, take shame
to your Faces, that you could sit quiet Spectators of this Bloody Tragedy, and
never lift up your hands to divert the Blow. It was the brave Spirit of Vriah
in 2 Samuel 11.11.
Samuel: The Ark, and Israel abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the Servants
of my Lord are encamped in the open Fields, Shall I then go into mine House to
eat, and to drink, and to lie with my Wife? as thou live, and as thy Soul
lives, I will not do this thing. Do you think that this was done like the
Children of the true old valiant Britains, to let your courage, and honor,
like neglected Swords rust in your Cells, and let the Enemy destroy your Father
and your Prince? And what gained you by this indifferency? you were afterward
severely chastised for your sleep; and experience, has now taught you, that in
insolent Rebellions, there is as little security for the Neuter, as for him
that is the most vigorous Defender of the Laws; and whatsoever his fate is, be
sure none will take pity on any such.

But seeing that Repentance is very defective in those, where past evils give
not counsel of future care, and conscience, since nothing can redeem our credit
in that which is past, but our prudence and better management in the time to
come: Give me leave to advise all true and loyal Englishmen, as one that shall
in some measure share in your Prosperity, or in your Smart, to follow those
things that tend to the quiet of your own hearts, and that make for the peace,
and glory of God's Church amongst us, and the happiness of our dear and
Native-Countrey. And now you see the Rock, where you have once already suffered
Shipwreck, be sure to avoid it. Particularly, take care that you become not
guilty of As the Apostle adviser others in a case not much unlike, 1 Timothy 5.22.
Et ubi cadem ratio, idem jus.
other Men's sins, by putting Persons of dangerous Principles in a capacity of
doing public mischief. Remember the Blood of CHARLES the First, and whose
Delegates they were that brought his Blood on all your Heads. Know that at the
last Day, when God shall Judge all the deeds of Men, all your privileges, and
your capacities, and elections must be accounted for; and therefore see that
you use unbyassed, and clear Consciences in giving your suffrages, to those
that are to have hand in the Legislative Councels of this great Kingdom. Let
there be no 2 Samuel 16.7, 8.
Shimei's to speak evil of Rulers; no Gen 9.22.
cursed Cham's to pry into their Fathers nakedness; no mutinous, sullen, and
unpeaceable spirits; Let there be no Men of insolent and ambitious tempers; Let
there be none that are greedy of innovations; None that have an itch after ways
unknown to the Laws, under which your Fathers have for many Years flourished;
Let them be true old zealous Protestants, that 1 Pet. 2.17
love their neighbors, that fear God, and honor the King. Then Exo. 20.12
You may live long in the Land, which the Lord your GOD has given you, Ps.
112.17
to see your Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel.

But by the way, see that you all perfectly understand the poison and mischief
of that one Antichristian practice, of Dethroning Princes, and 2 These. 2.4.
of Men's exalting themselves above all that is called God; and let this never
be forgotten, that whether this be practiced by the Tyranny and Pride of One,
or Many; whether by the Usurpation of the Pope, or by the Madness of Sectaries;
it is justifiable in both alike; that is, it is in either, a Character of
Antichrist, and a Doctrine of Devils.

But to conclude, because it is utterly unfit, that in a thing of this serious,
and lamentable nature and importance, I should deal partially, and forbear any
Persons, that by any means, lie under the Guilt of this Crying Blood, and
especially, now my promise has obliged me to spare none; I must be bold to
affirm that which yet is a very sad thing to relate, that too many of those,
that have cast the whole charge of the Guilt of this Blood on the Persons of
others, are themselves in a great measure Guilty of the Blood of this blessed
Prince. Many there were that gained themselves a name and honor by adhearing to
his Cause, that were the greatest Instruments and means of the miscarriage and
unsuccessfulness of it. And alas, how many were there that had nothing good in
them, but the empty character of Loyalty, and under that skreen did more
mischief than the most incorrigible and furious Rebels of the whole Kingdom?
Nay, it was impossible, that ever the enemy could have studied so many
advantages, as you your selves gave them; some by Treachery and Falsehood; some
by Cowardice; some by ambitious Mutinies; and some by the most unheard of
Debauches in the whole World; so that they estranged the hearts of the People
from that most pious Prince; they made the ignorant think that the Master could
never be Righteous, that had such dissolute and profligate Servants; that that
Cause could never be of God, whose Defenders carried themselves like Devils.
They drank the blood of the poor Soldiers whilst they spent their Pay, and
brake the Nerves and Sinews of the War, when they spent it on their Lusts. It
was therefore your wickedness too, that brought CHARLES to the Block, and left
Him naked and exposed to the force of his Enemies. Nay, to this Day, many of
you, because you have not the compensations that you expected, have almost cast
off all sense of Religion, and grown indifferent and cold in the service of
God, and in Reverence to that Church, which formerly was your common boast. But
my advice must be the same to these, as to the former, and as the Apostles
counsel was to the Jews: Repent of your wickedness, that your sins may be
blotted out; cast not all the dirt of this great Guilt on others wholly, but
take up your own Load, and redeem your credit by new and pious lives; and let
it not hereafter be said, that there is one of CHARLES his Soldiers, but is an
Imitator of CHARLES his Virtues, and a steadfast Disciple to CHARLES his
Religion. Remember that the Blood of this most excellent Prince has given a
most ample testimony to the Protestant Cause, and that this inference is most
natural and undeniable; That if CHARLES be a true Martyr, the Church of England
is the truest Church. And, now let us all, without divided and dis-united
hearts, cast our selves low before GOD's Mercy Seat, and Implore his Pardon for
this Great and National Sin, and say:

Deliver Us from Blood-guiltiness, O God, the God of our Salvation, and our
Tongue shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness. Remember not Lord our Offenses,
nor the Offenses of our Forefathers, neither take thou Vengeance of our Sins;
Spare Us good Lord, spare thy People, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious Blood, and be not angry with Us for ever. Let the Blood of Jesus out
cry the Blood of Charles; the Blood of thine innocent Son, expiate the Blood of
thy righteous Servant; Make our hearts truly sensible of the Guilt of this
great Wickedness, and reconcile us to thee, whom we have most highly provoked;
that the Army of Saints, may equal the Army of Martyrs; that our sinful Nation
may no more feel the Scourges of thine heavy Hand; that our Consciences may be
healed, our Transgressions pardoned in this life, that we may obtain also the
Mansions and Felicity of true Penitents in the life to come; To which, God's
Grace and Infinite Mercy and Pardon bring us all, for the Merits of his Son; to
whom with the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be all Honor, and Glory,
World without end.

Amen.
FINIS.

