depiction of three people, one atop a pedestal holding a large cross, the
other two are standing below. bottom-center is a portrait of a man. War and
Peace RECONCILED
Religion

In a Dialogue between two Friends with some remarkable passages upon the
Troubles in Belgia.



War and Peace RECONCILED; OR, A Discourse of CONSTANCY IN Inconstant Times.

Containing Matter of Direction and Consolation against Public CALAMITIES.

Written Originally in a Foreign Language, and translated for the benefit of
the Gentry of this Nation.

LONDON, Printed, and sold by R. Royston, Bookseller to the King's most
Excellent Majesty. 1672.

To his very Worthy Friend JOHN HAREWELL In the Middle Temple Esquire.
AS soon as my spare hours were delivered of this birth; I resolved it should
be yours. Not that you cannot converse with Lipsius when you please, without
the help of an Interpreter: Nor that I pretend by so slight a present as this,
to discount with him; who has ever been ready to perform me all the best
Offices that can be expected from a generous and disinterested friendship. But,
to speak truth, I have done it in a kind of tenderness to my self: I know you
will look upon my prefixing your name to this Essay with other Eyes than some
others would; and will interpret that to be the Fruit of a well-meaning
affection; which perhaps they would have called the bold effects of an
unpardonable presumption. Being also conscious to my self, in what manner I
have humbled that mighty Genius, which moves it self (with a peculiar and happy
elegancy as well as reason) throughout almost every page of our Author, by the
cheap and base allay I have brought unto it: I determined to appease his Manes,
and make him some amends at least by the choice of such a patronage as possibly
himself would not have refused: I am sure I do not flatter you, when I say you
are none of those degenerate Britains, whom Gildas their own Countryman calls
aetatis atramentum; but such a one as Lipsius himself does else wheredescribe.
-- In quo, veteris vestigia recti
Et mores, video, ductos meliore metallo.
In whom the prints of ancient worth appear,
And the choice draughts of manners are as clear.


Go on Sir, and as you have hitherto very happily avoided those Rocks,
whereupon some others (in an Age like yours, and through the dangerous
allurements of a fortune at command) have fatally split themselves: So let
every new accession of years, bring along with it such improvements, as may
force us to acknowledge, that you have more than acquitted your self of all
that your youth had so liberally promised. These are such wishes as he shall
ever be prone to; who is

SIR, Your most obliged Friend and servant, N. WANLEY.
Coventry, October. 1668.
To the Noble and Magnifique CONSULS, And to the SENATE and PEOPLE Of ANTWERP.
THese Books of Constancy, which I both began and finished in the midst of the
troubles of my Country, I thought meet to dedicate, and devote to you; the
great Senators of so great a City. Your Dignity, Prudence, and Virtue, were
the motives to it; together with that humanity of yours which I have often
experienced, and which is peculiar to you; toward all that are good and
learned. You will not I suppose disdain the gift; which though small in it
self, will derive a kind of value from the mind of the Donour: Seeing I have
given you the very best, and greatest of such things, as my Scholastical stores
would at this time afford. To conclude, possibly the novelty of it may some way
recommend it. For (if I am not mistaken) I am the first, who have attempted the
opening, and clearing of this way of Wisdom, so long recluded, and overgrown
with thorns; which certainly is such, as (in conjunction with the holy
Scriptures) will lead us to tranquillity, and peace. For my own part, I wanted
not a desire, to render my thankful acknowledgments to you; and to contribute
to the profit of others; if I have not had the ability, it is but reasonable,
that you should be as equal to me, as I am to the great God; who I know has
not given all things to any one. Farewell.

JVSTVS LIPSIVS To the READER, Touching the design and End of this TREATISE.
Reader,
I Am not ignorant of those new judgments and censures I am likely to undergo
in this new way of writing: Partly, from such as will be surprised with the
unexpected profession of wisdom from him, whom they believed had only been
conversant in the more pleasing and delightful studies; and partly from such as
will despise and undervalue all that can be said in these matters, after what
the ancients have written. To both these; it is for my concern, and no less for
thine, that I should briefly reply. The first sort of persons seem to me to
miscarry in two most different respects: in their care, and their carelessness.
In the former that they assume to themselves a liberty of enquiring into the
actions and studies of others: in the latter, that their enquiries are yet so
overly and superficial For (that I may give them an account of me) the Hills
and Springs of the Muses did never so entirely possess me; as that I should not
find frequent opportunities to turn back my Eyes and Mind upon that severer
deity: I mean Philosophy. The studies of which (even from my Childhood) were so
pleasing to me, that in this youthful kind of ardour I seemed to offend, and to
stand in need of the bridle of restraint. My Tutors at Ubich know how all those
kind of books, were as it were forced out of my hands together with those
writings and commentaries which I had laboriously composed out of all the best
ranks of interpreters. Nor certainly did I afterward degenerate; for I know
that in all the course of my studies; if not in an exact and straight line, yet
at least in the flexure, I have tended toward this mark of wisdom. Not after
the rate of most here that deal in Philosophy: who doting upon some thorny
subtilties, or snares of questions, do nothing else but weave and unweave them
with a kind of subtle thread of disputations. They rest in words, and some
little fallacies; and wear away their days in the Porch of Philosophy, but
never visit its more retired apartments. They use it as a divertisement, not as
a remedy, and turn the most serious instrument of life, into a sportage with
trifles: Who amongst them seeks after the improvement of his manners, the
moderation of his affections; or designs a just end and measure for his fears
or hopes. Yes, they suppose that wisdom is so little concerned in these
things, that they think they do nothing, or nothing to the purpose that look
after them, And therefore if you consider of their life, and sentiments,
amongst the vulgar themselves you shall find nothing more foul than the one,
nor more foolish than the other. For as wine (though nothing is more wholesome)
is yet to some no better than poison: So is Philosophy to them that abuse it.
But my Mind was otherwise; who always steering my Ship, from these quick sands
of subtilties, have directed all my endeavors to attain that one Haven of a
peaceable and quiet mind. Of which study of mine; I mean these books as the
first and undeceivable instance. But say some others, these things have been
more fully and better treated of by the ancients. As to some of them I confess
it: As to all I deny it. Should I write any thing of manners or the affections
after Seneca and the divine Epictetus: I should have (my self being judge) as
little discretion as modesty: But if such things as they have not so much as
touched upon, nor any other of the ancients (for I dare confidently affirm it)
then why do they despise it, or why do they carp at it? I have sought out
consolations against public evils: Who has done it before me? Whether they
look upon the matter, or the method; they must confess they are indebted to me
for both: And for the words themselves (let me say it) we have no such penury,
as to oblige us to become suppliants to any Man. To conclude, let them
understand I have written many other things for others; but this book chiefly
for my self; the former for fame, but this for profit. That which one
heretofore said bravely and acutely; the same I now truly proclaim. To me a few
Readers are enough, one is enough, none is enough. All that I desire is, that
whosoever opens this book, may bring with him a disposition to profit, and also
to pardon. That if possibly have any where slipped (especially when I endeavor
to climb those steep places of providence, Justice and Fate) they would pardon
me. For certainly, I have no where erredout of malice and obstinacy: But rather
through humane ignorance and infirmity. To conclude, I desire to be informed by
them, and I promise that no Man shall be so ready to convince; as I to correct.
The other frailties of my nature, I neither dissemble nor extenuate; but
obstinacy and the study of contention, I do heartily pray I may never be guilty
of, and I do detest it. God send thee good health, my Reader; which I wish may
be in part to thee through this book.

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANCY.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The Preface and Introduction, a Complaint of the troubles of Belgia.
SOme few Years since traveling toward Vienna in Austria; not without a
signal Providence, I turned aside to the City of Liege; which as it was not
much out of my way: So I had some Friends there, whom both Custom and
Affection did oblige me to salute. Amongst these was Charles Langius (to say
nothing but what is truth) the very best and most Learned Man of all the
Belgians, I was received by him at his own House; where he sweetened my
entertainment, not only by the expresses of a civil and friendly respect; but
also by such kind of discourses; as I shall doubtless find advantageous to me,
during the remainders of my life. This, this I say was the Man, who by the
dissipation of some Mists of Vulgar Opinions, was the First that opened my
Eyes; and showed me the way, whereby without intricacy I might arrive at
those desirable places, which Lucretius calls The high-rais'd Temples which
the Wise
By learning make to top the Skies.


For one hot Afternoon (as being toward the end of June) while we vvalk'd in
the Court before his House: In very obliging Terms he asked me concerning my
Journey, and the Reasons that had moved me to it. After I had spoken many
things with equal Freedom and Truth, concerning the troubles of Belgia: I told
him at last, that howsoever I had pretended another; yet this was the very
Reason of my departure. For who, O Langius said I, is there to be found of so
flinty and hard a heart; as longer to endure these evils? We are tossed as you
see, for so many Years together in the storms of a Civil War: and are vvhirl'd
up and down in a Tempestuous Sea with the different Winds of Trouble and
Sedition. Does my temper incline me to ease and quiet? The hoarce accents of
Trumpets, and the clashings of Arms, do speedily interrupt me. Do I seek my
Divertisements in the Country or Gardens? The Soldier and Swash-buckler soon
fright me into the City. And therefore, O Langius, leaving this infested and
unfortunate Belgia (pardon me O thou Genius of my Country) I am resolved (as he
says) to shift my Habitation; and to fly into any part of the Earth, where I
may neither hear of the name or actions of this Race of Pelops. Langius
admiring and somewhat moved; Is it true then Lipsius, says he, that you will
needs depart from us? Either from you or most undoubtedly from this Life,
replied I. For what Sanctuary is there from these Evils, but only in the flight
of them? For to behold them and endure them daily I am not able Langius, as
being one whose heart you may be sure is not composed of Adamant. Langius
sighed at this discourse; and feeble Young Man said he, what kind of delicacy
is this? Or what may be thy meaning to seek for safety by flight? I acknowledge
your Country is full of Trouble and Turmoile; but what part of Europe is that
which is at this day free? Insomuch as you may truly praesage according to that
of Aristophanes, Things that are high with awful frown
High-thundring Jove will tumble down.


And therefore not so much our Country (Lipsius) as our Passions are to be
fled: and this Mind of ours is to be so framed and established, as that we may
find repose in the midst of troubles, and peace in the midst of Wars. They are
rather to be fled, Langius, (replied I with an ardour Youthful enough) for
certainly those evils that we hear of, do more lightly affect us, than those
we behold: and withal our selves (as they say) are out of Gunshot and the
dust of this contention. Do you not hear how craftily Homer advises?

Get out o'th compass of the Arrows flight,
Lest a new wound upon the former light.
CHAP. II. That Travail availes not against those Diseases which are within
us. It is rather a Symptom than a Cure: unless in some first and light motion
of the Affections.
YEs I hear him, said Langius, with a kind of Nod: but I had rather you would
hear the Voice of Wisdom and Reason. For those Clouds and Mists which enwrap
you Lipsius, are ingendered by the Vapors of Opinion. And therefore in this
Case (as Diogenes says) you have more need of Reason than a Rope: I mean such
a ray as may enlighten the darkness of your understanding. You are about to
leave your Country, but tell me seriously, when you forsake it, can you also
forsake your self? Take heed lest you experience the contrary; and carry with
you even in that bosom of yours, the source and fountain of all your evils. As
those who are sick of a Fever do continually toss and tumble, and shift their
Beds, with a vain hope of finding some ease thereby: In the same manner it is
with us, who do in vain pass from one Climate to another; while the sickness
is in our Minds. For this is to manifest, not to remove the disease: to make a
discovery of this Internal heat; but not at all to assuage it. The wise Roman
speaks excellently well. It Is the property of the sick not to endure any thing
long: and to make use of change it self, instead of a Remedy. Hence are those
straggling peregrinations, and those wandering Voyages upon the Shores
undertaken: Now by Land, and anon by Sea; with a levity that is ever disgusted
with whatsoever is present. You do therefore rather fly than escape troubles,
after the manner of that Hind in Virgil Which (while un^ary she at distance
feeds
Among the Craetan woods and nothing heeds)
Some Shepherds arrow strikes; away she hyes,
And through Dictaean woods and groves she flies:


But all in vain; for as the same Poet adds. -- the fatal reed
Sticks in her side, for all her speed.


It Is thus with you, who being inwardly smitten with this dart of Passion; do
not by travel shake it out: but rather carry it elsewhere. He that has broke
an Arm or Leg does not use to call for a Horse or Coach, but for a Surgeon:
What kind of Vanity then is that of yours; that causes you to seek the Cure of
an inward vvound, by motion and gadding up and down? For certainly it is the
mind which is sick; and all this outward weakness, despair and langour,
arises from this one Fountain, that it languishes and is cast down. That
Princely and Diviner part has cast away the Scepter; and has humbled it self
to that Degree of baseness; as to become a voluntary slave to its own Vassailes.

Tell me now in this Case; what advantage is to be hoped for, from Place or
Motion? Unless possibly there is any such Region, which can temper our Feats,
or bridle our hopes; or make us discharge our selves again of that filthy
matter of Vices, which we have so liberally taken down. But there is alas no
such, no not in the Fortunate Islands themselves; or if there be, be so kind as
to show us it, and we will all embody and fort with march thither. You will
say that very Motion, and change of place it self has that force; and that
those daily sights, that variety of Customs men and places, which we meet
with in travel; does recreate and rouse afresh the dejected Mind.

You are deceived Lipsius, for (to speak seriously and as the matter does
require) I do not so far forth depress travail as to grant it no kind of power
over Man, and his Affections. Yes, let it be yielded that it has, but hitherto
only, that it may possibly remove some lighter taedium; or as it were
loathings of the Mind: but as for the Diseases of it, they have lodged
themselves so deep therein, as to mock the Virtues of any external Medicines.
Music, Wine, Sleep have frequently cured those first and lesser Motions of
Anger, Grief, or Love: But never the Disease, when once it has been fixed and
has fastened its Roots deep. The case is the same here; Travail will possibly
heal some lighter languors, but it can never cure the true ones. For those
First Motions which do arise from the Body, do after a sort still remain in
the Body; or at most (if I may say so) in the super^cies of the Mind: and
therefore it is no marvail, if some lesser sponge be able to wipe them out.
But it is not so with those inveterate Affections; which have their Seat, yea
throne in the very Soul of the Mind. When therefore you have gone far, and
spent much time in travail, when you have circled both Sea and Land: Yet no
Seas will suffice to vvash them out, nor any Earth to overvvhelme them. They
will follovv you, and whether on Foot or on Horseback, that I may use the
Phrase of the Poet; these black cares will sit behind you. When Socrates was
asked by one what might be the Reason that he had no better accomplished
himself by travail: he answered him pertinently; because said he you did not
travail from your self. Somewhat like unto this I shall now say. Even
vvhithersoever you shall betake your self; you will have in your company a
corrupted and a corrupting Mind; none of the most desirable associates. I wish
it an associate only, but I fear it may prove a leader: For your Affections
will not so much follow you; as they will dragg you after them.

CHAP. III. That the true Diseases of the Mind are not removed by travail, but
are thereby the more exasperated. That it is the Mind which is sick; a remedy
for which is to be sought for from Wisdom and Constancy.
YOu will say then: does not travail call us away from those truer evils?
will not the prospect of Fields, Rivers, and Mountains place us beyond the
sense of our Grief? They may possibly call you off; and place you beyond: but
neither for any time nor with any firmness. As the eye is not long delighted
with a picture how excellent soever: So all that variety of Men and places,
may affect us with the Novelty; but it will not last long. This is indeed a
kind of vvandring from Evils; but not the flight of them: Nor is it in the
power of travail to break; all it can do is to lengthen, this Chain of our
Griefs. What advantage is it to me for a while to behold the Light, and then
forthwith to pass into some comfortless Dungeon? Such is the case; and verily
the whole Body of these outward pleasures do lie in ambush for the Soul; and
hurt us the more securely, while they pretend to assist us. As the weaker
sort of Medicines do rather exasperate than draw forth the peccant humor: So
this vain complacencie does increase and swell the Tide of these desires in
us. For the Mind does not long wander from it self; but by and by how
unwilling soever is compelled to return home, unto its old familiatitie with
Evils. Those very Cities and Mountains which you go to see; will reduce to
your thoughts the Memory of your Country: And in the midst of all your
delights; you will either see or hear of something, which will unclose
afresh the vvounds of your Griefs: Or if possibly you may rest avvhile; it
will prove but like to one of those shorter slumbers; that leave the avvaked
party, in the same or a greater Fever. For there are a sort of desires which
being interrupted do increase the more: And are sensibly the stronger for
having had Vacations.

Away then Lipsius with these vain yea dangerous experiments; more like to
poisons than remedies: And betake your self to those, which how severe soever,
are yet the true ones. Are you about to change your Soil and Climb? O rather
let it be your Mind: which you have unhappily withdrawn from the Obedience of
Right Reason: for no other purpose than to make it a Slave to your Affections.
The unsound temper of that is the Root of this despair; and thence are your
languors because that is corrupted. It behooves you then rather to endeavor a
change of that, than of the place; and to strive not so much to be else where,
as to be another. You long now to see the fruitful Austria, the Loyal and
Stout Vienna, that King of Rivers the Danubius, and those other rare and
strange things which Men so delightfully listen to the Relations of.

But how much better were it for you, if you had the same Ardour and eagerness
after Wisdom? If you would foot it in those fertile Fields; if you would
search out the springs of Humane perturbations; in fine, if you would erect
such Bulvvarks and Forts; as might render you impregnable to all the storms and
assaults of such desires as are Illegitimate? For these are the grand Remedies
for your Disease; and every thing besides are but as Lint and Lavatory. Your
departure will nothing help you; It will be small advantage to you that you
have Escaped to many Grecian Cities, and
Through squadrons of armed Ships get safe to Land.


You will find an Enemy within your self; and (laying his hand on my breast)
in that so private an apartment. What matter is it how peaceable those places
are to which you shall arrive: So long as you carry a War along with you? Or
how quiet? When troubles not only surround you; but are got within you. For
this disagreeing Mind of ours, will ever be piquering with it self: Desiring
and flying; hoping and desparing. And as those flying Cowards do most of all
expose themselves to danger; that discover their unarmed Backs to their
Enemies: So those Errants and Freshvvater Soldiers also do: who as yet did
never maintain a fight with their Affections but always fled before them. But
thou Young Man, if thou vvilt hearken unto me, shall stand, and fortify thy
self against this Enemy of Grief. For above all things it is constancy you
stand in need off: and there are some who have commenced Conquerours by
fighting, but not a single Person by flying.

CHAP. IV. The Definitions of Constancy; Patience; Right Reason and Opinion:
The difference betwixt Obstinacy and Constancy, and betwixt Patience and
Stupidity.
SOmewhat raised with this Discourse of Langius, there is much of Noble and
Gallant (said ^) in these Advices of yours: And now am I endeavoring to raise
up my self and stand: But to as little purpose as persons that attempt the same
thing in their sleeps. For not to dissemble, Langius, I tumble back into my
former Seat; and as well public as private Cares stick fast in my perplexed
Mind. Drive from me (if it is possible) these Vultures which are continually
pecking, and take from me these Ligatures of Anxiety with which I feel my
self bound unto this Caucasus. I shall doubtless take them away replied he, and
as another Hercules, set at liberty this Prometheus: Do you only attend and
consider. I did before invite you to Constancy, Lipsius, and it is in that I
have placed the Hope and Sanctuary of all your Safety. This therefore in the
first place is to be understood by us. Now by Constancy I here understand; AN
UPRIGHT UNMOVED STRENGTH OF THE MIND; NEITHER ELEVATED NOR DEPRESSED BY
EXTERNAL OR ACCIDENTAL OCCURRENCES. I said a STRENGTH, and I thereby understand
such a firmness as is begot in the Mind, not by Opinion, but by Judgment and
right Reason. For above all things I would exclude from hence Pervicaciousness
(or whether I may better call it Pertinaciousness) which it self is the
strength of an Obedient Mind, but such only as is engendered by the vvind of
Pride and vain Glory; and is but in one part of it only. For those Pervicacious
Persons though they are not (swollen as they are) easily to be depressed: Yet a
light matter does lift them up. Not unlike unto a bladder which being filled
with vvind will not sink without difficulty; but appears aloft, and bounds
upon the Water of its own accord. Such is the flatulent hardness of these Men;
which as I said arises from Pride, and too high an estimate of self, and by
consequence from Opinion. But the true Mother of Constancy, is Patience and
lowliness of the Mind; which I define; A VOLUNTARY AND COMPLAINTLESSE
ENDURANCE OF ALL THOSE THINGS WHATSOEVER THEY BE, THAT FALL OUT TO, OR FALL
UPON A MAN FROM ELSEWHERE. Which being taken up, upon the actount of right
Reason, is that only Root, from whence the height of this excellent Oak-like
strength does vvear it self. For here also it is requisite that you should be
heedfull, lest Opinion should impose upon you, which frequently in the room of
Patience does subrogate a kind of abject and stupid remper of the Mind; a very
Vice, and which arises from too low an estimate of our selves. As for Virtue
she ever marches in the middle path, and is cautiously heedfull lest there
should be any thing of Excess or Defect in any of her Actions. For still she
directs her self by the Balance of right Reason, and has that alone for the
rule and square of her Test. Now this right Reason is nothing else but, A TRUE
APPREHENSION AND JUDGMENT OF HUMANE AND DIVINE MATTERS, AS FAR AS THEY
APPERTAIN TO US: Contrary hereunto is Opinion which is A FUTILE AND FALLACIOUS
JUDGMENT CONCERNING THE SAME THINGS.

CHAP. V. The Originals of Reason and Opinion. The Power and Effects of each.
That leads to Constancy; this to Levity.
BUt forasmuch as from this double spring (I mean of Reason and Opinion) does
arise not only the strength or weakness of the Mind: But also every of those
things for which we are accounted praiseworthy, or reproveable amongst Men:
I suppose I shall not do amiss, if I go about a little more copiously to
Discourse of the Original and Nature of them both. For as Wools must have a
previous tincture and preparation by some other juices; before they are capable
of receiving as they should that last and more excellent color they are
intended for: After the same manner, Lipsius, your Mind is to be prepared by a
preceding Discourse; before I shall be able (as I would) to dye it in the last
purple of Constancy. There are therefore (as you well know) two parts in Man,
Soul and Body: the one more Noble as resembling Spirit and Office; the other is
more Base as it respects the earth: These two are joined together, yet with a
kind of disagreeing Concord, nor do they easily accord with one another,
especially in those matters wherein Sovereignty, or subserviency is concerned.
For both have a desire to sway; but that especially that ought not. Earth
strives to advance it self above its own fire; and Clodds are ambitious to get
above the Clouds. From hence are those broils and troubles in a Man; and as it
were a continual fight, betwixt two parties that are alvvayes Skirmishing
with each other. The chief Leaders, and as it were Generals unto these are
Reason and Opinion. The one is for the Soul and Wars therein; the other is
for the Body, and in the Body it fights. Reason derives its Pedigree from
Heaven; yea from God himself, and very highly does Seneca extol it, as a part
of the Divine Spirit infused into Man. For this is that most excellent faculty
of understanding and judging, which is no less the perfection of the Soul,
than the Soul it self is the perfection of the Man. The Greeks call it the
Mind, and so the Latins, or else the Mind of the Soul. For (that you be not
mistaken) the whole Soul is not right Reason; but that only therein which is
simple, Uniform, unmixed, severed from all Lees and Dreggs, and (in a word)
that which is in it of sublime and celestial. For the Soul it self (howsoever
it is lamentably corrupted and infected, with the stain of the Body, and the
contagion of the Senses) does yet inwardly retain some certain Footsteps of
its Original: and there are in it (very clearly discernible) some sparkling
remainders of that first and purer fire. Hence are those stings of Conscience
even in the vvorst and most profligate Persons: Hence are those inward
scourges and gnawings; and hence is that approbation of a better Life, which
is frequently extorted from them, though not without a reluctance in
themselves. For that sound and holyer part within us, may possibly for a time
be suppressed, oppressed it cannot. And that burning Flame may be covered; but
cannot be extinguished. For those little Fires do always shine forth, and
sparkle out, to enlighten us amongst these shades, cleanse us from these
stains; guide us in our vvandrings; and to show us the way to Constancy and
Virtue. As the Heliotrope and some other Flowers do by a natural instinct bend
toward the Sun: So does Reason turn it self to God and the Original of its
self. Firm and immovable in what is good, one and the same in its Censures;
ever desiring or flying one and the same thing, the very source and Fountain of
right Council and sound Judgment. To obey this is no less than to command, and
to be subject here is to sway the Scepter of the Universe. Who ever hearkens
unto this has already subjugated the rebellious desires and motions of the
Mind: And he shall never be wildred in the Labyrinths of this Life, who remits
himself to the guideance of this Theseian Clevv. God himself by this his Image
comes unto us (nay which is yet more) into us. But that baser and unsounder
part (I mean Opinion) it owes its Original to the Body (that is to say) to
Earth, and therefore savours nothing besides it. For the Body howsoever it is
immovable and senseless of it self; yet it derives both Life and Motion from
the Soul; and on the other side presents to the Soul, the Images of things
through the Windows of the senses. Thus there is a kind of Communion and
Society Cemented betwixt the Soul and the Body: but such a communion, as if we
attend the Event, proves unfortunate to the Soul. For through this it is that
the Soul, by almost insensible degrees, is led from the Nobler place of its
residence, becomes addicted to and is mingled with the Senses, and from this
impure mixture, is the birth of Opinion; which is no other than a vain
shadow, and resemblance of Reason. The true seat of it is Sense, the Parent,
Earth; and therefore abject and base as it is, it advances not it self, it
aspires not, nor so much as regards any thing that is lofty and Aetherial. It
is ever vain, uncertain, deceitful, ill-advising, and as perversely judging:
and that which it chiefly aims at, is at once to deprive the Soul of
Constancy and Truth. It languishes for this thing to day, and on the Morrow
despises it, this it approves and this it condemns; nothing with judgment,
but gratifying the Body and indulging the Senses in every thing. As the Eye
makes but a false measure of those things which it beholds through some Cloud
or in the Water: So does the Mind but perversely judge of what it beholds
through the misty Mediums of Opinion. This (if you consider well) is to Man
the Mother of his Evils; and this is the Author of that confused and perturbed
Life within us. That cares do disquiet us, it is from hence; that the Passions
do distract us, it is from hence; and if Vices do Reign over us, it is also
from hence. And therefore as those who are resolved to abolish Tyranny in any
City; do first of all demolish the Castle: So if we are Serious in the
prosecution of a good Mind, we must subvert this Citadel of Opinions. For we
shall fluctuate with them for ever: Anxious, Plaintfull, Discomposed, and
never (as we ought) assigning what is equal either to God or Man. As a void
and empty Ship, is tossed in the Sea, with every wind: So will that Vagrant
Mind of ours be, which the weight, and (as it were) the ballast of Reason
has not established.

CHAP. VI. The praise of Constancy, and a serious exhortation to pursue it.
LEvity therefore Lipsius (as you see) is the Comrade of Opinion, and the
property of it is alvvayes to change and to repent. But the associate of Reason
is Constancy; to the putting on of which I do very seriously exhort you. To
what purpose is it to have recourse unto things vain and external? This is
that only Helena which can present you with that true and rich Nepenthe, in
which you may drown the memory of all your Cares and Griefs; which if once you
have tasted and taken down; proof against every chance, in the same equal
tenor, and not vvavering after the manner of a balance; you may challenge to
your self that great and God-like property of Immovable. Have you not observed
in the Scutcheons and Impresses of some of the Princes of this Age; that high
and envied Motto, NEITHER BY HOPE NOR FEAR? It shall be yours; who being truly
a King, and truly free; shall be a subject unto God alone, exempt from the
bondage both of Affections and Fortune. As there are some certain Rivers which
are said to pass through the middle of Seas; and yet preserve themselves
entire: so you shall travel through surrounding tumults in such a manner, as
not to contract any saltness from this Sea of sorrows. Do you fall? Constancy
will lift you up. Do you stagger? It will support you. Shall you hasten to
some Pond or Halter? It will solace and reduce you from the very Portalls of
Death. Do you only deliver, and raise up your self: Steer the course of your
Ship unto this Haven, where Peace and Security dwell: In which there is a
Refuge and a Sanctuary from troubles and perplexities. Whereunto (assuredly) if
you are once arrived; should your Country not only totter, but fall into
ruins; your self should stand unshaken. When Storms and Tempests, and
Thunderbolts fall about you; yet then you shall cry out with as true, as loud
a Voice, In midst of all these Waves I stand
Secure, as if upon the Land.


CHAP. VII. What it is and how manifold, that opposes Constancy: they are
external good and evil things. Those evils are twofold, Public and Private;
those which are Public seem the most grievous and dangerous.
WHen Langius had spoken these things with a Voice and Air more earnest than
he used: a spark of this desirable fire did seize on me also. And my Father
said I (for I call you truly not feignedly so) lead me wheresoever you please,
and instruct, correct and direct me. You have a patient prepared for any method
of Operation whether you shall determine to make use of the Caustic, or shall
proceed to Amputation. Both these replied Langius, in as much as in some places
the stubble of idle Opinions is to be set on sire, and elsewhere the shrubs of
Passions are to be grubb'd up by the very Roots. But shall we continue our
walk; or whether is it not better and most convenient for us to sit? To sit
replied I, for I begin to be hot, and that upon diverse accounts: So as soon as
Langius had caused Chairs to be brought into the same Court, and that we were
both sat; turning himself toward me, he again thus began.

Hitherto Lipsius I have been laying the Foundations vvhereupon I might safely
erect my discourse: Now if you will I shall draw a little nearer to you,
enquire out the causes of your Grief, and as they say, lay my Finger upon the
very sore. There are two things that lay Battery to this fort of Constancy
within us. False Goods and false Ills. Both which I thus define. THINGS NOT
WITHIN BUT ABOUT US and WHICH PROPERLY DO NEITHER DAMAGE NOR ADVANTAGE THIS OUR
INWARD MAN THAT IS OUR SOUL. And therefore I will not call them Good or Evil;
as if they were so absolutely and simply: But only from Opinion and the common
mistake of the Vulgar. Amongst the First they Rank Riches, Honors, Power,
Health, Long-life. Amongst the Last Poverty, Infamy, want of Power, Diseases
and Deaths; and in a word whatsoever is accidental and external. From these
two stocks those four chief Affections grow up in us which compass and perplex
the whole life of Man. Desire and Joy, Fear and Grief. The two former of these
respect some imagined good; and thence are bred: the two last respect supposed
evils. Each of them do equally hurt and molest the Mind: and unless care be
taken to dethrone it; though not after one and the same manner. For whereas
the repose and Constancy of the Mind is placed in a kind of even and equal
balance; they force it from this poise, the one by hoisting, and the other by
depressing it. But these false goods together with the Elation of the Mind by
them, I shall purposely pass over (as not concerning your Disease) and hasten
to those I call false evils; The Brigade of which is also twofold; Public and
Private. The Public I thus define; SUCH AS THE SENSE OF WHICH, DOES AT ONE AND
THE SAME TIME EXTEND TO MANY. The Private; SUCH AS REACH BUT TO SINGLE PERSONS.
Amongst the former I reckon Wars, Pestilence, Famine, Tyranny, Slaughter, and
such other things as spread abroad; and do respect the community: Amongst the
latter I put Grief, Poverty, Disgrace, Death; and what ever is enclosed within
private vvalls, and is the concernment of some particular person. It is not
upon any frivolous account that I thus distinguish. Forasmuch, as indeed that
Man mourns otherwise and in a different Fashion who laments the Calamity of
his Country, the Exile and Destruction of many; than he who only sighs for his
own misfortunes. Add to this, that from each of these do arise different
Distempers, and if I mistake not, the more grievous and durable from the
former. For most of us are concerned in Public Calamities; whether it is that
they rush upon us with an impetuous vehemence: Or as it were in a formed
Battalia do overwhelm the Opposer, or rather that they flatter us with a kind
of Ambition, that keeps us ignorant and insensible, that through them a
sickness is bred in our Minds. For whoever he is that bows under a private
Grief, he must of necessity acknowledge his vice and weakness; although he
amend it not, for what excuse has he? But he who falls under this other; so
far is he many times from the acknowledgement of his fall and fault, that he
often makes it his boast, and esteems it a praiseworthy thing. For it is
styled Piety and Commiseration, and there wants but little; that this public
Fever is not consecrated not only amongst the Virtues; but the very Deities
themselves. The Poets and Orators do everyvvhere extol and inculcate the
fervent Love of our Country: Nor do I my self desire altogether to erase it,
but to temper and moderate it; this is all that I contend for. For assuredly it
is a very vice, a Disease, the very fall of the Mind, and the casting of it
down from its seat. But vvithall on the other side, it is a very grievous
Disease, inasmuch as therein there is not a single Grief only, but your own and
another confounded, and that other is also double, respecting the Men, or the
Country.

That you may the better apprehend what I have more obscurely delivered take
this instance. You see your Belgia is at this time pressed with more than a
single Calamity; the Flames of this Civil war does enwrap it on every side:
You see on all hands that Fields are waste and spoiled, Towns are burnt and
overturned; men are taken and slain; Vlatrons are defiled; Virgins ravished,
and whatsoever in humanities use to accompany war. Is not here matter of
Grief to you? Grief indeed; but a various and divided one (if you consider it
well; inasmuch as at one and the same time, you lament your self, and your
Countrymen, and your Country besides. In your self your losses, in your
Countrymen their various Fortune and Death, in your Country, the change and
overthrow of its State. Here you have cause to cry out; O miserable man that I
am! there So many of my Countryment must stand,
The shock of Plagues brought by a hostile hand!
and lastly elsewhere: My Father! My Country! So that he who is not affected
with these things: he on whom the wedge and weight of so many invading Evils
can work nothing, must certainly be either a very temperate and wise person,
or exceedingly hard hearted.

CHAP. VIII. Public Evils opposed. Three Affections restrained: and of these;
First, a certain Ambitious Simulation, by which Men lament their own
misfortunes as Public Evils.
WHat think you Lipsius have I not seemed sufficiently to prevaricate with my
Constancy, and to plead the Cause of your Grief? Yet I have done but as
courageous and brave Chieftains use; I have dared out your whole Forces into
the Field; and now I mean to deal with them, in a Skirmish first and then a
joined Battle: In our Skirmish, there are three Affections (Great Enemies to
Constancy) which at the first onset are to be thrown under Foot, these are
Simulation, Piety and Pity: I Will begin with Simulation.

You are not able you say to endure these public evils, that they are not only
grievous to you but Death it self. Are you in good earnest, or whether is not
there here some imposture and cousenage? At this a little heated: Nay said I do
you ask this in earnest, or whether is it mockery of my Grief, and on purpose
to provoke me? I am serious replied he, for there are not a few of this Spittle
of yours that impose upon their Physicians, and Counterfeit a public Grief
which yet in reality is but a private one. I demand therefore whether you are
certain that this care, Which deeply rooted in your breast
Does you so grievously molest,
be taken up by you, upon your Countries account, or only upon your own? What
do you doubt it said I? I mourn solely upon the account of my Country, my
Country Langius. He shaking his head as unsatisfyed; consider of it again and
again Young Man said he; I shall vvonder to find in you so excellent and
sincere a Piety, for certainly it is to be met with, but in a very few. I
acknowledge it is usual for Men to complain of public evils; nor is there any
Grief so common, and (as I may so say) that does sooner show it self in the
Forehead: But if you examine it a little more nearly; you shall soon discover
some disagreement betwixt the heart and the tongue. The Calamity of my Country
does affect me; are words more ambitious than true: born in the Lips rather
than in the Reins. That which is reported of Polus the Famous Actour, that
when he was to play such a part at Athens as required to be presented with a
remarkable passion; he privily brought in the Urne and Bones of his dead Son,
and so filled the whole Theater with unfeigned Lamentations and Tears; the
same may be said of most of you. You play your parts in a Comedy (my Friends)
and disguised in the masking Face of your Country; you lament your private
losses with the truest and most lively Tears; The whole World says Arbiter
are employed in a Stage Play: I am sure it is so here. This Civil War (say
they) torments us, the shedding of innocent blood, and the decease of Liberty
and the Laws. Say ye so? I perceive indeed your Grief, I now ask and enquire of
the cause of it. Is it because Public matters are but in an Evil case? Away
with thy vizzard thou Stage Player; for it is because thy own concernments are
so. We have often seen the Rusticks tremble and throng together unto the
Temples, upon the approach of some sudden and unexpected Calamity; but so soon
as it is over, call aside those very men; examine them apart, and you will
find that each of these was in fear only for his Corn, and some little Close
of his own. Let them cry Fire, Fire, in this City, and I may almost affirm that
the very Blind and the Lame will run to quench it. But what think you? Is it
for the Love of their Country? Inquire of themselves I pray, and the answer
will be because the loss, or at least the fear of it does extend to every Man
in particular. It is in this case, after the very same manner: Public evils do
generally afflict and disquiet Men; not because many are concerned in those
losses: but because themselves are amongst those many.

CHAP. IX. A clearer discovery of this Simulation by Examples; something (by
the way) of our true Country. Of that malice in Men, which occasions them to
rejoice in the Evils of others, when themselves are secure.
BE you therefore the Judge, and let this cause be pleaded before your own
Tribunal; only (as I said before) let the disguise be taken off. As thus. Do
you indeed fear this War? You do fear it. Upon what account? Because
Pestilence and Slaughter are the companions of War. To whom comes that
Pestilence? To others indeed for the present, but it may also in time reach
unto you. Behold there the true source of your Grief; and (if without the rack
you will confess the truth) it has no other fountain. For as when the
lightning has struck down some one; even those also tremble who are near: so
in those great and Common Calamities, the loss arrives unto few; but the fear
unto all. Now take but that away, and together with it this grief also is
removed. If War be amongst the Aethiopians or Indians, you are not moved at
all (for you are in no danger) but if in Belgia, then you lament and take on,
and deliver up your self to all the expressions of sorrow. But if you bewail
Public evils as such; where lies the difference? you will say that is not my
Country. Thou Fool! Are not they also men? of the same stock and original with
they self? under the same Canopy of heaven; and on the same Globe of Earth?
suppose you that this little Horizon which these mountains terminate, and these
Rivers bound, is your Country? you are mistaken; It is the whole World,
wheresoever there are men sprung from that celestial seed. Socrates of old
replied excellently to one that asked him of what Country he was: of the World
said he. For a great and lofty mind includes not it self within the narrow
limits of opinion: but in its apprehension and thought embraces this whole
universe as its own. We have seen and derided the folly of such; whose keepers
have tied them in a nooz of straw only; or some slender thread: and yet they
have stood as if they were shackl'd in fetters of iron: such a kind of
madness is this of ours; who by the vain bond of opinion are restrained to a
certain part of earth. But to omit these stronger vvayes of reasoning (in
regard I fear you are not yet able to concoct them) I shall add this farther.
Suppose that some god should promise you, that during this war, your helds
should be untouched; your house and money safe, and your self set on some
mountains top, folded in one of Homers clouds: would you grieve still? I will
not say it of you, but there are a sort of men, that would even rejoice, and
greedily feed their eyes with the confused slaughter of dying men. What do you
deny this, or seem to vvonder at it? I tell you there is a kind of inbred
malice in the disposition of mankind; which as the old Poet speaks Joys at
another man's calamities. And as there are a sort of Apples, which to the taste
are sweetly sovvre: such are other men's perplexities when our selves are
secure. Set me but a man on such a shore of the Ocean where he may behold a
Shipvvrack, he will possibly be affected, but not without a certain pleasing
titillation of the Mind; as one that beholds other Men's extremities without
his own: But place the same Man in the same endangered Ship, and then he will
grieve (I Will vvarrant ye) after another fashion. It is the same here when we
have said and done all that we can: And we do bewail our own Miseries
truly and unfeignedly; while we lament those that are public only to be
talked of, or because it is a custom. Excellently Pindar Our own misfortunes
when they light
they wound us very near;
But let another feel the spite
Our hearts are quickly clear.


Wherefore at the last Lipsius, dravv aside this Scenick Tapestry, fold up this
Veil of the Stage, and without Simulation, show us your self in the Genuine
Countenance of your own Grief.

CHAP. X. A Complaint of Langius his so liberal Reproof. That it is the part of
a Philosopher. Endeavors of refuting what was before said. Our Obligation and
Love to our Country.
THis first Skirmish seemed to me somevvhat sharp, and therefore interposing,
what kind of Liberty (said I) or rather, what sharpness of speech is this?
You are so smart that I may well call unto you with Euripides, Add not
affliction to a Soul distressed,
I am already but too much oppressed.


Langius smiling, and what said he do you then expect at my hands, Wafers or
Muscadell? It is not long since you called for the sharpest Methods of
Surgery; And rightly, for you hear a Philosopher Lipsius and not a Minstrel;
whose design is to teach, not to entertain, to profit, and not to please. I
had rather you should blush and be ashamed, than laugh: and that you should
repent rather than triumph. The School of a Philosopher, O yea Men (said Rufus
of old) is the shop of a physician, whereunto Men hasten for health and not
for Divertisement. This Physician neither flatters nor smooths up any, but
pierces, tents, and searches the vvound, and with a kind of sharp Salt of
Speech, scoures away that Scurfe that cleaves to our Minds. And therefore
Lipsius dream not (no not hereafter) of Roses, Pulse, and Poppyes, but of
Thorns and Poynards, of Worme-wood and Vinegar. But said I Langius (if I may
say it) you deal with me in an ill and malicious manner: Nor do you as a
skillful vvrastler cast me upon a right lock; but supplant me by a cheat. In a
counterfeit manner (say you) we lament our Country. Do I? It is not so. For to
grant you this (as one that means ingemously) that I have therein a respect
unto my self, yet not unto my self alone. For I do lament Langius, I do lament
my Country in the First place, and I will lament it, although in the midst of
its hazzards, there should be no danger to me. And that upon the justest
grounds, for this is she which has entertained, fostered, and nourished me;
and is according to the common sense of Nations our most Reverend and Venerable
Parent. But in the mean time you assign me the whole Universe as my Country.
Who doubts it? But yet even your self will confess, that besides this vast and
common one, I have another more limited and peculiar Country; unto which by a
certain secret bond of Nature I have a nearer Obligation. Unless you do imagine
that there is no force in our being swathed and suckl'd in that our Native
soil, which we have first greeted with this Body of ours; and first set foot
upon, whose Air we have breathed; in which our Infancy has cried, our
Childhood played, and in which our youth has been educated and trained up.
Where the Skies and Rivers, and Fields are familiar with our eyes: wherein in a
continued order, are our Kindred and Friends, and Associates: and so many other
invitations unto Joy; as we in vain hope to meet with in any other place of
the Earth. Nor are these ties (as you seem to assert) from the slender threads
of Opinion, but from the strong Chains of Nature it self. Go to the Creatures
themselves and behold the vvildest among them do love and own the places where
they lodge, and the Birds their Nests. The very Fishes themselves, in that vast
and boundless Ocean, do yet delight in the enjoyment of some certain part of
it. For what should I speak of Men? Who whether they are civilized or still in
Barbarism; are yet so glew'd to their Native Earth, that whosoever is a Man
will never doubt to dye for, and in it. And therefore Langius this new and
rigid Wisdom of yours, (for the present) I neither embrace nor comprehend, I am
rather the Disciple of Euripides more truly affirming, that Necessity it self
commands
All Men to love their Native Lands.


CHAP. XI. The Second Affection of too much Love to our Country refuted. That
it is falsely called Piety. As also whence this Affection has its Original.
What is properly and truly our Country.
LAngius smiling at this discourse; Young Man (said he) your Piety is
wonderful, and now it concerns the Brother of Marcus Antonius to look after
his Surname. Notwithstanding it falls out well, that this Affection does so
readily present it self and advance before its colors, which I had before
determined to charge and to overthrow with some light endeavor. But in the
first place I must seize upon as spoil that very beautiful Garment wherewith it
has unhappily attyr'd it self: For this Love unto our Country is commonly
called Piety; which for my part as I do not understand, so neither am I able
to endure. For how comes it to be Piety? Which I acknowledge to be an excellent
Virtue, and properly nothing else but A LAWFUL, DUE, HONOR AND LOVE TO GOD,
AND OUR PARENTS. With what Fore head now does our Country seat it self in the
midst of these? Because say they it is that which is our most Ancient and
Reverend Parent. Ah silly Souls! And herein injurious not only to Reason but
also unto Nature it self. Is that a Parent? Upon what account, or in what
respect? For I profess I see not, if you Lipsius are any sharper sighted, help
to enlighten me. Is it because it has entertained us (for that you seemed to
insinuate but now) the like has been done to us often by an Host or Inkeeper.
Has it cherished us? So have our Nurses, and those Women that, when time
was, bare us too and fro, with a far greater tenderness. Has it nourished
us? This Office it performs daily to Beasts and Trees, and all sorts of Grain,
and so do also those great Bodies; Heaven, Air and Water, as well as the
Earth. To conclude, transport your self, and any other soil will perform the
same. These are frothy light words, from which nothing can be extracted
besides a certain vulgar and unprofitable juice of Opinion. Those are indeed
our Parents, who have conceived, begot, and gone with us; to whom we are
seed of their seed, blood of their blood, and flesh of their flesh. Of all
which if there is any thing which in any degree of comparison, may be fitly
spoken of our Country: I am willing that all my attempts, against this kind of
Piety, should prove but lost labor. But (say you) there are many learned and
great Men, who every where have spoken after this fashion. I acknowledge it,
but it was then when they had respect to Fame only, not to truth; which if
you will follow, you shall restore back that Sacred and August Name unto God;
or (if you please) to your Parents, and command this Affection (when it is
corrected) to be contented with the honest name of Charity. But thus far
concerning the name only, let us now consider the thing; which truly I shall
not wholy remove, but moderate, and pare (as it were) with the Penknife of
Right Reason. For as the Vine unless you prune it, will very vvidely extend it
self: So will those Affections more especially, whose Sails are swelled with
any gust of popularity. And I readily confess to you Lipsius (for I have not so
put off at once, both the Man and the Citizen) that there is in every one of
us, a kind of inclination and Love to this lesser country of ours: the causes
and Original of which I perceive are not so clearly understood by you. For you
will have it to be from Nature, whereas it is indeed from a kind of usage and
Custom. For after that Men from that rude and solitary life, were forced from
the Fields into Towns, and began to build Houses and Fortifications, to grow
into Societies, and informed Bodies, to make or repel invasions: From that
time there did of necessity commence amongst them, a kind of Communion and
Partnership as to diverse things. They together possessed such a part of Earth
with such and such limits: They had their Temples, Marketplaces, Treasuries
and Courts of Judicature in Common; and (which is the principal bond) their
Rites, Statutes, and Laws. Which things yet our covetousnes, did so begin to
love and care for (nor did it therein altogether err) as its own peculiar. For
there is indeed unto every particular Citizen, a true right as to those things,
nor do they farther differ from private posessions than in this, that they are
not the propriety of any Person alone. Now that Community does express (as it
were) a kind of form and face of a new State, which we call a
Commonwealth, and the same thing (properly) our Country. In which when Men
did understand how much of moment there was in reference to the safety of
every particular Person, there were then also Laws made concerning the
improvement and defense of it, or at least a Custom derived from our
Ancestors, which has the force of a Law. Hence it comes to pass, that we
rejoice in its advantages, and grieve in its Calamities: Forasmuch as in very
deed our private substance is safe, in the safety of it, and perishes in the
devastations of it. Hence is charity or Love toward it, which our Ancestors
(upon the account of the public good, whereunto also a certain secret
providence of God does attract us) have increased, while they endeavored in
every of their words and deeds to advance the Majesty of their Country. This
Affection therefore in my Opinion is from Custom, but if from Nature (as you
did lately insinuate) what is the reason that it diffuseth not it self into
all alike, and in equal measure? Why do the Nobility and vvealthier sort love
and care for their Country more, and the vulgar and meaner sort less? Whom you
may behold (for the most part) full of their own cares with a palpable neglect
of the public, which yet does most certainly fall out otherwise in every such
Affection as proceeds from the peremptory injunctions of Nature. To conclude,
what reason will you assign why so light an occasion should oftentimes
diminish or remove it? See how this man Revenge, a second Love, and others
Ambition has allured from their Country; and in our days how many has the
God Mammon in the same manner seduced? How many Italians are there, who
quitting Italy the Queen of Countries for gain alone have transported themselves
into France, Germany, yea into Sarmatia and there fixed their habitations? How
many thousand Spaniards, does Avarice and Ambition yearly draw into remote
Lands and of a different Climate? Certainly a great and strong proof, that this
whole Obligation is but external and Opinionative; seeing some one or other
Lust can with that facility dissolve or break it. But you err also to purpose
Lipsius, in the bounding of that Country, for you restrain it to that Native
soil of ours wherein we have settled, and whereupon we have walked, and such
other things as you tinckle with a vain sound of Words. For you will seek in
vain from thence the Natural causes of this Love. For if only our Native soil
may challenge that name, then only Bruxells is my Country, Isca thine, a
Cottage or a Hut will be some other Man's: Yes there are many that will not
have so much as a Cottage for theirs, but must seek it in the Woods or open
Fields. Shall then my love and care be shut up within such narrow limits?
Shall I embrace and defend this Village or that House as my Country? You are
sensible of the absurdities; and Oh how happy (according to your determination
in these matters) are those Wood-men and Rusticks, whose Native soil is ever
in its flourish, and almost beyond all the hazzards of Calamity or Ruin! But
certainly that is not our Country; No, but (as I said before) some one State,
and as it were a common Ship under one Lord, or under one Law; Which if you
will have (of right) to be beloved by its Natives; I shall confess it: If to
be defended I shall acknovvledge it, If death to be undergone for its sake, I
shall not be against it; but shall never yield to that that we should also
grieve, be cast down, lament, If once our Country for it cry
It Is sweet and glorious then to dye.


Said the Poet of Venusia with the loud applause of the whole Theater, but
then he said to dye, not to vveep. For we ought so to be good Citizens, as
that we may also be good Men; which we cease to be, as often as we decline to
the ejulations and laments of Children or Women. Finally, Lipsius, I impart
that to you which is lofty, and known but to some few. That these are vain
and counterfeit Countries, if you consider the whole Man. That possibly for the
Body there may be one found out here, but not any for the Soul, which
descending from that celestial and upper Region has the whole Earth as its
Prison and place of restraint; while Heaven is its true and proper Country.
After which let us breath that with Anaxagoras we may Cordially reply to the
Sottish Multitude as often as it shall ask, have thou no care of thy Country?
There is my Country pointing at once with our Fingers and Minds unto Heaven.

CHAP. XII. The third Affection which is Commiseration rectifyed to indulge it
over much, a Vice. Its difference from Mercy. How and with what respect it is
to be admitted.
THis Discourse of Langius vvithdrew (methought) a Cloud from my understanding;
and, my Father (said I) you still better me both by your reproofs and
instructions. So that (methinks) I am now able to keep under that Affection
which respects the place and state in which, but not as yet that which respects
the Men themselves amongst whom I have been bred. For how is it possible that
the losses of my Country should not touch and deeply affect me for my
Country-mens and Companions sakes, who are tossed in the Ocean of these
Calamities, or perish by a different and unhappy Destiny. Langius interrupting
me; but this Lipsius said he is not properly Grief, but Pity; which yet it
self is to be despised, by a wise and constant Person. For nothing is more
suitable to such a one than firmness and strength of Mind, which cannot be, in
case not only his own, but also another Calamity shall overturn and discompose
him. Here I interrupted him, and what Thorns of the Stoics are these said I?
Do you forbid me to pity too? Yet this is looked upon as a Virtue by all good
Men; at least amongst us who are seasoned with the true Religion and Piety.
Langius immediately, but I said he do forbid it, and if I shall remove this
sickness from the Minds of Men; there is no Man who is really good that will
resent it amiss. For it is certainly a sickness, nor is he far distant from
misery, whoever he is that pitties one who is miserable. As it is a sign of a
vveak and bad Eye to grow Blood-shot at the sight of one that is so: So is it
of a vveak Mind to grieve at the sight of one that grieves. Pity is rightly
defined, THE VICE OF A SLENDER AND MEAN MIND FAINTING AT THE APPEARANCE OF
ANOTHER MISFORTUNE. What then? Are we so rigid and severe as not to suffer
that any should be moved or affected with the grief of another? Yes, to be
affected I approve, but then it must be so as to assist, not so as to lament. I
am for Mercy, but not for Pity. For thus I am willing to distinguish at this
time, and a while to recede from our Porch the better to instruct. I call Mercy
AN INCLINATION OF THE MIND TO LIGHTEN THE POVERTY OR ANGUISH OF ANOTHER. This
is that Virtue Lipsius which you discover as it were through a mist, and in
which Pity creeps to, and imposes upon you. But you will say it is Humanity
to be affected with Pity and compassion: Be it so; yet is it not therefore
right. Suppose you that there is any Virtue in the Effeminacy and stoopage of
the Mind? In Sighs, or Sobbs, or in the mingling of broken and disjoynted
words with a Mourner? You are mistaken. If you think not, I can produce a sort
of covetous old Women and some sordid Euclio's from whose Eyes it is much more
easy to extract a thousand Tears, than one single Penny from their Purses. But
now that truly merciful Man (of whom I have been speaking) he will not
indeed be pitiful; but yet he will perform the same, or better Offices, than
he that is so. He will behold other men's Evils with a humane, but yet with a
right Eye. He will discourse with the Sufferers, with a serious, but not with
a mournful or dejected Countenance. He will comfort courageously, he will
assist liberally, and will do more nobly, than he will speak, and will more
readily lend his hand than words to a necessitous or fallen Man. And all these
things he will perform with Caution and Circumspection; lest as in some very
mischievous Contagion; the Disease of another should transfer it self to him:
Or lest (as they say of Gladiatours) a vvound surprise him through another
side. What is there here (I beseech you) of severe and rigid? and such is the
whole Body of Wisdom, which to them that look upon it at a distance, seems to
be stern and lowering: But as many as make nearer approaches, it is found to be
so gentle and complaisant, as that the Goddess of Love her self is not more
amicable and obliging. But enough of these three Affections; which I have
partly put to the foil within you; it will prove of no inconsiderable
advantage to me, in the rest of the Combat.

CHAP. XIII. These Impediments removed, Public Evils themselves are seriously
considered. Four Arguments propounded against them. Of Providence; that it is
interested in, and presides over all humane affairs.
I Come now at length from our Velitation to a true and serious fight, and
laying aside these light and jocular Arms, unto such weapons as shall finally
decide the matter. I shall lead up my Soldiers and Forces in Order; and range
them under their several Ensigns, which I also form into Four Squadrons. The
First, shall evince that public evils are sent unto, and dispersed amongst us
by God himself. The Second, that they are necessary, and from Fate. The Third,
that they are advantageous to us. And the last, that they are neither
over-pressive nor new. Now if these Forces of mine shall, from their several
Posts, dexterously charge and recharge; shall all the powers of your Grief dare
any further to resist, or so much as to face me? They dare not. I have
conquered, and with this Omen, let the Signal be given. Whereas therefore
Lipsius all those Affections which do so variously rush upon, and disturb the
life of Man, do spring from a distempered Mind: So also (in my Opinion) does
that Grief especially which we espouse upon the public account. For whereas
the rest of the Affections have some end and scope as it were; (as the Lover to
enjoy, the Angry to revenge, the covetous to heap up, and so in the rest) to
this alone you shall find nothing proposed besides it self. But lest my
discourse should be too loose and forward; I shall curb and restrain it
within this compass. You lament you say your falling Country. But to what end
I beseech ye? For what hope you, or what do you expect thereby? Is it that
thou may repair it in its decays, and underprop it where it yields? Or is
it that by grieving you may keep off that Plague and mischief under which your
Country labors? None of all these: It is only that you may use that thredbare
saying, it troubles me; as to any thing else this lamentation is but vain and
unprofitable. For it concerns a thing past; which to recover again, and to
render undone; the Gods themselves would not have it in their own power. But is
your Grief only vain? Yes, possibly it is impious also, if you shall rightly
consider it. For (as you know) there is an eternal Mind which we call God,
which Rules, Orders and Governs the lasting Orbs of Heaven; the different
courses of the Stars; the interchangeable variations of the Elements; and (in a
word) all things whatsoever, as well above as below us. Suppose you that any
Chance or Fortune bare rule in this beautiful Body of the World? Or that
humane affairs are hurried on, and blended together by a rash and blind
impetuosity? I know you do not believe it; nor does any other, who has any
thing (not to say) of Wisdom, but Sobriety. For it is the Voice of Nature, I
say of Nature, and wheresoever you shall turn your Eye or Mind: Things Mortal
and Immortal, Superior and Inferior, Animate or Inanimate, they all speak out
and proclaim, that there is something above us, which has created and made
those so wonderful, so great, and so numerous things; and being so created and
made, does also still continue to direct, and preserve them. This now is God,
to whose superexcellent and most perfect Nature, there is nothing more
agreeable, than that he should be at once both able and vvilling to undertake
the Care and Guardianship of all that he has made. And how shall he not be
vvilling who is the BEST? Or how should he not be able who is the GREATEST?
So far are any forces from being superior to his, that all are Derivative
from him. Nor does this vastness or variety of things either molest, or remove
him from their inspection: For that eternal light does every way emit its
rays, and with one and the same dint (as I may say) does pierce all the
retirements and Abysses of Heaven, Earth, and Sea. Nor does this Divinity only
preside over all things, but it abides with; yea resides within them. Why do
ye vvonder at this? What a part of the World does this Sun at once Survey, and
inlighten? What a Mass of things does this Mind of ours with one thought
embrace and compass? And fools that we are do we not believe that more
things can be seen into, and comprehended by him who has created and made
this very Sun, and Mind? Excellently, or rather Divinely said he, who has not
said much in matters Divine, I mean Aristotle; what the Pilot (says he) is in
the Ship; the Charioteer in the Chariot; the chief Chaunter in the Quire; the
Law in a City; or a General in the Army: Such is God in the world, with this
only difference, that to them indeed their Government is laborious, toylsome,
and perplexing; but that of Gods is without Grief or Labor, and severed from
all Bodily pains-taking. There is therefore in God, Lipsius, there was, and
shall be that very vvatchfull, and active care (yet a care which is secure)
whereby he looks into, visits, and knows all things; and does guide and
govern them so known, in an immovable, and (to us) incomprehensible Order. Now
this is that which I here call Providence; of which there are not a few, who
through weakness may complain, none that can doubt, unless they are such as
have stopped their Ears, and hardened themselves against every voice, and the
very sense of Nature it self.

CHAP. XIV. Nothing done here below but by the Previdence of God. Calamities
upon People and Cities from thence. It is not therefore piously done to
complain of, or lament them. An Exhortation to obey God, with whom it is vanity
and rashness to contend.
WHich if you have thoroughly imbibed, if you do in good earnest and from your
heart believe that this Governing Power does thus insert and insinuate it self,
and (to speak with the Poet) -- Does when it please
Pass through all Lands and Seas:


I do not see what further place there can be for your Grief or complaint. For
that very provident Being which daily moves and turns about this Heaven,
which leads forth and recalls the Sun; which discloses and shuts up all sorts
of fruits: has brought to the Birth all those changes and vicissitudes which
you do either repine, or vvonder at. Do you think that only pleasant or
profitable things are sent to us from Heaven? Yes, those also that are sad and
distasteful are from thence: Nor is there any thing at all in this grand frame
of the World, which is transacted, discomposed or confounded (sin only
excepted) whose cause and original proceeds not from that first cause: Pindar
said well, In Heaven they are that do
Dispense to us below.


There is (as it were) a certain golden Chain let down from above (as Homer
gives it us in a Fable) unto which all these inferior things are fastened.
That there, an opening of the Earth has swallowed up some Towns; it is from
Providence. That the Pestilence elsewhere has mowed down so many thousands of
Men; is from the same. And that War and Slaughter is amongst the Belgians; is
from the very same. It is from Heaven, Heaven Lipsius, that all these
Calamities are sent, and therefore they are aptly and vvisely styled by
Euripides -- Calamities
Sent by the Dieties.


Every Ebb and Flow (I say) of humane affairs depends upon that Moon; and the
Rise and Set of Kingdoms upon that Sun. As often therefore as you give scope to
your Grief; and seem to resent it, that your Country is thus harrass'd, and
overturned; You do not so much as consider, either who you are that repine, or
against whom your murmurs are directed. What are you? A Man, a shadow, Dust.
And against whom do you murmur (I tremble to speak it) against God himself. It
was the fiction of Antiquity; that certain Giants did attempt to dethrone the
Gods. To omit Fables, you Complainants are those Giants. For if all these
things are not only by the permission, but also by the immission of Almighty
God: You who fret and resist, what do you but (as much as in you lies) seize
his scepter, and entrench upon the prerogative of his Empire? Blind Mortality!
The Sun, Moon, Stars, Elements, and all the successive Orders of Creatures, do
willingly obey, and submit themselves to this Supreme Law; only the Noblest
piece of the Creation, Man lifts up his heel against, and replies upon his
Creator. Had you hoisted Sails into the jurisdiction of the Winds, you must
then go not vvhither you would but vvhither they list. And shall you in the
Ocean of this life refuse to follow the conduct of that Spirit by whom the
whole Universe is swayed? In vain notwithstanding is this refusal, for either
you shall willingly follow, or be forced along; and those Heavenly decrees
shall preserve their Efficacy, and Order, whether you shall comply or rebel.
We should smile at that Man who having tied his Boat to some Rock, and pulling
at the Cord, should rather think he pulls the Rock to him than that his boat
moves to it: And is not our Folly every way as remarkable, who being chained
to that Rock of Eternal Providence, do yet by our struggling and resistance
seem to desire that it should obey us, rather than we it? Let us free our
selves at the last from these Vanities; and (if we are wise) let us follow
that Power which attracts us from above, and think it nothing but equal that
whatsoever is pleasing to God, should (for that very reason) be so also to
Man. The Soldier in the Camp upon Notice of a March, gets on his knap-sack;
but if it sound to Arms, he lays it aside, as one who with his Mind, and
Eyes, and Ears, is intent upon, and prepared for any command. Let it be thus
with us, and in this Warfare of ours, let us cheerfully and resolvedly March
after our General, which way soever he shall command us. We are sworn to
this, says Seneca, to endure such things as Mortality is liable to, and not to
be disturbed in case some things fall out, which it is not in our power to
prevent. We are born in a Kingdom, and to obey God is Liberty it self.

CHAP. XV. The Second Argument for Constancy, drawn from Necessity. Its force
and Efficacy. Necessity derived from two Grounds; and first from the things
themselves.
THis Lipsius is a firm and well tempered Shield, against all external Evils.
These are those golden Arms with which being covered, Plato would have us
to fight against Chance and Fortune, to be subject to God, to think upon him,
and in all kind of Events, to bend this Mind of ours, unto that great Mind of
the World, I mean Providence, whose pious and fortunate forces, forasmuch as I
have already made sufficient proof of; I shall now draw forth and lead up
another Squadron, which marches under the Standard of necessity. A valiant,
stout, and Steel tempered Squadron it is; and such as I may not unfitly compare
to that Legion which the Romans called Fulminatrix: The stubborn and unbroken
force of it is such, as does conquer and subdue all things, and I shall vvonder
Lipsius if you should be able to resist it. Thales when one asked him what
was the strongest, answered rightly, necessity; for that Conquers all things.
There is an old saying too, about the same thing; although not so advised, that
the Gods themselves cannot force necessity. This necessity I annex to
Providence, because of its near relation to it; or to speak truly, because it
is born of it. For this necessity is from God, and his decrees; nor is it any
other thing than as the Greek Philosopher has defined it: A FIRM SANCTION AND
IMMUTABLE POWER OF PROVIDENCE. Now that it does intervveave and twist it self
with public Evils; I shall evince two vvayes, from things themselves; and
from Fate. From things themselves, because it is the Nature of all created
beings, to hasten unto their change and fall, from a certain inward proneness,
which they have thereunto. As there is a kind of fretting rust, which does
naturally cleave to Iron, and a consuming scurffe or Worm that follows Wood:
In like manner both Creatures, Cities, and Kingdoms, have their internal and
proper causes whereby they perish. Look upon things above or below, great or
small, the works of the Hand or Mind; they have perished from the first Ages;
and shall persist so to do unto the last. And as all Rivers journey toward the
Ocean with a prone and hasty current: So all humane things slide along by this
Channel (as I may call it) of miseries, unto their utmost periods. That Period
is Death and destruction; and thereunto Pestilence, war, and Slaughter are as
subservient instruments: So that if Death is necessary to these things, upon
the same Ground are Calamities also. That this may appear to you the more
evidently by Examples: I shall not refuse for a while to enlarge my thoughts
and travel with you through this great universe.

CHAP. XVI. Instances of Necessary Mutation and Death throughout the whole
World. The Heavens and Elements change, and shall pass away. The same is
discernable in Cities, Provinces, and Kingdoms. All things here are wheeled
about, and nothing is stable or firm.
THere is an eternal Law which from the beginning has equally passed upon
every thing in this world, that it shall be Born and Dye; Rise and Set. Nor
would the great Moderatour of things, have any thing firm and stable besides
himself.

From Age and Death only the Gods are free,
The rest of things under Times sickle be.
Cries out the Tragical Poet. All those things, which you behold and vvonder
at, do either perish in their courses; or are certainly changed. Do you see
that Sun? He is sometimes ecclipsed: The Moon? She suffers in the like kind,
and has her vvaines. The Stars? They shoot and fall; and howsoever the wit of
Man may seek to palliate and excuse the matter; Yet there have and will be
such accidents amongst those celestial Bodies; as may pose the skill, and
stagger the Minds of the ablest Mathematician. I omit to speak of Commets of
various Form, and different Situation and Motion; concerning which, that they
all have their Birth from, and Motion in the Air, is a thing which Philosophy
it self cannot easily persuade me to believe. But behold (of late) there are
certain new kinds of Motion and Stars found out, which have cut out work for
the Astrologers. There arose a Starr in this very year, whose increment and
decreases were thoroughly observed; and we then saw (what will scarcely be
believed) that in Heaven it self, there may be something Born and Dye. Behold
even Varro in St. Augustine cries out and asserts, that the Planet Venus which
Plautus calls Vesperugo and Homer (...), has changed its color, magnitude,
figure, and motion. Next to the Heavens look upon the Air, it is daily changed,
and passes into winds, Clouds, or showers. Look to the waters, and those
Rivers and springs which we call everlasting: Some are lost, and others have
altered their course, and found out new Channels. The Ocean it self that great
and abstruse part of Nature, is sometimes swelled with storms, and at others
smoothed with calmes, and though those storms were not, yet it has its own
Ebbs and Flows; and to convince us that it may totally perish; It does daily
increase or decrease in its parts. Look now upon the Earth which alone some
would have immovable; and to stand by its own strength: Behold there it
totters, and is shaken into a palsy fit, by the struggling of those vapors
that are pent up in the Bowels of it, and elsewhere it is corrupted by Waters
or Fires. For even these are at contest with one another; and that you may not
resent it over deeply, that there are wars amongst Men: The very Elements
have theirs also. How many Countries, has a sudden Deluge, or inundation of
the Sea, either lessened, or entirely swallowed up. Of old that great Island
Atlantis (for I think it no Fable) afterward Helice and Bura: And (that we
may not have recourse only to ancient and remote times) amongst us Belgians (in
the Memory of our Fathers) two Islands; together with their Towns, and
inhabitants. Even at this very day that blew Deity, is forcing open to it self
new creeks; and daily frets and wears away the unfaithful shores of the
Frisians and Hollanders. Nor does the Earth her self alvvayes give way by a
Womannish sloth; but does sometimes vindicate its losses, and in the midst of
the Sea frames Islands for its self; to the vvonder and displeasure of that
hoary god. Now if those great (and in our imagination eternal) Bodies, are
destined to their destruction and change; what shall we think of Cities,
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms; which must needs be as mortal as the founders of
them? As particular persons have their Youth, Maturity, Old Age, and Death: So
these, they rise, grow, stand, flourish; and all these to that very purpose
that they may fall. In the reign of Tiberius one single Earthquake overthrew
twelve famous Cities of Asia, and another did the like to as many Towns in
Campania, in the reign of Constantine; and one war of Attila more than an
hundred. Fame scarce retains the ancient Thebes of Egypt, and we scarce
believe the hundred Cities of Creet. But let us come to more received
instances. The ancients have seen and wondered at the Ruins of Carthage,
Numantia and Corinth, As we do at the ignoble, inglorious rubbish of Athens,
Sparta, and those other once renowned Cities. That Lady of Sovereignty, and
Queen of Nations falsely Styled the Eternal City, where is it? Overturned,
Rased, Burnt, overwhelmed: She has undergone more than a single Fate, and is at
this Day curiously sought for, but not to be found where she formerly stood.
You see that Constantinople proud of its being the Seat of a double Empire: And
Venice that glories in its continuance for a thousand years? Their Fate attends
them. And thou also our Antwerpe the Eye of Cities, there will come a time
when thou shall be no more. For that great Architect pulls down and sets up,
and (if we may say it) does even sport himself in the affairs of this World:
And as a Potter at his pleasure, does mold and unmake diverse forms and
representations out of this Clay. I have hitherto discoursed only of Towns and
Cities; but even Kingdoms also and Provinces (...) hagg'd unto the same
destiny. In old time the East flourished; Assyria, Egypt, and Judea were
famous for Arts and Arms; that happiness of theirs has passed over into
Europe, and even she methinks (as Bodies upon the approach of a Disease)
trembles and seems to have some lore apprehensions of her great fall. That
which we may more (though never sufficiently) vvonder at; this World which
has been inhabited this Five thousand and Five hundred years, does now grow
old, and that we may again applaud, the old exploded Fable of Anaxarchus;
there arise now elsewhere, and are born new Men, and a new World. O the
wonderful and incomprehensible Law of Necessity! All things turn about in this
Fatal Circle of beginning and ending: and there may be something in this whole
frame that is long lived; but nothing that is Eternal. Lift up your Eyes; and
look round with me (for I am not vvilling as yet to desist) and contemplate
the alternate courses of humane affairs; not unlike the Ebbings and Flowings
of the Sea. Thou shall arise; and thou fall: thou shall command, and thou
serve; be thou obscure and thou glorious; and let this round of things
hastening into themselves, vvhirle about, as long as the World it self shall
endure. Were you Germans Savage of old; be ye now civil beyond most of the
Nations in Europe; were you Brittons rude and poor? Do ye now emulate the
Egyptians and Sybarites in riches and luxury. Did Greece heretofore flourish?
Let her now lie vvast. Did Italy sway the Scepter? She shall now obey. You
Goths, you Vandalls, you refuse of the Barbarians; forsake your Dens, and in
your successive courses command the Nations. Come hither also you pelted
Scythians, and for a while, with a strong hand, rule both Asia and Europe:
But do you your selves after a while depart, and resign the Scepter to the
Nation bounded by the Ocean. For is it my Fancy only? Or do I indeed descry I
know not what Sun of a new Empire arising from the West?

CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity that is from Fate. Fate asserted, the universal
assent both of the Learned and of the people to it; though some difference
about its parts. How the ancients distinguished of Fate.
LAngius had finished; and this discourse of his had almost drawn Tears from my
Eyes, so clearly did it seem to represent those Mockeries that are in humane
affairs. Insomuch that I cried out; Alas! What are even we our selves; or
what are all these things we sweat so much in the pursuit of?

What Is he that has a brighter Fame?
Or he that is of Obscurer name?
Man when summed at highest, he
Is but as dreams of Shaddows be?
As the Lyrick Poet said truly of old. Langius replies; Young Man; Look then
upon these things not as above, but beneath you; and labor to establish
Constancy in your Mind, by reflecting upon the inconstant and unsteady levity
of all things. Inconstant (I say) as to our sense and apprehension of them: but
if we respect God and his Providence, than all things succeed in an admirable
and immovable order. For now laying swords aside, I come to my Ensigns, and
shall assault that Grief of yours, not with Arrows, but more formidable
inventions. I shall enforce against it the Ram of Fate, an Ensign of that
strength and firmness; as no humane power or policy shall be ever able either
to clude or resist. And howsoever the Ground is slippery enough to endanger a
fall: Yet I shall adventure upon it, though with a cautious slowness, and as
the Greeks say with a modest foot. In the First place therefore, that there is
a Fate in things, neither you Lipsius, nor (as I conceive) any Nation or Age
did ever doubt. Here I interposed; pardon me (said I) if as a Remora I stop you
in this course. Do you oppose me with Fate? Weak is this Ram, Langius, and
such as is directed by the enervate and languid forces of the Stoics. I speak
freely, I despise at once, both it and the destinies: and with the Soldier in
Plautus, I can blow away this feeble troop with a single breath, as winds do
leaves from the Trees. Langius with a severe and threatening Eye; Rash and
inconsiderate Young Man (said he) do you imagine you can clude or take away
Fate? You cannot, unless together with it, you deny the very Power and Being of
a Deity: For if God is, Providence is; if Providence, than a decreed order of
things; and if so than a firm and established Necessity of events, How do you
ward this blow? Or with what Ax do you sever the Links of this Chain? For
we cannot otherwise conceive of God that eternal Mind; than that there should
be in him an eternal knowledge and prevision of things: whom we believe to be
fixed, firm, and immutable, always one and the same; not at all varying, or
altering in those things, which he has once willed, and beheld. The Eternal
Gods are not inclined,
To variations of the Mind.
which if you acknowledge to be true (as of necessity you must, unless you
have divested your self of all Reason and Sense) you will then also
acknowledge, that all the decrees of God are firm and immovable from Eternity
to Eternity. Now from thence does Necessity derive it self together with that
Fate which you so despise. The truth of which is so very obvious and clear;
that amongst all sorts of Men, there is not a more ancient or received Opinion.
And look to how many the light of a Deity, and Providence has shined to well
nigh as many has this of Fate. Insomuch that those very same privative Fires
which discovered the knowledge of a God to Men; seem also to have guided Man
in the knowledge of this other. Consult Homer that first and vvisest of all
Poets. There is not any one path wherein that Divine Muse has so frequently
passed and repassed, as this of Fatality: Nor has the whole Race of the Poets
dissented from their Ancestour. Look upon Euripides, Sophocles, Pindar, and our
Virgil. Look upon Historians; their common Language is, such a thing fell out
by Fate, and Kingdoms owe their Ruin, and establishment to Fate. Look upon
Philosophers, whose charge it was to ransom and defend Truth against the
encroachments of the vulgar: Howsoever these have in most other things
dissented from one another; (transported thereunto, by an over eager itch after
contention and dispute) yet it is mavelous to observe, what a Universal
accord, there is amongst them as to the beginning of this way which leads to
Fate. I say in the beginning of the way: For I am not about to deny, but that
soon after it was trod out into diverse paths. All which notvvithstanding seem
to be reducible to these four, Mathematical, Natural, Violent and true Fate.
Each of these I shall briefly explain, and (as it were) set a foot in each:
Forasmuch, as commonly much of confusion, and error does arise from hence.

CHAP. XVIII. The three First kinds of Fate briefly explained. The description
of them. The Stoics in part excused.
MAthematical Fate I call that, which chains and fastens all Actions and
Events whatsoever, unto the influences of the Stars, and the Positions of
Heaven. Of which the Chaldeans and Astrologers were the First Authors; and
amongst the Philosophers that profound and sublime writer Mercurius
Trismegistus; who subtly and not altogether idly, distinguishing of
Providence, Necessity, and Fate; has these words. Providence (says he) is
the perfect, and absolute Counsel of the Heavenly God; to which there are two
faculties nearly allied; Necessity, and Fate. Fate does administer, and is
subservient at one and the same time, both to Providence and Necessity; and the
Stars are subject to Fate. For no man can evad^ the force of Fate, nor with all
his caution prevent the powerful influence of the Stars. For these are the
Artillery, and weapons of Fate, by whose direction they cause and conclude all
those things which are in Nature or amongst Men. And in this Ship of Folly are
(at this day) embarked; the most of the Astrologers amongst us to the great
reproach of Christianity.

Natural Fate; I call such an Order of Natural causes which (unless they are
hindered) do by their own Nature, and efficacy produce always a certain and the
same effect. Aristotle is for such a Fate if we may credit Alexander
Aphrodisiensis one of the most Faithful of his Interpreters; and of the like
Mind was Theophrastus; who plainly asserts that Fate is nothing else, but
every Man's Nature. Agreeable to those Men's Opinions it is, that a man's
begetting a Man, is by Fate; that if a man arrive to his death; by internal
causes; without the accession of such as are foreign, and outward; this is
by Fate: On the other-side that a Man begets a Serpent or some other Monster
this is not by Fate, neither if he perish by the Sword or Fire. An opinion
truly not very peccant; inasmuch as it rises not to the force and height of
Fate: And how can that be in danger of falling which never adventures to
climb? And such is Aristotle almost every where in Divine matters; I except
only that little Book of his, de Mundo; which is a golden one indeed; and such
as seems to me, to be inspired by some other and more heavenly Genius. I read
also farther in a Greek Writer; that Aristotle was of Opinion: That Fate it
self is not a cause, but a certain accidental Mode to the cause; in such things
as proceed from Necessity. O the courage of a Philosopher! Who durst seriously
Number, Fortune and chance amongst the causes, but not Fate. But I pass him,
and return to my Stoics (for not to dissemble I have a great affection and
esteem for that Sect) who are the Authors of violent Fate; which I define
with Seneca, such a Necessity of all things and actions: as no power is able
to interrupt: Or with Chrysippus; a spiritual power that does orderly govern
this whole Universe. Nor are these Definitions very remote from that which is
right and true: if they may have a sound and modest interpretation: As neither
is their whole Opinion perhaps; were it not that it has been already
murdered by the retorted Thumbs of the whole hand of the vulgar. These charge
them with two crimes; that they subject God himself to the disposal of Fate:
and that they place also, the internal actions of our will, under the same
power. Nor will I overconfidently undertake to clear them of either of these
faults. For amongst those few of their vvritings which are yet extant, there
are such, from whence these Tenants may be collected; as there are others,
from whence, we may receive that which is sound and Orthodox. It must be
confessed that Seneca (no mean Trumpet of that School) seems to dash upon that
first Rock, in that Book (where he had least Reason to do so) of Providence.
The same Necessity says he does bind even the Gods themselves, that
irrevocable decree does equally carry along with it, both humane and Divine
things. The great Creator and Ruler of all things; did indeed write down this
Law of Fate: But he follows it himself; and ever obeys, what he once
commanded. And that indissoluble Chain, and twist of causes, whereunto they
fasten all things and Persons, seems (and that not Obscurely neither) to offer
violence to the will of Man. But the Genuine and true Stoics, did never
openly avouch these things. Or if any such matter, did fall from them (as it is
possible enough) in their heat of writing and dispute; you shall rather find it
in words, than in their sense and meaning. Chrysippus himself who first
corrupted and Enervated that Masculine Sect, with the intricate niceness of
Questions, he in Agellius sufficiently cleares them from attempting upon the
liberty of the will. Nor does our Seneca subject God to Fare (he was better
advised) but (in a certain Mode of speech) God to God. For those amongst them,
who came nearest to the truth, do by Fate sometimes understand Providence, and
at others, God. And therefore Zeno when he defines Fate to be a power moving
the matter according to the same respects, in the same manner, he adds; it
matters not, if I had called it, either Providence or Nature. And Chrysippus
from the same Principle, does elsewhere call Fate, the Eternal purpose of
Providence. Now Panetius the Stoic, affirmed that God himself was Fate; and
the same thing is clearly the Opinion of Seneca: You may (says he) as you
please, vary the Title of this Author of things, and Natures: You may lawfully
call him, either the best and greatest Jove; or the Thunderer, or the Stayer:
Nor for that Reason which Historians assign; because after a Vow made to him;
He stayed the flying Army of the Romans, but he is therefore the Stayer and
Establisher, because all things do stand, and consist by his goodness, neither
shall you err, if you call him Fate. For since Fate is nothing else but an
implexed series of causes, he is the Principal cause of all things, on which
the rest do depend. Which last words are so piously spoken, that even Calumny
it self, is not able to calumniate them. Nor did that great writer (unto
Alexander the Great) in this at all dissent from the Stoics. I conceive (says
he) that Necessity, ought not to be called any thing else than God, as an
unchangeable Nature: And so also Fate it self; because it knits together all
things, and is moved and carried on, without any impediment. Which Speeches
though possibly they may have something in them which is not so advised: Yet
they contain nothing that is impious; and by modest interpreters will be
thought not far distant from that true Fate, which I am about to assert. The
truth is, I do heartily applaud the Stoics in this: That there is not any
Sect, which has more studiously asserted the Majesty, and Providence of God;
or more earnestly endeavored to incline the Minds of Men, to things Heavenly,
and Eternal, than they. And if in the performance of this fatal Race, they have
at any time stumbled: I believe it occasioned, by a good and praise-vvorthy
desire; to recall blind Mortals from their blind goddess; I mean Fortune, not
only whose Deity, but Name too, was by them very manfully exploded.

CHAP. XIX. The Fourth, true Fate explained. Of its Name, its Definition. How
it differs from Providence.
BUt I have said enough of the Sentiments and dissents of the ancients, for why
should I over curiously or subtly search into the Mysteries of Hell? my
business is with true Fate; this I shall now propound and illustrate. And I
here call it, an eternal decree of Providence, which is as inseparable from
things, as Providence it self. Nor let any one cavil at the Name; for I do
confidently affirm that the Latin language does not afford any other that is
proper to the thing. Did the ancients abuse it? Let us use it nevertheless; and
enlarging the word from the Prison of the Stoics, let us bring it forth into
a better light. For certainly Fate is derived a fando from speaking: Nor is it
properly any other than the Divine Sentence and injunction, which is that very
thing I here mean by it. For I define the true Fate either with the
illustrious Picus Mirandula, a Series and Order of Causes depending upon Divine
Counsel, or in my own terms (though not so plainly, yet more exactly) an
immovable decree of Providence inherent in things moveable, which surely
disposes every of them in its own Order, Place and Time. I call it a decree of
Providence; for I am not altogether of the same Mind, with the Divines of our
days (I crave leave for a free Investigation of Truth) who confound it as
well in Name as Thing with Providence it self. I know it is a high and rash
presumption to enterprise the comprisal and limitation of that supersubstantial
and supercelestial Nature (I mean God) or whatsoever pertains to him, within
the compass of definite Terms: Yet according to our humane capacity; I am
sensible that Providence is one thing properly, and this Fate I am speaking of
is another. For I apprehend not, nor conceive of Providence any otherwise, than
that it is a faculty and power in God, by which he sees, knows and governs all
things; such a power (I mean) as is universal, undivided, guarded, and as
Lucretius faith firmly united. But now the notion of Fate, seems rather to
descend to things themselves, and in each of them to be observed: That so there
may be such a digestion and explication of common Providence, as is distinct
and agreeable to its parts. Providence therefore is in God, and is ascribed
unto him alone: Fate is in things, and to them it is ascribed. It is possible I
may seem to you to trifle, and as (one says) to drill Millet. No Lipsius I
have these things from the common discourses of the Vulgar, amongst whom
nothing is more usual than to say, this or that came to pass, by my Good or
Evil Fate: This is the Fate of that Kingdom or City. But of Providence no man
will speak after this manner: I mean none can attribute it to things
themselves without impiety or folly. I have therefore justly said that
Providence is in God: Fate is indeed from God, but is understood in things. I
add further, that howsoever Providence is really inseparable from Fate, yet it
seems to be something more excellent, and superior to it, as we commonly say
in the Schools, the Sun excells Light, Eternity Time; and the intellect Reason.
Not to enlarge my self any farther about these serious (though uncommon
matters) by what has passed, you may readily apprehend the Reason of my
distinction; as also of my retaining the old Name, against the new Senate of
Divines. For those ancient and heretofore Conscript Fathers; do not at all
oppose me, but that I may very freely use this word Fate, in the sound and true
notion of it. But to return to the clearing of my Definition, I called it an
inherent Decree; to show that Fate is to be observed in those things to which,
not in him from whence it comes. I added in moveable things; signifying
thereby, that howsoever Fate it self is immovable, yet it does not destroy the
infixed Nature, and proper motion of things but acts in a mild and gentle way,
according as those marks and Characters do require which God has engraven
upon every thing: In causes (I understand second ones) necessary, necessaril^;
in natural ones naturally; in contingent, contingently. In respect therefore of
things, it is no way violent or compulsory, but bends and leads on every
thing, according as the Nature of it is to do or suffer. But if you reduce it
to its own Original, that is to say to Providence and God: Then I must affirm
with the greatest Constancy and boldness, that all things which are by Fate,
do necessarily come to pass. I added in the last place somewhat of the Order,
Time, and Place, confirming what I had before asserted; that Providence is of
all things taken together, but Fate is by way of distribution of particulars.
By Order I understand a Series of Causes which Fate defines. By Place, and
Time I understand that vvonderfull and inexplicable power, by which all Events
are tied to certain circumscriptions of place, and moments of time. Is it the
Fate of Tarquine to be expelled his Kingdom? Let it be done, but vvithall let
Adultery precede. You see the Order: Is it the Fate of Caesar to be slain? Be it
so; but be it also in the Senate House, and at the foot of Pompey's Statue. You
see the Place. Shall Domitian be murdered by his Servants? Let him fall, but
let it be in that very hour, which he sought in vain to decline, viz. the
Fifth, you see the time.

CHAP. XX. Its Difference from the Stoics Fate; in four respects. That it
offers no violence to the will. That God is neither a Copartner in, nor the
Author of Evil.
ARe you sufficiently apprehensive of these things young Man, or do you yet
stand in need of a further and a clearer light? I (shaking my Head) a clearer
Langius, a clearer said I, or you will leave me for ever in the midst of this
Night. For what means the subtle thread of distinctions? What captious snares
of questions are these? Believe me, I was in fear of some stratagem; and began
to be as suspicious of these your vveigh'd and wary words, as of so many
Enemies. Langius smiling; you may be confident (said he) no Hanibal is here,
nor are you fallen into an Ambush, but into a safe place of retreat. I shall
very willingly enlighten you; declare only where and in what part it is you
desire a further satisfaction. There Langius (said I) where you speak of force
and necessity. For I am not able to apprehend, which way you dissever this
Fate of yours, from that of the Stoics. For howsoever you have excluded it in
words, and (as they say) at the Portall; yet in reality and at the Postern,
you seem to me to readmit it. Langius readily, far, far be it from me Lipsius
said he; I would not so much as in my dreams introduce that Fate of the
Stoics; nor do I endeavor to revive those long sinceexpired Beldames the
destinies: It is a modest and pious fate I contend for, and which differs from
the violent one these four vvayes. The Stoics subject God to Fate; neither was
Jupiter himself in Homer able to exempt his Sarpedon from its bonds, when he
carnestly desired it, But we on the contrary subject Fate to God whom we
acknowledge to be a most free Author, and independent Agent in all things: Who
when he pleases can surpass, and break through all the strengths, and
intricate foldings of Fate. They also constitute a Series and Flux of Natural
causes from Eternity; we admit not such a Series of these causes without
interruption (for God makes Prodigies, and works Miracles, oftentimes
besides, yea contrary to Nature) nor can this Series of causes be from
Eternity. For Second causes are not Eternal, as having (most certainly) their
beginings with that of the world. Thirdly, they seem to have removed
contingency from things; we restore it, and as often as second causes are
such, we admit contingency and accident in events. Lastly, they seem to have
brought in a violent force upon the Will; this is far from us, who as we do
assert Fate, so we reconcile it with the Liberty of the Will. For we so avoid
the deceitful Gust of Fortune and Chance, as that yet we do not force our
Ship upon the Rock of Necessity. Is there Fate? That Fate is the first cause,
which is so far from removing the second and subordinate ones, that
ordinarily, and for the most part, it acts not but by them. Now amongst these
second causes is the Will, which never believe that God will either enforce
or destroy. Here is all the Error, and Cloud in this matter, no Man knows or
thinks that he wills what Fate wills, and yet that he wills it freely. For
that God who created all things, employes those things, without the
destruction of them. As the highest Heaven does so carry along with it all the
inferior Orbs, as not to stop, or break off the proper motion of any of them:
So God by the force of Fate disposes of all things; but destroys not the
peculiar power or motion of any of them. Is it his will that Trees, and Fruits
should grow? They do so by Nature, without any compulsion. Is it his pleasure
that Men should deliberate, and choose? They deliberate without any
inforcement, and they choose with their own will. And yet God from Eternity
foresaw that very thing in which their choice would determine: But he only
foresaw, he did not enforce; he knew, but did not enjoin; he foretold it, but
he did not prescribe it. Why stumble our Curioso's at this? Poor wretches!
There is no point, that seems to me, to carry a greater evidence of truth with
it; were it not for that vvanton Mind of ours which (being infected with an
evil Itch of wrangling and dispute) is ever and anon urging and exasperating it
self. For (say they) if God foresaw that I should sin; and this foresight of
his is no way to be deceived: How can it otherwise be, but that I should sin
Necessarily? I acknowledge it is Necessarily, but not in respect of your Mind;
since your own free will does here intervene. For he foresaw that you should
sin the same way he foresaw; but he foresaw you should do it freely, and
therefore of Necessity you must sin freely. Is not this sufficiently clear? But
they urge again; that God is the Author of all motions in us. He is indeed (I
confess) the Author of all motions in common, but the fautor, and favourer of
nothing but what is good. Do you prepare your self to an action that is
virtuous? He knows and assists it. Or to one that is vicious? He knows, and
permits it, nor is he herein chargeable with any fault. I ride upon, and spur
a dull and lame Horse, that I spur him is from me, that he is dull is from
himself. I play upon a Harp that is out of tune, and ill strung: You will
easily acknowledge, that the discordancy of the instrument is not imputable to
me, but to it self. This very Earth does feed all sorts of Trees and Plants
with one common juice; and yet some of these bring forth wholesome Fruits,
and some others Poisons. What will you here say? That this is from the Earth?
Or rather in that inbred Nature of the Trees, which converts the good
nourishment, into their own poison? In like manner it is here: That you move is
from God; from your self, and in your self, that you move to Evil. Finally,
that I may at last finish my discourse about this Liberty; Fate is as it were
the Leader of the Dance, in this Masque of the world: But so, that we also have
our parts to act, of always vvilling or nilling; but not further of effecting.
For it is only a will that is left unto Man whereby he may be desirous to
oppugn and resist God: But he has not a power whereby he is able. As I may
walk up and down the Decks and Hatches of a Ship; but this little motion does
not at all avail to hinder its course: So in this fatal Ship, in which we
are all embarked, though our wills move this or that way, they are not able
to divert, or put a stop to it. For that supreme Will will always hold and
manage the reins, and guide this Chariot, with a gentle kind of government.

CHAP. XXI. The Conclusion of the Discourse about Fate; that it is dangerous
and doubtful, not curiously to be pried into. An exhortation to strengthen our
Minds from the consideration of Necessity.
BUt why should I dwell longer upon these things? I shall now alter my Course,
and withdraw my self from this Charybdis in which the wits of so many have
been svvallovved up. I behold here the vvreck of Cicero who had rather destroy
Providence, than derogate in the least from the freedom of the will. Who (as
the Bishop of Hippo said elegantly) while he made Men Free, made them
Sacrilegious. How many even at this day are swimming in this Sea; and at
length carried away with the Waves of disputation. By whose dangers Lipsius
we being warned let us rather choose to coast about the Shore, than to
hazard our selves too far in the depths of this Ocean. Euclid to one that
asked him many things concerning the Gods, made this apposite reply: Other
things I know not; but this I know that they hate the curious. Think the same
of Fate, which will be looked upon, but not pried into; believed, but not
known. I think it is the saying of Bias; of the Gods say that they are, which
I may pertinently apply unto Fate, of which I advise you, that it is enough if
you know it to be: in other matters about it, it is no Sin to be ignorant.
That properly belongs to our Province (for I now return from this entangled
path into the old and beaten way) that you believe there is a Necessity
annexed to public evils: and that you derive from thence some consolation in
your Griefs. What does it concern you, curiously to enquire about the Liberty
or Servitude of the Will? Wretch! Thy Syracuse is taken, and thou art drawing
lines in the dust. War is about thee, Tyranny, Slaughters, Death, which
certainly are sent from above, and not at all under the disposal of thy Will.
These things you may fear but not prevent: Fly, but not be able to evade. Arm
your self therefore against them, and catch up this fatal weapon, which will
not only pierce, but kill; not only diminish, but destroy all your Griefs. As
if you slightly touch a Nettle it stings; but if hard, it has no such power:
So does the asperity of your Grief increase upon you if you ply it with gentle
remedies, but gives back in the use of those which are more forcible and
severe. Now there is nothing more forcible than necessity: whose first onset
does rout and conquer these feeble troops. For what does your grief aim at?
There is no place for it in those things which not only may, but must come to
pass. What would your complaints? You may struggle with a Yoke which Heaven
has imposed; but not be able to shake it off. By our complaints we hope in vain
To frustrate what the Gods ordain.


There is no other evasion of Necessity, than to will that which it self will
compel. That excellent wise Man said excellently; thou may be unconquerable
if thou never enter into such a combat, wherein it is impossible for thee to
overcome. And such is the conflict with Necessity, which whosoever
undertakes, falls under it, and which is the greater wonder, he falls even
before the fight.

CHAP. XXII. A pretense for Sloth usually drawn from Fate. Its Detection. Fate
acts by second causes, and therefore they not to be idle. How far we are to
help our Country, and when to forbear. The Close of the first Discourse.
ANd here Langius pawsing a little; I cheerfully broke out, and thus
interrupted him. If (said I) the wind shall continue thus to fill the Sail; I
shall quickly arrive at the Haven. For now I dare follow God, I dare obey
Necessity, and methinks I may say with Euripides.

I Will rather Sacrifice to mighty Jove
Than with vain rage combat the powers above.
But I am yet tossed with the vvave of one troubled thought, and this Langius
I pray you calm: For if public Evils are from Fate, and that can neither be
overcome nor avoided: Why do we further concern our selves or labor for our
Country? Why do we not resign up all, to that great and uncontrollable
Governor, and (as they say) sit down with our hands folded? since as your
self do confess; all contrivance and power is but vain, when the Fates do
oppose. Obstinacy and perverseness said Langius smiling, have set thee at
distance Young Man from that which is right and true. Is this to obey Fate, or
to contemn and clude it? I will sit (say you) with my hands folded; it is
well; I vvish you had done so with your Lips too. For who ever assented, that
Fate acts singly without the intervention of middle and assisting causes? It
is Fate that your Children dye: Yet so, as that they shall first be begotten.
It is Fate that you recover of a Disease: But then you must employ the
Physician, and make use of remedies. In like manner it is Fate, that the
fluctuating sinking Ship of your Country, shall be preserved: It is then also
Fate, that it shall be supported and defended. If you will arrive at the
Haven, you must apply your hands to the Oar, and hoise the Sails; not idly
gaping after, or expecting a Wind from above. On the other side if it is Fate
that this Country of yours shall perish; by Fate also those things shall come
to pass, which shall promote and further the ruin of it. The Commons shall be
at variance with the Peers, and amongst themselves none shall know how to
command, or to obey. Many shall be valiant in the tongue; all shall be sluggish
in action: And to conclude amongst the Commanders themselves, there shall be
found neither Prudence not Integrity. Velleius said well; the irresistible
force of Fate, does corrupt the Counsels of him, whose Fortune it is
determined to change: And again it comes to pass for the most part that God
perverts their Councels, whose Fortune he is about to alter; and (which is
the greatest unhappiness) so orders things, that those calamities which happen
to such persons, seem deservedly to have fallen upon them. Neither ought you
presently to conclude, that the last and fatal revolution is now come upon your
Country. For how do you know it? Or which way can you be certain, whether it
is some light distemper, or a Disease unto Death? Assist her therefore, and
while the Patient has yet breath (as they say) hope. But if by certain and
infallible discoveries, it shall appear, that its fatal change is upon it;
then (in my judgment) that is wholsome advice; fight not against God. That
Example of Solon I may here safely commend, who when Pisistratus had seized
Athens; and he saw that all endeavors for Liberty were vain, laying down his
shield and arms at the doors of the Curia: O my Country said he, I have
assisted thee both with my counsels and actions; and so went home, resolving
for the future to be quiet. Do you thus, give place to God, give place to the
times; and if you are a good Commonwealths Man, reserve your self to better
and more gentle Fates. That Liberty which is now perished, may revive; and your
Country which is now fallen, in process of time may yet arise: Why do you
unadvisedly despond, and cast away your courage? Of those two Consuls at
Cannas I esteem Varro a gallanter Person who fled, than Paulus that fell: Nor
did the Senate and People of Rome judge otherwise, who gave him public thanks,
that he did not despair of the Commonwealth. But whether your Country do
only totter, or whether it fall; whether it languish only, or wholy perish:
Afflict not your self overmuch, but espouse that noble courage of Crates, who
when Alexander asked him, if he could vvish his Country might be restored? To
what purpose replied he, possibly another Alexander will overturn it again:
These are the speeches of great and wise Men.

Let Griefs (though sad) within the best repose;
What gain is it to awake our Sleeping woes.
As Achilles was well advised in Homer; for otherwise as Creon in the Fable,
embracing his burning Daughter, freed her not; but himself perished with her
in the same Flames: So Lipsius, you will sooner drown your self in your own
Tears, than with them extinguish these public Fires of your Country. While
Langius was yet speaking, the door opened; and a Boy from Levinus Torrentius
came to tell us it was supper time? Langius as one awaked, what says he, has
this discourse so fair imposed upon me? and is the day thus privily slipped
away? And with that rising and taking me by the Arm; let us go Lipsius said he
to this my wished Supper. Let us rather sit still, said I (being unwilling to
go) for this to me is preferrable to all other food; which I may justly call
the banquet of the Gods. In these entertainments I always hunger and can never
be satisfied. But Langius compelled me, and said he, let us now perform our
promise; to morrow if you will we will finish our Sacrifice to Constancy.

A DISCOURSE OF CONSTANCY. BOOK. II.
CHAP. I. The occasion of renewing the Discourse; the going to Langius his
Gardens. Their commendations.
THe next day it pleased Langius to conduct me to his gardens which with a
great deal of cost and curiosity he had planted in two places, the one upon a
gentle rise of ground opposite to his house: the other somewhat fatther off, in
a lower place, and close by the River Maes Whose Crystal streams do gentle
slide
Along the pleasant City's side.


Surprising me therefore in my Chamber very early in the morning shall we
walk Lipsius said he, or whether had you rather repose upon a Chair here
within doors? Walk Langius (said I) provided it be with you; but whither shall
we go? If you approve it (replied he) to my Gardens which are by the waters
side, they are not far distant, and by the way you shall exercise your Body;
see the City, and besides we shall there meet with a cool and desirable air; in
the midst of this heat: With all my heart (said I) nor in your Company is it
possible that any way should seem tedious to me, though it were to the utmost
Indies. And with this we called for our Cloakes, cast them upon us, went forth,
and got thither. As Soon as I entered I took their prospect, with a wandering and
curious Eye; and really wondering at the elegancy, and culture of the place? My
Father (said I) what pleasantness, what splendor is this? You have here
Langius a Heaven rather than a Garden: Nor certainly do those Starry Fires
above, shine out more illustriously in a clear and open Night; than these your
flowers, do even sparkle and glitter in a most delectable Variety. Talk we of
the Gardens of Adonis or Alcinous? compared with these, they are doubtless
inconsiderable trifles, and such things as are next to nothing. And with this
being come somewhat nearer, beholding some; and smelling to others: Oh! said I,
which should I rather wish the Eyes of Argus or the Nose of Catullus? So
equally does this pleasure even tickle and delight both Senses. Hence, hence
all ye Odours of Arabia which serve only to provoke a loathing, in respect of
that pure and truly Celestial sweetness that breaths from hence: Langius gently
wringing my hand, and not without a smile or too; Fair fall my Gardens,
Lipsius says he; for neither I nor this rustical Flora of mine can pretend any
Title to so skillful and ingenious a commendation. It is yet a true one,
Langius (replied I) suppose you that I flatter? I speak it with all the
seriousness imaginable, the Elysian Fields, are less so than these Gardens of
yours. For see what a comeliness and order is every where? How fitly all
things are disposed in their Beds and Borders? That the different colored
Marbles in a pavement are not placed with a more becoming Beauty and
exactness. What plenty of Herbs and Flowers? What rarity and strangeness?
Insomuch as within the narrow limits of this one place, Nature seems to have
enclosed all those excellencies, which either this of ours, or that other
World is able to boast off.

CHAP. II. The praise of Gardens in general. Delight taken in them is ancient,
and from Nature. Kings and other excellent persons addicted to them. The
pleasures of them.
ANd truly Langius this your divertisment is a praiseworthy and commendable
one; a pleasure whereunto (if I am not deceived) the more excellent and
ingenuous persons are by Nature it self inclined. I am rather induced to
believe this; inasmuch as it is not very easy to think of any one pleasure, in
which the most eminent amongst the Nations have in all ages so willingly
consented. If we turn over the sacred Volume, we shall there find that the
World and Gardens were made together, which God himself bestowed upon the
first Man, as the Seat of a blessed Life: If we search into profane Stories,
Proverbs and Fables every where tell us of the Gardens of Adonis and Alcinous,
Tantalus and the Hesperides: and in true and credible Histories, we meet the
mention of King Cyrus his Orchards, that were planted with his own Hands: The
airy and pendulous Gardens of Semiramis, and that new and celebrated Plat of
Masanissa which Afric vvondred at. Amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans,
how many illustrious persons am I able to name; who casting off all other
cares, have betaken themselves only to this? Amongst the former, it will
suffice to say in short, that most of the Philosophers and Sages, removing from
Cities and the wild clamor of the Courts; have cloystred up themselves within
private limits and bounds. And amongst the latter, methinks I see King Tarquine
(in that then ancient Rome) diverting himself in his Gardens, and smiting off
the heads of the Poppyes. Cato the Censour applying himself to this study, and
vvriting Books with all seriousness about these matters. Lucullus retiring to
his Gardens, after all his Asiatique Triumphs. Sylla having laid down his
Dictatorship does here more contentedly grow old; and Dioclesian the Emperor
preferres his Sallads and Lettuce at Salona; before the imperial purple, and
all the Scepters of the Universe. Nor have the Vulgar receded from the
Judgment of their superiors; but even amongst them the honester sort, and
such as were free from ambition; were generally this way addicted. For
certainly there is a kind of secret impulse, that with us is born; the hidden
Causes of which I cannot easily explicate; which thrusts into this innocent and
ingenuous delight; not only us who bend that way, but even those serious and
severe persons; who both resist and deride it. And as none do behold the
Heavens, and those eternal Fires; without a secret kind of horror and Religion;
so neither do any take a view of the Sacred Treasures of the Earth, and the
beautiful Ornaments of this lower World, without a silent kind of Gust and
Titillation of delight. Enquire but of your Mind and Soul, and it will confess
it self not only to be surpised; but even fed with such a prospect. Ask your
Eyes and Senses and they will acknowledge, that they do not any where more
willingly repose themselves. Look round about I beseech you for a while, and
observe the several troops of Flowers, together with the manner of their
growth. Behold how this uncupps, and that unsheathes, and this other swells it
self out of the rich enclosure of it is Gemm-like Bud. See how suddenly the one
expires, and the other shoots out to succeed it; to conclude, observe in any
one kind of them, the Beauty, Form, and Appearance, a thousand vvayes diverse
and the same. What Mind is there so rigid, that in such entertainments as
these, will not withdraw and melt it self, into soft and pleasing
Meditations? Let the curious Eye dwell a while upon those Orient and dazeling
Colors: Behold this native Purple, this Blood, this Ivory, this Snow, this
Flame, this Gold, and such diversity of Colors; as a skilful Pencil may
possibly emulate, but can never be able to express? To conclude what exhaling
Odors, what subtle and piercing Spirit, and I know not what part of the
Heavenly Air breathed from above? So that our Tribe of Poets seem not in vain
to have feigned, that most Flowers are born of the Blood and juice of the
Immortal Gods. O thou true Fountain of dissolved pleasure! O thou happy Seat of
Venus and the Graces! May I ever pass my days, and repose myself in these your
shades; may it be lawful for me (thus remote from popular tumults) with a
cheerful yet unsatisfied Eye; to wander amongst the Plants and Flowers of the
known and unknown World; busying my self now with the Rise of this, and than
with the Set of that, and with a vvandring kind of deceit here to los^ the
memory of all my cares and sorrows.

CHAP. III. Against some curious People, who abuse their Gardens to Vanity and
Sloth. Their proper use. That they are places fit for wise and learned Men; and
that Wisdom it self is bred and cherished there.
WHen I had spoken this somevvhat earnestly, and with a kind of Ardour both in
voice and countenance; Langius looking mildly upon me: Certainly said he
Lipsius, you are enamored of this florid and purple Nymph; and I am
solicitous, lest you should love her immodestly. For you praise Gardens, but
yet so, as to admire only those things which are vain and external; while you
omit to speak of the true and lawful Pleasures of them. You greedily behold the
colors, and repose in the beds, and enquire after Flowers from the known and
unknown World? But for what purpose I pray? Is it to assure me that you also
are one of that newly sprung up Sect of curious and idle persons; who have
converted the most excellent and simple delight, into the instrument of a
couple of Vices; Vanity, and Sloth? For to this end have they their Gardens,
with an ambitious curiosity they search after a few foreign Plants and
Flowers; and when they have them, they cherish and attend them, with the same
anxiety and passion, as a Mother does her Son. These are they whose Letters
wander into Thrace, Greece, India, for some little parcel of seed, a Clove, or
off-set of a Flower: Who more passionately lament the vvithering of some new
fashioned Slipps; than the Death of an old tried Friend. Does any Man laugh at
that Roman, who put on mourning for the Death of his Lamprey? After the same
manner bewail they the Funerals of their Flowers. Now if any of these
Candidates of Flora have got any thing more new or rare, O how he boasts it!
How do his Corrivals emulate and envy him? Some of whom return no less pensive
to their Houses than Sylla or Marcellus when they were rejected in their suit
for the Pretorship. What shall I call this but a merry kind of madness? Not
unlike to that of children turning pale, and quarrelling for their Topps and
Counters. Understand also how these men employ themselves in their Gardens;
they sit, they walk round about, they gape and sleep, and nothing else; as if
they intended them not as places of retirement, but as Sepulchers of Sloth. A
profane Generation, and such as I may justly exclude from the Orgyes of the
true and sacred Garden, which I know to be consecrate to modest pleasure, not
to Vanity, to ease, but not at all to Sloth. Should I be of so feeble a temper,
that the gain or loss of a poor Flower, should either exalt or depress me? No,
I esteem things at their just rates, and setting aside the meretricious
advantage of Novelty: I know they are but Plants; I know they are but Flowers:
that is, short-lived and transitory things; of which the Prince of Poets has
pertinently spoken, When the soft VVestern winds abroad do fly,
Some Flowers they make to spring, and others dye.


I do not then despise these elegancies and delights (as you see) but herein I
differ from these delicate Hortensii; that as I get such things as these
without anxiety, so I keep, and so I lose them. Nor am I so stupid, or rather
so dead, that I should cloister up, and (as it were) bury my self in these
Garden shades: For even in these retirements, I find business, and my Mind does
here meet with something which it may perform without action. I am never
less alone than when alone (said one;) nor ever less at leisure than when so.
An excellent saying, and which I dare affirm had its birth in such Gardens as
these, which are intended for the Mind, not the Body; to recreate that, not to
dissolve and soften this; and for a safe retreat both from Company and Cares.
Is company troublesome? Here you shall be with your self: Have employments
exhausted your Spirits? Here they shall be repayr'd, where the Mind shall be
refreshed with its proper food of quiet, and where from this purer air, you
shall have as it were the inspiration of a new life. If you look therefore upon
the ancient Sages, they dwelt in Gardens; or upon the more learned and improved
Spirits of our times, they delight in Gardens: And in those for the most part
are those divine pieces composed, which are the wonder of Mankind, and which
no Age, or successions of time shall ever abolish. To this green Lycaeum do we
stand indebted for so many Lectures upon Nature: To this shady Academy we owe
those discourses about manners, and from the apartments of these Gardens are
those abundant springs of Wisdom diffused, which we drink of, and which with
their fertile inundations have enriched the World. For the Mind does raise and
advance it self to higher and greater things; when free and at large; it
beholds its own Heaven, then when it is cloistered up within the Prison of a
House or City. Here O ye Poets frame an everlasting and immortal Verse; here
let the learned meditate and write; here O ye Philosophers dispute of
Tranquillity, of Constancy, of Life, and Death. See Lipsius the true end and use
of Gardens; it is rest, secession, meditation, reading, vvriting; and yet all
these by way of recreation only, and divertisement. As Painters who by long
poring have vvearied and dimmed their sight, call it off to certain glasses and
green objects, thereby to quicken and refresh it; so do we the Mind when it
either straggles or is tired. And why should I conceal my Custom from you? Do
you see that Arbor set out with Topiary work? It Is the place I have
consecrated to the Muses. It is my School of Wisdom. There I either satisfy my
Mind with serious and retired reading, or improve it with the Seeds of
profitable Meditation? And as arms are laid up in a Magazene: So do I from
them, store up precepts in my Mind, which are always ready by me, against
every battery and impression of Fortune. As often as I enter there, I forthwith
command all base and servile cares to absent themselves; and (as much as I may)
with an elevated Mind, I despise the studies of the profane vulgar, and this
great vanity in the affairs of Men. Yes, I seem to my self to be wholly
divested of humanity; and to be transported into Heaven it self, in the fiery
Chariot of Wisdom. Do you think it there troubles me, what the French or
Spaniard are designing? Who keeps, or loses the Scepter of Belgia? That the
Tyrant of Asia, now threatens us by Land or by Sea? Or to conclude; What Plots
that King is forging in his brains,
That in the North and frozen Climate raigns?
none of all these I will assure you. Securely fortified against all that is
external; I retreat within my self, free from all sorts of cares except this
one, how I may subject this broken and subdued Mind of mine to Right Reason,
and to God: And all other humane things to my Mind, that whensoever that fatal
day shall come that must put a period to my Life; I may receive it with a
composed, and unsadded countenance; and may so depart out of this life, not as
he that is forced into exile, but as one that is set at liberty. These are my
musings in my Gardens Lipsius; and these the fruits which (so long as I am my
self) I shall not willingly exchange for all the Persian and the Indian
treasures.

CHAP. IV. An exhortation to Wisdom; thereby a Man may attain to Constancy. An
admonition to Youth, to conjoyn the more serious studies of Philosophy to the
more pleasant and liberal ones.
LAngius had finished, and I confess seriously that this last generous and
constant speech of his, had cast me into some amazement, which when I had
recovered, O happy Man (said I) both in your business and retirements! O that
more than humane life; which I have met with in a Man! Would to God I were
able in any Measure to imitate, and to creep along after these footsteps,
though it were at a considerable distance. Langius as reprehending me; imitate
says he? Yes excel. You have right here not only to follow, but to lead the
way. For in this Path of Constancy and Virtue Lipsius, we have made but a
small, a very small progress. As yet we are not comparable to the more Heroic
and excellent Persons, though possibly a little more assured than the utterly
enfeebled and debauched sort. But you whose Youthful inclinations are
Generous and Lofty, prepare your self; and agreeable to my instructions, assay
that path which does directly lead to firmness and Constancy. The way I speak
of is Wisdom, whose smooth and even path, I beseech and advise you no longer to
decline: Has learning and the Nine Goddesses hitherto delighted you? I approve
it. For I know the Mind ought first to be subacted and prepared with this more
pleasing and external knowledge, as being before unfit to have divine Seeds
entrusted with it. But vvithall I approve not that you should so far dote
upon this as to make it both the beginning and end of your studies. These are
to be our rudiments but not our work; our way but not our Goal. In a feast
(I suppose) you would not feed only upon Quelkchoses or Junkets; but would
gratify your stomach with something that is more solid. In this public
banquet of Learning, why do you not the same? Why add you not the firmer food
of Philosophy, to those delicious Viands of Orators and Poets? For (mistake me
not) I would not that the one should be deserted, but that the other should be
superadded, and that those looser, and by themselves more fluid Nymphs should
be tempered and mixed, with this (as I may call it) severer Bacchus.
Penelope's Suitors in Homer are justly laughed at; who deserting the Mistress
fell to courting the Maids: Take heed you do not the same, that despising the
great and excellent Princess, you should remain enamored of her handmaids. It
is a desirable purchase to attain the praise of a learned Man; that of a wise
Man is beyond it, but that of a good Man surpasses all. Hereafter let us aim at
these; and by all our labors endeavor not only to know, but to be wise and
do: How vaine's that knowledge where
No VVisdome does appear?
says that old and true Verse. How many are there in this our Assembly of the
Muses, who dishonor both themselves, and the very name of Learning? Some in
that they are even covered with the black spots of detestable impieties; and
the most because they are vain, light Meteours only, and of no worthy
designment. Do they learn languages? Yes, but languages alone. Do they
understand the Greek and Latin Authors? Yet they do but understand them, and
as Anacharsis said well of the Athenians heretofore; they used money only to
count it: so these their knowledge only to know. So utterly regardless are they
of their lives, and of what they do, that (even in my judgment) the vulgar
seem with some reason to look upon learning as the Mistress of vice: But it is
indeed the Directress to virtue; if we use it as we ought, and conjoyn it with
wisdom; to which learning should prepare our Minds, but not seize upon them,
and detain them to it self: For as there are some sorts of Trees, that will
bear no fruit, unless they are planted by other male ones (as I may call them)
so will the Virgin Muses remain barren, unless wedded to the Masculine strength
of wisdom. To what end do thou correct Tacitus? and at the same time suffer
so many Errata's in thine own life? Why do thou illustrate Tranquillus? and
yet permit thy self to be benighted with Error? Do thou carefully expunge
the faults out of Plautus, when thou suffer thy Mind to be overgrown and
neglected? Espouse at the last more worthy designs, and look after such a kind
of learning as may serve, not only for austentation and applause, but also for
use. Betake your self unto Wisdom which may reform your manners; calm and
enlighten your troubled and dark Soul. For it is she alone that can fix upon you
the impress of virtue; and consign you to Constancy, and give you a free
admission into the Temple of a good Mind.

CHAP. V. Wisdom is not acquired by wishes, but endeavors. The discourse of
Constancy renewed. The desire of knowledge, a happy presage in a Young Man.
THis admonition so inflamed me, that not able to dissemble it; My Father said
I, with my Mind I follow you already; but when shall I with my Actions also?
When shall that day appear, which releasing me from these cares, shall place me
in the path of true wisdom; that thereby I may attain to true Constancy?
Langius as one reproving me. Do you then (said he) choose rather to with, than
to act? It is to no purpose at all; and as the vulgar use to do. However.
Ceneus in the Fable was transformed from a Woman to a Man by wishing: Yet hope
not you after the same manner, to pass from a fool to a wise, or from a
wavering to a constant Man. It will concern you to use your utmost endeavor,
to turn every stone, and that with an industrious diligence; you must seek,
read, and learn: Here interrupting him, I know it Langius replied I; but do you
also I beseech you lend me your assistance, and continue the thread of
Yesterdays discourse, which our summons to supper did unhappily break off.
Return I sav unto Constancy, whose intermitted rites, it will be dangerous to
defer. Langius as refusing, shall I again said he be shut up in that School?
I will not Lipsius, at least not in this place, which you should consider I
have devoted to my recreations and not to business, another time we will
attend it. Yes at this time replied I, for what place is more fit for a
discourse of wisdom, than this her dwelling? I mean that Atbour, which to me
seems a Temple, and the little Table in it, no other than an Altar, at which
sitting down let us Sacrifice to the Goddess. Besides I take an Omen from the
very place. What Omen (says Langius?) It Is this said I, that as he who sits in
a place where Odors and sweet Unguents are, carrys along with him in his
Garments the perfume and scent of the place. So I am not without hope, that
some Air and Odor of Wisdom may adhere unto my Mind, by sitting in this her
Storehouse. I am afraid (says Langius smiling) there is but little of weight
in so light an Omen: Howsoever Lipsius let us set forward, for not to dissemble
with you, this so ingenious heat of yours does excite and vvarm me too. And as
the searchers after springs, when in the Morning they observe a certain vapor
exhailing from the Earth, do forthwith conclude that there they shall meet
with water: So have I hopes of a plentiful spring of virtue, wheresoever I
observe in Youth an early desire of knowledge to betray it self: And with this
he led me into the Arbor, and seated himself at the Table. But I first turning
my self and calling to the Boys; stay there said I and vvait, but be sure you
lock the door, and observe what I say; upon your lives see that no Man, nor
Dog, nor Woman enter; no though good Fortune her self should come; and with
that I sat down. But Langius laughing outright, did you ever sway Scepter
Lipsius (said he) so Princelike and so severe are your edicts? Yesterdays
misfortune (replied I) has dictated to me this necessary caution, and now in
Gods name proceed.

CHAP. VI. A third Argument for Constancy drawn from utility: Calamities are
good both in their Original and End. Their Original is from God; who being
eternally and immutably good, cannot be the cause of any Evil.
LAngius without any considerable pawse thus began. In my discourse of
Constancy it is fit I be constant, I shall therefore observe the same order and
method which Yesterday I propounded. Then (as you know) I formed Four
Squadrons (as I call them) to fight in its behalf against grief and
dejectedness. The two former of these, from Providence and Necessity; I have
already drawn forth, and have sufficiently evinced that public evils are sent
down from God; as also that they are necessary and impossible to be declined. I
shall now therefore bring up my Third Squadron led by Utility; which I may
truly call the Legion Adjutrix, a Valiant and subtle power, which I know not
how does convey and insinuate it self into the Minds of Men, and with a
pleasing kind of violence so overcomes them, as that themselves are not
unwilling to be conquered. ^t rather gains upon us by degrees, than by violent
impressions, and rather persuades than compells us. For we as readily permit
our selves to be led by Utility, as drawn by Necessity. This Lipsius I now
oppose against you and your failing troops. For these public evils which we
suffer are profitable, and contribute much to our inward advantage. Did I call
them Evils? They are rather goods; if removing this veil of Opinion, we have a
due recourse unto their Original and End; of which the former is from good,
and the latter is for good. For the Original of these Calamities (as Yesterday
I sufficiently proved) is certainly from God: That is, not only from the
chiefest good it self, but from the Author, cause, and Fountain of all other
good whatsoever; from whom it is as utterly impossible that any evil should
proceed, as that himself should be evil. That power is only benign and
healthful, equally despising to receive and to do vvrong, and whose sole and
chief prerogative it is to benefit. And therefore those ancient and blinder
sort of Men, conceiving something of the supreme Being in their Minds; did
rightly give him his Name from helping. Suppose you that he is exasperated, and
that as one in a passion, he hurles down these evils as so many deadly Arrows
upon mankind? No. Anger and Revenge are humane Affections, and being the
ef^ects of weakness, are found only amongst the infirm. But that excellent
Being does eternally persevere in its benignity, and those very severities
which we taste off from him, are only as Medicines; sharp and bitter to the
sense, but healthful in their issue and events. That Homer of Philosophers said
rightly God does no evil, and therefore cannot be the cause of any. But better
and more fully that wise one of ours. What is the cause of the Gods doing good?
Their Nature. He errs that imagines they are either desirous or able to do
hurt. As they cannot receive, so neither can they do an injury. The first honor
that we owe to the Gods, is to believe that they are, the next is to ascribe
Majesty to them, and goodness without which there is no Majesty. To know they
are those, who preside over the world; who govern all things as their own; who
are the Guardians of Mankind, and of every particular person, and that no evil
is in them, neither does any proceed from them.

CHAP. VII. The end of Calamities always directed to good; though often
administered by wicked Men, and for their evil ends. The force of them is broken
and allayed by God. All things are guided to our advantage. Why God uses
wicked Men as his Instruments therein.
CAlamities then are good in their Original; they are so also in their End,
because they are always directed to our good. You will say which way? Is
not mischief and ruin the manifest end of War and Slaughter? It is I confess
if you look at Men, but not if you look upon God. That you may the more clearly
apprehend this, It will be requisite thus to distinguish of divine
punishments; some are simple and others are mixed: Those I call simple which
are immediately from God; without the intervening of any humane Contrivance or
Assistance: The mixed, are such as are from God too; but acted and performed by
Men. Of the former kind are Famine, Barrenness, Earthquakes, Inundations,
Diseases, and Death: Of the latter, Tyrannies, Wars, Oppressions, Slaughters.
The first sort are pure and innocent, as being derived to us from the purest
Fountain: In the other I will not deny, but there is some mixture of filth,
inasmuch as they pass through, and are conveyed to us by the impure Channels of
Affections. Man intermeddles therein, and then what vvonder is it, if Sin and
corruption do discover it self? That is the vvonder that such is the merciful
Providence of God, as can convert that poison into Medicine, and that Sin into
good. See you that Tyrant there, who breaths out nothing but threatenings and
slaughter, whose delights are in doing mischief, and who could be content to
perish himself, provided he might thereby accomplish the destruction of others:
Let him alone a while, he shall fail in his designs; and God by a secret and
indiscernible thread (while he thinks and wills nothing less) shall guide him
to his end. As the Arrow without any sense of its own, arrives at that mark
which the Archer intended; so do wicked Men. For that supreme power does
inhibit and restrain all humane powers, directing and disposing all their
vvandring steps unto that best end of his. As in an Army the Soldiers are
variously affected; spoil encourages this, glory him, and hatred that other;
but all fight for their Prince and Victory: So every of these wills of ours,
whether they are good or evil, serve under, and fight for God, and amidst the
greatest variety of their own designed ends, do at last touch upon this (as I
may so call it) End of Ends. But you will say why does God use the help of
the wicked? Why does not he himself send that better sort of Calamities
amongst us; at least the worser by more desirable instruments? Thou art over
curiously inquisitive O Man: Neither am I certain whether I am able to explain
these Mysteries of Providence. But this I know, that he sufficiently
comprehends the reason of his actings; even at such times as we are not able to
discern the least of it in them. But what is it that appears so strange, and
unusual to us? The Ruler of a Province condemns a malefactor according to the
Laws; and commits the Execution of his Sentence to Brutianus or the Lictor. The
Father of a great Family sometimes corrects his Son himself; at others commits
it to the care of a Servant or Tutor. Why should not God have the same liberty?
Why should not he when he so pleases shastise us with his own hand? And when
he sees it good with another? There is no wrong or injury done to us in all
this. Does that Servant hate you? Does he come with a Mind to do you a
mischief? It matters not, overlooking the instrument of what you suffer: Look
back to the Mind of him that has commanded it. For assuredly the Father that
requires it stands by; nor will he suffer one stripe to be superadded to what
himself has prescribed. But you ask again; why is Sin here immixed? and why
are these divine Arrows dipped in the poison of Affections? You put me upon a
difficult task, which yet I shall adventure upon; and my answer is, that God
may declare his Wisdom and Power. They are St. Austine's words; he judged it
better to make evils good, than to permit no evils at all. For what greater
instance can there be of Wisdom and Goodness, than to bring good out of evil,
and to make those things Conspire our welfare, which were found out for our
ruin. You commend that Physician who successefully mixes his Treacle with a
Viper. And why should you resent it in God, if with this Plaster of
Calamities, he shall intermixe something that is hurtful, without any damage
of yours. For he does certainly decoct and evaporate all the adhering poison,
by the secret fire of his Providence. Lastly, this magnifyes his power and
glory; to which all things are by himself of Necessity referred. For what can
more lively express his power than this? That he not only overcomes those
Enemies that wrestle with him; but also overcomes them in such a manner, as
brings them over to himself, and causes them to take Arms in the pursuance of
his Victories: Which every day comes to pass, when the will of God is done by
evil Men, though not of them; since he so manages all those things which the
wicked do in opposition to his will; that none of them are besides his will.
And what greater miracle can there be, than that wicked Men should make
wicked Men good? Approach thou Cajus Caesar, and at once tread under Foot the
two Sacred Names of thy County, and Son in Law. This thy ambition without thy
knowledge shall be subservient to God; yes to thy Country it self, against
which it was taken up: For it shall prove the reparation and establishment of
the Roman State. Thou Attila fly from the remotest parts of the World, and
thirsting after blood and spoil, Sack, kill, burn, and wast; all this cruelty
shall fight for God, and prove nothing else but an awakening of the Christians
from slumbring in the Beds of Pleasure and Security. You two Vespasians what do
you? Ruin Judea and the Jews: Take, and raze the whole City; but for what end?
As you indeed intend it; for the glory and enlargement of the Empire, but you
mistake your selves, you are only the Lictours and Executioners of the divine
vengeance upon an impious Nation. Go ye who possibly have martyred the
Christians at Rome, and revenge the Death of Christ in Iudaea. All ages are
full of such examples, how God by the sinful desires of some Men has
accomplished his own good pleasure; and by the injustice of others, has
executed his own just and righteous Judgments. Let us therefore Lipsius rather
admire than busily pry into this recluded Power of his Wisdom, and let us know,
that all sorts of Calamities are good in their events: Although this Mind of
ours be so blind as not to discern it, or so slow in its apprehensions as not
to reach and comprehend it. For their true ends are oftentimes obscure as to
us; to which notwithstanding (though we are ignorant) they at last arrive:
not unlike those Rivers which though they retire from our sight, and creep
under ground, do nevertheless find the way to pour themselves into the bosom
of their own Seas.

CHAP. VIII. More distinctly of the Ends themselves. They are Threefold; and
to whom each belongs. Of the first End, which is for the exercise of the Good.
It is advantageous three ways. It strengthens them; tryes them, and fits them
to be exemplary to others.
IF I may therefore hoise Sail and pass on further into this depth of divine
matters; I may possibly discover some things more fully and distinctly
concerning the Ends themselves. But it is fit I should preface an attempt of
this Nature with that of Homer, If it may be done by me,
Or the thing it self can be.


For there are some of them, which methinks I am able with some certainty to
comprehend and point out, but there are others which I can only rove and guess
at. Of the more apparent ones, are these three; to Exercise, Chastise, and
Punish us. For if you observe it, the most usual and ordinary calamities do
either exercise the good, or chastise the offending, or punish the wicked; and
all this for our good. For (to illustrate and dwell awhile upon the first End)
we daily see the best Men either pressed by calamities singly and apart by
themselves; or else enclosed by them, in society with the wicked. We observe
and vvonder at it; as neither sufficiently comprehending the cause; nor rightly
considering the End. Now the cause is the love of God toward us, not his hate;
and the End is not our hurt, but our benefit. For this exercise does advantage
us more ways than one: It strengthens us, it tryes us, and it fits us to lead
on others. It strengthens us, being (as it were) that School; wherein God
trains up his in Fortitude and Virtue. We see vvrastlers inure themselves to
sharp Trials; that they may overcome at last: think the same of us in this
School of Afflictions. For that great Master of ours is a sharp and severe
exerciser of us; and exacts our labors and patience not only unto sweat but
blood: Suppose you that he fondly trains up his, and that he cherishes them in
the soft blandishments of pleasure and delight? No. They are Mothers which
soften and enervate their children, by an over-tenderness in their education;
but Fathers who preserve them, by acquainting them with hardship. Now God is
our Father, and therefore as he does truly so he severely loves us. If you
would be a Pilot, you must be brought up amongst storms; if a Soldier, you
must be trained up in dangers; and if you would be truly a Man, why do you
start at afflictions, since there is no other way to acquire strength. Do you
see those languishing and retired Bodies, whom the Sun seldom looks upon, the
vvind never assails, and the more piercing air never lights upon; the Minds of
those soft and ever happy Men, are such as the least gust of an angry Fortune
will overturn and dissolve. Afflictions then do strengthen us, and as trees
fasten their roots the deeper by how much the more they are shaken with the
Winds; so good Men become the more fixed in virtue, when attempted by the
storms of adversity. Afflictions do also prove and try us; for otherwise how
shall any Man be able to judge of his firmness and proficiency? If a prosperous
vvind do ever fill the Sail, the Pilot has no opportunity to display his skill;
and if all things still evenly and happily succeed to Man, he shall lose the
glory of his virtue; for the only undeceivable touchstone of it, is
affliction. It was a gallant Speech of Demetrius: Nothing seems to me more
unhappy than that Man who has never tasted of Adversity, and it is most true.
For our Great General does not exempt such Men, but distrusts them; he does not
indulge, but discards and contemns them. He rases I say their names out of the
Muster Rolls of his Legions, as a sort of feeble and unserviceable persons.
Lastly, they adapt us to lead on others; for the courage and patience of good
Men in their sufferings, is a light to this benighted World. They invite others
by their example to the same things, and as it were trace out a path of virtue
for them to walk in. Bias lost at once his Fortunes and his Country; but he yet
calls out to Men, that they be sure to carry all their Treasure about them.
Regulus in the midst of his Torments unworthily expired: But that excellent and
noble example of promise keeping does yet survive. Papinianus is slain by the
Tyrant; but his Axe has taught us securely to abide it, when we must dye in
the maintenance of Justice. To conclude, there are a number of most admirable
Persons, that through violence or injustice, have been banished or slain: but
from those Rivers of blood; we daily suck and drink in our improvements in
Constancy and Virtue: All which notwithstanding would for ever have been
concealed in darkness, were it not for this Torch of afflictions. For as Spices
do every way emit and disperse their Odours when they are pounded; so Virtue
does then chiefly display her Glories, when she is oppressed.

CHAP. IX. Of Chastisement, the Second End. That it avails us two ways.
THe Second End is to Chastise us, than which there could not be a more gentle
or effectual means found out for our preservation. For it benefits and
preserves us two ways, either as a scourge, when we have offended, or as a
Bridle lest we should offend. As a scourge, since it is the hand of a Father
which often corrects an offender for his faults; but it is an Executioner,
that slowly and only once punishes. As we use fire or water for the cleansing
and purging away of filth and dross: So does God make use of afflictions to
take away that of our sins. And it is deservedly a scourge upon us at this time
Lipsius; for we Belgians had before offended; and being corrupted with
wealth and pleasures, we Ran on Headlong in the Way of Vice. But our God
gently warnes and recalls us; and scourges us with some stripes, that
forewarned by these, we may return to our selves and to him. He takes away our
Estates, we abused them to Luxury; our liberty, because we enlarged it to
licentiousness? And with this gentle Ferula of Calamities, he does (as it
were) expiate and purge away our offenses. A gentle one indeed, for how slight
a satisfaction is this? They say the Persians when they are to punish some
Illustrious and great Person, use to stripp him of his Robes and Tiara; and
hanging them up they scourge these instead of the Man: So does this Father of
ours, who in every of his chastisements overpasses us, and touches only upon
our Bodies, our Lands, our Goods, and our ourward Enjoyments. This Chastisement
serves us also for a bridle, which he opportunely casts over us, when he sees
we are about to offend. As Physicians do sometimes advisedly breath a vein,
not because we are sick, but that we may not be; so by these Calamities God
does withdraw from us some such things, as would otherwise become incentives
and fuel to our Vices. For he who gave a being to all things does well
understand their Natures; nor does he judge of their Diseases, by the
Complexion and Pulse; but by the Heart and Reins. Does he see the Genius of the
Hetrurians to be over-haughty and raised? He rules them by a Prince: The
Helvetians easy and quiet? He indulges them liberty: The Venetians of a temper
betwixt both? He fits them with a middle way of Government; and will
possibly change all these hereafter; as the persons shall vary their
Conditions. Nevertheless, we complain, and why (say we) are we longer
harras'd with war than others? and why are we crushed under a heavier Yoke
of servitude? Thou Fool, and now really sick! Art thou vviser than thy Maker?
Tell me why does the Physician prescribe more Wormwood or Hellebore for this
than for that Man? Is it not because his Disease or Constitution requires it?
Think the same here; possibly he sees this people more stubborn, and therefore
to be subdued by stripes; that other more tractable and apt to be reduced with
the shaking of the Rod. But you do not think so: It may be so. Our Parents
will not trust a Knife or Sword in the Hand of their Child (though he cry for
it) as foreseeing his hurt. Why then should God indulge us to our destruction;
since we are truly Children, and neither know how to ask those things which
are expedient for us; nor how to part with those that will be fatal to us? You
may therefore lament if you please, and as much as you please, but you shall
notwithstanding drink of that cup of sorrows, which that Heavenly Physician
presents you with, and which he has (not unadvisedly) filled so full for you.

CHAP. X. Of punishment the Third End; that it is good both in respect of God,
Men, and him that is punished.
PUnishment I confess respects evil Men, but is no evil it self. For First, it
is good if you respect God, whose eternal and immovable law of Justice does
require that the crimes of Men be either amended, or removed out of the way.
Now chastisement amends those that can be vvashed out; and those which cannot,
punishment takes away. It is good also in respect of Men, amongst whom no
society could stand and continue; if all things were permitted with impunity
to turbulent and desperate spirits. As the punishment of petty Thieves and
Murderers, conduces to every Man's private security: So does that of the
greater and most famous ones to that of the public welfare. Those divine
animadversions upon Tyrants, and the great riflers of the World ought
necessarily sometimes to intervene, that there may be examples to admonish us,
-- That there is a wakeful Eye
Of justice, which does all descry.


And which to other Potentates and people may cry out, -- Thus warned by
others miseries,
Learn justice and the Gods not to despise.


It is good: Thirdly, if you consider those very persons that are punished. For
it is for their sakes; since it is not so properly a revenge, or an utterly
destroying judgment, as a gentle cohibition and restraint from Sin, or to
speak it fully with the Graecians a punishment not a revenge, for that
Gracious Diety Never consults his Anger that from thence
He may severest punishments dispense.


As that Impious Poet said piously. As Death is sometimes sent in Mercy to good
Men before they sin: So to the incorrigeable wicked in the midst of their
Sins, because they are so devoted to them, that unless they be cut off, they
cannot be divorced. God therefore stops their unbridled course, and while they
are commiting sin for the present, and designing others for the future; he
mercifully takes them away. To conclude all punishment is good, as it respects
justice, as on the contrary impunity is evil, which makes Men sinful, that is
miserable Men to continue so longer. Boethius said well, wicked Men are more
happy under punishment, than if Justice should inflict none at all upon them;
and he gives ohis reason, because some good is come amongst them (to wit)
punishment, which in all the heap of their other crimes they never yet had.

CHAP. XI. Of a fourth End; which pertains either to the Conservation and
defense of the Universe, or its Ornament. The Explication of each.
THese are the three certain evident Ends, which I have passed with a sure
and steady Foot: the fourth remains which I must adventure upon with a
doubtful one. For it is more removed and obscure, than that our humane
capacities should perfectly reach it. I discover it only through a Cloud, and I
may guess and offer at it, but never certainly know and attain to it. The End
which I mean has a double respect and regards either the conservation or the
beauty of the Universe. I therefore suppose it is for its conservation; because
that God who made and disposed all things by an excellent wisdom; did so make
them, that he bounded every of them within a certain number, measure, and
weight: Nor can any particular Creature transgress these limits, without the
weakening or ruin of the whole. Thus those great bodies the Heavens, the
Earth, the Sea have their bounds; thus every Age has its appointed number, and
thus both Men, Cities, and Kingdoms have their stated accounts. Will they
exceed these? It is necessary that some storm and tempest of Calamities do
check and retard them: For otherwise they would endanger and bring damage to,
this beautiful frame of the World. But those things especially would exceed
these bounds very often, that are under the command of Increase and Multiply.
Look upon Men, who can deny that by nature we are born faster, than we
naturally dye? So that in a few years from two persons a family of a hundred
may be propagated; of which in that space not above ten or twenty may dye.
Look upon a flock of Sheep; how numerous would the increase be, if the
Shepherd should not yearly choose out and set apart some to the Slaughter? The
Birds and Fishes would in a short time fill the Air and Waters, if there were
not certain dissentions; and (as it were) wars amongst themselves, and the
endeavors of Men to diminish them. Every age is building of Cities and Towns;
and if fire or other ways of destruction should not interpose; neither this
world of ours, nor the other world would be able to contain them. The same
may we imagine of the whole Creation. What wonder therefore is it if our
Saturn does sometimes thrust his Sickle into this overgrown Field; and reap
thence some superfluous thousands, either by the pestilence or war? Which if
he should not do, what Country would be able to hold us, or what Land could
afford us sustenance? It is therefore requisite that something should perish
from the parts; that so the whole may be eternal. For as to Rulers in States
the safety of the People is the supreme Law: So is it to God in respect of the
World. For the beauty or Ornament of the World I conceive calamities make two
vvayes. First, because I apprehend no beauty any where in this great frame
without variety, and a distinct succession and change of things. I acknowledge
the Sun is exceedingly beautiful, but he becomes more acceptable to us at his
return; through the interpofition of the dew-engendring Night; and those black
Curtains which she shuts him out with. The Summer is a most pleasant season,
but yet the vvinter sets it off, with it is icy marbles, and hoary Frosts:
Which if you take away, you really destroy the true relish, and that
particular gust of Joy, which it is light and Warmth afford us. In this Country
of ours, one and the same face of things delights me not; but I am pleasingly
affected to behold the Valleys and Hills, and Rocks, fruitful and vvast places,
Meadows and Woods, for satiety and loathing are always the Companions of
Equality. And why then in this Scene of life (as I may so call it) should the
same dress and countenance of things delight us? In my Mind it should not: Let
there be sometimes some smooth and Halcyon Calmes; and let those after a while
be discomposed and ruffled with the vvhirlevvinds of War, and the boisterous
storms of succeeding Tyrannies. For who would wish that this Universe should
be like the dead Sea; without Wind or Motion? But there is also another
Ornament which I guess at which is more serious and inwardly fruitful.
Histories inform me, that better and smoother times, do still succeed storms.
Do Wars molest any people? Yet for the most part they refine and sharpen them;
by introducing the Arts, and a various culture of ingenuity. The Romans of old
imposed a heavy yoke upon the world; but vvithall it proved a happy one in the
event; for as the Sun chases away darkness from our Eyes: So did that ignorance
and barbarism from their Minds. What had the Gauls or we Germans now been, if
the light of that great Empire had not risen to us? A sort of wild and inhumane
savages, glutting our selves with our own and others blood; and despisers both
of God and Man. And if I rightly divine, the same will befall this new World;
which the Spaniards with an advantageous kind of cruelty have exhausted; but
will again restore, and otherwise replenish. And as those who have great
plantations; remove some trees elsewhere, and cut down others: Skilfully
disposing all things, to make them more fruitful and to prosper the better: So
does God in this vast Field of the World. For he is the most excellent
improver, in some places he prunes and cuts off the luxuriant branches of some
Families, and in others (as I may so say) he plucks off some leaves of persons.
This helps the stock, though the branches fall, and the leaves that drop off,
become the mockery of the winds. He sees this Nation scorched and withered
away; as having outlived their Virtues, and he casts them out. That other he
observes to be vvild and unfruitful; he therefore transfers them; and others he
mingles together, and engrafts them (as it were) into one another. You
Italians in the declining of the Empire, being now decayed and enfeebled: Why
cumber you any longer that choice part of Earth? Depart and let those hardy and
unbroken Lombards more happily improve that soil. You vicious and effeminate
Graecians perish and let the harsh and sour Scythians be mellowed there. So
also by a kind of confusion of Nations, you French possess Gaul, you Saxons
Britain, you Normans Belgia and the places adjoining. All which and more
Lipsius will readily occur to him that is versed in Histories and the Events
of things. Let us take courage then and know, that whatever private Calamity
comes upon us; is some way or other advantageous to some part of the Universe.
The setting of this Nation or Kingdom shall be the rise of another. The ruins
of this City, the foundation of a new one, nor can any thing here be properly
said to dye, but to change only. Shall we Belgians think to be the only choice
ones with God; that shall be perpetually wedded to felicity; and the only white
boys of Fortune. Fools that we are. That great Father has many more Children
whom (because he will not all at once) permit to cherish, and receive by turns
into his bosom. We have already had our Sun-shines; let the Night succeed
awhile, and let those beauteous rays withdraw to the Western Nations. Seneca
(as he uses) speaks aptly and wisely to this purpose. Let a wise Man repine at
nothing that befalls him; but let him know that those very things under which
he seems to suffer; do make to the conservation of the Universe, and are of
that number which fulfill that Law and Order which the World is confined to.

CHAP. XII. An old and common objection against the Divine Justice; why
punishments are unequal. Its inquisition removed from Man; and therefore
unlawful.
LAngius paws'd here; and thus I broke forth. What a spring of water is to the
thirsty Traveller in the heats of Summer: such is this your discourse to me. It
refreshes, it enlivens, and with its cooling juice, it mitigates and allayes
my heat and Fever. But it does but allay; it does not quench it; for that
thorn which also molested the ancients (about the inequality of punishments)
remains still fixed in my breast. For Langius, if that balance of Justice be
even; how comes it to pass that this arrow of Calamities, So often the nocent
passes, but is sent
Amongst the Virtuous still and innocent?


Why (I say) are some guiltless people rooted out? and what have our wretched
posterity done, that they should rue the crimes of their ancestors? This is
that thick and troublesome mist that is got before my Eyes; which (if you can)
I pray dissolve and scatter with some ray of Reason. Langius frowning upon me,
Young man (said he) do thou thus again begin to wander from the path I set
thee in? I may not suffer it; for as skillful Huntsmen, suffer not their Dogs
to change; but force them to persist in the chase of that first buck they were
laid into: So I am resolved you shall follow me in that track which I first
traced out to you. I was discoursing you the Ends of Calamities; that if you
are good, you may know your self exercised by them, if offending corrected, if
wicked punished, and you forthwith hale me away to speak of the causes. And
what would that vvandring Mind of yours, by its so curious an inquisition?
Would you touch those heavenly fires? They will melt you. Would you scale that
Tower of Providence? You will fall headlong. As Moths and other little vvinged
insects, toward Night, will fly round about a Candle till they are burnt:
With the same danger does the Mind of Man, sport it self and vvanton about that
secret fire. Assign the causes (say you) why divine vengeance overpasses
these; and seises upon these? The causes? I may lawfully say I know them not.
For that Heavenly Court never admitted me, nor I its decrees. This only I know,
that the chief cause of all other causes is the will of God: Beyond which if
any Man enquire, after any force or power; he is ignorant of the Divine Nature.
For it is necessary that every cause be both before and greater than its
effect; but than God and his Will, there is nothing either before or greater.
There is therefore no cause of it. God strikes, and God passes by; what would
you have more? As Salvian says piously and truly; the will of God is the
perfection of Justice: But you will say, we desire some reason of this
inequality from, whom? from God? To whom alone it is lawful to do whatsoever
he pleases, and who is pleased to do nothing but what is lawful? Shall a
Servant call his Master; or a Subject his Prince to account? The one would
call it an affront; and the other Rebellion: and will you be more insolent
against God himself? Away with this perverse curiosity! This reason does not
otherwise appear to be one, than because it may be rendered to none. And yet
when you have all done, you shall never be able to disingage your self from
these shades; nor ever arrive to the knowledge of those (truly so called) Privy
Councels. Sophocles said excellently; Divine decrees thou shall not know
Though thou knew'st all beside;
For those from us who are below
The Gods themselves do hide.


CHAP. XIII. Yet to satisfy the curious, three usual Objections are answered:
First, of that; that evil Men are not punished. To which is replied; that
though their punishments are deferred, they are not remitted. And this comes to
pass either for Man's sake, or from the Nature of God which is slow to Revenge.
THis rude and simple way Lipsius is here the only safe one; the rest are
slippery and deceitful. In superior and divine things, the only acuteness is
to discern nothing; and the only knowledge is to be ignorant. But forasmuch as
this Cloud has heretofore, and does still rest upon the Minds of Men; in a few
words (if possible) I shall endeavor to remove it, and vvaft you (now at
a-stand) over this River also. Pardon me, O thou Heavenly Mind said he (lifting
up his Eyes) if I shall deliver any thing of these secrets (yet with a pious
intention) less pure and pious than I ought. And first of all Lipsius methinks
I am able in general to vindicate the justice of God with this one Argument.
If God does behold humane things, he does also care for them, if he cares for
them, he governs them, if he governes them it is with judgment, and if with
judgment, how then unjustly? For without judgment there is no government,
but a mere heap, confusion and Tumult. What have you to oppose against this
Javelin; What Shield or what arms? If you will confess it, nothing but
humane ignorance; I cannot conceive (say you) why these should be punished,
and those other escape. Be it so; will you therefore add impudence to your
imprudence; and carp at the power of that Divine Law, which you cannot
conceive of? What more unjust way of proceeding against justice can there be
than this? If any stranger should take upon him to judge of the Laws and
Constitutions of your Country; you would command him to desist and be silent,
because he understands them not, and shall you who are the inhabitant of
earth, presume rashly to censure the Laws of Heaven, you understand not? Or you
that are the work to question your Maker? But it matters not, go on, for I
shall now come up more close to you, and distinctly examine (as you desire me)
these misty calumnies of yours by the Sun of Reason. Three things you object,
that God does not punish the wicked; that he does punish the innocent; and
that he substitutes and and exchanges offenders. You say first divine
vengeance does ill to pass by wicked men. Does it then overpass them? In my
apprehension it does not, but rather deferrs their punishment. If diverse Men
owe me money; and I require it of this debtour as soon as it becomes due, and
allow to that other a longer time of payment: Am I therefore culpable? Or are
not these things at my own dispose? The same does our Great God; to whom all
wicked men owe a punishment: He requires it presently of these, but gives day
to others; yet to be paid with interest, and what injustice is this? unless
(possibly) you are solicitous for God, and fear he should lose part of his
debt, by his merciful forbearance: But you need not fear it; no Man ever proved
bankrupt to this supreme Creditour. We are all under his Eye wheresoever we
betake our selves; nay already in his shackles and custody. But I would (say
you) have such a Tyrant immediately punished, that by his present slaughter, he
may satisfy so many as he has oppressed. For this way the Justice of God
would shine out the more illustriously to us. Rather your stupidity in my
Mind. For who art thou that not only presumest to lead on the judgments of
God, but also to prescribe him his season? Do you think him your judge, or
rather your Lictour or Executioner? Dispatch, lead him off (say you) scourge
him, cover his face, and hang him up: For it is my will it should be so. O
impudence! But God wills it otherwise, who (you ought to know) sees more
clearly into these matters, and punishes for other ends. The heats of passion,
and a certain desire of Revenge transport us; from all which God is most
remotely distant, and intends the warning and correction of others: For he
best knows to whom and when these things may be useful. The choice of times
is of great moment, and for want of a due and seasonable administration, the
safest medicines do oftentimes prove fatal to us. He took away Caligula in the
first setting out of his Tyranny: He suffered Nero to run on longer, and
Tiberius beyond either; and this no doubt for the good of those very Men, who
then also complained. Our vicious and uncorrected manners, do often stand in
need of a lasting and continued scourge, though we would have it straight
removed, and thrown into the Fire. This is one cause of the forbearance of God,
which respect us; the other respects himself. To whom it seems natural to
proceed on to his Revenge with a slow pace; and to recompense the delay of his
punishment with the vveignt of it. Synecius said well, the Divine inquisition
moves on slowly and by degrees: And so did the Ancients who from this property
of his; feigned God to have feet of Wool. So that although you are passionately
hasty of Revenge; you cannot yet accuse this delay, since it is so only a
respite of punishment; that it may be also an increase. Tell me, were you
present at a Tragedy; would you stomach it that the Atreus there, or the
Thyestes; in the first or second act, should in a glorious garb, and with a
stately tread, pass through the Scenes: That they should rule there, threaten
and command all? I suppose you would not, for you know that felicity is but
short-lived: And expect that all this grandeur should finish in a fatal
Catastrophe. In this Play and Fable of the World, why are you more offended
with God, than you would be with any Poet? That wicked Man flourishes, and
that Tyrant lives happy. Be it so; but think vvithall that this is but the
first Act: And before possess your self inwardly with this, that tears and
sorrows press on hard to overtake those joys. This Scene shall shortly flow
with blood, and then those robes of Gold, and Purple shall be rolled up and
down, and trampled in it. For that great Master of ours is a good Poet, and
will not rashly exceed the Laws of his Tragedy. Do we not willingly bear
with Discords in Music for some time; because we know that the last closures
will end in comfort? Do so here. But you will say those miserable Creatures
that have suffered under this Tyranny, do not always see the punishment. What
wonder is it? For the Play is oftentimes somewhat long; and they are not able
to sit it out in this Theater. But others see it and fear; because they see
that though (in this severe Court of Judicatory) some Men are reprieved; yet
they are not pardoned: And though the day of execution is prolonged, yet it is
not forgot. Wherefore Lipsius remember this; that wicked Men are sometimes
forborne, but never acquitted: Nor is there any Man that entertains a crime into
his breast, but who also has a Nemesis at his back; for that Goddess is in
pursuit of him and as I may say with Euripides, With silent unsuspected pace
She does the guilty Sinner trace.
And though he strive with utmost have
To escape; she seiseth him at last.


CHAP. XIV. That there are diverse sorts of punishments; some occult and
internal, which accompany the crime it self; and which the wicked never escape.
That such are more grievous than any external ones.
WHich notwithstanding that you may more clearly apprehend; and that I may once
lead you into the height of this cause: You must know; that Divine punishments
are threefold; Internal, Posthumous, and External. Those I call Internal which
are inflicted on the Soul, while it is yet in the Body; such are Anxiety,
Penitence, Fears, and a thousand pangs and stings of Conscience. Those are
Posthumous; which are inflicted upon the same Soul, but then when it is freed
and separate from the Body. Such are those torments which even the Ancients
(most of them) were of opinion did await the wicked after Death. The third
sort are such as touch upon the Body, or the things that belong to it; as
Poverty, Banishment, Pain, Diseases, Death. All which do (sometimes) by the
just Judgment of God concur against the Wicked; but the two former always. To
speak of internal punishments; where shall we find the Man, so profusely and
audaciously wicked; that has not sensibly felt in his Soul some of these sharp
scourges, and stripes either in the Commission of his crimes or at least after
he has acted them. So true is that which Plato said of old; that punishment
treads upon the heels of sin: or as Hesiod more properly, it is coeval and
twinns with it. The punishment of evil is not only allied to; but is bred
within that evil. nor is there any thing in this Life, that can pretend to
calmness and security; besides innocence alone. As the Roman custom did
enforce the Malefactor to bear that Cross which was straight to bear him: So
has God imposed upon all wicked Men, this Cross of Conscience; on which they
shall begin to suffer, before their further and worse sufferings do begin. Do
you suppose that only to be punishment, which we can look upon, and which this
Body does sensibly undergo? No. All those external things do but lightly, and
for no long time touch upon us; they are the internal that more exquisitely
torment us. As we judge them to be more desperately sick, who languish away
under an inward waste; than those that are seized with some visible
inflammation, or preternatural heats, though these last are more apparent: So
are wicked Men under a more grievous punishment, who with so low and
indiscernible procedures are lead on to their eternal Death. It used to be the
cruel command of Caligula; so strike as that he may feel he dies; the same
befalls these Men, whom their Conscience as an Executioner, does daily
torture, and even kill by these slow degrees of lesser and repeated stripes.
Nor let the splendor or the enlarged power and wealth of those Men impose
upon you: Since they are no more happy and fortunate for these than they are
healthful, whose Gout or Fever rests it self upon a purple Couch. Do you see a
beggarly Follow represent in some Play the person of a Prince, all Pompous and
brave? You behold him yet without envy; for you know how under those golden
Robes his Sores and Filth, and Poverty lie hid: Think the same of all those
great and proud Tyrants: In whose Minds if they lay open to us says Tacitus,
we might behold gashes and wounds: For as Bodies are torn with stripes; so are
the Souls of Men miserably dilacerated with blood, lust, and other impious
contrivances. They laugh I confess sometimes, but it is no true laughter: They
rejoice, but their joys are not genuine and kindly; but it fares with them as
with condemned vvretches in a prison, who endeavor with Dice and Tables to
shake out of their Memories the thoughts of their execution, but are not able:
For the deep impression of their approaching punishment, remains with them; and
the fearful Image of pale Death is continually before their Eyes. Look now upon
the Sicilian Tyrant, vvith-dravving only the Veil of his outward happiness.

A drawn Sword hangs in a twine thread
Over the wretches impious head.
Hear that Roman lamenting, let the God's and Goddesses destroy me worse then I
every day perceive my self to perish. Hear that other thus sighing; Am I then
that only one, who have neither Friend nor Enemy? These Lipsius are the true
torments and agonies of Souls; to be in perpetual Anguish, Sorrow, Dread, and
which are incomparably beyond any Racks; or other invented ways for the
torture of the Body.

CHAP. XV. That punishments after Death do await the wicked, and that for the
most part they are not acquitted from External ones, is proved by examples.
Add to these those Posthumous and External pains vvihch we have learned from
Divinity; and which without further discussion it will be sufficient only thus
to mention. Add to those also external punishments; which yet if they should
be wanting, since the former are inflicted, who could reasonably blame the
external Justice? But they are not vvanting. Nor was it ever, at least very
seldom, but that public oppressors, and Men openly wicked; do undergo public
and open punishments; some sooner, others later; some in their own persons, and
others in those of their posterity. You complain of Dionysius in Sicily that
for many years with impunity, he exercises his Lusts, Rapine, and Murders:
Forbear awhile, and you shall behold him inglorious, exiled, pennyless; and
from a Scepter (who would believe it) reduced to a Ferula. The King of that
great Island shall teach School at Corinth, being himself become the mockery of
Fortune: On the other side you resent it with passion that Pompey and his Army
of Patricians should be vanquished in the Plains of Pharsalia; and that the
conqueror for some time, does wanton and even sport himself with Civil blood.
I do not wonder at you: For I see here the helm of right reason wrested out of
the hands of Cato himself, and this faltering expression falls from him: Divine
things have much of obscurity in them. But yet thou Lipsius, thou Cato, turn
your eyes this way a little. One sight shall reconcile you both to God. See
that ambitious Caesar; that proved commander in his own opinion, and in others
too almost a God; see him slain in the Senate house, and by the hands of
Senators; not falling by a single Death, but secured by Three and twenty
vvounds; like some vvild beast, weltring in his blood (and what would you
more) in Pompey's own Court, and at the foot of Pompey's Statue falling a great
Sacrifice to that great shade. So methinks I pity Brutus slain for and with
his Country in the Fields of Philippi; but vvithall I am some what satisfied,
when not long after I behold, those victorious armies like gladiatours
slaughtering one another at his Sepulcher; and one of the Generals Marcus
Antonius vanquished both by Sea and land; in the Company of three Women, with
that effeminate Arm of his scarce finding the Death he sought. Where art thou
now thou once Lord of all the East; thou Butcher of the Roman armies; the
pursuer of Pompey and the Commonwealth? See how with thy bloody hand, thou
hangest in a Cord; how being yet alive thou creepest into thy monument, and how
even in Death it self thou art unwilling to be divorced from her that was the
cause of thy Death; and then judge whether dying Brutus spent his last breath
and vvish in vain.

Jove suffer not to escape from thee
The cause of this Calamity.
No Brutus, he was not hid; neither did he escape. No more did that other
General who smarted for his youthful crimes, not obscurely in his own person,
but most evidently in all his posterity. Let him be the fortunate and great
Caesar, and truly Augustus, but vvithall let him have a Iulia for his Daughter,
and another for his Grandchild. Let him lose some of his Grandchildren by
fraud; others by force, and let himself force others into exile: and out of the
impatience of these crosses, let him attempt to dye by a four days abstinence
but not be able. To conclude let him live with his Livia dishonestly married,
and dishonestly detained, and let him dye an unworthy Death by her, on whom he
so unworthily doted. In sum says Pliny that Diety, and who I know not more
whether he attained Heaven, or merited it: Let him dye and leave the Son of
his Enemy to succeed him. These and such like are to be thought of Lipsius as
often as complaints of injustice are ready to break from us: and the Mind is
presently to reflect upon these two things; the slowness and the variety of
punishments. Is not that offendour punished now? But he shall be. Not in his
Body? Yet in his Conscience and Soul. Not while he lives? Yet most certainly,
when he is dead.

Seldom slow punishments lame Feet forsake,
The wicked Wretch what have soever he make.
For that Divine Eye does always wake; and when we suppose him to sleep, he
does but vvink: Only see you entertain not any prejudice against him: Nor go
about rashly to judge him by whom shortly thy self is to be judged.

CHAP. XVI. The Second Objection answered, that all have deserved punishment;
in regard all have offended: That Men cannot judge who is more or less
culpable. It Is God only that clearly discerns betwixt crimes, and therefore
most justly punishes.
BUut (say you) there are some people punished that are guiltless, and have no
way deserved it: For this is your Second complaint or rather Calumny.
Unadvised Youngman! Are there then any punished who have not deserved it?
Where I beseech you are those innocent Nations to be found? It is an excess of
confidence, yes absolute rashness and presumption to assert thus much
concerning any one single person; and shall you dare to justify whole Nations.
But to small purpose this; for I am satisfied that all of us have sined, and do
still every day repeat it. We are born in sin, and so we live in it; and to
speak with the Satyrist the Magazeens of Heaven had been long since emptyed,
if its Thunderbolts had always fallen upon the Heads of such as deserved
them. For we must not think that as Fishes, though increased and bred up in
the Sea, do yet retain nothing of its saltness; so Men in the filthiness of
this World should contract nothing of uncleaness. If then all are in fault?
where are those guiltless people you speak of, who have not deserved the
punishments they undergo; since it is most righteous that punishment should be
the inseparable companion of unrighteousness But you will say it is the
inequality of it that displeases me: For we see them heavily scourged that
have but lightly offended; while those that are outragiously wicked, do
continue and flourish in the height of all their grandeurs. Would you then
wrest the balance out of the hands of the Heavenly Justice, and poise it
with your own weights agreeable to your own apprehensions? For what else can
you mean by that bold pronouncing upon the equality or inequality of crimes,
otherwise than God has done before you? You are therefore here Lipsius to
consider of two things: First, that a true estimation of the crimes of others,
neither can nor ought to be attempted by Man: For how shall he do it; that not
so much as observes them? And which way shall he put an exact difference,
betwixt those things which he has not so much as seen? For you will easily
grant it me that it is the Mind that sins; by the Body and senses indeed as its
instruments, but yet so as that the main business and weight of the crime,
does in the mean time depend upon it self. This is so exactly true; that if it
appear any one has unwillingly sinned; he is clear of the sin. And if this be
so how is it possible I beseech you, that you should thoroughly discern of Sin,
who are not able to reach to the residence and seat of it. For so far are you
from seeing into the Heart and Soul of another; that you cannot attain to the
knowledge of your own: It is therefore a wonderful vanity; and no less a
temerity, to pretend to the Censure and Arbitration of such things, as are
neither fully seen, nor to be seen; neither known, nor to be known. Consider
secondly, that if what you say were true, there were yet neither Evil nor
injustice done to them. No Evil; because its done for their good, who are
presently punished, even for smaller offenses. It Is rather the love of God to
them; since that punishment which is delayed is justly to be suspected; as
portending a heavier judgment is to come. Neither is it unjust; because (as I
said) we have all deserved punishment: Nor can the best of us pretend to so
unblemished a purity; but there will be found some such spots in it, as are to
be vvashed out (as I may say) with this salt water of Affliction. Forbear
therefore young man this intricate pursuit of the respects and proportions of
crimes: And since thou art but an earthly and pedaneous judge; leave it to God,
who from his higher tribunal will determine of it; with greater equity and
certainty. It Is he only that can distinguish of our deserts; and it is he alone
who (notwithstanding all artificial disguises) can behold both vice and virtue
in their proper countenances. Who can impose upon him who equally searches
into things internal and external; that sees at once the Body and the Mind, the
Tongue and the Heart: And (to conclude) those things that are open, with those
that are recluded and retired? Who does not only most clearly behold our
actions themselves, but also their causes, and the whole progress of them.
When Thales was asked, whether a Man might hide his evil actions from God: He
answered truly; no nor his evil thoughts neither. Whereas on the contrary we
are here so benighted; that we do not only not see those close sins committed
in the bosom, and (as they say) within the Buttons; but scarcely those which
are open and dragged into the light. For we cannot behold the Crime it self,
and the vigor of it; but some certain footsteps of it, when it is already
committed, and upon its departure: They oftentimes are the best Men to us, who
are the worst in the sight of God; as on the contrary they are reprobates in
our esteem, who are the choicest to him. Forbear therefore (if you are wise)
to discourse or judge of persons that deserve or deserve not their punishments;
for such obscure causes as these are not to be decided, by some light and
superficial appearances.

CHAP. XVII. The Third Objection; that punishments are transferred, answered.
That Men do the same; why God does so?
BUt you have cast another Cloud upon Justice; which I must disperse: It is
concerning substitutes. For say you it is not so just that God should
transfer punishments; and it is somewhat hard that posterity should rue the
crimes of their Ancestors. But where is the wonder and strangeness of it. I
rather vvonder at these vvonderers that they can find a wonder in that which is
every day done by themselves here on Earth. Pray tell me; do not those honors,
which for his virtue a Prince has conferred upon the Ancestors, descend to
his posterity? Yes they do; and so also do those mulcts and punishments, which
are inflicted on him for his offenses. In attaindours for treason or rebellion
it is manifest that these are guilty; but others share in the punishment which
humane cruelty does so far enlarge; as to make Laws that follow the innocent
Children with perpetual wants; such as make life a burden, and death a
comfort. Perverse Minds, who will permit that to be lawful to a Prince or
Magistrate; which you forbid to God: Who yet if you examine it rightly has a
juster reason for his severity. For all of us in one have sinned, and rebelled
against this great King; and through so many successive Generations that first
blot has been derived to the unhappy Children: So that there is to God a
continued twist and chain of Crimes. For instance; my Father or yours did not
begin to sin, but all the Fathers of our Fathers: What vvonder then is it if he
punish in their posterity not (properly) diverse offenses; but such as by a kind
of communion of seed, have been still linked and coupled together, and never
discontinued. But to omit these higher speculations, and to deal with you, in a
more popular way of reasoning. You must know this that God joins those things,
which we (through ignorance and unskilfulness) use to sever, and that he
considers Families, Cities, and Kingdoms; not as divided but as one Body and
Nature: The Family of the Scipio's or the Caesar's is one thing to him. Rome or
Athens, for the whole time of their duration, were but one to him; and so was
the Roman Empire, and that very justly, for the Society of the same laws, and
privileges, is that bond which unites these great bodies, and intitles them
though in several ages, to a communion in partaking of rewards and punishments.
Were then the Scipio's of old good? That Heavenly judge will remember it to
the advantage of their posterity. Were they Evil? It shall be hurtful to them.
Were the Belgians some years ago; Lascivious, Covetous, Impious? We shall
suffer for it. For in every external punishment, God not only beholds the
present, but also looks back upon passed times; and with the weights of them
both, does most equally poise the balance of his Justice. I said in external
punishments and I would have you to observe it. For crimes themselves are not
transferred, nor is there a kind of confusion of them: God forbid there should.
But certain punishments and corrections only, such as are about us not in us;
and which properly respect the Body, or estate; but not this inward Mind of
ours. And in all this where is the injury? We are doubtless willing to be heirs
of those advantages, and rewards (if any) that are due to our ancestors: And
if so; why do we refuse the burdens, and punishments?

Those Plagues for which the former times did call
On thee poor Roman undeservedly fall;
Sings the Roman Poet, and truly; had he not added undeservedly. For it is most
deservedly, since our ancestors did deserve it. But the Poet could only see
the effect: He ascended not to the cause; but as in one and the same Man, we
justly punish in his old age, that offense, which he committed in his youth: So
does God the elder crimes of Empires and Kingdoms, because in respect of their
outward communion, they are to him but one conjoined thing. These intervalls of
time do not divide us with him who comprehends all eternity in the vastness of
his Mind. Should those martial Wolves, heretofore raze so many Cities, and
break so many Scepters with impunity? Should they broach so much blood by the
slaughters of others; and themselves never bleed for it? I should then indeed
confess that God to be no avenger, who yet hears and sees all that we do. But
they shall not escape so, at length of Necessity they must undergo punishments
at least in their posterity; such as are slow indeed, but not too late. Nor is
there a conjunction of time only with God but of parts too. I mean thus, that
as in a Man the whole Body suffers, when possibly only the hand, or groin, or
belly has offended: So is it in great Societies. All many times do account for
the fault^ of a few: Especially if those that ha^^ sinned are (as it were) the
more pri^cipal members; as Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. Hesiod spoke truly,
and from the most inward recess of Wisdom it self.

For one Man's crime, often the whole City smarts
For his oppressive sacrilegious Arts;
Jove from high Heaven his dreadful vengeance sheds
Of Plague or Famine upon all their heads.
So the whole Navy of the Graecians perished.

For ones offense what Ajax did commit
In the distemper of a brainsick fit.
Thus in Judea threescore and ten thousand were slain with a single pestilence;
for the unlawful pleasure of their King. And sometimes on the other side; God
singles out one or but some few; to be the expiatours of a general sin. In
which if he recede something from the rigid Law of parity; yet out of that very
disparity a new equity is raised; and that is a merciful act of Justice toward
many; which seems cruelty upon a few. Does not the Schoolmaster give the
Ferula to some one of his wantonizing Scholars? And does not a General chastize
his cowardly Army, by the decimation of them? And both these upon the safest
considerations: because the punishment though but of those few does terrify and
amend all. I have often seen the Physician strike a vein in the Foot or Arm,
when the whole body was distempered: how know I but it may be thus here. These
are secrets Lipsius, secrets I say, and if we are wise let us presume no
nearer unto this sacred fire, some sparkling emanations and bright emissions of
which Men may possibly behold, but it self they cannot. As they lose their
sight that too daringly gaze upon the Sun; So they all the light of their
Minds, who too intentively fix it upon this more glorious light. Let us
therefore abstain from that which is at once of so curious and so dangerous a
disquisition: And let us rest satisfied at least in this, that crimes neither
can not ought to be estimated by Men, that the balance and tribunal of God is
different from that of ours; and that how abstruse soever those judgments are,
yet they are not to be blamed, but patiently undergone and trembled at by us.
This one Sentence I shall immind you of, and with it, shall both close this
discourse and shut the mouths too of all those Curioso's. The judgments of God
are many of them hidden; but none of them unjust.

CHAP. XVIII. A transition to the last Argument for Constancy, from Examples.
That sometimes it is advisable to mix harsher Physic with such things as are
pleasant.
THis is that Lipsius which I thought meet to say in the behalf of Divine
justice against these unjust Cavillers. And though (I confess) it does not
directly lead on my discourse: Yet neither is it at all besides it. For we
shall doubtless undergo our Calamities with greater cheerfulness and patience;
when once we are thoroughly satisfied that they are not unjust. And here Langius
pawsing a while, he suddenly broke forth again. It Is well (said he) I have
recovered breath; I have got beyond all those Rocks of objections; and now
(methinks) I may with full Sails spoom away into the Haven. I discover my
fourth and last Brigade; which I shall very cheerfully lead up. And as
Mariners in a tempest when they behold the Twins are full of hopes and mirth:
So also am I (after all these storms) at the appearance of my Twinny Legion. I
may safely call it so after the old custom since it is double. And two things I
shall evince by it; that these miseries which we now suffer are neither
grievous, nor new. Which while I shall dispatch in those few things that remain
yet to say; see Lipsius, that you be attentive. Never more Langius (replied I)
for it joys me to have passed these difficulties; and after these scrious and
severer Medicines, I greedily long after this gentle and more popular one; for
so the Title promises me it is. Nor are you mistaken said Langius, for as
Physicians after they have sufficiently made use of Causticks and Incisions; do
not so cast off and relinquish their patients; but apply some gentle
somentations, and other remedies to assuage their pains: So will I deal with
you; whom (because I have enough followed with the sharper methods of wisdom) I
will now cherish with milder discourses, and handle (as they say) with a
Ladies hand. I shall descend from that steep hill of Philosophy; and take a
turn or two with you, in the pleasant plains of your Philology, and that not
so much to recreate you as to complete your cure. As they say Demochares the
Physician did to the Lady Considia since she refused all harsher prescriptions
he caused her to drink the Milk of Goats; but yet such as he had fed with the
Branches of the Lentisk Tree: So I will administer to you, Historical and
pleasing things, which yet shall have a secret tincture of the juice of
Wisdom. What matter is it how we cure our patient, so we make a perfect cure
of it.

CHAP. XIX. That public Evils are not so great as they seem, proved first by
Reason. That we fear the circumstance and dress of things rather than
themselves.
MArch on then my Legion; and before the rest, let that cohort first advance,
with which we shall maintain that these public evils are not grievous, this
shall be performed with the double vveapon of reason and comparison of reason.
First, for if we respect that, all those evils which are either present or
imminent, are not really either great or grievous, but are so only in
appearance. It is Opinion that heightens and aggravates our calamities, and
presents them to us in so tragical a garb. But (if you are wise) disperse this
circumjected Cloud, and examine things by a clearer light. For instance, you
fear Poverty amongst these public Evils, Banishment, Death: All which
notwithstanding, if you look upon them with a perfect and settled Eye, what
are they? If you examine them by their own just weights, how light are they?
This War or Tyranny by multiplied contributions will exhaust you; what then?
You shall be a poor Man. Did not Nature it self bring you into the World so?
And will it not hurry you thence in the same manner? But if the despised and
infamous name of it, displease you; change it, call your self free and
delivered. For Fortune (if you know it not) has disburdened you and placed you
in a securer station, where none shall exhaust you any more: So that what you
esteemed a loss, is no other than a remedy. But say you I shall be an exile;
call it (if you please) a stranger. If you change your affection; you change
your Country. A wise Man wheresoever he is, is but a sojourner; a Fool is
ever banished. But I daily expect Death from the Tyrant: As if you did not do
the same from Nature. But that is an infamous Death that comes by the Ax or
Halter: Fool! nor that nor any other Death is infamous; unless your life be so.
Recall to your thoughts all the excellent and more illustrious persons since
the world began; and you shall find them snatched away by a violent and
untimely Death. Thus Lipsius you must examine (for I have given you but a taste)
all those things which have so frightfull an appearance, you must look upon
them naked and apart, from those vizards and disguises; which opinion has put
upon them. But alas poor creatures; we gaze only upon the vain outsides of
things: Nor do we dread the things themselves, so much as we do the
circumstantial dresses of them. If you put to Sea, and it swell high, your
heart fails, and you tremble at such a rate, as if (should you suffer
Shipwreck) you were to swallow it all; when alas one or two Sextaries would
be sufficient. If there be a sudden Earthquake; what a cry, and what fears it
raises? You apprehend immediately, that the whole City (or house at least)
will fall upon you: Not considering how sufficient any single stone is to
perform the work of Death. It Is thus in all these calamities; in which it is
the noise and vain image of things that chiefly affrights us. See that Guard;
these Swords. And what can that Guard, or those Swords do? They will kill. And
what is that being killed? It Is only a single Death; and lest that name should
affright you: It is the departure of the Soul from the Body. All those military
troops, All those threatening Swords, shall perform no more than what one
Fever, one Grapestone, or one Insect can do. But this is the harsher way of
dying. Rather it is much the milder; for that Fever which you would prefer,
does often torture a Man for a year together; but these dispatch him with a
blow, in an instant. Socrates therefore said well; who was wont to call all
these things by no other name than that of Goblins and Vizzards, which (if you
put on you) will fright the children; but if you take them off again, and
appear with your own face, they will come again to you and embrace you. It Is the
very same with these evils; whose Vizzards if you pluck off, and behold them
apart from their disguises; you will confess you were scared with a childish
fear. As Hail falling upon a house dashes it self in pieces: So if these
calamities light upon a constant Mind, they do not break it but themselves.

CHAP. XX. A Second proof by way of Comparison. But first the Calamities of the
Belgians, and of the Age heightened. That common Opinion refuted. And proved
that the Nature of Man is prone to aggravate our own Afflictions.
I Did not expect so serious a discourse from Langius and therefore
interrupting him; whether go you said I, was this it you promised? I expected
the sweet and delicious vvines of History; and you bring me such harsh and
unpleasant ones, as scarce all the stores of Wisdom will afford their like.
Suppose you that you are speaking to some Thales? It Is to Lipsius a Man; and
that of the middle rank; who desires remedies that are somewhat more humane
than these. Langius with a mild countenance and tone, I acknowledge (said he)
you justly blame me. For while I followed that pure ray of reason; I perceive
I am got out of the common Road, and unawares again fallen into the path of
Wisdom. But I return now; to walk with you in a way that is better known;
since the austerity of that wine does displease you; I shall quallify and allay
it with the sweets of examples. I come now to comparison; and I will clearly
show you that in all these calamities which every way surround us, there is
nothing great or grievous, if you compare them with those in times past. For
those of old were greater by many degrees, and more truly to be lamented. I
replied with a gesture that discovered something of impatience. Will you
aver this said I -- and hope you to persuade
Me to believe what you have said?


Never Langius so long as I am Master of my reason; for what former age (if
you rightly consider it) was ever so calamitous as this of ours, or what
after one shall be? What Nation? What Country ever endured, So heavy miscries
and manifold
Grievous, or to be suffered, or be told?


As we Belgians do at this day? You see we are involved in a War; not in a
foreign one only, but a civil; and that in the very bowels of us. For there
are not only parties amongst us, but (O my Country what hand shall preserve
thee) a subdivision of those parties. Add to this the Pestilence, add Famine,
add Taxes, Rapines, Slaughters, and the height of all the Tyranny and
Oppression, not of our Bodies only, but our Souls too. And in the rest of
Europe what is there? Either War or the expectation of War, or if there be
peace, it is conjoined with a base subjection to petty Rulers; and not a whit
eligible before War it self. Which way soever you turn your Eyes or thoughts,
you will find all things full of suspicion and suspense: And as in a house
that is ill underpropt; many visible signs of an approaching ruin. To
conclude Langius as there is a General rendezvous of all Rivers at the Ocean:
So all sorts of Calamities seem to Center in this Age. And yet I now speak only
of such as are at present upon us; what are those that await us? Of which I
may justly sing that of Euripides, Such spacious Seas of ills I see
As cannot safely passed be.


Langius looking severely upon me; do you again (said he) cast your self down
with these complainings? I thought by this time you had stood firm; and that
your vvound had been closed: But you relapse. If ever you will recover, it is
requisite, that there be a kind of calmness in your Mind. This Age say you is
the most unhappy. It is an old complaint; I know your Gransier said the same,
and so likewise your Father; I know also your posterity will have the same
complaint. Nature has riveted this into the Disposition of Man; to look fixedly
upon his Evils; and to shut his Eyes upon his mercies. As Flies and other
Insects, do not rest long upon smooth and polished places, but stick to those
that are rough and soiled: So this querulous Mind of ours, lightly overpasses
our better fortunes: But will not be vvithdrawn from its contemplations of
that which is worse. It handles and pryes into its evils, and for the most
part shows it self vvitty, in the aggravating comments that it maks upon them.
As lovers ever find something in their mistress; for which she must needs
surpass all others in excellency: So do those that are afflicted, with their
miseries. Yes we fancy to our selves vain additions, and lament not only our
present, but future Calamities. And what is the reward of this too too
inquisitive Genius of ours? No other, than as some Armies are frighted out of
their Camp, by the dust that is raised afarr off: So we are often cast down,
by the false shadow of a future danger.

CHAP. XXI. A more strict confutation of it, by comparing the present Evils,
with those of former times. First, of Wars, of the wonderful slaughter of the
Jews.
LEave then those vulgar things Lipsius, and follow me to that comparison
which you challenge me to make. By this I shall clear it to you, that as to
all the sorts of Calamities, not only the like have happened of old, but also
greater; and that the age we live in, has rather matter of triumph than
complaint. We are engaged in a War say you. What? Were there then no Wars
amongst the ancients? Yes Lipsius they were begun with the world; nor are
they like to end but with it. But possibly they were not so great, so grievous
as ours. So far are you from the truth; that (I speak seriously) these wars
of ours, are only pastime and sport, if compared with those of the Ancients.
I cannot easily find an entrance or an exit, if I should once lanch forth into
this depth of examples. Nevertheless, will you that we travel through the
parts of the World? Let us set forward then, and begin with Judea, that is to
say, with the holy Land and Nation. I omit what they suffered in Egypt, and
what after their departure from thence; for those are recorded, and easily to
be met with in the Scriptures. I come to their later sufferings, and such as
did accompany their funerals; which I will place several (...) in an Index.
They suffered (...) civil and what by foreign wars, (...) that follows. viz.

Slain at Jerusalem by the command of Florus six hundred and thirty.

At Caesaraea by the inhabitants out of hate to the Nation and their Religion;
twenty thousand.

At Scythopolus a City of Caelosyria, thirteen thousand.

At Ascalon in Palestine by the inhabitants also, two thousand five hundred.

At Ptolemais in like manner, two thousand.

At Alexandria in Egypt under Tyberius Alexander the then Governor; fifty
thousand.

At Damascus, ten thousand.

All this was done seditiously, and by way of tumult; but there were slain
besides in a just and open war by the Romans

At the taking of Ioppa by Caesius Florus, eight thousand and four hundred.

On a Mountain called Cabulon, two thousand.

In a fight at Ascalon, ten thousand.

Besides by stratagem, eight thousand.

At the taking of Aphaca; fifteen thousand.

At mount Garizim were slain; eleven thousand six hundred.

At Iotapa where Josephus himself was present, about thirty thousand.

At the second taking of Ioppa there were drowned, four thousand and two
hundred.

Amongst the Tarychaeans were slain, six thousand and five hundred.

At Gamala that were killed, and that precipitated themselves, nine thousand.

Nor were any of that City saved, besides two women that were Sisters.

In the desert of Giscala were killed in flight two thousand, and taken of
women and children, three thousand.

Slain of the Gadarens, thirteen thousand,

Taken two thousand two hundred.

Besides infinite numbers of those that perished in the waters.

In the Villages of Idumaea ten, thousand.

At Gerasa, one thousand.

At Machaerus, one thousand seven hundred.

In the Wood Iardes, three thousand.

In the castle of Massada which slew themselves, nine hundred and sixty.

In Cyrene by Catulus the Governor were slain, three thousand.

But in the City of Jerusalem throughout the whole time of the siege, the
number of them that dyed or were slain is, ten hundred thousand.

Taken ninety seven thousand.

The whole number amounts to (besides infinite omitted) twelve hundred and
forty thousand.

What say you Lipsius? Do you cast down your Eyes at these things? Look up
rather; and (if you dare) compare with the Massacres of this one Nation, the
Wars of the Christian world for some years. And yet how small and
inconsiderable is either this Country or people; in comparison of all Europe?

CHAP. XXII. Of the Calamities of the Graecians and Romans too occasioned by
War. the vast number of Men slain by some particular Commanders. The
Desolations of the new found world, and the miseries of captivity.
NOt to stay here any longer; let us pass over into Greece, to recount orderly
all those wars they maintained both against forraigners and amongst
themselves; would be too tedious and to little purpose. This I say it was so
exhausted and lop't with a constant continued Ax of Calamities; That Plutarch
tells us (which I never read without wonder and indignation) all of it in his
age was not able to muster up three thousand Soldiers; which number yet, the
one small City of Megara (says he) had formerly set forth in the Persian War.
Ah! whither art thou fallen, thou once the glory of the Earth, the light and
leader of the nations? There is scarce a Town at this day (of any name) in this
our waste Belgia, but is able to raise such a number of Men fit to bear
Arms. Let us take now a view of Italy and the Romans. Augustine and Orosius
have already eased me of this trouble. Consult them and there you will meet
with Seas of evils. The second Punick war it self, in less than seventeen
years (for I have exactly computed it) consumed in Italy Spain and Sicily only,
above fifteen hundred thousand men. The civil war betwixt Pompey and Caesar
three hundred thousand. And the Arms of Brutus, Cassius, and Sextus Pompeius a
greater number. But why should I insist upon such Wars, as were managed by the
conduct of several Commanders? That one Caius Caesar (the plague and poison of
mankind) confesses and that in a way of triumph, that there fell by him in
several batails, eleven hundred ninety and two thousand men; not reckoning into
this number the slaughters of the civil Wars; But only those of foreign
Nations, which he had made in those few years wherein he had the Government of
Spain and Gaul. In which notwithstanding (greater in this too) the Great Pompey
out-went him; who wrote in the Temple of Minerva that there were by him
vanquished, put to flight, slain and taken One and twenty hundred, and eighty
three thousand men. To these (if you will) you may add Quintus Fabius who
slew one hundred and ten thousand Gauls. Caius Marius two hundred thousand
Cimbrians. And in the latter ages Aetius who in that memorable Catalaunican
Field slew one hundred sixty two thousand Hunnes. And lest you should think
that in these Wars, there were only Carcases of Men; there were those of
Cities too. That Cato the Censour boasts that he took more Towns in Spain than
he continued days there: Sempronius Gracchus (if we may believe Polybius)
raised Three hundred in the same Spain, nor has any age (as I think) any thing
to add to these Examples; unless it be our own, though acted in another World.
A few Spaniards about Eighty years ago; passing over into those vast and new
found Lands: Good God! what funerals, what slaughters did they make? I do
not discourse the causes and justness of that War; but only the events. I see
that huge space of Earth (which eertainly was a great enterprise to discover,
not to say to overcome) overrun by twenty or thirty Soldiers, and those
unarmed multitudes every where mowed down as corn is by the sithe. Where art
thou Cuba the greatest of Islands, Haytus or you Iucayans? Which heretofore
were each of you guarded with six or ten hundred thousand men; but have now
(some of you) scarce preserved fifteen of them for seed. Show thy self avvhile
thou Peru and thou Mexico. O wonderful and miserable face! that immense tract,
and such as may well be called another World, appears vast and desolate, in
such a manner as if it had been blasted with a fire from Heaven. My Tongue and
Heart fail me Lipsius, as often as I remember these things; and I look upon all
that has befallen us (in comparison of these) to be but pieces of strawes (as
the Comaedian words it) or little mites. Nor do I here represent to you, the
condition of captivity, than which nothing was more bitter in the Wars of
the Ancients. Free, noble, Men, Women and Children, all sorts were hurried
away by the Victour; and who knows but it was into eternal slavery? Into
slavery it was. The footsteps of which, I justly rejoice, have not been nor
yet are in the Christian World. It Is true the Turks practice it, nor is there
any thing that ought to render that Scythian Tyranny more detestable or
dreadful to us.

CHAP. XXIII. Wonderful examples of Plagues and Famines in Former times. Also
of excessive Taxes and Rapines heretofore.
BUt you go forward in your complaints, and speak of the plague and Famine, of
Taxes and Rapines. Will you then that we proceed with each of these in our
comparison, though briefly. Tell me in these five or six years, how many
thousands, has this plague snatched away in all Belgia? As I guess fifty or at
the most one hundred thousand. But in Iudaea a single plague in the reign of
King David, swept away seventy thousand in less than a day. When Gallus and
Volusianus were Emperors, a plague beginning in Aethiopia passed through all
the Roman Provinces; and for fifteen years together did incredibly exhaust
them. Nor did I ever read of a mortality that lasted so long, or that spread it
self so vvide. But that which seized upon Constantinople and the neighboring
places in the reign of Justinian the Emperor is more remarkable for the fury
and fierceness of it: which was such that it made every day five thousand
funerals and sometimes ten. I should not be forward to speak this; but should
my self remain doubtful of the credit of this report: were it not confirmed by
unquestionable vvitnesses, that lived in the same age. Nor was that African
plague less wonderful, which began upon the ruin of Carthage and destroyed
in Numidia alone eighty thousand men, in the Sea costs of Africa two hundred
thousand: about Vtica thirty thousand Soldiers left there as the guard of
those parts. Again in Greece in the reign of Michael Ducas there was so raging
a plague that (they are Zonaras his words) the living did not suffice to bury
the dead. To conclude in Petrarchs time (as himself reports it) so direful a
one sat brooding upon Italy, that of every thousand men scarce ten survived. I
come now to speak of Famine: Certainly we of this Age have seen nothing, if
we consider the times past. When Honorius was Emperor, there was such a
dearth and scarcity of all sorts of provisions, that men were ready to eat one
another, For it was openly cried at the Cirque, set the price of man's flesh.
In the reign of Justinian throughout Italy (after the Goths had waste it)
there was one so great, that in Picenum alone, there were fifty thousand men
famished to death: and all about, they eat not only the flesh of men, but their
own excrements. Two women (I tremble to speak it) had at several times by
night treacherously killed seventeen men and eaten them: and were themselves
slain by the eighteenth who had discovered their practice. I forbear to relate
the famine in Jerusalem and the well known examples of it there. If I must say
something of Taxes also; I deny not but they are heavy ones with which we are
pressed. But they are such only, when you look upon them by themselves; not
when you compare them with those of old. All, most all the Provinces of the
Roman Empire, paid yearly the fifth part of the profits of their pasture, and
the tenth of their arable. Nor did Anthony and Caesar forbear to exact the
tributes of nine or ten years to be paid in one. When Julius Caesar was
slain, and arms were taken up for their liberty, every Citizen was commanded
to pay down the five and twentyeth part of all their goods. And more than this
all that were Senators paid for every tile of their house six asses. An
immense contribution, above the reach of our senses as well as of our Estates.
But Octavianus Caesar (probably with some reference to his name,) exacted and
received of all freed men the eighth part of their Estates. I omit what the
Triumvir's and other Tyrants have done, lest I should teach those of our times,
by the recital of them. Let that one of Colonies, be instead of all examples
of Exactions and Rapines. An invention then which nothing did more contribute
to the strength of the Empire: and nothing could be devised more grievous to
the Subject. Veterane Legions and Cohorts were drawn out into Towns and Fields,
and the miserable Provincials, (in a moment of time) were thrust out of all
their Estates and Fortunes, and that for no offense or unlawful attempt, their
riches only and plentiful possessions were their crimes. In which certainly
the sum of all calamities is comprised. It Is a great misfortune to be robbed of
our money, what is it then to be deprived of our houses and lands? And if it
is grievous to be driven thence: what is it to be forced from our Country, our
Temples and Altars? You might see some thousands of woeful people hurryed away,
children from their Parents, Masters from their Families, Wives from their
Husbands, and thrown out into diverse Countries, as their lot designed them.
Some amongst the thirsty Affricans, and as the Poet says in this very case,
Others were into Scythia hurled,
Or Britain severed from the world.


One single Octavianus Caesar placed eight and twenty colonies in Italy only;
and in the Provinces as many as he pleased. Nor was there any thing (I know)
that was more destructive to the Gauls as Germans, and the Spaniards.

CHAP. XXIV. Arehearsall of some strange Cruelties and murders in time past,
above the guilt of this Age.
BUt yet (say you) there are such cruelties and murders at this day, as the
like have not been heard of. I know what you point at, and what was done of
late, but I appeal to your conscience Lipsius, was their no such thing amongst
the ancients? How ignorant are you if you know it not, and how wicked if you
dissemble it? For there is such a plenty of Examples in this matter, and they
lie so ready, that it is some trouble even to choose. Know you not the name of
Sylla the Fortunate? If you do, you remember that infamous and cruel
prescription of his, by which he cast out of one City four thousand seven
hundred Citizens. Nor were they of the meaner sort; but one hundred and forty
of them were Senators. Nor do I touch upon those infinite slaughters that were
usually acted either by his permission or command. So that not undeservedly
those words burst from Quintus Catulus with whom at length shall we live; if
in War we kill armed Men, and in peace the disarmed. But shortly after; this
same Sylla was imitated by his Disciples: I mean the triumvirs, who in like
manner proscribed three hundred Senators, and above two thousand Roman Knights.
O wickedness! A greater cruelty than this the Sun in all its travels from the
East unto the West, did never yet behold; nor is like to do hereafter. If you
please you may look into Appianus; and there you may behold the various and
deformed condition of those times: Of those that lay hid, and fled; of those
that stopped their flight, and halled them forth: the woeful vvailings of Wives
and Children; so that you would believe humanity itself had perished and fled
from that savage and inhumane age. These cruelties were acted upon the persons
of Senators and Knights, that is to say, upon so many little less than Kings
and Princes; but possibly the Commons were more favorably dealt with. No such
matter. Look upon the same Sylla, who commanded four Legions of the contrary
party (for whose security he had given his faith) to be murdered in the
public Villa; they in vain imploring the mercy of his treacherous right hand:
Whose dying groans reaching the Curia and the Senate being startled and amazed
at it: Let us mind our business Conscript Fathers, (said he) a few seditious
fellows are punished by my command. I know not which I should most vvonder at;
that a Man could do so, or that he could speak so. Will you have more examples
of cruelty? Take them. Servius Galba in Spain summoning the people of three
Cities together, as if to communicate to them something to their advantage;
suddenly commanded seven thousand of them to be slain; amongst which was the
flower of their youth. In the same Country Lucius Licinius Lucullus the Consul
sent his Soldiers into the City of the Cautaeans, and slew twenty thousand of
them contrary to the Articles agreed upon at their yielding. Octavianus
Augustus when he had taken Perusia; chose out three hundred of the chiefest of
both orders, and though they had yielded themselves, he slew them as Sacrifices
before an Altar which he had erected to D. Julius Antonius Caracalla, (being
offended with those of Alexandria; for I know not what jests upon him)
enters that City in a semblance of peace, and when he had commanded all their
young Men into the Field; he surrounds them with his Soldiers, upon a Signal
given he kills them every one, and using the same cruelty to the remaining
multitude, he utterly exhausted that populous and most frequented City. King
Mithridates by one letter caused eighty thousand Roman Citizens to be slain;
that were dispersed throughout Asia about their mercandise. Volesus Messalla
the Proconsul of Asia, in one day caused three hundred to be beheaded; and
strutting amongst the dead bodies with his arms on his sides, as if he had
done some glorious act; cried out aloud; O Princely deed! Hitherto I have only
spoken of profane and impious persons; but behold amongst those that are
devoted to the service of the true God: You will find it of the Emperor
Theodosius that having by the highest wickedness and deceit, betrayed seven
thousand innocent people of Thessaloniea into the Theater, under pretense of
exhibiting some plays; He sent his Soldiers amongst them, and murdered them
all: Than which fact nothing is to be found more impious in the records of all
the Heathen impieties. Go now my Belgians, and after all this, accuse the
cruelty and treachery of the Princes of this Age.

CHAP. XXV. Of the present Tyranny. That it is from humane Nature or Malice.
Oppressions external and internal were heretofore.
LAstly, you complain of the Tyranny that is now adays, and the oppressions at
once both of our Bodies and Souls. My purpose is not (at this time) to applaud,
or condemn our own age; for to what end were it? My business is to compare
only. I ask you therefore when ever those evils were not; and where that place
was. Assign me any one Age, any one Nation, without a remarkable Tyranny in it;
and (for I Will run the hazard) I will then confess, that we are the most
wretched of all that are miserable Why do you not reply? I see that old
Sarcasme is true; all the good Princes may be registered in a Ring. For it is
natural to Man to use authority insolently, and hardly to keep a mean in that
which it self is above it. Even we our selves who complain of Tyranny, do yet
carry the seeds of it enclosed in our bosoms: Nor is there a Will wanting in
most of us to discover them, but the power. A Serpent when he is benumbed with
cold, has poison within him, though he do not exert it; It Is the same in us,
whom only weakness keeps innocent, and a kind of Winter in our Fortunes. Give
but power, give means, and I fear that the most of those that accuse would
transcend the example of their superiors. This is every days instance; see
that Father stern with his Children, that Master with his Servants, and that
Schoolmaster with his Scholars. Each of them is a Phalaris in his kind, and
raise the same waves in their Brooks, as Kings do in their greater Seas. The
same Nature is discernible in other creatures; most of which prey upon their
own kind, both in the Air, the Earth, and the Water: So greater Fish devour the
smaller fry,
And weaker Foul under the Goshauks die.
says Varro truly; but you will say these are the oppressions of Bodies only:
But this is the peculiar of our age, that ours are of the Soul also. Take heed
you speak not this with more malice than truth. That Man seems to me to be
little skilled in the knowledge of himself, and the heavenly nature of the
Soul; that thinks it can be forced or compelled. For no outward violence
whatsoever can make you will, that which you do not will; or to yield to that
which you do not assent to. Some have power over the bond and tie of the Soul;
but none over it self. A tyrant may loose it from the Body, but he cannot
dissolve the nature of it, which being pure, eternal, siery, dispises every
external or violent attempt. But we may not speak our own thoughts. Be it so.
The bridle then curbs your Tongue only, not your Mind; your Actions, but not
your Judgment. But even this is new, and unheard of. Good Man! how are you
mistaken? How many can I point you out, who have suffered under Tyrants, for
their opinions? through the heedlesness of their tongues? How many of those
Tyrants have endeavored to compel men's Judgments, and their Judgments too in
matters of Religion? It was the common custom of the Persians and the Eastern
Nations to adore their Kings, and we know that Alexander challenged to himself
that divine adoration, with the ill will of his ruder Macedonians. Amongst the
Romans that good and moderate Emperor Augustus had in the Provinces, yes in
every house, Flamens and Priests as a God. Caligula cutting off the Heads from
the Statues of the Gods, with a ridiculous impiety, caused his own to be placed
upon them. The same instituted a Temple, Priests and chosen Sacrifices to his
own deity. Nero would be taken for Apollo, and the most illustrious of the City
were slain, under this accusation; that they had never sacrificed to the
heavenly voice. Domitian was openly called our Lord and God. Which vanity or
impiety if it were found at this day, in any of our Kings; what would you then
say Lipsius? I will sail no nearer this Scylla, into which no winds of
ambition shall either betray or force me: For a secure old age is the reward of
silence. I will bring in only one testimony of the ancient slavery, in this
respect; and that shall be out of an Author you are well acquainted with, and
I would have you to attend him. It Is Tacitus in the reign of Domitian: We read
(says he) that when Petus Thrasea was praised by Arulenus Rusticus, and
Priscus Helvidius by Herennius Senecio; it was capital to them both. Nor did
the cruelty extend it self only to the Authors, but also to their Works. Charge
being given to the Triumvirs, that the monuments of those excellent wits should
be burnt in the Forum and Comitium, supposing by that one fire, to have
suppressed the voice of the people of Rome; the liberty of the Senate, and the
conscience of Mankind. The professors also of Wisdom were banished; and all
ingenious arts proscribed, lest there should any where appear the least
footsteps of honesty. We gave certainly a grand example of our patience; and as
the foregoing ages saw the utmost height of liberty, so did we of slavery, the
commerce of hearing and speaking being barred; and in danger by informers. We
had certainly lost our memories together with our speech if it had been as
much in our power to forget, as it was to be silent.

CHAP. XXVI. Lastly, that these evils are neither strange nor new. But common
to all Nations and Men; whence we may derive comfort.
I Have done with comparison; and now I bring up the other Brigade of my
Legion, which opposes the novelty of these Calamities: But briefly and by way
of Triumph. For it rather takes the spoils of the already conquered enemy;
than fights with him. And to speak truth, what is there in these things, that
can appear new to any man, that is not himself a gross Ignaro in humane
affairs? Crantor said excellently and vvisely; who always had this verse in
his Mouth.

-- Ah me! and why ah me?
We suffered but a humane misery.
For these Calamities do daily move in a Circle, and in a kind of round pass
through this round World. Why do you sigh that these sad things fall out? Why
do you vvonder at it?

O Agamemnon thou were not
To pleasing things alone begot,
But to equal hopes and fears
Interchange of joys and tears.
For thou art mortal humane born, and though
Thou should refuse, the Gods will have it so.
It were rather a vvonder that any should be exempted from this common Law;
and should not have his part in that burden, which lies upon the backs of
all. Solon when a friend of his at Athens was sadly be wailing himself; he
brings him into the Tower, and from the top of it shows him all the houses of
that great City. Think with your self (says he) how many sorrows have
heretofore been under these roofs; now are, and hereafter shall be: And then
cease to lament the evils of Mankind, as if they were your own only. I vvish I
could give you the like prospect of this vvide World Lipsius, but since it is
not to be done actually, let us imagine it. I place you upon the top of some
high Mountain ( Olympus if you please) look down now upon all those Cities,
provinces and Kingdoms beneath: And think that you see but so many enclosures
of humane Calamities; the Amphitheatres, and (as it were) the Sands, in which
the bloody sports of Fortune are exhibited. You need not look far from hence;
do you see Italy? It is not yet thirty years since it rested from sharp and
cruel wars on every side. See you the spacious Germany? The dangerous sparks
of a Civil discord were there but of late, which threaten to break forth
afresh (and if I am not deceived) into a more destructive flame. Do you see
Britain? Wars and slaughters are perpetually in it, and that peace which it
now awhile enjoyes; it owes to the government of the middle Sex. See you
France? Behold and pity it. Even now the Gangrene of a bloody war, creeps
into all the Joints of it: Nor is it otherwise in all the rest of the World.
Think upon these things Lipsius, and let this communion in miseries help to
alleviate those of yours. And as they used to place a slave behind the
Triumpher, who in the midst of all the joys of the triumph, was often to cry
out to him; thou art yet but a Man: So let this Monitour alvvayes stand by to
remember you, that these are humane things. For as labor in Society with
others is more easy; so is also our grief.

CHAP. XXVII. The conclusion of the whole discourse, and a short exhortation to
consider seriously of it.
I Have drawn forth all my forces Lipsius; and you have had what I thought
meet to say for constancy against Grief: which I wish may not only be
pleasant to you, but healthful, not only delight you, but (which is more) be
helpful to you. This it will doubtless be if you admit it not only into your
Ears, but into your Mind; and if you suffer not what you have heard to lie and
wither as seed that is cast upon the surface of the ground. Lastly, if you
seriously digest and ruminate upon it: For as fire is not forced from the flint
with one stroke; so in these cold bosoms of ours, that retired and failing
spark of goodness, is not enkindled by a single admonition. That at last it may
truly flame in you; not in words and appearance only, but in reality and deed;
I humbly beg and beseech of that divine fire. When he had thus said, he rose up
hastily; I go Lipsius (says he) the Sun at this Noon height remembers me it is
dinner time; do you follow. That I will readily and cheerfully (said I) justly
making that acclamation, which they use to do in their mysteries; I have the
Evil fled,
And the Good discovered.


FINIS.
THE TABLE
A.
ABjectness of the Mind, a Vice and whence. 21 Achilles, how advised. 135
Affliction, the touchstone of virtue. 182 The ends of it. 180
Africa, a great Plague there. 267 Anaxagoras, his reply. 65 Antonius, taxes
by him. 269 The manner of his death. 223
Antonius Caracalla, his cruelty. 275 Arbiter, his saying. 43 Aristophanes, his
saying. 5 Aristotle, his opinion of Fate. 105 Atlantis, drowned. 91 Augustine,
his censure of Cicero. 126 Augustus, Flamens and Priests to him. 281 Colonies
placed by him 271 His endeavor to dye 224 Taxes imposed by him 269, 270
Unfortunate in his family. 224

B.
BElgia, its troubles 3.39 Bias, his saying 127 Boast, of Julius Caesar 262 Of
Pompey the great Ibid. Of Cato the Censour 263
Boethius, his saying 191 Brutus, his wish. 223
C.
Caius Caesar, where slain 222 Calamities, are good how 167 Their Original when
ne. 80, 81, 82, 83 Their end what 170 The force of them broken, 172
Caligula, his saying 217 Captivity, the miseries of it 265 Cato, his saying
221 Ceneus, his story 162 Chance, has no rule in the world 74 Change, all
things tend to it 88, 89, 90 Instances of it 91, 92, 93, 94
Chastisement, it avails us 186 Circumstances, more feared than the things
themselves 144, to 149 Cities, raised at once 263 Colonies, placed by Augustus
270 The strength of the Empire Ibid.
Comets, not all in the air 89 Complaint, of Tiberius 219 Of Nero Ibid.
Considia, how cured 243 Constancy, a remedy in the sickness of the Mind 19 Its
definition Ibid. The praise of it 31, 32 Opposed by what 36
Country, what 47 Which the true one 61 Our obligation and love to it 55 Not
from nature but custom 61 How to be assisted by us 134
Crantor, his saying 283 Crates, his reply to Alexander 135 Creon, his story
Ibid. Cruelties, in times past 272, etc. Custom, of the Romans. 216
D.
DAvid, the Plague in his reign 266 Death, punishment after it to the wicked
223 Demetrius, his saying 182 Demochares, his prescription to a Lady 243
Desires, some the stronger for being opposed 14 Dioclesian, his retirement 143
Dyonysius, his story 221 Domitianus, at what hour slain 118 His blasphemous
Title 281 His cruelty. 282

E.
EArthquakes, wonderful ones. 92, 93 Euripides, his saying. 214 Evil men, not
punished why. 208 Evils present compared with those of former times. 256, etc.
Evils not grievous, nor new. 242 Evils public and private what 36 Euclid, bis
Apothegme. 127
F.
Famines, in former times. 268, etc. Fate asserted. 98 Universally aseended to
101 Some difference about its parts. 102 How distinguished of by the ancients.
Ibid. Mathematical Fate what 103 Natural Fate what 104 Violent Fate how defined
106 True Fate, its definition 112 How it differs from providence 114 How from
the Stoics Fate 119 It offers no violence to the will 121 It acts by second
causes 131 No ground for sloth. 133

G.
Galba, his cruelty 275 Gardens, those of Langius 139 The praise of them 141,
142 Kings and other excellent persons addicted to them 143 How abused by some
148 How to be used Ibid.
God, orders and rules all things 74 Not to be murmured at by us 81 His
unchangeableness 100 Not the Author of sin 122, 123, 124 Not the cause of Evil
168 Punishes most justly 229 He only discernes the difference betwixt crimes
230 Why he transferres punishment 235, 236 He joines those things we sever Ib.
He loves his, but severely 180 He has appointed all things their bounds 192
Greece, its calamities by war. 260, etc.

H.
Helice, and Bara swallowed up by water 91 Hesiod, his saying 216, 237, 238
Homer, his advice 5, 135 Honorius, the famine in his reign 268 Horace, his
saying 64 Hunnes, how many slain at once. 263
I.
Jews, their wonderful slaughter 257, etc. Instruments, why God uses the
wicked as his 173 Internal punishment, the most grievous 216 Inundations, the
mischiefs by them 91 Italy, slain there in the punick war 261 Julius Caesar,
the manner of his death. 222 Justice, of God wakeful 190 Justinian, the great
plague in his reign. 267 The famine in his time 268

K.
KNowledge, the desire of it a happy presage in youth 165
L.
LAngius, praised 2 His gardens 139 How used by him 153
Lucullus, his cruelty 274
M.
MAn, at variance with himself 24, etc. An in bred malice in him 48 Pindars
account of him 97 Unable to judge of crimes 229 He has a will but not the
power to resist God 125 Prone to aggravate his own afflictions 254
Masanissa, his famous plat. 142 Mercy, what it is 68 How it differs from pity
Ib.
Michael Ducas, the great plague in his reign 267, 268 Mithridates, his cruelty
276 Murders, in times past 127, 128 Mutations, several instances of them 88,
etc. Mysteries, the acclamation usual therein. 288
N.
NAture of God, slow to revenge 211 Nature of Man, prone to aggravate
afflictions 254 Necessity, what it is 85 Public evils from it 86 Its force and
power 85, 86 From what grounds derived Ibid.
New found world, its desolations 263, 264
O.
OBstinacy, how it differs from Constancy 20 Opinion, what it is 22 Its
original whence 27, etc. Its power and effects Ibid. It leads to levity Ibid.
Oppressions, internal and external heretofore. 279, 280
P.
PAssions, whence they rise 34 Patience, the mother of constancy 21 Its
definition Ibid. How it differs from stupidity Ibid.
Petrarch, a great plague in his time 268 Polus, his story 43. Pompey, his
boast 262 Philosophy, how it works 51 Pindar, his saying 49 Pity, what it is
68 How it differs from mercy Ibid. How it may be used 70
Plagues, wonderful examples of them 266, 267, 268 Plato, his council 84 His
saying 216
Proscriptions, 272, 273 Providence, what 77 Nothing done below but by it 80
Public evils, why they afflict us 44 Not so great as they seem 144
Punishment, all have deserved it 229 Good for us 189 For the safety and
ornament of the universe. 193 Why unequal 202 Why wicked men are not punished
208, 209 Deferred why Ib, Transferred why 232 Diverse sorts of punishments 215

Q.
QUintus Catulus, his saying 273 Quintus Fabius, how many Gauls slain by him.
263
R.
RApines, 270 Regulus, how he dyed 183 Right Reason, what it is 22 Its original
whence 25 Its power and effects 28, 29 It leads to constancy 26
Romans, their calamities by war 261, etc.
S.
Salvian, his saying 204 Semiramis, her pendulous gardens 142 Senators, of
Rome how taxed 269 How many at once proscribed 272 etc.
Seneca, his seeming error 109 His sayings 83, 200
Simulation, in men's griefs 41, 42. Socrates, his reply to a Question
propounded 11 Sloth, no excuse for it from Fate 133, 134 Solon, his story Ibid.
His prospect to his Friend 285
Sophocles, his saying 205 Stoics, commended 108 The Authors of violent Fate
105
Sylla, his cruelty, 274
T.
TAcitus, his saying 218 Tarquinius why expelled Rome 117 Thales, his Apothegme
85 His saying 230
Theodosius, his cruelty 276 Travail, helps not diseases within 8 A Symptom
rather than cure 7 It removes only the lighter motions of grief 12 Rather
exasperates the greater 13
Tributes, examples of them in former times 269, 270 Trismegistus, his opinion
of Fate, Providence and Necessity 103 Tyranny, whence. 278
V.
VAriety, delights us 195, 196 Varro, the consul praised 134 Velleius
Paterculus, his saying 132 Venice, its antiquity 94 Venus, has changed its
color magnitude and situation 90 Violent Fate, how defined 106 Virtue, how she
is directed 21, 22 Volesus Messalla, his cruelty. 276
W.
Wars, of the ancients 161, 162, 163 Wars, in Judea how many slain in them
157, etc. Wicked Men, why used by God as his instruments 173 What punishments
they never escape 217 Punished after death 320 Not exempt from external
punishments Ibid.
Wisdom, seems stern at a distance 70 An exhortation to it 161 The way to
attain to Constancy 162 Not acquired by wishes Ibid. The greatest instance of
it, what. 174

Y.
YOuth, advised in their studies 161 A good presage in Youth, what 165
Z.
ZEno, how he defines fate 108

