

CABALA:OR, THE MYSTERY OF Conventicles Unvaild:

IN AN Historical Account of the Principles and Practices of the
NONCONFORMISTS, AGAINST Church and State: FROM The First REFORMATION under King
EDWARD the VI. Anno 1550. to this present Year, 1664.With an APPENDIX of an
CXX. PLOTS against the present Government, that have been defeated.

By Oliver Foulis.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas-Holmwood, Anno 1664.

THE MYSTERY OF Conventicles UNVAILED.
ORthodox. Why how now Scruple, what ailes you now with your Friday face, and
Sabbath day Looks?


Scruple. Add not reproach to affliction, and thy sin to our suffering -- I am
glad to see thee.


Orth. Right Presbyters! scripture at one end, and hypocrisy at the other;
reproach -- affliction -- sin -- suffering -- out of the Concordance; glad to
see you, out of the bottom of your heart; why? thou have not seen that that
made thee glad these sixteen years? -- But why here at Amsterdam!


Scrup. Here a man may be as holy as he will.


Orth. So you may any where else if you would be but as honest as you ought --
But what is the matter? is England unsettled, that you cannot live there?


Scrup. Yea, upon the Lees.


Orth. Something it was you made that Vinegar face; what a Gods name would you
have?


Scrup. Only liberty of Conscience.


Orth. What do you mean by that? Do you mean liberty to do what you will, or to
do what you ought? if liberty to do what you will, we know where about you
would be; if what you ought -- who shall judge what ought to be? you, or your
Superiors? if you say your Superiors, you know their mind; if you say your
selves they know yours: -- But prithee tell me truly is the Conventicle broke
in England, and must it be made up in Amsterdam! -- a man may pick a Church
here when it is lost in the World; or are we for the Commonwealth against
Tyranny? or have you any more Spoones, Bodkins, Thimbles for this War? or do I
smell a Rat, or rather a Rat-catcher; and is there a new Act against your
Conventicles!


Scrup. There are snares enough laid for tender Consciences, but yet it does
not lie in their power to restrain us.


Orth. Why? I thought there was such a provision made of late as would root up
the Schism.


Scrup. Some such thing was aimed at, but they cannot touch an hair of our head.


Orth. I know you have your starting holes -- yet it were worth the while to
know how you will escape that late Statute?


Scrup. Many ways! as first -- none can come to a house and see our Meeting
without a Warrant from two Justices of the Peace. 2. No man has any
encouragement for so invidious a toil as to trot from one Justice of Peace to
another for that The Conventicles shifts against the late Act, forbiding
Conventicles.
Warrant. 3. The Militia cannot as formerly distarbe us without that Warrant.
4. Our Meeting places may be contrived at distance enough from any Justice of
Peace. 5. The Justices must meet before they can proceed against us. 6. They
may punish us for the three first offenses we are convicted of as little as
they please, and its odds but we can make friends to them; and as we may meet
often before we are convicted the first time, it will go very hard if we be
convicted the fourth. 7. We may meet and confer, and yet nothing proved against
us concerning the worship of God. 8. We may walk into the Fields, and never
come within the compass of the Act. 9. Our Ministers may go from house to
house, and visit, and so instruct too, and we may visit them. To all this I may
add that many of the Magistrates in the Land are not so zealously affected to
prosecute the people of God.


Orth. See now how safe you are, yet it is persecution, oppression of
Consciences!


Scrup. Yet still the Act of Uniformity is in force.


Orth. Look now, that Act takes away only the preferment of some few of you (as
what State can prefer those who have sworn to overthrow it and its
Constitutions, and will not renounce that Oath, which is their case that come
under the stroke of that Act) and not the conscience of any of your
consciences, and your livings are not all one with you.


Capt. Prithee what do thou spend thy breath with that sniveling pretender!
there is no hope of him here where he may serve any God for twelve Crowns.


Scrup. We might have had the same liberty in our native Country.


Capt. You have deserved it indeed, so good use you made of the last kindness
of that nature.


Scrup. Why we are men fearing God, and loving righteousness.


Capt. And why not fearing God and honoring the King; and meddling not with
them who are given to change! But that Text is not in the last Edition of the
Geneva Bible, nor in Cannes Alcoran.


Merchant. Lord! What good men are these Blew Cap Saints, these Scotch
Christians, these Knockes Protestants? Butter will not now melt in their
mouths; what is it to be poor? now we must be Religious! but if God would trust
them with the Sword once more, what gallant thing would they do in the fear of
God!


Scrup. No more then carry on the Reformation.


Orth. Reformation! it is a dreadful word, and in thy mouth imports no less then
ruin and desolation: These are the men that propagate Religion by Wars, force
Consciences, nourish seditions, authorize conspiracies and rebellions; that put
the Lord Baceni
Sword into the peoples hands; that sanctify Tumults; preach off the heads of
Kings, overthrow constitutions and Governments, undermine Laws and settlement;
that resist for Conscience sake, and teach others so to do for their Salvation;
that make Christ a raiser of sedition, and his Religion a Firebrand; that give
Kings too much reason to stand up, and the Princes to conspire together against
Christ and against his Anointed; -- these are they that fear God, and speak
evil of Dignities, and despise Dominion, and kill the devil for Gods sake.


Scrup. Verily our late miscarriages are to be bewailed! but our Principles are
peaceable.


Orth. Bewailed! yes now they do not prosper! with what face can you say your
Principles are so peaceable when your practice is so unquiet; either never
speak so well, or never live so ill: -- why I Will tell you, there have been two
new Sects broached within this 120. years, both the 1542.
same year, both to the same A mystery of Jesuitisme.
end, I mean the Jesuits and the Presbyterians, the one set up by John Calvin,
the other by Ignatius Loyola; the one is confessed to be the Boutfew of
Christendom, the other is known to be Specul. Jesuit
the Incendiary of the Protestant part of it; many have discovered the mad
pranks of the one -- none indeed have yet laid open Mirlare Jesuit.
the sly insinuations of the other. Owen of running Register.



Merch. I have brought over as good an. Historian as England ever bred, we will
go to him and he will give you an exact account Hospin H. ft.
of this Schism in England from the very Egg, beginning Ies. l. 2.
at the time of Edward the sixth, and carrying it on to this very hour,
throughout the several Raigns of Queen Mary, Queen Rabad. vit. Ig. Ioyola.
Elizabeth, King James, King Charles First, King Charles Second.


Orth. A match! let us go together and call a Court, and with Aula Jesuit.
that Gentleman's assistance try these grand Pretenders by a Jury of our English
Historians.


Capt. Agreed! and O my conscience you will find such a mystery of iniquity
from time to time carried on was never managed on English ground! a plot of an
hundred years continuance! a Government within a Government; a design to blow
us up with white powder: first you will find them scrupulous, next stubborn,
and at last turbulent; first they beseech, then expostulate, now they flatter,
anon they threaten; now they beg against a Ceremony; anon they petition against
King and Bishops; to day you will find them creeping about the Court, to morrow
they are canting to the people, etc.


Orth. Let us to work impartially and seriously, that we may see the bottom of
these men.


Court. O yes, O yes. --

O ye Nonconformists, hold up your hands -- You are Indicted of several Plots,
Conspiracies, Disturbances, Contrivance's and Designs against the wholesome
orders of this Church, the welfare and Government of this Realm, eversince the
Reformation; are you guilty or not Smeitym. p. 72 Ordin. Conc. the direct.
guilty?


Nonconf. We bless God for the Reformation begun in this and other Churches;
but (because nothing was ever by men at one Neces reform. p. 16.
timebegun and perfected, much less so good a work as that was meeting with so
great opposition from within and without) we desire in compliance with the
mercy of God discovering himself to us more and more every day, to go on to
perfection; not as if we bad already attained, or were already perfect -- but
this one thing we do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before -- etc.


Court. We must needs interrupt you, and desire you to answer directly in due
form of Law, whether guilty or not guilty; And what Plea soever you have to
offer in your own behalf shall be in due time, place and order received with
favor, heard with patience, and debated with all equal impartiality.


Nonconf. In submission to that authority which (whatever is thought of us, or
suggested concerning us) we obey for conscience sake, as ordained of God; we
plead in due form of Law Not guilty.


Court. By whom will you be tried?


Nonconf. By the great God before whom we stand, whose eyes see, whose eyelids
try the children of men; and by those faithful men who have reported the
transactions of this last age impartially, concealing nothing out of fear, nor
speaking any thing out of favor, not omitting anything through ignorance, nor
neglecting any thing in forgetfulness, but delivering words of truth and
soberness with good authority, not overswayed by partiality, or corrupt
affection, nor biased by love or hatred.


G. L. B. L. When it pleased God (who makes all things work for the best) to
make use of Henry the Eighth passions and private interest in order to a
public good, so far as that his bold attempts should make a way to the pions
endeavors of those that came after him for that Reformation the whole World
wished; as in other Churches so in this there rose up some men speaking
perverse things, and drawing away Disciples after them, stirred up as its
feared by the Church of Rome which endeavored to hinder that blessed work by
an inward division and domestic confusion, which had in vain opposed by
outward power and foreign interest: For as Mr. Baxter observes very well out
of Luther in his Book against the Anabaptists; When the reformed Ministers had
spent some years in building the Church, the Romish adversaries Baxter against
Tombs.
raised up some strange-spirited persons who should destroy it in few Months.


Nonconf. Verily we do not remember that any of us made any opposition to the
first Reformation, in which many of us had the honor of being Instruments in
the Lords hand, which we owned with the loss of all that was near and dear to
us; and many of us sealed it with our blood: although we must confess we did
endeavor to carry the Reformation so far as might be most agreeable with the
Word of God, most answerable to the Primitive Churches way, and nearest the
pattern of other Reformed Churches, with whom we desire to hold Communion in
the great concerns of Christianity.


Court. What you did, the World took notice of; for these things were not done
in a corner; but that you may be proceeded with more clearly, distinctly and
satisfactorily, those of you who lived in King Edward the sixth days, and
practiced at the first Reformation, may hear the Evidence we have against them,
and the rest may withdraw. --


Nonconf. We submit.


Court. Mr. Calvin -- Our Evidence against you, is, That since you had
prevailed in Geneva for a Government and order according to your own humor,
fancy, and judgment, the necessity of that place and time, you were not
contented to see any thing established in other Churches without your consent
and Hist. reform. p. 79. Church History p. 129.
approbation; and particularly that you went beyond your own line as an (...),
or one busy in other men's matters about the affairs of England: First, When
you sent Letters to Martin Bucer to take heed of his old fault; (for Calvin's
Ep. ad Bucer.
a fault you thought it was to run a moderate course) as we do here in
Reformation, neither keeping too near, nor going too far from Rome: 2 When you
offered your assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, and being refused by him,
because of your rigidness, Calvin ad Cranmer. ad Protect.
you tampered in a very long Letter with the Lord Protect or Sommerset, that
most Ceremonies should be altered, and that he should go on to reform the
Church without regard to peace at home, or correspondence abroad, either in
altering, adding, taking away, or moderating the Liturgy, Discipline and
Ceremonies: A 2. Ed 6. 1549.
And besides you writ that the Godly Homilies should ad Protect.
by no means be allowed for continuance, or be looked upon as a rule for the
Church, or constantly to serve for the instruction of the people, contrary to
the judgment of Martin Bucer, to the scandal of the Zuinglian Gospellers, who
ever since almost declaimed against them; and when your agents and arguments
had raised some disputes about the Ceremonies of the Church then by Law
established; you writ for a peace, which you would have composed, not by
bringing the Nonconformists to a Conformity, but by encourageing them in their
Nonconformity against our Law, order and peace.


Mr. Calvin. Indeed as I had done at Geneva, so I was willing others should in
other Gospel Churches endeavor to bring ad Protect.
things to the pattern in the Mount; and take care that nothing should be
exacted, which is not warranted by the word of God; there being nothing more
distastful in the eyes of God then worldly Wisdom, either in moderating or
going backward, but merely as we are directly by the Word of God; and
accordingly I write my poor advice to most Christian Princes that looked
toward Reformation.


Mr. Hooker. Your advice we highly value, as esteemed by us the most learned
and wise man, that ever the French Church did enjoy since the hour it enjoyed
you; yet you must understand Preface Eccles Policy.
that it did not become you to obtrude upon the Church of England a new way you
had found out for the City of Geneva, agreeable to the temper of that people
and that time, so disagreeing with our temper and our time, especially since
you could not bring that way to Geneva it self without the consent of the
people: Two things of principal note there are which deservedly procure you
honor throughout the Christian World, 1. Your exact institutions of Christian
Religion. 2. Your no less industrious exposition of Scripture according
Bancroft Discipline p. 106.
to those institutions; in which two things, whosoever bestowed their labor
after you, you gained the advantage of prejudice against them if they gainsaid
you, or of glory above them if they consented; yea, that which you did in the
establishment of, your way was harmless, as being necessary; but what you have
taught for the countenance of it established is blameworthy, because out of
love to your own prudent invention you endeavor to persuade the World that
what you found out as yesterday Brom. wara. Scotch Discipl.
was established by God since the beginning of Christianity; we take it not
well that what you with much ado imposed upon your own people by your own,
should be imposed upon us as from Divine Authority; and that you should to that
purpose disparage the ancient Rites of the Church, as Ineptiae, nugae, trifles,
and I know not what: O Mr. Calvin, Mr. Calvin, There will come a time when
three words uttered with charity and moderation, shall receive a far more
blessed reward then three thousand Vollumes written with disdainful sharpness
of wit: We wonder Court epist. p. 69.
that you who said, That you did highly approve a Form of Prayer, Doctrine,
and established Administration of Sacraments, which it should not be lawful for
the Ministers themselves to neglect, that Provision might be made for the
ignorant and unskilful: 2. That the consent of the Churches might be more
apparent: 3. That Order may be taken against the desultory levity of them who
delight in Innovations: We wonder that you should encourage some Zelots at home
and abroad, to procure so many alterations of and enemies to the Common Prayer
in the year 1547. and 3. of King Edward the sixth; in so much that Reverend
Father Latimer was feign to say in a Sermon before King Edward a little before
his Death, That the Admiral was gone, I heard say he was a seditious man, a
contemner of Common Prayer, I would there were no more Latimers Sermon 1607. p.
83.
in England; well he is gone, I would he had left none behind him.


Bish. Bancroft. Mr. Calvin was not the only man that disturbed the peace of
our Church by countenancing these Innovations, and Church Hist.
practicing in Court, City, Country, and Universities by his Agents, till he
had laid the first Foundation of the Zuinglian faction, Dang. posit. p. 63.
who labored nothing more then Innovation in Doctrine and Discipline.


Court. We pray you (Sir) what was the maine engine that Mr. Calvin used to
bring his way into so much credit and esteem among us? Hal. descrip. p 66:



Bish. Bancroft. By insinuating to some men well affected the practice of the
poor reformed Churches who not being able to set up the Primitive, were
overruled by his authority to comply with his way; and gaining an improvident
Indulgence unto John a Lasco, with a mixed multitude of Poles and Germans to
have the Privilege of a Church for him and his, distinct in Government and
Worship from the Church of England, by Letters Vien hovig Nor of Dutch cong.
Pattents in St. Augustine near Broadstreet, to be hereafter called the Church
of the Lord Jesus; whence we may observe, 1. Of what consequence it is
totolerate any people though never so inconsiderable, in a way of separation.


Mr. Durel and Dr. Basile. Whereas it was suggested by several that most
Reformed Churches walked in the way of Calvin; and that the Church of England
must submit to that way to preserve its Communion with other Churches: We will
make it appear that there is no Rite, Ceremony, or order of the Church of
England but is observed in some of the Reformed Churches, and some of them are
observed in all.


Court. Thus encouraged from abroad, and indulged at home, that party began to
appear more publicly: And you Mr. Bucer and Dr. Peter Martyr must needs
seruple at some Ceremonies, Vestments, the one as Kings professor at Cambridge,
the other Full. Church History.
as Margaret professor, and Cannon of Christ-Church in Oxford, though with such
moderation as that we have no more to say to you but that we are sorry the
oversight of those times furnished the Universities, and filled up the Chaires
with men of your Principles, to lay up in those nurseries of Religion and
Learning, Alar. Dam.
the seed of a separation, dissent and chisme, that may continue as long as
this Church stands: we are sorry to hear that you Doctor Bucer refused some
Ceremonies at Cambridge, especially that you would not use a square Cap,
because forsooth your head was Round. Eccles. Rest.
We are sorry likewise that you Dr. Martyr should encourage the Nonconformists
in your Letter July 1. 1550. by saying that You thought it most expedient to
the good of the Church, that they, and all others of that kind should be taken
away, when the P. Martyr Opusc. Angl. p. 63.
next opportunity should present it self: for (say you (as we judge)
unchariteably) Where such Ceremonies are so stiftly contended for, as are not
warranted and supported by the word of God, there commonly men are less
sollicitous of the substance of Religion, then they were of the cicumstances of
it: and that you say in your Letter of the 4. Nov. 1559. that you never used
the Surplice when you lived in Oxford, though you were then a Cannon of
Christ-Church, and frequently present in the Qaire.

And for your part John a Lasco, you might have been contented with the great
indulgence of a gracious Sovereign to set up a Church with an express order to
all the Bishops of the Realm not to disturb you in the free exercise of your
Religion, and Ecclesiastical Government; notwithstanding, that you differed
from the Government and forms of Worship established in the Church of England;
and not have abused his Majesty's goodness so far, as to appear in favor of
the several factions which then began more openly to show themselves against
the established orders and laudable Customs of the Church; and to write that
scandalous Book called Forma and Oration totius Ecclesiastici Ministerij, much
to their encouragement who impugned all Order and Discipline; and you must
countenance those that refuse to wear the Cap and Surplice, and to write to Dr.
Bucer to declare against them; for which you were severely reproved by that
moderate and Learned man.


Doctor Martyr, Doctor Bucer,and John a Lasco. Opinions of Divines beyond Se 1.
p. 19.
Truly we are very sensible of the great favors we have received from the
Church of England, and are very sorry that there fell from us any expressions,
and that there was allowed by us any practice that occasioned the saddest
difference that ever happened in the Church of England, if we consider the time
how long it continued, the eminent persous therein engaged, and the doleful
effects thereby produced; and we observe that there have been three degrees of
Nonconformists; 1. Those in our days in King Edwards, who scrupled only at
some Vestures and Gestures.

2. Those in Queen Elizabeth's time, who excepted against several things in the
Common Prayer, Cannons, and Articles. 2. Those since who have laid the Axe to
the Root of the Tree, and destroyed the Government it self. --


Court. After these men had been a while among us, two opposite parties plainly
appeared.

I. The Founders of Conformity such as by politic compliance and cautious
concealment of themselves in the days of King Edward the sixth were possessed
of the best preferments in Church History p. 402.
the Church, and retained many Ceremonies decent and ancient; the Authority of
Cranmer, and the Activity of Ridley headed these Parties, the former being the
highest, the latter the hotest for Conformity.

II. The Founders of Nonconformity, such exiles as living in States and Cities
of popular reformation, were well affected to the Discipline of the places they
lived in; who returning late to England were at a loss for preferment, and
renounced all Ceremonies practiced by the Papists; John Rogers Lecturer of
Paul's, and Vicar of St. Sepulchers, and John Hooper afterward Bishop of
Gloucester, were the Ringleaders of this party.

And that these Divisions grew to that height that the King with the advice of
his Counsel sets out a Proclamation Septem. 23. to this purpose, Whereas of
late by reason of certain Controversies and seditious Preachers, his Majesty
moved with the tender Zeal and love he Edw. 6. 2. 1548.
had to the quiet of his Subjects, has forbidden any to Preach without License
from the Lord Protector, or the Archbishop of Canterbury, upon hope that they
whom they Licensed should Preach and set forth only such things as should be to
Gods honor, and the benefit of the Kings Majesty's Subjects: Yet seeing such
Preachers did still behave themselves irreverently, and contrary to good order
in Preaching against such good instructions as was given them, whereby much
contention and disorder might rise and ensue in his Majesty's Dominions;
Wherefore his Highness minding to see shortly one Uniforme Order throughout the
Realm, and to put an end to all Controversies in Religion, for which purpose he
has called together the Learned men of the Realm, does inhibit all public
Preaching, wishing all Ministers in the mean time to pray for a blessing on the
Convocation; and so to endeavor themselves that they may be ready to receive
from the Convocation a most Godly, quiet, and Uniforme order to be had
throughout all his Majesty's Realms and Dominions.


L. A. B. C. I pray, who appeared first against the order of the Church, and
how did they behave themselves?


L. B. W. To feel the pulse of authority, one Dr. Glasier as soon as ever Lent
was over 1547. (and it was well he had the patience to stay so long) affirms
publicly in a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, That Lent was not ordained of God to
be fasted on, nor the eating of Flesh to be forborne, but that the same was a
politic Ordinance of men, and might therefore be broken by men at their
pleasure. For which Doctrine as the Preacher was never questioned, the temper
of the times giving encouragement enough to such extravagancies, so did it open
such a gap to carnal liberty, as the King was feign to shut up by Proclamation
on the 16. of Jan. and the Protector by an Army raised under pretense of a War
with Scotland: He knowing very well that all great Counsels tending to
Innovation in the public Government (especially where Religion is concerned)
are either to b(...)cked by Arms, or otherwise prove destructive to the
undertakers.


L. B. L. Who was the next who appeared against the Kings Orders and
injunctions.


L. B. G. Encouraged by Glasiers boldness and impunity, several persons began
to run out to some excesses, which occasioned these Words in a Proclamation of
the 8. March 154 7/8. We wish all men with such obedience and conformity to
receive our Order, that we may be encouraged from time to time further to
travel for the Reformation, and setting forth of such Godly Orders as may be
most to Gods glory, the edifying of our Subjects, and the advancement of true
Religion; Willing all our Subjects in the mean time to stay and quiet
themselves with this our Direction, etc. As men contented to follow authority,
and not rashly to run upon such courses as may hinder what they intend to
promote: For now there arose persons by the name of Gospellers that dispersed
(as Bishop Hooper observes in the Preface to his Commandments) several
Blasphemies and Heresies; and some Anabapists who lurking in the late Kings
time began to appear publicly, and were convicted at St. Paul's before the
Archbishop of Canterbury and others, where being convicted of their errors,
some of them were dismissed with an admonition, some were sentenced to a
recantation, and others were condemned to bear their Faggots at St. Paul's
Cross: these persons among the many wild Opinions they vented, were notorious
for this one, (as Campneyes Writings, one of themselves, but coaverted,
declared) That they laid all they did upon the eternal Predestination, making
God who is of purer eyes then to behold any, the Author of their iniquity.


Court. It Is true these wild persons and the Women that were burnt for heresy,
might disturb us: but who kept up the old cause of Nonconformity?


Witnesses. One Mr. John Hooper a grave and Learned man, who had lived a while
in Zuricke with Bullinger, and returned after Henry the 8s. death with very
good affections for the way of the Zuinglian and Helvetian Churches; and by his
frequent preaching and learned Writings having got credit and esteem with the
Earl of Warwick and other great men, was preferred Bishop of Gloucester; but
when he came to be Consecrated, he utterly refused the Episcopal Habits wherein
he was to appear at his Consecration by the rules of the Church; and the
Archbishop Cranmer would not Consecrate him without them.


Court. Why do not you my Lord, use these innocent and harmless Weeds? church
Hist.



Hooper. I put my self upon the trial of the Searcher of Hearts, that no
obstinacy, but mere Conscience makes me refuse these Ornaments.


Court. These Ornaments are indifferent of themselves, and of These are their
own Words.
ancient use in the Church.


Hooper. They are useless, being ridiculous and superstitious.


Court. Nay, my Lord, being enjoined by lawful authority, they become
necessary, not to Salvation, but to Church Unity.


Hooper. Being left indifferent by God, it is presumption in man to make them
necessary.


Court. By a moderate use of these Ceremonies we may gain Papists into the
Church.


Hooper. While you hope to gain Papists into the Church, you will lose many
Protestants out of it.


Court. You discredit other Bishops who have used this Habit.


Hooper. I had rather discredit them then destroy mine own Conscience.


A. B. C. How think you being a private person, to be indulged with, to the
disturbance of the public Uniformity of the Church.


Hooper. If it please your Grace but to read these Letters, I hope you will be
satisfied.


A. B. C. These are to desire that in such reasonable things wherein Hoopers I
etter. from the Earl of Warwick.
my Lord Elect of Gloucester craveth to be borne withal at your bands, You
would vouchsafe to show him your Graces favor; The principal cause is that you
would not charge him with any thing burdenous to his Conscience. J. Warwick.

We understand you do stay from Consecrating our well beloved Mr. John Hooper,
because he would have you omit, and let pass certain King own Letters.
Rites and Ceremonies offensive to his Conscience, whereby ye think you should
fall in Praemunire of Laws; We have thought good by advice aforesaid, to
discharge you of all manner of dangers, penalties, and forseitures you should
run into, by omitting any of the same, and these our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant and discharge. EDWARD REX.

My Lord of London, What shall we do? if we indulge him, we open a gap for
licentiousness; if we refuse him, we incur his Majesty's displeasure.


Ridley Bp. Land. Public Uniformity shall never be broken to satisfy a
private humor; I had rather displease his Majesty, then break his Laws;
especially seeing I observe it is the design of the whole faction to feel the
pulse of authority; for Mr. Calvin has written already to the Lord Protector
to lend Mr. Hooper an helping hand, whereby we are to understand that the whole
Party is engaged.


Court. Truly Mr. Hooper, though we honor your Parts and Piety, yet for your
contempt and disobedience we can do no less then send you to Prison.


Hooper. May it please your Honors, having consulted with Peter Martyr and Mr.
Bucer, and with some of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, I shall
very willingly wear my Episcopal Robes at my Consecration, and attendance upon
his Majesty, upon condition I may be dispensed withal from wearing it at
ordinary times as my daily Habit.


Court. Much must be allowed his Majesty's most Honorable PrivyCounsel, much
to your piety and worth, and much to peace; but let no man presume upon the
like indulgence for the future.


Bish. Gardener. Who do I see there? Mr. Tims, are you not a Deacon? What do
you appear in a Coat and Stockings of diverse Colors; is that a fit Apparel for
a Deacon?


Tims. This Vesture does not so much vary from that of a Tims Words.
Deacon as your Lordships from that of an Apostle.


Court. You forget your self -- Take him Jaylour, this is the effect of
Indulgence.


Bish. Ridley. Mr. Rogers, I pray do you come hither; you are Prebend, and
Lecturer of Paul's, why do not I see you in your Cap and tippet as the other
Prebends your Brethren?


Mr. Rogers. I will never agree to that part of Conformity, but on this
Condition, that if you require the Cap and Tippet; his own words.
etc. then it should be also decreed that all Popish Priests (for a distinction
between them and others) should be constrained to wear upon their Sleeves a
Chalice with an host upon it.


Court. Nay, Mr. Rogers, do not you teach us how we shall Govern the Papist,
but learn you how to obey yourself.


Bish. Horn. I pray Mr. Prolocutor, why did Mr. Philpot leave the Convocation
house lately?


Prolocutor. According to the laudable Customs of this Realm and Church I put
Mr. Philpot to his own choice, whether he would wear the Cap, the Tippet, and
other Ornaments which Divines wear, (to which he was then averse) or depart the
Convocation house? he fairly forsook the House.


Court. Alas! to what sad times are we reserved, when a few men's fancies and
opinions shall control the whole Church! -- what will be the issue of these
extravagancies! Did you hear how one Sir Steven of Christ-Church about a month
ago Preached down the Names of Churches, Days and Months; that Fishdayes
should be altered, and Lent should be at any time, but between Shrovetide and
Easter: Did you hear how he went from the Church to the Elmes to preach, and
from the high Altar to the Church door to read Communion service; what will be
the end of these things! Principlis obsta: Do you hear how many Letters Calvin
has sent to this Realm, 1. To the King, exciting him to proceed to a through
Reformation according to his project. Another to the Counsel telling them how
many things were amiss in the Church and Kingdom. And another to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, certifying him that there was an whole mass of
Popery in the Common Prayer.


CHAP. II. Queen Mary's Reign.
COurt. Whilst mutual animosities were heightened between the Opposers and
Asserters of the Liturgy, Providence put A. I. Mar.
a period for a time to that Controversy in England; such who formerly would
not, soon afterward durst not use the Common Prayer, Mass and Popery being set
up by Queen Mary in the room thereof: As when Children fall out and fight about
the Church Hist.
Candle, the Parents coming in and taking it away, leave them to decide the
differences in the dark: Do you think this Controversy died with the happy
times of King Edward? No, the poor Protestants carry it over with them to
banishment, 1. To Embden in East Friezland; 2. To Weasel in the Low Countries;
3. To Arrow in Switzerland; 4. To Strasburg; 5. To Zurich; 6. To Francford on
the Meyne. Mr. Fuller, will you be pleased to acquaint the Court with the
Opposition made against the Church of England at Francford?


Fuller. If you take no more delight in hearing, then I in discoursing on so
doleful a Subject, you will show little cheerfulness in your faces, and less
joy in your hearts; yet will I relate this sorrowful accident impartially, the
rather because the Pen-knives of that age are grown to Swords in ours; and
their Writings laid the foundations of the fightings now adays.


Court. Proceed (Sir) to the History of these Nonconformists when the
Protestants were banished in Queen Mary's days.


Fuller. The English Protestants came first to Francford Jun. 24. and on the
14. of July had a Church allowed them by the special favor and mediation of
Mr. John Glauberg, one of the chief Senators of that State; but upon condition
that they should not dissent from the French in Doctrine, or Discipline, or
Ceremony, least thereby they should minister occasion of offense, -- And in
conformity to the French, 1. They concluded that the answering aloud after the
Minister should not be used. 2. The Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies in
service omitted as superfluous and superstitious. 3. That there should be
another Confession of more effect as they said, and framed according to the
state and time. 4. That after a Psalm a Prayer for the assistance of Gods
spirit; and the Sermon with the Articles of Belief with another Psalm, they
should dismiss the people with a blessing. 5. That there should be a prayer for
all the Church after Sermon.


Court. What strange alterations are these! but were they contented to set up
this new way among themselves?


Fuller. No, but they require those of Zurick to come thither and join with
them in that new way, Declaring the necessity of joining themselves in one
Congregation, where they might Trouble Franc.
serve God in purity of Faith, and integrity of life, having both Doctrine and
Discipline free from any mixture of superstition: But they of Zurick excused
themselves; 1. Because they saw no necessity that all the English should repair
to one place, it being safer to adventure in several Bottoms. 2. Because they
were peaceably seated, and courteously used at Zurick; and did not see how they
might be all entertained at Francford. 4. Because they were resolved not to
recede from the Liturgy used in England under the Reign of King Edward the
sixth.


Court. How began the trouble at Francford?


Fuller. Mr. Chambers and Mr. Grindal came from Strasburgh with a motion to
those of Francford that they might have the substance and effect of the Common
Prayer, though such Ceremonies and things which the Country would not bear
might be omitted. Whereupon Mr. Knox the Pastor of Francford and others drew up
a Platform of the English Liturgy as used in England under Edward 6.


Court. I pray what was Mr. Calvin's Judgment of it?


Fuller. He in a Letter of 20. Jan. 1555. says, That in the English Liturgy
there was not that purity which was desired to be; and although these things
were at first tolerated, yet it behooved the Learned, Grave, and Godly
Ministers of Christ to enterprise further, and to set forth something more
filed from Rust and purer.


Court. What was the effect of this Letter?


Fuller. This struck such a stroke, especially in the Congregation at
Francford, that some therein who formerly partly approved, did afterward
wholly dislike; and more who formerly disliked, did now detest the English
Liturgy.


Court. O sad! at first some Garment: and Vestures were disliked; then some
passages in the Liturgy, and now the whole Liturgy it self! but we entreat you
go on.


Fuller. The Learned, and Prudent, the pions and resolute Dr. Cox coming out of
England and arriving at Francford with several other men entered the
Congregation Mar: 13. behaving themselves according to the Customs, Rites,
Ceremonies of the Church of England; which Customs the Pastor Mr. Knox
preached against as superstitious, impure and imperfect, and withal prevailed
with Mr. Glauberg so far that he publicly professed that if the reformed order
of the Congregation of Francford were not therein observed, as he had opened
the Church door to them, so would he shut it again. a. a. a.


Court: Who was active there against the Church besides?


Fuller. One Will. Wittingham, one (though of less authority) yet of as much
affection to the cause as Knox himself, who could not endime the great English
Book; for so he called the Liturgy.


Court. What did these say for themselves.


Fulier. They murmured that Archbishop Cranmer had composed a far more pure
Liturgy, but the corrupt Clergy (they said) would not admit of it.


Court. Who else opposed the Church of England?


Fuller. One Ashley, who set up the people above the Ministers; and occasioned
the drawing up of a new Discipline, which occasioned new troubles, and the
choice of new Pastors; until by the mediation of Dr. Sandy's and others they
were persuaded to some tolerable agreement.


Court. I pray let the persons concerned answer to their Names.


Register. Mr. Williams, Mr. Knox, Mr. Wittingham, Mr. Fox, Mr. Gilby, Mr.
Goodman, Mr. Cole, Mr. Wood, Mr. Keth, Mr. Kelk, Mr. Hilton, Mr. South-bouse,
Mr. Purfote, Mr. Escot, Mr. Grafton, Mr. Walton, Mr. Kent, Mr. Hellingham, Mr.
Carier, etc.


Court. Could neither the love of peace nor compassion of your suffering
mother, nor the offense of the Reformed Churches, nor your own dangers keep you
within compass, order and government!


Nonconf. We aimed at pure Reformation, an holy communion with other Churches,
and the peace of Protestants.


Court. Truly you have laid the foundation of the most dangerous Schism that
ever was in the World; and what the issue may be God only knows, and late
Posterity may suffer: O why cannot you agree seeing ye are distressed brethren?
O why cannot the great things wherein you agree unite you, rather then the
small matters wherein you differ should divide you? Greatly does concern all
of you in your places, and orders to put to all your powers, prayers, and
interests, for preserving the Unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, that in
nothing you give offense to the Church of God; rather be willing to silence and
smother your private judgments, and to relinquish your particular liberties
and Interests; to question and mistrust your singular conceits and fancies,
then to be in any such thing stiff and peremptory against the quiet of Gods
Church; the weak to be humble and tractable; the strong to be meek and
merciful; you the Pastors to instruct the Ignorant, to reclaim the wandering,
to restore the lapsed, to convince the froward with the spirit of meekness and
compassion: And trouble not your Superiors by ungrounded Scruples,
uncharitable prejudices, or unquiet, and in the end uncomfortable
singularities: If any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, Be ye like minded; take
heed of strife, of vain glory, of pride in your own conceits, of censure of
your brethren, of private respects, lay aside your own reputation, have such
humble judgments as that you may be willing to learn any though unwelcome
truths, and to unlearn any though a darling error; have such humble lives and
purposes, as that you may resolve to obey with duty, whatsoever you are not
able with reason to gainsay, to the suppressing of those unhappy differences,
wherewith by the cunning of Satan the Church of God is like to be too much
disquieted. Whosoever therefore by pride or faction, schism or ambition, or
novel fancies, or arrogance, or ignorance, or sedition, or popularity, or vain
glory, or envy, or discontent, or correspondence, or any other carnal reason
shall cause Divisions and offense: we shall not need load them with any other
guilt then the Apostle does, That they are not the servants of Christ, To. 16.
17. You that are Governors, rule with authority and meekness; you that are
Teachers teach with wisdom and compassion, that you cut off occasion from those
that seek occasion, and may open a way by peace and holiness to your Native
Country.


CHAP. III. Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
COurt. There is a restless party that will never suffer the Church to be
quiet; who when they could not prevail by force at Francford, endeavor to
carry on their design by Policy from Geneva: For when they heard that Queen
Elizabeth was come to the Crown, (who they thought would favor the most
moderate and prudent Reformation) that the world might believe that they were
for peace, they write to the English at Franeford by Will. Creth Dec. 15. That
all offenses heretofore taken or given, might be forgotten, and that for the
future they might no more fall out again for superfluous Ceremonies. But
however to make sure work, Calvin writes that the Queen cannot be Head of the
Church, so that if she would, she cannot establish the Liturgy, with the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England.


A. B. C. See how they are improved; first they refuse some Gestures and
Ornaments, next they mislike some passages in the Vid. Sand. de schis. Ang. l.
3. p. 116. Host. against Rein. 316.
Liturgy; and at last they throw away the Liturgy it self: and now they deny
the Queens Ecclesiastical authority whereby these things are established. So
that now the Axe is laid to the root of Tree, -- the very Papists being taught
by the Centuriaters and Calvin to deny the Queens Supremacy.


Court. What was the next appearance of this Party?


H Chapter One Mr. Gilpin a grave, pions, and reverend person, refuses the
Bishopric of Carlisle, as that party thought, to the great disparagement of
that Order.


Court. Mr. Gilpin, did you refuse that Bishopric out of any disaffection to
that Office?


Gilpin. No verily; but because I had so many Kindred about Carlisle, at whom I
must either connive at many things, not without hurt to my self, or else deny
them, not without offense to them; to avoid which difficulties I refused the
Bishopric, O. o. o. o.


Court. What was the next attempt of this Party?


H. H. Having declared that the Queen was not Head of the Church, they
undertake to reform it without her.


Court. How durst you meddle with the Church without order?


Nonconf. Idolatry is not to be permitted a minute; all that have power, have
right to destroy it for Gods glory; if Sovereigns forget, it is fit Subjects
should remember their duties.


Court. Do you know what you say? though you may reform private persons, and
families, and refrain to communicate in any outward act contrary to Gods Word;
yet public Reformation belongs to the Magistrate; and a good deed may by you
be ill done, for want of a calling to do it. --

Non licet populo renuente magistratu Reformationem moliri.


Court. What was the next practice of these men?


Fuller. They procured that the 20th. Article, viz. that the Church has power
to decree Rites and Ceremonies, etc. was Bp. I auds speech in Star-Chamb.
by the malicious cunning of that opposite faction left out of the Printed
Articles. p. p. p.


Court. But let us have further evidence concerning these men and their way.


Fuller. When the Reverend Bishops urged subscription to the Liturgy, the
Ceremonies, and Discipline of the Church, Mr. Fox appeared before Archbishop
Parker to subscribe, the old man produced the New Testament in Greek; To this
(says he) will I subscribe; and when a subscription to the Canons was
required, he refused, saying, I have nothing in the Church save a Prebend of
Salisbury, and much good may it do you if you will take it away from me.

Dr. Lawrence Humphry refuses subscription, saying, that they should never
have his hand, who had not his heart.

And one Gilby, more furious, declamed against Ceremonies, calling them the
known liveries of Antichrist, cursed patches of Popery and Idolatry, worse then
Lousy, etc. William Wittingham, and Christopher Goodman would say that they did
not fly from Popery in Queen Mary's days to embrace it under Queen Elizabeth.

The last is Thomas Sampson Dean of Christ church, who refused subscription.


Court. If any man teach otherwise, and consents not with heart and hand, to
the wholesome form of sound Words, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, but languisheth about questions
and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing, evil surmizes,
froward disputations of men of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth: q. q.
q. But did they content themselves in not subscribing?


L. B. G. No; for when the first race of peaceable Nonconformists were almost
all dead, then behold another more active and zealous succeedes them; as
Coleman, Button, Benson, Halingham, who inveighed against the established
Church Discipline, accounting every thing from Rome, which was not from Geneva.


Court. Did they stop here?


Cambd. No; for they began to defame the Queen who established Church
Discipline, endeavoring to bafle Ecclesiastical authority by overthrowing the
fountain of it. For this year 1567. three London Nonconformists, viz. Will.
White, Tho. Rowland, Rob. Hawkins, being cited before Grindal Bishop of London,
and asked this question, Have we not a godly Prince? speak, Is she evil? They
made their several Answers in this manner. 1. White. What a question is that,
the fruits do show. 2. Rowland. No, but the servants of God are persecuted
under her. 3. Hawkins. Why this question the Prophet answers in the Psalms,
How can they have understanding that work iniquity, spoiling my people, and
that extol vanity!



Court. I pray what followed?


Cambd. They are imprisoned by her Majesty until they made a Recantation. And
in the year 1572. an Act of Parliament requiring that subscription, which was
before sparingly pressed, and daringly denied; that every Minister should
subscribe before December. 20. 1562. the Nonconformists kept private meetings in
Woods and Fields, and private Houses.


Court. What Mr. Cartwright, are you turned Conventicler?


Cartw. That Name (which agrees to Anabaptists) is too light and contemptuous,
to set forth such assemblies, where Gods Word and Sacraments are administered,
even by your own confession.


Camb. O Mr. Cartwright, it is you that sent an admonition to the Parliament
concerning grievances with a remedy, viz. The admiting of a platform of
discipline by you prescribed.


Court. What is that! an admonition? that is the lowest of Ecclesiastical
Censures, and a preparative if neglected to suspension and excommunication;
what? If the Parliament comply not with your admonitions, they must be
suspended and excommunicated! you have brought things to a fair pass. We
entreat you Mr. Cambden, give in some further evidences concerning these
persons.


Cambd. When two admonitions made by Mr. Cartwright had been answered by Dr.
Whitgift, and defended again by Mr. Cartwright, and at last unanswerably
confuted by Dr. Whitgift; Mr. Cartwright either scorning, or not able, or not
daring to answer, attempts some other designs, and particularly at Wandsworth
in Surrey, they presuming upon Parliament favor, set up their Discipline
privately, which they could not establish publicly, with the assistance of Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Field Lecturer there, living in London, Wilcox, Standen,
Jackson, Bonham, Smith of Mieham, Serretloe, Cram of Roe-hampton, Edmonds,
Clark, Travers, Barber, Gardener, Cheston, Crook, Egerton; r. r. r. r. Under
whose wings a Congregation of Dutch Anabaptists assembled themselves without
All-gate in London, who being discovered, eight of them were banished, and two
not withstanding Mr. Fox and other Nonconformists intercession for them, were
burnt at Smithfield, by the Statute de Heretico comburendo.


Fuller. Yea, to countenance their way they pretended to dispossess several
persons of Devils until a trick was put upon them by one Rachel Pindor aged
12. years, who deceived the Ministers of London, from whom more prudence and
less credulity might have been expected; what prayer! what fasting! what
preaching! In a word these men grew so extravagant that Mr. Fox and others were
deserted by them as lukewarm, and remiss in the cause. And among these rigid
men, Coleman, Furton, Hallingham, and Benson, exceeded all of their own opinion.


L. B. E. Yea one of them Deering by name, was so bold as to tell Her Majesty
that in persecution under her Sister Mary, her Motto was Tanquam ovis, as a
sheep, but now it might be Tanquam indomita juvenea, as an untanred Heifer.


Court. Surely the Queen still retained much of her ancient Motto as a sheep,
in that she patiently endured so public (and causless) reproof, in inflicting
no punishment upon him, save as they say she commanded him to forbear preaching
at Court. s. s. s.


L. B. L. Upon these men's perverseness, others were encouraged, particularly
the Family of Love who appeared Ao. 1580. set up by one H. Nicholas Ao. 1550.
maintaining strange communion with God, and venting fantastical and
Allegorical interpretations of Scripture, and allowing themselves to continue
in sin, that Grace may abound: which the Privy Counsel endeavored to suppress
by an Abjuration.


L. B. C. To what purpose are they abjured who teach in higher Germany that God
has freed them from all Oaths, Vows, Promises, Covenants, Debts, and all
carnal Obligations?


A. B. L. What should be the reason of this looseness in this Kingdom?


P. H. The turbulent Party had under hand contrived that Edmund Grindal (a
person a little inclined to their way) should be promoted to the Sea of
Canterbury, who encouraged private Conventicles under the name of Prophecyings,
where all might speak one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted:
which if permited to take place, would occasion such Schism and faction should
prove the ruin of Church and Commonwealth.


Court. It is a strange thing to see how the vigilance and activity of these
men infinuated their Cause to the favor of the chief men in Church and State:
how with good words and fair speeches they deceived the hearts of the simple.


L. B. B. And now they had gotten an Archbishop that would wink at them; the
Nonconformists were not idle, but appointed a meeting at Cockefield (Mr.
Knewstubs care) in Suffolk, where threescore of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge
met together, to confer of the Common Prayer Book, what might be tolerated, and
what was necessary to be refused in every point of it, Apparel, Matter, Form,
Days, Fastings, Injunctions.


L. K. Yes, and they say they had another in Cambridge, finding so much favor
as amounted to a connivance at their Discipline.


A. Y. What was the reason of this Liberty?


Fuller. 1. The State was so intent upon the Jesuits, that the Nonconformists
escaped: 2. My Lord of Leicester in the Counsel, and my Lord of Canterbury in
the Church, were looked upon as Patron generals to Non-subscribers: For indeed
my Lord of Leicester (whether persuaded by the Lord North, or his own Policy I
know not) though publicly complying with other Lords of the Counsel, yet
privately engaged all his power and Interest for the Nonconformists.


L. C. T. Wherein did my Lord of Leicester make use of his Power for the
Nonconformists?


Fuller. 1. He preferred the Kentish Ministers Petition for liberty of
Conscience (in reference to the Liturgy, the Articles, and the Queens
Supremacy, to which they were called upon by my Lord of Canterbury to subscribe
and for further Reformation;) to the Lords of the Counsel; he made Mr. Beale an
able and eager Clerk of the Counsel their friend; yea he procured a Letter from
the Lords of the Counsel, viz. Burleigh, Sbrewsbery, Warwick, Nottingham,
Hatton, etc. to the Archbishop to suspend his severity against Nonconformists,
and to restore those that were outed to their Livings for Nonconformity; yea he
prevailed so far with Burleigh himself as to write to the Archbishop, that as
he would not have him so remiss, as to leave Ministers to their own liberty, so
neither would he have him so rigid as to press Conformity to the height: Omnia
licent, (says he) omnia non expediunt: he set Walsingham upon writing to the
Archbishop for several Nonconformists, intimating to him, that Moderation must
settle the Church.


Court. What effect did these great Intercessions produce?


P. H. They produced this effect, (that notwithstanding my Lord of Canterburies
resolution to stand to the Rules of the Church) the Nonconformists at several
meetings above said, decreed a new Platform, which they said consisted of
things that might well stand with the peace of the Church. Where they resolve
first, That Scholars should not offer themselves, but stay until they be
called to the Ministry in certain charge by the Classis upon the recommendation
of the Brethren. 2. None ought to conform any further then the Classis
allows him, and not at all to the Liturgy and Cannons now established. 3.
Churchwardens and Overseers should be turned to Elders and Deacons, etc. 4.
That there should be Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies; yea and
Comitial ones too.


Lem. What were they?


Fuller. That is meetings at the Commencements and Acts in Cambridge and
Oxford, conveniently shadowed by a confluence of Ministers and people coming to
those solemnities.


Court. To see how great a flame a little spark kindles; to see a party who
from an hand breadth is improved to a Cloud that overshadoweth the Heavens, the
higher power of this Nation! But did they stop at this?


Cambd. No; for one Brown of whom it was presaged at Cambridge by Dr. Still and
others, that he would disturb the Church, returning from Zealand to Warwick
with one Harrison a Pedant, inveighed against all authority; and set up the
Independent, or Congregational way, propagated by several Books until Coppen
and Thacker were hanged for it, the one on the 4. of June, the other on the 6.
of June 1583. at St. Ed. Burg.


Court. An wholesome severity that some should suffer, and all should fear! But
what became of Brown himself?


T. F. By the Cecils favor, who were his Kinsmen and his own compliance, he
lived at a Church, a good living in Northamptonshire, until the Year 1630. when
he dyed for an assault and battery in Prison at Northampton.


Court. Where was Authority all this while?


T. F. It disputed at Lambeth in two Conferences 1584. to no purpose, and then
pressed the Subscription of these three Articles; 1. That the Queen had supreme
Authority over all persons and Causes. 2. That there was nothing in the Common
Prayer contrary to Gods Word. 3. That the Book of Articles was agreeable to
that Word.



Court. Were they convinced by argument, or did they submit to Authority?


T. F. Neither; but (a Parliament being called 29. March 1585.) they set up
underhand a National Synod, who were better discovered by their moving then by
their meeting, whose practices were more conspicuous then their places; some
Agents for them were all day at the door of the Parliament House, and some part
of the night in the Chambers of Parliament men, effectually soliciting their
business with them.


Court. How did this their diligence appear?


P. H. In the effects of it, this Parliament was observed so extraordinarily
busy in Church Affairs, about approbation of Ministers, about Ecclesiastical
Courts, Bishops, etc. that the Archbishop Whitgift was feign to write to the
Queen to own her own Laws, Orders, and Authority; which she did, consenting to
no Material alteration.


Court. When this way failed them, what course took they?


T. T. They piece the Lions skin with the Foxes tail; and what they could not
do by Interest against the Archbishop, they attempt by compliance with him.


L. B. D. How I pray I


P. H. Why Mr. Cartwright by Leicesters Mediation gets in with the Archbishop,
and is so civilly used by him, that Leicester writes a Letter of thanks to the
Archbishop, with a promise that Cartwright shall be at his service.


L. B. O. But does the Archbishop trust him?


T. H. The wary Archbishop is not overfond of his friendship, but keeps him
at distance, and writes to Leicester, That he is at peace with him, but that he
cannot without further trial of him give him any License to preach.


Court. What does Travers do all this while?


P. H. He complains to his Patron the Lord Burleigh against the Liturgy.


L B. E. What answer does that wise Lord make him?


T. F. He demanded whether they desired the taking away thereof? They answered
no; but only the amendment of what was offensive therein: Then said he, Do you
make a better, such as you would have settled instead thereof.


Court. What did they?


F. F. They divided themselves into four Classes; The first whereof framed a
new Liturgy after the form of Geneva: The second altered it in 600.
particulars: The third resolved on another model: The fourth dissented from the
former: And so that wise Statesman put them off for the present until they
should agree.


Court. Then we may observe that it is not so much the Liturgy and Cannons that
trouble them as that they have no hand in composing them; now we may presume
that they are quiet.


F. F. No; for now they endeavor to overthrow the High Commission, and the
Oath ex Officio; the one they persuade the World is against the Law of Liberty,
none is bound to betray himself; the other against the Law of the Land, none
ought to be disseized of his Liberty or Estate without a trial by his Peers.


Court. This was very subtly done to bring in as many of their party as
either were molested in the High Commission Court, or troubled with the Oath ex
Officio -- who were the greatest part of the Kingdom: Although to avoid the
Odium of these things, Archbishop Whitgist brought the Nonconformists to the
Star Chamber a Court without dispute; and as the High Commission was her
Majesty's highest Court for Ecclesiastical Causes over which sue was Head; so
the Oath ex Officio is usually tendered in Chancery in matters not touching life
or Limb; and there was no man there tied to betray himself, but he that was
first betrayed by a common fame, from which he was to clear himself by his Oath
according to the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 21. 7. and the practice of Geneva its self in
Camparel and Baltasers case.

Would none of the Nonconformists when they were indicted for a fame of a
Conventicle or so, clear themselves by an Oath?


F. F. 1. Some of them would not take this Oath at all, but would say, If our
faults be unknown, why are we accused? if they are known, produce your evidence.

2. Some would take the Oath, but with a protestation that they would not
thereby accuse either themselves or their brethren.

3. Others would take the Oath to accuse those that were truly guilty to
remove evil from the Land, but not to accuse their brethren for those things
which are not faulty.

4. Others would take the Oath where there were no Witnesses to be had. Jo. 17.
21.


Court. When the Powers in being would not establish them, what pains they
take to weaken those powers that they might not oppose them! but when their
Arguments failed them against these Courts, did they sit down?


Cambd. No, but in the next Parliament they had such an influence upon the
Commons choice that they at their first sitting offered the Lords a Petition of
sixteen branches in favor of the Nonconformists.

1. That they might be free from the Cannonical Oath. 2. That they might not be
troubled for some things omitted in the Common Prayer. 3. That they might be
called before lay Officers. 4. That those that were suspended for
Non-subscribing, might be restored. 5. That they might not be troubled at the
High Commission but for high offenses. 6. That they might have in every
Arch-Deaconry common conferences among themselves. 7. That the high censure of
Excommunication might not be denounced for small matters, nor by laymen. 8.
Non-residency may be removed out of the Church. etc.


And other things against insufficient Ministers; in the discussing of these
particulars the House fell most fiercely against Non-residence.


Court. Truly Non-residence may be allowed in way of recovering of health by
changing of air, of study for a time in the University, of mortal enmity borne
by some of the Parish; of prosecution of law, or of being employed in public
affairs.


L. B. Truly I could allow Pluralities, as encouragements to learned men, so
they be in one Diocese.


L. H. It is fit her Majesty as Head of the Church should confer with the
Bishops about these matters.


T. F. Therefore the Bishops very prudently petition her Majesty to take the
case to her own hand, to whom it properly belongs, remonstrating the
inconveniences ensuing to the State present, future, to Cathedral Churches, to
Universities, to her Majesty, to Religion, in case Pluralities were taken away.


Court. Who was it that promoted this cause so far?


T. F. The Lord Gray seemed the most jealous, who wished the Bishops might be
turned out of Doors as in the case of praemunire in H. 8ths. time, because they
upheld abominable Non-residence, and Pluralities against their own consciences
and the good of the people.


Court. If the Lord had not been on my side, might the Church now say, if the
Lord had not been on my side, they had swallowed me up quick: for these were
but the pretenses under which the adversaries threatened the whole Church; for
take away encouragements, and you take away worth and Parts; take away Parts,
and you overthrow the Church: When this most hopeful enterprise that ever the
adversary undertook failed him, was he satisfied?


P. H. No, for having formerly (as they said) tried all serious and sober
means to reclame the Bishops, which hitherto proved ineffectual, they set up
Libelling in these Pamphlets, 1. The Epitome, 2. the Demonstrance of
Discipline, 3. the Supplication, 4. Diotrephes, 5. the Minerals, 6. Have you
any work for Coopers! 7. Martin Mar Prelate, sen. and jun. 8. More work for
Coopers. A new way whereby whom they could not in earnest make odious, in jest
they would make ridiculous for their garbs, gate, apparel, youth, defects and
infirmities; its strange how secretly these were Printed, how speediy
dispersed, how generally bought, how greedily read, yea and how firmly
believed, especially among the Common sort, to whom no better Music then to
see theie betters abused.


Court. Such Books are altogether unbecoming a pious Spirit, to print, or
publish, or with pleasure to peruse, which supposed true in matter and measure,
charity would rather conceal then discover; the best of men being so conscious
of their own badness, that they are more careful to wash their own faces, then
busy to durty other men's: An Archangel thought himself too good to bring, and
Satan not bad enough to have railing accusations brought against him: But what
was the Law asleep all this while?


C. N. The Law fined two Knights, Knightly, and Wigston for entertaining the
Press Gentlemen, and discovering the Press (which was first set up at Mously in
Surrey, and removed thence to Faushey in Northampton shire, then to Laton,
thence to Coventry, thence to Welstone in Warwick shire, thence to Manchester,
and there found by H. E. of Derby, in the Printing of more work for the
Cooper.) they found out Udal, Penry, Greenwood and Barrow, and Condemned them (
Penry for being the Author of Martin Mar Prelate, and Udal for being the
Author of Demonstration of Discipline) who were executed afterward to the
great terror of evil doers, and peace of the Kingdom.


Court. Poena ad unum, terror ad omnes.


L. B. C. L. O the sad condition of the Church, which like Rebeccab had Twins
of Discipline struggling within her, the Hierarchy, ancient and established; the
Presbytery newly founded by some Clergy men, favored by many of the Gentry,
and followed by more of the Common sort, who being prompted with that natural
principle, that the weakest must be the most watchful, what they wanted in
strength, they supplied in activity.


Court. I pray wherein were they active when all these courses failed them?


L. B. C. L. A Synod of Presbyterians of the Warwick shire Classis was called
at Coventry the tenth day of the fourth Month as they said, that is April,
where they resolved 1. private Baptism unlawful; 2. Homilies useless; 3. the
sign of the Cross dangerous; 4. not to Communicate with unlearned Ministers,
yet they may hear Laymen; 5. Bishops are unlawful; 6. That they have no power
of Ordination or jurisdiction; 7. That they will privately bring wise men to
the approbation of the holy Discipline, and afterward teach it publicly to
the people: These and other things necessary at all times were subscribed by
all the Classes in England, with humiliation for their former Conformity, as
Mr. Johnson witnessed against them when he revolted from them.


Court. What became of these men?


P. H. Cartwright was cited to the High Commission on the 1. of Sept. 1590. to
answer to these Articles against him, 1. that he had renounced his Orders; 2.
that he was ordained beyond Sea; 3. and there had settled a Presbyterian
Consistory, where he had presumed to ordain others that new way; 4. that they
had exercised their authority in admonition, suspension, etc. against the Laws
of this Realm; 5. that though he had promised not to oppose the Laws, yet he
did it in neglecting and opposing the orders of the Church, and inveighing
against the Governors, in public preaching and private conference; 6. that
when he should pray for Bishops, he used these words, Because that they who
ought to be Pillars in the Church do bend themselves against Christ, therefore
O Lord give us grace and power all as one man to set our selves against them:
and by his persuasions others did the like; 7. that he received the Sacrament
sometimes sitting, sometimes walking: 8. that since his suspension by the
Bishop of Worcester he had presumed to appeal from him and preach publicly;
and by his own authority to own a servant of his guilty of fornication, a form
of Penance in St. Mary's in Warwick; 9. that he presumed to ordain Fasts
contrary to the Church of England; 10. that he had nourished dissentions
between Her Majesty's Subjects, by distinguishing them into Godly and Profane;
11. that he concealed the Authors of some late Libells, and said in their
behalf, That they who would not amend by grave admonitions, should be further
dealt with to their reproach and shame; 12. That he had composed a Book called
Disciplina Ecclesiae sacrae verbo Dei descripta; allowed at several meetings in
Oxford, Cambridge, Warwick, etc. and practiced in several places, where Mr.
Cartwright was chief.


Court. What says Mr. Cartwright to these Articles?


Cartw. I think I am not bound to answer to them by the Laws of God.


Bishop Almer. You must then to the Fleet.


Cartw. Gods will be done.


L. B. C. What were the discourses that were abroad of these proceedings?


T. F. I pray hear Mr. VViggingtons words in a Letter to Mr. Porter of
Lancaster. Mr. Cartwright is in the Fleet for the refusal of the Oath (as I
hear) and Mr. Knewstubs is sent for, and sundry worthy Ministers are
disquieted; so that we look for some Bickering ere long, and then a Battle
which cannot long endure.


Court. And no wonder that they talked at this rate; for they had now by their
private Agents procured a Letter from King James to the Queen, Not to straiten
men for setting forth the Evangel in the simplicity of their Consciences. But
did they break out into any excesses and extravagancies?


P. H. Yes; for with these encouragements Hacket, Arthington, etc. were
animated to kill the Queen, the Privy Council, and to speak and do such strange
things that they were hanged, August the twelfth 1591.


Court. What was that Hacket?


A. B. He was so civil by nature that he bit and eat his Mistress Note when a
School boy; he was at first an informer against Recusants, and then by his
access to great men so busy, that he was the great patron of Nonconformity,
despising all Ministers; and though in their Company, yet saying Grace himself
always, and so in all Ministerial duties: so angry he was with the Queen that
once he stabbed her Picture, etc.


Court. Enough of him: Good Lord to see what a Schism will come to in time!
Nonconformity was now much improved, and many State businesses are by turbulent
spirits shufled into that cause; it were worth the while to have before us a
series of their meeting and actions in general.


Mr. Stone. To satisfy my own conscience, and for the peace of the Kingdom, I
shall inform your Honors what I know in this matter.


Court. Where did they meet?


Mr. Stone. 1. At London in Travers, Egertons, Gardiners, and Barbers House; 2.
in Cambridge at St. John's; 3. in Northampton at Mr. Johnsons and Snapes house;
4. at Kettering in Mr. Dammes and my House.


Court. When did they meet?


Stone. 1. Since the beginning of the last Parliament, of which they had great
hopes.


Court. Who met?


Stone. Cartwright, Travers, Egerton, Clark, Gardener, Brown, Barber,
Somerscales, Chatterton, Gyfford, Allen, Edmunds, Gellibrand, Culverwell,
Oxenbridge, Barbon, Flud, Snap, Johnson, Sibthorpe, Edwards, Spicer, Fleshwore,
Harrison, Littleton, Williamson, Rushbrook Baxter, King, Proudtome, Mastre,
Bradshaw, Dammes, Pallison, Oaks, Atkinson, and my Self, and several Scholars
of Oxford and Cambridge.


Court. This is ingenuously done of you Mr. Stone, and we look upon you as a
man in whom there is no guile.


Stone. I can do nothing against, but for the Truth; let Truth and Justice take
place, et ruet Mundus.


L. B. L. Thus one Link being slipped out, the whole chain was quickly broken
and scattered, this one discovery marred all their meetings, there being none
now that could trust, or be trusted.


Court. Yet they were not quiet, but being disappointed one way, they attempted
another; for one Travers (ordained beyond Sea, and of so great repute among
that party, that with Mr. Cartwright he was invited to be a professor at St.
Andrews upon Mr. Melvins motion) being settled at the Temple a Lecturer,
endeavored to gain the great Interest of the Law on his side, and there
opposed Mr. Hooker about predestination, the Church of Rome, etc. with a design
(as some think) to make parties there for other purposes, until he was
silenced by the Archbishop; 1. because he was not lawfully ordained; 2.
because he preached without License; 3. because he had disturbed the peace, and
that wholesome order of Her Majesty's, That no Opinions should be publicly
refuted, but that notice should be given to the Ordinary to hear and determine
such cases to prevent public disturbance.


L. B. C. It was that he looked for, that he might (as he did afterward in a
supplication to the Council) set his Patron Cecil and others to revive the Good
old Cause; which if opposed by others, (as he knew they would be) would be
Patrons to that Cause, if not for conscience, yet for their honor.


Court. He knew that if once great men be inveigled to appear, they will go
through with It.

What became of this Master Travers?


L. B. W. When he could not prevail in England, he went to try whither he
might reform Ireland, and to that purpose very cunningly got to be Priest of
Trinity College near Dublin, where he might have the advantage to instill his
Principles into the Youth of that Nation, and so secure to himself and Part, if
not this, yet the next Generation.


Court. Now it may be presumed that the Church of England had rest round about.


P. H. Not so; for these men finding that people were weary of small diffences,
about Cap, Surplice, etc. that they might have some just occasion to oppose the
Church, one Dr. Bound set up Judaisme, in a Book asserting that Christians are
bound to as strict an observation of the Sabbath as the Jews, by a precise
rest from all recreations, feasts, study, and whatsoever but praying, hearing,
reading, and holy conference; which Doctrine was very taking for its own
purity, and their piety that owned it.


Court. The cunning of these men, while the Bishops are providing for
Ecclesiastical authority against their Discipline, they leave that as not so
considerable among the vulgar, and set up extraordinary directions for the
Lords day; which while the Church opposed, it was looked upon as ungodly and
profane; and now it was that this party got the opinion of purity and holiness
among the people, which was no small advantage to their Cause; -- the piety of
the persons being a fair way to persuade the world of the truth of their
opinions; but how were these men maintained when they were suspended?


P. H. Mr. Cartwright had a Catalogue of sixteen hundred sixty three Patrons,
who allowed the least of them five pounds a year, toward the maintenance of
that way; and it is observed of him that he was very rich, and its known that
Mr. Travers left Zion College an excellent Library, with 60 l. worth of Plate.


Court. Some of them gained more by their private conferences, then by their
public preaching they could otherwise have expected.


CHAP. IV. King James Reign.
COurt. But now Queen Elizabeth was dead, these men thought they were sure of
King James, who was always bred under them, and frighted to their way in his
Mothers belly; what was their carriage upon that alteration?


Sand. One Mr. Pickering a Northamptonshire Gentleman, a favourer of that way,
rid post with the news of Queen Elizabeth's death to King James; and no doubt
took his occasion to urge something in favor of the Nonconformists, but how
far, and with what answer he moved the King, is uncertain: But Dr. Tho. Nevill
Dean of Canterbury sent by Whitgist, brought back a welcome answer of his
Majesty's purpose, to uphold and maintain the Government of the late Queen as
she left it settled.


Court. King James foresaw the dismal things the World was to look for from
those men; as appears by his (...): He knew that a Presbytery as well agrees
with Monarchy as God and the Devil; they are his own words; He knew no Bishop
no King.


L. B. C. Yet Mr. Cartwright dedicates his Comment on Ecclesiastes to King
James; and the Presbyterians prepared a Petition before hand against the
Parliament sat, managed by Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Egerton, which though called the
millenary Petition, yet with seven hundred and fifty two Preachers hands was it
presented to the King and Parliament.


Court. How did the King like this canvasing for hands?


L. B. E. His Majesty foreseeing that they were likely to trouble him and the
next Parliament, granted them a Conference at Hampton Court; where Dr.
Reynolds, Sparks, and Mr. Knewstubs, and Chadderton appeared on the one hand;
Bishops, Bancrost, Matthew, Bilson, Babington, Rudd, Watson, Robinson and Dove;
Dr. Andrews, Overall, Borlow and Bridges, Field and King appeared.


Court. What did they desire?


Dr. R. 1. That the Doctrine of the Church of England should be kept pure: (for
now to make us more odious, they quarelled with our Doctrine.)

2. That good Pastors might be planted in all Churches to teach the same.

3. That Church Government might be sincerely ministered according to Gods Word.

4. That the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted to more increase of Piety.


Court. What would they have altered in the Doctrine?


A. They would have predestination and perseverance more clearly held forth.


Court. By all means; and the Church must be now looked upon as unsound in
Doctrine, as it was before corrupt in Discipline; yea the nine Lambeth Articles
and all the controversies about them must be inserted in our confessions of
Faith: as King James sa'd of one Craiges in Scotland, I renounce and abhor,
till his multiplied Renunciations so amazed the people that they fell back to
Popery. They urged other things about Ordination, Priests intention,
Catechism, etc. but that was only to color over the maine design.


Court. What did they more besides?


A. 1. They moved a reformation of Sabbath profanations.


Court. Still they would be the only men that took care of purity and holiness.


A. 2. They moved a new Translation of the Bible.


Court. Good, good! thereby they might persuade the people that they had not
the true word of God.


A. 3. They prayed the suppression of seditious Books.


Court. Better and better! they had never writ any seditious Books I Will
warrant you. What did they intend by good Pastors?


A. Such as would neither read Prayers, nor Homilies, but make Religion nothing
but Preaching.


Court. What were their exceptions against Common Prayer?


A. They excepted against the harmeless Surplice, the ancient sign of the
Cross, With my Body I thee Worship.
some words in the Matrimony, against Ecclesiastical Censures by
Lay-Chancellors.


Court. What did they desire in Church Government?


A. That there should be a meeting of Ministers every three weeks in royal
Deaneries, who should reform things in their Deaneries.


Court. What was the issue of this Conference?


A. That they should all conform, or avoid the Land; whereupon the
Nonconformists there submitted.


Court. The King observed that their exceptions were frivilous and such as
argued more peevishness then conscience, and that they did not so much dislike
affairs as they disliked that they had not the ordering of them: Were they now
satisfied?


P. H. No, but they agreed thus, viz We whose Names are under written are
agreed to make our humble Petition to the Kings Majesty, that the present state
of the Church may be reformed in all things needful, according to the rule of
Gods holy Word, and agreeable to the example of other reformed Churches, etc.
Which Petition they subscribed thus, Your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the
Ministers of the Gospel, that desire not a disorderly innovation, but a due and
Godly Reformation.


Court. What would they have in that Petition?


A. They desired that Cross, Surplice, Confirmation, Church-Musick, Kneeling
and bowing might be removed; 2. that Baptism should not be administered by
Women; 3. that the Communion be administered not without examination and a
Sermon; 4. that the Service should not be so long; 5. Sunday to be strictly
observed, and the Holidayes not so; 6. the word Priest and absolution, etc.
changed; 7. Canonical Scripture only read; 8. an Uniformity of Doctrine
prescribed.

2. They desired that Pluralities and Nonresidence might be provided against;
and that ministers be not urged to subscribe but according to Law; and that all
ministers should Preach.

3. Some reformation of Ecclesiastical Officers, their Fees, etc.

These things they urged, saying to King James, Who knows not, whether you are
come to the Kingdom for such a thing as this? --


Court. This Petition (they say) was favored by some Scotch grandees, who
would be considerable by being the head of a faction.


H. H. Yes, it was so cried up that the Family of Love likewise presumed to
Petition for themselves, that they might have a toleration and liberty of
Conscience: and another party presented a Petition to the House of Commons
assembled in Parliament.


H. W. Yea, and the High Commission proceeded against them; they began to
entereain several Lawyers to dispute points of Law in their behalf; so that
most part of the Kings ministers, Courtiers, Lawyers, etc. were engaged in the
promoting of that way.


Court. Had they no design to carry on by the new Translation of the Bible?


A. Yes, for they endeavored to have the Geneva Notes inserted in the margin;
and so the Bishops Bible might have a Presbyterian Comment.


Court. What did these men more in King Janes his Reign?


A. They did endeavor by strictness and severity in their conversation in
keeping Sabbath, etc. to gain the love of the people, when they could not
gain the Countenance of the King; and therefore they oppose the Kings
Declaration for Sports on the Lords days; one Thrask especially appearing
violent that way.


S. H. Yea, and as they were in great esteem for their strictness, so they
would be for their industry: they being the only men that opposed the Kings
Declaration, 1623. for Catechizing in the afternoon instead of Preaching.


Court. What said they against this Declaration?


A. They said first, Christ sent Ministers to Preach, and they should not
forbid them; 2. Souls should not be starved; 3. They that were Licensed to
preach, might choose their Text, and not be restrained to the Lords Prayer, the
Creed, the ten Commandments, etc. 4. why should not men teach Predestination
which the Scripture has taught? 5. Why should Lecturers be discouraged,
whereas the power of Godliness flourished most in those places where these
Lecturers were?


Court. Alas, alas! these Lecturers laid the strongest foundation for
Nonconformity: Catechizing in the Afternoon edifyeth more in the principles of
the Doctrine of Christ then both Sermons: and for Predestination it is a point
too high for most people to hear, and for most Preachers to teach: -- But this
King kept them under well enough.

How came they to prevail in King Charles time?


CHAP. V. King Charles the Firsts Reign.
A. IN King Charles his time they observed first a faction at Court, and they
found some men willing to head them, Bishop williams, etc.
that they might balance other persons who were head of the Protestant party.

2. They observed the Kings necessities which a Parliament must supply, and
they knew the Parliament would be for their turn.

3. They observed a difference between the Clergy and others about
Arminianisme, in opposition to which many joined with them; yea so considerable
they were that it was observed that Doctor Preston rode with King Charles and
the Duke of Buckingham in a Coach from Theobalds to London, the Coach being
shutdown, the day King James died.


Court. How got they in with the Parliament?


A. The Gentry were so weary of the High Commission and Star Chamber, and other
severe Courts, that they would join with any body that would help to pull them
down; besides that there were several persons of great parts discontented for
want of preserment, as J. H. D. H. A. H. W. S. T. W. -- whose busy spirits
kept under by King James, were now more active in the indulgent time of King
Charles.


Court. Do they set these men immediately upon establishing their way?


F. F. No; they stir them up against Arminianisme in Mr. Mountagues Books and
others; knowing that Mr. Mountague would have friends in Court, and that these
would oppose the Gentlemen in Parliament, who enraged there with, would close
with this party more firmly, and do any thing to spoil their enemies at Court.


Court. Was it for Arminianisme that Mr. Mountagues Book called Appello
Caesarem was so much opposed?


A. No, it was for some smart truths concerning that party, which they were not
willing to hear of.


Court. What did wisemen judge of that stir the Commons kept with Mr.
Mountagues Book?


A. My Lord of Canterbury has entered it in his Diary thus, 'I seem to see a
cloud arising, and threatening the Church of England; God for his mercy
dissipate it.


Court. What was the Danger?


A. It was this, That the Nonconformists under pretense of suppressing
Arminianisme, were able to be revenged of Master Mountague for some tart
expressions against them, notwithstanding his Majesty's protection of his own
Chaplain, so that the King was feign to leave him to himself, and to stand or
fall (as he told the Duke of Buckingham, who sounded him to that purpose)
according to the justice of his Cause.


C. How went they on?


P. H. As the great Champions of truth forsooth they procure two conferences at
Yorkehouse before the Duke of Buckingham by the mediation of R. E. of Warwick,
between Dr. Buckridge, Dr. White, Mr. Mountague, on the one hand; and Bishop
Morton and Dr. Preston on the other; where their design was to divide the
Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, and get as many as they could on their side
against Arminianisme, until they had got such a party as might be able to carry
all before them; for they knew that those learned Gentlemen, and Ministers who
were of their mind in some points, would, being provoked by their adversaries,
be of their mind in all. --


C. But do they stay here?


L. No; but being intent upon their Design, and knowing that the King was well
settled and resolved against all Innovations, they intend to weaken his power,
and to that purpose they retrenched his Prerogative by many Laws and Statutes;
and questioned Dr. Manwaring for preaching up his Prerogative, being resolved
to put all power in the Parliaments hands, who were too well affected to their
way.


F. Yea, they were so bold as to employ two persons, Humphreys and Jones to
hinder Bishop Mountagues Confirmation by alleging against him some frivolous
exceptions, so much did they prevail now they had joined themselves to the
discontented, the Antiarminian, etc.


S. But while the wisemen of this party were driving on their design covertly,
and politickly, one Leighton was to break the Ice, and feel the pulse of the
times, and to that purpose he sets out a Book called Zions Plea, railing
against the Queen as Idolatrous, and exhorting men to kill the Bishops, and to
smite them under the fifth rib.


C. Was he suffered?


A. No; when his party saw that he was not suffered, they let him shift for
himself, and they go on in a more prudent method.


Court. How!


F. That they might engage the Clergy to themselves, they set up a Committee
for buying in impropriations; viz. Dr. Gouge, Sibbs, Mr. Offspring, Davenport,
etc. who were to buy so many Livings to be bestowed on the Favorers of the new
way; whereby of nine thousand Ministers, three thousand and nine hundred might
be sure to their side, beside those presented by the many Patrons that were
devoted to their party.


Court. Here they took care to prefer their friends; how did they bring men up
still in their way; notwithstanding the discouragement of public authority?


P. H. When they had preferment they were sure to have friends; yet they had
persons of their way in both Universities, very vigilant for their Interest, as
appeared in Oxford, where one Thorn of Baliol, and Ford of Magdalen Hall broke
out into bitter invectives in their Sermons on this Text, Numb. 14. 4. Let us
make us a Captain, and let us return into Egypt. 1 King. 13. 2. And be cried
against the Altar in the word of the Lord; and said, O Altar, Altar.


Court. It was a notable way to buy out impropriations to set up Lecturers,
knowing that they who hold the helm of the Pulpit in England, always steer
peoples hearts whether they please, whereby they might have more Chaplains
depending upon them then either King or Bishops; but the great plot lay in
securing the Universities, where if young men were tainted with their way, they
would not depart from it when they were old: But did any Countenance these
persons?


A. Yes, the Proctors and Dr. Prideaux, with Dr. Wilkinson, until the King
appeared against them at Woodstock.


Court. Now the King interposed his authority, we may presume this faction was
quite dashed.


E. G. By no means; for the expelling of these Preaches expelled not, but
increased the differences in Oxford, which burnt the more for blazing the less.


Court. How came Dr. Prideaux to favor such persons?


A. H. His love to the Predestinarian way which these men promoted in an high
degree; this was these men's policy to join with some eminent men in some
opinions that they might have their favor and assistance in other things.


Court. What was their next project?


A. W. They set up the Sbabatarian controversies again by one Bradbourne, which
if the Church allowed of, she went against her own judgment; if she
disallowed, she was looked upon as an enemy of Godliness, and a friend to all
profaneness, yea so high did they raise these controversies, that they made a
difference between the Judges and the Bishops, the one allowing a liberty on
the Lords day, the other punishing it. And when the Church declared her
judgment moderately, they procured underhand many reproaches and hard speeches
to be cast upon her, as if she intended to destroy that Godliness which she
taught, and to undermine that Religion she professed.


Court. Not a word all this while of their Discipline?


A. No; for they resolved upon other ways of undermining the Church of
England, and upon her fall they would raise themselves; -- but some hotheaded
persons, as Bastwicke, Burton, and others break out to some excesses, for which
they are severely punished.


Court. What is the reason that they are so fierce now?


F. M. Upon Bishop Abbots death who was over-indulgent to them, the Archbishop
pressed conformity very severely, whereupon they who hid themselves under other
pretenses, discovered themselves against Altars, kneeling at the Sacrament,
holiness of Churches, etc.


L. C. M. Let me tell you that there was one accident happened that helped this
party very much.


Court. What was that?


L. C. M. The Bishop of Lincolnes discontent, who said that all flesh in
England had corrupted their ways, and maintained many private correspondencies
dangerous to Church and State.


L. C. N. The design of these men growing now ripe, as they had by Lectures and
private conferences debauched many here, so they go abroad for aid to the
brethren of Scotland, who are at their Devotion, and ready upon their call to
disturb the peace of England.


Court. How durst Scotland stir?


J. C. The people in England having kept the King bare, put him upon some
displeasing courses to furnish himself, and maintain the peace of the
Kingdom; who should oppose this his Majesty's course but the Puritans, who
thereby became the Patrons of their Country, and were sure to be chosen to the
next Parliament, where they might join with their brethren the Scots, who if
they made a War, were assured that the King should not be able to resist them;
for they being sure to be chosen in Parliament, let them know that they would
not assist the King against them.


Court. When they got at last to be the prevailing party in Parliament, what
did they?


A. They called to an acount all persons who had pressed strict Conformity, and
countenanced those that refused it (witness Dr. Cozens, and Smart,) Bastwicke
and Burton who came triumphantly to London, and were ordered reparations for
their services, and sufferings.


Court. How did they proceed?


A. They settled a Commitee for Religion, who appointed a Subcommittee to
prepare matters for their Cognizance; where was,

CONFORMISTS.

Bishop Williams, Doctor Hacket, Bishop Usher, Doctor Holdsworth, Bishop
Morton, Bishop Hall, Doctor Prideaux, Doctor Ward, Doctor Browning, Doctor
Featly.

NONCONFORMISTS.

Doctor Burgess, Mr. White, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Caryl, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Hill, Mr.
Newcomen, Doctor Twisse.


C. But this meeting was only a pretense, while the House carried on higher
designs against Deans and Chapters, root and branch, for whom Doctor Hacket
made a Speech in the behalf of the Church; against whom Dr. Burgess made a
speech in behalf of the faction.


L. C. N. Yes; and they began to pull down the Bishops, step by step: First,
From the Lords House: 2. From all civil power: and then they pull down those
Courts that kept them in Order all this while, viz. the Star Chamber, and the
High commission.


N. O. I observed that the poor Bishops went down first in their reputation and
esteem, they not suffering them to be called right honorable, nor to have
precedence. --


N. M. And to make sure work, the Rabble were stirred up against them, to the
danger of their lives, and strange Petitions procured, in so much that the poor
men were in a straight; to keep the House was dangerous; to leave it at this
time was unworthy.


C. What did they do?


N. They were trepanned by Bishop Williams to a Remonstrance, for which they
were all committed to the Tower, and Impeached of High Treason; and now the
Bishops were safe in the Tower, the Bill against them passed the House, and
they were for ever excluded the House.


C. Now the King could not help the Church, the Bishops were secured, the
severe Courts against the Factions were down, how did the people appear?


N. Q. Their restraint being removed, they broke out to an excess of Riot, in
Petitioning, Preaching, Railing, a Company of Fanatics in Southwark crying
that the Law of Uniformity was the Law of Bishops, and so to be repealed; the
Citizens crying to your Tents, O Israel.


Court. Having now almost destroyed the Church Government, Discipline and
Worship, what do they not endeavor to set up their own way?


N. H. Yes, by all means: but by degrees that the Kingdom might not perceive
it, but think they were easing it all this while.


C. How did they contrive to set up their new Government?


N. H. They called an Assembly of that way, (...). Gouge, Mr. Calamy, Mr.
Caryl, Dr. Spurslaw, Tho. Goodwyn, Phil. Nie, etc. who proposed to the
Parliament the new Church Government and Directory; who thereupon abolished the
ancient Church Government, Worship and Discipline: and took a Solemn Oath as
they of Scotland had done before, every one in his place, to stand by this new
way, which Oath they Imposed upon the Kingdom.


C. What, do they Impose any thing?


K. C. O yes! there are none more severe in Imposing upon others, than those
that would have liberty themselves.


Court. Where was the King all this while?


L. B. N. Being not able to reach the Church but through him, they having made
him as odious as they could to the people, by ripping up all the faults of
Government in a remonstrance, and having frighted him away with the fury of the
incensed multitude that were in open War with him, that the World may see that
there are no Innovators in the Church but such as are Traitors to the State.


Court. It was very strange the whole House of Commons should go along with
them in these enormities!


N. H. The honest Gentlemen could not help it, for they were overawed by the
rude rabble, who came to the House in whole multitudes with Petitions,
remonstrances, grievances, about Religion, Liberties, and rights, to which was
added all that prevails with men of force, or flattery, of craft or terror.


Court. Now Ireland was all in a Rebellion; Scotland was up in Arms; and they
in England practiced: they after some Treaties with the King, and Disputations
with his Divines, alter Church Government, and settle that Discipline which
they had contended for these 120. years.


L. B C. When it was established, did the people submit to it?


N. H. No, for they looked upon it as a yoke which neither they nor their
fathers could bear.


Court. How did they propagate it?


H. J. They sequestered all the Orthodox Clergy, and settled in their places such
men as were ready to advance their new project; th(...) who complained so much
when a dozen Ministers were (...), made nothing to silence five or six hundred
at a time.


L. H. Yet for all this the new Government was not owned; for there arose other
factions innumerable, who though they differed among themselves, yet agreed in
this, viz. that they would have no Government, but that every one according to
his own conscience might do what was good in his own eyes; as the Presbyterians
cried formerly, so the Independents cried now, that Christians should have
liberty of Conscience to do according to the best light afforded them.


Court. It pleased God to let them set up what they so long looked for; that
the World might see what they are, and what is their way, and what is the
dreadful consequence of that way when it does prevail; their pretenses before
they had the Government in their own hands, were such as rendered them very
amiable, and made them the darling of the people; their practices when they had
it, made them the most odious of Mankind.


L. B. C. The people would never believe their mischief until they saw their
practice; and providence let them take a turn upon our stage, to see how they
would behave themselves, until they went off Odium humani generis.


L. H. When they had suppressed the Orthodox Clergy, alienated their
maintenance, overcome their Friends, and put him to death who they knew must
otherwise avenge on them these abominations; (for these people had the face too
before the world to lay violent hands upon the Lords Anointed;) they made an
Act wherein it was not lawful for an Orthodox man by any means to exercise his
Ministry, being made incapable either of performing the duty, or of enjoining
the maintenance of a Minister, either as Chaplain, Tutor, Schoolmaster, Curate,
Vicar, or Pastor.


L. H. This cut off all the Orthodox men that were already, root and branch;
but what care did they take of the next Generation?


A. C They furnished the Universities with active men that might instill their
Principles into all the Youth; yet lest some honest men as D. H. Dr. S. Dr. G.
and others should take care for the succession of true Ministers by encouraging
some youth to embrace the ancient Catholic and Apostolic way, they set up a
company of Triers, as Manton, Caryl, Nie, etc. at Church door as it were, who
were to take care that every man should be true to their faction, before he
were admitted to any place bestowed upon him.


L. O. Yea, and least any man that was approved by the Triers, should
afterward embrace any of the ancient Rites and orders of the Church of
England, they set up in the several Counties Commitees of Ejection, who upon
the first discovery of an Orthodox man had power to render him incapable of any
livelihood in the Church.


L. W. And that they might be sure of the following age, they set up new
Ordinations, and new associations of Ministers.


L. I. Yea, and rather then fail, if they had not the Clergy to serve their
turn, they were resolved to take away Tithes, and all the settled maintenance of
Ministers, and to let into the Church all persons whatsoever that were well
affected to themselves and the good Old Cause; in so much that we were like to
be all Teachers and no Hearers: yea in a word they intended to destroy all Law,
Order, Civility, Learning, and pure Religion before God, and undefiled; they
denied the being of the Church, and so began to set up a new Church; but that
God who seteth in Heaven laughed at their devices, and brought their Counsel to
naught.


CHAP. VI. King Charles the Seconds Reign.
COurt. When a miracle restored the Church, and a wonder defeated these
prosperous Parties to their own and the worlds amazement, we presume that they
acquiesced in it, and thought, this is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in
our sight; stand off from these designs lest we be found fighters against God.


R. L. Especially when besides a providence that might awe these men, there
came along with his Majesty so much Clemency, mercy, and goodness, as made him
ready to condescend as far as reason, honor, 'or conscience would give him
leave, and content to yield them all that seemed to advance true piety; he
only desiring to continue what was necessary in point of order, maintenance,
and authority to the Church Government, and what he was persuaded was agreeable
to the true Principles of Government, raised to its full stature and
perfection, as also to the Primitive and Apostolical pattern, and the practice
of the universal Church conform thereto; nor were the remaining differences so
essential to the peoples happiness, or of such consequence as in the least to
have hindered the Subjects security or prosperity; for the best enjoyed both
many years before those demands were made.


Court. But the violence of these men was not so allayed.


R. L. No, as soon as ever the King set foot on English ground, Smectymnuus was
Reprinted, the Covenant maintained, the Kings engagement in Scotland was
urged, and many more pestilent Papers, whose common business was by affronting
the Law, and slattering the rabble to cast all back into a confusion; a
multitude of persons are dissatisfied, to whom his Majesty must either yield,
or endanger himself and three Kingdoms: whereby they extorted from his Majesty
an Interim or a Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical assaires, which allowed
them their own liberty, until his Majesty could with the advice of his Divines
take further order.


Court. Where they herewith satisfied?


L. R. No, for I do not well remember, where ever that party was ever satisfied
with less then all; allow these people their askings in what concerns their
Discipline, will they rest quiet there, without further hankering after the
Legislative power, the Milita, or some such thing.?


C. How did they proceed?


R. L. They endeavored to settle that temporary indulgence for ever in
Parliament; and when that would not do, they endeavor to confirm the people
in what they had taught them formerly; and urged his Majesty to a Conference,
which he granted them at the Savoy, between Mr. Baxter, Dr. Seaman, Mr. Calamy,
Bishop Reynolds, Dr. Jacomb, Dr. Manton, Dr. Conant, Dr. Spurstow, and Dr.
Gunning, Dr. Pearson, Dr. Pierce, etc.


C. What was the success of that Conference?


R. L. The same with all others of that nature, whence both parties go away as
firm in their several Opinions as they came; it was not very likely that a day
or two's conference should persuade them out of that way, out of which the last
hundred years law, power, and reason could not force them.


C. It Is strange to see a few people endeavoring to impose upon a whole
Nation! it is strange that a novel and vulgar imagination should bear down an
Apostolical institution; that a private opinion should consist with a public
and solemn sanction.


R. L. Yet what these men could not do by argument, they endeavor by policy;
using all means to secure to themselves the next Parliament, by the most
notorious canvasing that was seen this twenty years; elections being carried
with much partiality and popular heats in most places by the last endeavor of
a gasping faction.


C. It is well they kept themselves within the compass of private policy and
design.


R. L. Not so; for at first all the lesser factions were hid in Presbytery,
till time and military success discovering to every one his own advantage,
invited them to part into several parties, as Independents, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy men, who all before the King came drove on their
several designs; but were united since as against a common enemy.


C. Then these factions grew to the same excess with them in Germany, who were
at first an harmless people, but at last made havoc of all Order, Law, peace,
Religion, etc. and whatsoever is sacred among Mankind: But what did they
attempt?


R. L. They contrived a design so comprehensive as might take in the whole
stream and strength of discontent and faction in the Nation, a design for
liberty of Conscience in Religion, for ease of all payments, as Taxes, Tithes,
etc. in estate, for recovery of King and Bishops Lands to the thousands that
bought them; of selling all in common to all the poor people that in quiet
times could not live.


C. O their cunning! they knew that they were inconsiderable, until
discontents drove men into sidings; as ill humors fall to the disaffected
part, so all who affected any novelties, or complained of any grievances,
adhere to that way as the most remarkable and specious note of difference in
point of Religion: But did they break out into any violence?


R. L. Yes, they set up a desperate party to break the Ice, as Venner, etc.
according to whose success the rest were ready to fall in and improve the
design, to the ruin of Church and State.


C. When this failed, what course did they take?


R. L. They scribled as Crofton; they petitioned and engaged the Grandees, etc.
and left no stone unturned, until the Parliament closed up all disputes by
several wholesome Acts for the security of the Kings person and Government; for
suppressing of all Pamphlets, and unlearned writings; for prevention of all
tumultuous Petitions; and for submission to the present Government, requiring
them to declare their Covenant illegal and unjust; their War against the
King-rebellious; and that the Discipline, Ceremonies, Worship which they had so
long opposed, was according to the Word of God.


C. What did they after the enacting of these wholesome Laws?


R. L. Many of them endeavored by the mediation of potent friends to have the
execution of them suspended, until his Majesty and Council satisfied them;
there was no suspending of Laws so much conducing to the peace and welfare of
the Nation.


C. Yet it was observed that they were so confident of success in this attempt,
that they writ to several not to subscribe, for his Majesty would allow an
Indulgence: What other ways might they use?


L. 1. They offer his Majesty 500000 l. (a temptation to his necessities like
that of the Devils to our Savior when hungry, and taking of the stones of the
Church for bread) to confirm the sale of Bishops Lands with the Deanes and
Chapters for 99. years, reserving the old Rents to the Church; Which, the noble
Prince to his eternal memory be it recorded, refused with scorn and disdain,
suitable to his Fathers piety, who said he had rather live upon the Alms of
the Church as some of his Predecessors Kings of England had done, then put the
Church to depend upon the charity of the people.


C. Alas! who could be so bold as to offer his Majesty a motion to sacrilege!


F. L. Even Dr. Burgess who had written that Sacrilege was no sin, in a Book
and case he writ for the sale of Church Lands, whereof the good man had to his
own share no less then seven hundred pound a year.


C. Well! his Sacred Majesty did graciously appoint a way to satisfy all
parties in point of Interest; But what do they do in point of Conscience?


F. L. They make the best friends that could be made with words or money; ever
andanon you should have a Lord drop into their Church at Aldermanbury,
Walbrook, etc. a great encouragement no doubt; and you would meet half a douzen
or half a score of the reverend Pastors walking at Court, as demurely as I
have seen so many spirits walking before my Lord Majors Banqueting house, and
to the same purpose of haunting too: here is first offered an advantage to be
head of a party to any that is ambitious; 2. Here is money for any that is
covetous; 3. Here is the good old cause to move the well affected.


C. What is their success?


J. B. Having very large promises they go home and republish the old Principles
to the number of 3000. Copies, to keep up the spirit of Reformation; they write
for the necessity of it, they plead for the Ministers that were in
sequestrations; they cry up directly or indirectly, the obligation of the
Covenant, some by writing as Mr. Crofton, and others by hinting; scarce any
Sermon being preached without an use of perseverance to be steadfast and
unmovable, as Mr. V. concluded with his beloved Congregation.


C. Was there any more done?


I. B. Yes, there was a book much applauded that was gathered out of the Papers
of a studious man that was formerly Minister in Bedfordshire, they say since
his death, by a young man with others assistance, that little understood the
compass or merit of that controversy, to prove that there is no Church
Government of divine right, the wary Sirs being contented the cried up divine
right of Presbytery should be waved a while, that the same right of Episcopacy
be suppressed altogether; rather then the legal government should be
established, they will wave the settlement of their own.


C. He was a bold fellow that would publish any thing of his own, or of other
men's, to dispute that which the Church by Bishop Hall so clearly asserted,
which its Books so punctually pressed, which his late Majesty so excellently
disputed, and he with his eminent Divines at the Isle of Wight so irrefragably
proved: But what did he that writ, or he that set out that Book mean? did they
resolve to make good what Mr. Hooker said that when we had disputed on both
sides our selves a weary, a third party would come in, and with our mutual
arguments against, and concessions to each other, overthrow us both, -- or did
they intend to remove all Religion from its basis of divine right, and six it
as Mr. Hobbes does, upon humane Constitution? for although this Book instanceth
only in Church Government, yet the arguments (to those that graspe and
understand them, which I fear the publishers did not,) would reach any point of
Religion whatsoever, and would make up the strangest piece of Adiaphorisme that
ever was in the World, since the interim of Germany, -- but they stick here.


J. B. No, no, this was only to trouble the waters, and keep men irresolved as
to the public constitutions; while they confirmed the brethren in their
private opinions, -- and are un Bishoping Timothy and Titus, bidding men beware
of Diotrepheses, and those that Lorded it over Gods heritage, insinuating, they
desired not rooos, a year, Lordships, Baronies, etc. but the liberty of their
Ministry; and what was the issue of all this? they extorted from the Government
an Indulgence in order to a mutual coalition, good understanding and peace.


C. What use did they make of that?


J. B. When it was expected they should have complied with his Majesty's
incomparable design of charity, they go home and preach against the coming in
of Popery; against Covenant breaking; against the profaneness that was breaking
in upon us; and they put out and discuss in Print these Queries about the
interest of England: 1. Whether the Presbyterian party should in justice or
reason be rejected and depressed, or protected and encouraged, since they
forsooth brought the King in? 2. Whether the Presbyterian party may be
protected and encouraged, and the Episcopal not deserted nor disobliged? 3.
Whether the upholding of both parties by a just and equal accommodation be not
in its self more desirable, and more agreeable to the state of England then
the absolute exalting of the one party, or the total subversion of the other?
Bold questions you will say, being indeed no other then thus much, viz. Whether
the particular and private humors of a discontented party is as considerable
as the public and general constitution of a well settled state.


C. This is downright; -- but is this all?


J. B. Not so neither; for we have our slanting and back-strokes that are more
effectual; as to pass by many others, they preach and write for serious
holiness as they call it, as if it were now leaving the Land; now or never they
cry, a Saint or a Brute, in the preface or conclusions whereof they had their
dogged insinuations, that the Church was an enemy to holiness, and the
Professors of it, when it discourageth nothing but hypocrisy; and when the men
of the nose smell out that, out-comes a Book of hypocrisy preached at the
Abbey at Westminster, (for the brethren have the thriving way of selling their
Sermons first from the Pulpit, and then from the Press,) wherein the Cavaliers
who had been formerly the profane, were now the Hypocrites; But he that made
all sure, is the man that writes the sighs and groans of the Church, that party
paleman, that speaks high Fullam in the beginning of the Book, and
Colemanstreet in the end of it; this maus Masters stabbed the King with his own
power, and he (a good proficient I Will warrant him) the Church with her own
weapons: But above all the Legerdemaines of this party commend me to their
Sermons of persecution, and their preparation of people for it; as if the
Common Prayer had been as dreadful as a Faggot; to wear a Surplice as to wear
Irons; to exchange a benefice of an 100 l. a year for a collection of 200 l.
had been a martyrdom; and to visit the Capon eaters, and the sop Ladies, were
a misery that should complete Mr. Fox his volumn: -- Lord, what a work is here!
forsooth a few factious fellows that had gone too far in the late Rebellion,
dare not recant, yea, rather then they will recant, they will leave their
flocks, their dear flocks for which they would die, but cannot be honest for
their sakes.


C. But did not his Majesty order a Conference between both parties?


F. D. He did indeed between Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Conant, Dr. Spurstow, Mr.
Calamy, Mr. Baxter, Dr. Manton, Dr. Jacomb, Dr. Bates, Mr. Newcomen, Dr.
Seaman, etc. and Dr. Heylin, Dr. Gunning, Dr. Pearson, Dr. Pierce, Dr. Sparrow,
etc. but what was the issue? the sober party came off and would have acquiesced
in his Majesty's gracious concessions upon those exceptions they made to the
Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church: But a more fiery party (for all the
faction was then in Town) flew so high as to say, That an indifferent thing if
commanded, was no more indifferent but unlawful.


C. Sure such a position could not come out of their mouths!


F. D. Indeed it is strange it should; but it is attested by Dr. Gunning, and
Dr. Pearson, who had the chief management of that affair.


C. But would they do nothing toward a closure?


F. D. Upon some Parishes petition, particularly that of Covent Garden, to my
Lord of London, some of them got Readers (as too many do still) to say Common
Prayer which they could not vouchsafe to do.


C. But was there any further news of the Conference?


F. D. Yes, when the concessions would not satisfy them, they disperse a thing
called a Petition for peace, to incense the people, to which they annexe an
unauthorized form of Worship, composed, printed, published and dispersed by
private persons, to affront public authority.


C. A petition for peace from them who fomented all our Wars, whose discipline
was settled with conspiracy, and promoted by Rebellion, conscience opposing
authority; men for their private conscience urging the King his own, -- a
petition for peace; as if no peace without indulging the faction; liberty of
conscience now; but what will it come to at last? -- Lord, is there no peace to
be had in the world unless these people are pleased?


F. D. No really! for now they muster up the old objections against the Common
Prayer; and add new ones; particularly Mr. Zachary Crofton runs out into that
excess, that we find him in the Tower for a year together, and still abroad
upon Bail.


C. But now all will not do, what shall we do then?


D. F. Then we interrupt the proceedings of Parliament by fly diversions; we
watch advantages, so that one Session is over without any considerable effect
toward a settlement, and in the interim of the adjournement we persuade the
world they shall never meet, or if they do, shall speedily be dissolved; and
besides we have a plot managed by one Philips, his brother that usurped, Agmond
Shiam, Gibbs and others to surprise Whitehall, Windsor Castle, the Magazine of
London.


C. How was that plot discovered?


D. F. Even as the 150. plots that were managed against the Government since
the Conquest by their own Agents, who cannot be true to one another, since they
have been false to the Government.


C. But when his Majesty declared for an Indulgence, did they acquiesce in that?


D. B. No! but they immediately petition for more, viz. that the tender
consciences of young men in the University should be free, -- which was as much
as to say that we might have a young Set of Presbyterians and Elders, against
the old one decays; and over and above all this they sent to the foreign
Churches to keep correspondence with them.


C. Now I hope they have done.


D. B. Not so neither, but they are up with their old trade of Prophesying of
Wonders, Prodigies, Star-gazing, Conjunctions, and the judgments of God which
they would say were the same now as in Queen Mary's days, and in times of
great alterations and changes.


C. But were they true?


J. B. No, but upon the examination of particulars those were alive and well
whom they writ dead, and they dead of a natural death whom they printed
Thunderstruck, -- etc. after all this stir they joined issue with the Papists,
even when they were most fiercely declaiming against them; and by that
combination the excellent Act of Uniformity was once thrown out of the Lords
House, and likely to have stuck there for ever: But when all these shifts fail,
they prepared themselves for persecution as they called it; and preached that
the lights were extinguished, the dear Pastors torn from their beloved
flocks; then they say, they preach their last, and that they are dying men,
and that this may be the last opportunity; Now they give their rules, one 17.
another 25. another 36. all may be reduced to these six, 1. That they should
not forget their faithful pastors: 2. That when they cannot hear their Words,
they may read their Works: 3. That they should take heed whom they hear: 4.
That they have nothing to do with Idols: 5. That they persevere: 6. That they
hold Communion one with another.


C. Had they any more hope?


B. D. None at all, but that they thought the disbanded Soldiers would be
troublesome; an expectation the prudence and wariness of our Superiors
defeated in that most eminent Act of his Majesty's Government, the disbanding
of the Army.


C. What then?


D. B. No more, but that they encouraged their party to go on, and stand out
against the Act, that they might appear so considerable as to prevail either
with his Majesty for an indulgence against, or with the Parliament for a repeal
of the said Act; to which end they sent their Letters all over the Kingdom to
advise every man to stand to his principles, not doubting of a Toleration upon
his Majesty's promise at Breda, with other arguments they could make use of;
And in order hereunto they oppose not the Act in Parliament, lest they should
exasperate the noble Patriots to severer courses, but they stand it out, that
they might know their strength and power, not doubting but their considerable
number and interest, which will appear by the public and general dissent to
the Uniformity enjoined, might gain them an indulgence, that will vacate and
make void all former Laws; and accordingly we find them with their bed-roll of
those that were to be ejected, rather threatening then petitioning his Majesty,
(after some tumults raised in Dr. Seamans and other Churches, through which
they would have his Majesty see the inclination of the people) as if they had
said, May it please your most excellent Majesty, Whereas we are many, and our
party very considerable for their interest with God and men, as you would enjoy
peace and tranquillity in your Kingdoms, or any quiet in your Throne, we must
entreat you to let us do what we please, and set no law or government over us,
for we cannot in conscience endure any; and upon condition we have what we
desire, your Petitioners shall pray for you.


C. Well, but his Majesty is resolved, and the Law indispensible.


D. P. When they saw that, 1. They take an account of the ejected Ministers
through every County; 2. They take the subscriptions of several well affected
persons toward the maintenance of those persons, especially the elect Ladies;
3. They have Country and City Committees for that purpose, together with their
Treasurers in both places, by whose order the money is delivered to the
respective ejected men according to their conditions, provided that they have
good Certificates of their sufferings and faithfulness.

And then to keep the cause in heart and life, the Farewell Sermous are
Printed, first singly, and then in Volums, as the dying words of the faithful
Pastors, whose heads are set before their Sermons just as they looked from the
Pulpit, wrapped in their reverend white and black Caps like the twelve Apostles
before the Bible; For though we worship not Images, we adore imaginations.

After this a seed plot of honest young men were to conform as their fathers
had done formerly, and so undermine the Hierarchy once more as they did -- who
who were to be chosen Lecturers; (for the Lectures are their only hope) for the
faction would be quite over if the Ministry depended for its maintenance only
upon the Church.


C. How may these conforming Nonconformists be discerned?


D. B. 1. By their Habit; for they wear neither girdle or Cassock, but are
All-a-mode and querpo Divines.

2. By their double Ordination.

3. By their setting poor Readers to make the Common Prayer contemptible, and
then praying an hour themselves, as if that Prayer were inconsiderable.

4. By their preaching over the old ones notes, Ah, precious are those Elishaes
that have the spirit of the Eliah's upon them!

5. By their canting notions of indwelling, enlightening, Soul-saving,
heart-supporting, and I know not what deluding notions that deceive the simple.

6. By their affectedly mortifyed countenances, or furious zeal, their bauble
jingles, their long prayers, their indirect and wary mention of King and
Bishops, by ah Lords and hughs; by his bewailing the sins of the times, while
he flattereth those of the faction; by his hints of what is done abroad, but he
is sorry for it; by his Sermons of inward sincerity against outward conformity,
the Sabbath against Holidays, and a pure heart instead of the Surplice.

7. By their attendance on the old Patriarchs of the province, their
correspondence with, and their Certificates from them.

8. By their refreshing Solifidian Doctrines, their flowings of milk and honey,
when others preach moral honesty, universal obedience, and good works.

9. By the great name of moderation.


C. What do these men do to distinguish themselves from their brethren?


B. D. Besides what I declared, 1. They groan under the burden of Ceremonies;
2. They shake their heads at the times; 3. They Bury, Marry and Christen by the
Directory; 4. They visit and give the Communion the same way, dispensing with
kneeling even in public.


C. Why are they suffered to do these things in other men's Parishes?


B. D. Why a piece of money is sent the poor parish Priest to stop his mouth,
as his fee for registring, yea so impudent are they that there are several men
maintained about town to get into careless men's pulpits, who no sooner give
them leave but the whole Town knows it, and then what running! what
thronging! what crouding! But St. Anthonies Lecture the old seminary is the
surest cord they have; only now they have weaker preachers then they had
formerly in that place, and indeed the sisters had need have Candles next their
hearts when they come to those raw morning discourses.


C. They hear Common Prayer there?


B. D. They do hear Common Prayer indeed, but they think according to the
Directory till the poor Reader has done, and the formal Bauble, the Preacher
forsooth comes up with his tedious gatherings out of Wilkins his gift of prayer
of an hour long, as if the Church prayer had been nothing without his.


C. But have they that have disserted their Ministry, nothing to support them
but voluntary contributions?


B. D. Yes; 1. The young sisters and widows are bound to marry them, and so
they as well as the Apostles in time of persecution lead about their sisters
their wives; 2. They keep Boarders, and under the pretense of a poor scholar,
teach them to debauch all the youths of the Kingdom, whereby the Schism is
propagated and made perpetual; 3. They print their own Books and dedicate them
to all the faithful; 4. They turn sollicitors and Tradesmen; 5. They visit from
house to house; 6. They have their Churches as entire now as ever they had, --
having the convenience of Moorfields, Islington, and Hickney to entertain
them; 7. They have concealed the table of Tithes and duties from the Orthodox
Ministers, and look what the people can cheat the one of, they bestow it on the
other.


C. Is not the Law open for the honest men to come by their dues?


B. D. It is, but the brethren will tire out an honest man with a common stock,
or put him out of countenance with a common clamor.


C. But how can they meet now the Law is so severe?


D. B. Why? 1. They have private houses whereinto the Entries are dark, and
from which there are several passages into other houses; 2. They meet at
unusual hours, as at twelve at noon and about five at night; 3. They are but
few at a time; 4. Those that meet are invited to a Feast, and if you surprise
them, the table is laid and they go to dinner, only a Chapter is read, and O
what times do we live in, that a man cannot read a Chapter without the danger
of a Praemunire! 5. The Servants are all of the Church.


C. What do they do at their meetings?


D. B. They that have been there say (how truly I know not) that first they
bewail their apostasy from the old cause; 2. They pray that the Kings heart
may be turned, and the Council of the wicked may be overthrown; 3. They bewail
their neglect of the many opportunities put into their hands; 4. They wish an
union between all parties; 5. They take in all intelligence, and likewise
communicate all those scandals that lie upon the Government; 6. They teach
perseverance; 7. They take order about any new occurrences that happen; As
first if there be a new Law, how to evade it; 2. If any brother is taken in a
snare, how to get him out by purse, interest, or importunity.


C. How do the Presbyterians keep the people in these courses from running into
Independency?


B. D. Mr. Crofton has taken care of that by teaching that the people ought
not to separate from the Church as hearers, though the Ministers do as
Preachers; the Presbyterian Rabbis (says my Author) must leave the Church,
lest Presbytery be swallowed up of Episcopacy; the people must not leave the
Church, lest Presbytery should be brought to nothing by Independency.


C. Really that was warily done; but what hope have they to bear up in this way?


B. D. Why first they watch the vacancies in this Parliament; and tugg hard in
the new elections; 2. They clap their hands at the little plots and the great
quarrels, and are observed to ride up and down incessantly at that time; 3. They
engross the stock, and stop the trade of the Nation; 4. They have active Agents
in Ireland, where they are very troublesome -- and unpeaceable; 5. There is (as
it appears from the late Plotters examination here at York) a constant
Committee to manage all affairs yonder at London; 6. Foreign Wars; 7. Yea
they promise themselves (good Christians the whilst) great matters from the
Turk, and bless themselves when they consider what liberty they shall enjoy
under that good man, Calvino Turcismus; Right! 8. Besides that many Patrons
reserve their Livings for them.


C. Where can so many lurk as have forsaken their callings, rather then their
Rebellion?


D. B. They have a combination that every well affected noble or rich Family
shall no sooner want either a Chaplain or a Tutor, then a hopeful or an honest
man, for so they talk, is recommended thither; or if an honest man offer
himself, the first question is, Did you know Mr. Boules? etc.


C. It is well they are not suffered to print and preach however.


D. B. They Print as much as ever! There is their Bishops no Preachers; their
Vindiciae Pietatis, as if none took any care of godliness but they, or as if
there were no godliness in the world but their sniveling hypocrisy: Dr. Owen
of Liturgies, and his Book against Popery: I Will warrant you if it had not been
for these men, the silly people must think Popery had been here before this
time; the Latin Apology for the Nonconformists to their brethren abroad; as if
they would persuade us (notwithstanding what Mr. Durell a forreigner has
written of the Conformity of foreign reformed Churches to our Church) that
they agree with all Protestants but we; yea, they have engaged with some poor
foreign Divines to meddle with what concerns them not, yea with what they
understand not; not to mention that dreadful Libell called Meue Tekel, and
dispersed the very day of the Kings death, and infinite more phanatick
Rhapsodies printed every day.


C. How do these men escape the Bishops Courts?


D. B. 1. They keep in fee so many confiding Lawyers, who are to find out all
the ways to escape and elude the Laws; 2. They keep the Officers in fee; 3.
They care not for an Excommunication; for a Nonconformist in our parts durst
come to Church even before the Judges, though he was excommunicated; 4. They
make the Church Wardens their own, therefore it is they busle so much at the
election of them; As at Newbury where the faction was so unruly in Easter week,
that nothing but the Train-bands could keep them in order; they shift their
dwellings and live in a corner that may be in two Counties or Diocesses, or at
the worst they hide themselves in London where they are most secure, and most
serviceable.


C. It is a very strange thing that men should continue in a state of
disobedience and uncharitable, considering how short their life is, and how sad
their fame after death!


B. D. Alas! they are as famous as any men after their death; for Mr. Clark he
writes their lives, and the brethren erect their Monuments, as any man, I am
told, may see in the new Churchyard, where Mr. Biddle has a large square stone
over his grave, and this Inscription over it, Hic jacet Johannes Bedellus
artium Magister Oxoniensis, qui maxima dedit tam pictatis, quam eruditionis
specimina. And another this, Here lies one that feared God and honored the
Truth: Not one that feared God and honored the King.


C. An obstinate people!


D. B. If you knew all! I have been told that either in London or Westminster
upon the 30 of Janu. last a silly fellow that could not speak sense, must
needs bestow a Sermon upon a Congregation, and for the more solemnity give
warning of it a week before hand; but when he came, what did he pray, and prate
against? even three or four abominations, whereof one was the turning out of
the ejected Clegy; another the corruption of Gods worship; and a third the
patience and stupidness of the people under these abominations; and not a word
all this while of the Kings death.


C. Was this man a Conformist?


B. D. A very early one, they say.


C. Lord who encourage such men!


D. B. It was observed as I am informed, that one whose Cozen was hanged here
with us at York, was a maine stickler for this fellow.


C. They are the most dangerous people that declare before God and men their
acquiescence in the Government, and yet thus act against it.


D. B. I; O if you did but hear how solemnly the graver sort of our Bopeepes
out of Grotius, Du Plessis, Amyrald, Vives, etc. prove the truth of
Christianity, as if we were all heathens again since his Majesty's return,
though just before it was the most glorious time for the light of the Gospel
that ever was in the World; though I must needs say that their hypocrisy would
make any man an Atheist; and that by their many religions we were in danger of
enjoying none.


C. But the Ministers that fell off have been silent of late.


B. D. So they may as long as there are so many that speak for them; yet they
are not so silent; did you not hear their charge to Archippus? I mean did you
not see a Book called so, wherein they were stirred up by all the arguments in
the world to invade their Pulpits; and the News yonder, yonder at London was
so strong, that some of their Reverences they say took Coach very demurely to
Whiteball to wipe off forsooth that aspersion, although many of them creep up
into some careless men's Pulpits; and you know how Mr. Calamy Preached boldly at
his own Church, and how he made it a Moot-point whether he had offended or no.


C. Was the late plot in the North a general one?


B. D. They would not a great while believe it was any; yea, and that was the
main plot to persuade others that it was none; yet in the mean time how
insolent! how busy are they! what riding! what posting! what writing! We will
be in Chester the 24. of the sixth Month, says one; Tell brother Owen we are
6000. strong of our own friends, etc. How sullen! how dogged are they here, as
well as some of our wel-wishers abroad, until the design was broken, which in
the breaking discovered a Committee here in London that united all interests,
and managed all affairs!

Now the question will be whether the dissenting brethren (considering their
carriage and behavior since the fancy began in King Henry the Eighths time, of
which we have given an exact account to this hour) are to complain if they are
restrained by laws, and kept from meeting or acting by public constitutions?

For answer to this, it is the observation of all men; 1. That private men must
be checked rather then the public Government violated. 2. That it is not safe
or reasonable for any private opinion or fancy to control or guide a public
authority. 3. That the King must either violate his own Conscience, and so not
have the liberty of it, which they insist on for themselves, or else check
their pretenses of theirs. 4. That they were never satisfied with any thing
that was granted them; he that allowed them a little, does but give them a
power to take more; Could all the late Kings concessions keep them from his
blood? first its Liberty, but at last it is a War: they are a party not to be
gained by Obligations. 5. That neither Scotland nor England had an hours peace
or quiet since Knox set footing in the one, or they who had conferred notes
with him in the other; but that blood, rapine, violence, malice, animosities,
and plots have been the attendants of the good old cause since it was in the
cradle. 6. That the Law must not be ruled by a faction, and yet that the
question is now whether they who overthrowed the Law formerly may now
control, and they who raised a War against it may be free from it in peace.
7. That the indulging of men because they are many, is rather an encouragement
to Villainy, then a provision for tenderness. 8. That to ask liberty of
Conscience is to ask liberty to what they please, which they may call
conscience; for who shall judge what is really Conscience, and what is really
malice? 9. That to grant these people what they desire, is to allow the reason
of the reason of their requests, and so at once to reward one injury, and
justify another. 10. That the late War begun with calling that Christian
liberty which the Law calls treason, that Religion which the Church calls
Schism. 11. That no Oaths or Vows but one to rebel can tie these people.
12. That they would never trust others with the least indulgence. 13. That they
are a people that rather then submit, expostolate; whose Addresses look like
mutinies, and their Petitions like threats. 14. That the whole business and
bustle is but a contest between a Law and a Faction.


And now considering these things, we must conclude that either the Government
must be again banished, or the Faction; that either the King for upholding the
Church according to Law must be an exile, or they for supporting Conventicles
against the Law must be proscribed; and which is fittest, let the World judge.
--


THE History of Plots: OR, ALL The Plots against the Government of England
since the Conquest, to this day, which are 247. in Number unsuccessfull: -- In
a continued Series of them, from year to year, to this present of February,
1663. Concluding with an Exact Narrative of the Plot in Yorkshire. History is
the knowledge of things past, whereby we may judge of things present, and guess
at things to come. Dionys. Pet. Pref.
WHen I had taken up persuasions that Interfered with the established Religion
of this Nation; and the public Laws laid hold upon me as well for my former
engagements under the late Revolutions, as for my present sentiments of the
state of things that now prevails; those unruly lusts of pride, ambition,
envy, covetousness and looseness that remain in the best, assisted with
prejudice, discontent and sufferings (and all improved by those vehement
impulses of conscience, and a desire of liberty, A man deter red from any
attempts against the government by this one consideration, that 247. Plots,
viz. all the Plots from W. the Conque to this day were unsuccessful.
that all men are sensible of) transported my impatience, not only to
murmuring, to speak evil of Dignities, to despise Dominions, to entertain evil
thoughts of the Rulers of my people, but (so endless and boundless are the
workings of a foul heart under fouler temptations) to some dangerous
Considerations, how necessary, how lawful, how easy, and how successful an
attempt more upon this Government might be; all the Principles and Grounds of
our late Engagements that are scattered in our Remonstrances, Apologies;
Declarations, Propositions, and States of the Case, immediately offering
themselves unto me, then prepared for such Impressions; yea the Scripture it
self, (wherein I was much conversant in my solitudes, to my apprehension)
exactly answering my thoughts and inclinations, and with those glosses upon it
thee lay before me there twenty years, looking like one great remonstrance for
the good old Cause; so that my exceptions of things being before hand wrapped
in Scripture notions, I saw my own mind there so clearly, that I was resolved
that an undertaking for the alteration of the present frame of things was not
only my interest, but also my duty; not only a kindness to my self and our
common cause, but some service to my God: under these temptations a reverend
and a most excellent person endeavored to relieve me with three sorts of
arguments.

1. The first whereof was from the concernment of private persons in the
public peace and welfare, and the great advantages men had from all
Governments in general, and every English man's Interest under this Government
in particular; which I easily evaded with the maxims of a Commonwealth which
possess more men then are publicly observed, and carry them to the affront,
and weakening of all the rules, laws and principles of Monarchy that are now
extant in the world.

2. The second was from the great Obligations laid upon men to peace and
obedience in great rules and examples, by Christianity above all the Religions
in the World, it being not the least part of its glory and renown that it
provides best for Government and obedience, for the security of Princes, and
the peace of the people, of any persuasion under Heaven, is the Reverend person
instanced in many of its Theorems and principles, especially Romans 13. a Pet. 2.
to which I had my replies ready from the several discourses in justification of
the late War, and the Kings death, still extant, and still someting men's
dangerous and discontented thoughts: especially the sermons before the
Parliament from 1641. to 1649.

3. The third, and so much the more cogent argument (as Fear is more prevailing
then Conscience) and a care of our selves, of more force with us then a sense
of our duty, was the dreadful event of all attempts against Government,
mentioned in Holy Scripture: which the good man urged with much earnestness and
power. As, Had Zimri peace that flew his Master? Can a man touch the Lords
Anointed, and be guiltless? My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them who are given to change: for their calamity shall arise suddenly;
and who knows the ruin of them both? Whosoever loves Rebellion, a cruel
Messenger shall be sent unto him. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought;
for a Bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall
tell the matter. The terror of which words was yet much allayed by the
immunity and indulgence we already had, and might always expect; only one day
considering with my self that the events and issues of things in the World were
exactly correspondent with the Prophecies and predictions in the Scripture;
that Heaven and Earth might pass away, and the Government of the Creation be
altered, and not one jot or title of the Word of God should fall to the ground:
I resumed the last argument, examined those sayings of Scriptures
aforementioned, comparing them with what happened upon that occasion in the
World, and particularly recollected such Memoires and observations of that
nature as occurred in the English Nation from the time of William the Conqueror
to our Age; out of which to my great astonishment I gathered this great
Conclusion; (which I think it the interest of this present age and posterity to
take notice of,) that as the Scriptures have foretold some 3000. years Since,
so we find it true in every age that Government is so secured by the ordinance
and providence of God, that all attempts against it have come to naught, and
all open and secret conspiraties and plots have had only this remarkable issue,
That they ended in the ^^ ine of those that were engaged in them.

. 1. It is now near 600. since the Government and Monarchy Plots against
William the Conqueror.
of this Kingdom was after the barbarousness of the Britains and Romans, the
confusion and unsettledness of the Saxons, the Incursions and Intervalls of the
Danes, settled upon the Foundation it now stands upon by William Duke of
Normandy. In the W. Malmsbury.
year 1074. Edgar AEthelin King Harolds Son with his Mother Agatha and his two
Sisters Margaret and Christine, all of the Blood Florentin Bravon.
Royal retired in discontent to Scotland: Our ancient and most desperate enemy
followed by the great Earls Edwyn and Morchor Turgol.
his Uncles, the two Archbishops Stigand and Aldred, and many other Lords;
where first by alliance with the King of Scots, who Raradocus in Gul. 1.
married Margaret; 2. By a correspondence with the Danes they Hen. Hunt.
procured an invasion that made the North for 60. miles desolate; Will. 1.
3. And by their Agents in England raised Insurrections in Exceter, R Hoved. in
Will. 1.
Oxford, the Isle of Ely: the issue of which notwithstanding the dangerous
combination, was first the ruin of the King of Scots, who submitted to King
William's mercy; 2. The Imprisoument of Edgar and his Lords during the Kings
pleasure; and the settlement of the Government by the Curfeau bell, the Law
against the peoples Arms, and the provision against the Clergies temporal
Jurisdiction.

. 2. But restless discontent notwithstanding those dreadful examples foregoing
of the ill success of Rebellion, goes ou; for the year 1079. Waltheoff Earl
of Northumberland with the Earls of Bologn, Norfolk, and Hereford, with the
King of Scotland, and Eadmer. in Gul. 1.
the Princes of Wales, whom the Kings of Denmark and Ireland asisted with 265.
sail of Ships, contrived a most dangerous plot to seize the Kings Castles and
Sea-Towns, while the King was Guliel Pictav.
engaged in the Siege of Dole in France; a conspiracy that threatened Raradocus.
in Gul. 1.
another change, when behold Lanfrank to whom Waltheoff had communicated the
design, discovers the whole to the Holinshed in Gul. 1.
King, who prevented their uniting, and engaging them one by one overcame them
all, putting Waltheoff to death, sequestring, imprisoning, banishing all the
rest; Who are observed never after to prosper in any thing they undertook.

. 3. In the year 1087. King William leaving his Dukedom to his eldest Son
Robert, and his Kingdom to his youngest Son William, Robert making use of the
Bishop of Bayeux, and many other Lords grudges against his Brothers Government,
especially Against Will Rufus.
his Archbishop of Canterbury, Lanfranke, with their assistance surprizeth the
North as furthest from Loudon; divides the Kings Council, raises some
disturbances in the South and West, thereby Gul. Parvus in No. m. R. g.
did acting the King, so that he knew not where to begin, nor where to turn
himself; the King having the Archbishop and the Wike in Gul. 2.
Bishop of Winchester of his side, and obliging his people by some Acts of
grace, defeated all the Rebels, made his Brother abjure Math. Westminster ibid.
the Realm, and be contented with a Pension, and ruined 700. Families that were
concerned in that Conspiracy: And a while Holinshed Gul 2.
after hearing that Man's in Normandy was besieged, as he was at Supper, the
King asked which way it lay, and immediately commanded Speed.
Masons to make way for him thither through the Wall; Daniel.
and when his Lords entreated him to stay until his people were Math. Paris
Guliel. 2.
ready, he replied, That they who loved him would immediately Stow ibid.
follow him; and a Tempest arising when he was at Sea, he commanded the Master
of the Ship to go on notwithstanding; For Dr. Heywood
(said nt) never was King drowned: Thus he came suddenly to Man's, raised the
siege, dispersed the Rebels, undid 652. Families Will. Martyn ibid.
that were of the Confederacy, and left a fatal Monument of conspirators
success behind to late Posterity.

. 4. Anno 1100. no sooner had Henry the first succeeded his Against King Henry
the first
brother William, who died Childless, and compounded with his brother Robert of
Normandy, but Robert de Belesm Earl of Shrewrbery, and the Earl of Cornwall
in discontent made a general Insurrection about Wales and the borders, surprise
the Castle of Bridgenorth, stop Trade gathered the people together, who no
sooner heard that the King was drawing toward them, but they fled and left
their traitorous. Leaders at the mercy of an incensed Sovereign, who seized
their Estates, banished their Persons, and put a period to their Names, Honors
and Families in England.

. 5. Although Steven invaded the Kingdom against the right Against Step.
of Maud the Empress, and the Oath of Allegiance which the people had taken to
her, and was countenanced by very few at his Coronation; Will. Newburgh in Step.
yet such is the futality of conspiring against a settled Government, that
diverse Lords having the Empress of their side to justisie, and Scotland
(without which no Rebellion can prosper in England) to assist them, several
Castles to secure them, a general discontent to second them; all England in a
combustion to advantage them, were yet strangely suppressed by the Usurper,
their Castles dismantled, their Children disinherited, their heads taken off,
no less then 3000. Families undone in their cause, the Empress Maud is
straightened at Oxford, and the whole combination dispersed, King Steven dying
quietly in his Bed.

. 6. Upon Stevens death King Henry the Second, the right Heir, is established
upon the Throne, but troubled first with the Welsh, against K. H. 2. vid.
Gyrald Cambren. in H. 2. et 10. Hagulstad.
who cunningly invited all the Malcontents of England to their inaccessible
Mountains, where his Majesty no sooner shows his Sword, but they desert
their Leaders, who are utterly ruined, and their Country made Tributary to
England: And then by Robert Earl of Leicester, who thought to have surprised
the Generals at their own houses, and his Majesty at Court, when poor man he
was overthrown himself, and though afterward he was furnished by the French
King (who wai^ed all opportunities to invade England) with an Army, yet he
perished and 12000. men with him, as did Biggot and Ferris (who tried the old
way of Scotland) in the head of 16000. Scots, who with all their Confederates
threw themselves upon the Kings mercy.

. 7. In the year 1189. Richard the First succeeding his Father against Rich. 1.
vid. Telveriensem in R. 1.
with the consent and applanse of all his people, had you some desperadoes who
would teach the World what providence always secures Government, and what
disasters and mischiefs attend Rebellion; for proud Long shorope Bishop of Ely
(in the Kings absence, who was now deep in the Holy War,) made a faction in
the Kingdom, entertained all the discontented complaints of ill Counselors;
promises liberty and (...) to the people, sets up for the Pope and Religion;
is opposed by the Lord St. John, trepanned by two Women, banished his native
Country, derided by the French, and comes to a miserable end.

. 8. Anno 1199. King John upon Richards death usurped the Crown, yet none durst
contradict him; dispossessed Arthur, yet against King John, vid. ^ ycronicon M.
Paris in 10. M. Paris in ibid Trivet ibid.
none durst say to him What do thou? peoples business being the performance
of their own duties, rather then discourses of other men's Titles: The English
more troubled with his Tyranny (...) his Usurpation, suborne the Welsh and
Irish to perplex him; (as the embroyling of Ireland or Scotland is the surest
way to gain England) the plot is discovered to him, he sends his own Courtiers
to ripen it, they discover to him all the methods, steps and proceedings of it,
so that he surprised the Welsh, puts 3000. of them to the Sword, takes 28.
Pledges of the best Families among them for their good behavior for the
future; with whom upon their second Revolt he was so angry that the day he
heard of it, he would not dine until the 28. pledges were hanged before his
face: But the Barons forsooth stand for the Liberty of the Subjects, assert the
ancient Franchises of England, make a general party, debauch the whole Nation,
secure all the strong Holds, engross all the Treasure, draw over the French
King to their party; yet the odious weak King John (so sacred a thing is
Sovereignty in the meanest person) recovereth their Castles, excommunicates
their persons, lays wast their Estates, undoeth their adherents, cutteth off
their posterity, and makes them wander up and down poor and destitute exiles in
the Earth.

. 9. Anno 1216. King Henry the Third, though a Child, had against H 3. Andrew
du chesu Hist. Angl. Scot. Hib.
that success against Rebels, that were not that sin a sin of Witchcraft, no
such thing as treason would ever show its self in the world; for although the
Child could not secure the government, to weak he was, yet the Government
protected the Child; so sacred that is. Lewis the Fair King of France indeed
(as it was his interest) set up some Lords against this Child, viz. the Bishops
of Winchester, Salisbury, and Chester; the Earls of Salisbury, Ferrers, and
Albemarle, who bore great sway in the Kingdom, stopped Trading, were favored
by the Pope; yet they and their French Auxiliaries were cooped up in Lincoln,
before which City the Kings Forces doubling their Ensigns appeared twice more
then they were, awed the besieged, brought to an humble submission to the Kings
mercy, who at that time degraded 18. Barons, 300. Knights, ruined 6000.
Families, who were sad instances of the miserable event and issue of Rebelsion
and treason.

King Henry disposes of Barhainstead Castle which belonged to the Duke of
Cornwall to a Dutchman, whereupon the Duke in revenge consults with the Earl
Marshall, the Earls of Chester, Glou ester, Hereford, and Warwick, who
declare for their Liberties, the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest
with whom some great Officers lately displaced, join themselves, they gain the
whole Kingdom, win over all the people, declare against evil Counselors; yet
the King (providence still appearing in the behalf of that great Ordinance of
God) sends for a few Poutovins, Summons a Parliament at Oxford, to which the
Lords refuse to come, and another at Winchester, whither they will not come
neither; they are proclaimed Out-lawes, their Estates are seized; the Earl
Marshall is trepanned into Ireland to save his own stake, and there
circumvented and slain; the other Lords are won over by the Bishops with money;
the Earl of Pembrook is dispossessed of his Estate; money is raised by force,
the King put by the peevishness of his Subjects upon rigor, tyranny, and
strange Levies, so that 4000. Families are undone.

The great Earl of Leicester with other Lords declare for the Liberty of the
Subject; indeed they prevail a little against the King; but at last the Earls
of Gloucester and Leicester fall out, the Rebels are divided, the Earl of
Leicester and 7000. of his Followers fall at a pitch battle near Evesham; his
Sons flee the Kingdom, his Estate is confiscated, all his accomplices undone,
and most of the Rebellious Barons disinherited, and the whole Kingdom desolate.

. 10. King Henry is dead, his Son Edward is absent in the Holy Land; Leolin
Prince of Wales disputes his Homage; but see Against Edw. 1.
how his dear Lady is taken by the English, and he glad to submit for her sake
upon any terms; after her death he revolteth again, Orafton in Ed. 1.
goes on and prospers until the Earl of Pembroke slew him Polid. Virg.
ibid.
before his own House at Bear Castle, and a Common Soldier brought his Head to
the King, who Crowned it with Ivy and set vid. stat. Ed. 1. 12.
it upon the Tower of London: And not long after his brother David is taken in
Wales, and judged in England to that ignominious death that Traitors usually
come to; And (as always Subjects lose, and Princes gain by Rebellion) all
Wales was brought upon that occasion under an English Prince, who established
the Government thereof according to the Laws of England. Against Ed 2. Dr.
Heyward, ibid.


. 11. Edward the Second goes on in his Fathers exorbitant ways, entertaineth
evil Counselors, viz. Gaveston and Spencer, to the great grievance of the
Lords and Kingdom; Upon this Stow.
the Lords arm and rebel; the Pope writes to them; they would Iangford in
Edw. 2: et 10 Erugens
not read his Letters, saying, That they were men of the Sword; the Bishops
treat with them, but they would not hear: affronts are put upon the King by the
Lords, as that of the mad woman who brought him all his faults in Writing; and
upon the Lords by the King, as that of the Duke of Lancaster's Wife, being
challenged from him by an ugly fellow, who made it good he was Married to her;
the Lord Baldesmers Keeper is hanged, and his Wife and Children in prison for
holding the Castle of Leedes against the King; many of the Barons fall off, and
submit to his Majesty, the whole Kingdom is dissatisfied; yet the King
defeates Lancaster, takes him and many of his Followers prisoners, condemns
and beheads him, as he does the Lord Clifford, the Lord Lisle, the Lords
Tuchet, Cheyney, Mowbray, Danell, Teyes, Aldenham, Baddlesmore, the last of
whom with many noble Knights are hanged, drawn, and quartered, as thousands
more upon that occasion came to a miserable end. And afterward when the Queen
and the Barons by a joint interest prevailed so far as to depose the King, yet
first, within three years after was she in Parliament voted incapable of her
Jointure, put to a Pension of a 1000 l. a year, and kept a Prisoner 30. years
to her dying day; 2. And her Minion Mortimer seized after this manner; the King
her Son takes a Torch light, and two or three to attend him, and steals
privately under ground into the Queens Chamber about Bed time, where the Wanton
undressing himself for her Bed, they immediately carry him away,
(notwithstanding the Queen shreeks, Bell fills, bell fills, ayes pity du Gentile
Mortimer, good Son, good Son, pity Gentle Mortimer;) he is committed to the
Tower, and hanged, drawn, Tho. Delamoer in Life of Ed. 2.
and Quartered by Tyburn, where his body remained two days, an opprobrious
espectacle to all Beholders: And in a word so remarkable were the disasters
that befell those that contrived any thing against the Government in this Kings
Reign that we hear of no more treasons in the others, who lived fifty years in
perfect peace, all men looking upon the former examples, Seeing and fearing,
and not daring to do any more presumptuously.

. 12. Until the beginning of Richard the Seconds Reign, when by reason of some
extravagances by the exactors of Pollmoney Against Richard the 2d.
the common people at Deptford, and indeed all over the Kingdom rising as one
man, Upon this occasion a Collector of Pollmoney comes to one John Tylers
house, demands Pollmoney Fabian concordance of Histories ibid.
of his Wife for her Daughter, and she saying that her Daughter was not of age
to pay, the rude fellow said he would see whether that were so or not, and
thereupon forcibly turned up her vid. Alex. Estebiensens in Edw. 2.
Clothes, whereat the Mother cried out; the Father being at Work hard by, upon
that comes in, and with a Lathingstaffe which he had in his hand knocked the
fellow on the head; upon Tylers complaint among his Neighbors, and one Ball a
Priests seditious discourses of Liberty, levelling, etc. whose saying was, When
Adam dug, and Eve span, where was then the Gentleman? the Commons of Kent,
Essex, Hertfordshire, Sussex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, are up 100000.
declaring for the King and the Commons, and resolving to have no King John;
entered the City, besiege the Duke of Lancasters house at the Savoy, abuse the
Kings Mother in the Tower, behead the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Treasurer,
the Lord Chief Justice; they pull down Lawyers houses, they compel many
Noblemen and Gentlemen to ride with them; their Leaders keep the state of
Kings; they resolve to destroy all Knights and Gentlemen; But what was the
issue? 1. Two and thirty of them are burnt in the Duke of Lancasters Cellar; 2.
Fear and trembling siezed on several of them, who deserted their brethren; 3.
Their Leader is stabbed to death by the Lord Mayor, Sir W. Walworth; (for whose
sake the Dagger is in the City Arms to this day,) 4. The rest of them laying
down their Arms upon Sir Rob. Kuolles his approach to them, submitted to the
Kings mercy, who executed 1500. of them in diverse places; in which exploit
25000. Families perished.

Not long after, the City of London that dares do any thing, for a Riot against
the Lord Treasurers servants in pretense, but indeed a plot against the Kings
Government, had their Liberties seized on, their Charter taken from them, their
Lord May or removed, and a Warden set over them, and a fine of 15000 /. set
upon them.

All this would not allay the discontents, and ambitions of men, for the Duke
of Gloucester, and other Lords upon an Abbots Vision of the Destruction of the
Kingdom by the misgovernment of King Richard, (and was there ever Treason
without a Clergy man?) consult about seizing and deposing K. R. and executing
John Froistard Chron. Gall. rerum Anglican.
the Lords of the Council at Arundel Castle, where they received the Sacrament,
and took upon it an Oath of Secrecy by the hands of the A. B. Canterbury; now
the Earl Marshall, Deputy of Callice discovered all the Plot to the King, who
thereupon by a stratagem Dionys Preav.
Anno 1386.
devised by his Counsel, took the Duke of Gloucester a Bed, who hearing of his
coming, cast his Cloak about his shoulders, and with all reverence bid him
welcome; the King courteously requesting him to make himself ready to ride with
him a little way, within a mile of his House he was arrested by the hands of
the Earl Marshall, and sent to Callice, where he dyed a miserable death: the
Archbishop of Canterbury is banished: the Earl of Arundel and the Lord
Treasurer are beheaded, and 1500. Families of their brethren and adherents
perished.

. 13. Anno 1399. Henry the 4th. was in full Parliament declared King of
England, but having let fall an expression to this Against Henry 4th.
purpose, when he was Earl of Darby, viz. That Princes had too little, and
religious men too much; the politic Abbot of Westminster Sir Robert cotton in
his Notes on his Government, M. S.
laid hold of the words, and inviting to his House the discontented Dukes of
Surrey, Exeter, Albemarle, -- the Earls of Salisbury and Gloucester, with many
more communicated their grievances to each other, and lay a Plot to invite his
Majesty to asolemn Just, at Oxford, where he was to be murdered by an Tho.
Rodbourn in Hen. 4th.
unknown hand in the heat of the pleasure and action, taking oaths of secrecy,
and sealing Indentures Sextipartite for the performance of Conditions on all
sides; the Justs are proclaimed, the 10. Trevis Supplem.
King is invited, and promises to come: secrecy on all hands kept most firmly
to that very day; but there is a God in Heaven polichrom in Hen. 4th.
that reveals secrets unto Kings; for it happened that as the Duke of
Albemarle rid to Oxford, he called upon his Father the Duke of York, and having
in his bosom the Indenture of Consederacy, Hall union 2. roses in Henry 4th.
his Father as they sat at Dinner espied it, and asked what it was, to whom his
Son answering, that it was nothing that concerned him; by S. George (says his
Father) but I will see it; -- and so snatched it from him, and reading the
Contents, called for his Horse to ride to his Majesty now at Windsor, whether
his Son was before him asking pardon, when the old Man knocked at Door. The
King not coming, the Lords at Oxford suspected themselves discovered, and so
they stand upon their guards, set up a mock King Richard (one Magdalen very
like him) who they pretended so escaped out of Prison; send to the King of
France (always ready to assist the Rebels of the King of England) they raise an
Army, pursue King Henry now unprovided to London: what became of them think ye?
why, they are amazed and sometimes would do one thing, sometimes another, and
at last nothing; they march up and down they knew not whether, until at
Cirencester the very Townsmen were able to overthrow them, so weak is guile and
fear; their counterfeit King is hanged; the Lords are beheaded, the whole Army
by a rumor is dispersed; in which Rebellion 916. Lords and Gentlemen perished,
and 16000. Families brought to a morsel of Bread; the Abbot of Westminster upon
the News fell suddenly between his Monastery and his House into a dead Palsy,
and shortly after miserably ended his life; And another who had contrived to
lay an Iron with three sharp pikes standing upright in the Kings Bed, that when
he laid Himself down, he might thrust himself through with them, came to this
sad end; a String was tied about his neck and privy Members, and so he was
hanged up with a great Stone upon his Belly, that broke his back bone.

Yet men cannot be quiet; for Owen Glendover upon a private grudge between
himself and the Lord Gray of Ruthen, and a public ambition to be Prince of
Wales, in the divided times of England, raised all Wales, and the borders of
England, and with the advantage of a Scots Invasion at the same time, and the
French Auxiliaries, prospered a while; but that's well, that ends well: Owen is
at last (as all Traitors) abandoned by his Followers, the people are altered in
their Resolutions; Owen himself was famished in the Woods, and Wales made
desolate. --

But at the same time Treason had all the fair and promising circumstances
imaginable; for the unhappy King had not only France and Scotland our old
friends, and Wales to deal with, but the Percies of Northumberland and
Worcester, and Henry Hotspur who upon some private discontents enter in a
leagure offensive and desentive with Glendover, and an Indenture Tripartite,
wherein all Wales were asligned to Glendover, all England South and East of
Trent to the Earl of March, and the rest to Northumberland; a formidable
design, but comes to nothing; Henry Hotspur is slain, their Army is defeated,
6000. of them left dead upon the place, the chief of them are executed; and
7016. Families undone in this undertaking; Northumberland and others who had
been pardoned, ingratefully engaging again upon Yorks-wold Downs against his
Sovereign, where he was surprised by the Earl of Westmerland in this manner;

The Earl sends to know their Grievances; which when they sent him, he
allows of, and promises to join with them, seems to pity their
Soldiers, and his own, and persuades them to disband as he would do himself;
which they no sooner do, but he arresteth the chief of them, who were executed
at York and Durham; where Northumbarland after he had wandered up and down
Scotland, Wales, France, about a year, was slain likewise; and 13000. Families
of the Revolt were upon this sad occasion exterminated and rooted out of
England. Such dreadful consequence of Rebellion as awed the Lords and Commons
to peace and allegiance all King Henry the Fifths Reign, and the first sixteen
years of Henry the Sixths.

. 14. When the Duke of York now aspiring to the Crown, Against H. 6.
takes his opportunity to whisper and suggest to the people that the King was
weak and easy, the Queen was of a malignant spirit, Polyd. Virg. in Hen. 6.
the Privy Council was ill inclined, wherewith the Common people were
possessed, when one Mortimer the Dukes Agent promises them a Reformation of
all abuses, freedom from Taxes, who styling himself Captain Mend-all, marches
to Blackheath, there exercises them; sends their grievances to the Parliament,
complaining that the Kings Revenue is lavished away; that he burdeneth the
people; that he takes their Commodities from them by his Purveyors; and their
Estates by his Courtiers; that legal Martin. Chro.
proceedings were stopped by Letters from above; that extraordinary Hen. 6.
fees were exacted; that freedom of Elections were denied; and Parliament men
chosen by Court Letters; that the Stow.
faithful Counselors, the Dukes of York, Exceter, Buckingham, Norfolk, were
discountenanced by the undue practices of some corrupt Courtiers and their
Favorites: The Parliament countenanceth them, the Privy Counsel receives
their Petition; and if any plot ever prospered, this was like to be one; Yet
see how the King though never so generally hated (so considerable a thing is
Royalty under the greatest disadvantages) gathers an Army of 15000. the
Rebels defeat him, come to London, command the City to provide them Horse and
Arms, and other Necessaries; behead the Lord Say, and Sir James Cromer, carry
all before them, when on a sudden some old Soldiers from the Tower surprise
them, the Rebels look about them, and consider their danger, are weary of
their service, and upon the Kings pardon submit, and leave Jack Cade to shift
for himself, who fled away in a disguise, and (Proclamation being made that
whosoever should bring him dead or alive, should have a thousand Marks for his
pains,) a while after was attached by one Eden, and making resistance in a
Garden at Hothfield in Sussex, was there slain; his Body was brought to London,
beheaded and Quartered, his Head set upon London Bridge, his Quarters dispersed
in diverse places in Kent, and his Followers to the number of 500. arraigned, to
the utter ruin of 4000. Families, who perished in this gainsaying of Kore, as
did the Prentices and Commons of London, of whom 2000. died in a commotion the
year following; the Duke of York flies to Ireland, Owen Teuther and diverse
Welsh Gentlemen are beheaded; and the King who had usurped the Throne, never
prospered; and the Duke of York slain at Wakefield, and his Head put over the
great Hall of York.

. 15. Edward the 4th. is Crowned, but with cares and troubles; for the Kingdom
was in a Combustion; King Henry was against Edward the 4th.
at the Head of 40000. to try it with him for that Crown, seconded both by the
French and Scots; but see the fate of Rebellion, vid. Guliel.
the Armies approach each other; the Lord Fauconbridge gives Abbington in his
Life.
the Archers direction upon (a signal given by him) to shoot every Man a flight
Arrow, (for that purpose provided) and then to fall back three strides and
stand, the Northern men in the mean time plied their Bows till all their
Sheaves were empty, but their Arrows fell short of the Enemy threescore yards,
doing them little, and themselves a great deal of harm; for their Arrows
being spent, and coming to hand blows, their own Arrows sticking in the
ground, galled their shins, and pierced their feet; ten hours the Battle
continued, wherein fell 36000. Rebels; among whom were the Earl of
Northumberland, the Lords Beaumont, Gray, Dacres, Welts, etc. the Earl of
Devonshire only surviving to an execution; whom the Earl of Oxford, and the
Duke of Sommerset followed; his Son and the Earl of Pembrooke living beyond
Sea in great misery, as little better then Vagabonds; their Estates and Lands
with the possessions of 6000. of their Followers, who are now undone, being
divided among King Edwards Followers.

Yet a while after all this is forgot, and the people are up in Yorkshire for
the breach of a Custom to give the people of St. Leonards in York some
quantity of grain; and the Northamptonshire men for Liberty; the Captain of
the one party Robert Huldorne is beheaded; and the other is boiled in an hot
Cauldron; the Lord Wells, and Sir Tho. Dymock are executed; 10000. Rebels are
slain, Sir Rob. Wells their Leader is hanged, the Earl of Warwick flies for
it; and at last the Usurper Edward was glad to be a Vagabond in France, and
afterward he and his Rival Henry both by turns suffered the vengeance due to
treason and Rebellion; the great Earl of Warwick is slain, with many more
Rebels to the number of 16000. who are signal Monitors to late Posterity to
study to be quiet, and to follow their own business; for why should they meddle
to their hurt? Queen Margaret is taken Prisoner, her Son Edward was murdered;
the Duke of Sommerset is beheaded, Fauconbridge the Pyrat (after his dangerous
tumult about London in the head of 17000.) and his Captains Spicing and
Quintine that assailed Algate and Bishopsgate, were hanged drawn and quartered,
and their heads placed on Poles upon those Gates; and by a Commission of Oyer
and Terminer, many both in Essex and Kent were arraigned and condemned for this
Rebellion, and more fined; the Archbishop of York was kept close Prisoner to
his dying day, as were the Earls of Oxford, Pembroke, and Richmond, whose
Ladies begged their bread, while their Estates were disposed to King Edwards
Courtiers; the Duke of Exeter being reduced to that penury that he run by the
Duke of Burgundies Coach begging his Bread for Gods sake, and was found dead
upon the shore of Dover: Thus bloody and deceitful men lived not out half their
days, they Comin.
love mischief, and it happens unto them; they hated peace, and it is far
from them.

. 16. Well! Richard Duke of Gloucester, after his Brothers death Against Edw.
the Fifth.
aspires to the Crown, to that purpose procures himself made Protector,
dismisseth his Nephew Edw. 5th. Guard: removes from him his faithful friends
and kinsmen, gets his Brothers out Sir Tho. Moor in Richard the third.
of the Sanctuary, contriveth it so that the young Princes should be declared
and preached Bastards: that the Lords of the Counsel should Petition him,
considering the necessities of the Kingdom by reason of the late
misgovernment, to take upon him the administration of the Sovereignty; that the
Cities pulse should be felt by a long Speech of the Duke of Buckingham; and
upon their sullenness and silence, some of Richards servants in the crowd
should cry, King Richard, King Richard; that himself should be married; the
Relict of Prince Edward, Henry the 6th. Son, and with his Queen Crowned very
solemnly; murthereth the two Princes, makes love to the Lady Elizabeth the
Rightful Heir of the Crown, and flourishes; Men seeing this oppression and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in this Province, marvelled at the
matter; but he that was higher then the highest regards, and there be higher
then they; for this prosperous Usurper never had a quiet mind, but was troubled
with fearful dreams; the King of France rejects his Ambassadors; the Duke of
Buckingham who set him up, plotteth with Bishop Morton of Ely House to depose
him; The Earl of Richmond, afterward K. H. the 7th. is set up by the French
and Welsh, landeth at Milford Haven; the Earls of Pembrooke and Shrewsbury
join with him; the Lord Stanley secretly favors him, as Sir Jo. Savage, Sir
Simon Digby, and others did more openly; at Bosworth he meets King Richard,
where the Earl of Northumberland deserted him, the Duke over-powers him, 6000.
of his followers dye upon the place, and himself left dead and naked in the
Field, until a Pursivant at Arms brought him behind him (like a Calfe, his
Head and Arms hanging down one side of the Horse, and his Legs on the other)
to the Gray-friersChurch within the Town of Leicester, where he lay a miserable
Spectacle of the sad issue of Treason and Rebellion, until for pity the
Friars buried him; his Agents coming all to a like shameful end, as Sir James
Tyrrel who was executed, Miles Forest rolled alive, James Dighton lived and
dyed unpittied, the great Duke of Buckingham who raised him, was beheaded by
him; and Bannister who betrayed him to Richard, was afterward hanged, whose
eldest Son hanged himself, his youngest Son was drowned, and his Daughter
smitten with a Leprosy; because sentence against evil doers is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
evil; though sinners do evil an hundred times, and their days be prolonged, it
shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall they prolong their days,
which are as a shadow, because they feared not before God. --

. 17. Anno 1485. The Usurper thus suppressed, Treason and Rebellion thus
avenged, King Henry by Conquest, by marriage, Against King Henry the 7th.
by choice settled upon his Throne with a strong Guard about him, never known
before in England; some discontents appeared See my Lord Bacons Life of Henry
the 7th.
in the North, where the Lord Lovell was in the Head of an Army before the King
was aware, but upon Proclamation of Pardon, the Rebels disperse, and Lovell
with his Accomplices fly for their Lives, which they afterward loose shamefully
upon Tower Hill, the place of Execution. --

Not long after a Priest named Symond, sets up one Lambert Symnel for Edward
Earl of Warwick, who was lately escaped out of Prison, and pretends him King
of England; he is countenanced in Ireland, encouraged by the Lady Margaret
Countess of Burgoign, and assisted by an Army under the Earl of Lincoln; but
what came of this Plot? why, the true Earl of Warwick was showed abroad; the
Earl of Lincoln, and many Lords are slain at Stokes. 500. Families are
undone by this Treason, and the King more firmly established.

A Subsidy is granted the King in the 4th year of his Reign toward his French
Wars, and it was agreed that every Man should pay the tenth penny of his
goods; the Northern Men refuse to pay it; the Earl of Northumberland President
of the North Parts, collecteth it by force, but he is murdered; an
insurrection is made, and in defense of their Liberties, the people would give
the King Battle: what followed? Liberty? No, -- the multitude is discomfited by
the Earl of Surrey; their Leader with many of his accomplices hanged, drawn
and quarted at York; and 3564. Families turned upon this occasion out of
doors, to the wide World. --

This device failing, one worth two of it is thought upon by the Countess of
Burgundy, and that is that one Perkin VVorbecke should counterfeit Richard the
younger Son of Edward the 4th. who was now dead, and could not be showed to the
people as the Earl of Warwick was; and being Brother to the Queen could not
be prejudiced in his right by her; this Perkin is entertained by the King of
France, flocked to by the English Malcontents; the people of England generally
respect him, Sir Rob. Clifford, and Rob. Barley are sent to attend him, the
Lord Fitzwater, Sir Simon Montford, Sir Tho. Thwaits, Doctor Richford, Doctor
Sutton, Doctor VVorsky conspired with him, he gets an Army; marries the Earl
of Huntleyes Daughter, and engages the King of Scots in his Quarrel; he goes
to Ireland, landeth in Cornwall with very considerable Forces: Does he prosper?
no, his Confederates are discovered by King Henryes espialls in Flanders, and
executed; particularly Sir William Stanley, Sir Simon Montford, etc. an
hundred and sixty of his Followers were hanged, drawn and quartered in London,
and along the Seacoast; -- Scotland is laid waste, his friends leave him, he
submits to the Kings mercy, and upon his attempt to escape out of the Tower
three times, was hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn, and Edward Earl of
Warwick for his sake is beheaded. --

In these troublesome times the people refuse to pay their Subsidies, and in
Cornwall they rise under one Flammocke a Lawyer, and Joseph a Smith, and draw a
formidable Company toward London upon Black Heath: do they now ease themselves
and their fellow subjects? no; they are environed by the Kings Forces, three
thousand of them perish upon the place; my Lord Audley, Flammocke, and Joseph
were hanged, drawn and quartered: their Estates bestowed among the Courtiers,
and some hundreds of Families bound to curse them to this day: -- To which we
may add the dismal end of VVillford another pretender, set up by an Augustine
Friar, who was hanged, drawn and quartered, and made an example to rash and
inconsiderable Traitors, for the following Generations, as were Sir James
Tyrrell, Sir John Windam, the Earl of Suffolk, and others in the following
year, to the ruin of many Families, who rued their Treasons many years after.

. 18. In the 8th year of King Henry the 8th. there happened in London an
Insurrection against strangers, especially Artificers Against King Henry the
8th.
who exercised Handicraft, and vented Wares to the great damage of the Kings
Subjects; the Prentices and others assembled, cried up Privileges, Privileges;
what was the end of it? twelve See my Lord Herbert in big Life of Hen. 8.
of them were hanged, and four hundred more drawn in their shirts, with Ropes
and Halters about their Necks to Westminster to submit to the Kings mercy, as
VVeakely did; many of all Professions hearken to the enthusiasmes of the holy
Maid of Kent, who would needs persuade men that King Henry could not continue
long, who lived to hang her, and to ruin five hundred of her Accomplices.

But Religion is altered, and Treason that hereto served the Interest of Men,
is now hallowed and become the cause of God; K. Henry sets forth injunctions
for translating the Lords Prayer, the Creed, the ten Commandments into the
English Tongue, and requiring all Parsons and Curates to teach them so
translated to their Parishioners; this Innovation was not to be endured; twenty
thousand assemble at Lincoln, and forty thousand at York, taking Arms, as
they said, for the faith of Christ, and deliverance of the Holy Church now
oppressed; sixty thousand in Lancashire, 15000. at Hull, -- indeed all the
Kingdom: here is a general Plot, and this Plot for Conscience sake; but does
God bless it? or does the spreading nature of it prevail? nothing less; for
thirteen of the Ringleaders at Lincoln, 300. of the chief at York, and the
Northern parts, 60. of the principal at Hull were hanged, drawn and quartered,
and the rest undone by the Lords, Derby, Shrewsbury, Pembrooke, and others, to
the number of 6000. Families, besides the Lords Darcey and Husley both
executed, Sir Rob. Constable who was hanged in Chains at Hull, and Sir Jo.
Bulmers Laly who was burned in Smith-field, Henry Marquess of Exeter, H. Lord
Mountacute, Sir Nicolas Carew, Sir Will. Nevill, who came all to miserable
ends upon the same score --

. 19. But the Reformation of Religion proceeds in King Edward the Sixths
days, and the people are more and more enraged; for Conscience sike the Kings
Commissioners were stabbed, Against Edw. the 6th.
the multitude arm themselves and commit many outrages, they increase to the
number of 50000. a terrible number, they declare for Religion against
Enclosures, Lawyers Courts, etc. besiege rich Cities, as Exeter, Norwich, etc.
but to what end? they are defeated and Sir John Heywood n his Life.
before those Cities, most of them slain upon the place, 500. of them were
executed at London, and as many with their Ringleaders hanged up and down the
Country: But there was a Prophecy that the time should come when there should
be no Godw History of Reform.
King, when the Nobility and Gentry should be destroyed; when the kingdom
should be ruled by four Governors elected by the Commons, etc. and now sure
was that time; Up must Ombler a And Dr. Heylia.
Gentleman, and Dale a Parish Clerk with 5000. more to fulfill this Prophecy;
but was this Prophecy fulfilled? no such matter; (...) Church (...) in Ed 6. et
Hen. 8. et Mac.
they found to their sorrow a King, Nobility, Gentry, and a Government that
brought them to Justice, executed sevenscore of them, and brought 600. Families
deeply engaged in the Rebellion to a morsel of Bread.

The King, I mean Edward the Sixth, is a dying, and Religion is like to die
with him; for the glory of God, the preservation of the Gospel, the Ladies Mary
and Elizabeth, are put by their known right, and the Lady Jane Gray set next
his Majesty in the Royal Succession: the King makes his Will, the Privy Council
confirm it, the Mayor and Aldermen swear Allegiance to the Lady Jane, who is
proclaimed Queen; the Privy Council refuse Queen Mary, they sent an Army
against her under the Duke of Northumberland; but see the end of it, the Privy
Council notwithstanding their protestations to the Duke of Northumberland
relent and proclaim Queen Mary; the Earl of Huntington entrusted by the said
Duke with four thousand men deserts him; the people all over the Kingdom
discountenance him, six Ships ordered to Intercept the Lady Mary, he revolts to
her, yea the Duke of Northumberland himself is glad to proclaim her; Queen
Jane and the said Duke are arraigned and executed. Against Qu. Mary.


. 19. Queen Mary alters Religion again; the Earl of Suffolk, Sir Tho. Wyat
and others for Conscience sake, and to remove ill Counselors, raise 26000.
men, they come to London, See Church History of great Britain.
terrify all before them; but mark the event, the City is shut against them;
the Court is in Arms behind them, they are most of them cut off; the Duke of
Suffolk, Wyat, the Lord Gray, the (...) Acts and (...).
Lady Jane Gray are executed at Towerhill; as one Fetherstone a Miller who
acted Edward the 6th. was afterward hanged at Ty-burn; and all the good they
did was to ruin several Families, and exasperate the Queen to those severe
Courses against the Reformed Professors, which we read of in the Acts and
Monuments of those times.

. 20. Anno 1558. Queen Elizabeth succedeth, who now the fourth time alters
the public Profession in this Nation; the Against Qu. Elizabeth.
Pope excommunicateth her; the Queen of Scots sets up her own Title against
her; Margaret Countess of Lenox and her Husband, vid. Cambdins Eliz.
Arthur Pool, and Anthony Fortescue favor that Queen; the Papists were
underhand stirred up by Ridolph a Florentine, Commissioned to that purpose by
the Pope; The Duke of Norfolk consults with the Bishop of Roste about a
Marriage with the Queen of Scots; the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland,
and the Lord Dacres are up in Arms, 1. That the Religion of their forefathers
might be restored: 2. That wicked Councillors might be removed from the Queen:
to great purpose you may be sure; for first the Queen upon these practices was
enforced to make those severe Laws, under which the Catholics groan to this
day: 2. The Queen of Scots falls to very great troubles, and has not where to
lay her head but in the Dominions of Queen Elizabeth; the Duke of Norfolk comes
to a miserable end; the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and many other
Lords are proscribed, and many hundred Families upon this account dispoyled of
all they had in the World, no less then twelve score of them being hanged,
drawn and quartered in London, York, Durham, and the other seats of their
Rebellion; Felton that set up the Popes Bull upon the Bishop of Londons Gate,
was hanged, drawn and quartered; and they who attempted and conspired to
release the Queen of Scots out of Prison, fasten her more irremediably'in, and
brought themselves to sad ends, no less then 37. being at once executed upon
that occasion; Campian and Parsons are hanged, drawn and quartered; Throgmorton
is racked and hanged; but the Papists go on, write Books, and persuade the
Queens servants to kill her, as Judith did Holophernes; but to what end? to
their own ruin; for the Authors and dispersers perish, and the Government
endures.

Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador who procured the Catholics much favor, he
was thrust hereupon out of England; the Papists would have married the Queen of
Scots to an English Catholic, but that hastened her death, and her friends
ruin; the Earl of Westmerland dies miserably in exile; Dr. Parry would kill
the Queen at a Feast in his house, but he brings himself to a wretched end; the
Malcontents contrive against the Queen and the Lords associate in her behalf;
particularly one Savage was by Dr. Gifford encited to kill the Excommunicated
Queen, when to make the Queen and Council secure, there was a Book written by
the Papists, exhorting their brethren to attempt nothing against their Prince,
and to use only the Christian Arms of fasting, prayers and tears; Ballord is
joined with Savage, who having consulted with Mendoza and others, comes over in
a Soldiers habit, and under another name, discovers himself to Babington,
who drew into the Plot many zealous Catholics, as Tho. Salisbury, Edward
Windsor, etc. and one Polly who discovered their progress of the Plot to
Walsingham day by day, but Gifford relented, and opened to the Secretary the
whole matter; the Secretary sent him to the Queen of Scots to keep on his
correspondence with her, that he might betray her Letters, which Walsingham
perused, sealed up again and sent to the respective persons to whom they were
directed; all their design was laid open, the persons apprehended, and fourteen
of them executed, the Queen of Scots Closets searched and Boxes secured, and
she her self after all her unfortunate meddling arraigned, condemned, and (not
withstanding the Intercession of France, Scotland, of the one whereof she was
Queen Dowager, of the other Queen Mother,) beheaded. To prevent the Queen of
Scots death, about this time L' Aubespine the French Ambassador deals with
one Stafford (a needy young Gentleman whose Mother was of the Bedchamber to
Queen Elizabeth,) Trappes and Moddy to dispatch the Queen, while they are
disputing whether it should be done by Poison in her Meat and Clothes, or by
Gunpowder under her Bed, or by a Blunderbush as the Prince of Aurange was
slain. Stafford reveals all to the Lords of the Council; upon this the Queen
seals a Warrant for that unfortunate Ladies execution, and this was the fate of
all these treasons, that they hastened those mischiefs which they were
designed to prevent, as never taking any effect but in the downfall of the
Authors.

The Catholics conspire again; the King of Spain invades us, the World gave
England over for lost in 88. when beyond expectation the King of Spains great
Navy comes to naught abroad; the Papists answer for their lives at home; and a
Law is upon this occasion enacted, That none should entertain Popish priests
upon pain of the Queens displeasure: Yet the Papists are at work still, to this
purpose hire one Lopez the Queens Physician to make the Queen away by poison,
and one Cullen an Irish man to do it with a Rapier, both which Conspiracies are
discovered by intercepted Letters, and the persons are hanged, drawn and
quartered at Tyburn, as York and Williams were the year following for being
bribed to kill the Queen; a Traitor hitherto seldom escaping an extraordinary
death.

But Treason is restless, and about this time one Squire Groom of the Queens
Stable, poisons the Earl of Essex his Chair, and the Queens Saddle; neither
the one nor the other came to any effect, save that the Traitor being
discovered by VVallpoole his ghostly Father, (who upon the failure of his
success, doubted his fidelity) is arraigned, and severely executed. --

The Papists did not contrive more designs to overthrow the Reformation, than
some well-meaning Protestants did to promote it, even beyond the established
Laws; they Petition, they make Cecill, Leicester, and others friends at Court;
they hold meetings at Cambridge, London, Oxford, Northampton, and Leicester,
they draw up their Discipline, they admonish the Parliament, and make many
friends in both Houses; they write against the Queens marriage with Papists,
against the established Government and worship of this Church: but what came of
it? why, 1. Stubs for writing against the Queens marriage had his right hand
cut off: 2. The Authors, Printers, and Dispersers of Martyn Mar Prelate, and
Sions Plea, with other Books, are executed: Penry and Barrow are hanged, Mr.
Cartwright, Mr. Udall, and others are Confined, Suspended, Silenced, and
Discountenanced; severe Injunctions are upon their intermedling made against
them, and the Queen at last so incensed, that she would not to her dying day,
hear any in their behalf.

To mention no more Conspiracies in her Reign, the Earl of Essex, a popular
and powerful Man, that had some pretense (in that variety of claims to the
Crown that were laid in the latter end of her reign) to the Throne, that was
Governor of Ireland, and General of England, had a great Army at his command,
and a great Interest to serve him; for 158. Lords favor him, and the people
generally love him; this upon some affronts in the declining age of the Queen,
sets up a plot to remove ill Counselors, keeps open house for all comres,
entertaines silenced Ministers to preach to great throngs of people every day,
engages the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, resolves to seize White Hall by Water and
by Land under the pretense of a Show; what success I pray? Why the City fail
him, his Accomplices disclose him, the Queens Council surprizeth him with a
summons and a Message; the Nobility follow him to the City, proclaim him
Traitor, he flies to his house, he is there besieged, taken and secured in the
Tower, whence he is brought forth to Trial and Execution, with 20. more of his
Accomplices; in whose busi-300. good Families were utterly undone and ruined.

. 21. Anno 1603. King James is settled on the Throne of his Against King James,
vid. Sanderson in King James.
Ancestors, by all the establishments that are as yet discovered to the World,
when the Lord Cobbam, Sir Walter Rawleigb, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and
others, some Protestants, some Papists, some Priests, some Laymen, some upon
discontent, Cabala.
some for Conscience, some Noblemen, some Knights, some Gentlemen, and these
backed by the Popes Bull, seconded by the Kings of France and Spain,
endeavored to alter Religion, and change the Government; but with what
fortune? why, their Plot is discovered, they themselves are apprehended,
arraigned and condemned; Watson, Clarke, and Brook are executed, and the rest
come to miserable ends within a while after.

Yet the discontented will take no warning; for not long after Catesby, Percy,
VVinter, Sir Everard Digby, Garnet, contrive to blow up the Royal Family, the
Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of Great Britain sitting in Parliament; they are
encouraged by the Pope, set on by their own Ghostly Fathers, assisted from
Spain, take an Oath of secrecy, hire a convenient Room under the Parliament
House, furnish it with Materials for the blow, as Powder, Faggots, Iron; the
Villain is ready, his Candle and his Match light; but does it succeed? No, the
Parliament is twice adjourned, and the very night before they were to sit, a
Letter must be sent from one of the Conspirators to the Lord Mounteagle to save
himself; yet the Court understood not the Letter, -- but the King laying hold
upon some odd expressions as this, There is no danger as soon as the Letter is
burned, etc. orders a more diligent search; the storehouse is found, 36.
Barrels of Powder are discovered, Faux that should have fired them is
apprehended; the other Catholics that made the Hunting match to surprise the
Lady Elizabeth, are amazed at the discovery, and commit Outrages, are pursued
by the high Sheriffs of Warwick and Worcestershire; Catesby and Piercy are
slain, the rest are hanged, drawn and quartered, several Lords are fined; the
Government is firmly settled, the Oath of Allegiance is devised; two thirds of
Papists Estates are forfeited to the King; most severe Laws are made against
the Papists, who lie under the dismal consequences of this treason to this day.

. 22. Anno 1625. King James dies, and leaves King Charles an empty Treasure, a
War abroad, an incensed Against King Charles the First.
Parliament and People at home, envied and hated persons of his Council; his
necessities put him upon calling Parliaments Mr. L'estrange his Excellent
History.
the Kingdoms discontents debauched those Parliaments; they demurre his
Supplies, they draw up remonstrances, they clip the Prerogative, they question
his Favorites and Servants, they set the Ministers of State one against
another, as Digby and Buckingham; -- they raise some petit disturbances in
Lancashire, and thereabouts; and occasion some Sanderson and Dr. Bates.
ill resented Proclamations upon those disorders; some Favorites are
murdered; Parliaments are dissolved in discontents; many great men are laid
aside; the King is necessitated to take some displeasing courses for Money;
daring offenders provoke his Majesty to severe courses, and those severe
courses make more daring offenders; a dark Cloud hangs over the face of the
Nation; Scotland arms, Ireland Rebels, England could not remedy either
without a Parliament; after twelve years discontinuance and grievances, all the
ill humor of the Nation meets in Parliament as in the Common-Shore, where some
would reform Religion, others would reform Grievances, all would embroyle the
State; the King parts with his most faithful Councillors; it becomes dangerous
to serve him; he gives away his Prerogative, the Tower, the Militia of London,
a power to the Parliament to sit as long as they pleased, suffers the Scots to
rage and domineer; leaves the City, -- the whole Kingdom is up against him for
Religion, Law, Liberty, and the removal of ill Counselors; the Treasure, the
Magazines and Militia is in his enemies hands, with whom yet he contested four
or five years. When they prevailed, they seized on the whole Kingdom, imprison
the King, defeat all the attempts for his release, and at last put him to
death, reduce his three Kingdoms under their Tyranny, Banish all his Family;
and notwithstanding all foreign assistance, all endeavors at home, all the
resolutions of Scotland and Ireland, and Holland, with thirty thousand men to
restore his Son at several times, as 1649. 1650. 1651. 1654. 1655. 1657. 1658.
they settle first a Commonwealth, then a Protectorship; the first Protector
carries all before him, dies a natural death, and succeeded by his Son,
Credimus esse deos? And now you will say Treason prospers, and Rebellion
thrives, -- but alas! nothing less; the first party is divided into
Presbyterians and Independents, they are first jealous of one another; the
Presbyterian Officers are displaced, as Essex, etc. they plot against one
another in the House; the Old Officers fall off, the City of London and the old
Puritans revolt, close with the Kings party for peace, -- Duke Hamilton
marches in order to that peace in the head of 30000 men. Waller, Brown, and
Massey, correspond with him; the Ministers preach against the present
Proceedings; the Scotch stand by the K. Son; the Presbyterians are all
discontent, neither are the Independents unanimous, an evil spirit of division
creepes into the Army; Cromwell takes the Government upon him, and so
disobligeth the Commonwealths men and the Long Parliament; aims at a
succession, and displeases the great Officers; -- they watch the opportunity
of his death, and with the countenance of the people lay aside his Son and
Interest; they Quarrel among themselves, call in General MONK, who suppresseth
them all, makes way for his most Excellent Majesty, -- and puts a period to
twenty years Treason: what was the effect of all these Treasons? was it
Liberty, Religion? No, some three hundred thousand Souls perish; an hundred
Millions of Treasure is spent; -- some five thousand Families are undone, the
principal men are brought to shameful ends; -- some eight thousand persons are
ruined by public faith, King and Bishops Lands; Vane glozeth, but dies on a
Scaffold; Pym debaucheth the Parliament, but ends his days miserably; Hampden
takes Arms, but falls on that place where he first Rebelled; Lenthal
Collogues, but dies in much horror Dr. Bates his Excellent History.
and trouble of Conscience; Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, Scot, Carew, and others
domineer, but are hanged, drawn and quartered, and set up, to assure the World
that the punishment of Treason may be slow, but is very sure, and that a Rebel
labors in vain: The late Purchasers lived nobly, and now beg their Bread;
the approving, ejecting, and sequestring Ministers, are now silenced
themselves; the Church Government is most firmly settled; the tender-Conscienced
are more closely held in; and the Reformation it self become a byword and an
hissing among all Nations; Argile and Warreston had their time, and now in the
place of Traitors, scattered up and down in several places of their Country. --

. 23. Anno 1660. But to mention no more of those thousands that were ruined by
the late defection, his Majesty Against King charl the Second.
is restored by a Wonder, received with the applause and satifaction of all
men: And yet one Venner a Fifth-Monarchy man and many of his followers are
persuaded that now was the time to set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; they
first preach it up, then they draw such a Declaration for it as might draw in
all dissenters against the Government whatsoever; they agree upon such rules,
maxims and Principles as suited with most men's humors; they prayed and
preached themselves to very great resolutions, and all this very closely; upon
Sunday Twelfnight 1660. they continue at their exercise in Coleman street till
late at night, when they arm themselves to attacque a secure City in the dead
of night, being assured that one man should chase an hundred, and ten men a
thousand; -- but alas! do they promote their cause, or advance the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ? nothing less, they are discovered by the Owner of the meeting
house; yet they march through the City without control; -- but Sir Rich.
Brown then Lord Mayor draws toward them; the Kings Guard surroundeth them,
the Train-bands engage them; of some thirty of them six die upon the place;
Venner, Hodskins, and the chief of them are hanged, drawn and quartered, their
flesh rots, and their memories are rooted out from the Earth, and all people
(even they of their own persuasions) detest them, and in several Remonstrances
declare against them.

Anno 1662. when some severe Laws were made against dissatisfied persons, and
the Government grew toward a settlement, Tongue, Philips, Stubes, Sallows,
Gibbs, Baker, and others lay a Plot to deliver themselves from those at
Whitehall; they first set up a Council of forty for satisfying all Interests,
and reconciling all differences, and out of this Council they chose another of
8. which was not to sit twice in any one place, to consider of Officers,
Ammunition, Musters, and particular designs; upon whose dissolution the Plot
was to begin, viz. to secure Windsor Castle by a Gunner there, and the Tower by
a party following the Lords Mayors Coach late at night; to admit of Ludlow for
General, to engage some of the Trained Bands, to spread abroad a rumor of a
Popish Massacre; to buy up all the Arms that could be met with; to list their
Country friends under the old Officers of the Army that were then scattered up
and down; to set up a Magazine in Crutched Friars, and seize the City Magazine,
to seize Whitehall by the way of the Privy-Garden; the General and Sir Rich.
Brown being beforehand dispatched, to set up the old Parliament, and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ: But is any of these things done? or were not these
men betrayed by their own brethren, Hill and Riggs? hanged, drawn and quartered
by the Common Hangman, and made a prey for the Fowls of the air, rotting upon
the face of the Earth: are not their Families undone; and their parties under
more severe Laws and confinements to this day, their liberty lost, their
meetings dispersed, and all his Majesty's Indulgence toward them forfeited? --

Anno 1663. Yet some Anabaptists taking advantage of some general discontents,
lay a Plot in the Bishopric of Durham in March.

1. To reconcile all their Brethren of different persuasions.

2. Upon an Oath of secrecy to send Agitators all over England with
propositions most comprehensive of all Interests; who met at one Ouldreds
house, the Devil of Dewsbury as they call him, and afterward at Stankebouse in
that County; from whence Marsden and Palmer are sent Agitators to London to the
secret Committee there, whence they bring a Resolution to rise October. 12. with
assurance that the Insurrection should be general.

3. To attempt White Hall, upon some Shew-night; to secure New Castle for a
passage to Scotland, and Bolton in Lincolnshire for correspondence with
Foreign Parts for succor and Ammunition.

4. To lay hold upon the Gentry.

5. To oppose Subsidies and Chimney-money, to restore the Long Parliament, to
establish a Gospel Magistracy and Ministry, and to check the Clergy, the
Gentry, and the Lawyers.

6. They preached all over the Nation, in Order to the General Rising, calling
it Following the Lamb, and inferring from that expression the lawfulness of
the Design, so it were carried on for love of the Cause, and for no by-ends.

7. They were to Garrison Nottingham, Gloucester, etc. and ^

^

(...). They drew a (...) the sectaries against the Government

10. They were to begin in Ireland.

11. To seize the Lord Fauconbridge and the Lord Fairfax his Horses and Arms,
and indeed all the Gentry and Clergy thereabout. --

But what was the issue of all this?

The Parties are treacherous to one another, the Design is discovered, and some
thirty are gone into another world, To see whether God said, FEAR GOD, HONOR
THE KING, AND MEDDLE NOT WITH THEM THAT ARE GIVEN TO CHANGE: -- FOR THEIR
CALAMITY SHALL RISE SUDDENLY, AND WHO KNOWS THE RUIN OF THEM BOTH? LET
EVERY SOUL BE SUBJECT UNTO THE HIGHER POWERS: FOR THERE IS NO POWER BUT OF
GOD: THE POWERS THAT BE ARE ORDAINED OF GOD; WHOSOEVER THEREFORE RESISTS THE
POWER, RESISTS THE ORDINANCE OF GOD, AND THEY THAT RESIST SHALL RECEIVE UNTO
THEMSELVES DAMNATION.

Whether it be not certain as an Article of Faith, that by Christ Kings reign,
and Princes decree justice; that Power is given of the Lord, and Sovereignty
from the Highest; -- and therefore that Mankind must be Subject to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; -- and that we must needs be subject not
only for wrath but for Conscience sake, and as to Christ, (i. e.) by the same
necessity, for the same reason, to avoid the same punishment, to have the same
rewards, and by the force of the same Religion, and that they may not
prevaricate the Laws of God, or do violence to their own Conscience; -- that
he who despises the supreme Magistrate despises God; That we must not curse
the King, no not in our Thoughts, for a Bird of the air may tell the matter:
That the Primitive Christians were in the right when they said, Though we
cannot obey, we can die: that though in some cases it is lawful not to obey,
yet in all cases it is necessary not to resist; That ancient Christian was in
the right when he expressed himself thus,

(...)

I have one and but one remedy against all my evils, one way to victory, and
but one, I can die for Christ.

The poor Souls that died at York and other places, if they were but allowed
to forewarne their Brethren, methinks they would say as the voice in the
Legends, Lay down your Arms, and lift up your hands in Prayers for the
Governors and Government of the World.

FINIS.

