WONDERS NO MIRACLES; OR, Mr. Valentine Greatrates GIFT of HEALING EXAMINED,
Upon occasion of a Sad Effect of his Stroaking, March the 7. 1665. at one Mr.
Cressets house in Charter-House-Yard.

In a Letter to a Reverend Divine, living near that place.

1 COR. 12. 9. 10. (...) to another the GIFT of HEALING. (...) To another the
Working of Miracles. (...) to another discerning of Spirit. LONDON, Printed for
Sam. Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet. 1666.

Wonders no Miracles; OR, Mr. VALENTINE GREATRATES Gift of Healing Examined,
Upon occasion of a Sad Effect of his Stroaking, Mar. the 7. 1665. at one Mr.
Cressets house in Charter-House-Yard.
SIR,
WHen I consider in how many respects, the world is now under the sad
Judgment, of being given over to believe 2 These. 2. 11.
Lies, because it receives not the Christian truth, in the Love and Power of
it: Errors and Impostures, as a Grotius Cont. Riv.
Great man observes, being at once the Sins and Punishments of the later Ages
of the World.

When I read that some pretensions in the last times, will almost deceive the
very Matthew. 24. 24.
Elect; insomuch that one of those Elect writing to his Brethren, has left
this as the greatest Caveat amongst them, Beloved, believe not every Spirit,
but 1 John 4. 1.
try the Spirits whether they be of God.

And add to all these, those sad words 2 These. 2. 7. That the Mystery of
iniquity does already work; only, he who now Lets, will Let, until he be
taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked one be revealed, even he whose
coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and LYING
WONDERS, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish.

When I reflect on the state of the World, now so parrallel to that it was 4000
years ago, especially in one particular, viz. that it is immersed in Fancy,
Imagination and Lust, which are all Inter-woven with its Philosophy, its
Religion, Worship, Doctrine, Discipline and Government, so far, that it is as
subject to Diabolical Impressions, leading to Atheism, now toward the end of
the World, as it was to such as led to Polutheism, then in the beginning of it:
I do not so much admire your Caution in complying with the Vulgar apprehensions
of this late Gift of Healing, so much cried up amongst us; as I do others
unwillingness to comply with your Cantion; so much more strange is it, that the
generallity should allow such groundless, and ill contrived pretenses, than
that any man should scruple then; were not we in England, famous almost to a
Proverb, for our folly, in reference to Prodigies and Prophesies; and a People
that would make it necessary, that as it was one condition in the Judges of the
Sanedrim, that they should be skilled in Magic, that they might detect and
Judge others for it; so it should be one in our Councils, that they should be
expert in the works of Nature, that they might understand what is above it.

Sir, Seriously, since there is not a greater confirmation of what God speaks,
than what he does; and so no greater evidence of Religions proceeding from God,
than Miracles wrought by God. And there being no ordinary way of conveighing
the evidence of divine Truth into the minds of Men, but by a concurrence of a
divine power set before their eyes to confirm that Truth. The World is not
capable of diving into the depth of Religious Mysteries; so shallow, narrow,
and dark are men's capacities and intellectuals, and so apt are men to suspect
impostures in things of subtilty, reason and mystery, and therefore they must
have plain confirmations of those mysteries before their senses, which they
think will not deceive them; so true is it, what that excellent person
observes. The world being to be taught of God, must be taught with actions,
which they can trust, and not with words, wherewith they may be deceived; and
hence Miracles, or the performance of matters above the reach of Nature, has
been always looked on as the greatest testimony to divine authority, and
revelation.

For the course of nature being settled by an omnipotent power, and all Agents
acting by the force of that power; whosoever in doing wonders, alters the
course of nature, is esteemed to have the Divine presence going along with him.

Since I say, the working of Miracles, and performing things above the course
of Nature, has been looked upon by mankind, since God has made use of men to
act in his name; here in the world, as the best evidence of Gods presence going
along with them, as the fairest credentials for their Message, and the greatest
argument for the truth of the Religion; by them at several times published in
the Name of God. As it is certainly of very dangerous consequence, to
Counterfeit the Kings Seal, by which all Acts of State are confirmed, and made
authentickly known to the people, so it is to pretend to Gods Seal, whereby he
does convincingly make known his will in the world.

And as all the Kings Liege People, should beware of conniving at the one, for
fear of a misunderstanding, likely thereby to grow between the King and the
People; none then being able to discern what is really the Kings Act, and what
is not; what they should obey, and what they should not; as they would not be
guilty of mis prision of Treason against the Government, so all Gods people
should be very cautious in allowing the other, for fear of a misunderstanding
between God and their Souls; none in case of such Counterfeits, being able to
discern what is really confirmed to be Gods will, and what is only pretended
so, what is a Religion, and what is a cheer.

Whence really there cannot choose but ensue these two sad things. viz.

1 An opportunity in distracted and divided Times, to broach strange and
dangerous Opinions. For if a man can but prevail with the People, to believe
that God assists him, to Effect new and extraordinary things; he may easily
persuade them, that the same God inspires him to speak new and extraordinary
Opinions; when they see God in what he does, they will easily believe he is in
what he says; and where they observe omnipotence, there they will believe
infallability: and if the man says now, I received a voice from Heaven,
bidding me Cure all Diseases; he may if this take, say anon, I am Commissioned
by a Voice from Heaven, to reduce the World to the unity of the Roman Church,
to teach the infallability of the Pope, to reveal a Messiab to come, a fifth
Monarchy, and what not? Thus Clem. Romans l. 1. Recog. Iren. 1. 21, 24. Eusebius. l.
1. c 10. Epiph. haer. 27. Sulpit. Sever. Sac. Hist l. 2. Just. Martyr, Apol. 2.
Zonar. tom 3. Paul. Diac. 18. Hist.
the Arrians pretended Miracles by the infinite power of Christ, to confirm the
denial of his Deity ( Menander to blind his followers, would restore their
sight. Basilides stroaked and deluded the multitude. Cerinthus and Ebion
performed as strange things as they taught. Valentinus and Heracleon, first set
up with new Cures, and afterward with new Opinions. Marcus Carpocrates and
Cerdon were Magicians first, and then Heretics. Apelles, Severus, Tatianus,
and Montanus, first had the gift of Healing, and afterward that of
Prophesying. Sabellius, Samosatenus, Photinus, Macedonius, Apollinaris, had
some thing singular in their practice, before they had any thing Novel in their
Opinions. The Donatists and Luciferians, pretended to do things above other
Christians, before they set up a separation from them. The Nestorians and
Eutichians, got reputation by their converse with a bad Spirit, before they
durst deny the being of the good one.

All the sixteen false Christ's, that obtruded themselves upon the world,
pretended to our Saviors Miracles, before his person; Mahomet had two Masters,
a Magician and a Priest; and the three first century of his prevalency in the
world, were called the Septem-Castrensis. lib.
Magical ages. The Church of Rome challenged the power of doing Miracles, ever
since she would be thought Infallible; ever ushering in her strange Doctrines
with strange performances; and amusing the people, especially here in England,
with the feats of one Seminary Priest; thereby to prepare them the more readily
to embrace the delusions of all, no less than fifty seven Miracle-Mongers of
that Gang, being detected in England, Scotland, and Ireland, within these fifty
years; and the Papists urging their power Vid. Bellarm. de Eccles. and Ger. de
Eccles.
of working Miracles, as one of the most famous notes of their Church.

And to say no more, the first Heretic since Christ's time, was Simon the
Magician, of whom its said, that he opposed the truth, with the same artifices
that Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so true is that ancient observation of
the knowing a Tertullian, Maxima b De prescript contr a haret. c. 34. Et de
Anim. c. 57.
haereticorum cum magis, circulatoribus and curiositati deditis commercia: and
that, Magiam esse haereticaru^ opinionum auctricem; that there was always a
great correspondence between the Heretics, that had a design to impose upon
men's understandings, and Conjurers, that could put a cheat upon men's senses;
knowing well that if they could take the senses with strange performances, poor
men that cannot examine the bottom of things, will tamely yield their
intellects to their strange tenets.

It being a generally allowed observation, made first by St. Jerome, that the
Devil being discharged out of the Heathen Temples, and Oracles took up with the
Heretics Conventicles and Oratories, playing those Legerdemains of late, to
support Heresies among the too curious Christians, that pry unto things that
they have not seen; that they used of old among the looser sort of mankind, to
keep up Polutheism with.

Whence the early caveat, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a fign or a wonder, and the
fign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go
after other Gods; thou shall not hearken to him, for the Lord your God proves
you: So just it is with God to try peoples faithfulness to, and stedfastness in
the truth, by Diabolical Wonders, leading them to error.

So good a Caution is that of Gerson, upon the different pretenses of Miracles
among the Papists themselves, to carry on their different okpinions and
factions; one side pretending Miracles for their Opinion, and the other for the
contrary, De distinctione verarum and salsarum visionum.
That in this old Age of the world, in this last hour, and time so near
Antichrists Revelation, its not to be marvelled at, if the world, like a
doting old man, be abused by illusions and fantasies: And so excellent is Dr.
Fields observation, that there being but two ways to confirm Religion; the
Testimony of Gods Spirit to the heart, called usually Gods privy Seal; and the
Testimony of his Miracles to the Eye, called his broad Seal: There cannot be a
wider door opened for all the fallacies Satan would put upon mankind, than the
pretenses of the first by the Enthusiast, and the second by the Juggler: There
being no greater Testimony likely to be given to the truth, than that they
Counterfeit for falsehood, viz. the Testimony of God, who can neither deceive
nor be deceived, confirming it by inspiration, or operation.

These are sad things, but the second consequences of these pretenses is
sadder; for men deluded by these juggles of false Miracles, are shaken in their
belief of true ones; and as by the first appearance of any pretended Wonders,
they may be cajoled to embrace some errors; so upon the discovery of the
bottom of them, they are ready to cast off all truth, and because they find
themselves imposed on once, their short reasonings cannot satisfy them, but
that they have been abused always, and therefore says the excellent Mr.
Stillingfleet; It is no wonder Atheism should be such a thriving Plant in
Italy, nay, under, if not within the walls of Rome it self, where inquisitive
persons do daily see the jugglings and impostures of Priests, in their
pretended Miracles; and from thence are brought to look upon Religion its self
as a mere imposture, and to think no Pope so Infallible, as he that said,
Quantum nobis profuit, haec de Christo fabula?

Sir, By this time you see you are not the only Person, that look upon rash
pretenders to, and rash believers of Miracles in these days, as dangerous,
upon the two great accounts of letting in errors among the people, and upon the
discovery of the pretenders, of letting out the people to Atheism; and so are
not singular in your compassion and pity toward this poor Nation, for their so
easy compliance with every thing, that pretends to Novelty or Wonder; being
not so much concerned, as you use to say, for this nine days Wonder of
Greatrates which carries with it its own discovery, as for the opportunity and
temptations offered to more subtle persons to work upon an unstable people to
more dangerous purposes.

But in the mean time, while we are preparing a just account of Miracles,
Prophesies, Visions, Impulfes, etc. to Antidote and pr^^^nt those impostures,
likely to be obtruded upon the world, in these last and worst days; when it is
thought that the Devils time being short, and the commission expiring, that he
had to deceive the Nations, his diligence and artifices are improved: take this
short accout of this Mr. Greatrates.

An Account of Mr. Valentine Greatrates, and his Performances.
SIR,
THe man it seems being bred up in loose times, Mr. Greatrates temper.
and a more loose way, a Soldier, having prostituted his understanding to a
variety of Opinions and Errors, for he has been in his time of most of the
Factions that were lately extant; and now pretends himself a Latitude-man, that
is, one that being of no Religion himself, is indifferent what Religion others
should be of; has either a design to be even with the World, and to deceive
others, as well he dwelling with delusions, may think others have deceived him:
Or, which I had rather believe (for I would feign hope that the man is not a
plain Impostor) being unsettled in his mind, and possibly in the turn of times
discontented as to his Fortune, is troubled with Fancies and Imaginations,
which he takes to be Impulses; and indeed it is not so much a wonder to me,
that one should pretend these Impulses, as that half the Nation does not, since
they have been so given over to Fantasies and inward suggestions, having lost
almost the faculty, principles, and exercise of Reason.

How possible it is for a man, especially in an age of Fantasies as a Learned
man calls this, to be wrought by his Imagination to a belief of strange
Abilities in himself; may easily be discerned by Mirandulaes Discourse de
Imaginatione, c. 8 where he says, 1. That by the predominancy of a
melancholique humor (for humors give complexion to a vulgar Fancy,) 2. By the
imposture of the senses: 3. By the strength of the passions, that have a great
command over this faculty. 4. By the ministry of evil Angels, who can easily
cast into the Fancy strange and false species, with such subtilty as shall
easily gain them plausible credit, and admittance. 5. By the influence of a
man's Stars. 6. By hereditary imaginations. 7. By sad Necessity. 8. By windy
meats, and want of due Evacuations. 9. By sor did dwellings and manner of life,
with thick Air. 10. By idleness and solitariness. 11. By lying a bed and
sleeping. 12. By grief, fear, envy, disgrace, faction, revenge, etc. a man may
become an Enthusiast. So easy it is for these or the like causes to stir up a
man's humors, and those humors to work upon the Fancy: And by the many Instances
hereof throughout the World, as 1. The Jew that did so really imagine he could
raise the dead, that he killed himself in order to the experiment. 2. The
Grecian that went upon a Vision 2400 miles to cure the Emperor of his
deafness that had been in his Grave four years. 3. The Italian that came by an
impulse to France, to restore light to the blind, and lost both his Eyes. 4.
The Frenchman that heard a Voice speaking to him, to make a man without a
woman, and endeavored it seven years. 5. The Dutch-woman, that imagined she
could be with Child when she pleased without knowing a man. 6. The People that
imagine they must sell all, and live on Air, till Famine has made them wiser.
7. The man that kept his Children, as they died of the Sickness, unburied till
they stunk, in hope of a Resurrection. 8. The German that went, as he said, by
Inspiration to cure the Duke of Tuscany of the Sciatica, by breathing on him,
and died a Prisoner in Legorn. 9. The Spaniard that went upon a Vision 600
miles to cure the Duke of Venice of the Gout, and dyed himself of it, in Irons.
10. The Physician that thought he could make man immortal and died himself
before fifty. 11. The Sussex man that talked of Visions to his Minister, who
advised him to send for the Physician, the Vision being no more than the effect
of a feverish distemper. 12. The Venetian that undertook to live without food,
and the tenth day heard a Voice saying to him, Arise and eat two Eggs. Not to
mention hundreds more of the same infirmity, too much imposed on by their
Imaginations, and the impresssions made by the Devil, Qui miscet se atrae bili
and phantasiae, or their distemper thereupon, which you may see in the Authors
quoted in the Agrippa de Occulta Philosophia, l. 1. c. 6. and 64, 65. Wierus de
Lamiis, c. 8, 9, 10.- Zanchius de potentia Daem. l. 4 tom. 3. c. 12. Donatus,
l. 2. c. 1. de hist. medic. mirab. Lemnius de Occult Not. mir. l. 1. c. 12.
Cardan l. 18. de rerum varietate. Camer. 1 Cent. c. 54. hor. subseciv Fienus de
viribus Imaginationis. Laurentius de melanchol Philostratus vita Apollon. l. 1.
Sennertus l. 1. p. 2. c. 8. de melancholia. Benevenius de abditis rerum Causis.
G. Fablicius Cent. 3. Observe. P. de Sancta Creuz. in Hippocratem de morbo sacro
Zacuthus Praxis admiranda.
Margin.

It being so possible, that the man is really possessed with an importunate
Imagination that he should perform these Cures he pretends to, let us condition
whether the Attempt has any thing more in it than Imagination.

1. And to deal plainly with you, Sir, the very Observations on the time of
Greatraies setting up this pretense of healing.
time of the pretense is suspicious, it being a time of great Expectations
among all men, and of strange Impressions upon very many; the very imagination
of strange alterdtions in the world, makes strange alterations upon men's
thoughts and spirits; it is no wonder, when all men look or a year of Miracles,
that one man should attempt to begin it.

Besides that, since the true Wonder of his Majesty's Restoration, evidencing
the presence of God with his Person and Government; the men of Mr. Greatrates
party have spent their time in venting and dispersing false Prodigies, to
delude men into an Opinion of the displeasure of God against both: and those
that look narrowly into things, are apt to suspect, that Mr. Greatrates being
concerned, that the reports of Miracles and Prodigies did not work upon us,
imagined he might promote the cause further, and perform Miracles himself. It
is a dull thing to tell strange things only to amuse people, when men can do
strange things to convince them.

And this Observations on his first attempt upon the King's Evil, and the reason
of that, and his proceeding to other diseases.
suspicion prevails the more, because of the first instance wherein this man
discovered his gift, I mean the curing of the Vid Primrosium de vulgatis
erroribus, cap. ultimo.
King's Evil: A Cure that though entailed on the Kings of England since Edward
the Consessor, and looked on as a gracious Gift of God, that Gods Vicegerents
hand should cure that malady which Gods hand has inflicted; it being as
probable that there should be a healing virtue in the highest sort of animals,
as well as in the lowest sort of vegitables; confessed by our A Papist in
Prison being troubled with the King's Evil, and being cured by Queen Elizabeth
after five years Expense upon Physicians, in vain, and being demanded what
News, I perceive, said he, now at last by plain experience, that the
Excommunication against the Queen is of no effect, since God has blessed her
with such a Gift.
Adversaries; whereof one being cured by Queen Elizabeth, acknowledged her
Authority when he selt her Power, and derived to the Kings of France, per
aliquam Vid. Laurentium de mirabist flrumarum Curatione.
Propaginem, by a sprig of right, derived from the Primitive Tackerum de
chorismate, Peucerum de fascinatione.
power of our English Kings, under whose jurisdiction most St Lewis of France
not performing it till 145 years after King Edward begone it
of the French Provinces were once subjected. A cure I say, though so Generally
owned, to the great honor of his Sacred Majesty of Great Britain; yet
cavilled at by the more morose sort of people, as superstitious in the
Ceremonies used about it; I mean, the Gospel, the Collect, the Angel, the
Cross, the Belief required, notwithstanding that it is well known, that our
Kings can heal by a bare stroke, without these circumstances, which are rather
arguments of the devotion of the great Personage that heals, than means
necessarily influencing upon the people that are healed; and as ordinary in the
manner of performing it; for say they, we need not run to Miracles, or to the
(...) and occult qualities, for the pretended Wonder of Vid Ferrer. l. 2. Me
bc. 11. de Homer. Curat.
Healing the Kings Evil; Its only the power of Fancy, say they, and
Imagination; for when the poor Patient (who perchance feldome heard of, and
never saw a King before) shall behold his Royal Hand dabling in a puddle of
putrefaction, and with a charitable confidence, rubbing, smoothing, chafing
those loathsome Kernels [which I may call clouds of carruption, dissolved
oftentimes into a feculent shower] I say, when the sick man shall see an Hand
so humble of an Arm so high, such condiscention in a King, to stroke; that
soar, at which meaner Persons would stop their Nostrils, shut their Eyes, or
turn their faces; this raises, erecteth, enthroneth the Patients fancy,
summoning his Spirits to assist Nature with their utmost might, to encounter
the Disease with greater advantage.

And certainly (might a Melancholy, or a discontented man think) any man may
work upon the imagination, as well as Princes; and finding it feasible by one
or two experiments, he with other cunning peoples suggestions, might set up an
Healing power, as well as the King; levelling his Gift, as well as they would
his Office; with a design, that when it appeared he could do no more than other
men, he should be no more than other men: yea, and when parity of reason led
them to attempt in other Diseases, what with some success they had begun in the
Kings Evil, they might not only outdo his Majesty, but be in a fair way to
give Laws to the world.

5 For mark the ground of this man's attempts, and he tells you in his Letter to
the L. Bishop of Chester, that The voice from Heaven which he preterds twice to
have heard. and his account of it, in a Letter to the Lord Bishop of Chester,
examined.
he had a voice from Heaven, assuring him first that he had a power to cure the
Kings Evil, and afterward, that he might cure all Diseases; that he could not
be quiet until be had undertaken it: And that a Woman unknown to him, had a
Vision to come to him, and that hereupon, notwithstanding he was dissuaded by
his Friends from the practice, and jeared out of the imagination, he had a
constant impulse, to force him upon the several experiments that he had made,
till the whole Country thronged to him: This is sum of what the man says for
himself.

1 How dangerous it is to admit of Impulses and Vifions, and how common it was
with men of Mr. Greatrates former way to obtrude; need no further proof, than
Olivers Impulses, James Naylor, and other Quakers Visions, and light within,
which would have superseded, if allowed, all Religion, Law, Duty, Right, and
wrong, and common honesty, there being hardly any villainy Imaginable, against
any of these that has not been, and may be, perpetrated upon the account of
this Impulse and Inspiration; and if people will but allow any thing to be
true, upon these Enthusiastic grounds, they must allow all things that a
deceivers fancy, or interest shall suggest to them.

And more particularly, Consideration touching the Voice Mr. Greatrates heard.


1 He voucheth a voice from Heaven, for his extraordinary Performances, when
yet he should vouch extraordinary performances to make good that voice from
Heaven; the voice of God gives not evidence to Miracles, because the Devil in
the Air, or the Fancy in the Brain, may counterfeit such a voice, but Miracles
give evidence to his voice; How shall the people be assured, says Moses, Exodus
4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. that thou O God, have appeared to me, take the Rod, and it
shall turn to a Serpent, that they may believe, that the Lord God of their
Fathers has appeared to thee, says the Lord. Its impossible for us to be
satisfied of any appearance of God to this man, bidding him work Miracles,
unless we had other Miracles to satisfy us about the appearance of God.

2 Gods revealing himself to men by Bath Col, or the daughter of a Voice, which
was indeed the last way that he was pleased to communicate his mind to his
people, seems to be now superseded by that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
And this voice which came from Heaven, we heard when we were with him in the
Holy Mount. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto light that shines in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: and we are obliged by the
voice of God, confirmed by uncontrolled Miracles, not to give heed to any voice
pretended, to give credit to new unnecessary and doubtful ones.

3 The Voice of God concerning any extraordinary Person, under the Old and New
Testament, was not spoken only to the Person himself (as it is in this case) in
private, but to several others in public; as you may see, Exodus 4. Mat. 3.
Act. 1. 2 Pet. 1. and the History of the Transfiguration: These things as the
Apostles argue, were not done in a Corner.

4 The Voice of God was agreeable always to the dispensations that were then a
foot, so that when they heard the Voice, they had Prophesies, Precepts, and
Rules, directing them to the belief and use of the voice, a particular
defective in this Case, where the dispensations of God amongst us, are so far
from concurring with this pretended Voice, that the established Religion is
inconsistent with it; we having a complete platform of the will of God
conveyed to us by Voices and Signs from Heaven that rendereth it needless, to
have any more extraordinary revelations (til the great day of the Revelation of
all things) unless we ad mit menstruam and diurnam fidem, a new Faith every
month and day; for what is this Voice for, is it to confirm our faith? that is
already done, or we have been Infidels all this while, and indeed know not when
we shall be complete Christians, because we know not when these pretenders will
have done; Is it to reform the corruption that has overgrown Religion in the
theory and practice of it? Indeed the Prophets under the old Testament, had
extraordinary Voices to this purpose, but it was provided by the Law of Moses,
in the time of the Theocratia, that it should be so, and the Paedagogy of the
Jews might look for it; but its not so under the Gospel, whereby we are
Conjured not to be soon shaken in mind, either by Spirit, or by Word, or by
Letter, or by Voice; is it to beget Faith? 1 ^. 14. 22.
Signs, says the Apostle (who had Signs to confirm what he said) are for
unbelievers; is it to supply any defect in natural causes? This pretends not to
it, the ordinary way of Physicians, being together with Philosophy the ground
of it, at the height in these times; and however God never wrought a Miracle
for no other design, than to alter the course of nature.

Is it to do good to some particular persons? God never miraculously did good
to any particular, but with reference to the common good of mankind; shall we
make providence so cheap, as to put it upon such mean Offices, as helping the
Patient to another stool more than his Physic could work; to cure a poor body
of a swelling, to save 20 s. charge? Its true, when God has a great and
suitable design to be carried on by Miracles, he condescendeth to show those
Miracles, in such charitable and good Offices as these, but not barely for
them: Christ confirmed Christian Religion by Healing here and there a poor
person; but neither he, or any other extraordinary person, came to the world
with so low a design, as only to perform those Cures.

Is it to set out this person for an eminent instance of Heroic virtue and
holiness? besides that the man pretends not to such heroic seize, his
carriage being loose and like a good Fellow, his Religion Latitudinary, his
discourse unsavory, sometimes breaking out to Oaths (as I have been Informed by
a very discerning and honest person at the Charter House, who heard him in much
passion say, that though the poor people that urged him to touch them, from the
length of the journey they had taken to come to him, came from Jerusalem, he
would not, by his Maker, meddle with them) often incohaerent, faultring, and
inconsistent (an effect of the weakness of his memory) his converse and
dealing with Women, notorious and scandalous; his privadoes and familiars, men
of no great repute for common honesty; and though our Savior conversed with
Publicans to convert them, he was not guided wholly by such men, to set them up
in the world; his falacies put upon poor people, as to the places of his abode
palpable, his neglect of ordinary Christian duties intolerable, his account of
himself very various, broken and ambiguous.

5 Besides that, the holy men inspired of old time, approved themselves to the
most knowing and discerning persons in the world; yea, and addressed themselves
upon any extraordinary occasions for advice; whereas this man began and set up
among the Ignorant and Rude part of mankind, the Irish, easily imposed on;
(when he should by right have sat among the Doctors, as the greatest worker of
Miracles did, and have answered them about the ground of this pretension, and
have asked them Questions;) not appearing among wise men in public, till his
feats had prevailed with the more Ignorant in private: How much more agreeable
had it been for him, upon the hearing of the pretended Voice, to have repaired
to some Reverend Divines and Physicians, than to chat with his Wife and some
two or three old Women, and then set up; for it seems he told his Wife the
Vision, and when she laughed at him, he tries experiments upon her, and
between them behind the Curtain was begot this great faculty.

6 Nay, and this voice was in his sleep too (the season of sowing the Devils
Tares) and should every Dreamer of Dreams, practice in the world according to
his Visions on his Bed, the whole world would require again, Christ's miraculous
power of curing Lunaticks, and that but twice; notwithstanding that the doubts
of men require the oftener promulgation of it: whereas all the real testimonies
that ever God gave, were given as often as there was occasion for them.

Sir, But the man replyeth, that however we are The Impulse that moved him to
hearken to this voice considered.
at liberty to dispute this extraordinary faculty of his, he was forced by an
impulse and motion over all his body to exercise it.

But considering how much Impulse as they call it, is put out of countenance,
and exploded, by reason of the horrid Villainies at all times, especially of
late, performed upon that ground: This pretense is worse than the other, there
being nothing more desperate than a man given over to his own Impulses, and
inward Motions, without any regard of Religion, Reason, Laws, Rules, and
Principles. And

1. The jolly man does not look as if he were much troubled with Impulses.

2. He can be no more sure of his Impulses being from God, than he was of the
Voice, and therefore this should not be any Motive to him, to hearken to that:
the Impulse may be a cheat as well as the Voice.

3 Impulses being the method of Satan, when he reigned among the Children of
disobedience: I mean the Heathens; such as the Sybils, the Corybants, the
Bachides, the Zabii, etc. God allowed no Impulses for current, under either the
Old Testament, or New, but what were agreeable to, and made good by the
established Religion: If they speak not according to this word, It is because
the truth is not in them.

4. God looks upon it, as contrary to the nature of man to be acted by brute
Impulses, and Instincts, having hitherto led him to all his performances, by a
rational discovery of the grounds, leading thereunto.

5. But of the madness of being guided by Impulses, you may see in Laureminus
de melanchol. C. 4. Casaubone, and Dr. More, of Enthusiasme: Savanorola, c. 4.
de aegrit. cap. Hercules de Saxonia de melancholia: Burton's Melancholy,
Meursius in Apollonium: Antonii ponte sancta Cruz. prelectiones vallesolitanae
in Hyppocratem de morbo sacro; Arist. Problems. Antonius. Bennivennius de
abditis, M. causis, etc.

Sir, But why should we suspect a man that makes His taking no money examined.
no advantage of his practice?

A. 1. He takes nothing in public himself, but it has cost some good round
sums of money to his followers, who are observed, to be noted Projectors. John
Terril Gent. expending 100 l. to come at him, James Bivion 40 l. William
Feltiplace 60. and others to the number of 500 that have expended above 7000 l.
to follow this man.

2. He may have a greater design than money; let him gain Reputation the first
quarter, and he shall not fail of money the next.

3. He borrows money of his Patients though he takes none.

4. Nay, what if it be proved that such as he, have those that maintain them,
and hire them Patients; Now the Story about his great Estate of 800 l. a year,
dwindling to a hundred, and he living at the rate of a thousand a year, being
certainly kept by a party, and the Patients he produces for his vouchers,
being poor Women and Children, that no body knows whence they come, nor whither
they go: The English understand too well now, what the Preachers mean, that
will take no Tithes, and the Physician that will take no fees.

And the dullest nose may smell the matter, when he hears but this tradition
of him, that being a Member of an Independent Church, he was Excommunicated
thence, for pretending to this gift of Heaven, and thereupon his gift left him,
until being absolved, he was readmitted at once to his Church-Priviledge, and
his Gift.

Sir, Why is he followed, if he be but an Impostor, His being followed
examined.
why do not the people cry out against him, and the Magistrates restrain him?

A. That the giddy multitude should follow any strange thing: that the English
so notorious for their unsettledness, should gaze after a novelty at first: is
no wonder, especially in such a year of expectation as this is: But they follow
him not in any place so eagerly at first, as they leave him discontentedly at
last: He is not so much cried up in the places where he comes, as he is cried
down in the places where he has been: and he removes from place to place,
not so much to Communicate his virtue, as to save himself, being not known two
nights together in one Lodging: I, and whereas it might be expected, that he
should come with Certificates of recommendation, he comes loaded with
reproaches from each place where he has been.

And if the deluded souls reply, as some very Blasphemously do, that that was
our Saviors case (for no less a parallel will do.)

We Answer, that our Savior being to alter old Customs, to cross men's lusts,
to overthrow their Laws and Government, to prejudice their carnal interest, to
reprove and reform their vices and corruptions, by the Religion to be confirmed
by his Miracles, was reproached indeed for the Religion he taught, but all
that saw him reverenced him for the Miracles he did. His Miracles being equally
recorded and owned among Jews and Heathens, and among Christians; their
affection and interest, as it is clear, carrying them to speak the worst of his
person, when their hearts and consciences thought best of the actions done by
him, as appears in diverse places of Scripture.

But this man pretends to nothing that grieves or disobligeth men, crosses no
man's opinion, stands in no man's way, only takes on him to help the miserable
and afflicted, and to do good, and yet is cried upon not certainly because he
does such innocent things, as cure a Toothache, help the Eyesight, lance a
Sore, which good old women have practiced these many years, without any clamor
against them, but because he pretends these things and does them not; and so
puts an injury upon people, which they are most impatient of, called by them a
Cheat.

And to make it evident that this whole Affair is but a Cheat, I Will not
instance in the 1000, that have been deluded by him in Ireland, the West, in
Warwickshire, and other places, nor those at Whitehall, St. James, Lambeth,
Westminster, Fleetstreet, Bread-street, Cheapside, Foster-lane, that make
horrid complaints of his undecent and intolerable handling of all their parts;
of his pinching, rubbing, chafing, and lancing their Sores, of his inflaming of
their blood and humors, and rendering many of them by cutting them and other
ways, incurable: Not to tell you, that there is not a man, woman or child,
that may be trusted, and are well known, that is the better for him; that all
that he does, is but by raising peoples Imaginations, especially the weaker
sort, by rubbing and chafing, to scatter the humor for the present to the
Patients little ease, till it returns with more violence after the chafing
than ever: I say, not to instance in any thing but what I have seen.

This Mr. Greatrates was at one Capt. Cressets in What Cures he performed at
the Charter house.
Charter house-yard, the 10, 11, and 12 of March, there several people applying
themselves to him, some he would not take notice of, notwithstanding that he
had an impulse, and could not but heal and do good: Others he could not help,
he said, although he pretended his second voice commissioned him to heal all
Diseases: Others he directed to some impertinent means, as to wash their sore
eyes in fair water, and it may be he said, God might do them good. One that was
almost blind, he directed to some frivolous remedy, adding what every body
saw, that God in time would make him blind. Others that were deafish, he
rubbed and chafed, poking in their ears, leaving them after all that within
three hours in the same condition he found them.

But one poor Fellows Case there is, more eminent than any that I have heard
of, except the Gentlewoman in Austin-Fryers, and the Gentleman of Harrow of the
Hill.

The poor man, a member of the Charter House, being A Fellow in the
Charterhouse which Greatrates had almost killed, and how.
a little troubled with a sore knee, and so little that he did but just take
notice of it, must needs address himself to him: He pincheth and launceth the
poor man, the Sore gangrenes, the worthy Doctor Bevoir, Physician to that
House, and Mr. Harrison the Surgeon, are sent for to the fellow, who within
a day after takes his bed: They gave him over almost for dead; yet using all
means possible for his recovery, with the blessing of God upon their
endeavors, and incredible care and pains, they stop the Gangrene, set the man
past danger, though he be like to be long bedridden. Greatrates heard of this,
and comes to the man, and would have been tampering with him, but the man would
not endure him, charging him with his blood, if he had died, and wishing him no
more to delude the people.

If he has not the grace to make good use of this Instance, to undeceive
himself, who as I told you, I hoped rather deluded than a deluder, and the
world: Certainly the Magistrate, who would not hinder any man from doing any
good he can pretend to, will take care that he do no more mischief: And the
people being now convinced, how easily they may be deceived, will take care
whom they follow.

But as the Athiest, thinking our Savior did all his Miracles by the power of
men's Imaginations, say that Christ, so some people say this man cannot do any
Miracles because of men's unbelief. Ah that any Christian should talk so, who
must needs know, that the meaning of that passage about Christ, is not that
Christ could not work Miracles, because men believe not, but that he could not
prevail with himself to do what he could, and that it is not the want of
Imagination or Fancy which is indeed enough to set up a Juggler, whereof the
And our Savior wrought Miracles on things that had no fancy, as the Fig Tree,
the dead, the water, the winds, the Heavens, people at distances, the loaves.
Jews had good store; but of the grace of Faith, which was the condition of
embracing, and benefiting by a Savior, that rendered them incapable of his
Miracles: And can the man blame men for want of Faith, when they see nothing
that deserves it; or was he so weak as to undertake Miracles, which yet he
could not perform, unless men believed he could do that which no man ever saw
he could? It is well the folly is grown so notorious, that it has no other
plea than this, That he cannot cheat the people, if they will not trust him.

But his Jack-Puddings, I mean his Vouchers, and Familiars (who have been
caught in fearful untruths about him, and his acquaintance with Friars, he
speaking one thing and they another; he saying he had not heard from such a
man in eight years, and one of his followers showing a Letter he had from him
in eight days; he showing how he had Cured one with a stroke, and one of his
Comerades asking the man unawares, how his Pill, Glister, and Plaster wrought
last night; he pretending to pray all day, and yet one of his Zanies saying,
to take off from him the suspicion of a Phanatick, that he was none of them
that spent their time in Canting, Whining, and Praying:) I say, his Disciples
alleged for him, that the Apostles could not work some Miracles that they
attempted, To which we Answer, That possibly they could not, where they had no
Commission, as they had not but in some cases before our Saviors Resurrection;
and if for that reason he can cure no Disease, let him say so; or possibly they
might by unbelief, whereof they were too frail in Christ's life time, provoke
God to suspect the virtue which they really had; shall a pretender thence argue
for want of that power which he never had? let him show us that he can do any
thing that the Apostles did, and we will bear with him, if he fails only in
what they failed in; however this is certain, we believe Christ and the
Apostles could do more Miracles, than in some cases they would; we see
jugglers would do in all cases, more Miracles than they could.

Sir, Now you may expect I should add a line Of the temper of the body, and
whether some by virtue of their Crasis or Complexion, can work Miracles, and of
Dr. Mo^es opinion concerning him.
touching his Crasis or Temperature; some giving out that Dr. More should say
of him, That he saw nothing in him Diabolical, little Divine, all Humane, and
that he might do some feats, by virtue of his Crasis or Complexion.

But the man has done nothing worthy such an inquiry, and we should be as
ridiculous as he, should we discourse the ground of that man's actions, that can
do nothing; only as to that surmise of (...) as Paracelsus calls it, or (...)
i. e. a just and equal temperament and complexion, that may enable men to work
Wonders, besides that it is the old Atheists obsolete cavil against Christ's
Miracles Vid. Medin. 1. 2. c. 7. fol 66. Fuse hanc questionem explicantentem.
Videsis etiam Leon! Vairum 1. 3. de Fascin. c. 6.
that he did that by the extraordinarily exact complexion of his humane nature,
which all that saw, confessed done by the power of the Divine; either this
complexion is the complexion of all men, and then every man could do feats, as
every Herb of a kind will cure; or of some, and then I wonder we have not yet
been told, either by God or Men, what are those Individual qualifications that
constitute this complexion; and if there be some secret healing Virtues in Men,
as well as in Plants, Stones, and Herbs, as the factors of this Opinion allege
out of De in cant. c. 3.
Pomponatius and others, how can they heal all Diseases any more than these,
how comes the one to be a real panacea and catholicon, when they cannot be so;
how? a virtue in man to cure all Diseases, that is not in any Herb; if it cure
the Dropsy, how does it relieve the Feavour; what natural virtue is that, that
may be applied to the infinite contrarieties that are in the nature of man? if
because other creatures have, man should have a healing quality; then certainly
as their quality is limited to certain Diseases, one thing good for one
Disease, and another for another, so should man's Besides if so, what need the
pinching, stroking and cutting.
too.

Does not say some, the Torpedo stiffen a man's hand by a bare touch? does not
the Hiena strike Dogs dumb with the shadow? does not the Serpent die with the
stroke of an Oaken leaf? do not the strings of the Wolves guts, make those of
the Lambs fly to pieces with a touch? Alexanders casting a sweet perfume, and
the Jews a stink round about them? the Carcass bleeding at the touch of the
murderer? the Cures by sympathy? and why may not a Man then do Feats by bare
Stroaking and Touch?

As much as is true of these and many more like Instances of this Nature, may
be referred to that Sympathy and Antipathy, that may be between these things
that thus strangely touch one another, which cannot be imagined between any man
and all men in the world; and Alexanders Aromatic smell is but a piece of
flattery on the one hand (as Cardans imagination to that purpose of himself,
was but a fancy) as the Jews stink is but the invention of malice on the other.

True as others argue, some creatures can do mischief with a Breath or Touch,
but that they can therefore Heal, does not follow, it being easy to do
mischief, but not so easily to cure it; and malum est ex quolibet defectu, when
bonum is only ex Intergra causu.

And as true as they urge, that imagination may do much upon people, that fancy
great matters of a man, it may gather up a man's fear, desire, hope, and other
affections, with the spirit and blood that may be moved by them, and remove or
scatter an humor for the present, as many have known by exrience; yea, and by
chance being very strong, cure a light sore, but usually the humors return
more violently after they have been disturbed, and settle incurably; as an
Anan. l. 4. de not. demon. Albert. Mag. l. 3. de motu animal.
excellent Author, in a book written to that purpose, has by many examples
made evident; and so it happens in most of this man's Cures.

Sir, Had Apollonius the Heathen been among us, to make his Dog lick all
Diseases to a curing, himself curing the Dog at last, which was done by compact
with the Devil, appearing under the shape of that Dog, we could have judged it
Witchcraft: had the same Heathen here, as in the Temple of Esculapius, Cured a
man of the Dropsy, by prescribing him Temperance, we had thought it a piece of
good morality; had the same man for the Heathens (in whom the Devil prevailed
so much, before Christ cast him out of their Temples, Oracles, Persons, and
Hearts, by greater Wonders than he could pretend to) out-went in juggles,
wonders, enchantments, any of our Modern pretenders, freed us from the Plague,
as he did the Ephesians, by making them all meet in a Theater, to stone an old
Beggar, which he called the Plague, and wiser men know a Devil, the very Devil
that brought, carrying away that Pestilence, God permitting him then to
exercise his power, as Prince of the Air, to that purpose, we had concluded it
Magic.

Did he among us raise people when dead, we should discern, that they were
only in a Trance, and that the pretended Resurrection had been but a
contrivance.

Had a Mahumetan given men stools and vomits by stroaking them, as the man of
Smyrna did, we would have searched his Pockets, and have found the Doses there.

Had Alvarez the Spanyard endeavored among us, to cure men with Apotelesmes or
Figures, agreeable to the aspect of Heaven at our Birth, we had laughed at him
for an Almanack-maker.

Had Paracelsus applied the secret virtues of things secretly to Patients, we
had commended his Philosophy; only for his pretense to heal by a rub, we had
questioned his honesty.

Had Fonsieca kept the Bird Gagalus in his Chamber Which cures the Jaundice at
sight.
here, and prentended to cure the Jaundice with the stroke, the simple would
have admired his performance, when wiser men might discern his applying of
natural causes together, though pretending a supernatural cure.

If Lindan would desire only a drop of a wounded man's blood, after he had
stroked him, and so cure him, we have learned now, that the stroke is but a
formality to amuse people, and that the blood by sympathy does the cure.

If Cerdon pretends to dissolve all Tumors with a touch, and by a legerdemain
dazelling the eyes, conveyes ointment etc. to the tumors insensibly we would
call it a juggle, and not a cure.

In a word, should a man have familiarity and make a compact with Satan, and
should the Lord per^ Satan to work some strange things, not that Satan can do
any thing above nature; but that he may do many things that seem to us above
nature, because above our understanding, it might exercise and try our Faith;
If a man had some secret skill in heavenly influences, upon men's bodies, and
could counterfeit that with a stroke of his hand, which is really done by the
influence of a Star, he might exercise our Philosophy: Had a man skill in the
secret virtues of things, and could secretly do cures by applying these virtues
insensibly, while he does nothing but touch men seemingly: It would be some
satisfaction to our curiosity; did a man understand some Critical times, and
take them to perform his feats; we might discern some reason in it.

If the Salutators of Spain, or the Sons of the Passover in Holland, would bid
men here, as they do there, drink wine lustily, and be healed; lie with such a
man's Wife, and be healthful, eat the bread that they chew, and recover; go
into the fire, and be cured of a Fever, touch the seventh male-childe Vid.
Viarum de Fascino.
of a man that had no female between, and be well of the Dropsy: It would be
worth the while to consider what they do; But for a man to pinch, lance, and
rub people, and after all this stir, not to be able to show, one knowing or
sober person, (Women and Children being not capable of understanding how they
are cured, and he deals most in such) or one credible person, many of those
that are under his being capable of being tampered with, and corrupted, to own
that to be done by his touch, which may be done by Physic privately given, and
other means.

And there is no other Reason to be assigned for his stroaking one day, and the
peoples being cured many days after, when Miracles may be done in an in stant
(nothing respecting Infinite power,) but this, that he may act the
Miracle-monger upon a man one day, and practice Chyrurgery upon him afterward,
till he comes and voucheth, that he has been cured by the Stroaker.

Or one near, that a man may see, we being usually remitted for proof of his
power, to instances of 100. or 200 miles distance; the Londoner being sent to
be satisfied in Dublin, and the men of Dublin being sent to London, or both to
Cornwall.

Or one perfectly cured; rubbing, chafing, and stroaking some sores, with the
Patients strong Imagination, working some slight alteration of the humor, but
not a cure; driving it from place to place, but not removing it.

Or one cured by stroaking only, and not by some accident, happening about the
stroaking time; A man is Sea-sick going over to England, and is stroaked, his
Sea-sickness eases him of the matter of his Disease, the stroke has the
reputation of it: A man is troubled with the headache, is stroaked, and
sleeping well that night, finds ease, and cries up the Miracle.

Accidents may perform many of his slight cures, and yet he have the credit of
it. The danger of running after such Pretenders as this Greatrates.


When I say, an obscure man in loose and troublesome times, of a suspicious
education and course of life, shall undertake in the face of three Nations,
what he can produce no warrantable ground to attempt, nor any considerable
power to perform, what is it but an evidence of the just judgment of God upon
us, to make us now as ridiculous by our credulity to these simple pretensions,
as we have been odious by others more dangerous and more sub^le: to keep up the
French surcasme, that we are a B^dlam still, and not a Kingdom: and to
justify wise men's fears, that we shall be so tossed to and fro, and so
distracted by the various pretensions of deceivers, in Church and State, that
every Juggler may impose on us, and every Mountebanck put his tricks upon us:
An intolerable reproach to so wise, and understanding a Nation as the English
were reputed in former Ages?

What is it to see a plain fellow draw after him, some Noblemen, many
Courtiers, a few Clergymen, several Magistrates, all sorts of Citizens, People
of all ages, sexes, and conditions, in spite of the ill report of him,
wherever he has been, the great mischief they see him do, and the little
good they either see or hear, but to warn us of the just Judgments we may
still fear upon us, in that God (as his manner is with people devoted to ruin)
seems to make the first stroke at our heads and understanding.

What is it for a man to take on him to work Miracles Mr. Stubbe says, that
Nature has, and may do more than his Miracles pretend to.
in the Name of God, when yet he does but play the Chyrurgion, chafing and
cutting peoples sores, without any word or thought of God, discoursing with
standers by in the mean time, about the pictures in the room, or the like
subject; Whence a poor fellow I spoke with, said: that his heart misgave him,
he could do no good, because he spoke not a serious word, all the while he
was launcing him, not once mentioning or thinking of the God, by whose power
he pretends to heal. But to teach how easy a matter it is for one to obtrude
what Doctrines and Practices they please upon the inconsiderate and
undiscerning part of mankind, in the Name of God, especially, when ungrounded
in the true ways of that God, and the sober principles of his Religion; and an
argument when men have quitted solid Principles, how easily they are ensnared
with slye appearances, having no rules to judge of those appearances; for a man
to pretend a Voice from Heaven in a Nation that has the whole will of God as
far as it concerns them, published amongst them in the complete Canon of the
Scripture, and being taught of God not to gaze up to Heaven for voices thence,
the will of God being nigh them, in their mouths and in their hearts, and for
people to follow him, what is it but to declare, That after Christianity has
been amongst us 1500 years, and the clearest and most powerful publications of
it for these last 150 years, of any in the world, to our shame we are yet
unsettled and wavering, like a wave of the Sea upon every blast of wind. What
is it but a fulfilling on us of Gods sore Judgment mentioned, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
that because men of itching ears, and curious minds turned from the Truth,
they should be given to Fables, and to give heed to Doctrines of Devils.

What can it be, but a trial how far we are fitted for Enthusiasmes, and all
the Delusions of the latter days; Enthusiasm preparing people for all the bad
Impressions that can be made upon men, by Men or Devils; that being indeed his
Throne when he played Rex among the Heathens, and may do among any upon whom he
has a design to reduce them to Heathenisme.

What may it be but an Essay, what Amulets, Charms, Crosses, holy Waters,
Periapts, Characters, and other Romish feats, might do, if they were set up
again at Wolverhampton, St. James, etc. and in the name of St. Hugh, cure
Fevers, of St. Joyce cured Dropsies, of St. Dennis the Pox, as they have a
Saint for every Disease; and whether as Williams writ to Holden, The English
Nation be not in a fit temper to be wrought upon at this time.

What is it but the praelude to the last Effort of Diabolical Illusions (coming
to try all those that dwell upon the face of the earth) in Judaisme,
Mahometanisme, Heathenisme, Enthusiasme, and what is a mixture of all these
Papism; to see whether we are thoroughly taken off from the Wisdom and Power
of sober Religion, and sufficiently prepared by Skepticism, Itching after
novelty, weariness of sound Doctrine, unpeaceableness and discontent of Spirit,
unwarrantable curiosities in Philosophy and Religion, illusions and appearances
in Opinions and Practices, wild and distracted notions and Enthusiasms,
unmortified and unbounded Lusts, Atheism and Profaneness, canting, toning, and
wording Religion into noise, forms, and gestures, breaking the Community of
Church and State into Parties and Factions; the ignorance and noise of common
Teachers, that understand not the grounds of the Religion they Preach (and may
be imposed on in the Scripture, whose Original they understand not) that wrest
Scripture to what it never meant, and make quid libet ex quo libet, that set up
a parcel of formal words, as Faith, Spirit, Gifts, Edification, Outgoings, In
dwellings, etc. instead of real and solid Whose right and genuine Notions are
lost. See Mr. Patricks excellent Book, called the Pilgrim. and I fear Men will
not be more than ordinarily careful, in opening the genuine meaning of such
fundamental words in Religion, as Faith, Spirit, etc. now so much wrested and
abused, by the ignorance and interest of Modern Preachers and Hearers, the
whole is like to run into Gibberish and Enthusiasm, as by the mistake of the
fundamental words; Religion of old was turned into Mythology and Gentilism.
vid. voss. de Idol.
Religion: The Implicit Faith got up among Protestants, as well as Papists, to
follow some Men through thick and thin, having their Faith wholly with respect
of persons; the looseness of Professors so inconsistent with Christian purity;
the peoples attending Prophesies, and expecting strange Events, rather than
learning and practicing their plain duty; their uncontentedness with their
present condition, I say, what is this practice, but an Essay made to try how
far we are prepared by these foresaid particulars, for the universal Apostasy,
so much feared in the latter days?

To say no more, if because the Man is but only bold enough to pretend Strange
Cures, he is so much followed by the undiscerning multitude; what if he could
really perform them; as the Devil, now we are so willing, is ready and able
enough, if God should permit him and lengthen his Chain, to work any of these
Cures perfectly by this man's stroaking? what if he could cure every body he
touches? as he might, if Satan, finding him so willing would assist him? how
would all the Nations run Wondering after him?

Sir, Since he performs not, as you see the Cures he pretends to, and if he
did, it might be so many ways (as I have hinted to you) privately used, though
the Stroaking be all that is seen, that we need not put God upon making his
Miracles so cheap, as to perform the part of a Surgeon and Quack, without
any further design, fix we with all sober people upon this resolution.

1 That true Miracles, or the altering of the course The Devil may do strange
things, and what we would think were above nature, but nothing really so.
of nature by God, who alone can do it, are the greatest Testimonies, that God
uses to evidence his presence (otherwise invisible) with any Doctrine or
person, sent by him to the world.

2 That if God should assist a man to work Miracles, that has no Divine truth
to confirm, nor any suitable Design to carry on by them, as this man has not,
but possibly may be in an error, as this man may be, men could not be sure when
Miracles confirm truth and when they do not; for by this it should seem they
might go along with truth in one man and with error in another, and so men
should see the greatest assurances they have of Gods being with any Doctrine
attending the looser and the stricter Opinions of men, the indifferency of the
Latitude-man. and the heat of the Zealot; and so men that had a certain way of
intercourse with God, and discerning of his voice, by the Miracle, that so
solemnly attended his voice, will loose it, if Miracles be wrought by all sorts
of men, upon every petty and trivial occasion.

3 God does not work such a Miracle as this is, that is produce an effect
without any second causes, but for some very considerable design; for
otherwise, as a learned man observes, when God works Miracles, they would not
be taken notice of, nor thought to be an alteration of the course of nature,
but only some rare contingencies, that lie hid in the order of causes, but only
break out at some times.

4 That if a Simon Magus, and Apollonius, a Barchochebas, David el David, or
any other pretender, should hereafter presume to work Miracles among us, upon
the Impunity of this undertaker; we may judge of him by these rules, and
criterions, whereby true Miracles may be discerned from false.

1 Rules to discern true Miracles from false.
Though Jugglers may do much to work upon men's minds in appearances, and
Magicians more, when permitted by the Divine providedce in reality; yet there
is such an evidence attending Divine Miracles, as after much jealousy and
suspicion may convince men that they are of God; Moses his Miracles, after much
contest with the Magicians of Egypt, being owned as the effects of the finger
of God; and Christ's as things that evidence him the son of God; whereas there
is nothing above the art of man, and the power of Nature in any Miracle, since
those of Christ and his Primitive followers.

2 Divine Miracles are done without means, forms, Rites, Ceremonies, Cuttings,
Lancings, Plasters, etc. Sine ulla vi carminum, sine herbarum aut graminum
succis, sine ulla aliqua observatione sollicita, Sacrorum, Libaminum, temporum
-- Sine ullis adminiculis rerum, sine ullius ritus observatione vel lege non
Inquiro non exigo (says Arnobiis, whose rule this is) Quis Deus, aut quo
tempore, cui fuerit auxiliatus, aut quem fractum restituerit sanitati, illud
solum audire desidero, an sine ullius adjunctione materiae, i. e. Medicaminis
alicujus ad tactum morbos jusserit ab hominibus evolare: which words amount in
brief to this; that Cure is Divine, that is done without observations,
prescriptions, and applications; otherwise, Cures performed by means (says
he) are beneficia rerum, non curantium potestates, to heal men by
Prescriptions, Applications, and ordinary Operations, arguing no extraordinary
power at all in the Prescriber or Operator; but an ordinary virtue in the
Prescription or Operation: And it is observed as an Argument of Christ's divine
power, that he practiced not on slight Sores, but on the most acute,
chronical, and malignant diseases: Some learned Physicians affirming those
Diseases our Savior cured, incurable by the ordinary way of Physic and
Chyrurgery, and all this with a word, a touch of himself, or garment, a
thought, or such means mystically chosen, as naturally would rather (as the
Clay and Spittle to open blind men's eyes) improve the Disease than heal it.

3. * Divine Miracles are done in an instant, nothing This third Rule is drawn
from the History of Moses, Elisha, Elias, and our Saviors Miracles.
being able to oppose, and consequently to delay the workings of a God. Those
that wrought Miracles formerly did some of them indeed in time, and by degrees,
to comply with the weakness of men, (I mean such as looked upon them, that they
might discern the manner of working as well as the work it self) but they did
most instantly, to evidence the power of God.

4. * True Miracles were most commonly done under And this 4th.
the open Air, in Fields and public places, before both those that favored
the person, that wrought the Miracles, and those that opposed him; in such a
manner as there should be no suspicion of any private dealing or compact;
usually the people that most suspected the person, bringing him patients, and
those patients afterward so far from following the Healer as his
Confaederates, that we hear no more of most of Christ's followers, but that they
blessed God for their Cure, and went to their respective homes.

5. * We read of none that wrought Miracles in And this 5th.
Scripture, but that they could and did confer that Gift upon others, and
pitched not upon rich, but poor, not upon knowing but simple persons, not at
all versed in matters of Art or subtlety, that they should work Miracles
likewise fine fucis and adminiculis, without any fraud or assistance.

6. * Neither were the Miraculous Cures only And this 6th.
little Eases for the present, but perfect and complete Cures, and that not of
one or two of 500 that are touched, but of all, Divine Power never failing,
nothing being impossible with God.

7. Divine Miracles being the Seals of Divine Truth, and the only way that poor
men that cannot see God, and yet must hear from him, or perish, have to know
whether God speaks to them really or not, must be wrought only by an
infallible person, otherwise poor mortals may as well be infected in their
minds by the Errors of those that touch them, as they are cured in their
bodies by their powers.

8. There are Prophecies, and other divine Dispensations, that make way for
divine Miracles, and the Jews had not been under so great a sin, for not
embracing Christ for his Miracles, had not the Prophecies that went before of
him, the nature of the Mosaical dispensation to be removed by him, the
condition of Mankind expecting to be improved by him, made it necessary for
them to look for such a Thaumaturgh, as he was before he came, and to believe
in him, when they saw by his works that he was come. Whereas now the state of
things being fully completed, and we being not to have any Revelations from
God until the last day, nay being bid by that last and perfect will of God,
confirmed by Miracles, to look for Impostures and Lying Wonders, to try our
Faith (whether we will neglect the Miracles wrought already to gape after new
ones) but no more true Miracles than those wrought by and his primitive
followers, to confirm it: We need not trouble our selves so much to find out
whether a man that pretends Miracles does work them or no, as conclude such a
sudden, ungrounded, and unwarrantable pretense its self, as against the
present state of things in the Christian Chruch, where he that looks for
Prodigies, true Religion being settled in the World by uncontrouled Miracles,
is says St. Augustine a Prodigy himself.

9. Miracles indeed are gratia gratis data, but seldom performed by any but
such as were at the time of the working of them under the power of gratia
gra^um faciens: For to what end should God show himself by a wicked man's hand
who denycth him in his life.
Divine Miracles make divine Impressions upon the minds of those that believe
them: There was no Miracle whereof we have any undoubted record (excepting the
Vid. Grotius in 2 These. 2. 9. in opusculis.
(...) or Lying Wonders of Antichrist, that come to bring men (...) to the
deceivableness of unrighteousness) but were wrought to render men more holy, to
work in men clearer apprehensions of God, to overthrow the power of Satan, that
hid himself amongst Jugglers and Wonder-mongers, some thousands of years in the
time of men's ignorance; to improve humane Nature, and those Wonders that have
no other effect upon men than to make them talk, admire, gaze, and dispute, and
pretend nothing more than the saving the little charge of Physician and
Chyrurgeon, are certainly as low in the power that works them, as in the design
that is aimed at by them: And it being a matter of too much curiosity for
common heads to inquire into the nature of a Miracle in it self, and to know
exactly when Nature has gone in a thing as far as it can; and when a
supernatural cause raises it to what it self cannot do; It Is the safest and
the only certain way left men in this case, not to pore on the thing done, but
to look to the Agent, his design, his pretense, and see whether the man be
likely to do so much good in the World, as that God should bear witness to his
Person and Proceedings.

And indeed it is a great help to discern things of this Nature, to understand
the condition of the people, that either practice or promote them; and as much
as you see of Gods goodness impressed on their Judas might work M^racl^^ and
the m^n that Christ knew no^ might pretend they head wrought them, bu^ ne^^ther
since they le^t Christ, or were cast off by him.
souls, so much of his power, you may believe, going along with their actions,
if they savor of no more than ordinary men, in the one, ye may be sure they
are no more than ordinary men in the other; And if there be any extraordinary
evil principle of looseness to be discerned in their lives, there may be
suspected as extraordinary an evil principle of juggling in their practices; If
the vouchers of this practice among us, be people of no credit, and people
that have writ for, and maintained the worst practices, and cheats, that were
amongst us, these twenty years: I need say no more, than that in an age,
wherein from the rash believing of every thing we are come seriously to
believe nothing; Epicharmus his old Rule, will not be unseasonable, viz. (...)

With which in compliance with the time of night, and the importunity of your
Messenger, I will conclude, when I have told you, that there are in Spain you
know some Soldiers, of this Gentleman's profession, called Salutators, who
pretend to heal all sores with a touch, the application of white Linen, and
this form of Per Christum and cum Christo: Et in Christo est tibi Deo patri
omnipotenti, in unitate Spiritus sancti omnis honor, and gloria per omnia
secula seculorum oremus, salutaribus praecept is moniti, and divina
institutione formali audemus dicere, Pater noster qui es in Coelis, etc. Amen.
Jesus potentia patris, sapientia filii, virtus spiritus sancti sanet hoc vulnus
ab omni malo. Amen. Jesus Domine mi Jesus Christ, credo quod nocte Jovis Sancti
in caena, post quam lavastipedes tuorum sanctorum discipulorum; accepisti panem
sanctissimis manibus suis, and benedixisti and fregisti, and dedisti tu is
sanctis discipulis, dicens accipite and comedite, hoc enim est corpus meum,
similiter accepisti calicem in sanctissimas manus, and gratias egisti, and
tradidisti illis dicens; accepite and bibite, quia hic est meus sanguis novi
testamenti, qui pro mult is effundetur in remissionem peccaterum hoc
quotiescunque feceris, facite in meam commorationem, obseero te domine milesu
Christ ut per haec sanctissima verba, and per virtutem illorum, and per
meritum sanctissimae passionis tuae, sanetur hoc vulnus, and malum istud. A
usen Jesus. in nomine Patris and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen Jesus.

And these people though at first allowed, because one or two of the first of
them seemed to be serious The reason why the Salutators of Spain have been
restrained and punished.
men, and men of Estates, and because they pretended the public good, and took
no money, are now severely prohibited.

1. Because they are a lewd people, unlikely to have that Commerce with God
they pretend to.

2. Because they are but loose, and unsettled in Religion, and would render
others so.

3. Because they made the people tempt God to do that by an extraordinary way
of Miracles, which he had appointed to be done in the ordinary way of means
and Physic.

4. Because they had seduced people to the neglect of the ordinary means of
their preservation, to the danger of many peoples lives.

5. Because they brought the Curse of God upon poor people, many having
confessed, that they perished under the just hand of God, for having any thing
to do with these Salutators.

6. Because they were abetted by desperate men of dangerous principles and
practices.

7. Because they took the Name of God in vain, and abused his Word to
superstitious purposes.

8. Because they performed no real, or lasting cures.

9. Because they distracted the peoples thoughts Vid. Mallevt^ tract. de
mortissimis.
and prepared them for Diabolical illusion and Ma gick.

10. Because many of them could do nothing till they had well drunk (a pottle
of Sack, being required to a Miracle, when they pretended that they were
Inspired) and had with them a mad Dog.

11. Because they gave occasion to strange discourses about the Miracles of
Christ and his followers, and so overthrew the great ground of Faith.

12. Because they persuaded people to do themselves mischief, that they might
do cures.

13. Because there were several instances brought in of their confederacies,
impostures, and juggles.

In fine, because they did a world of mischief, and but little good.

Because some of them were convicted of familiarity with Satan: Because the
pretense and cheat, by reason of the curiosity of some, and necessity of
others, was spreading: because these Miracle-mongers proved at last Athiests,
Apostates, or Heretics, because it took people off their callings, spending
their time in vanities: Because some of them were Enthusiastical: because they
set many others upon unlawful distracting, and intolerable courses to attain
that gift: Because they were mostly men of bad looks: Because they took men off
their art, industry, and skill, pretending to that in Physic, that gifted men
do in Divinity, both with a design to overthrow the standing Ordinance, and
order of God.

All these the Articles against them in the Bishop of Ypres Court, and in other
Ecclesiastical and civil Courts, to be considered by all sober Christians.

But what need, you will say, all this, when Mr. Stubbs himself in a Called the
Miraculous Conformist.
Book written in the man's behalf, has sufficiently laid open his pretense; for
indeea upon perusing that Book, I find,

1 That the ground Page the 3. of that Book.
of this strange attempt, is but an Impulse, and some chat thereupon between
him, his Wife, and a poor Woman of the Village.

2 That the man observing how his stroking Page 4.
was ineffectual upon some Diseases, betook himself, without any Voice or
Impulse, to Incision.

3 That Page 4.
Dean Rust being solemnly employed by my Lord Conway, to bring him from Ireland
to the Lady Conway, he came, and could do her no good.

4 That some say his body smells strongly, but Mr. Stubbs found it not so,
which if it did, there is nothing extraordinary in the Case.

5 That notwithstanding the pretended virtue of his body, together with the
pinching, rubbing and cutting of peoples Sores, and the peoples imagination
fermenting the mass of blood, spirits, and humors, (wherein lie all the
diseases as Mr. Stubbes says he pretends to cure, for he medleth not with any
in whom nature is decayed) all that he can do, is to ease people a little by
Pinching and Rubbing an humor from one place to another, which Mr. Stubbes
takes some pains to prove Natural, Ordinary, and not at all Miraculous, by
many instances; Of the said Poole, where he shows how Nature and Art does as
much as Mr. Greatrates pretends to
Page 18, 24. 25. yea, and Page 14, he concludes that the removing of a
distemper from place to place, is the effect of Nature invigorated, and not of
his touch.

6. That there are none perfectly healed by him, one Gentleman failing because
he laid aside his Cap too soon; The Gentleman at my Lord Co^wayes, wh^m he
Pinched from place to place to no purpose.
another because the humor settled again into an Aposthume: The Maid that was
struck dumb by a Poison, being able only to cry Ma for mother, for all his
stroaking; the Gentlewoman that he went to dispossess of a Devil, when she was
only troubled with the wind, being still troubled with the Colic; and the
rest of the simple people mentioned in that book, finding no other benefit of
his rubbing, pinching, and cutting, than a little alteration, as they poor
people imagine for the present.

7. And therefore Mr. Stubbes says, that as he added Lancing and Pinching,
without any extraordinary Commission to his stroaking, when he saw it would not
do, so he added Physic to his Launcing; for he saw him apply Eye Salve to
one persons Eye, and he had leave of him to apply Physic to others after his
stroking; so dividing the honor of the Gift, that Mr. Greatrates touched, and
Mr. Stubbes Cured.

And to say no more, I find, that all that Mr. Stubbes can say for this
pretender, is, that for ought he can guess, by a few Page 4, 5. 14. he says
he had not the happiness to converse with him long.
hours converse with him, he may be a Primitive Christian, and a conformist,
though no rigid one; that there were formerly Gifts of Healing in the Primitive
times, which he proves out of I Cor. 12. 4, 5.

That the cheating Soldiers called Salutators in Spain; that Pyrrhus,
Vespatian, Simon Magus, Apollonius, and other Heathens, that some Turks, by a
Gift left them by Mahomet, do feats of the same nature; about whom Mr. Stubbes
refers us The substance whereof together with, etc.
to Delrio; who indeed has written six Books of Magic, not to approve, as a
man would think by Mr. Stubbes his quotation, but to discover these
Legerdemains.

And that he finds nothing in what he calls Miracles, but what he undertakes
to: Salve by Natural causes, Page 18, 19, 20, 21. the effects whereof, by
reason of the ignorance of some sort of people, may seem Miraculous, which to
others, more knowing, are ordinary, the Sympathetick Cure, and others of the
same nature may be thought Conjuring by the Vulgar, when they are known
Physic to Philosophers; and therefore when I have entreated you to pardon the
mistakes of a Letter, that I have not time to Read over; I conclude, that
though you and other Reverend Persons, may think charitably the man means no
hurt, all men confess, as well as our Society, that he can do no good.

March the 13th. 1665.
FINIS.

