THE PRESENT SVRVEIGH OF LONDON AND ENGLANDS STATE.

Containing A Topographicall description of all the particular Forts, Redoubts,
Breast-works, and Trenches newly erected round about the City on both sides of
the River, with the several Fortifications thereof.

And a perfect relation of some fatal accidents, and other disasters, which
fell out in the City and Country, during the Authors abode there.

Intermingled also with certain several Observations worthy of light and
memory.

By William Lithgow.

London, Printed by I. O. 1643.

The present Surveigh of London, and Englands State.
AFter long forty years wandering since my first launching abroad to surveigh
the spacious bounds and tertiat face of the ancient world; besides my daily
fastidious and now frequent p^edestriat progresses at home, and in neighbor
Regions about; and being fallen in the rotten bosom of declyning age, the sun
being set on the winter day of mine elabourat time, and that time past three
score years: yet now I say for diverse serious respects* in this instant year,
1643. April 24. it was my resolution to imbarke at Preston Pannes with sundry
passengers bound for London: Where weighing Ankers, and hoysing sail, with
room winds and fair weather, we coasted along the Brittannian shore. In all
which deserted way between Forth and Gravesend we found only three ships,
two Scots-men and a Noruegian, and one of the royal Whelps lying at Anchor in
AErmouth road, which made the sea resemble a wilderness, and the devasted
shore the comfortless sight of a desolate land. Where never heretofore
(winter excepted) these Tritonian bounds were seen (reciprocally taken) without
2000 sail, recoursing that sandy and shelfy marine

But the estate and affairs of this world are ever ranging, ever changing,
never constant; which made Solon tell Craesus that man should never reckon on
the felicity of this life, because there might be a mutability of fortune ere
death. The like may I now say of deplorable Germany, lately the mother soil
of Europe, yea, and the glory of the whole Universe, that never in these days
of antiquity could Chaldea, Chelfania, Assyria, and Mesopotamia, the four
principal pastures for the first Creation, compare with that almost invincible
Empire for Princes, Potentates, Nobility, Imperial Cities, Gentry,
Merchants, and rich Bowres; no, no, for it was the superabounding fullness of
men, money and might; and indeed nothing inferior (the fall of Adam reserved)
to the first oriental Paradise. And yet when the fullness of their pride,
luxury, gluttony, and libidinous lusts, were sprung on high, and crying for
Heavens all-commanding judgments, how soon with the sword, plague, and famine,
were they thrown down upon the desperate rocks of grievous desolation. And who
can tell (it is now begun) how soon the like punishment may fall upon this I Will,
the South part whereof being laden with self love, vain glory, the fatness
of vices, ambitious pride, and a contemptible disdain of all nations,
themselves excepted. So that their backs and bellies, like unto Castor and
Pollux are become the loadstone of their flattering follies and pampering
pleasures: That without some condign correction they might easily (in a
manner) forget the Creator, and so the Creature: Spain in this chastisement
may second Germany, France may resemble Spain; and I fear ere long (which God
evert) England shall be left the last mourner of all; bearing now (as it were)
almost the very effigy of the distracted and combustible Kingdoms in this
Europian tierce, upon the shoulders of her declining fortune.

But now reverting to my purpose, the first news I heard at my disbarking, was
the down-casting of the golden cross in Cheapside, to the which with speed I
approached, where I saw diverse imagious relicts tumbling down in the
bottomless pit of oblivion: upon the sequel day, May, 4. it was razed to the
ground, and the foundation thereof made level with the street, which was not
done by tumult, but by order of Parliament. And now I will neither commend nor
condemn the fact, but this far I dare say, whilst it stood, it was a
monumentall ornament worthy of a royal City, and the beautiful object of
admiration to all spectatours and strangers. But indeed some idolatrous Papists
made it (in going by) the Sanctuary of their superstition, making homage to
it, and crossing their now crossed breasts, have left the golden cross to fall
down like Dagon at the feet of a happy begun reformation. So the third day
thereafter, they caused take down all the new and old crosses standing on
Churches, and steeple tops; and notwithstanding whereof, I still carry six
crosses on my arm, and the seventh cross still follows me against my will,
which the world may help, and I cannot prevent. Next upon Weddinsday ensuing
May 10. by order of Parliament, I saw at noone day two great heaps of books
burned, both where the golden cross formerly stood, and before the Royal
Exchange: Which books had been compyled by the Popish prelaticall faction, for
tollerating on the Sabbath day, sportings, pastimes, profane plays, and so
consequently all sorts of labor, (as the Papists do at this day in the Popes
own patrimoniall lands) prohibiting afternoon sermons, and commanding the
erection of Altars and homages thereto; which was done for the introduction of
the Mass, and other infinite pendicles of Popery.

And now truly I never saw London these forty years past so populous as now
it is* only there is a general muttering that money is hard to come by, and
that is, because all kind of trades and trading begin to decay, and they who
have money keep it close, for common employments are lately metamorphosed in
flying colors, toucking of Drums, inveloping scarffs, and Pandedalian
Feathers, wherein they have more pleasure than profit: And yet it best agrees
with the peoples nature, who delight mainly in public shows and frivole
ostentations. Indeed for victuals they have abundance, and plenty of all
things, and at an easy rate, and want for nothing as yet save only peace.

But it may truly be feared, that if these their general combustions draw to a
Winter leaguer, that both the City and Kingdom shall smart for it: And why?
because both the great armies, and also the petty armies in every County do so
sack and spoil the grounds of horses, bestiall, grass, corn, and hay, a^^
also pitifully plunder the people of moneys, victuals, and domestic furniture,
that the continuing of it in a short time shall ruin all.

And now to begin with the Cities insides, before I come to its outsides, and
fortifications, I found the River from Ratcliffe upwards, full of Merchant
ships, and they lying two and two, and side to side, with a pretty distance
from couple to couple, resembled as though they had been to make a sea fight:
But indeed they ly at their guard and are well provided. The first lamentation
their tongues offered me here was the dearth and scarcity of coals, and
notwithstanding of the daily relief they get from Scotland yet they are loath
to part with money, and in a wringing way, and grudging at their infranchized
lot, heavily bewail the loss of their advantageous Tyne. I confess their
weekly taxes are great levied to maintain the Parliaments army, besides many
other burdens that daily depend upon their purses: And for all this (besides
the monthly contributions of the nine circumjacent counties) the Armies pay
falls daily short, and they can neither march nor fight for lack of moneys, the
want whereof being the main and chiefest cause of their slow proceedings. Which
weekly collections, according to that multipotent place, and the Country about
is truly supposed to amount ( per annum) to three millions of money. But how
it is disposed, either by the hands of corruption, or if reserved policy for
future respects be the maine restraint, I cease to discern it, though many
thousands daily gape for it. Which makes me call to mind, that when the last
Constantine lost Constantinople, Mahomet the second, the great Turk found such
store of gold and silver amongst the inhabitants, that he sighing, said, O! if
the Christians had been as bountiful for their own defensive safety* as they
had substance to do it, all the power of the Scythian Ottomans had never been
able to have dantoned their might. So peradventure the like (as God forbid) may
be said of London if it should fall out so; then would these rotten
Money-mongers lurking within her bowels be left the miserable and mourning
spectators (as the Greeks were) upon their own Idolatrized coin. For the long
delicacie of doting peace and pleasure so effeminates the world, that they
begin to spurn at trouble before distress appear, which sensuality begets,
and disdainful pride would contemn, and yet cannot prevent what the heavens
determine.

Now for a general view, the City has many courts du guard with new
barrocaded posts, and they strongly girded with great chains of iron; and all
the opening passages at street ends for the fields and road ways are in like
manner made defensive, and strictly watched: The sides of the river, as at
Billinsgate, and other places have also Courts du guard, and they nightly
guarded with companies of the Traind Bands: which number being of six old
Regiments, and they six thousand men, are now doubled with six new Regiments,
which makes up twelve thousands in all. Beyond the River in the borrough of
Southwark is the self same discipline observed, and all under the command of
the City. So is Westminster, the Strand, and all the liberties thereof, now
taken in under the custody of London: and their Traind Bands there, I mean of
Westminster are not be trusted with neither Parliament nor City; so that the
quotidian guard of the Parliament come daily out of London: where they are
placed in two courts of Guard, the one before the Hall in the Palace Court near
to the water stairs, the other Court du Guard stands in the Parliament yard,
where the Peers ascend and descend from the upper House. Both Houses of Peers
and Commons having double Sentinels with Pick and Musket at the entry of
their sitting places, remain there ay as long as the Parliamentariat bodies
remain: The number of the upper-house amounts to twenty six Noblemen,
besides eight others at sea and land service, the lower house by a just
computation of the Clark and given to me in Print, amount to two hundred and
twelve Knights, and Commissioners, besides the deserted persons of both Houses,
and some of them lately returned. And what shall I say, I found the
Street-enravelld Court before White hall gate, guarded also with a Court du
Guard, a noveltie beyond novelties, and what was more rarer, I found the g^^^^^
growing deep in the royal Courts of the Kings House, which i^^deed was a
lamentable sight. And in that sight I rancountere^ there abouts with George
Withers my fellow Poet, and once my fellow-prisoner, where digesting some
discourses (for he is now a Captain of a Horse Troop) he told me that he had
been plundered at Michalmes last by some of the Kings forces in Surray, for
there he has a wife and residence, where being civilizd, his Poetic mansion
met with uncivil fellows, I would say Malignants.

And here I may not forget the false and lying aspersions laid upon Scotland
lately by two English authors, the one work, named the plain English, where his
perjuriat falsehood averres, that (...) hold and enjoy our present peace and
safety, of some of their Peers in England; when contrariwise they hold their
Parliament and present liberty of Scotland, and our invincible army which
procured it. The other work entitled, The subjects liberty, will have
Scotland at the first but a Dukedoome and in subjection to England; see how
these damnable villains can coin and invent (an they please) such base
absurdities, and yet go free unpunished And why? because they have from ancient
and preteriat times, a general and natural malignitie against our Nation,
which neither can nor will be extermined till the day of doom; for it runs
in a successive line, as the Conduit from the fountain ingorgeth the Pond. I
would speak more freely here, and that justly, but that I do not love to be
accounted for a Malignant, whilst there are too many already of that
sycophantick kind in both Kingdoms; and so I proceed in a fair way.

The daily musters and shows of all sorts of Londoners here, were wondrous
commendable in marching to the fields and outworks; (as Merchants, Silk-men,
Macers, Shopkeepers, etc.) with great alacrity, carrying on their shoulders
iron Mattocks, and wooden shovels, with roaring Drums, flying colors, and
gurded swords; most companies being also interlarded with Ladies, women, and
girls: two and two carrying baskets for to advance the labor, where diverse
wrought till they fell sick of their pains. All the trades and whole
inhabitants (the I^sey Courts excepted) within the City, Liberties, Suburbs,
and circumjacent dependencies went day about to all quarters for the erection
of their Forts and Trenches: and this has continued these four months past,
the half of which time I was a spectator to their laborious toil, as after you
shall hear. The greatest company which I observed to march out, according to
their turns were the Taylours, carrying forty six colors, and seconded
with eight thousand lusty men: The next in greatness of number, were the
Watermen, amounting to seven thousand Tuggers, carrying thirty seven colors:
The Shoe-makers were five thousand and odds carrying twenty nine collors; and
indeed the gentle craft could never heretofore have mustered so many here since
Crispus and Crispianus, the two supposed Princes, their Patrones, forsook the
Trade. Neither in this Catologue dare I forget the Porters that marched forth
one day toward Tayburne fields, carrying twenty three colors, being three
thousand white shirts: And ( verbi gratia) upon that same day, a thousand
Oyster wives advanced from Billinsgate through Cheapside to Crabtree field all
alone, with drums and flying colors, and in a civil manner, their goddess
Bellona leading them in a martial way. The next day following May 17, the
Feltmakers, Fishmongers, and Coupers, marched three several ways to three
sundry fields, carrying twenty four colors, had their number amounted to
three thousand and odds.

And now to shun prolixitie, let the ingenious Reader judge, what number of
numbers would these sequel Trades be, as Goldsmiths, Ferriers, Bakers, Bruers,
Butchers, Cooks, Candlemakers, Smiths, Cutlers, Carpenters, Shipwrights,
Joyners, Boxmakers, Wheelewrights, Turners, Carmers, and four thousand
Weavers, Braziers, Dyers, Imbrouderers, Horologiers, Watchmakers, Engravers,
Tinkers, Haberdashers, Feathermakers, Clothiers, Tanners, Curriers, Glovers,
Spurriers, Painters, Printers, Stationers, Bookbinders, Gunmakers, Glaziers,
Masons, Tecturers, Brickmakers, Plumbers, Vpholsters, Combemakers, Girdlers,
Cobblers, Chimney-sweepers, Jackfarmers, with many more that I can not recollect.
Which indeed (as they are of a mavelous great number) so it was a delicat
observation, to consider and remarke the indefatigable multitude and strength
of the City, never heretofore practiced nor exercised. The computation whereof
may sincirly amount to an hundred thousand able men, not reckoning any above
fifty years of age, although the latter number would far exceed the former.

And now closing this preceding passage, behold the superstitious Holy days
in the City, and Country, are not as hitherto abolished; Neither have they a
seeming purpose to abandon them, because they are the baits of profane
pleasures, and vicious wantonness, which their gadding inclinations love
rather to follow than forsake. Neither is their Service Book exterminated, but
in an ambiguous way some Churches professing it, and other some disallowing it;
I will not here expostulate between the mean and the manner, but surely there
is a great wisdom visibly seen in the general council, that will not
enforce a sudden alteration upon the People, till weightier matters be first
settled, lest the one half should devour the other, and the common estate of
the Commonweal be miserably ramversed, for as the Italian says, china Piano
ua sano, so say we, that soft fire makes sweet malt: Even so the prudent
proceeding of provident policy must with a multitude dally, as the Fisherman
does with a hooked Salmond, lets him strugle in the stream a while, and then
softly steals him to the land, where he is catchd and dispatchd. And now the
nature of man would ever either hear or see novelties, and here a special one;
the Tower of London from long antiquity, wont ever to guard the City as the
Eagle keeps her young ones from the Griffon) but now the city guards day and
night the Tower, lest Bishop Laud, and Bishop Wren should leap out through the
iron windows to swim on Thames, and that Euripus to swallow them down, which
should be a great pity, if the Popes indulgences could prevent it: And now I
recall at my first coming here, it was agitate in Parliament, to send these two
ghostly fathers to new England, that the great Ocean before their arrival
there, might purget hem (like to purgatory) of all the corruptions and
perfidious knaveries they had done in England, with many others these twenty
five years: This resolution was relented, which many a heart lamented: but it
may be against the next spring, they will either make sail or hing. The City
now has fourteen horse Troops, that scoute the high ways, both day and
night, and ride the round nightly twice about the foot squadrons, where so
their Sentinels are set at watch, and themselves to stand on guard, for this is
the military way of Mars.

And now coming to my maine purpose, I wish the Reader hold but conceive, as my
pen shall let him see, the fairest encompassed city in all Europe, which my
pedestriall march in twelve hours time painfully performed. And thus, three
days before my departure thence, I approached to make the toure round about,
and descending to the lower end of Wappine, there I began my circuit. Then
here close by the houses and the River Thames, I found a seven angled Fort,
erected of turffe, sand, watles, and earthen work, (as all the rest are
composed of the like) having aine Port holes, and as many cannons; and near
the top round about pallosaded with sharp wooden stakes sixth in the bulwarks
right out, and a foot distant from another, which are defensive for sudden
scalets, and single ditchd below, with a Court du guard within. Advancing
thence along the trench dyke (for all the Trenches are deep ditched about)
which runs through Wappine Fields, to the further end of Whitechappell, a
great way without Aldgate, and on the road way to Essex, I savv a nine
angled Fort, only pallosaded and single ditched, and planted with seven pieces
of brazen Ordonance, and a Court du guard, composd of timber, and thatched
with tyle stone, as all the rest are: Where toward Myle-end green I beheld
there two pertie Forts or Redoubts, each of them with three Ports and they
Cannoned, stand within an entrenched closure, having five courts du guard,
that secure the passage way: From White chapel Fort Northvvestvvard, I
trenched along the Trenches to Shoarditch Fort, standing mainly quadrangled,
single pallosaded, and single ditched, carrying on three corners of the four,
eight Demicanons and a royal court du guard within: And without which and at
Kingsland (being the old post way for Scotland) there stands two earthen
Rampires, with two Courts du guard. Thence returned; I followed along the
champaine breastworkes to Hogston, where I found a quadrat Fort, well
pallosaded and planted with five Cannons at the two field corners: The strength
is double ditched, and between the two it is strongly barrocaded, with wooden
stakes, every stake near the top being fenced with three iron hooks of a
span long. Thence I marched through Fineberry fields along the Trench
(enclosing there Moorefields) and came to Mount-milhill, Fort, (for all the
Forts about are blank and blanke in sight of other) where being arryved I found
it standing on the high way near to the Red Bull: This is a large and singular
fortification, having a Fort above and within a Fort, the lowest consisting of
five angles, two whereof toward the fields, are each of them thrice ported,
having as many great Cannon, with a flanking piece from a hid corner: The upper
Fort standing circular is furnished with eleven pieces of Cannon real, which
command all the rest, and upon the bosom top of all stands a Windmill. The
lower bulwarks, are first pallosaded round about, and near their tops, and then
in the middle flank between the two ditches strongly barrocaded, beside two
Countercarps, and three Redoubts of lesser importance, yet all defensive. This
is one of the chief Forts about the city and first erected. Thence footing
along the Trench dyke (which is three yards thick, and on the ditch side twice
as high) I courted Islington, at the lower end whereof I found a strong and
large strength, called Waterfield Fort, having within two utter works a
circularie Mount, stored with nine great pieces of artillery, and on the point
of a Countercarp three pieces more: there I saw the longest Court du guard)
being longer then two ordinary Churches) that I have seen as yet. A little
further (about ten pair buts) I appoached to Islington hill, where there is
erected a most rare and admirable Fortification, called Strawes Fort, but now
Fort Royal. It has eight angles, and a spacious interlarding distance,
between each of the cornerd bulwarks: This Fort is mavelous perspicuous and
prospective both for City and country, commanding all the other inferior
fortifications, near and about that part of the enclining grounds. The
Northeast cornerd Bulwark is double altified above the rest of the work,
carrying on the two sides thereof six Cannon Royal; and the two South and
West corners are mutually charged on each of them, with two half Culverins of
Brass; and the East promontoriat corner adorned with three whole Cannon. The
altified bulvvark is twice pallosaded, and at the root of the work
answerable to the top of the inmost ditch, it is strongly barrocaded; the
middle place betvveen the two ditches is enravelled all about with lovv
wooden Stakes, and long pikes of thrown pointed iron, and without all
which works there is a breastvvork cast up, and made defensive either for the
first assault, or for the second invasion.

Descending thence to Holburne fields I accoasted a strength, named, Pinder of
Wakfields Fort, being only quadrangled, pallosaded, and single ditched, and
enstalled with five great Ordonance and a Court du guard. Abandoning the place
and shoaring along the Trench a little further to Longfield, I presently
rancountred with North Hampton Fort, consisting of two divided quadrangled
bulvvarks, and each of them garnished with four Demiculverins of brass; the
interveening distance fortified, the two former bodies are pallosaded, double
ditched, and the middle division vvherof, barrocaded with stakes a yard high,
and each of them hooked with three counterthwarting pikes of iron: Whence
conducted along with the Trenches through S. Geilles fields, I arryved at
Crabtree fort, in Crabtree fields, standing in a quadrangle, and laden with
six Culverines of brass, placed on the two field corners, defying the
Malignants or what assailants may there encroach: The fort is pallosaded above,
doubleditched below, and barrocaded in the middle division, with thick standing
stakes and they conterbanded with thwarting iron pyks and a stately court
duguard within:

Leaving this and marching along the circulary line, it grieved me to see so
many rich grounds of grass utterly spoiled with (...) erection of these works,
insomuch that horse and cattle certaynels will come short of their food there
for seven years and the owners thereof must fall pity fully short of their
yearly profits, for where trouble is, then comes misery Having left the
aforsaid fort, I saluted the banqueting house fortress, composed of two forts
upon Tayburne way and Maribone fields: Here I found both the forts answerable
to other, the way only divyding them, and they both, pallosaded, double ditchd,
and barrocaded with iron pyks; the one cled with eight demicanon, and the other
fensed with four semiculverines of iron; both wondrous defensible. A little
advanced from this Tayburnian passage, I insulted upon Sergeants fort, composed
mainly of four angles, a court du guard five piece of ordonance and fortifyed
in all things, just like to the former: departing thence, I shortly encroached
upon Head Park-corner fort, which is a maine great strength, having one fort
above, and within another, and the third fort closing the road way stands
breasting the other two: The upmost inveloped fort, overtopping the other two;
is garnishd with eight cannon real and on the inferior bulwark northward,
being a second part of the forts maine body, there be entrusted there five
brazen half-cannons more; and before it toward the fields a breasting
Countercarp: The third dependant fort stands enstald with six demie
culverines, amounting to ninteen of all: This great fortification, is but only
pallosaded and single ditched, yet wonderful strong and of great bounds: all
the three having seventeen angles. And this this is the west most fortification
enclosing the park, the fields, the large mansion, and other enlargements
belonging to S. James his liberty. Thence drayning along a devalling Trench
through Milkfield toward Tuttle fields, I rancontred with two half moon works;
some ten pair buttes distant, both of them pallosaded, barrocaded with irne
picks, and each of them planted with three demie cannon of brass: Both these
works stand sighting Chelsay: Whence breasting along the breastworkes I happily
embraced Tutlefield fort, my familiar ground of old acquaintance. This
fortress is composed of nine angles being pallosaded, and only double ditched,
and surcharged at the fouth and west corners with six pieces of ordonance and a
court du guard. Here is an end of Midlesex labor: from which posternall place,
I courted the river side, and crossed over to Lambethin Surray: In the head of
which town westward, and close by the river, I visited the nyne-elmes fort,
composed of four angles, five ports, and five demiculverines being slenderly
pallosaded and single ditched, for this fort and Tuttle fort stand opposite to
other, the river only dividing them. Whence following my circulary progress I
enhaunced my desired view of Fauxhall fort, which indeed is a delicate large
and defensive work being twice pallosaded* once ditched, and bearing the
burden of fourteen Culverines. And hence transported amain with a greedy
desire to surveigh S. Georges fields, I found half way hither a singular
Countercarp, and fortified, besides workmanship, with three half culverines;
and then I arryved at the fort royal in Georges field: Which indeed of all the
works I have as yet made mention of, this is the only rarest and fairest, and
contryved and reared after the modern model of an impregnant Citadale: Having
four large bulwarks, every one counter banding another from flank to flank,
and the four interveining quarters are also interlaced with spacious and
defensible midworks: The maine bosom of which, with the incumbent insides of
the four Promontories, may easily contain three thousand men the four
corners being destinated for twenty four cannon real. The exterior works are
not as yet accomplished (although fast advancing) but certainly they will be
perfyted after the Londonian forts as I have newly rehearsed; Neither are the
trenches done which are drawn a long thence to the top of Southwark called
Nevington fort: The which is composed of two flanking Redoubts, divyding nine
pieces of ordonance between them, having two courts du-guard, and backed with
two Countercarps, infringing the road way passenger, till a condign trial of
what are you what carry you and from whence came you be demanded; hence I
continued my purpose to the top of Kentstreet and found there only a circulary
rampire of small importance fensed with a single ditch between two ditches, and
enstald with five piece of ordonance, and so is the other at the back of
Redre^^ but more defensible then the other: yet they are both to be interlarded
with redoubts, and countercarps, in the entrenched grounds. So here at
Redreiff-fort, just opposite to Wapine fort, I finished the pilgrimagious toil
of a wearisome days journey, the circuit whereof on both sides the river
amounts to eighteen Kentishmyles. From which I may say, that London was never
truly London till now, for now she sits like a noble lady upon a royal thron,
securing all her encroaching pendicles under the wings of a motherly
protection; yet these limits were never heretofore granted till the Parliament
for their better safety, confirmed this construction; that (Grand- Cayro
excepted) I have not seen a larger inveloped compass within the whole
universe. By which computation I apprehend that this circuit comprehends above
five hundred thousand dwelling houses, and in them large three millions of
souls, that me thinks he were a happy Prince, that could be but only King of
such a city, as London now sits entrenched though he had no more Provinces
besides. And now the maine number of all these circulating fortresses (besides
redoubtes, countercarps and halfmoon-workes along the trenches) amount to
twenty four forts in all; and upon them planted and resetled two hundred and
twelve pieces of Cannon, which indeed is a mighty and tremenduous sight, where
Vulcan and Bellona mean to make a bloody match if the esurious Assailants
should come in a tragical inconsiderable way, to surpryse the virginity of
these new and now almost finished Fortifications. Which indeed have been very
chargeable to the City, and daily will be more, for all the Port holes are
soled and syded with timber, the Plat forms where the Cannons ly, are laid
with strong oaken planks; all the Ordonance are mounted upon new wheels,
besides the pallosading and barrocading of them without, with iron works, and
other engynes.

And now sorest in the daily maintaining of Commanders and forces into them,
with ammunition and all things necessary both for the Forts and Soldiers. But
it is no matter, let Guilth'all pay for all, for there lies the Treasure and
weekly collections of the City, which amounts to twelve thousand pound
sterling a week, besides the Country about: and moreover, the customs, the
Royal rents, the Episcopal revenues, the plundring of Malignants, and all lie
there: where there are sitting a daily Committee appointed by the Parliament
and City, who have the disposing of all, as they think sitting* notwithstanding
they must return their accounts to both the Houses.

And now in discoursing of these Forts, I have been somewhat prolixious, not
usual in my former styles, but done of purpose, that the Reader may conceive
by Paper, which I have known by occular experience, and so I proceed.

Now to observe in these following consequences my former condition, I will be
as indifferent as these relenting times may suffer me; and thus I begin: The
chiefest conflicts and accidents, which actually fell out in my being here,
were only three* The first was the intaking of Redding by General Essex, and
that repulsing skirmish fought at Cussan bridge, the royal Patriot of the
Country being there in person: for surrendering of which town, Colonel
Fielding then governor thereof, was lately condemned by a Council of war held
at Oxford, to be shot dead at a post.

The second accidental blow May 12. was that conflict in Cornwall, where sir
Ralph Hapton prevailed against some of the Earl of Stamfords forces, he being
for the time in Exceter, and had left five traind bands of that County, to
second his entrenched Brigad, which when Hampton fell on, they fled, and left
Stamfords forces to find the sweet and smart of life and death from the
adversary, some taken, and some dispatchd, and yet Stamford was equal with
that defeat the day following. Hapton was and is for his Majesty, and Lord
Stamford for the Parliament.

The third and most remarkable of all, was that prevalent victory, May 20.
which the Lord Fairfax son obtained at Wakfield in Yorkshyre, against Colonel
Gowring and his forces, being a part of the Queens army led under General
King, a conjunc^ with the L Newcastle, where Fairfax put to flight and rout the
whole Brigad, taking Colonel Gowring prisoner with twenty five pryme officers,
and fifteen hundred common Soldiers, so that none escaped save some fevv
horse troops, and a fevv of them slain: for the which auspicuous happiness,
there was solemn thanks given to God through all the Churches in London May
28 being sunday, and this grateful celebration was ordered by the Parliament
to be done. Colonel Gowring, and a Lieutenant Colonel, with some serjant
Majors and special Captains, were sent to Sir John Hottam governnour of Hull
to be enterained there as captives, because they love powder so well, there is
a great Magazin standing there, where I leave them to smart, till they find a
better heart: But by your leave, Gowring was once taken before by the
Parliaments forces, and thereafter swore at his enlargement never to carry
arms any more against them; but now what the council of war will modifie I
know not, let mercy or the martial law decyde it. Neither will I meddle here
with that promiscuous battle fought at Edgehill or Keynton, where both the
armies left other without either flight or following: nor will I report of that
unhappy business of Brandford (though in the end it proved happy for London)
because they do carry a reflection to a greater eminency, than my pen dare to
contend with.

And indeed all the Counties of England (except the five confederat Counties,
and Kent that are (and many more) for the great Council) are in a combustion,
some for the Papists, some for the Parliament, and all for the King: But
understand me better, and be not misled, take not this general uproare (as I
may say) to be between our gracious King and his loving Subjects; No, no, The
quarrel depends only and absolutely between the Papists and Protestants;
for either must the Gospel prevail with us, else their Idolatry shall
overtrample all; and therefore look to it who may, for here is the main
matter. And yet observe more, policy was wont to depend upon prudencie and
providence, virtue being the sole foundation of both: but now it depends upon
perjury and falsehood, perfidious dissimulation being the groundwork of its
deceitfulness; and a sophistical habit, the sycophantick boldness of its
brazen face: Great God amend it, else speedily mend it, for this distracted
I Will is over burdened with the filthy contagion of its forsworn falsities; and
honesty and honor miserably misregarded.

Neither may I forget that hard and unkindly usage that some of my country
gallants have got there, being about an hundred and fifty of them; all officers
and soldiers of fortune; And all and most of them being enrolled, some have
attended ten months, some longer, some lesser time, and yet can neither get
employment, pay, nor pass from the Parliament, to their great undoing and
loss of time. But indeed at their first going to the field (not they) but some
other special Commanders were held in great estimation, but as soon as the
English begun to learn the military art of discipline from our Scots
Cavaliers, they begun to contemn them, and wring them out piece and piece from
their employments and charge. I will not herein particularize any more,
(although duty commands me) least I be found refractary, to that quiet and
happy looked for association. But indeed their contemptible ambition, cannot
away with our generous Countrymen any longer, than they have reacquisted their
own ends.

And now some of their flattering Ruffians, begin to direct their soldiers
with lectorall lessons, as doting Phormio, would have taught Hanniball to
fight, and forgetting the true discipline, would put all upon ignorant
practice. So now I call to mind about Whitsontide last, there was such an
exclamation against the Scots for a weeks time as was pittyfull to hear,
tearming us (commonly and disdainfully) false Scots: with many other
incompatible execrations; And those their calumnies and despite arose from an
employment sent from Chester to York, the effect we know, the event is not
finished, but this I may say since that imploring missive was published here in
Print, the name of a Scot is grown so odious amongst Londoners, as the name of
Satan is to the soul of a Saint. Yet they are still longing and praying for
our help. But wishing and woulding (we say) makes poor housholding: Nay, their
tongues challenge our assistance by way of obligation, affirming that we first
begun it and therefore should help to end it; To whom I often answered, that
this combustion came first from them, and now it is returned again in their own
bosom. And Scotland has done for them (said I) which they could not do for
themselves which you all acknowledge and yet are ungrateful; And besides the
great sums of moneys resting indebted by their publict faith to our Nation,
for that friendly aid, yet our Kingdom keeps now an army in Ireland to danton
these bloody Rebels, set against your peace, and our profession; and as yet
they have received no acknowledgement from your Parliament therefore; And said
I cast away your ceremonies your holy days, superstitious rites, your Romish
letanie, your dregs of Popery, and upbraiding of our cavaliers, and then will
Scotland prove a true Sister to England; which if not, why should they go fight
to maintain your Fopperies, Many such expostulations had I with hundreds of
them. The recitation whereof to avoid prolixitie I purposly omit. And
notwithstanding whereof, yet the groaning and mourning people crave
commisseration, for even now they are begun to collect a several domestic
contribution through London, and the now enclosed circumjacent parts thereof,
for the regaining of coal again winter, and thus, Every house according to the
chaulders they spend less or more yearly shall presently advance as much money
(to set forth a present navy and forces for recovering of Newcastle) viz.
twenty shillings sterling for the chaulder, and are to receive the coals (when
they get them) at the same rate, which will draw to a marveilous mass of money
since the meanest house will spend three or four chaulder a year. So is there
amongst the adventurers here, for the relief of Jreland another colection
presently in hand and for defraying the charges of the Scottish army there. And
many like burdens have the people lying upon their necks, besides the
hebdomadall and domestical pay of Essex army. The continuance of which, will
utterly undo the poorer sort, and make the rich to grumble.

And I may not thrust in oblivion here, the great sea navy weekly maintained by
the Parliament and people, round about the coasts of England and Jreland,
though to small purpose, yet to an infinite deal of charges, which indeed the
commons must bear, the Parliament command, and the shore loytering Lubbards
consume. But now to return to both armies at this instant June. 28. they are
lying within four miles of other, and near to Oxford, where selected troup
parties on both sides, now and then are snarling at other like unto Hircanian
wolves, but seldom byte, unles it be with a flying farewell. The Parliaments
army is 30 thousand strong, and daily grow stronger and stronger, both out of
Kent, the city, and the confederat Countyes: The Kings army, but rather the
Papists and Malignants forces, are nowayes answerable to their adversaries
number, neither for pay, nor power.

But I must confess, they are both grievous plunderers of the commons
wheresoever they come. Although the Parliaments army be daily and orderly
paid; which the other is not. And it is daily expected they shall shortly
either fight or flee, or else do both; where after which we hope the Papists
shall seize upon the mountains of Wales for their refuge: For if it draw, (as
it is very likely) to a local and lingering war, the whole Kingdom shall be
utterly spoiled, and undone before the next approaching year. As for their
captives on both sides they are many, and left misregarded, neither will they
interchange quality for quality with other, and our countrymen Sir William
Ballantine, and Colonel Cocheran with diverse others ly incarcerated in
Windsore castle, under the Parliaments reverence; so are also Colonel
Connesby, Sir Villiam Crofts englishmen and many other Cavaleirs enthralld at
Bristoll under the same reverence and condition; besides Canterburryes house in
Lambeth now filld full of the like stuff, and honest doctor Lichton appointed
for their keeper; Which countryman of ours, was pitifully disfigured and
demayned by the villainous tyrannical despite of William Laud, who shortly is
to undergo his trials for his former treason, as the Parliament have newly
declared. Observe here Gods providence, how Lichton, being but lately released
from long imprisonment, is now put in Lauds house, and cruel Laud expuls'd
from his princely mansion is now lying fast prisoner in the Tower; being both
Physicians, Lauds charge should have been for the soul, but indeed Lichton is a
honester Physician for the body, and a better Christian which crowns all.

And to engrosse here further discourse, Colonel Bruce is newly committed to
prison, by the Parliament, and his goods that were embarked for Scotland, are
disbarked again and retained for the Parliaments use, till further trial be
had of his negotiating in Jreland these certain years past, with the mere and
barbarous Jrish, and upon what authority he went there so often.

About this time, June 23. Colonel Hurry made a start to Oxford, having just
reason, considering diverse affronts he had received, and could not be righted
neither by Committees nor Martial law, which here I forbear to particularize.
But we expect ere long he shall deservingly repay all: And why? because there
is naught can kill merit sooner than ingratitude, nor enforce a noble
disposition to be longer indebted to a misregarding friend, than a just revenge
commands expedition. And let me tell you that now presently the sea here and
there is spotted with Dunkirker Frigots under the color of Irish rogues, and
Fammouth in Cornwall is become the mother Harlot of these bastard-begotten
Brigants, being the chief place of their receptance and refuge. I will not
touch here the condition nor manner how, because understanding may conceive it.
And now the convention of some sound and learned Divines, is presently in hand,
who were summond hither by Parliamentall power to sit and meet in Westminster
Palace for reforming of Religion, and in abolishing the former fopperies
thereof; and they are to continue there, during the indurance of Parliament;
being to be assisted with some Nobles, and members of the House of Commons, for
the better performance of their burdenable task, where I leave them to a
happy conclusion.

Neither may I here obumbrate the memory of this late design, framed for the
overthrow of Parliament and London: The discovery and deliverie whereof was
wonderful, and yet the purpose far more cruel if it had taken effect: I will
not further insist herein, since the Oracle of the lower House has twice
already most largely manifested the same, both under print and power. But this
much I may avouch, that if that unnatural attempt had prevailed, then and
there, had I doubtless suffered with the rest: For now as I live to Malaga a
living Martyr, so then they had sacrifized me with London a dying Martyr.
Yea, and the like design, and that same time, was contrived against Bristol,
whereupon there were two of the villains hanged for their pains. There was a
solemn thanksgiving to God through London, June 15 and the Country about for
that happy day of their deliverance, and forty six of their adversaries
taken, and under trial of the Martial Law. And although every man wishes and
speaks as he affects, yet have I indifferently (like to the passenger sailing
betvveene Scylla and Charibdis) carried my self to neither hand, but in a just
way keeping a right course, least I should have offended the truth, and so
have slain the honesty of my good intention. For although it is impossible to
give all parties content, yet I had rather please many as to offend any. And
now to close, Almighty God preserve aright, and sanctify the royal heart of
our dread Liege and governor: And now good Lord, either in thy mercy convert
the Papists, else in thy fury confound them, and turn their bloody svvords
back in their own bosoms, that their devilish designs may never hence forth
prevail any more against thy Saints and choicelings; and send us and all true
believers, the life and light of peace and truth. Amen.

FINIS.

