A Lively POURTRAICTURE OF THE FACE OF THIS COMMONWEALTH, Exactly drawn By
LEWIS the Fourth, OF FRANCE, Of Famous Memory.

Printed in the year, 1659.

LEWIS THE FOURTH, To his Revolted Subjects.
BEfore I shall receive your Oath of Fidelity, which I may justly demand, and
you ought dutifully to take, I shall let you know you have recalled (this day)
a Prince (who during his Exile) had nothing else to do, but to study how to
Rule and Reign; and hereby I shall enforce you to believe that you shall not be
able to make a Royal Throne a passage into my Fathers prison: And after you
have presented me with a Crown, to dare to wish me so much ill, as once to
think of Chains and Irons. I know well, that this discourse will surprise you,
and that you did not believe when you presented me with a Scepter, that I
should not rather have received it with Thanks, then Reprehensions; but this
act is extraordinary in its commencement, in its progress, and in its
conclusion; and it is just that all circumstances should be proportionable. Let
it then suffice you only to know, that if I be ignorant to what point Subjects
are to pay their obeisance, yet I am not ignorant to what degree Sovereigns may
extend their clemency: Notwithstanding there is this difference betwixt them,
that the Subjects have no limits for the first, but Sovereigns have for the
latter. The People are obliged to the Princes wills, both by their Births and
their Laws. They owe them their goods, their lives and their liberties; and
their Princes owe them nothing but Justice, which can hardly pardon Traitors.
If these Truths and Maxims had been equally understood, and followed by the
late King my Sovereign, and you his People, affairs had not been in that sad
condition as they now are. The State had not been reduced to such confusion;
the Provinces had not been Cantonized; Germany had not been so full of
Factions; Italy had not been so divided; all the Cities of the kingdom had not
had so many kings as they now have Governors; you had not been guilty of the
crime of Treason, in elevating an Usurper to the Throne, the King my Father
might still have Reigned, or (at least) I might have received the Crown from
his hands, and not from yours; his Tomb might have been bedewed with my tears,
his Scepter had not been profaned, his Hearse might have been covered with
Trophies, and not with Chains. And (to speak all in a few words) you might have
been happy and innocent. But as his Clemency, and your Rebellion were the sole
causers of all these evils, so your Obedience, and my Justice, are the only
means to make reparation. Consider a little (I pray you) (that you fall not
back in the same estate wherein you were) in what Relation you now stand; and
in what condition I am. First, you have violated all sorts of Rights in the
person of your King, you have raised a War against him; you have assaulted him,
and afterward poisoned him; you have abused the confidence he had in you, you
have detained him prisoner with as great Treason as Injustice, with as great
insolency as cruelty: an injury which was never offered (hardly) to the person
of an ordinary Herald. Thus you have violated, and impudently abused your King;
you have detained him prisoner during a Treaty of Peace, for five years
together led him from prison to prison; you have forced him not only to set by
his Militia, and to depose his Crown; but you have constrained him with
violence to transfer it into other hands then mine. To conclude, you put him
to death, and you have reduced my self to a strict necessity, to search my
safety in my flight, and to go and show my misery beyond the Seas. Yet this
is not all, you have done one thing which never any did before, it has been
seen sometimes that the Grandees of a Kingdom have interposed themselves
against a Tyranny, and have destroyed it; but 'twas never seen that they
themselves elevated a Tyrant to the Throne as you have done: In these kind of
crimes the Abettors may be said to be more criminal then he who has received
all the fruit: For if each one of you in particular had aspired to set the
Crown upon his own head, you might have been more excusable, then to have
snatched it from your lawful Prince to place it on the head of an Usurper. But
you will say to me, the Prince that bore it was not able to support it. To that I
shall answer, As I have the honor to be his Son, and was his Subject, it
belongs not to me to determine what he could, or what he could not: seeing he
was my Father, I ought not to presume to be his judge, and seeing he was my
King, I ought not to be so impudent to censure, much less to condemn his
actions, he being not obliged to render an account to any, But God alone.
Believe then, the same respect I have for his memory, you ought to have had
for his person, he was your King as well as mine: seeing then that Kings are
called the Fathers of the people, Their Subjects are obliged to have for them a
true resentment of a respect, which their very birth may infuse into them:
Besides, as Sovereigns are the true Images of God, and that the splendour of
their puissance is a beam and ray of his power; Subjects ought to have an
equal submission to their Sovereigns will. When you see a Comet appear, the
Sun eclipsed, the Thunder bolt fall on innocent heads, when you see Floods
drown whole Towns, by their inundation, and the Sea (passing his bounds, and
swallowing whole Provinces in the bottom of the deep) devour them up: When you
see an Earthquake make Kingdoms tremble, and cause horrid devastations of whole
Countries, then (I say) it is permitted to the People to murmr? Do you not
discern the contrary, how in these occurrences they redouble their vows and
prayers, and that they are never more obedient to God, then at such a time, as
if God had forsaken his providence of the Universe? and when it shall so
happen, that Heaven (for the punishment of your sins) gives you a Prince under
whose Reign policy and prudence are not well observed, during whose Government
Foreign and Civil Wars devour all with cruel ravages: it belongs not then
to you to reprehend and condemn your Sovereign; for, is he feeble? then you
ought to sustain him: is he unfortunate? you ought to bemoan him: is he wicked?
you ought to look upon him as a scourge and chastisement sent from Heaven, and
to wait with Patience for a remedy from that hand, which has caused your
evil. For when a Prince commands an Army, and gives Battle; if it so happen
that the Soldiers perform not their devoires and duty, that his squadrons
yield, the main body be broken, and (in the end after he has done even
miracles in his person, he be yet constrained to quit the field, and to retreat
from his Enemies? is it not the Prince that loses the Battle? Is it not the
Prince that suffers the disgrace? Is it not the Prince that is reputed
vanquished? And that bears the loss and infamy of the day? Notwithstanding,
that by his own particular actions he has merited to be conqueror? seeing it
is thus, why will not you (in such conjunctions) bear with the infirmities, and
misfortunes of your Princes, as well as they do with yours? Or (to speak
something yet nearer to the quick) why do you not repair these disorders by
your own more exact obedience? The Prince alone is obvious in a Battle to the
infamy, Cowardice and misfortune of his whole Army, and you are thousands, who
are obliged to strengthen the Authority and Honor of your King, which he
cannot support with his single valor. Believe me, if all Subjects would be
loyal, no Kingdom could be miserable: and if all Princes thought more of
severity then of Clemency, there would not be so many Subjects, Rebels.
Moreover, if it were permitted to the Capritious people to take and give
Crowns, when they fancied a change: I conceive there is not a Shepherd but
might hope to be a King, and not a King but might be reduced to be a Shepherd;
so unruly and uncertain are their floating judgments. But (to speak the truth
to you) these things ought not thus to pass: we are your Masters, and you ought
not to become ours. It is not that I am ignorant that God disposes of Scepters
and Crowns, as he pleases, and gives them as he lists, and bestows them on, or
takes them from whom he will, and what he always does is without all
injustice; sometimes permitting that the people shalelevate to the Throne,
those who never pretended to such a high degree. But when such an accident
happens, it is usually in favor to those extraordinary persons in whom
Virtue has impressed a Royal Character so visible, that it were almost injustice
not to admit them Kings. To conclude, that which precedes, and that which
follows, ought to be sufficient to justify the effect, and it became Charles
Martel, Pepin, and Charlemain puissantly to erect a Throne, which was not
founded upon a line of right succession, yet even in this reencounter you will
see the event to this present has not authorized your design; The Engine of
this enterprise has been slain in battle: The Arch bishop of Rhemes preserved
not his life, but three days after he had anointed the usurper. But it is not
seasonable (to day) to exaggerate the injustice of your proceedings; I am not
willing to particularize other things, and I shall satisfy my self with
telling you, in general, that Kings ought not to lose their Crowns, but with
their lives, and that nothing can dispense Subjects from the respect, and
loyalty, which they owe to their Sovereigns, nor any pretense (whatsoever)
Authorize Treason and Rebellion. If sacred persons may not enjoy their
particular privilege, (which is derived from none but God) they shall be
exposed, more then others, to all sorts of miseries; Their guards will appear
to them instead of enemies, their Thrones will rather seem a direful precipice
then a place of honor, and safety; a King (of this kind) is no better then an
illustrious slave, when he shall have as many Masters as Subjects. This first
disorder will quickly cause a second, for when the Nobles of a Kingdom fail in
their duty to their Prince, their own Vassals, and Tenants will forfeit their
fealty to them, and then Rebellion communicated from the Grandees to the
Commons, and so descending from one Soul to another, an universal confusion
swells and devours all. Every one will command, and no person obey, (and in
this resentment of Levelling equality) each person proves a slave to his own
ambition, and no one, either rationally Commands himself or others. In effect,
this is the most sad condition that a Kingdom can fall into, when there is no
subjection, and where (for their punishment) the Prince has not force to
reduce the people to their obedience. For mine own part, when I consider my
self to be the Son of a King, the successor of so many Kings, and yet,
notwithstanding that I immediately succeed not my Father: This Idea imprints in
me, a strange confusion as toward you, and an extreme grief as toward my
self: for when I reflect how the same Subjects who inchained Charles in
Fetters, and gave the Crown to Robert, placed Lewis on the Throne, the malice
which they bore to the Father, may it not easily fall upon the Son? and may not
they fear that the Son will revenge the outrages committed against the Father?
but yet (may some one say,) those who have searched after you, and passed the
Seas to present you with a Scepter, they need not fear that the memory of
their ancient injustice will obliege you to punish them: They have reason
rather to believe, that this submission should blot out the memory of the first
disservice: It is certain, in the exact Rule of justice, no noble Action ought
to pass without his recompense: and it is really as true, That no crime ought
to escape without his punishment. After all these reasons, what ought you not
to fear? and what not to hope? you have recalled me to the Throne, it is true,
but if you had not, had you not been as Criminal against Lewis, as you had
been against Charles? he who gives to another, that which he has taken from
him, restores without doubt that which he has taken, but his restoration is
not a free present, and he ought not to expect thanks for an Action of that
nature. No, it suffices if one punish not the first, without intending any
recompense for the second. I may say also, that you understand not rightly all
my present concernments; for why? because you have not left me still in exile,
because you have rendered what justly appertained to me, Because you understood
that I came to re-demand mine own, not with a powerful Army: and (being tired
with your crimes and miseries) you believe you may probably disarm the fury of
Heaven, by this Act of justice: No, no, confide not in any of these pretenses,
for if I had not stronger considerations then these, I should commence my Reign
with the punishment of your treasons, I should send them to prison, who
restrained the person of my Father, and expose them to the most cruel
tortures, who contrived and caused his death, with the greatness of his
misfortunes. Those black crimes are such which nothing can exterminate;
Repentance and tears for common errors, where humane frailty may plead excuse,
and not for Traitors and Rebels, nor for those, who have destroyed Thrones and
Scepters, inchaind Kings, created and protected Tyrants. Think not then, that
by taking an Oath of fidelity (which is your duty) that I am thereby engaged
not to do what becomes a King. No, I scorn a Throne where I should be a slave,
and I had rather be obscured in prison, as my Father was, then not to Reign as
Sovereign. Those people with whom Loyalty is elective, forbear not to make
their Kings absolute, because they could have no pretense of Justice to do
otherwise: judge then, if those who hold their Crowns from Heaven ought to
acknowledge their subjects for their Masters, and whether they ought not rather
to punish, or pardon, as best agrees with their pleasure. In a word, I find it
far more glorious to be a loyal Subject, then to be a King disobeyed. Prepare
then your selves to render me all that obedience which you owe me, and (without
farther informing you whether you are to hope more for Clemency or Justice)
resolve your selves to an absolute submission, I know well some peevish
Politians will censure, that I act not as I ought in this conjuncture, and that
I should reflect on former passages with some sweetness, and gratify you with
Presents, to encourage you with future hopes, but I presume my Policy is more
generous, and more secure then theirs; for if I had so persuaded you, perhaps
you would have believed me to have been more fit to wear my Fathers Irons then
his Crown; and would have more suspected me of weakness and dissimulation, this
excessive indulgence would give you more of fear, and me less of honor and
estimation: I (being then so far from following such Maxims) tell you once
more, that I declare my self to be your King. And (without farther capitulation
with you) I ascend the Throne by the steps of mine own Authority as
Soveraignly, as if not recalled by you at all. Hitherto I have let you know I
am not ignorant how far the duty of Subjects ought to bend: But moreover, I
judge it fit to acquaint you to what degree Sovereign Clemency may extend it
self; to this end, that by that resentment, you may reasonably know what to
fear, and what to hope. Know then, that although a Prince may justly punish
Traitors, he may likewise pardon penitent offenders, principally then, when he
discerns his pardon shall reclaim insolency to obedience, and fidelity: For,
seeing Kings are the Fathers of the people, they ought not always to be too
severe in justice; and seeing that a Prince may afford grace and pardon to his
enemies, he may without doubt show pity and mercy to his own Subjects: He
cannot well punish them all, but must (in part) enfeeble himself; nor sluice out
their blood without emptying his own veins; wherefore he ought to spare them as
far as Reason and Justice can make the way passable. When then a particular
accident grows up against a Prince, or State, it may suffice that the heads of
some chief offenders be sacrificed to a reparation, and that by some severe
examples others may be instructed with exemplarie terror. But seeing that the
number of the offenders may prove infinite, and if all should be punished, a
desolation of entire Provinces might succeed, and consequently more men be lost
then 15 main Battails could devour, so that the piles of dead corpse should make
mountains, and severe execution of revenge cause Rivers of blood: in such
considerations (I say) it may be better to use a greater example of Clemency,
then of Justice, and hazard something, rather then to loose the lives of so
many miserable souls: and there cannot be a greater Victory then to vanquish
ones own passion in such dangerous conjunctures. Fear not then that I shall
abuse my Authority, since if I should punish all who have offended, I should
reduce my Kingdom to a forlorn Desert: For who is there among you that has not
failed of his duty? Some have done mischief, others have desired it, or at
least permitted it to be acted: some have assisted Robert, others have directly
fought against their King: some have most perfidiously laid their hands upon
their Anointed Lord, and committed a sacred person into prison, and others have
(at least forsaken him. The public good is pretext of all things, but
Rebellion alone is the mother of that horrid Monster. The Nobles agitated (as
they did) for their own interest, and the people by their madness, and
unadvisedness, seconded their fury, and put in execution the intention of the
Parricides: Your wives and your children are not exempt from these crimes,
seeing (without doubt) they made vows for their Parents offending, and prayers
against their Prince. Whereas then I cannot punish you all, but that I must
utterly exterminate you; it rests at my choice, whether I would become a King
without Subjects, or to pardon you out of pure grace and bounty, and not by
Obligations. It may be that during your lives you may repent you of your
ancient crimes, and become as faithful as you have been disobedient. But
(perhaps you will tell me) as to our selves, we have repented formerly before
we sent to you to come, and receive the Scepter which belongs to you. It Is
true, it may be as you have said, and that I have considered your Addresses to
me were to make reparation of what formerly passed, and that with those hands
you would advance to the Throne his Son whose Father you had barbarously
removed. But (after all) whosoever can abandon the path of Virtue to make
choice of that Vice, can again embrace that occasion if presented. Wherefore
you owe greater obligation to me then I can considence to you; for had I not
resolved to show Grace and Pardon, the great number of Nobles which the King of
England, my Uncle, has presented to me to attend my person, had not come
without Soldiers; each one of these who incircle me have troops at their
command: and I would not have received my Fathers Crown but in the head of a
victorious Army, in the midst of a Field covered with dead, and dying men;
bedewed with the blood of ten thousand Rebels: I would have been the Conqueror
of my Kingdom, and not have mounted unto the Throne supported by the same hands
who snatched it from my Fathers head. But I call to mind I am your King, as you
are also my Subjects, and in this relation I can love you yet, as guilty as
you are: I can have pity for your errors, and kindness for your obstinacy;
and I will not put my self into a condition of sadness after the Victory: I am
then come to you without an Army, to receive what is mine. This Action
(without doubt) is hardy, bold, and well deserves glory; and is sufficiently
obliging to demerit your acknowledgement in all degrees of fidelity. Before
that you were criminous, the Divine and humane right conjured you not to
forsake your Prince; but this day a new obligation chaineth you to more strict
obedience. It is not enough alone to be faithful, so to satisfy your duty;
but it is your part to blot out the memory of what is past, and to justify
what is present; you ought not to look on me merely as your King, but as a King
of your own choice, as a King who has pardoned you, as a King who confideth in
you, who now is commending his person into your hands, and commits the very
care of his life to your protection, next to Heaven: Study then to gratify
such pressing endearments, and provoke not the wrath of Heaven upon your heads
by new rebellions. Those who have examined your bypast actions, approve not
(doubtless) that resolution that I have taken to return into France as I have
done; for (they will tell me) what confidence can you have in those who had no
regard to their lawful Sovereign? They pretend much to desire your presence,
but their fears exceed their desires: And it is rather to secure your person,
then to advance your Scepter; that though you are this day recalled, yet as
long as your youth co^tinu'd, they sufferd you to live in exile, and obeyed
Robert; but he being dead (at present) and they seeing that you were in a
condition to obtain by force that which they now offer, they seem to repent,
not so much regarding your loss, as themselves. Behold the reasons which have
here contested with my resolution, which (seeing they are not without some
rational ground) I have not desisted to persuade my self, and that in double
choice, whether to make a War with you, or confide in you, I have chose the
latter as more glorious, and I love rather to hazard my person then the
destruction of all my Kingdoms. Those who taught me the art to Reign have well
foreseen the Exigencies to which I am now reduced, and therefore without doubt
they took so much care to advise me what to do in justice, and what I might be
allowed to do in Clemency: These two Virtues appear as contraries, but are
not; they accord easily in the heart of a Prince. They mutually give place each
one to the other in the Empire of his Soul, according to the diverse occasions
which are presented, for he ought always to abound in Clemency, and he ought
not likewise to be ever too severe with the strict measure of justice. Mercy
and justice are two excellent Virtues, but Prudence ought to employ them both:
And the Princes sole Will, ought to be the only rule to guide them. Having then
conjured you to an equal confidence in me, as I have in you, let an Act of
Oblivion pass, and let us remember no more former crimes, unless it be to
prevent relapses. Let us not look on the Tomb of Charles, but merely to bedew
it with the tears of tender Repentance: Not to make it an Altar whereupon to
sacrifice his Enemies; let us Raze to the ground those horrid Cells which
served for his Imprisonments thereby (if possible) to destroy the memory, and
not to leave a mark or point to posterity of those black crimes; let us ascend
the Throne with as much splendour as if it had never been profaned, and let us
Reign (if possible) with more honor and tranquillity then the late King my
Sovereign did. But do not think I shall be able to effect it without the aid
and succors of my Subjects; deceive not your selves, the valor and prudence
of the Prince are not sufficient of themselves to make a Kingdom happy: The
Subjects ought to contribute their proportions. The Nobles are to offer their
loyal Obedience, and the people to follow their good example, and both degrees
ought to be united in virtue: for otherwise he who gives Victory and Masters
Fortune, will approve the virtue of the Prince in punishing the vice of the
Subjects. Those who are valiant, do not always gain the Battle; and those who
are wise, are not always fortunate: However let us place our selves in such a
capacity, that we may be successful, though we cannot merit it. See here what
your Prince has said unto you, who in Lieu of punishing you, has pardoned
you; instead of fighting with you, prepares to defend you; instead of being
your Enemy, becomes your Conservator, and who by his own birth and your choice,
is now your Lord, your Master, and your King. These two qualities permit me not
to Capitulate farther with you: It suffices that I only add this; That I
admit you to hope for clemency, whilst I Reign, as I wish you to fear
always my justice, and beware that you put not your selves in a condition to
make trial of the second, or of loosing the former.

FINIS.

