The Grounds Of RELIGION.

Perlegi hunc libellum, in quo nihil reperio orthodoxae fidei vel bonis moribus
contrarium, quo minus cum publica utilitate imprimi possit.

Ex Aed. Sabaud. December. 24. 1661. GEORG. STRADLING, S. Th. Dr. Rev. in Christo
Patris Gilberti Episc. Land. Sacellanus Domesticus.

SOLOMON'S GATE, or An Entrance into the Church, Being A Familiar Explanation
of the Grounds of Religion contained In the Fowr Heads of CATECHISM, viz. The
Lord's Prayer. The Apostles Creed. The Ten Commandments. The Sacraments.


Fitted to Vulgar Understanding.

By A. L.

1 Cor. XIV. XXVI. Let all things be done to Edification. LONDON Printed by R.
DANIEL, 1662.

To the Most Illustrious Princess ANNE Duchess of YORK, etc.
Increase of Grace Here, and the Improved Rewards of Glory Hereafter.
MADAME,
THe Design of This plain Treatise being to Infuse Notions of Peace and
Obedience into the Minds of the Multitude, by a familiar Declaration of the
Grounds of Christianity, I could not think how to recommend it to public Use
with fairer Advantage, then from Your Highness Hands; who, as You are in Your
Person, both for Natural Endowments and Moral Excellencies, the Miroir of Your
Sex: so in Your Relations, are the Wife of a Prince, whose Heroical Virtues
rendered Him the Delight and Terror of Foreign Nations; and the Daughter of a
Statesman, whose Wisdom is the Pillar of public Interest, and His Counsels the
Buttress of our Peace. Indeed the Subject does of it self challenge a Reverence
from the Reader, and Usefulness is a just Apology for Plainness, besides that
Sacred Truths show best when they are seen in their own Light, and have that
Native Beauty about them, that they stand not in need of Additional Helps of
Art: Yet to secure the Author from that Censure, and the Work from that
Contempt, which the Vulgar Dress and mean Language, they appear in, is too apt
to Betray them to; the Luster of so Great a Patronage was even to Necessity
Convenient, and will beyond all Doubt be Sufficient. Your Highness Name will be
Amulet against the Censorious, and Charm to the Rude. Wherefore that I have
thus for the Public sake presumed to Address a particular Respect, will (I
hope) be Interpreted a pardonable Ambition in Him, who is

MADAME, Your Highness most Humble and Devoted Servant ADAM LITTLETON.

To the REVEREND, My ever Honored Father, Mr. THOMAS LITTLETON, RECTOR of
Suckley in the Diocese of Worcester.
Honored Father,
THat old complaint of St. Jerome, that Divinity is become every ones Trade, was
never more seasonable then of late times amongst us; when all Professions
invaded the Pulpit, and God's word was rudely handled by those that were
Bunglers at their own trades. To vindicate me from that imputation of unseemly
meddling with sacred things, if my Education, which has been all along in
Letters, and the Employment I am in, which requires of me sometimes to perform
the place of Catechist, will not serve: yet the Relation, which I and this
Treatise both have to your self, will abundantly plead a defense. For if the
Church has accepted services of this nature from several of her sons in the
Laity; then I hope, I that am not only a Son of the Church, but the Son of a
Churchman too, shall escape censure; especially, when I own my self in this
small work no other then your Amanuensis, and do but copy out those notions of
Truth and Duty, wherewith you by your early institutions seasoned my Youth: So
that in effect, the Book I present you, is as much your child, as the Writer of
it, and this Explanation, what it is, is (...) Filia vocis, (the veneration I
owe to a Father will justify the Allusion; I mean) the Echo, the rebound and
report at distance of your Instructions, and those discourses you made a score
of years ago, at Hales-Owen. Sir, It was then your custom constantly on
Sunday-afternoons, with all familiar plainness, to set forth the Grounds of
Religion, and Principles of Christianity; an exercise (though performed in the
Desk) of as great necessity, and tending as much to edification, as that other
(I was going to say) Idolized way of Preaching. Yet the sad truth is, that in
this age of disorders, Preaching has not been so much abused, as Catechizing
(with other holy ordinances) has been disused. And indeed, to this neglect we
may mainly impute most other miscarriages. When the Groundwork sinks, it is no
wonder if the Building totter, and run to decay; and if these Foundations
should be shaken, it may justly be feared that the whole Fabric of Church and
State will go to ruin, and fall into confusion. An ungrounded Christian will
be easily persuaded to give himself up to any wild opinion or loose practice,
to turn Heretic or Rebel, and prove a fit Instrument for the managery of
Satan's designs.

I must confess, that much has been writ already upon these Subjects; so that
the very Titles of those Books, which have been intended Comments, and
Expositions of Catechetical Heads, and Enarrations of the Grounds of Religion,
would take up more paper then this whole Discourse wastes: And I know there are
many Excellent Treatises of this kind, even in our own Language; yet I have not
met with any one hitherto, that has comprehended all the Rudiments of
Christian Doctrine (for so I think I may safely call these Heads of Catechism)
in one Manual, or delivered the plain meaning of them in so familiar a Phrase
and Method. For whilst others engage in controversy, and spin out all
School Divinity out of these plain Truths, and fill their margin with
quotations out of the Fathers, and accommodate Humane Learning to Sacred
purposes; as if they meant to print only Ad Clerum, laying out their vast
abilities out of the Peoples reach: I judged it more suitable to public Use,
and to the scant measures of my Skill, to give only a Grammatical account by an
easy Paraphrase and exegetical interpretation of every clause, word by word,
and then of the whole sentence together. Nor have I been wanting, as occasions
have invited, up and down to bring in Practical considerations, nor feared
sometimes to enter the Lists against the Romanists and (their Proselytes) our
Sectaries; yet not so as to fetch in strength from Authority without, but make
use of those weapons only, the present place afforded me. I have been the
larger in my Discant upon the Lords Prayer; becasue indeed it is the Ground of
all Liturgy. In the Creed I did not think it safe or fit to mention those old
Heresies so long since exploded, for fear least a weak Confutation should teach
them; (seeing there have been too many in our late Separations, too industrious
to revive them, and bring them into Credit;) but contented my self with a
short, and (I hope) Orthodox explication of the Mysteries of our Faith. When I
was upon the Decalogue, I could not but make National reflections upon each
Commandment, yet so as to convince the whole People, not to upbraid any one
Party: For though the Act of Oblivion injoyns us to forget Injuries done to
Men, yet Religion will oblige us to remember our Sins against God. The
Sacraments I have handled with that brevity, that I have not there much
insisted on the Rites, wherewith our Church administers them; but elsewhere in
the Book have in the general offered somewhat to their defense. Where I plead
Admission of all to the holy Table, I would not be understood to speak for
those which are under Church Censures. On every of these parts I have said
little of the much which might have been said, and for ought that I know
nothing that has been said by others, having had a special care all the way of
the Eighth Commandment. Sir, You are the only Author that I have consulted,
and these sheets have not been the travail so much of my Invention as of my
Memory; while I have been recovering those Notices, your Institution lodged in
my young head and heart. Wherefore what I have failed in Elegance of
expression, or Solidity of matter, I must first here beg your Pardon for,
(seeing that contrary to the method of the Resurrection, what was sown in
strength is now ra^s'd in weakness:) And next crave your Blessing upon the Book
and Me, that God would make us both serviceable to the Public; For I very well
understand, what hazard of censure I run, by appearing thus in Print; and what
Obligations I now lay upon my self to walk carefully, and order my conversation
aright; since he that puts forth a Book of Religion, and leads an irreligious
life, does but libell himself, and scandalize his Book, Sir, As it was your
great care and love to send me in my younger years to several places for my
education, so 'twas my no less happiness that I was principled in Religion by
your self, and though Scholar to sundry Masters, was your Catechumenus. I
thought it then the most fitting Gratitude to return you what I received, and
design your own Instructions the Memorial of my Duty. That the God of all
Consolation would crown your Old age with Honor and Joy, and after these many
years of Suffering and Persecution (wherein you have had so large a share) heap
upon you the blessings of Peace and a long Life, that you may see and partake
the prosperity of Jerusalem, shall be the daily prayer of,

Dear Father, St. Thomas-day, 1661. Your most dutiful and obedient Son Adam
Littleton.

Sentences out of Scrip ure.
Heb. V. 12. FOr when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that
one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the oracles of God, and
are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. 1 Timothy I. 13.
Hold fast the Form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, in Faith, and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus. Prove. XXII. 6. Train up [or Catechise] a Child
in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not depart from it. Psalm.
XXXIV. 11, 12, 13, 14. Come, ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. What man is he that desires life, and lov^th many days,
that he may see good? Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking
guile. Depart from evil, and do good; seek Peace; and pursue it. Prove. IV. 23.
Keep thy Heart with all diligence, [or, above all keeping:] for out of it are
the issues of life. Psalm CXI. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom; a good Understanding [or, good success] have all they that do his
Commandments. Eccles. XII. 13. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter;
Fear God, and Keep his Commandments; for this is THE WHOLE DUTY OF MAN. An
Explanation of the GROUNDS OF RELIGION.
RELIGION is the Fear of God, i.e. the acknowledging and worshipping of God.
God is known by his Works and by his Word. There was never any Nation which did
not profess the worship of God. An Atheist was always counted a monster. Now
most Countries following Nature as their guide, have mistaken either in the
matter or manner of their worship. The Heathens therefore, such as Indians,
Scythians, Turks, etc. worship either a false God, or with false worship. But
God's people being guided by the light of Scripture, do embrace the true
Religion; the Jewish Church in the time of the Law, the Christian Church under
the Gospel. For after the coming of Christ, the Religion of the Jews has now
no longer use, since it was but a shadow and type of Christ to come. For Christ
the Sun of Righteousness being risen, the Ceremonies like shadows are
scattered and fled away. Christian Religion then is that Doctrine, which Christ
himself taught when he was on earth, confirmed by miracles and holiness of
Life, and sealed with his precious Blood dying on the Cross. Christian Religion
is at large contained in the holy Scriptures, i.e. in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, who were the Pen men of the holy Ghost; But it is
chiefly comprised in the four Heads of Catechism, which we call the Principles
of Religion. Now Catechism is a brief and plain Institution, which explains the
Mysteries of Faith, and the Duties of a holy Life, in that manner, that they
may be easily understood by any, even the most vulgar apprehension: Wherefore
it is called the Sincere milk of the Word, as being fitted to the capacity of
little children, which as yet cannot bear more weighty discourses, which are
compared to solid meat. This Doctrine then is plain that it may be received by
the Understanding, and short that it may be held in Memory; yet full too that
it may instruct us in all things necessary to salvation. For it is made up of
four parts, whereof the First teaches us what we are to believe concerning God
and the Church; the Second, what duty we owe to God and man; the Third
describes a method of praying; the Fourth delivers those Sacred seals, by which
this doctrine is confirmed. The Confession of Faith is set down in the Apostles
Creed. The Law of God contained in the Ten Commandments is the Rule of life.
The Lord's Prayer is a most absolute form and pattern of Prayer. And lastly the
two Sacraments of Baptism, and the Holy Supper, are instead of Seals. These are
the Pillars, upon which not only the Church, but every faithful soul is in
the Spirit built up to perfect knowledge and blessedness, to grace and glory.

AN EXPLANATION Of the LORD'S PRAYER.
The Lord's Prayer.
OUr Father which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The LORDS PRAYER.
PRAYER is a calling upon God in time of want or distress; and a returning of
praise for blessings received, or deliverances obtein'd: Or indeed more
generally, and suitably to the nature of this holy exercise, abstracting it
from our occasions; it is a Meditation upon God, his essence and his Attributes;
his Word and his Works; and an acknowledgement of his power and wisdom and
goodness, whereby he orders all things to his own glory and our good. It is
indeed the special act of God's worship; for Adoration is nothing else, but a
praying to him, whom we adore: Whereupon Qui singit sacros auro vel marmore
vultus* Non facit ille Deos; qui rogat, ille facit. Mart.
the heathen well observed, that 'twas not he that graves the idol, but he that
prays to it, which consecrates the Deity. This is sure, that his Religion may
well be questioned, who uses not to pray; though it is true too, that prayer
may be abused to wrong ends, even to devour widow's houses, nay to eat up God's
own House.

Now the grounds of Prayer are laid in the nature of God, and the relation
which he has to us; who, as he is our Creator and preserver, challenges this
homage; whence the Psalmist frequently invites all our fellow creatures to this
duty, and brings us altogether into one quire to praise the Lord. And the very
instinct of nature, has taught ravenous beasts, Non tam praedari quam precari.
not so much to prey as to pray; the young Lions, and the young Ravens in their
hunger cry to him, and he feeds them, and fills every thing living with his
blessing. Nor does our relation so much as our want make prayer necessary; for
we depend upon him, both as to the life of nature and of grace; nor are we able
to subsist or act without his constant help. Therefore that praecept is no
more, then nature dictates to us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. (...) in the precept; in
Cornelius his practice (...) Act. 10. 2.
Pray without ceasing, or continually, that is, In every time, In every place,
In every business: The main thing in Prayer being to lift up the soul, to carry
God in our thoughts, and have our conversation in Heaven; as the man after Gods
own heart says of himself, I have set the Lord always before me. And in the
presence of so glorious a Majesty there cannot choose but be an humble,
reverent, fervent, cheerful frame of spirit, a mind well tuned, and the
affections so ordered, the thoughts so composed, as if one were always in an
actual devotion.

Now God's Nature makes it as convenient for us to go to him in prayer, as our
Interest makes it necessary: for, as he was pleased to call Abraham (that had
frequent intercourses with him in this kind) his friend; He has all the
qualities, which should be taken notice of in the choice of a friend. He wants
neither will nor skill to do us all imaginable good; He has kindness to intend
us good, wisdom to contrive it, and power to accomplish it. Nor are the other
Attributes idle in our behalf; For it is his Mercy to promise us help, and his
Justice to perform his promise: and the like may be said of the rest. Then what
a privilege is it, that a poor creature, dust and ashes may freely speak to
his maker? That we who dwell in houses of clay may keep up a commerce with
heaven? that sinful creatures as we are have access to the throne of Grace
with boldness, and may challenge a hearing in God's Court of Chancery? Genesis 18.
25.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth (says he) do right? And any sinner may
sue for his pardon with the same plea. Shall not justice acquit me, since mercy
has accepted my surety? Is it not enough, that my debt has been once paid?
Christ has dyed for my sins, and my soul shall live. Nay, let our case be what
it will, God himself has afforded us such Arguments, as he will not stand out.
Shall he that has given me a life, deny me food? shall he that has given me a
body, deny me raiment? He that has given me his Son, will not he much more
give me all things else? Thus Prayer is not only like Jacob's wrestling with
God upon earth, but his scaling ladder too, to reach heaven; whilst Prayers
ascend to fetch down blessings, and blessings descend to fetch up praises.

Lastly, let us but look to the advantages that come by praying, and me thinks
no body should be so ill natured to himself as to neglect it. What is it, but
ask and have? and will any one be so lazy, as to refuse the pains of asking? He
deserves not bread to put in his mouth, that will not open a proud mouth to ask
it. We have Gods word for it in several places, that his kindness he rates so
cheap, that it shall be had for asking. Matt. 7. 7.
Ask, and it shall be given you. And our Savior passes his word, Ioh. 14. 13,
14.
that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, he will do it. Can any thing be
purchased at a lower rate, then asking? This is the buying without money and
without price. Does a man want wisdom, counsel, help? Does a sinner want
grace, pardon, strength? Does a Saint want light, comfort, rest? Let him but
come and ask, he shall find God readier to give, then himself was to ask; who
sometimes answers prayers before they are made, and counts it one of his
greatest titles, that he is a hearer of Prayer; But some ask and have not;
Because, Iam. 4. 3.
as the Apostle says, they ask amiss. Wherefore he that would pray aright, so
that he may obtein, must come prepared and furnished with those Graces, which
may make him accepted. Psalm. 19. 14.
Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight. We must not rush into so great a presence; (for Psalm. 5. 5.
the foolish shall not stand before thee:) but consider the Majesty of God, and
our own vileness, being deeply affected with the sense of his goodness, and
man's misery; and premeditate before hand what we have to say, and how; and
indeed pray before we go to pray, that God will prepare our hearts for prayer.
For so the Psalmist resolves the success of Prayer; Psalm. 10. 17.
Thou shall prepare (or direct) their heart, and shall cause thy ear to hear.
And though all the graces, like a bed of spices, are upon this occasion to
breath forth their sweet odours; yet some have a more particular employment,
such as are, Reverence in our high thoughts of God, Humility in our low
thoughts of our selves, Trust to rely upon his goodness, and Patience to wait
his time, Knowledge that we may understand in some measure the nature of God,
and Obedience that we may sincerely perform his will, Zeal which may inflame
and raise our affections toward him, and Constancy which may keep us in a
daily practice of this Deity. And to those, which call upon him so, God will be
near, and will either do that which they ask, or something which may be better
for them.

Who comes irreverently puts an affront upon God, which an earthly Prince would
not brook. He that is possessed with an aw of greatness, will take heed how he
demeans himself before it. Reverence then draws with it attention, which will
drive away vain thoughts, as Genesis 15. 11.
Abraham scared the birds from the sacrifice. We cannot in reason exspect, that
God should take notice of us, if we mind not him; or hear those prayers, which
the Speaker himself regards not.

Who leaves Humility behind him does but personate a devotion, and plays,
rather then prays. He may please himself, or others it may be, with acting a
pompous part; but God resists the proud, nor does the boasting Pharisee go home
justified. Now Humility is chiefly seated in the mind, but it expresses it self
too in the outward parts, and prescribes the posture of kneeling, bowing,
falling flat upon the face: nor was the Publican less humbled, when he stood
afar off and prayed.

Who would seek to God, if he durst not trust him, but looked upon him, either
as a downright enemy, or an unsteady friend? we must bring the confidence of
children, if we look to have the kindness of a Father. The Apostle has said
it, that Iam. 1. 6, 7.
he that prays doubting and with wavering, shall go without; so that who asks
with distrust, bespeaks a denial.

Nor yet must this confidence be so bold, as to limit God to means how, or
appoint him his time when. God's own times are best; Psalm. 31. 16.
our seasons are in his hand: and it is not for us even in this sense to know
the times and the seasons. Moreover he works without means as well as with
means, and the unlikelier the means, the likelier for God's service; the first
cause virtuates the second: therefore the assurance that God will grant, must
be attended with patience, i.e. a quiet expectation, till it please God to
answer us in his own way. He that will not stay God's leisure, deserves not his
answer. Isa. 28. 16.
He that believes, says the Prophet, shall not make have; which the Apostle
quotes thus, Romans 10. 11.
He that believes shall not be ashamed, that is, disappointed; And that is the
next, to wit.

Faith, by which we apprehend and get knowledge of God; For he that addresseth
to him Heb. 11. 6.
must first believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek
him. God is not pleased with the sacrifice of fools; The best service we can
perform, if it be not enlivened with says, is at the best but a carcass of
duty, and like that cheat Plutarch mentions, of an oxes bones covered with the
hide, and intended a sacrifice when the flesh and entrals were gone.

Nor will a naked faith serve turn, to make this oblation acceptable; unless it
be clothed with good works. There must be obedience, as well as knowledge; a
sincere heart as well as an orthodox head; nor is it less fit, that pure hands
should be lifted up to God in prayer, then devout eyes: And therefore this
Prayer is accompanied by both Creed and Decalogue; both of them having an
influence upon it; since we cannot pray as we should, without having respect to
both Faith and manners; seeing that Heb. 11. 6.
without Faith it is impossible to please God, and Psalm. 112. 10.
the desire of the wicked (as well as their Psalm. 1. 6.
way) shall perish.

Prayer is sometimes termed a sacrifice; now that cannot be offered without
fire: There must be then all the affections in a flame, For Iam. 5. 16.
the fervent Prayer of the righteous avails much, and Rev. 8. 3.
the Prayers of the Saints are presented by Christ to his Father, mixed with the
sweet odours of his intercession, in a censer. Zeal was that fiery chariot,
wherein Elias rode to Heaven; who had that great command over heaven, while he
was on earth, by his praying, that he could with this key of David either open
or shut it at his pleasure.

Yet we must take heed of bringing strange fire, the ignis fatuus of a new
Light, or the glimmering taper of an ignorant devotion, but fetch it from
heaven; nor content our selves with a flash and fit of devotion; but keep it
alive in our hearts, as the fire upon the altar, which was never to go out.
There must be a constancy and a daily practice, such as Daniel's use was, who
prayed three times a day with his face toward Jerusalem; and David's, who
praised God morning and at evening and at noonday: And thus some expound that
Iugiter (...)
Pray always i.e. constantly, every day, without intermission, set aside some
of your time for this duty; alluding to the custom of the daily sacrifice.

Now there are several sorts of Prayer: As to the place; public in the church,
or private, in the family, in the closet. As to time; ordinary, for our
ordinary affairs, morning and evening, before and after meals; and
extraordinary upon extraordinary occasions, such as are designs, dangers, and
deliverances, fasts and feasts, judgments and mercies; particular sins and
graces, etc. And accordingly some have to very good purpose and great benefit
of the vulgar, put forth Manuals of devotion, fitted for all the business and
most occurrences of life. As to the manner; mental only, as 1 Samuel 1. 13.
Hanna prayed in silence; or oral, uttered by the voice, whence it is called
Oration. As to the person praying; either conceived, and that either upon
premeditation; or with sudden affection, and as they say ex tempore; (and this
may, must be allowed any Christian in his privacy,) or set, either by public
appointment of the Church, or the civil Magistrate; (who being to order the
matters of Religion, may well be styled in this meaning, Romans 13. 4.
the Minister of God, Diaconus Dei, and Liturgus Dei, i.e. as the Greek word
imports, God's common-Prayer-maker; it being the very word, whence Liturgy is
derived,) or by direction of Godly men for the use of them, who are unprovided
with forms of their own. And lastly as to the subject, or the things prayed
for; 1 Timothy 11. 1.
the Apostle has divided it into four kinds: Petition for good, Deprecation of
evil, Thanksgiving for the good obtein'd, or evil removed, and Intercession in
the behalf of others. All which sorts of prayer are either exemplified or
included in this most absolute form, which our Savior himself prescribed,
which from him is called The Lord's Prayer.

There are not many things, which wear the stamp of this title, and those have
a peculiar veneration due to them, as immediately appointed by Jesus himself;
the Lord's Day, the Lord's Supper, the Lord's Prayer: (The same word, out of
which the name which we give God's House is made, (...).
Kirk or Church.) Christ did not only make it, but appoint it too; for when his
disciples came to him with a desire that he would teach them to pray, as John
had done his disciples; He bade them use this form. St. Matthew indeed, When
you pray, say thus: which yet does signify not only in this manner, but in
these very words. St. Luke more peremptorily delivers the institution, Luke 11.
2,
when you pray say: so that granting the adversary the advantage that he would
catch at from St. Matthew; yet he must acknowledge even from thence, that this
prayer is an exact copy, and platform, by which we are to frame and model all
our prayers; and St. Luke will make out farther, that it is a form of prayer,
to be constantly used by them, who would be taken for Christ's disciples. And
no question but as it is the most ancient, and best prayer, which ever was in
the Christian Church, so 'twas meant for constant use and rehearsal in the
sacred offices of the Church. This assertion proves Liturgy as lawful, as the
prevention of blasphemy, schism, and nonsense make it convenient if not
necessary: which the opposers of set forms perceiving and fearing least the
spirit (as they term it) should be bound, if Christ's own form should pass
free, make bold not only to disuse but to abuse it too, and cry it down; as if
his words could offend God, whose very name does so much prevail with him in
prayer. Wherefore they would have Luke be understood according to Matthew's
expression: which (by their favor) is not to be granted them; for St.
Matthew's way of speaking Thus says the Lord, i.e. (...)
is often taken in St. Luke's meaning, but on the contrary, 'twill be hard for
them to find an instance of their arguing. Nor will the variation of a word in
the middle of it, or the omission of a clause at the end of it, stand them in
much stead, as we shall see anon. This excellent form and pattern then of
prayer is both for matter, and form, and order so full and complete and
comprehensive; so well ordered, and fitly suited, and hansomly expressed; that,
were the command for the use of it laid aside, it seems to commend it self to a
Christian's daily practice, as a short yet full Liturgy.

This Prayer may be divided into three parts; the Preface, the Prayer it self,
and (...) Conclusion. The Preface is a comp^^tion of him, whom the prayer is
addressed to; to wit, God, who is described, partly by a title, which shows his
relation to us, and our interest in him, Our Father. partly by the place,
wherein he dwells and shows forth his glory, which art in Heaven. The body of
the Prayer it self contains in it a complete sum and total of all holy desires,
and a perfect breviat of things prayed for, both spiritual and temporal, and
has six or (as some would have it by parting the last into two) seven
Petitions: The three former whereof concern God's glory, the three later belong
to us and our necessities, both unto this life and that which is to come. So
that the glory of God, and the Salvation of man, which are the two pillars,
upon which the frame of providence, and work of grace do stand; are mainly here
considered, and run in each vein of this Prayer. The sense of all may be
briefly reduced into these two (...) verses.

1. Name. 2. Kingdom. 3. Will be done. 4. Bread. 5. Debts. 6. Temptation.

The conclusion, or indeed peroration, has in it a Doxologie, or excellent
form of confession and praise, reflecting upon the three first petitions, and
carrying along with it a reason of the whole prayer, thus: Thy Kingdom come,
For thine is the Kingdom; Thy will be done, For thine is the power; and
Hallowed be thy Name, For thine is the glory. That God's glory is in our
prayers (as it ought to be in all our actings) the (...) and (...), the first
and the last, the beginning from which all things came at first, and the end to
which all things tend at last.

And the Petitions themselves have a mutual respect, and seem to look to one
another after this manner: That we may hallow thy name, and praise thee in the
Land of the living, preserve our life by supplying us with food; That thy
Kingdom may come into us, and grace may rule in our hearts, blot out our past
iniquities, and justify us by forgiving our sins; That we may perform a due
obedience to thy will, remove every offense out of the way, and suffer us not
to fall into sin, by giving us up to the power of temptation, or leaving us to
our selves. This in general.

To come to the Prayer it self; in the compellation, wherein we call God
Father, we do not mean only the first person of the blessed Trinity, excluding
the other two persons, the Son, and the Spirit, but take in all three the word
Father here being not appropriated to one person, as in relation to another,
(to wit of the Father to the Son,) but applied to God according to his essence,
i.e. to all three Persons (for they all three are one and the selfsame God) in
opposition to us, who say the prayer. The Father, Son and Spirit being each of
them, one as well as the other, a Father in respect of all created things, and
particularly of men, it being usual with the Heathens so to term their Jupiter,
-- (...). Hom.
Father of Angels and of men.

FATHER. God is the great Father of the universe, the master of the world, from
whom and to whom are all things. He made all things by the word of his power,
and of his ^eer goodness preserves all things and wisely orders all events, and
deals with the whole world no otherwise, then a ^ather does with his child. He
is not only in himself an infinite being, as his name Jehovah shows, including
in it all the differences of time Past, Present, and Future; Rev. 1. 4.
who was, and is, and is to come. but the immens fountain of beings, whence
every thing that is had its original^ not that his very essence or substance
was or could be communicated to any created thing, as man begets man (a Father
the Son) in his own likeness; then every thing would be God, which is the (...)
blasphemy to say. No; the nature of God is quite of another kind then that of
the creatures, and altogether incommunicable; For how can we imagine, that his
infinite essence, could have streamed forth it self into such a various and
particular existence, clothed it self with those accidents, and submitted it
self to those laws of change, which all created things lie under? 'Twas his
almighty Word, which produced all things of nothing, light out of darkness,
order out of confusion; that was the womb that afforded the fruitful seed, out
of which all things grew: Psalm. 148. 5.
He spoke, and they were made; and 'twas well observed by the Heathen Critic,
Longin. (...).
that Moses used expressions suitable to the Majesty of a God, when he writes,
God said, let there be light and there was light.'It Is true, he has imprinted
upon every creature some character of himself, that we may know by looking on
the piece, by the Image and superscription, whose handy work it is. And in this
sense we may say, every thing he has done is like him; as we would of an
absolute artist, whose rare pieces will at first sight show what hand they came
from.

Nor did he only make things, and then leave them to themselves, as some
unnatural parents expose their children; But takes care of and provides for
every thing, looks after them, wears them in his thoughts, in his ^y, supplies
their wants, opens his hand and fills them with his goodness, cherishes and
maintains them. And having built this goodly frame of heaven and earth does
with his Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
everlasting arms (what vain story says of Atlas) support and uphold it, or
rather as his Vicegerents are pictured with a Globe in one hand and a Scepter
in the other, grasps the whole world in his hand; and dandles it in his lap, as
a tender hearted mother her playsom child. Can he that implanted so tender an
affection in all mothers and dammes to their young ones, himself be without
large bowels of compassion, full breasts of mercy, and a tender bosom of love?
His goodness exceeds all comparison: Though a mother should forget her child,
yet ( Isa. 49, 15.
says he) I will not forget my people. Providence is that great dug, at which
every creature hangs, and draws its comfort, by which all things are
maintained, whence are issued forth daily allowances and constant provisions
dealt out. For he commands Ps. 133.
blessing and Ps. 44. 4.
deliverance. Ps. 2^.
Thou art my shepherd (says the Psalmist) and I shall want nothing. The
Spirit of God (says the sacred Historian;) moved upon the face of the deep,
that Chaos and first matter, out of which the several kinds of creatures were
afterward to be particularly produced. A word (...).
proper to birds that sit upon their eggs and brood them; He fluttered and sat
upon it, and kept it in a lively warmth, and quickened that rude lump, that he
might out of that great confused ball, wherein the seeds of things lay jumbled,
(which therefore an vid. Gr^t. d^ v^r. R^l.
ancient Philosopher called Natures Egg) hatch a well ordered world. And since
God has compared himself in Deuteronomy. ^2. 11* 12.
one place to a broody eagle; and Christ in Matt. 23. 37.
another himself to a hen; the one teaching her young ones to fly and shift for
themselves by carrying them on her back; the other clucking her chickens, with
great pains scraping up their subsistence, cherishing them under her wings, and
with all her might protecting them from rapine; We may from these similitudes
learn, what a dear love and careful fear God has for all his, least they come
to hurt. God then may very well be styled a Father in this sense too, that he
has not only as a Father given being to all things, but as a Father of a
family provides for all about him, furnishing them with convenient
accommodations and seasonable supplies.

Nor is this all yet; but he orders all things, disposes chance, and overrules
events to his own ends, doing Psalm. 135. 6.
whatsoever he pleases both in heaven and earth; even as Fathers order the
affairs of their family, or as magistrates (who are the Fathers of their
country) manage the civil state, making laws and putting them in execution,
rewarding the obedient and punishing the disobedient. Indeed all government is
naturally bottomed upon this relation, and grounded in a paternal authority;
the Father at first exercising all power even to life and death over those of
his own family: nor is a city or commonwealth any other then a more numerous
family, subject to the same ruler and governed by the same laws. God then it is
that gives order for every thing* by whom and when and how it should be done.
Matt. 10. 29.
Not a sparrow falls to the ground without his leave. The whole series of second
causes is but that golden chain the Poets fancied, whose uppermost link is
fastened to Jove's chair. He is the Lord of Hoasts; such as are the stars in
their courses, thunder, lightning, hail, snow, rain, wind and storm, fulfilling
his word; nay, frogs and lice, when he has service for them, will muster into
armies and the locusts gather themselves into bands* He knows best what will
make for our good, and his own glory, and by his wise contrivance carry's
things in that nature, that they shall all work together for those ends. He is
in the world as a King in his Kingdom: Where his word is there is power, and
who shall say to him what do thou? Angels are his attendants and menials, the
other creatures his utensils; But men, though they are termed vessels too in
his great house, yet they are priviledg'd with a nearer relation to him; They
are his children, for he is our Father.

OUR. This word denotes a propriety and closer interest, seeing he is not our
Father alone in that general sense, in that Psalm. 100. 3.
he made us and not we our selves; as he is styled Job 3^. 2^.
the Father of rain, and Lam. 1. 17.
the Father of lights; nor for the greater likeness we have to him more then
our fellow creatures, which is common to us with the Angels, who are therefore
called Job 18. 7.
the Sons of God; But by redemption also, having purchased us by the Blood of
his Son, and made us a peculiar people to himself, and having begotten us anew
by the word and spirit, and adopted us by grace, that we who are by nature
children of wrath might be made the children of God; and to which of the Angels
ever said he thus, my Son? Oh! what a condescension of love, that God should
suffer himself to be styled our Father, who have corruption for our mother?
that Christ should become our brother, whose sisters are the worms? For Romans 8.
17.
if we be sons, then are we heirs, and if heirs then coheirs with Christ: Oh
infinite love, and kindness unspeakable! how dearly obliging an expression?
that our Savior, who is the only Son of God begotten of his substance should
not permit, but command us to call God our Father too? Ioh. 29. 17.
my Father and your Father, says he. Now as Father is a word of authority, and
signifies love and care bespeaking from us a reciprocal love, a filial
reverence and obedience: so Our is a note of indearment, which should teach us
charity, which indeed the whole prayer breaths in all the parts of it, Give us,
Forgive us, and Deliver us, bringing in all mankind to partake the benefit of
our prayers. And seeing it has pleased God to own us for children, and Christ
to make us partners of his relation to become brethren, it would very ill
beseem the best of saints or greatest of men to disdain any of their
fellow-brethren, he they never so miserable, never so wicked: Since, were there
not a community of the same nature, the sense of humanity, the ties of reason
and religion, and the laws of nations to bring us to some kind of unity, and
mutual affection; God's love to us is an invincible argument, why we should
love one another.

WHICH ART. And there is none beside thee; For Psalm. 73. 25.
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire in
comparison of thee. Indeed the original does not so express it, making use of
the article alone, and leaving the verb to be understood; which as it is
elliptical, so it is an emphatical kind of speaking; (...).
He or The in Heaven, which should note a superlative excellence above all
others, to whom the title of Father can belong; the Lord God, the King of
glory, immortal, infinite, eternal, the greatest, the best; in a word, the
Heavenly Father. And this distinguishes him from the fathers of our flesh, our
earthly parents, who are weak men dwelling in houses of clay, of a limited life
and love, whose breath is in their nostrils, and when they return to the dust,
all their thoughts perish: who cannot do for us as they would, and sometimes
will not do us that little good they can; short-handed and narrow-hearted; who
if they supply our outward and bodily wants, give us a handsome education; and
provide us a fashionable way of life, they do as much as is expected, more then
can be requited; but cannot bestow grace on us, nor bless us with spiritual
blessings in heavenly places. And yet to these parents we are required, (next
to God) to pay our service and thanks to the utmost, and show all possible
honor: Nor did our Savior (who Mar. 7. 10, 11.
finds fault with the Pharisaical interpretation of that precept, and the sorry
evasion of the Corban) mean to slacken that natural bond of affection and duty,
which is betwixt parents and their children, when he bids us Matthew. 23. 9.
call no man Father upon earth. But he speaks that comparatively to heighten
our reverences and duties to our heavenly Father; that in comparison of him we
should take no notice of our earthly relations, nor think them worthy of our
least respect, as himself says elsewhere, Luke 14. 26.
He that hates not father and mother, etc. that is, does not infinitely less
love them then he does me, my ways, and my concernments, he cannot be my
disciple. Wherefore how great an aw ought we to bring along with us before such
a glorious presence? what distance should we stand at? what reverence should we
bear to his name, since he is in Heaven and we on earth? what obedience should
we have for his word, with what humility should we come and fall down at his
feet, and kneel before the Lord our Maker? How should every one with the
prodigal cry out, Luk 15. 2^*
Father I have sinned against Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy son.

IN HEAVEN. God is every where, omnipresent, fills all places, Both lands and
tracts of sea, and heaven high. Psalm. 139, ^.
Whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art
there: if I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there. But he is said in a
peculiar manner to be in heaven; there he dwells in unapprochable light, there
he displayes his glory, and scatters his goodness out of his treasures, his sun
and his rain, thunder and lightning, hail and storm fulfilling his word. There
are the dreadful remarks of his presence, and the brightest appearances of his
Majesty: which made the very heathens place their imaginary deityes in heaven;
that though they mistook in the object of their worship, yet they hit right in
the place where they were to seek God; For heaven is his dwelling place, Psalm.
115. 16.
but the earth has he given to the children of men. The word is in the
Heavens, not in these lower regions of the sky, where the winds bluster, and
the clouds thicken, where the sun and moon and stars observing their courses
carry light about the world: But in the third heaven, in the Psalm. 68 33.
Heaven of Heavens, whence he is called Psalm. 47. 2.
Elion the Highest. Poor short-sighted Pagans dazzled with the glories of these
luminaries, which shine in the firmament, and are but the servants of nature,
tapers which God has hung up in the vault and cover of the world, directed
their devotions no farther, and so came short of the glory of God who dwells
on high, far above the very light of nature, and the laws of change; whereas
things here below are subject to continual vicissitudes, rolled about with the
wheel of chance, always flowing or ebbing, the world it self being but Rev.
15. 2.
a sea of glass, there is a perpetuity of good, and a constant happiness, which
knows neither change nor end. Besides it became the infinity of God, which
cannot be bounded or cooped up with any term of locality, to choose heaven for
his mansion, whose vast circumference and compass is of that wide extent, that
in the Natural Philosopher's opinion the whole globe of earth is but as a point
to it, and this clod in which men make such a quarter and bustle in persuit of
their interest is a sorry ant-hillock in respect of that stately arch, and
spangled roof. nay the nations are as the Prophet has it Isa. 40. 15.
as the small dust of the balance, and a drop of a bucket. Lastly the
incorruptible God, thought fit to set his seat on high, far above the sphere of
corruption, to which all sublunary things are liable, and advance himself to
the greatest distance from earth, the grounds and dregs of nature, the bottom
of the world, the sediment and mother of things. There he dwells in liquid and
clear regions of glory and bliss, the invisible God, whose face no man can see
and live, attended by millions of Angels and blessed Saints departed this life;
yet is pleased to look down from on high on the children of men and have his
ears open to their prayers when they call upon him.

Nor does he only dwell in heaven, and (as with reverence I may say) keep house
there with his courtiers and domestics about him, but he sits there too, as a
Judge: Psalm. 103. 19.
The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens. Heaven is his throne and
earth is his foot stool. And let things run never so much at random here on
earth, there is one in heaven to render to every one according to his works,
whose wrath as it is unsufferable, so his power is irresistible, and his
knowledge infallible. He has girt the whole round of nature, that there is no
escaping him; the whole world is his close prisoner, and let wicked men use all
their shifts; though the mountains should fall upon them, and the hills cover
them, yet God's hand shall find out his enemies, and bring them to punishment.
For He is there as a spy too, upon us, he beholds us afar of and observes our
carriage, and takes notice of all our doings, not an idle word scapes him, nor
is there a thought in the heart which he knows not long before. His piercing
eyes walk too and fro through the earth, and his ey-lids try the children of
men. And this argument our Savior uses where he persuades to secret good,
Matthew. 7. 6.
and (says he) thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

What care then should we have to our ways, to our words, who are always in
sight, in hearing of our heavenly Father? with what reverence should we
approach to his throne? in what aw should we stand of his power? How should we
be struck flat to the ground, like Paul at his conversion, amazed and
astonished with the considerations of a heavenly Majesty? How should our hearts
be set on fire with heavenly flames, and the desire of heavenly things? How
should we slight and trample upon earth and all earthly concernments in
comparison of Heaven, where our Father has many mansions of glory, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for evermore? How should our appetites be
flatted to the relish of all sensual contents, when we think of those good
things which the Father of mercies, and the God of all consolation has laid up
for us in heaven? What a mean esteem should we have for, all the glittering
vanities, the paltry preferments, deceivable riches, the gilded hopes, and
pleasures (as false as base) of this lower world; when we think of the glories
and the joys above? How should these ravish our souls, and make them
impatient, till they have Phil. 1. 3. (...) solvere e port^^.
weighed anchor, and be with Christ? How highly should we prize our spiritual
birthright, and heavenly inheritance? How should we now endeavor to have our
conversation already in heaven? How should we fear the displeasure of so great,
so good a Father, more then hell? How careful should we be of disparaging our
high birth, and heavenly calling, by any indecency or foul miscarriage? How
should we strive to be like our Father which is in heaven, holy as he is holy,
merciful as he is merciful, perfect as he is perfect? that we may be known by
our conversation to be the children of God, children of the highest, the
children of light, to whon belongs the Kingdom of Heaven. For it is God's
presence and favor makes heaven: Heaven would not be heaven unless he were
there. Where ever grace is, there is heaven; for God dwells there, entertaining
himself in an humble heart as much in the highest heavens. To make short, how
should we admire him, worship him, fear him and love him, and joy in him with a
holy ecstasy of affections, and heavenly reptures of devotion, that have leave
to use these words, Our Father which art in Heaven? This appellation with the
other title of Father assures, and makes up our confidence complete. For being
our Father he will do us all the good he can, and being in Heaven he can do
what he will; so that the goodness of a Father, and the power of heaven stand
engaged for us, as the two pillars of our hope; and two sureties, that all our
petitions following will be granted and made good unto us.

Amongst which, as 'twas fit, those which belong to his own glory have the
first place; and God having made all things for himself cannot be unmindfull of
providing for that. But he loves to be asked to do even what he means of
himself to do, that man's will may be brought into a compliance with God's, and
the execution of decrees become the return of prayers. Thus he delights to
oblige where he can force, and that which he has with an unchangeable purpose
from all eternity resolved with himself, makes it the product of his creatures
will; as if he had more kindness for the desires of men then for his own
resolv's, and would not perform his own eternal decrees, unless man first
consent, and make it his request. And indeed it is man's concernment that is
driven throughout the prayer; for it is not for God's sake that we pray, but for
our own: What advantage gets God by our prayers, unless giving be getting? His
name is holy, his Kingdom is everlasting, and his will irresistible, whether we
pray or no. But we pray that all this may be ordered for our good, and we are
as much concerned in this as in our daily bread; God so ordering all the
administrations of his providence and grace, that his glory and man's salvation
go hand in hand, and that all things may work together as for his glory, so for
our good, the good of those that love and fear his name.

HALLOWED BE THY NAME.
The name is the first thing we enquire after about any thing we desire to
know; as Moses, when he talked with God at his first appearance to him, told
him the Israelites would ask him, who sent him, and Exodus 3. 13,
what was his name. There has always been taken great care for the imposition
of names, that they might be suitable and proper to the nature of things. For
things are distinguished and known from one another by their names. Wherefore
God himself named the greater pieces of his work, which being of vast unruly
bulk, were to be under his own immediate government, as Heaven and Earth and
the Sea; and it is said Psalm. 147. 4.
he calls the stars all by their names, etc. But those creatures which he meant
to put under man's feet, he brought to him to name.

The like care has been constantly taken by parents and others in providing
fit names for their children, that families and persons may be sufficiently
distinguished; for which purpose the day, on which the child was circumcised,
amongst the Jews, which was the eighth day from his birth, and about the same
time among the heathens, but amongst us Christians at the baptism, this
solemnity of naming the child is performed; a thing of such concernment, that
it has been delivered sometimes by the message of Angels, other while by
miracle. And that was a signal token in the Isa. 45. 1, 3.
prophecy, wherein he calls his anointed Cyrus by name four hundred years
before he was in being. It Is a nice consideration, but there may be something
in it, and of more then ordinary consequence, that God should take such care
about names, that he should think fit to give and change them either in favor
or displeasure; as in the instance of Abraham, Conjah, Peter, etc. and that he
is said to write the names of his elect in the book of life, and to give them a
new name; and to blot out the names of the wicked, and to threaten that their
names, i.e. their memory shall perish. Let them take heed that forbear to
Christen their children, and give them names, least they design their childrens
ruin; God finding no names they have in the church-roll, to copy into his book.
Genesis 27. 36.
Is not he rightly named Jacob; says Esau, for he has supplanted me this
twice? And Nabal was as very a churl as his name gave him for; and very many
scripture-names are thus signicant. And Melchizedeck (whose true name if 'twere
Shem, was Name according to the signification of the Hebrew word) denotes, Heb.
7. 2.
as the Apostle explains it, the character of the person, King of
righteousness, who was also King of Salem, that is, King of peace. God out of a
familiar love to mankind is pleased to dress himself as 'twere, and set forth
his nature by those ways which are usual amongst men, and therefore Ier. 32.
20.
has made himself a name.

Now the name of God is any thing, by which God has made himself known, and
has in the Scripture Language several acceptions; For sometimes the name is
taken for the person himself whose name it is, as in reckoning Act. ^. 15.
so many names. And so we say of God, to call upon the name of the Lord, i.e.
to call upon the Lord: and to give thanks unto the name of the Lord, etc. Ps.
115. 1.
Not unto us, but to thy name give the glory, i.e. to thy self; for so the
opposition stands not to us, but to thy self. Sometimes it is taken for fame
and renown and glory, which accompanies a good name and makes it like good
ointment; the Giants of old were Genesis 6. 4* (...)
men of name, to wit, famous renowned men much talked of: Mar. 6. 14. with E^h.
4. 14.
Christ's name after he had wrought some miracles was spread abroad throughout
the country, i.e. he grew famous. We will make mention of thy name (says the
Psalmist often,) and will speak well of thy name, and sing praises to thy name,
i.e. set forth thy praise in verse, and contribute the skill of my tongue and
harp, (which are Ps. 16. 9. and 57. 8.
my glory) in the celebration of the glory. Then it is taken for those abilityes
and virtues, which commend a man to fame, and raise an admiration and esteem of
him; as power, wisdom, goodness, mercy, etc. And such are the glorious
attributes of God, the excellencies and perfections of his nature; as Ps. 8. 1.
How excellent is thy name in all the earth, says David, when he meditates
upon the works of creation, wherein those attributes of his do most
conspicuously shine forth, to the amazement of any serious beholder. And lastly
it comprehends all the effects and achievements of the divine attributes,
whether produced by common providence in the world; such as are, his works,
daily accidents, extraordinary events; or by special grace, such as are, his
word and ordinances, the Sacraments, the Gospel, his Ministers, his Sabbaths,
his Temple, his inheritance, persons, places, times and things dedicated to his
service; and whatsoever wears upon it a stamp of holiness to the Lord. Thus,
Psalm. 44. 5*
in thy name will we tread down our enemies, i.e. by thy assistance and help,
and by the conduct of thy providence so ordering it, defeating the counsels,
and breaking the strength of our adversaries. Matt. 7. 22.
In thy name we have prophesied and cast out devils, etc. by virtue of thy
commission, by thy command and appointment, and the warrant of thy word; Matt.
2^. 19.
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. to wit, into the profession of
the Gospel, into the worship and service of God, faith in his promises, and
obedience to his commands. Nor is the principal and usual signification to be
laid aside, God having many such names given him in Scripture; both proper, as
Jehovah, Iah, Elohim, Adonai, Shaddai; and appellative, even a full Alphabet of
names as the Syric Grammarians reckon them. And so too, Psalm. 111. 9.
Holy and reverend is his name. Our petitions here begin in God's name, a form
so well liked, that it came to be taken up even up even in the civil affairs of
life, wills, contracts, etc. and made use of at last as a stale to countenance
the worst designs of cheat, prostituted to base self ends, even to the infamy
of a Proverb. And surely if we facing our prayers with it, make it only a vizar
to our own corrupt desires, we do it a fowl reproach, and profane it, when we
pray it may be sanctified.

To Sanctify has also a doubtful meaning according to the thing it is applied
to. The Philosopher has in a moral respect ranked things into three forms; For
there are some things absolutely and in their own nature good; others as
naturally bad; and a third sort of indifferent things, which in their own
nature are neither good nor bad, but according as they are used. His
distinction may find room here and accordingly admit of a threefold
Sanctification; That which is in it self holy is sanctified, when it is
acknowledged and reverenced as holy; And thus Isa. 8. 13. and 29. 23.
we are bid to Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, the holy One. That which is
by nature evil and corrupt is sanctified by being made holy, and having that
nature renewed according to righteousness; And thus Lev. 20. 8.
God sanctifies us by his spirit, creating us to good works in Christ Jesus;
and he bids us also Verse. 7.
Sanctify our selves by a diligent attendance on the holy ordinances and
holiness of life and conversation. That which is of a middle and indifferent
nature, is sanctified when we set it apart from common service and apply it to
holy uses. So our meat is 1 Timothy 4. 5.
sanctified by the word and Prayer, so the Priest with his vests, the Temple
with it is utensils, the Sabbath, etc. become sacred and inviolable; And who
offers a violence to any thing that thus belongs to God's peculium is profane
and sacrilegious.

Our request then in this petition is, That all things may be done to the glory
of God, that he would order his own counsels, and all the dispensations of his
providence and his grace to the utmost advantages of his own praise; that he
would sanctify us that we might sanctify him in our hearts; that we may fear
before him, that is dreadful in holiness; that we may entertain reverent
thoughts of him, admire him in his infinite perfections, be astonished at his
unsearchable glory, study his praises, meditate on his goodness, delight our
selves in him, and speak well of his name, and set forth his noble acts; that
we may take notice of him in his outgoings, observe his providence, mark his
particular supplies and restraints, regard his mercies with thankfulness, and
mend under his judgments; that we may wait on him in his sanctuary in the use
of his ordinances, go to his house in his fear, praise his name Psalm. 42. 4.
in the assembly among those that keep holy days, attend to his word, keep his
Sabbaths, honor his Ministers, and give due respect to every thing that
belongs to him; and that we use not any of his names or titles, but upon
weighty occasions, and with great reverence. And lastly that our whole life be
so holy and blameless, that we may not give occasion for God's name or his
ways to be evil spoken of, but rather that Matt. 5. 16.
our light may so shine before men, that they seeing our good works may glorify
our Father, which is in Heaven. And this being done will promote and set
forward the interests of his Kingdom, and so speed the second petition too.

THY KINGDOM COME.
God is Rev. 17. 14.
the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings, the great Soverain of the world, who
does whatsoever he pleases, and neon says unto him what do thou? Romans 9. 19.
who has resisted his will, or Isa 40. 13.
given him counsel? For that the word signifies also in the (...) regnavit, Chapter
consul. vit.
Chaldee dialect, those two things being necessary to complete a Monarch's
right, and make him absolute, to do what he does by a clear and full authority
and power of his own, and by his own counsel and pleasure to act and determine
that power. He is the great Basis and support of all societies and governments
in the world; For Romans 13. 1.
the powers that are, are ordained of God; Prove. 8. 15.
By me King's reign, and for him too, being his Vicegerents Romans 13. 4, 5.
and sword-bearers, to be a terror to evill-doers and a praise to the good. And
as he has corwn'd all mankind with honor and dignity, giving them dominion
over their fellow creatures; so he has put that Majesty upon rulers, whom he
has appointed to govern their fellow-men (who else without laws and order
would be little better then beasts,) that they may be looked upon, and observed
with that reverence, as if they were earthly Gods. Psalm. 82. 6. 7.
I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men. They are God's anointed
ones; and honored of him, accountable only to him, required therefore to do
their homage, and Psalm. 11 12.
kiss the Son least he be angry. And as they must like all other men die, so
they must also appear before the judgment seat of God. Regum timendorum in
proprios greges, Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis. Hor. Od. l. 3.
Kings to their subjects dreadful stand Over Kings themselv's is Gods command.
He has all the royalties that belong to an Imperial Crown, a righteous
Scepter, righteous laws, loyal subjects, glorious privileges, blessed rewards
for the obedient, and great punishments for the disobedient. Not ought Kings of
the earth to be impatient at mutinous and rebellious spirits, when God himself
wants not those who Psalm. 139. 21.
rise up against him; and which may set them a copy of princely clemency to
write their acts of grace after, Psalm. 78. 18.
gives gifts to the rebellious, leaving some of them as monuments of his mercy,
though too others he make trophies of his justice.

I might note that sure Kingship is the best form and model of government,
since God himself rules under that title; that the Regicide is a kind of
Deicide; and when subjects dare mate their soverain, and contrive a
Commonwealth to justle out the Kingdom, they do but challenge divine vengeance
for that, which perhaps their injured princes forces cannot chastise, and call
upon themselves Lucifer's fate, who Jude, v. 6.
left his first estate by clambering higher, whose pride preferred him to the
principality in Hell, where he gnashes his teeth, and curses God; who
questionless has been that Angel of light, that has cloak'd sedition with the
name of Godliness, and taught the late teachers to Verse. 8.
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, and blaspheme the name of
Kings. And all nature has by instinct followed divine example, gathering it
self as much as may be into oneness; making every sort of creature almost
submit to monarchical rule, and preaching as it were the Apostle's lesson, Iam
3.
Be not many masters. But the sad experience of these nations in the time of
tyranny, and the wonderful providence of God in the restitution, has
sufficiently convinced all honest English of this truth, that That government
is best, which is likest God's; to wit a Monarchy, a Kingdom. Now God has a
twofold Kingdom, one universal at large, all the world over, the other
particular and special, his Church; For he is Ier. 10. 7, 7.
King of the nations and Rev. 15. 3.
King of the Saints. or we may say, a threefold Kingdom in respect of the
different administration of this later, according to the different condition of
the church militant here on earth, or triumphant in heaven, to wit, a temporal,
spiritual, and eternal Kingdom; or the Kingdom of his power, the Kingdom of
grace, and the Kingdom of glory. By his power, he governs the whole fabric of
the world, disposes of all things, appoints seasons, sets bounds to human
power, overrules their purposes, stills the raging of the Sea, and the madness
of the people, raises up, casts down, kills and makes alive, strikes the earth
with his thunder, and darts forth his lightnings; the winds obey him, and blow
only where he lists. Psalm. 119. 91.
All things are his servants, and Psalm. 135 6.
he does what he pleases both in heaven and in earth. By his grace he governs
his Church, sets up his throne in the hearts of his people, appoints officers,
gathers the elect, and rules them by his word and spirit, conquers sin and
death, kills our corruptions, subdues our lusts, and treads Satan under our
feet, and breaks the powers of hell, that the gates thereof shall not prevail
against the church, guids the faithful ones in his ways, tryes their
patience, exercises their faith, teaches them his laws, that they may observe
his statutes and ordinances, defends the Saints, and is Psalm. 84. 11.
a sun and shield to direct and protect them, that neither the Devil nor wicked
men can do them any hurt; rewards those that do or suffer any thing for his
sake, punishes offenders, and persues the impenitent, and such as obstinately
stand out his calls and tenders of grace, and go on presumptuously in their
evil way, with the fury of his indignation, afflicting them with bodily
plagues, temporal calamities, and spiritual judgments, as blindness of mind,
hardness of heart, etc. giving them up to their own shameful lusts, and a
reprobate mind, and into the power of the devil, and either passing final
sentence upon them in this life, or reserving them till the great Assizes of
the last judgment. In the Kingdom of glory (as he himself is called Psalm. 24.
10.
the King of glory,) he sits on his Throne encompassed with millions of Angels,
and blessed Saints, who fall down before him, and sing praises Rev. 4. 9, 10.
to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb. This is to have it is
beginning when the other two end, not to be completed till the last day, when
the Angels gather the elect from the four corners of the earth, whom God shall
reward with everlasting bliss; when he shall send the ungodly to Hell, Mar. 9.
44.
where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out. Then those who were
sufferers shall be conquerers, and wear a never-fading crown. 11. Tim. 4. 8.
I have fought a good fight (says St. Paul) and henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness. All the Saints then shall be Kings, there
shall be the glorious orders of pure Virgins that defiled not themselves, of
blessed Co^^essors that were not ashamed of their profession, of holy Martyrs
who loved not their souls to death, of Prophets the Harbingers of Christ, and
Apostles the heralds of the Gospel, and all the quire of Heaven singing
Halleluiahs. This is that Kingdom of Christ which he said was Ioh. 18. 32.
not of this world, for which he despised the shame, and with which his
servants that have a taste of the heavenly gift, and are afforded the earnest of
their meditations, (a sight of the heavenly Canaan, and glorified
transfiguration; as from Pisgah, and on mount Tabor) are so ravished, and
deeply affected, that they must needs cry, Rev. 22. 20*
come Lord Jesus come quickly; Thy Kingdom come.

COME. i.e. appear and show it self, may its interest be promoted, may it get
ground and enlarge it self, may it be seen that Psalm. 69. 1.
the Lord is King, let the people be never so unquiet; may it come into our
hearts and rule there, and beat down every proud imagination, that lifts it
self up against God; may Christ hasten his coming and illustrious presence,
which the Jews Liturgy is full of even to this day, the coming of Messiah. Now
there is a twofold advent or coming of Christ mentioned in Scripture; The one
was when he came in the flesh, in the form of a servant to die for us, that he
might reign upon the tree as some readings have it in the Psalms: The other
will be, when he shall come in the clouds with power and glory, attended with
Angels to judge the world, at that great and dreadful day, when the trumpet
shall summon all to appear before the tribunal. And when that is done he shall
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father; and the time of this his coming and the
end of the world, he has left here to be the subject of our prayers, and not
of our inquiries, to exercise devotion not curiosity: the uncertainty of the
time being an argument to quicken our diligence in preparing for it, that we
may watch and pray; he having told us aforehand, that he will steal upon us, 2
Pet. 3. 10.
as a thief in the night. But what need we trouble our selves about the age of
the world, when our own time is so uncertain, that we cannot call the next hour
our own, and know not how soon the arrest of death may hurry us away to
judgment? He that dies now in the Lord Rev. 14. 13.
rests from his labor, and his good works follow him; and if we cannot
properly say that the Kingdom of God is come to him, we may safely say he is
gone to it. At the end of the world then is Christ's great coming, and the
general judgment: but at every single death there is a particular doom past,
when the soul immediately after it is delivery out of the body is dispatched
either into the regions of life, or lodged in the chambers of death, so that in
this sense Christ may be said to come too. And there is a gracious visit, when
he comes, and Rev. 3. 20.
knocks at the heart, and calls to his beloved by his word; When he comes into
us, to a feast and banquet of love furnished with the consolations of the
spirit.

The sum of this request is, that God would declare his power even to the
heathen that know not his name, and make discoveries of his Majesty by his
outward administrations, not leaving himself without witness, but convince
profane spirits that there is a God that rules in the world; that he would
manage the affairs of the world for his peoples good, and for the advancement
of the Kingdom of his Son; that he would bless the civil societies of men;
that he would fill Sovereigns with wisdom to go in and out before the people,
and people with loyalty to their rulers, and with love to one another; That he
would establish the state, wherein we live, in peace and order, preserving us
on one hand from the tyranny and oppression of superiors, and on the other
hand from rebellion and conspiracy of inferiors; That he would save the King,
whom he has set (under himself) our supreme Head and Governor, from all
treasons and treacherous designs; that he would subdue the people under him,
cloth his enemies with shame, and upon himself let his crown flourish; that he
would give the King his judgments, and make our Magistrates men of courage,
fearing God and hating covetousness; That he would preserve us from all
dreadful calamities, the plague, pestilence and famine; from wars, fires,
inundations, from murder and sudden death; That he would take a special care of
his Church and his chosen ones; that he would send laborers into his vineyard;
that he would endue his Ministers with righteousness; that he would illuminate
all Bishops and Pastors with true knowledge and understanding of his word,
that both by their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it
accordingly. That he would enlarge the tents of Japhet, remember his ancient
people the Jews, gather in the remnant of the gentiles, send forth his Gospel
into the dark corners of the earth, and publish the glad tidings of salvation
unto all mankind; that he would fill up the number of his elect, and hasten the
glorious appearance of Christ; That he would confound the devices of all that
have evil will to Zion, and turn the hearts of heretics, schismatics, and
bloody tyrants; That he would assist those that suffer for the testimony of a
good conscience with strength from above, and send them the comforter; That he
would destroy the man of sin, with the breath of his mouth; That he would Phil.
4. 7. (...)
garrison our hearts with his grace; that he would teach us his laws, that we
may walk in his statutes, and keep his commands; That he would mortify the
desires and lusts of the flesh, subdue us to himself, and make us a willing
people in the day of his power; That he would open our hearts for the receiving
of his word, and rule in them by his spirit; That his Kingdom may first enter
into us, that we may enter into it. Lastly that we may have our feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel, and live in a constant exspectation of our
great change, that when our Lord comes he may find us doing his will on earth
as it is in Heaven: And Matt. 24 16.
blessed is he, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

THY WILL BE DONE.
The nature of God is not made up of a body and soul, nor has he bodily parts,
as eyes, hands, feet, etc. or faculties of mind, as understanding, memory,
affections; and it is no less improper to say of God, that he knows or wills any
thing, as that he walks, sees, etc. which are metaphorical expressions taken
from men, God being pleased in holy writ to condescend to our capacity, and
speak of himself after the manner of men: God is all understanding, all will;
nor is there any thing in God which is not infinite, i.e. himself. His will
then is not a thing really distinct from his understanding or indeed from his
essence, neither is it a blind power as it is in us, that needs the guidance of
reason and the light of another faculty to be conveyed into it, to represent
the object, and advise it to choose the good, and eschew the evil; but is of it
self most free, most wise, most good. It self is a law and rule to it self,
determins it self, and is the measure and standard of all goodness,
righteousness and holiness. Psalm. 145. 17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works; And his
pracepts are Psalm. 19. 12.
more to be desired then gold, yea then fine gold, sweeter then honey and the
honeycomb.

Now there is a twofold will of God; that of his decrees, and that of his
commands. Nor do these two cross and oppose the one the other, as if God
decreed one thing should be, and commanded the contrary: but they keep a sweet
harmony and mutual correspondence. God's word and his providence may seem
sometimes to clash and justle one another, yet they do keep the same road of
righteousness, nor does God ever contradict himself, or speak one thing and
mean another. Romans 3. 4.
Let God be true and every man a lyar' that makes such interpretations of the
will of God, as that his good pleasure or everlasting purposes should thwart
the manifestations of his will, which he has made in his word. For instance;
God says that Ez^k. 1^. 23.
he would not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live;
And his Apostle says that 1. Tim. 2. 4.
he would have all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. He
then that shall teach that God has absolutely predestined any sinner to
damnation, and by irreversible decrees concluded him under an impossibility of
repentance, lays an imputation upon God's veracity, and makes him if not a
liar, yet (which is the worse of the two) a dissembler, to say he desires their
life, when he has by an irrevocable decree prejudged them to unavoidable
death, and with all arguments of love to invite them to come to heaven, when he
has long before they were born shut the gates against them.

By his decrees he has from the beginning set down with himself what shall be
in time, foresees and orders all events to his own end; insomuch that one
tittle of his word shall not pass away, till he have accomplished his full
will, and brought about his own purposes. Poor weak men want strength and
policy to perfect designs, and many times we are cut of in the midway by an
untimely death; But God's counsels are laid deep, and he is of an infinite
power, and lives to do what he does to the uttermost. Nor yet does he act so
absolutely as to take from second causes their freedom of acting or impose a
necessity upon man's will to force it this way or that. Far be it from any
sober heart to think, that God can in any sense be the author of sin: Should
this doctrine obtein in any man's mind, that all his actions are from all
eternity predetermin'd by God, so that he must needs do what he does, and
cannot possibly do otherwise; I should desire that it may only be considered,
what direful consequences will naturally ensue from such a persuasion, when
it is in good earnest owned and lived after, and whether all the villainy and
mischief in the world will not find hence a ready justification. Not to say how
vain and useless all reason, counsels, debates, exhortations and reproofs, all
that by which we are men or Christians, the use of ministry and ordinances, and
all the arguments for a virtuous and a godly life, would prove with one that
were obstinately possessed with this opinion, and were resolved to live according
to it. But it is safer for us to consult God's precepts, then tamper overboldly
with his decrees; and to study his will in his commands, with humility adoring
the wisdom and righteousness of his unsearchable counsels. These he has
reserved to himself; and locked up from us, as the Arcana imperii: The other he
has plainly made known unto us, and proclaimed them in his word, and we hear
the sound of them in our ears; O that they might also sink into our hearts to
do them! By these we shall at last be tried, when every one shall receive
according to his works: nor will the decrees of God prejudice that soul which
has duly observed his commands, or secure those who wilfully break them.
Scripture is the plain rule which we are to walk by; the book of decrees is
that sealed book, which none but the Lamb is worthy to open. We ought to study
our duty more then destiny. Matt. 22. 37, 39.
Thou shall love the Lord with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thy self,
are flat commands that require absolute obedience: But the promises and
threatenings of God are under condition, and God will make righteous judgment
and be found no respecter of persons, when Matt 7. 29.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
but he that does the will of our Father which is in Heaven.

BE DONE. God's decrees are done upon us; his commands are to be done by us:
those require our submission, these our performance. And indeed our whole duty
is made up of a passive and active obedience, whereby we willingly bear what
evils God is pleased to send, and as readily do what good he bids us. But why
do we pray that God's will may be done, since his decrees will come to pass
though we pray not, and his commands it is our part to perform? The reason is
for the first to show our compliance with God's will; for the second to desire
God's assistance, since without the aids of his grace we are not able to do
any thing as we ought.

ON EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN.
That men here below may as willingly submit to his good pleasure, and pay as
cheerful and constant obedience to his commands, as the Saints and Angels
above do, who always stand in his presence in a readiness to serve him, who
never quarrel at any of his appointments, or grudge at any pains they put
themselves to, praising him continually, falling down before him, and ascribing
power, and dominion, and glory to him that sits on the throne, and to the
Lamb: All the business they have to do there, and to spend their time at, is
the singing of Hallelujahs, and delighting themselves in seeing the face of
God, and meditating on his goodness; They have no other employment but the
contemplation, and enjoyment of the chiefest good, and count it their happion
to be taken up always with these thoughts. oh! what a heavenly life should we
lead here on earth, if we could but thus throw all our desires at God's feet,
contenting our selves with his disposals, not trouble our selves with the cares
of this life; but count it our meat and drink to do his will, to obey him, and
trust in him though he should kill us, to do and suffer any thing for his
sake, and think it our honor that we are thought worthy; to breath after
heaven, mind heavenly things, and whilst we are in this valley of the shadow of
death prepare our selves for eternity, by doing that here in this life, which
will be the whole employment of the next.

To gather up the sum of the whole petition, it is this; That God would give us
patient and cheerful spirits so far, that we may resign up our selves and our
interests wholly into his hand, and submit to his good pleasure, possess our
souls with patience, and count that condition best, which God out of his
infinite wisdom and tender care thinks fittest for us; as being well assured,
that he does all for the best, that he loves us better then we our selves do;
That we should thankful acknowledge his goodness in his preservations of us,
and provisions for us; And if at any time he chastise us with wants and
distresses, and exercise us with afflictions, to entertain them as messages of
his love, and tokens of his kindness, not to murmur or repine under the cross,
and think we are hardly dealt with; but to account it great joy, and take up
the yoke, and bear the burden quietly, and cast it upon the Lord who will bring
it to pass; That we may not boldly pry into his decrees, nor presume upon a
rash confidence, or despair in distrust of his love; but adhere to the plain
rule of his word, and busy our selves in doing his will; That we would tread
carefully in the path of duty and mind the business of our general and
particular calling, and trust God with the success in the use of all lawful
means; That we may not be discontented, peevish and froward, when our humors
and interests are crossed, and when his providence answers not our desires; but
bless God, when he takes away as well as when he gives, and give him the glory
whatever befalls us: That we may resign all to his blessed will, and rest fully
satisfied with his determinations, that in all cases we may say with our
Savior, I (...) ^2. 42.
Not my will but thine be done; That he would write his laws in our hearts, and
teach us his statutes, and acquaint us with his will, that we may do it; That
he would assist us with his grace, and strength from above for the performance
of his commandments; That he would mortify our lusts and the corrupt desires
of the flesh: that we may not set up them in opposition to his Holy will, but
bring every proud imagination in obedience to him; That we may be so acted by
his spirit, that we may be quickend in every good way and work, and be carried
on from strength to strength till we come to perfection; That we may have a
holy emulation for the blessed spirits above, and endeavor to imitate them in
yielding an obedience without delay, without murmuring, and without weariness;
That we may endeavor to the utmost to find out Romans 12. 2.
what that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God is, and to perform it,
and never think we can do too much for him, or suffer too much for his sake;
That we would lay aside all worldly cares, and Luke 1. 74, 75.
serve God without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days
of our life, and fit our selves for the business of eternity, by having our
conversation in heaven, whilst we are here on earth.

Thus the three Petitions do immediately concern God, and may also have
particular reference to the three Persons of the Trinity; That the name of the
Father who is God blessed for ever may be exalted and glorified; That the
Kingdom of his Son and his glorious presence may be hastened; That the spirit
would frame our hearts to the obedience of his will. And to the three offices
of Christ; By whose name as he is our Priest we are saved, whose name is above
every name holy and excellent; who as King rules in our hearts, and will come
in triumphant manner at the last day to own his faithful subjects and be
avenged of his enemies; And who lastly as Prophet has declared unto us the
will of the Father, and came to do his will on earth as it is in Heaven, with
an exact unsinning obedience.

Nor is the word Thy idle, but has a great significance, commending to us that
great Gospel-duty of self-denial, which is indeed the essential character of a
right Christian, who can be content to part with all, so God may have his due.
For so the opposition is to be understood; Thy name not our honor; Thy Kingdom
not our interest; Thy will not our humor. And thus the three petitions seem to
be levelled at the world's Trinity, Honor, Riches and Pleasure. We ought not
to study our own honor, but to do all for the glory of God; we must not
strive for deceivable riches, but set the Crown upon Christ's head; We should
not follow our own pleasure and pursue our own satisfactions and contents, but
submit to God's will. It is no wonder that this holy form of Prayer was so
displeasing to the ambitious and factious spirits of these latter times, a
generation of self-seeekers, who meant to advance their own names, and get the
power of the Kingdom into their own hand, and pretended a divine authority for
their own will, as if they would have prayed rather, Our will be done in heaven
as it is on earth: nor did they stick to say as much, when they fathered all
their mischiefs on providence, and from their successes concluded God's
approbation of their wickedness.

These last words, On earth as it is in Heaven, may seem to look back upon the
three precedent Petitions, after this manner; on earth, as in Heaven.
Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done,


May we men on earth praise and glorify thy name, adore thy power and Majesty,
perform thy commands, and submit to thy holy will, even as the Angels those
ministering spirits and the blessed Saints do in Heaven, saying, Isa. 6. 3.
Rev. 4. 8.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath.

Now follow the Petitions which concern us and our necessities, which are
either temporal supplies of food, and a comfortable subsistence, and a daily
provision, and sustenance; or spiritual wants, such as are the Pardon of our
sins, and justification by the blood of the Son of God, which was shed for the
remission of sins; and the strength of assisting grace, whereby we may resist
and overcome temptation, and sanctification wrought by the spirit of God,
dwelling in us, and cleansing our hearts by faith. So that these three also may
have respect to the three persons, seeing that they seem particularly directed
to the Father for maintenance; to the Son, for pardon; to the Spirit for grace.

BREAD. What more natural for children to ask, or for a father to give? Bread
is the staff of life, the stay and support of nature, the chief nourishment,
and that which alone will keep nature in repair, and the body in health; but is
usually taken by a Synecdoche for all manner of food whatsoever, even for (...)
caro; and so the Hebrew word Zeph. 1. 17.
flesh, meat and drink, whence to eat bread with one was a common form of
speech, meant for sitting down at table, dining or supping and being
entertained and indeed feasted with varieties. And yet more largely sometimes,
(as here it is) for all the provisions and accommodations of (...) q (...) ad
vitam.
life, not only food but raiment, habitation, health, strength, money, friends,
estate, preferment, vigor of mind, soundness of body, success in our
undertakings, a blessing upon our labors, comfort from our relations, with all
other temporal concernments; as seasonable weather, the early and the later
rain, fruitful fields, plenty, peace, deliverance from dangers, long life and
a good old age; with all those good things of mind, of body, and of fortune (as
we call them) which may be the objects of a right ordered natural desire; and
all those additional advantages, which the custom of countries has made
convenient and agreeable to people, according to their several ranks and
qualities; which are all here comprehended under the name of Bread, to teach us
frugality and contentedness, that if we have but bread, we should be there
withal content, and not grudge at those who have greater variety afforded
them: For we are not worthy to feed upon the crumbs that fall from the table of
his bounty, and if he please to allow us a portion in the childrens bread, we
ought to accept it with thanks from a fathers hand; and that providence is
never wanting to supply us with bread, David's experience has taught us, Psalm
37. 25.
who never saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seed though begging their bread.
Again we may learn hence a thrifty bestowing of God's gifts, not to lavish them
out in riot, or spend them on our pride, as the Luk 16. 19.
rich glutton, that wore gorgeous apparel and fared sumptuously every day; but
rather to communicate God's goodness, and to distribute it amongst the poor,
and let others share in our superfluities; which are the true Christian
sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased, seeing that all that we ask or can
challenge for our selves is but bread, and if God give more he does it to that
intent, that there may be occasions of doing good, and exercising of charity,
that he that abounds may impart to him that wants. Who would grudge God, if he
rightly considered it, the tenth sheaf, who has so freely given him the other
nine? Who would not cheerfully feed the poor with a scant alms, and make a
dole of pence, when God has enriched him with pounds and blessed him with a
fair estate? But such is the perverseness of worldly men, that they consider
none but themselves, and the more bountifully God deals with them, the more
niggardly they deal with others; not fearing to cheat God himself of his due,
and defraud the Priest and the poor, whom God has appointed his receivers of
those small returns he expects from them for his large kindness to them. The
covetous miser that pinches his own belly is a thief to himself, and turns his
bread into stone. He that hoards his corn in a time of dearth, is a thief to
society and inherits the curses of the people. He that spends all on himself,
and considers not the poor, and robs the Church of her due, is sacrilegious and
profane, and either says not this prayer at all, or else says it not as he
should; for it teaches us to say our Bread.

OUR. The covetous and ambitious person is all for himself; He says in his
heart, give me my Bread, and cares not what becomes of others. But this Prayer
requires another kind of spirit, that we take notice of the wants of our
brethren. God is not for monopolies, that any one hand should ingross the whole
stock of his blessings; He will not have one go away with all, and the rest
have nothing left them; If he give any one more then is enough to serve his
private turn, what is over and above is a trust to be laid out for the good of
the community; for estates, honors and parts, and all the other advantages of
life are talents, and will be called for back again with usury: we are then to
have a mutual compassion as fellow members of the same body, which though they
differ very much in place and condition and use, yet are they all helpful to
one another, and conspire together to the good of the whole body. Nor is this
all which is gathered from this word; but it teaches us industry too in some
honest way of life, for the getting of our bread: It must not be the bread of
idleness, for that would prove a temptation to lust; and if we should pray here
for that, e're we come to the end of the prayer we should unpray it again. It
must be ours before it will be given us; that which was Adam's curse proves a
blessing, Genesis 3. 13.
In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread; so the Psalmist construes
it; Psalm. 128. 1, 2.
Blessed is every one (says he) that fears the Lord that walks in his
ways; For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands. No man has a privilege of
being idle; every one's to earn his living, and make his sweat his sauce; for
the bread as well as the sleep of a laboring man is sweet. The gentleman
himself has a calling and though he be born to an estate, yet Job 5. 7.
Job tells him, that man is born to labor too. The heathen could observe that
though the Gods be bountiful, yet they set their gifts to sale and will have
them purchased with sweat. The Apostle's command is express, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
He that will not work let him not eat. And when we have thus made it ours, we
cannot yet call it ours, or promise our selves it will do us any good till God
give it us.

GIVE. If it be given, how is it ours? If it be ours, how does he give it? Till
God assign it, we have no propriety; his blessing must accompany our labor to
make it ours; Psalm 127. 2.
It is in vain else to rise early and sit up late, and eat the bread of
carefulness. What reason is there that a piece of dry bread should do any more
to my nourishment then a chip of wood, or a clod of earth? or how comes it to
pass that the meat which was e're while upon my trencher, is now turned into my
substance, and become part of my flesh and blood, and wonderfully spreads it
self over my whole body to the relief of every part, but that God conveys a
blessing along with it, and has put a strength into these creatures to nourish
us, and give us suitable refreshments, and has endued our nature with
faculties and forces, by a strange kind of Chymick, to draw out that strength
from them, to digest and ferment their substance, to distill and fetch from
them their virtue, to throw of the refuse, to retain what is useful, and bestow
it into so many little vessels, to be carried up and down through the whole
fabric, and make up every defect. Matt. 4. 4.
Man (says our Savior) does not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. It Is God's fiat that does thus virtuate and
commission his creatures to serve us, and do us good; It Is a giving, a
particular assignment of every ones allowance out of God's exchequer; it is not
a scramble, catch that catch can. We must not snatch his gifts but stay till he
give them. The oppressor, the extortioner, the griping usurer, the couzning
trades man and every one that takes an ill course of life has not what he has
given him: he will not let providence be his pourveyour, but makes his own
craft caterer for his bread; he will not stay for God's allowance, but breaks
open the exchequer, and plunders divine bounty. But such will find the bread
turn gravel in their mouths, and those stolen waters bitter in the end. What
God does not give, comes without a blessing, and 'twill be found at last that
those are worst served, who serve themselves. Nor must beggars be choosers, or
pass censure upon God's gifts; Be it more or less, whatever it is, it comes
from the hand of a Father, and is better then a rebellious child deserves. We
must neither envy those that have more given them, nor scorn those that have
less, since it pleased God so to make the distribution. Matt. 20. 15.
Let not thy eye be evil because thy master is good; nor censure any one from
his outward fortune. We are all children of the same Father, and if he gives
one child better clothes and better fare then another, he sees very good reason
to diversifie his dispensations, and it is reason enough to quiet our thoughts
that he has so ordered it. But if our curiosity do tempt us to look out upon
the condition of others about us, let us make this use of it, and compare our
selves with those above us, to learn humility, that we should not be proud for
God's giving us so much, since he has given to some others more; and with those
of lower degree, to practice thankfulness, that we may not grumble at God's
providence who has done better by us, then by many our betters. Let the rich
be humble, because he has nothing but what he has received, and let the poor
be thankful for the little which he has received; and God if he see it fit
for him will give him more. One particular duty at our meals we may pick out
here, that we presume not to feed upon those meats which God has prepared for
us, (for so the Psalmist acknowledges. Psalm. 23. 5.
Thou have prepared a table for me and made my cup to run over) till we have
craved a blessing for them, nor rise up without a thanksgiving, our Saviors
constant practice. It Is observed of the swine, that he wants those nerves that
should draw his eyes upward, so that when he feeds on the mast and the acorns,
he never looks up to the tree whence they fall. He that I^d. 12.
feeds himself thus without fear or looking upward for a blessing, sacri^ices
to his belly and makes it his God; and with him sure, as 1 Cor^ 6. 13.
the belly is for meats and meats for the belly, so God shall destroy both it
and them.

THIS DAY. Day by day, from one day to another without any carking thought for
the future, for Matt. 6. 34.
sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. And who, that says this prayer,
knows but this day may be his last? we should at least live so as if it were to
be. Besides it puts us in mind of a constant dependence upon God. He that has
provided for me to day, will not let me want to morrow; we have been cast upon
his care from our mother's womb, and have lived ever since we came into the
world at his charges; He will not therefore cast us of now, no nor Psalm. 71. 9.
forsake us in our old age, when our strength fails us. We have had so many
trials of God's goodness toward us, as we have lived days and hours, we may
well trust him then for the time to come. It Is true, all futurity to us is
uncertain; it is not so to him: to morrow is all one with him as to day, and
this is certain that he will never want power or love to help us, nor will he
fail the expectation of those who put their trust in him, who is Heb. 13. 8.
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Let us content our selves then with
present enjoyments and not care for to morrow, for the morrow will care for it
self. While we have a mouth to ask, God will not want a hand to give. And this
word makes the prayer as daily as the bread it asks. Wherefore be sure be thy
condition what it will, if thou say this Prayer every day thy daily
allowance will find thee out; and be where thou will it shall be sent thee some
way or other, Kin. 17. 6.
as the Ravens were caterers for Elias. Christ's miracles of the loaves, and
his turning water into wine may assure us, that, be our provision never so
scant or mean, yet if his blessing be in them, they will be sufficient for our
support and comfort.

DAILY. That which thou have apportioned for us, that which God's providence
has set out in the particular distributions to be our part and portion. This
Petition alludes to the Manna, Angels food, that fell every morning among the
Tents of the Israelites in the wilderness, whereof Exodus 16 18.
he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that took up little had no
lack; but every one enough for his eating. It Is so ordinarily; and it is little
less then miracle, how so many thousand families, as are in a great city, in a
nation, live by one another, and how they are provided for according to their
several rates and proportions. Thus the Syriac renders it, (...)
The Bread of our sufficience, or of our proportion. He then that takes more
then belongs to him, and exceeds his allowance, must look that the overplus
shall stink and breed worms. The Greek word is indeed doubtful, and admits of
a double interpretation; First, as it is derived from a word which signifies
(...).
the day a coming; to morrow's or the next day's bread; and thus it signifies
an honest care to be aforehand in the world, and not (as we say) to live from
hand to mouth. And such a care does not argue distrust, but on the contrary a
man's improvidence may seem to call God's providence in question: For so the
Apostle pronounces of him; ^ ^im. 5. ^.
that he is worse then an infidel that does not provide for his family. And so
before we were obliged to trust in God, because it is to be given, and yet take
care of our selves, and use the means, because we must make it ours, before he
give it. Secondly as it is compounded of (...).
a word that signifies substance and a particle of various use, on, over, to,
beside, in, etc. it is rendered super substantial bread, added to our substance,
belonging to our substance, by which we are maintained or kept alive, or of an
excellent substance; And so some apply it to Christ, Ioh. 6. 51.
who was that bread that came down from heaven, of which the Mann^ was a type:
Whose holy Body is in the Sacrament of the Supper represented by the symbol of
Bread. And what so fit to beg of our heavenly Father, as this heavenly Bread,
by which our souls are fed to life everlasting, our nature repaired and
perfectly restored, our hearts strengthened, our spirits quickened and our
graces kept alive.

The meaning of this Petition is, that God would feed us with food convenient
for us, that he would supply all our necessities and fill up all our wants;
That he would as a faithful creator preserve us in the land of the living,
and give us all things that he knows convenient for us in this our pilgrimage;
That his blessing may every day fall round about our dwelling like the morning
dew, and as the Manna lift amongst the tents of the Israelites; That he would
provide for us all accommodations suitable to our condition, and to that
station of life, whereunto his good providence has designed us; That he would
give us strength of body and vigor of mind, perfect health, and all natural
and moral abilities, that may fit us for the discharge of our duties, and above
all a contented spirit, that we may eat our bread with cheerfulness, and be
satisfied with his gracious disposals of us and any condition that he shall in
his wisdom cast us into, either riches or poverty; That he would neither send
us so much of the world's good, as to tempt us to wantonness and riot; nor so
little as to make us repine: but assign us such a competent portion that we may
find a comfortable subsistence, and have where with to do good to others; That
we may be enabled to provide things honest and fashionable before all men, yet
not make provision for the flesh to satisfy the lusts thereof; That our food
may be wholesome rather then delicious, so that in the strength thereof we may
do him service; That our attire may be decent and comely, to cover shame not to
show pride and vanity, that we may not turn his gifts into wantonness, or
^mbezill his talents, but employ them to his glory and others good ^ and Luke
16. 9.
make us friends of the unrighteous mammon; That he would bless our labors,
and give success to our honest undertakings, that we may eat the labor of our
hands and it may be well with us; That he would procure us faithful friends,
diligent servants, dutiful children, fruitful seasons, and furnish us with
all other perquisites, that may make our condition comfortable; That he would
bless the nation with righteous government, and honest magistrates, indue the
nobles with courage, the commons with loyalty, bless all orders and conditions
of persons from the highest to the lowest; from him that sits on the throne,
to him that is behind the mill, enlarge all that are in distress, send us
plenty and peace in our days, crown the year with his goodness, and make all
his steps toward us drop fatness; that we may thankfully acknowledge his
benefits, and be charitably disposed to those that are in want, that we may be
tenderhearted and compassionate, not forget to communicate and distribute, and
show gratitude to all those, whom he has made instruments of good to us, who
have obliged us by any kindness, and pray for them that God would restore
seaven-fold into their bosom; That he would keep us in an humble constant
dependence on him, and provide honest courses for us, that we may not eat the
bread of idleness, or tempt his providence with the use of unlawful means;
That he would deliver us from dangers and distresses, preserve us from rapine,
and spoil, and keep us from distrusts and anxietyes about the things of this
life, but that we may Matt. 6. 35.
seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, assuring our
selves that then all things else shall be added to us, and whatsoever our share
be of outward things, take the Lord for our portion and our inheritance; That
he would to this end give us Christ the bread of life, and with him all things,
and that he would with that bread which came down from heaven, feed our souls
to life everlasting, strengthening our graces, pardoning our sins, and subduing
our lusts.

AND FORGIVE US OUR TRESPASSES AS WE FORGIVE THEM THAT TRESPASS AGAINST US.
Pardon is as necessary for our spiritual life, as bread for our natural. For
Ezekiel. 18. 20.
the soul that sins shall die. Iam. 3. 2.
In many things we offend all; even Prove. 24. 16.
the righteous falls seven times a day. For Romans 5. 12.
death came into the world by sin over all mankind, but righteousness and life
came by Jesus Christ; And we have daily need on it too; for Psalm. 7. 12.
we provoke God every day. So then we are to hunger and thirst after the
righteousness of Christ that our souls may live; And as Christ's flesh is bread
indeed, so is his blood, (which he shed for the atonement of wrath and
forgiveness of sins) drink indeed, the water out of that spiritual rock which
is Christ. Oh, that Psalm. 42. 2.
our souls might thirst for the living God as the wounded heart pants after
the waterbrooks.

OUR TRESPASSES. The other Evangelist uses another word debts, which comes all
to one, both signifying sins, by a translated sense borrowed from dealings
amongst men, betwixt creditor and debtor, the person suffering the injury, and
the person doing it. For a debtor or trespasser that is not solvent, or has
not wherewith to make satisfaction, agrees with his adversary, puts it to
reference, comes to composition, and by mediation of friends, takes up the
business, that there may be no arrest or indictment, or other procedeur in law
against him, as knowing that he should come by the worst, be cast in his fuit
and be sent to prison, where he must ly by it, till he have paid the uttermost
farthing; which being utterly unable to do, he must never hope to come out,
but rot in prison. The same is the case betwixt God and us, we are bound to him
by our creation to an observance of his laws, or to undergo the penalty of the
breach which is everlasting death; But we are fallen short and are unable to
discharge that debt, nor are we able to answer him one word of a thousand; so
that there are due to us all the plagues written in his book; We have gone
astray and done abominably, we have broken all his laws and commandments, we
have been rebellious children from our youth up, and the imaginations of our
hearts have been evil continually, we have neglected our duty in every thing,
and have not harkned to him to obey his voice; so that to us belongs shame and
confusion of face for ever. Now Christ became our surety, took up the business,
undertook our reconciliation and has answered the law, satisfied justice,
discharged our debts, cancelled the obligation, and nailed the hand writing of
the law unto his cross, making a new covenant of life betwixt God and us upon
Gospell-terms of grace, and new obedience; yet still we are wanting on our part
and deal treacherously in our covenant, trampling upon his blood and despising
so great salvation. Nay even the best of Saints have their daily slips and
failings; Who is he that can justify himself? and 1 Ioh. 1. 10.
if any perfectist say he has no sin, he deceives himself and the truth is not
in him.

Our sins. All Adam's offspring, the whole race of mankind is tainted. Psalm.
51. 7.
Behold (says the holy Prophet, a man after God's own heart,) I was brought
forth in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me. And Romans 3. 9.
the Apostle has concluded all under sin, so that we are all guilty of original
corruption, whereby all the faculties of our soul and members of our body are
overspread, as with a leprosy, from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, beyond the cure of all humane arts and helps; Philosophy, education, laws
and punishments, shame and interest, cannot weed out this root of bitterness;
nay grace it self, though it may over top it and keep it under and hinder it is
growth, yet cannot totally exstirpate it in this life; we are bid to strive
after perfection, though it be a thing impossible to attain it; and of actual
transgressions, which like impure streams flow from that filthy puddle of
corruption, that is lodged in our nature, into our lives, and issue forth in our
thoughts, words, and deeds; whether by omission of good or commission of evil,
whether against God by impiety, against our neighbor by injustice, or against
our selves by intemperance, whether wilfully and deliberately with presumption
against the light of nature, dictates of conscience and plain rules, or weakly
and suddenly out of ignorance, frailty, sudden surreption or surprise, or by
the hurry of temptations; whether public and notorious scandalous offenses,
which are loathsome to the ey of the world, and make us stink in the nostrils of
those about us, or secret closet sins which ly open to God's sight, and perhaps
may escape our own knowledge or be lost out of memory.

From the different words the Evangelists, use some draw an argument against
the formality of the whole prayer, and that therefore it is enough, if we
deliver our selves according to the meaning of the prayer and not in the very
self-same words, the words themselves being diversely reported. To this may be
replied, first that this is but a contention about words; For though the two
words differ a little in sound, yet they are all one in sense, and let them use
which expression they like best, so they use one and observe the precept which
injoyns the form. Secondly that the various reading of a word ought not to null
and void the whole form so as to say that that prayer recited by St. Matthew is
not the same which St. Luke rehearses: If so; then Psalm. 18. compared with 2.
Sam. 22.
that Psalm of David is not the same with that which is set down in Samuel, nor
would the ten Commandments, as they are repeated in Deuteronomy be the same as
God spoke in the xxth Chapter of Exodus, because of the alteration of some
words. Indeed upon this account the whole body of Scripture might be called in
question, there being hundreds of different readings in the very originals: now
there can be but one right, and we have no means left us to know which is that
right. But in most of these there being no point of faith or manners concerned,
'twill be indifferent which of the two we take, so we take one; or we may make
use of both, and that is the third answer, That our Savior dictating this form
at two several times, at second going over might possibly vary a word or two,
which may be the reason also of most (if not all) the several readings in the
Hebrew and Greek Text; the writers themselves in the several copies transcribed
from them, altering here and there a word. And from this ground may have sprung
that liberty which the Septuagint take in their Greek Translation, they
following another copy much different from the present Hebrew: And then the
command obliges us indifferently to either, or if we will to both, sometimes
one, sometimes the other. Not to say in the fourth place that our Savior spoke
Syriac, and the Evangelists might allow themselves the freedom of Interpreters,
to translate the same word differently, it being a (...).
word probably that bears both the significations of debt and guilt; Though I
must confess the Syric Interpreter affords here no help, rendering it, as the
Evangelists have done, by two differing words, a liberty which he often takes
As in this very Prayer, (...) and (...).
and here was bound to it, because the Evangelists whose words he was to
translate had done so to his hand.

As we forgive them that trespass against us. This is either a condition upon
which we beg forgiveness, desiring to find that favor at God's hand, as our
brother does at ours, and that God would deal with us in that very manner as we
deal with one another. And thus it is a very high obligation to charity, mutual
forgiveness, and brotherly kindness: or else it may be taken as a reason of the
foregoing desire, and as the other Evangelist words it, For we also forgive;
That seeing we poor and wicked creatures have so much goodness as to pardon one
that offends us, the great and blessed God who is goodness and love it self,
would not be hard to be entreated, but would lay aside his wrath and forgive
and forget whatsoever has been amiss. And in this sense the words afford a
powerful argument to plead with God for pardon and an undeniable consequence,
from the less to the greater, that God would yield to do out of his own
infinite goodness that toward us, which his grace has enabled us to perform
to others.

As. This particle here denotes a likeness but not an equality; such an As, as
in those precepts of impossible duty, Luk 6. 36.
Be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful, etc. For who can reach
infinity? who can overtake him, whose ways are past finding out? as himself
says in this very case, Isa. 55* 9.
As far as heaven is above the earth, so far are my thoughts above your
thoughts, which there are meant his thoughts of mercy and love. Alas! should we
coop him within our narrow model and scantling, should we make that kindness,
which we show to one another, the standard by which his love must be meeted out
to us; how should we dry up the breasts, and shrink the bowels of his mercy,
and dwindle his bounty Ioh. 1. 16. (...).
out of whose fullness we receive Grace for grace, or Gift for gift* Charity for
charity, a vast unmeasurable love, as in exchange and return for that small
love we have for him, and one another; for those words will very well bear that
sense. It Is meant then not of an even, yet a just and fit proportion; that as
we who are mortal and finite have a charity in us, which though bounded with
the measures of time and place and strength, that we can do but little good
and that but to few, and that but a little while, yet it is so sincere that we
would to our utmost do all the good we can, and which is the greatest
character of a good nature, are ready to forgive any one that offends us; So he
who is the fountain of all good, the Almighty, infinite, and everliving God,
would with his infinite charity, his everlasting love, entertain and embrace us
sinners, and freely pardon all those offenses which we have ever committed
against him. Thus the reason may be the same of the most unequal numbers, and
finite and infinite may walk together in the same proportion; as a finite
charity is to a finite offense, so an infinite charity to an infinite offense;
as man is to man, so and much more is God to man. If one man be a God to
another, as charity makes him; then what is to be exspected of God himself? If
we that are wicked forgive one another, surely God cannot choose but forgive us.

WE ALSO. This carries a great emphasis with it, and makes the request very
easy, and lays a force upon God: As if one should say, will God suffer himself
to be out done and outbrav'd by man? will the divine bounty contract it self,
because he sees humane kindness enlarged? will he withdraw his own mercy, and
let ours Iam. 2. 13. (...).
crow over his justice? will his love want measure, and shall ours overflow?
no; on the contrary it is a good evidence that he has shed his love abroad in
our hearts already; that we can thus forgive one another is a consequent of his
having forgiven us first, and a fruit of justification whereby we obtein the
remission of sins. For he justifies us by the blood of his son, and sanctifies
us by his Spirit. Now Gal. 5. 22.
the fruits of the spirit are love, peace, joy, long-suffering, gentleness,
meekness. God other while commands us to imitate his example, as in the
Sabbathrest, etc. And on this very subject to be merciful as he is merciful,
and to be followers of Christ, who 1. Pet. 2. 23.
when he was reviled, answered not again, but was led as a lamb dumb before the
shearers: But here he is pleased to set himself a copy from our actions, and to
take pattern of us, whereby as he does make a low condescension to draw his
goodness parallel to ours, so he does deeply oblige us to forgive one another,
by putting words into our mouths by which we shall be judged if we do not; For
the uncharitable person that says this prayer, prays backward, and does
indeed but curse himself, and he who bears a grudging mind against his brother,
puts in a caveat against himself, and prays that he may not be heard. And to a
peevish, humorous, passionate, revengefull spirited man God will retort the
argument. Art thou a worm and can not endure to be trod upon? can not thou
who dwell in the dust brook an affront, nor bear with an injury? And can
expect that the living God who is a consuming fire, should tamely put up the
injuries which are offered to his honor? Do think it reason for him to
pardon thy talents, when thou can not forbear to use violence for the
recovery of a few pence. Our Savior lays a great stress upon this argument,
therefore he repeats and Mat. 6. 1^, 15.
inforces it, For if ye forgive others then will your Father also forgive you;
But if ye forgive not one another, neither will your Father which is in heaven
forgive you. And at the last though infidelity and impenitency may have a main
hand in shutting heavengates against unbelievers and sinners, yet if our
Savior give us a true account of the proceedings which shall be at those great
Assizes, (as it is Blasphemy to think he did not) the great damning sin for
which reprobates will stand arraigned will be the want of charity. His offenses
then will be inexcusable who was a rigid exactor of other's duties to him; and
who knew not how to pass by others small faults, shall not have his own great
ones pardoned, he who showed no mercy, shall have no mercy showed him; as he
did by others, so shall it be done by him; for Matt. 7. 2.
that measure as you mete, the same shall be meted to you again. The niggard
does not take a course to thrive. Give good measure and it shall be given to
you heaped, and running over into your bosom. Forgive much and thy own pardons
shall be multiplied, and this kind of charity by which thou forgiv'st others
shall hide a multitude of thine own sins.

FORGIVE And alas! what wrong is done to us which is worth revenge, which does
not deserve a forgiveness for our own sake? The poor heathen Philosophers had
that brave principle in them, that they would not disorder the quiet of their
own mind by entertaining passion for another's miscarriage. Out of a generous
contempt of the world they thought nothing here worth the quarrel; or at least
consulting their own ease, and being in love with their tranquillity never
troubled themselves about what was not in their power to help. Let fools, and
knaves abuse Socrates, make mouths at him, twitch him by the cloak, libell him,
draw up articles against him, and at last confute his Philosophy with a draught
of hemlock, he is no more angry with them, then he is with the rain for wetting
him to the skin, with the puddle for wet shodding him, with a stone he stumbles
at, or a post that stands in his way. He Would tell his enemy, Friend, take heed
what thou do, thou wrongst thy self, thou can do me no hurt; my mind's an
invincible fort, thou can not disturb it, nor is it concerned in thy weak
assaults. It Is thy nature perhaps to do ill, it is mine to suffer it; an iron
headpiece for a box of the ear. If providence has ordered thee my executioner,
I can more cheerfully forgive the injury then thou can do it; Epictet.
Kill me thou may, but can not hurt me. So high had Philosophy wrought them
above the region of cloud and trouble, and the pitch of humanity, into a calm
and clear serety of mind, that they lived beyond discontent, and mischief, that
ill turns could not reach them, that passion was an utter stranger to them,
that they baffled wrongs by taking no notice of them, and their dissimulation
of injuries was their great art of living: In so much that Iliero^l,
one of them lays it down for a maxim, that A good man has no enemies. Oh! how
far short are we heathen Christians of those Christian heathens? what a
different temper are we of? How ready are we to quarrel about every trifle,
when a word conjures up our passion, every punctilio ingages our honor? who
are so critical in the study of our reputation, that we examine looks, censure
behavior, and let nothing pass unscan'd, that it is dangerous even for
innocence to enter our company, and our conversation is an inquisition? We make
our very tables snares, and whosoever or whatsoever we like not we judge and
condemn at our pleasure, hang and draw within our selves, and spare none we
catch tripping; And if any one has indeed deserved ill at our hands, to be
sure, we let fly at him bitter words, murder him in our thoughts, and seek all
opportunities for a desired revenge. And can such a one exspect that God should
swallow his camels, who has so queasy a stomach and narrow a throat himself,
that he streins at gnats? O let no one be so desperately revengefull, so ill
natured to himself, as to pursue an enemy beyond the hopes of heaven, and
purchase a revenge with the loss of his soul. He forfeits his own pardon that
cannot forgive another. Consider at what a cheap rate God sets his pardons to
sale. For thou may wipe off thy own score with thy brother's faults; his
moats will remove thy beams. As God has made the poor his receivers, so he has
appointed thy debtors and trespassers his assigns. What they cannot pay thee,
God strikes off of thy account; what thou forgivest them is discharged out of
God's bill against thee. Thus our forgiveness like quit-rent or a legal cheat,
stands for a hundred times it is value, and our enemies prove our greatest
friends by injuring us to our happiness, and turning our shame into the
advantage of our glory, by procuring us pardon of our sins, whilst we forgive

THEM THAT TRESPASS AGAINST US.
It Is such an argument as the Centurion used, and shows as much charity as his
did faith. Matt. 8. 8, 9.
Do but speak the word (says he) and my servant shall be healed. For I also
am one in a petty authority, and have soldiers under me, and say to one, Go
and he goes, to another Come and he comes, to a third, Do this and he does it.
So we are taught to plead this request. Forgive us our sins for we also forgive
offenses committed against us. We have superiors that oppress us, and we bear
with patience; equals that scorn us, and we in honor prefer them; inferiors
that neglect us and we use them kindly, we have hard masters, severe teachers,
base friends, abusive companions, stubborn children, spightfull neighbors,
unfaithful servants, and yet we return not evil for evil, but give place to
wrath, and according to thy command Romans 12. 21.
overcome their evil with our good. We bless those that curse us, pray for
those that wrongfully use us, do all the good we can to those who do us all
manner of ill, and endeavor as much as in us lies to keep peace with all men,
and readily forgive every one that does us any unkindness, and with our Luke
23. 34.
Savior on the cross, pray that our heavenly Father will forgive them too, and
with the first Act. 7. 60.
Christian Martyr, that God will not lay what they do to their charge. And
will not the Father of mercies do so by us, and much more? will not he forgive
Psalm. 130. 4.
with whom there is forgiveness that he may be feared. God would want
worshippers; no body would fear him, were he a cruel God, and delighted in the
death of a sinner, and would accept of no other sacrifice for sin but the soul
that commits it. He is merciful and gracious and long suffering, full of
loving kindness, and plenteous in redemption; Exodus 3 4. 6.
as he has expressed himself in the vision of Moses. That he may forgive us as
we forgive others, let us learn of him to forgive, to be reviled and not revile
again, to love our enemies, to pass by offenses, to wink at great faults, not
to be strict in observing what is done amiss; (For if God should do so, who
would be able to stand; for who knows how often he offends?) to make a candid
interpretation of other men's carriage, and judge the best of their actions, to
put up wrongs, at least to put them upon God's account; as David said of
Shimei, 11. Sam. 16. 10.
God has sent him to curse me this day; and to look upon every enemy thou have
as God's scourge, and 'twill become a dutiful child to submit to his father's
correction, though administered by a servant's hand; For he appoints the hand as
well as the rod. God has several ways to chastise his children, and punishes
some with a malicious tongue to blister their good name; to some a marriage bed
proves their purgatory, or an ill neighborhood; To others men of violence
come with a commission from heaven as God's Takers, and seize on all the
comforts of their lives; and remember amongst all these injuries of men, God
does no man wrong; and he may take what course he please to reduce a rebel
subject to his obedience. And lastly how malicious so ever the intentions of
men may be, God means all this vexation for good, and would not apply this
strong Physic, but that he finds it necessary for the health of thy soul. What
little reason have thou to be offended at any man; whom God imployes in the
drudgery of his chastisements? How much reason have thou to forgive and thank
too any one, that does thee such kind injuries, which reclaim thee from thy
sins, and put thee in a capacity of God's pardon? And shall he that is at this
pains about thee to fetch thee home to thy Father, and bring thee to Heaven, be
thought to do thee ill offices, and not deserve a pardon for his courteous
malice? What good shrewd turns are these? What friends more beneficial then
such foes, whose mistaken rage meaning to kill cures by breaking an Impostume
of pride or lust; whose cruelty while it would drive us from earth, would but
give us an earlier possession of heaven, and banish us into bliss? But may one
say, if this reasoning be good, to what purpose are laws, whereby men's persons
and properties are secured from wrong? To what end courts of judicature, where
injured persons may have right done them? Besides that war upon this account
will be as unlawful as murder; and if men may not be allowed to preserve their
rights by laws, and where they are overpowered to maintain them by arms, in a
short time they would have nothing to loose; for one injury will invite another
till they have eaten out their patient entertainer? To this I answer, it is true
the whole tenor of the Gospel is for self-denial, taking up the cross, and
bearing cheerfully all that an injurious world can put upon us; that the great
character of a Christian is to be a sufferer, and that the scope of this very
petition is in short, that we should deal with others as we will have God deal
with us, which is freely to forgive all trespasses that are committed against
us without any exception; for no other pardon can serve our turn from God's
hand: (any one sin unpardoned will damn us.) Yet God has for the preservation
of the civil societies of men, implanted principles of moral honesty in the
minds of men, and has prescribed rules of equity in his word, and has set up
his Vicegerents, Kings and Magistrates under them, to keep good order, that no
person of loose principles that has debauched his notions, may disturb others
to gratify his own lust, but may be made give account to him that Romans 13. 4.
bears not the sword in vain. And one may in some cases, nay must out of
charity to the public, prosecute notorious offenders, as traitors, murderers,
thieves, etc. least by a patient sufferance of their mischiefs we encourage
them in their wickedness, and become accessory to the guilt of any other
villainy they shall commit afterward. As for private wrongs, as slanders, etc.
ones own ease would be argument enough to put a supersedeas to Law with an
ingenuous man, who knows no ill by himself: it being generally seen, that he
that is over eager to prosecute a scandal, justifies it. To conclude, there can
be no offense so heinous, no miscarriage so mischievous, wherein Christian
moderation and patience has not place; By doing nothing to serve our own
passion or interest, but all for God's glory only and public benefit; And to
let our hearts even bleed in pity over those wicked wretches, who dye by the
hand of Justice, and abate rather then improve the rigor of the law any
farther then is necessary for the terror of evil works. Such was Ioshuah's
carriage to Achan; Josh. 7. 19.
My son (says he) give glory to God: who nevertheless was stoned to death.

We desire then in this petition, that God would blot out all our iniquities,
and remember our sins no more; that he would not impute our sins to us, but
cover our iniquities; that he would pardon all that we have done amiss; that he
would not deal with us according to our iniquities, nor reward us according to
our sins: But that he would deal bountifully with our souls, and of his free
grace pardon us; that he would accept of what Christ his Son, our surety, has
done and suffered for us, to take away the sins of the world; that he would
look upon his death, as a sufficient ransom, and a perfect atonement for sin;
that he would sprinkle us with his blood for justification, and cloth us with
the robes of his righteousness, that as our sins were imputed to him for a
shameful and cursed death, so his righteousness may be reckoned to us for glory
and immortality. That he would nail the handwriting of the law against us, to
the Cross, and bury our sins in his grave, that they may never rise up against
us, neither to shame us in this world, nor to condemn us in the next; That he
would break the rule and dominion of sin, as well as free us from the guilt and
punishment of it; That he would Psalm. 51. 11.
create in us a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within us; That he would
Dimitte.
loose us from the bands of death and quicken us to newness of life, killing
sin in us by the virtue of his death, and raising us by the power of his
resurrection, who dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification; That
he would sprinkle our consciences from dead works, and wash away the stains of
our natures and of our lives, and though our sins be as red as crimson, make
them as white as wool; That he would Psalm. 19. 13.
keep us from presumptuous sins, and cleanse us from our secret sins; That he
would lay the restraints of his grace upon us, that we may not break out into
foul enormities; That he would mortify our lusts, and subdue our corruptions,
and earthly affections; That the pollution of our nature and original
uncleanness may be done away, by the water of Baptism in the layer of
regeneration; That he would forgive us all the evil of our doing, our neglects
in duty, the sins of our youth and the sins of our riper age, the vain
imaginations, and the evil concupiscence of our hearts, every idle and
unsavory word, all our wicked and ungodly deeds, whereby we have dishonored
him, injured our neighbor, or abused our selves, our own sins and our other
folks sins, our national and our personal sins, our civil and our religious
sins, our rebellions and apostasyes, and our hypocrisy, our righteousness, our
prayers, our charity, and our very forgiveness it self; all the transgressions
and violations of his law, and the breaches of his holy commandments, sins we
have committed knowingly or ignorantly, wilfully or weakly, deliberately or
upon surprise, with temptation or without; all that we know by our selves, and
that he knows by us, who knows our folly and our frailty, and how brutish we
are; that as his mercy is over all his own works, so he would stretch it over
all our works; That he would be graciously pleased to do what he requires us
to do, to love his enemies, and bless his Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Act. 9. 4.
persecutors; That he would magnify his mercy in pardoning great sins, and not
let the mercy of man exceed it; that he who is abundant in loving kindness, and
full of compassion, would not come short of his creatures; that since Matt. 18.
22.
he has commanded us, if our brother offend seventy seven times, we should
forgive him, he would take pattern from his own command, and pardon us our
repeated abominations, wherewith we provoke him every day; that he would work
in us the grace of repentance and charity, and assure us of the forgiveness of
our sins, by our readiness to forgive others.

AND LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION.
As it was not enough, that God should give, unless he would also forgive us;
so neither will a bare forgiveness serve our turn to quit all that is past,
unless we may have his assistance to prevent faults to come: so that in the
preceding petition we desire to have our former debts struck of the score, in
this we beg a stock of grace, and the supplies of the spirit, that we may run
in debt no more, nor fall into any more sin. So that we entreat God to deal
with us, as a tender mother with her little one that is yet unable to go alone,
who takes it up when it catches a fall, and holds it when it is up that it may
not fall again. There we called for pardon, here we ask for strength; having
been often foiled by the tempter, we implore spiritual aid that God would
enable us to resist Satan, that he may fly from us; to withstand evil, so that
having done all, we may stand. That belonged to justification whereby we are
reconciled to God, this pertains to sanctification whereby we are made like
unto God, who is both all good, and (...). I a m 1. 1 3.
is not tempted of evil.

AND. The Petitions which concern us have mutual connection with, and dependence
upon one another; Give us, and forgive us, and Lead us not, but deliver us:
whereas the others which concern God stand apart, and are not so coupled and
joined together; because they are of themselves entire and complete, and one
granted naturally infers the rest, every thing that belongs to God being like
himself infinite. His Name, his Kingdom, and his Will, each in a manner
severally including the other two; so that his glory is sufficiently provided
for, if any of them hold good. For his name cannot be hallowed, unless his
Kingdom come and his will be done too. And if his Kingdom come, his will must
needs be done, and his name will be hallowed. Or if his will be done, it is a
certain sign his Kingdom is come, and his name as sure will again be hallowed.
But the benefits we crave for our selves are partial, and such as God often
disjoins and gives apart, as 'twere by piece-meals: For many times he bestows
bread and an outward estate, where he does not vouchsafe pardon and peace of
conscience; nor gives grace always to prevent the commission of future sins,
where he forgives sins past. Some men are rich to their hurt, and their fullness
of bread is a curse, whilst their abundance does but increase their debt, and
their table proves their snare. Others are in God's favor though the world
frown on them, and with Luke 16. 21.
Lazarus are put to shift for crumbs that fall from the rich glutton's table,
whose outward man is ready to perish for want, while the inward man lives by
faith. Others may have their sins forgiven them, and yet be put upon worse
conflict then bodily want, and the necessities of a short life, being buffetted
with Satan, and winnowed, and exercised with strong temptations. And there may
be those who, though preserved from falling into temptation, and kept from
great sins by the restraints of a gracious providence, yet may not be secure as
to their forgiveness, who may be damned for their little sins, every sin being
in it is nature high treason against an infinite Majesty. For they are all three
well linked together with a copulation, seeing that any one would not do us
much good without the other two, nor make sufficient provision for our
necessity. Bread is for the maintenance of our natural life, Justification
freeing us from the guilt of sin, puts us in a spiritual life, by taking out
the sting of death; and sanctification by which we are enabled to work out our
salvation, instates us to the life eternal. Bread keeps us while we are on
earth, Pardon rescues us from hell, and Grace conveys us to heaven; which is
here meant, as that with which we are to encounter temptation, and give it the
foyl.

LEAD US NOT. Man's life is often compared to a walk, and a pilgrimage: There
are many ways and many leaders; we are often at a stand, and through ignorance
know not well which way to take, and therefore have need of being led. Moses
led the children of Israel through the wilderness, and Joshua led them into
Canaan, we seek a land of promise, and have a wilderness of temptations to pass
thorough; and as we want eyes to see our way, so we want feet to walk it: being
naturally as weak as we are ignorant, our understanding dark, and our will lame
and crooked: Nay, and when we are acquainted with the ways of truth and
holiness, we are apt to be misled, to go back, or start aside, and turn to the
right hand or the left. We are beset round with temptations, every step we
tread is snare, and unless God order our goings, and direct us in his way, and
bear us up with his grace, we should every moment fall into sin, and run into
error. The world, the flesh and the Devil, lay baits and traps for us. The
instigations of Satan, the vanities of the world, the counsel and example of
wicked men, and the corrupt desires of our own flesh misguid us, and put us
upon dangerous occasions of ill, rocks of offense, and pits of destruction.
Wherefore seeing that sin does so easily beset us, we pray that God would not
lead us into it; that he who is the Savior of men, and the lover of souls,
would not take up the enemies trade, who is a Matt 4 3.
tempter first, and then Rev. 12. 10.
the accuser. That since we are ready to go astray our selves, he would not
put stumbling blocks in our way, nor countenance those evil guides and
ringleaders of mischief, which seek our soul to destroy it, by leading us
himself into temptation. But do not we lay an imputation upon God's goodness in
praying, that he would not lead us into evil and sin? Iam. 1. 13.
God tempts no man, but gives way to temptation, sometimes in mercy for the
trial of his servants, and to refine their graces; whence himself is pleased
to make manifestations of his presence in the fiery trial, in the furnace of
affliction, as he did with the three children, though it be heated seven times
over, that their faith may be as silver, seven times purified in the fire;
Otherwhile in judgment, 1. Tim. 1 20.
he gives up a hardened sinner to the counsel of his own will, and delivers him
over to Satan as his officer to be tempted. Thus 1 Kin. 22. 23
put a lying spirit at one time into the mouth of the Prophets; thus our
Savior bid Ioh. 13. 27.
Judas after the Devil had entered into his heart, do what he meant to do
quickly. God leads us then when he lets us alone, and leaves us to our selves,
when he does not deliver or keep us from temptation; for so the opposition
stands, Lead us not but Deliver us. And sure our state must be very sad, when
God withdraws, when we have nothing left about us but cunning and powerful
enemies, and a false heart within, that will sooner surrender then temptation
can summon. If God go aside, we need none to lead us into temptation, we will
be our own tempters; the Devil may trust us with our selves, and not spend his
artillery. We often tempt the tempter, and as if we were afraid to be led into
temptation, we go of our selves, and seek it, loving the ways of destruction
and courting our ruin; thinking we cannot be too sure of damnation, we make our
lusts Proctors for Hell, and (as 'twere) out of kindness to Satan take his
drudgery out of his hand, lead our selves into temptation and run head long
into the pit.

INTO TEMPTATION. All temptation is a trial, and every thing in the world will
afford materials to make temptations of. The world is Satan's forge, in which
he hammers his fiery darts, and flings about his sparkles and his firebrands.
Honor, riches, pleasure are the great temptations of mankind. Prosperity an
inticement to ill; Adversity a discouragement from good. He knows the several
genius and inclinations of men, studies their temper, learns their humor, and
interests, and knows how to give them content and gratify their corruptions, He
catches at opportunities, and nicks the temptation, and shoots his darts
betwixt the joints of the h^rness; He represents the objects at the best
advantage, and fits his design to every circumstance. The forbidden fruit to
tempt the woman, the woman to tempt the man. He surprises her when she is
alone, that the female appetite might not have a masculine reason to rule it.
The fruit was fair to look on, and sure pleasant to taste, and curiosity
inhances the desire, knowledge though it be of evil being very pleasant. Genesis
9. 21.
Noah's vineyard tempts him to drink, Genesis 19. 30.
Lot's daughters set upon their aged father. In short there is nothing which the
Devil cannot make use of to his purpose, and if need be, he will head his
arrows with Scripture, as he did to our Savior. And as every thing is thus fit
for the Divel's use to be made an instrument of evil to us, so neither is he
wanting in skill, (for he has Ephesians. 6. 11. Rev. 11. 24.
methods and depths) nor in his industry, (for 1. Pet. 5. 8.
he goes about seeking whom he may devour) to shape and apply them dexterously
upon all occasions. No business, no condition, no place, no season, no person
secure against him, or temptation proof. His hook is always hanging, he is
always at our elbowes egging us to mischief. He has no other business, no
other recreation to entertain himself with, but to set gins and snares to catch
souls in, it being the design of his implacable spite, to see man who by his
means fell from Paradise the place of bliss to an accursed earth, fall yet
lower into the torments of Hell, to be a companion to the damned spirits. He Will
accompany thee to Church, and watch thee into thy closet, whatever thou art
about he is at hand, he intermeddles in thy civil affairs, in thy religious
duties he will bear a part, and suggest vain thoughts; he will buy and sell with
thee, nay he will watch and pray with thee. Matt. 4. 1.
Our Savior himself was led by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted,
where after the preparation of a forty days fast for the conflict, he was to
enter the lists and vanquish this grand enemy of our salvation.

O blessed preparatory Lent! O happy encounter! when the Captain of our
salvation with the buckler of faith, and girt with the sword of truth, and
meekness upon his thigh, was pleased to meet this spiritual Goliath in the
field, and combat with him, that he might Rom 16. 20.
tread him under our feet, Genesis 3. 15.
break his head (his strength and his policy) and Psalm 74. 14.
give his flesh to be mea^ for his people in the wilderness; that as the
viper's flesh proves an excellent Antidot against the poison of the viper, and
is a great restorative to nature, which the creature it self would destroy; so
temptations might turn to advantages, and the malice of Satan improve our
bliss. How little able should we be to resist him who made such fierce assaults
on the Son of God himself? How little hope can we have to escape being tempted
to the fowlest and most horrid sins, when he had the impudence to tempt God
himself (for such was Christ) to the fowlest Idolatry, to fall down and worship
the Devil? Oh dreadful blasphemy! Oh outrageous confidence! O a Devil void of
all ingenuity, past all shame and fear! All these things will I give thee, if
thou fall down and worship me. All these things, all which things? Base bold
feind, have thou any thing to give? All too? all at a clap, false pretender,
thou have nothing to bestow of thy own but evil, hell and death, the wages of
sin. All that is good is God's already, or if thou have any thing to give, do
know, saucy creature who it is thou speak to? will thou offer thy maker any
thing? do think that he will take any thing at thine hand? If he stood in need,
would he pass by all his creatures, can imagine, to accept thy kindness? And
why, feind, this unusual bounty, and so great a present to him thou hate?
What would thou have him do for it? would thou purchase his favor? Have a
mind to buy thy peace and compound for pardon? spare thy gifts, bring thy self,
repent and beg that thou may have leave to fall down at his footstool, and
worship before the mercy seat; can thou confess and forsake thy sins? Thou
have Prove. 28. 13.
Scripture for it, and thy former discourse shows thee well read in Scripture,
thou shall find favor. And what an opportunity have thou? The Savior of the
world in thy company, (who came on purpose to reconcile sinners, and save what
was lost) will be easily entreated to intercede for thee, and get admittance
for a fallen Angel, nor is all his charity tied to fallen men; thy brother Angels,
whom thou left'st in heaven, trust in him and worship him. And why may not
thou hope the day of thy return is coming, now that heaven gates are set open
to all that will enter, and the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence? And thou
have greater reasons to prevail with thee for repentance then miserable men
have, as knowing the great happiness thou have parted with, and having so long
felt the torments of an evil conscience, thy own hell, and of that hell which
thou art heating for others. If any man were in thy case, who yet is of a
shallower understanding and sense then thou art, would he not willingly leap
out of those flames in which thou fryest? would he not gladly be freed from the
wrath of God, which thou have for so many ages lain under, and which for ever
thou must lie under unless thou can repent? And to what end should thou
stand out any longer in an enmity to him that overpowers thee, to whom thy
hatred can do no hurt, who constantly baffles thy counsels and defeats thy
strengths, and has bound thee with everlasting chains? one would think this
very conflict might sufficiently convince thee, how poor thy malice shows, and
how successless all thy attempts? No; Repentance is a doctrine to be preached
only to men; as the good Angels cannot sin, so neither can the bad repent. The
Devil is but enraged with the tidings of salvation, and his despair imboldens
him, and he is resolved to be damned for ever. He has an inveterate hatred, and
implacable malice against God, which has called him forth now unto this
defiance. He hates the very thoughts of being blessed, because he cannot be so
out of God's company; he hates God, as God hates sin, with a perfect hatred,
and would treat with God upon no other terms then this, that God would not be.
Out of hatred to God he hates himself, and is contented to foregoe his
happiness rather then to acknowledge it, and buys his spite with endless
torments. If God should reinstate him (as he is) in heaven, and enlarge him
from his bonds, he would look on the favor as a more painful imprisonment, and
account heaven his worse hell; Though he knows aforehand that nothing he does
against God shall prosper, he thinks it success enough of his plots, that he
has shown a contempt; and in this very temptation of Christ nothing pleases him
so much, as the effrontery of it, that he could (as his servant Luke 23. 11.
Herod after did,) mock him and set him at naught, when he was not suffered to
do him any more hurt. For what is it he tempts him to? that which he could not
have impudence to hope would be hearkened to, that which he knew was impossible
for Christ in his very nature as well as in his will to do; to sin; the holy
one to commit a sin. Oh audacious tempter! could thou offer to corrupt him
who knows no sin with a bribe? could thou fancy the judge of all the earth
could be made do wickedly for reward, when every upright judge scorns to have
justice bought? many an honest lawyer will not be hired to be an advocate for
wrong? But oh Divelish impudence! what, sin? He had tempted him before to
distrust and then to tempt providence, and seeing Scripture, as he applied it,
would not prevail, is not dismayed by a double repulse; but that he might go of
with a boast, seeing he could not with conquest, shows himself right Devil, and
belcheth out a blasphemy big enough to fill the wide mouth of hell. He would
have his Maker and his God turn Idolater, he bids him that dwells on high
fall down, such a fall too, as would be lower then the divel's own fall; for it
must be below him, it must be to him; Fall down and worship me. Oh impudent
blasphemous absurdity! what devil could put such thoughts into Satan's heart,
such words into's mouth? that God, whom all the Gods worship, should himself
worship. For he knew very well whom he had to do with in this encounter, that
he was the Son of God, having been often cast out by him, and confessing it
here with an If. And whom, what would thou have him worship? an image? an
idol? stocks and stones? why, thou can not persuade any men that have their
reason about them to do so; What is it? some Saint or Angel? Thou know his
Angels have charge of him and are bid worship him: what then? speak, Lucifer?
me. Oh diabolical pride! oh unsufferable rudeness! which a poor creature can
hardly have patience to hear; that God, at whose name the devils tremble,
should be tempted by the devil to worship that devil that tempts him. Me
thinks, one cannot read this passage without a great horror, and an agony of
fear, that God should suffer his only Son, God equal to the Father* to be
tempted by the devil to the foulest of sins, Idolatry, to the worst of
creatures, the devil. What care and vigilance ought we to have? what fear and
jealousy? How should we watch and fast; and prepare our selves for spiritual
conflicts, and beg strength from above, that our hearts may be garrisoned and
kept by grace; And since Christ himself was thus brought into the clutches of
Satan, what great reason have we to pray that we may not be led into temptation?

Now there is a twofold temptation: one for trial, whereby God does keep the
graces of his Saints in exercise; so Psalm. 7. 10.
God searches the hearts, and tryes the raines of the children of men, as
silver is tried in a furnace. Thus Abraham's faith, Job's patience, etc. were
tried, nay sometimes God leav's his best servants to themselves, and lets them
catch falls to keep them humble, and to let them know that their strength is
from him. God tempts for trial, the devil only tempts for sin, and sometimes
too God imployes the devil in his trials to heat the furnace, which he does
with an intention to destroy, but God orders for experiment and probation.
Another is for hurt, when we are tempted to sin, to presumption or despair.
Thus God tempts no man, but judicially hardens impenitent sinners that harden
themselv's in their evil way, and gives them up to their lusts, and into the
power of the devil. Thus we read he hardened Pharaoh's heart, put sometimes a
lying spirit into the mouth of the Prophets, let Satan tempt David to carnal
confidence, and the pride of numbering his people; and our Savior after the
devil had filled Judas heart, bid him do what he meant to do quickly; meaning
that horrid treason of betraying his Master. And of this kind of sinful
temptation is this especially to be understood, though it mean also the other
kind of trials.

BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL.
This infers the contrary; that since we have so many to lead us into
temptation, God would rather lead us out, and keep us from evil then lead us
into it. The opposition lies in the words Lead us not, but Deliver us, i.e.
bring us not into temptation, but when we either of our selves fall into it, or
are by others led into it; do thou bring us out, and lead us forth, rescue us
out of the tempter's clutches, and set us at liberty; for so (...) a Verb more
often construed with (...).
the word properly denotes deliverance out of an evil we are already in; though
the (...).
preposition will very well bear this sense, that God would keep us totally
from it; as the Church teaches us to pray as well in time of health and plenty,
as mortality and dearth, from plague, pestilence and famine good Lord deliver
us. We are kept from evil by preventing or restraining grace, we are delivered
out of it by assisting grace. God keeps us from being tempted by the restraints
of his grace and providence, by alarming conscience, by quenching lust, by
denying opportunities for sin, by employing a man, and filling all his time
with duty; For it is the idle soul that commonly proves the tempters, prey;
Diligence in one's calling is a good preservative against vain thoughts, and
checks the approach of temptation, shutting the doors and windows by which it
should enter. God delivers us out of temptation by proportioning it to our
strength, so that we may not faint or (...), Ephesians. 3. 13.
grow evil under it, which he does either by lessening the burden or
strengthening the shoulders, by supporting and bearing us up in conflict, by
making our faith victorious with heavenly supplies of grace, Phil. 1. 19. (...)
a word whence the English charge is derived.
by the aid and at the charge and provision of his spirit, and in fine by
giving us a joyful issue out of our temptations; as he did with Joseph, by
making his brethrens envy an occasion of his advancement, with the Israelites,
by a wonderful delivery from a cruel bondage; with Job, making his
righteousness break forth as the Sun before his setting, after those dismal
storms and clouds, which had darkened it. Thus it is Gods usual course to
heighten the rewards of his tried servants, which 1. Tim. 4. 7.
have fought a good fight, and lays up a crown of glory for them. Indeed in
every temptation the tempter comes by the worst, and it is to the divel's
disadvantage; for if it take, it is true it is his hellish delight to see souls
perish, yet however it increases his guilt as being accessory to another sin,
and consequently must needs increase his punishment and improve his torments:
If it meet with repulse, it cannot choose but be great torment to this
spightful spirit to see that he has been instrumental in raising the happiness
and furthering the salvation, and heightning the gloryes of the Saints; every
baffled temptation is a step higher into glory, and (if I may say it) we get up
to heaven on Satan's back, by trampling him under our feet. A Saint goes
triumphant with a train of conquered lusts and (as Samson carried away the
gates of Azza) breaks the gates (the powers) of hell to force his passage. None
in so high a form of glory as those who have most scarrs to show, and who have
the buckler of their faith battered and shattered with temptations. We are to
fight under Christ's banner, and he will be most blessed who shall be found
likest his master, and have the marks of Christ's wounds imprinted not so much
upon their body as the Legend has it of St. Francis, I mean by outward
sufferings, as upon his soul by the violent assaults of temptation. St. Paul
indeed Gal 6. 17. (...).
says of himself, I wear the marks of our Lord Jesus in my body: it may be
that which 2. Cor. 12. 7. (...).
in another place, we render a thorn in the flesh, a word, which does usually
signify the fork or cross upon which stigmatized and branded slaves were
executed. And then it may signify the mark of the cross, that opprobrious
servile and accursed death. But is resolved by most Interpreters to be a
metonymical speech, and to stand for some great carnal temptation, with which
the Apostle was fiercely and frequently set upon. And so every man has some
peculiar temptation fitted to his temper, which being conquered adds to his
glory. It is the whole duty of man, (his life being a warfare) to be always
upon his guard, to buckle and combat with the tempter. Luke 13. 24.
Strive to enter in at the straight-gate says our Savior; (...).
a word borrowed from the Olympic games, and prizes, and signifies Quinquortium.
five kinds of exercise, leaping, running, hurling, darting and wrestling. And
the whole New Testament is full of Agonistical expressions, though the reward
proposed to the conqueror in those strifes were but some fading chaplet of
flowers, but lusts conquered gain 1. Pet. 5. 4.
a crown of glory which will never wither. If temptation were not, Grace would
loose it is exercise, and Glory it is improvement; Wherefore in the opposite
request we desire not to be delivered from the temptation it self, but

FROM EVIL. From the evil of temptation, for there is a good use of
temptations as God orders them. We are liable and exposed continually to
temptations. But God takes out the sting and the venom of them, and whilst the
wicked fall under the evil, the righteous go free: that what is said of God's
preservation in time of Epidemical infections, that though thousands fall at
thy right hand it shall not come near thee, is as true in a spiritual sense.
Evil here may bear the same meaning with temptation, thus. From the evil one,
that is, from the tempter, that enemy. And thus it is said, 1. Ioh. 5. 19. (...).
the whole world lies in the evil one, is at his dispose, who is the Prince of
the world. And so our desires would be, that God would not himself tempt us,
but rather deliver us from the tempter. But it is best to take words in the
largest sense, from evil, i.e. from all manner of evil, both bodily and
ghostly, both temporal and eternal, both of sin and of punishment. And thus it
will contain in it a whole Letany that God would deliver us from a hard heart,
and a seared conscience, from a reprobate mind and corrupt affections, from
presumptuous sins and contempt of his word, from gross miscarriages and secret
wickedness; from murder and whoredom, and every deadly sin, from pride vain
glory and hypocrisy, from envy malice and all uncharitableness, from any thing
that may prove an occasion of fall, from the pomps and vanities of the world,
from the evil concupiscences of the flesh, and from the suggestions of Satan;
from the influence of lewd examples, and from the inticement of evil company,
and from the foolish counsel of our own will; from all opportunities and
conveniences of sinning; from fire, and sword, and pestilence, and famine; from
all those curses which are due to us for our sins, from all manner of
calamities whether in body, or mind, goods, or good name; from sudden or
untimely death; from maims, sickness or deformity; from ignorance, folly, and
mistakes; from unruly passions and disordered thoughts; from rapine, plunder
and oppression; from war and civil broyls; from having too much or too little;
from being lifted up in prosperity, or cast down in adversity; from honor and
dishonor, from shame and reproach, from meats and drinks, from our business
and recreation, from our enemies, from our friends, and from our selves; in
short, from every thing, so far forth as it may procure us evil.

To sum up the meaning of the whole Petition together, which we have delivered
by parts; we desire of God, that he would not only pardon sins past, but would
furnish us with strength from above, to resist temptations hereafter, and
having had our sins forgiven we may sin no more, nor return again to folly;
that his justifying grace may be accompanied with sanctifying grace, which may
keep us blameless, that we may become temples of the Holy Ghost, and he may
dwell in our hearts by faith, which may quench the fiery darts of the evil one;
That he would not leave us to our selves at any time, but instruct us with his
eye, and guide us in the way which he shall choose for us; That he would not
for our many provocations, in judgment, harden our hearts and deliver us up to
a reprobate mind and dishonorable affections, or upon our frequent refusals of
grace offered, conclude us under a state of impenitence, and give us into the
power of Satan, to be led captive at his will, who is the God of this world who
rules in the hearts of unbelievers; That he would hedge our way about, so that
the opportunity of sin may be denied us, and that, though it easily beset us,
yet we may not fall into it; That he would keep us from presuming on his mercy,
or despairing of it, that so being carried with the full sails of faith, as
neither to split at that rock and make shipwreck of a good conscience, or sink
in this gulf and be swallowed up in sadness, we may work out our salvation with
fear and trembling; That he would not bring us into any distress or difficulty,
which might be too hard for us, but would support us in it, and give an issue
out of it; That he would be our sun and our shield, our light and our strength,
to direct and secure our paths, that, though we are surrounded with
temptations, yet he ordering our steps, our soul may escape as a bird from the
snare of the fowler; That he would save us from the destroyer, that walks to
and fro on the earth, seeking whom he may devour; shorten the tempter's chain,
and put a hook in his nostrils, that neither the devil, nor any wicked man, or
evil thing, may have power to hurt us; That he would keep us in his ways,
least our foot should at any time dash against a stone of offense; That he
would refrain our foot from every false way and work, suffer no vanity to have
dominion over us, that we may not grow worse under his judgments, or his
mercies, but that all the dispensations of his providence about us may be so
improved, that his fear and love may constrain us, and keep us in the walk of
our duty; That he would preserve us from sin, and the shame and punishment
which attends it; that he would not let the fierceness of his wrath break out
upon us, nor shower down those many plagues upon our head, which our multiplied
rebellions have deserved; That he would stretch out his loving kindness, renew
his compassions, and never forget to be gracious, but deliver us when we call
upon him that we may glorify him; That he would save us out of the hands of our
spiritual enemies, (as (...). 1. 74.
himself has promised) that we may serve him without fear; That he would
overcome the world for us, mortify the old man, and trample Satan under our
feet: Finally, that he would save us to the uttermost and completely in our 1 Thessalonians. 5 23. (...).
whole man, body, soul, and spirit, from all, and all manner of evil whither of
this life or of that to come, and would so contrive all events, and lay the
plot of his eternal purposes, that all things may work together for our good
and procure our everlasting welfare.

FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM, THE POWER, AND THE GLORY FOR EVER AND EVER.
This is the Doxology, which either comes in as a Confirmation to back the
foregoing petitions, or is added as a bare Confession, it being usual, that in
sacred writings that particle for, or because is not always brought in as a
causal or rational influence, but is many times simply narrative.

In this later sense the several words may be taken to mean the same thing, as
in Dan. 5. 31. Rev. 5. 13.
Daniel's prophecy and the Revelation many such synonyma's are heaped together;
and in the Psalms several in several places used indifferently, to show that
too much cannot be said, or too many expressions made use of, to set forth
divine Majesty. We end our Prayer then in an adoration of his exeellencyes, and
a deep acknowledgement of his greatness, represented under a threefold term,
Kingdom, Power and Glory, which are farther raised and lifted up beyond our
conception by the infinity and eternity of them. His Kingdom has neither
beginning nor end of days; his power admits no bounds, knows no end; and his
glory as himself, is, and was, and is to come; And as the Church has worded
it, which was but a pious descant upon this piece of the Lords Prayer.

Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.

In the former sense it is laid at the bottom of the Prayer, as a ground and
foundation of it, as if we were pleading to be heard; Nor do we in these our
requests, seek our selves, or study and design our own emolument and advantage,
but our souls are touched with a love to thy name, and we humbly desire thee to
accept these petitions in order to thy own glory, which will receive some
advantage even then, when the necessityes of us thy creatures are supplied. If
thou be graciously pleased to hear us in these our desires, Thy Kingdom will be
advanced, thy power made manifest, and thy Glory promoted. It Is not for our
selves we ask, nor can we think our poor concernments an argument sufficient to
ground a confidence on, but for thy names sake. Alas! should we aim at Kingdom,
power or glory, what poor short-arm'd^, short-lived thing would it be, bound up
within the measure of a transitory life of a span length? but thine lasts to
ages of ages, thy Kingdom has the same date as eternity, never commenced, never
shall exspire; thy power reaches from everlasting to everlasting, and thy glory
indures from generation to generation. It Is our earnest request that thou
would provide for the honor of thine own name, that thou would not be
wanting to thy self in the vindication of these thy glorious attributes, nor
let them suffer by turning thy face away from our prayers.

And thus these three words may cast back a respect to the several petitions,
as has been before observed; to those which concern God, in this manner. Thine
is the Kingdom, therefore let thy Kingdom come, since it does of due belong
unto thee. Again thine is the power, therefore let thy will be done; for whose
will should carry but his, whose will no one can resist? And lastly, which was
proposed first in the petitions, (that the Prayer might begin and end alike,
and God's glory might be the (...) and (...) of it.) Thine is the glory,
therefore h^llowed be thy name. And in subordination to these we proceed to ask
in our own behalf, wherein yet those attributes seem to be no less concerned,
with some such reflection as this. Thine is the Kingdom, wherefore give us
bread; it was a Genesis 41 56.
Pharaoh's care to provide bread for his subjects: how much more will our King
and our God supply all our wants, and allow us necessaries? Thine is the power,
therefore forgive us our sins, for Mar. 11 7.
who has power to forgive sins but God? Oh! that it would please thee to show
this thy power in pardoning our iniquities, and not in avenging them! and
lastly again, Thine is the glory, wherefore lead us not into temptation,
whereby we may bring dishonor to thy name; but deliver us from evil, that we
may glorify thee, the author of all our good.

And all these requests to be granted not for the present only, for a day, or
an age; but this provision for his own glory and our wants to be for ever;
because his Kingdom and his power, which are the store, whence this provision
is to be made, and his glory, which is to be provided for, are for ever; as
also our wants need a continual supply. Now these his attributes having been in
ages past, and being to last for all ages to come, by former experience of
those that have been before us, and our own, beget a confidence for the future,
that as Psalm. 22. 5.
our fathers trusted in him and were not ashamed, so succeeding generations
shall find, it is not in vain to seek him, and that he, whose goodness is
unexhausted, will not be weary of doing good. So that the eternity of Gods
perfections ingages our posterity to hope in him, and concludes this prayer fit
to be used as long as the world indures.

This Doxologie or Conclusion of the prayer is set down only by St. Matthew;
St. Luke mentions it not, and accordingly the Church in her offices leaves it
out; nor does this difference plead any thing against the formality of the
prayer it self, or the omission of this part prove, that the whole may be
omitted and laid aside. For as't has been said before, Christ proposed this
Prayer upon two several occasions, at two several times; one was, Matt. 6* 9.
when he was preaching his Sermon on the mount before a great multitude of
au^ditors, wherein he delivers in a large discourse the sum of Christian
institution, and the duties of a holy life, of which Prayer being none of the
least, himself propounds a pattern for imitation and use. Luke 11. 1.
The other was more private in the company only of his disciples, when after he
had been at prayers by himself, they desired him to teach them to pray, as John
had done his disciples, whereupon he gives them this form for their constant
use, at least upon solemn occasions, when ye pray, say, etc. Now this latter
appointment of it leaving out the conclusion shows, that it is not an essential
part of the Prayer, necessarily belonging to it, but an addition that may be
spared, indifferent to be used or not; wherefore whether thou say the Lord's
Prayer this way or that, so thou say it one way or other, either with this
addition according to St. Matthew, so as to be one of the Christian multitude;
or without it according to St. Luke, so as to be one of the disciples, we shall
not quarrel; only do not thou quarrel at his wisdom, who thought fit to vary
some expressions in the self same form, on purpose to please thee, that thou
might have a liberty of choice, there being an express command to use it, and
thou left to thy freedom to take which thou will.

One thing may yet perhaps be objected, why the Church should follow St. Luke
in this omission, and take the rest from St. Matthew, whose words in expressing
the fourth and fifth petitions differ from St. Lukes? To this some perhaps will
answer that the Doxologie is of a questionable authority, as supposed to have
crept in out of the scholion or margent into the text, wherefore it being
without all doubt omitted in St. Luke's Gospel, and being doubted in St.
Matthew's, (the Vulgar and Arabic Translations having it not*) that the use of
it might breed no scruple it was thought fit to be quite left out: But allowing
it a full authority, the Church may surely be allowed the same freedom, which
any private Christian has, of using which form it shall think fittest for
public service. Wherefore seeing both the Evangelists do agree so far as the
petitions, which make up the prayer, the Church might judge it convenient to
lay aside the rest, and therein follow St Luke. And again because St. Luke's
language is more elegant, and difficult: St. Matthew's on the other side,
according to the simplicity of the Hebrew style, being more plain and facil,
might consequently be deemed fitter for popular use, especially when St.
Matthew himself says that our Savior did dictate it to the multitude; which
variety of style together with the custom of Interpreters, (who are used to
render the same things differently,) being considered, may also evince that
this prayer, though delivered by our Savior upon two several occasions, might
be the very same in the Syriac language, which our Savior used, though it be
diversely expressed in the Greek: St. Matthew perhaps more closely adhering to
the words then St. Luke, who according to his genius, to keep an accurate
propriety of the Greek tongue, might take the liberty a little to vary. And of
this we might produce many instances, in several discourses of our blessed
Savior related by them both, which though variously reported by both, nay by
all four, yet were plainly meant for the same, so that both the forms, though
not exactly agreeing in all the words, are but the same Prayer, and he that
uses either of the forms says the Prayer, no less then he that should say it
in Latin according to Pagnin's, or Steven's or Beza's Translation, who yet may
differ in the plainest sentences, (as not using the same pen, and possibly
sometimes out of the mere study of variety) shall be thought to say his Pater
Noster in Latin; only he that would use it in Latin, would no question choose
that Latin translation which he thought came nearest the Original, which is
here the Churches case.

AMEN. This is a word our Savior, (who was truth it self, and therefore called
in the Revelation the Amen) had in his mouth often, and seldom began any
discourse of weighty moment, but he fronted it with this asseveration, many
times doubled too, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, i.e. Truly, Truly) as Matt. 16.
2^. (...). Luk 9. 27. (...).
St. Luke expounds it) or Verily, Verily. But the chief use of it is at the end
of our Prayers, especially in public devotion, where the Priest's blessings and
services are to be attended with the peoples acclamation; an ancient custom, as
appears by the Psalm, Psalm. 105. 17.
And let all the people say Amen. It has a double significancy in it, not only
to gather up the whole Prayer which went before, and throw it out at a word,
with a fervent desire, that our requests may be heard and granted; But also to
denote a confidence of obtaining, and an assured trust, that what we have been
praying for, will not be denied us. It claps a Fiat to the Prayer, as the
Septuagint render it, (...).
So be it, and seems to demand performance.

FINIS.
THE EXPLANATION Of the APOSTLES CREED.

THE APOSTLES CREED.
I Believ in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. 2. And in
Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord. 3. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary. 4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead,
and buried. 5. He descended into hell; The third day he rose again from the
dead. 6. He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty. 7. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
8. I believ in the holy Ghost. 9. The holy Catholic Church: the communion of
Saints. 10. The forgiveness of sins. 11. The resurrection of the body. 12. And
the life everlasting. Amen.
Of the Apostles CREED.
THe Apostles (as some deliver it) before they went into the several quarters
of the world, to preach the Gospel to all Nations according to Christ's
command, met and agreed upon the common form of Doctrine, which they should
teach in each Province, wherein the sum of Faith might be set down. Others are
of an opinion, that some grave and pious men did, at the beginning of the
primitive Church, gather the sense, if not the very words, out of the Apostles
writings. Now Symbolum bears a double meaning; for it signifies, first, a
military badge, or watch word; by which a soldier may know one of his own side
from an enemy: So this distinguishes a true Christian from an Infidel, or an
Heretic. Secondly, a shot Rather Symbola, whence a Symbolis esse to meet at a
club.
or club, when every one pays his share toward the reckoning: Because the
Apostles laid their heads together, a (...) confero.
and every one contributed his piece. Wherefore it is also divided into twelve
Articles according to their number: but it is more conveniently distributed
into three main parts, that it may answer the Trinity of Persons, and their
threefold operation; thus. The first part treats of God the Father, and the
work of Creation, whereby he made the world and all things that are contained
in it. The second of God the Son, and the work of redemption, whereby he
restored mankind fallen by sin; and by his death and resurrection purchased
Salvation for us. The third of God the Holy Ghost, and the work of
sanctification, whereby he does apply to the Church (that is) to the company of
believers, the benefits purchased by Christ, to wit Pardon, Grace, and Glory.

The first Article.
I BELIEV. This word belongs to all the parts of the Creed. We pray for
others, we believ only for our selves. Thy Faith has saved thee, Matt. 9. 22.
says our Savior. Faith is either taken for the Doctrine Quam,
which we believ, or the grace Qua credimus.
by which we believ; That is in the head, this in the heart. Again Faith is
divided into Historical, Temporal, and Saving Faith. The first the Devils have
Iam. 11. 19.
who believ and tremble. The second is of hypocrites Mar. 4. 17.
who believe for a time and fall off. The last does properly belong to the
elect, who are therefore called Believers, and the faithful, who hold out to
the end and Heb. 10 38.
live by their Faith. Now Faith is a full persuasion of mind, and a sure
confidence, by which we depend upon him, in whom we believ.

IN GOD. We are said to believ Deum
a God, when we acknowledge that there is a God, and he that is such an one, as
he has discovered himself in his word, and works: to believ Deo.
God, when we are persuaded that his word is the very truth, and that
whatsoever he has promised, or threatened in holy Scripture shall surely come
to pass: to believ In Deum.
in God, when we place all our hope and trust in his power and goodness, who
both will help those that trust in him, because he is a Father, and can,
because he is Almighty. God is of an infinite nature, which exceeds all bounds
of time or place, much less can be comprehended by our shallow understanding.
we cannot know; but we must believ; and this very Faith does as much exceed
reason, as reason does sense in evidence and certainty. The Holy Trinity, by
which three Persons are one God; and the Incarnation of the Word, by which two
Natures meet into one Person are high and deep mysteries, not to be reached by
the eye, not to be fathomed by the plummet, of our reason; but Faith takes the
height with a Jacob's staff, and humble Hope fastens her Anchor in the bottom
of this depth; and diffusive Charity embraces the whole compass of Divine
truth.

THE FATHER. The Deity is distinguished into three Persons, the Father, the
Son, and Holy Ghost; and these Three are One and the same God. the Father
begets the Son, the Son is begotten of the Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from
both the Father, and the Son. God is the Father also of all things; for of Romans
11. 36.
him, and to him, and through him are all things.

ALMIGHTY. Who can do all things, and does whatsoever he pleases both in
Heaven and in Earth: neither is there any thing too hard for him; for Rom 9. 19.
who has resisted his will? Yet God cannot lie, call back yesterday, or make
the same thing to be, and not to be at the same time: for these are marks of
extreme impotence, not omnipotence, and God would not be God if he could do
them.

MAKER. God's power is not idle. Even before he made, he decreed to make, and
his thoughts were busy about the work of creation from eternity. He made not as
workmen do of stuff lying before them; for he made all things of nothing: nor
with pains and weariness; for Psalm. 148. 5.
he spoke and they were made; He did not only make the world, and then leave it
to it is self, as Masons do houses they build, but he preserves and governs
too, and disposes all events to his own glory.

OF HEAVEN AND EARTH. That is, of the whole world, whereof heaven and earth are
the principal parts. He spread out the earth as a floor, and built up the walls,
and laid the roof of heaven; he stored the elements with several creatures; the
heaven with stars, as lamps hung out; the air with birds, the water with
fishes, the earth with beasts. He made heaven and earth, and all things therein
contained, in the space of six days; but the chief of all his works were
Angels the citizens of heaven, and Men the inhabitants of the earth, made after
his own likeness, and endued with understanding, and excellent gifts: But some
of the Angels with Lucifer by reason of pride, left their station, and turned
Devils: All mankind fell in Adam by disobedience from a state of innocence and
happiness into a state of sin and misery, so that by nature we are the children
of wrath; but by grace become the children of God; and that by means of the Son
of God, who became the Son of Man, that he might save the children of men.

The second Article.
Here begins the part of the Creed concerning Christ the second Person. Now
Christ is considered either in his Person, or in his State; which is twofold:
the state of Humiliation, and the state of Exaltation.

And in Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son our Lord.

The Person of Christ consists of two natures, Divine, and Humane: for as soul
and body make up man; so God and man are one Christ. He is described here by
his names and titles. The names are Jesus and Christ, by which are noted his
offices. The titles which are given him, that he is the only Son of God, and
our Lord, show partly his essence, partly his dignity.

AND. He who believes the Father must also believ the Son: for Ioh 2. 23.
he who denies the Son, has not the Father.

IN. It must be the same says, by which we believ Father and Son; since both
Father and Son are the same God, Ioh. 10. 30. (...) unum and 14. 1.
I and the Father are one, says he; and therefore as Ye believ in the Father,
believ also in me.

JESUS. That is, Savior; for he came into the world to save sinners, that he
might reconcile God and man, and recover fallen man out of the state of sin and
misery, into a state of grace and glory. He saves from sin, and from the
punishment due to sin, and freeth us as well from the power as guilt of sin.

CHRIST. Messiah in Hebrew and Christ in Greek is all one as in Latin anointed.
Now three kinds of men were wont to be anointed, that is, to be consecrated to
their office by pouring oil upon their heads; to wit King, Priest, and Prophet.
Christ was Psalm. 45. 8.
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, that is, extraordinarily
furnished with gifts of the holy Spirit. Melchizedeck was King and Priest;
Samuel Priest and Prophet; David Prophet and King, Christ alone the thrice
greatest, King, Priest, and Prophet. King by subduing our enemies the world,
the flesh, and the Devil, and ruling our hearts by his word and spirit. Priest
by offering up a perfect sacrifice for us, satisfying divine justice for our
sins, and by blessing us by a perpetual intercession. Prophet by revealing the
will of the Father, and discovering to us all things which belong to salvation.

HIS ONLY BEGOTTEN SON. God has many sons, but Christ is the only begotten.
God is styled Iam. 1. 17.
the Father of lights, and Heb. 12. 9.
the Father of spirits; and the Angels are Job 1. 6.
called the sons of God; Magistrates Psalm. 82. 6.
children of the most High, because they resemble him in power and dignity; and
all Godly men are by grace made Romans 8. 16.
the children of God. Now there is a vast difference betwixt Christ and these.
All creatures by creation, blessed spirits by imitation, Princes and Rulers by
institution, Believers by adoption; become God's children. But Christ alone is
his Son by eternal generation, of the same nature, and essence with the
Father, begotten of his substance before all time, God of God, Light of Light,
very God of very God, equal to him in all things, as to the Godhead. Christ as
the Son of God had no Mother, as the Son of the Virgin no Father, who became
Man that he might in the flesh satisfy for the sins of the flesh: yet continued
God that he might appeas the anger of an offended God: Man that he might suffer
death, God that he might overcome it. (...).
God and Man that he might be a perfect Mediator, and might reconcile God to
Man by atoning wrath; and man to God by destroying sin; wherefore he took up
humane nature, put not of the divine. But these two natures were united, and as
it were married in the one Person of Christ.

OUR LORD. In respect of God, Christ is called the Son which shows his essence;
in respect of us a Lord, which shows his dignity. Now he is our Lord both by
right of creation, because he made us; and by right of redemption, because he
has bought us with a price, and purchased us with his blood to be a peculiar
people. We are no longer then our own, that we should fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; But we are Christ's the Lord's, to do his Will, and keep his Commands.

The several Steps, by which Christ humbled himself, and Divine Love moved
toward us, are his Conception, Birth, Passion, Crucifixion, Death, Burial, and
Descent to Hell. The infinite is conceived, the everlasting is born, the
Blessed suffers, the King of Heaven is nailed to a Cross, the immortal dies,
the Immense is buried, and the King of Glory goes down to Hell. What strange
contradictions have our sins put the Son of God upon, who to procure our
Salvation denied himself, and put on the form of a servant?

Which was conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.
CONCEIVED. That is, clothed with flesh, formed and fashioned into bodily
parts, endued with sense, motion, and a reasonable soul inlivened, cherished,
produced, preserved, increased, and in one word made man, Humane nature being
taken up and joined to the Divine.

OF THE HOLY GHOST. Not begotten of his substance, for then the third Person
should be Father too, which is contrary to Faith: but by the operation of the
holy Spirit, the power of the Highest overshadowing her, the Virgin without the
help of man conceived; which is a miracle foretold by the Prophets, and
fulfilled in our Messiah. Isa 7. 14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceiv and bring forth a Son. now the holy Ghost did
separate that most pure mass of flesh and blood, of which the Body of Christ
was to be formed, from all corruption of our nature and the stain of sin, to
which all other (the Virgin her self not excepted) are liable, who are born
after the ordinary way of generation. Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, says David (a man after God's own heart) I was conceived in sin, and
in iniquity has my mother brought me forth. Moreover, 'twas necessary that he
should be born without sin, who came to die for other's sins: and the Lamb of
God which was to take away the sins of the world should himself be spotless: He
could not have been our surety, had he been himself a debtour, nor satisfied
justice for us, could the law have charged him with any guilt of his own.

BORN. Having taken upon him a true body, being in all things made like unto
us, sin only excepted, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, that he might
truly become the Son of Man, he observed the laws and customs of humane
nature, and after he had continued in the womb the usual time, he was at length
brought forth into light, laid in a manger, wrapped in swaddling clothes, and
attended by the Virgin, and bred up, passed his child hood in performing Luk
11. 51. 52.
obedience to his parents, and grew in stature and wisdom.

OF THE VIRGIN. It became God thus to be born, not without a miracle. Our Faith
is full of miracles; a Three-One God, a God-Man Christ, a Virgin Mother Mary. A
Virgin she was before her delivery, in her delivery, and after her delivery;
for they who are called 1. Cor. 9 5.
the brethren of the Lord are after the manner of the Hebrew speech to be
understood as Kinsmen. She was indeed espoused to Joseph but she knew no man.
Her Virginity dignifies a single life, her betrothing justifies the married
state. It pleased God to choose a woman without the help of man in the business
of our salvation, for the honor and comfort of that sex, that as by the
disobedience of the first woman mankind fell, so it might be recovered by the
birth of the Virgin; and Mary might make amends for the miscarriage of Eve.

MARY. For the greater certainty the name of the Royal Maid is expressed; she
being of the tribe of Judah, of the lineage of David the King, according to the
Prophecies concerning the Messiah. Yet the Mother of the Lord, this Blessed
Virgin was very poor, to show that Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, and
in this were the blind Jews offended, that they looked for outward pomp, and
the glory of an earthly crown, little heeding the foretellings of the Prophets,
wherein Christ is described Isa. 53. 3.
a man of sorrows, to suffer all the punishment due to our sins, to wit, death,
and all the miseries of an afflicted life.

Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.
We pass immediately from his birth to his Passion; for indeed his whole life
from his cradle to the Cross was nothing else, but a continual passion, being
spent in hunger, thirst, fasting, watching and traveling, grief, reproach, and
shame; and he was therefore sent into the world that he might die* and to this
end God prepared him a body that he might lay down his life for His.

SUFFERED. Having undertook our cause he satisfied divine Justice, by
undergoing those penalties, which God in his word has threatened to the
transgressors of the law; He was by the sentence of an earthly Judge condemned
to death; that we might be acquitted before the heavenly Father.

UNDER PONTIUS PILATE. In that time, wherein Pontius Pilate was Governor of
Judea, being set over that Nation by the Roman Emperor; when was fulfilled
that Prophecy, which foretold the coming of the Messiah should be, Gen 49 10.
when the Scepter was departed from Judah, that is, when the Jews should be
subject to a foreign power, having lost their own government.

CRUCIFIED. Christ being betrayed by Judas, forsaken of his disciples
apprehended as a malefactor, is brought to the judgment hall, and having been
spit upon, and mocked by the soldiers, accused by the Priests with the charge
of blasphemy, persecuted with the hatred of the people crying, Mar. 15. 13.
Crucify him, Crucify him, scourged with whips, crowned with thorns and
besprinkled with large showers of his innocent blood, is at last by Pilate
delivered up to the will and malice of his enemies; who nailing his blessed
hands stretched wide open to the Cross beam, and his holy feet closed together
to the upright beam of the Cross, exposed him naked to public shame, being
hung betwixt two thieves, in a place without the city, at the Feast of
Passover; and when he had given up the ghost with many pains and groans, a
soldier pierced his side with a lance, that that saying might have place,
Ioh. 19. 37.
they shall look on him, whom they have pierced.

DEAD. By the separation of soul and body; for his body remained upon the Cross
and his soul returned immediately to God, as himself told the penitent thief.
Luk 23 43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. He was not born after an ordinary
manner, neither dyed he a common death: for as much as beside the extreme pain
he suffered, whilst he hung with the weight of his body upon the Cross, and
the great shame to which he lay open, he lay under a curse, Gal 3. 13.
the Law pronouncing him cursed that hangs upon the tree.

AND BURIED. Taken down from the Cross, embalmed with spices, wrapped up in
fine linen, and laid in a tomb, where none had lay'n before, by the care and
cost of Mar. 15. 43.
Joseph of Arimathea. And the malice of his enemies persued him beyond death,
and attended him to his very grave, who, that he might not rise again as
himself had promised, rolled a great stone to the mouth of the tomb, and
clapping on their own seals set a guard to watch him.

HE DESCENDED INTO HELL. That is, he went down into the lower-most parts of Ephesians
4. 5.
the earth, and for the space of three days remained in the grave amongst the
dead: Or, as some expound it, he suffered the pains of Hell and the wrath of
God due to our sins, and underwent the curse of the law and terrors of
conscience, to which we were liable. Others take the words, as they sound, of
the place: that he did coveigh himself into the regions of darkness, and
discovered to the devils, and to the wicked spirits the glory of his presence,
and routing the powers of Hell, leading captivity captive, and trampling Satan
that old serpent the enemy of mankind under his victorious feet according to
the first Prophecy of Christ, Genesis 9. 15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head.

And in this sense, this article is the beginning of Christ's exaltation. The
other degrees are his Resurrection, his Ascension, his Sitting at the right
hand of God the Father, and his Coming to judgment.

THE THIRD DAY. After that he had lain three days in the grave, as Jonas, who
ws Matthew. 12. 39, 40.
the type of the Son of Man, continued three days in the whale's belly; It
being observed that on the fourth day the body begins to corrupt, which was not
to happen to Christ, David thus speaking concerning him: Act. 11. 27.
My flesh shall rest in hope, because thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Wherefore early in the
morning on the third day, which was for that reason appointed the Christian
Sabbath,

HE ROSE AGAIN. Partly raising himself by his own virtue and divine power, as
himself says, Ioh. 10. 17.
I lay down my life that I may take it up again, I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again; Partly being raised by God the Father, who
when his Justice was fully satisfied, released Christ out of the prison of the
grave, and to that purpose sent his Angels to roll away the stone, death having
now no more dominion over him, who having finished the work of our redemption,
rose again for our justification.

FROM THE DEAD. He returned to life, appeared to his Disciples and others
several times, showed the wounds which he had received on the Cross, and Ioh.
20. 27.
made Thomas who was hard of belief to feel his side, that he might know it was
a true body; And having for forty days together conversed upon earth, and
given orders to the Apostles, how they should go into all the world and preach
the Gospel and plant churches, promising them the assistance of the spirit, he
took his leave of them in this manner, as follows.

HE ASCENDED. In the sight of his Apostles from the top of mount Olivet, where
he had bin formerly used to spend much of his time in holy retirements and
spiritual exercises, he lifted up himself from the ground, and so mounting
upward through the air was received by a cloud, and to the wonder of them all
carried aloft out of sight, Act. 1. 11.
two Angels telling them, as they stood gazing, that as they had seen him go
away, so he should come again.

INTO HEAVEN. The seat of the blessed, where God sits on his Throne, attended
by millions of Angels far above the sphere of the stars and the sky, to wit,
the highest heaven: For having dispatched the business, for which he came down
on earth, he returned to the Father by whom he had bin sent, to intercede with
him in our behalf, and make out to us thence the benefit of all those things,
which he had done and suffered for us here; And having conquered sin and death,
and broken the power of Hell, what remains, but that he should as in triumph
ride upon the wings of the wind, ascend to Heaven as the prize of his glorious
conquest?

AND SITS. To note that he has fully accomplished the work of our
Salvation, he is said at last to sit down, that he may as it were rest from his
labors: For the servant stands or goes whilst he is employed, and sits not
down till his work be done: Now Christ put on the form of a servant, and came
(as Matthew 20. 28.
he says of himself) to wait, not to be waited on. That he sits also, is a
token of that authority which the Father has given him, having delivered unto
him all power both in heaven and in earth, and put all things under his feet.
So God sits in Heaven to order all things at his pleasure. Again to sit
sometimes signifies stay; he sits there not to return before the end of the
world. Lastly by this word is expressed the blessed and glorious condition of
the Saints in the life to come, who shall Matthew. 8. 11. (...) discumbent.
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven; and
therefore to show the greatness of the dignity, to which Christ according to
his humane nature is advanced, is added;

At the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
The right hand usually expresses strength and honor; power and glory:
besides Gal 11. 9.
to give the right hand is a sign of fellowship, and friendship; wherefore God
calls him the man my fellow: Now to speak properly God has no right hand or
left, nor any bodily parts; but that he may apply himself to our capacities, he
does use to speak of himself after the manner of men. Becuse earthly Princes
are wont to place those at their right hand, whom they favor, and would show a
particular honor; as Kin. 11. 19.
Solomon entertained his mother. The meaning is, that God has raised him to
the highest pitch of honor, set him above Angels, principalities, and powers,
and has committed to his trust the Government of the world.

FROM THENCE. To wit out of Heaven, whither he ascended, and where he now is,
Christ God and Man, at the last day in the end of the world, riding upon the
clouds, shall show himself, and

HE SHALL COME. Attended with innumerable Angels and Saints, with the voice of
a Trumpet, in a glorious manner to the joy of his servants, and the terror of
his enemies.

TO JUDGE. For all mankind shall be gathered together from the four quarters of
the earth, and Romans 14. 10.
we must all appear before the Iudgmentseat of Christ, to give an account of
our works. Then shall the books be opened, and every man's conscience shall
witness against him, and that which has bin done in secret shall be made
known, and the thoughts of the heart shall be discovered: Then righteous
sentence shall proceed from the Judges mouth according to the Law and the
Gospel: Then shall be put a difference betwixt the good and bad, the righteous
and the wicked; when God shall reward his servants with a Crown of Glory, and
destroy his enemies with an everlasting destruction and endless torments. There
is a twofold coming of Christ, Christ came first to be judged, the second time
he will come to judge

THE QUICK. Those who shall then be found alive, who 1 Cor. 15. 52.
shall be suddenly changed, in the twinkling of an eye, and without death
shall pass from death to life.

AND THE DEAD. For the dead shall rise again, as many as from the beginning of
the world, throughout all ages have lived upon the face of the earth, and
though they have been mouldered into dust, or torn by wild beasts, or buried in
the waves of the Sea; yet they shall take up the very same bodies again, to
which the soul may again be united; God's power bringing this about, and his
justice so requiring it; that every man may in his body reap the fruit of those
things, which he has done in the body.

I BELIEV. With the same Faith, by which I believ the Father and the Son, I
believ also in the third Person of the holy and blessed Trinity: Being verily
persuaded, that he is true God, and the power of the most High; depending upon
his assistance, and finding by experience that whatsoever good I either do or
have, comes all from him.

IN THE SPIRIT. He is therefore called Ghost or Spirit a Spirando.
because he partly proceeds from the Father and the Son, by way of breathing;
partly because he breaths into us good thoughts and holy desires; wherefore it
is added

HOLY. Seeing that he is not only Holy in himself, with such holiness as far
exceeds all other blessed Spirits, both Angels, and Saints, but also makes us
holy by an effectual working of grace in our hearts. He it is that applies the
benefits of Christ's death unto us, and makes us partakers of the salvation,
which he has purchased for us by his blood. The holy Prophets and Apostles
were the penmen of the Holy Ghost, who wrote as they were inspired by him. He
gathers the Church by the Preaching of the word, having furnished the Apostles
with the gifts of tongues, and provided a ministry and other holy ordinances
for the propagation of the Gospel, filling up the number of the elect, and
bringing souls to life.

THE CHURCH. The company of believers, whom God has ordained to life, before
the foundation of the world was laid; and whom he has called out of a state of
sin, to the profession of Faith in Christ, and a holy conversation, whom he
also does rule by his Word and Spirit.

HOLY. Gathered, and guided by the Holy Ghost, distinguished from the rest of
the world by holy appointments, adorning their profession with holy works.

CATHOLIC, or Universal in respect of time, place, and persons; being to last
through all ages of the world, spread abroad over all quarters of the earth,
and consisting of men of all ranks and conditions; God having shut the gate of
his Kingdom to none, but such as wilfully refuse to enter. Now the Holy Ghost
bestows upon the Church, which he gathers by the word, and sanctifies by grace,
these Blessings which follow.

THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS. Whereby the Saints, who are the faithful ones, the
chosen, and the children of light, are united to Christ as their head, and
amongst themselves as members of the same body, the Church, drawing virtue and
life and efficacy from Christ, and performing to one another all offices of
Charity, as being knit together with a spirit of love, and bond of peace.

THE FORGIVENESS OF SINS. Which the spirit on our unfeined repentance assures
us of by applying the merit of Christ, and sprinkling our consciences from dead
works with his blood, which he powered forth, to be a price of souls; neither
does he only seal to our hearts a pardon of former offenses, showing us the
favor of God reconciled in his Son; but does withal give us power to resist
sin for the time to come, cleansing us from every defilement of the flesh and
spirit, subduing our lusts, changing our wills, and renewing our natures
according to righteousness.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY. For in the last day when Christ shall come to
judgment, the trump shall sound, and the dead shall arise with the very same
bodies that they had before, and every one shall receive according to his
works: For as much as the wicked shall be thrown into Hell, there to be
tormented with the Devil, with the worm which never dies, and the fire which is
never quenched. But the good shall enter into

LIFE EVERLASTING. Where they shall rest from their labors, and enjoy God for
ever, living in abundance of joys and pleasures, 1. Cor. 11. 9.
which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor can the heart of man
conceiv.

And all these things I believ not only with an Historical Faith, but
appropriate unto my self, being fully persuaded, that God made me by his power,
preserves me by his goodness, and provides for me both in soul and body by his
infinite wisdom. And that the Son of God, whatsoever he has done or suffered,
he performed and underwent for my sake, that I through him might live: And that
the Spirit of God dwells in me, working in me Faith and Repentance: that I am
a true member of the Church, that my sins are forgiven me, that I shall rise
again, and see my Redeemer with these eyes, who shall out of his free bounty
reward me, his unworthiest servant, with the Glory which shall have no end.

FINIS.
THE EXPLANATION OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

The Ten Commandments.
Exodus xx.
GOD spoke all these words, saying. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
I.
Thou shall have no other gods before me.

II.
Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image; or any likeness of any thing
that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me: And showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.

III.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. For the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor and do
all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: In it
thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man
servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger, that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: Therefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

V.
Honor thy father and thy mother; that thy days may be long upon the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI.
Thou shall not kill.

VII.
Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII.
Thou shall not steal.

IX.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house; thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his man servant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is thy neighbors.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.
GOD, when he had erected the stately frame of the World, and furnished the
scene of nature with various kinds of creatures, prescribed an order and
course, in which every thing should move; for his command does as well
determine the actings of his creatures, as it did produce their beings: Thus
the great wheel of nature keeps an orderly and constant course; and, as in a
watch or some other curious piece of workmanship, every small parcel of his
work observes the rule of it is motion, and is by that principle, the workman's
hand put into it, guided to those ends for which it was made. And this is the
Law of Creation, by which all creatures pay an obedience to their Creator; for
as they depend upon his power to Be, so 'twas fit they should be directed by
his wisdom to Act.

This is indeed the Law of Nature, which God, as supreme Sovereign and absolute
Lord, and proprietour of all things, has the sole right of imposing. By this
the heavenly bodies dispense their influences, and steer their motions, which
when excentrical are not irregular. The Sun knows his place of rising and
setting, and it must be miracle that either stops him in his wonted rode, or
puts him back. The Moon is constant to her changes, and all the stars fixed to
their stations, nor do the wandering stars rove out of those bounds which God
has set them. The very inconstancy of weather and vicissitude of seasons is
ordered by this Law, and when any thing in the Elements happens extraordinary,
as that fire should refuse to burn, water deny to drown, etc. it is because a
more particular warrant has superseded the general commission, which was
signed at first; for the law giver has power to alter his own laws, and make
what exceptions he please: which was the ground of Abraham's Faith, who though
by the general precept forbidden to kill any one, yet upon special command
thought himself obliged to sacrifice his own and only Son. To this Law are
subject the Sea also, ebbing and flowing, from and toward the shore; God
having appointed it its bounds, beyond which it may not go; and the Earth with
all plants and fruits which grow on the surface of it, and stones and minerals
in the bowels of it, according to the rules of each kind.

Of this Law a paricular branch is that, which we call natural instinct;
whereby living creatures, which are endued with sense and motion and a faculty
of propagating their like, to wit, Birds, Beasts, Fishes and creeping things
are regulated in the managery of their care and converse. Hence springs that
tender affection, which all damms have for their young ones, the conjugal
fidelity of pairs, the rules of order and government amongst societies, such as
Sheep, Bees, etc. After this manner it pleased the faithful Creator to
provide a Law for the well-being of his creatures; without which the universe
would have been still a mere Tohu and Bohu, void and without form. This is that
ligament, which binds the jarring Elements in a league of amity, and sets every
thing a work, quietly to its own ends, so as to preserve the whole; and were it
not for this, all things would run into confusion.

But man being a creature of a more excellent make, and having the imprese of
divinity stamped upon him, (being made in the likeness of God,) was not to be
cooped up within the same measures as his fellow creatures, and be guided to
his duty by blind instincts and a reason without him; but had a greater
latitude as of knowledge so of liberty allowed him; for it was thought fit,
that he, who was to have dominion over the rest, and to act Sovereign among
other creatures, should be entrusted with the government of himself. Wherefore
he had an understanding and a will given him, whereby he might see and choose
his rule, and might determine himself to a generous obedience. And these
faculties of his were (as all things else were that God made) at first very
good; his understanding right and wise, his will holy and just, of perfect
sufficience to lead him to the right, and of as perfect an indifference to
leave him to the wrong; besides, his affections pure and free from all
disorder. Now that man might not pride himself in the reflection upon his own
excellencies, and that God might from this his Vicegerent and Prince of the
Creation have some small acknowledgment of subjection, it pleased him to make a
command of trial in a slight matter indeed (the eating of an Apple) but loaded
with a grievous threat, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death: The breach of so easy an injunction upon so solemn a denunciation
aggravating the ingratitude and the contempt of the offender. And see, how hard
it was to persist in good, even for him who before never knew evil? How
slippery a State Innocence, when there is but the least temptation to debauch
it? How frail a thing the best of men, if he be left to himself? A toy tempts
Adam from his obedience and his happiness together, and from Eve's hand, which
administered the sin, he took his death too. Then were forfeited all the
glorious privileges of his Creation; then were defaced all the resemblances of
divine perfections; then was his soul as well as body left naked of all graces
and virtues, and his original righteousness turned into original sin; then were
his days cut short by bringing a mortality upon himself and his posterity, so
that he, not Cain, was the first murderer; then was lost even that awe and
authority, which he had over the other creatures; who after man turned rebel
withdrew their allegiance too; And it is not unlikely that by the sin of man the
affections of the very brutes have been debauched from their natural temper;
Hence possibly those enmityes and antipathies, which some kinds of creatures
have to others, that before in the golden age of innocence lived at peace;
hence those quarrels and animosityes, which those of the same kind exercise;
and hence perhaps those (I may say) vicious miscarriages and enormous
misdemeanors of several indiviudal creatures, those especially which are man's
domestics, and have a more familiar acquaintance with his manners; as dogs,
swine, etc. which sure, had man continued innocent, would have kept to rules of
meekness, modesty, and such other virtues, as was fit for the goodness of the
supreme Lawgiver to prescribe for the preservation of peace and good order
amongst his creatures. Thus has the Fall of Man put whole nature into
disorder, spoiled the natural principles of honesty and justice, and by abusing
the Liberty of doing good or evil, brought us all into a sad necessity of
doing nothing else but evil; that, whereas he had only a possibility of
sinning, it is impossible for us not to sin.

Wherefore when God saw that those notions and inclinations, which he had
implanted, were by the fall so battered and marred, that they could be no
longer useful for those great purposes of his own service and man's felicity;
and that man had now darkened his understanding, depraved his will, and
corrupted his affections, and made himself in all his faculties and members a
vassal of sin; he was graciously pleased out of the rubbish of those endowments
and that law which he had written in man's heart, to collect, and set down in
writing, a Law, by which man might be instructed to his duty; that humanity
might not wholly degenerate into beast, and withal to show that God has not
lost his right to command, though man have lost his ability to obey. It Is true,
that all the time before the flood, and some good while after, mankind was
governed by an unwritten Law, by inbred notions of right and wrong, and
traditions handed to them by the Patriarks from the fathers to the children;
such as was the worship of God by offering sacrifice and first fruits, by
calling upon his name, and keeping the Sabbath, and those precepts which were
given to Noah and his three sons: and thus some remnants of the primitive
integrity were always visible in the customs and usages of the most savage
people, that had no positive law to walk by; whence arose that which we call
the Law of Nations, all nations agreeing in some common principles at least of
public justice, and God instructing them by his Sun and his rain, though he
did not teach them by his word and messengers.

Yet when the number of men was multiplied into so many nations, (which began
to difference themselv's by manners and religions as much as by languages and
countries,) and their lives shortened so, that tradition could not be conveyed
so purely to posterity as formerly; it pleased God to choose to himself a
peculiar people among all the nations of the Earth, even the family of his
friend Abraham, to whom he might make more particular discoveries of his will;
and having four hundred years affliction in Egypt, and a miraculous delivery
thence, prepared the children of Israel for the receiving of his Law, he did in
open audience from the top of mount Sinai with his own Mouth pronounce aloud,
and afterward with his own Hand fairly ingrave on two Tables of stone the Ten
Commandments; which though they be in a special sense termed the Law of God,
yet the whole Scripture may be and is so styled often, in as much as the
History of the Bible does but serve to represent examples of obedience or
disobedience to this Law, and the Prophetical writings are but explications and
comments upon it, and the Psalms and other sacred pieces are but Meditations
and pious descants. This is that we call the Moral Law, the rule of manners and
the guide of life, which teaches every man how he is to behave himself both
toward God and toward man, whether as he is considered barely in his person
or in his relation.

There is mention made also of other Laws of Gods making which were peculiar
only to the Jews: the Ceremonial Law which sets down rules for sacred persons,
places, times, assemblyes, vests, utensils, sacrifices, and other rites; and
for the ordering of all Ecclesiastical affairs: and the Judicial Law, which
provides for the securing of propriety and peace, for the creation of
Magistrates and administration of Justice, and all politic concerns. Now
though these were indeed so proper to the lewish State and Church, that no
other Nation is strictly obliged to their observance; and although the
Levitical Priesthood is ceast, and the Ceremonies, being but types and shadows
of Christ which was to come, were at the rising of that Sun of righteousness
made void and useless to the Jews and dangerous to Christians, since the use
of them would tacitly imply a denial of our Lord's coming in the flesh, and so
indeed prove down right Antichristian, he being 11. Ioh. 7.
the Antichrist, which denies that: yet I know not why Statesmen should not
think themselves obliged to respect the lawgiver's wisdom and the equity of
the thing, though the law it self does not oblige; as in the case of thieves, a
fourfold restitution would look like a more proportionable punishment then
present death, no goods amounting to the value of life, and a Bridewell or
Plantation be a sorer course to chastise the malefactor for his mischievous
actions, and surer to recover him from his wicked habits, then the goal and
gallows. Again God's Law has given adultery it is due, punishing it with death,
the honor of the sufferer being irreparable; whereas man's law commonly is so
remisly either made or executed, that all the satisfaction the injured person
must expect is from his own patience, fearing least by a challenge of justice,
he make himself but the object of a public reproach. Nor do I see, why the use
of any innocent Ceremony in gesture or vesture, etc. should now be deemed
unlawful upon this ground, because the Levites perhaps used one not much
unlike; or why the Governors of the Christian Church may not in things
indifferent order the same observances, as were used in the Jewish, and yet not
lie under the scandal of Iudaisme: as to instance, shall a white vest now be
less becoming, because the Levites wore linen? surely if this argument hold,
blacks will be much more mis becoming the holy order, as being the color by
which the Idolatrous Priests Called thence (...) Kemarim, i e, Atrati. Zeph 1.
4.
were distinguished. But it is not perhaps the thing so much discontents, as the
imposition. They would be left at liberty, and have their obedience as
indifferent, as the Ceremony. It Is too manifest, what this means; they can
brook no superiors; they would have no authority over their heads; for it is
confessed on all hands, that God cannot be served without form and Ceremony, of
time, of place, of persons, and that a distinctive govenment, whereby we may
know him that officiates from the rest of the company, is expedient. Now set
pride and faction aside, and it is easy for any indifferent man to judge,
whether it be fitter to obey the grave and deliberate constitutions of the
Fathers and Governors of the Church, or be led by the sudden and mutable fancy
and humor of every parochial Teacher, especially such as these late times have
afforded us many, whose forms it has bin unsafe to say Amen to, and whose
postures and garbs have rather moved the laughter of the vulgar, and the pity
of serious auditors, then their devotion. Whose discretion will it be best to
trust to? And if there be such a thing as Church Government, where will it lie,
if not in determining things of this nature? Besides such straggling Pastors do
not consider, what a sorry example they set to their flocks; for how can they
expect that obedience, which themselves refuse to pay? or how can they hope to
exercise a Pastoral authority over their hearers (amongst whom some
peradventure are men of as large abilities and as great learning and piety as
themselves) when they themselves affront the Episcopal authority which is over
them? But they resolve to be directed wholly by Scripture, and will do nothing
without an express Text. I wish they would but take notice, what advantage they
reach out to all schismatics, and fanatics, and how easy it is to use their
arguments for the overthrow of all decency and order, contrary to the Apostle's
rule, 1. Cor. 14. 40.
let every thing be done decently and in order. Where Is Scripture, say they,
for surplice, for cross, for kneeling? Has not the schismatic improved this
objection to them unanswerably? Show me Scripture for gown, for black cloak,
for capps, for pulpit, for bells, for churches, for Minister's set maintenance,
for any thing, for every thing. Thus we see, if this hold, nothing will stand.
In short, some habit, some place, some posture, etc. is necessary to the
worship of God; but what particular habit or form or posture is fittest to be
used, that which the wisdom of the Church prescribes, or that which the
discretion of each private Pastor shall make choice of, I shall leave to the
sober Reader to judge. Again it is not the Ceremony so much troubles some, as
the significancy of it; as though any thing could be appointed, which an
ordinary wit will not make significant. Our Savior himself (if learned men
mistake not) was not so scrupulous, who has transcribed into Christian
practice several usages of the Jewish Church, even to the very expression, as
in the Lord's Prayer, and the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, several passages
whereof are quoted out of the Jewish Liturgies and Rituals. To conclude, it
concerns us to be very wary of changing old well-laid customs, though they be
but superstructures, for fear of shaking the foundations: and let some men
please themselves (as they list) in their spiritual liberty (as they call it)
or itch (as 11. Tim. 4. 4.
the Apostle calls it) woeful experience has taught us, that the Church is in
great danger, where she is left to the conduct of particular ministers. Not to
say, that discontents and quarrels about the circumstances of religion, as they
give vent to schisms and separations in Church; so they often lead the dance
to seditions and rebellions in State; for Schism and Rebellion likely go hand
in hand, and men would be as willing to have their civil liberty as their
spiritual; and it may be observed, that those pens, which have traveled most
against Prelatical tyranny (as they term it) have bin easily encouraged to go
on, and strike at civil power, as liking no Monarchy whether in Chair or
Throne. Wherefore let us study peace, and if we cannot show our selves good
Christians by our self-denial, by submitting our discretion and our abilities
to the rules of the Church and the wisdom of our superiors; yet let us out of
love to our Country act the part of good Subjects, and not with unreasonable
discontents and unseasonable quarrels endanger the imbroiling of three Nations
in the miseries of a civil war; having found by trial, that Discontent
improves to faction, and Faction blows the Trumpet to Rebellion.

The Law according to the importance of the Hebrew (...) in Hiph. (...) docuit.
word signifies doctrine and instruction, teaching us how to order our lives;
and as the Greek (...) t^ibuo; quod jus suum ^uiqu^ tribuat.
word notes, to give unto every one his due; unto God the things which are
God's, and unto men the respects and offices which belong to men; And it is
attended with promises and threatenings. The promises hold forth rewards to the
obedient, the favor of God and a prosperous condition, even as to outward
things in this world, and everlasting life and happiness in the world to come.
The Threatenings denounce the severity of God's judgments on the breakers of
the law here, and an everlasting death in never dying torments hereafter. The
Law is a hedge to keep us in within the bounds of duty, but it was it self to
be fenced and secured with the proposal of rewards and punishments, that, if
the love of virtue alone could not win us, the advantages of holiness might
allure us, and, if the deformities of sin in its own ugly shape could not
affright us, we might be startled with the dreadful apprehension of those
plagues and evils, which it brings along with it. Now the Nature of God's Law
is much different from the laws and institutions of men. God's Law is perfect,
and has provided for every condition of men and for all their actions; here is
no rule wanting which is necessary, nothing redundant or over much; but the
ordinances of men are but poor scantlings and consequences drawn out of a
shallow reason, and enlarged by further experience, new occasions still
requiring new supplements. God's Law is pure and holy, proceeding from a Holy
God, and making those holy, that place their studies and endeavors in the
exercising of it: but those laws, which are derived from the puddle of humane
reason, carry along with them the mixture of corruption, passion and interest
and ignorance, and many times downright wickedness and injustice being
interwoven in the very frame and constitution of them. And above all, where as
the politic devices of men can only restrain the outward man, and lay traps
for words and deeds, but cannot ensnare the freedom of thinking; God being Lord
of the Conscience, his statutes reach conscience, captivate the mind, and
apprehend each guilty thought: and whereas here on earth plots and conspiracies
against authority are made out only by what has bin done or said, God's
supremacy will arraign those that rise up against him by the evidence and
verdict of their own conscience.

This Law being so perfect, so pure, and so holy, it is impossible for us, who
are altogether evil, by our own natural strength to accomplish; for we are not
able of our selves so much as to think a good thought; so that, if we stand to
the tenor of the Covenant of works, whereby we are obliged to a punctual and
exact obedience to the Law, in all its parts, in all our thoughts words and
deeds, and God should b^ stric^ to obs^^ve what is done amiss, and should in
judgment proceed against us accordingly, no flesh would be justified in his
^ight: for we have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God; short of it
both as the end and as the reward of our actions: we have neither lived up to
it, nor can we upon our own account be made partakers of it; Wherefore that all
mankind might not faint under this intolerable yoke, and sink under the
unsupportable burden of this Law, God was pleased out of his love to mankind to
strike a New Covenant with us in the Blood of his Son, who has made the yoke
easy and the burden light, by bearing it for us. The terms of the first
Covenant are, Luke 10. 28.
D^ this and live; of the second, Acts 16. 31.
Believe and thou shall be saved. The Covenant of Works requires an exactness,
the Covenant of Grace looks for the sincerity of obedience.

Nor does this Law of Faith void and null the Moral Law, but the terrors of
the Law drive us to embrace Gospel-terms; for which reason the Gal. 3. 24.
Law is called the Scholemaster to Christ. For when a sinner is convinced, how
unable he is of himself to fulfill the demands of the Law, and how his
multiplied transgressions render him liable to the curse of the Law and the
fierce wrath of God, he in the apprehension of his own guilt and insufficience
flies to the Mediator (as to a city of refuge) who has fulfilled the Law for
us, and has undergon the wrath of an offended God and the curse of a righteous
Law, that he might be able to save those to the uttermost, that should put
their trust in him. Neither does the Law of works cease to be of use to those,
that are in Christ, and are now under the Covenant of Grace; for Obedience as
well as Faith is required, as a condition of the new Covenant; for it must be a
Faith acted or acting by love, and, though the person is justified by faith,
yet that faith must be evidenced by good works: Gal. 5. 6. ^ James k. 1^.
Show me, says the Apostle, thy faith by thy works. The Moral Law then remains
still in force, as a rule of this obedience: as it shows our misery and drives
us to Christ, so it regulates our gratitude, when we are in Christ. The Law is
a glass to present us with a sight of our sin, by comparing our past actions
with the rule; and a lanthorn too to direct us in the path of our duty, by
comparing our future actions with the same rule. In the one respect we see at
what distance we have lived from the rule, and repent; in the other respect we
see how to keep close to it, and amend our lives. The Law indeed has lost it is
damning power as to the righteous, but it is still in force to direct; and
though they are acquitted from the curse by the merit of our Saviors death,
they are not discharged from the duty, as being risen again with him to a
newness of life, and created in him to good works. Nay, their obligations are
heightened, and they are to have greater respect to the Law, that they may
proportion the measures of their gratitude to the merits of their Redeemer: for
they, who have had much forgiven, must love much, and love is the fulfilling of
the Law. Christ having bought us with a price, we are no longer our own to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, but we are his; and we shall be known to be his
by loving one another, and keeping his commands. And it is plain, that he meant
not to release us from the Law, but rather to improve and inhance the
observation of it; and in those things, wherein the ties of the Law were
slackened, either by God's indulgence, or false glosses and corrupt customs of
men, to fill it up, and clear it from mistakes, and lay greater weight on it is
precepts; as appears by his Sermon on the mount, wherein he goes over most of
the particulars. And what the Apostle says before conversion, Romans 7. 7.
If it had not bi^ for the Law, I had not known sin; so we may say after
conversion. Were it not for the Law, we should not know our duty.

The Law is divided into ten Commandments, whence it is called the Decalogue or
ten Words, which were written upon two Tables, four on one Table, and six on
the other. It Is not amiss to take notice of the division: the Law is a rule of
practice, and the hand the great instrument of action, a Table for each hand,
and for every finger a Commandment. A brief survey of the method and scheme,
by which the commands are distinguished, we may take thus. The first Table sets
down the duties we ow to God, the second Table contains our duties to Man, our
neighbors and our selves. All is but Love, but with difference of degrees; for
our love to our neighbor must be subordinate and inferior to our love to God;
so our Savior has resolved the sum of all; Matt. 22. 37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength. to as high a degree, as possibly we
can; for it may be supposed that these several words signify but the same
thing, that is, the highest intension of love. It would be too Critical perhaps
to make a different sense of each word, that the heart should signify the will,
the mind note the understanding, the soul stand for the affections, and
strength imply our bodily service. It means sure the whole man. And thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. And that one would think should be very well,
but this Law teaches us how to love our selves too. There Is scarce any one
does that so well as he should do. Our neighbor cannot quarrel us, if we love
him as our selves; but God will not be content with that; he will be loved
above every thing, above self it self. We must love every thing else for God's
sake, and God for his own. The duties to God take up the first place, and those
being discharged will a priori effect the second table duties. He that go's
thorough the first table, will never boggle at the second. Religion and Knavery
are inconsistent. Can he be holy that is unjust? fear God that honors not his
King? does he conscientiously fear an Oath, who makes no conscience of a Lie? a
zealous professor and a cheat? a strict Sabbath keeper and an Usurper, a
Rebel? scrupulous of idolatry, and yet delight in adultery, and indulge
himself in schism, envy, and other works of the flesh? If these things may be
reconciled, then Saint and Devil, Christ and Belial, heaven and hell may be
joined together. Such men's religion is vain. The duties to man follow in the
second place, and will a posteriori demonstrate the first table duties, and he
that is thorough paced here gives a fair evidence, that either he has made or
means to make his progress further. An honest man and yet an Atheist? a
charitable person and idolatrous? a loyal subject, a good neighbor, and yet a
swearer, a Sabbathbreaker? the Morality of such men is as counterfeit, as the
other's Religion was: for how can he be faithful to his Prince, who is false to
his God? or exercise charity aright toward men, who fear's not God's
displeasure? We must not part the two tables, but take them together,
spiritualize our morality, and civilize our religion.

Our love to God is seen in the worship we give him; now the worship of God is
either internal, of the inward man; and that is prescribed in the first
command: or external, and that is shown forth in our gestures, directed by the
second, in our words and speeches, which are the subject of the third; and in
our work all the week and our rest on the Sabbath, which is the business of the
fourth commandment. Our love to our neighbor is considered either relatively
to our superiors, etc. in the fifth; or absolutely to all men what so ever, in
the rest; and that either externally in his body, as to hurt, in the sixth; as
to defilement, in the seventh command; in his goods, in the eighth; and in his
good name in the ninth; or internally, which strikes at the root of all, evil
concupiscence, in the tenth commandment. So that the first and last do more
particularly restrain the inward man, the rest do more immediately order the
outward man; yet so as that the thoughts and desires also are reduced to the
same heads.

Having taken this brief survey, before we proceed to the commandments in
particular, it is necessary to take along with us three or four general rules,
according to which they are all to be understood. One is, that every
Affirmative precept includes a Negative, and on the other side where any sin is
forbidden, there the contrary virtue is enjoined: thus the Commandments are
like the flocks of Engedi, every one bears twins. The Commandments are most of
them negative, there being but two, the fourth and fifth, that are set down
affirmatively; yet he that has but a negative religion, will hardly be
acquitted by the Law. It Is not enough not to kill thy neighbor, not to steal
from him; but thy charity must be employed in helping him, when he is in danger
and in want: nor will it serve turn, that we do not worship images, nor take
God's name in vain; but we are bound to worship God, and to make a reverent use
of his name. Another is, that where any duty is commanded or any sin forbidden,
there the several kinds, degrees, causes, occasions, signs, circumstances, and
whatsoever else belongs to that duty or that sin, are together with it
commanded or forbidden; as murder includes in it hatred, quarrel, and all
manner of hurt. The expression indeed is scant, but very comprehensive and of
large sense. The third is, (which was partly touched at before) that in every
command not only gross acts, but together with our deeds, our words, and above
all our thoughts are considered; it being God's prerogative to be a searcher of
hearts, and God of all parts requiring the heart, and having erected there his
judicatory, even our own conscience: and this was that great advantage of God's
Law beyond all humane laws, that it orders the thoughts, and divides betwixt
the joints and the marrow. It Is not sufficient then to have a demure outside
like the Pharisees cups and platters, but we must keep a clean inside: for God
requires truth in the inward parts. And this is indeed the perfection, that
Evangelical obedience aims at, sincerity, and the right ordering of our
thoughts and desires is the highest pitch of Christianity, as giving God the
great glory of his omniscience. A fourth may be this, that all Virtue
consisting in a mean has two extremes, on each side one, a vicious excess and
a vicious defect, which both fall under the prohibition, though but one perhaps
be named. The Atheist which owns no God at all, is as much a transgressour of
the first precept, as the Polytheist, who has a multitude to pay his devotions
to. Fondness may be as great an error in love, as too much severity.
Prodigality transgresses the bounds of a liberal disposition, as covetousness
comes short; when we are bid not covet that which belongs to another, it is not
meant we should fling away what is our own. Wherefore we must keep a middle
road, take heed of being righteous too much or too little, we must neither turn
to the right hand nor to the left. The fifth and last rule is this; That the
same Grace or Sin, the same good or bad act may in several respects, be reduced
to several commandments; as the eating of the forbidden fruit, and the
disobedience of Lot's wife, etc. Indeed the whole circle and round of virtues,
is like a gold-chain, where if you break off one link, you spoil the whole
chain; whence may have proceeded that note of St. James, That Iam. 2. 10.
he who breaks one Commandment, is guilty of all; not so much because the
Authority of the Lawgiver is the same in the several commands, as by reason of
that mutual coherence and dependence, which the Commandments have with one
another. Most sins, are made up of a complication, and are like a bed of snakes
enfolded together. To this head may be brought those sins which are of a
transcendent nature, and are scarcely to be lodged properly and directly in any
one precept, but seem rather to include the violation of them all: such as are
Pride, Hypocrisy, Ignorance, malice, profaneness, sloth, with their opposite
virtues, meekness, sincerity, discretion, charity, zeal and diligence, etc. And
some other Beldam sins, which are the womb and outlet of other sins; as
presumption, despair, drunkenness and covetousness, which the Apostle has
branded as 1. Tim. 6 10.
the root of all evil: and their contraries, Faith, Hope, Temperance,
contentedness, etc. which all seem to be accumulated habits, and so resolve
themselves into many, if not most parts of the Law. Taking these rules along
with us, we shall with the more ease take the just measures of each command in
its full latitude; for God's P^alm. 119. 96.
Commandments, as the Psalmist has observed, are exceeding broad: Much matter
delivered in few words; for so it became the Majesty of the Lawgiver to use
plainness and brevity, to help the understanding and ease the memory of the
hearers, and he that would to purpose understand the Law of the Lord, must
meditate in it day and night, that so he may time his duties aright, and be
like the tree planted by the river side, which brings forth its fruit in due
season, and thus whatsoever he does shall prosper.

GOD SPOKE. Three months after the children of Israel's departure out of Egypt,
when they had pitched their Tents in the wilderness of Sinai, when they had
fresh in memory that wonderful deliverance, which God wrought for them, in
their passage over the Red Sea, from Pharaoh and his host, besides those many
dreadful miracles which he had shown in Egypt, God mindful of the Covenant
which he had made with Abraham and his seed, the Israelites being now in a
convenient place, in a desert retired from the observation as well as the
invasion of their enemies, strikes a league with them, that, if they will obey
his voice and keep his Covenant, he will own them for his peculiar people, and
upon their acceptance of these terms, after two days solemn preparation, the
Divine Majesty came down, with Thunders and Lightnings and thick Clouds, and
seated himself upon the top of the Mount Sinai in the midst of fire and smoke,
with the noise of Trumpet, that the Mountain and the Camp both shook with fear,
and whether by the ministry of an Angel, or rather by some other more immediate
way, with audible voice, face to face pronounced the tenor and conditions of
the Covenant, comprehended in the words of the Law.

ALL THESE WORDS. Christ the second Person is called the Word, but he is the
word begotten, as the Word is the immediate and essential issue of the Mind.
The whole Scripture too is God's Word, that is, was by God inspired into the
holy penmen, they writing according to the dictates of the Spirit: whence that
form of speech especially among the Prophets. Thus says the Lord, and The Word
of the Lord came unto me. But these Words God himself uttered, which therefore
call for the more heedfull attention, and awful regard. If the Lion roares
shall not the beasts of the forest tremble; every word should sound in our
ears like a clap of Thunder, and cause an Earthquake in our bowels; for the
Highest has uttered his voice, even a mighty voice. All these words too; which
requires an universal obedience. We are not to pick and choose, but receive
them all with a like readiness of Faith, as the clear manifestations of God's
will. God at the first creation for every days work spoke, and it was done:
Oh! that he would so speak to our hearts, that his Spirit may accompany his
Word, and help us to do, what he commands us to do. O Lord, give us strength
to perform thy Commands, and then command what thou will.

SAYING. The Rabbis have a tradition or fiction, that God pronounced the Law
twice over; the first time with that have, as if the whole Law had been but one
word; but at the second going over, leisurely and distinctly. Whereupon they
say, that in this portion of Scripture the accents are upon every word doubled,
to denote that double delivery, the one a note of speed, the other of stop and
pause. This (I suppose) they gather from the two words here used, as if he
spoke them in have, and said them at leisure; or whether they thought it fit
the Law should be delivered twice by word of mouth, as well as twice written
upon tables. Whether this were so or no, matters not much; only it should be
our prayer and endeavor, that they might be spoken over twice to us, to the
ear first, and then to the heart, to the inward man as well as to the outward;
and though we have not the advantages of those terrors and dreadful
circumstances, wherewith the Law was at first delivered, to prepare us with a
prostrate humility and a devout reverence, yet let us imagine that we hear the
trumpet sound to judgment, and awaken our attention; and let us think we see
the flames of Hell, and those everlasting burnings, whither the transgressors
of this Law must be dispatched, and possess our souls with fear, and hearken
what the Lord will say to his servants.

The Preface.
Had God surprised them with this terrible appearance, they might have been
swallowed up in their fears, and been lost in those dazzling amazements;
therefore he gave them two days time to prepare themselves; and here before he
makes known to them his Law, he acquaints them with the Lawgiver; and that he
might put their affections into a suitable temper for so solemn an occasion, he
makes an Introductory Preface, wherein he lays down the arguments of their
obedience, taken partly from his power and Sovereignty, in that he is the Lord;
partly from his mercy and kindness seen first generally, in that relation
wherein he placed himself to them, as being their God; and more particularly
discovered in a late great deliverance he wrought for them, and that both in
respect of place out of a strange country; he had brought them forth out of the
Land of Egypt; and in respect of condition, out of a slavish and toilsom
drudgery; out (...) the House of bondage.

I Who now speak to thee from the midst of fire, out of the thick cloud, the
fear of thy Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; I that appeared to Moses in the
burning bush, clothed with Majesty and dread; I who have carried thee upon
Eagles wings, and have brought thee thus to my self, to show my statutes unto
thee, and to make known my laws. Hear O Israel and fear and observe to do; for I

AM THE LORD. The maker of all things, the absolute Sovereign of the World,
Jehovah, the Fountain of beings; who give being also to my word and promise:
there is nothing resists my will; for my power is infinite: wherefore stand in
aw and fear before me; the subjection and homage of all creatures being due to
me by right of creation* all things are my servants, for from me and to me are
all things: I spoke the Word, and they were, and are created; I made all things
according to my good pleasure, and for my own glory; and men more especially
for my service; and amongst all the sons of men I have chose you for my select
people, for I am

THY GOD by Covenant as well as by Creation, by promise no less then by
providence; I made my self known to thy Fathers, and engaged my loving kindness
to them and to their posterity after them; I took a particular care of you,
when you were but few in number, that the Nations about you might do you no
harm: I supported you under your burdens in Egypt, and multiplied you when you
were sorely oppressed, in so much that of seventy persons you are become a
great people; I have owned you as my charge* and have done wondrous things for
you in the land of Cham, and

HAVE BROUGHT THEE OUT with a strong hand and stretched out arm in the sight
and pursuit of Pharaoh and all his host, who sunk in the midst of the red Sea,
which divided it self to give thee passage dry-shod; 'T was not thy own wit,
nor thy own strength, that has brought about this great deliverance for thee,
but it must be confessed even to the astonishment of the heathen roundabout,
that my wisdom contrived, and my power has effected it by the conduct of my
faithful servant Moses, who by my appointment and by the guidance of my holy
Angel, has led thee

OUT OF THE LAND OF EGYPT. Where thou wast by the tyranny of Pharaoh and his
taskmasters, cruelly dealt with, and slavishly employed, having neither
freedom of body nor of soul, denied all opportunityes of serving thy self or
thy God, captived amongst Idolaters, straightned in a (...) arctari.
land of straits, in so much that thy number increasing, they sought to destroy
thee by cruel edicts; hating thee out of Antipathy, as a stranger and of
another religion, and out of fear, because they saw thee grow numerous:
wherefore after so many years captivity in a strange and Heathen Land, I have
called thee forth to bring thee to a country of peace and plenty, flowing with
milk and honey; and above all, the Land of promise, and which, if you will be a
holy people, will deservedly be styled the Holy Land

OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. Out of that prison from whence your sighs and
groans have often pierced Heaven, out of that Bridewell, where you were kept to
make brick, and raise huge piles, to be la^^ing monuments of your misery and
the tyrants lust, without the allowance of any thing for your labor but
blows; not so much as stubble affoorded, and yet your full tale of bricks
required at your hands. Consider now at distance, what a sad life thou have
escaped; the day spent in toils, and the night in complaints: the Nation kept
under in poverty and disgrace, and none to relieve thee so much as with their
pity, but thy God, who have brought thee aside into this solitude, that I
might make my self and my laws known to thee; a favor; which I have not shown
to any nation besides; that I may espouse thee unto my self, and make thee a
Kingdom of Priests, and a holy people, if thou will obey my Statutes and
hearken to my Law, which I am now proclaiming in thy ears. I am the Lord, that
have right to command, and power to punish, and therefore fear before me. I am
thy God, who have entered into Covenant with thee, and will reward those that
keep Covenant, wherefore I exspect thy love. I have brought thee forth of Egypt
from a sad bondage, where thou wast oppressed with slavery and want, and shall
provide for thee Liberty and plenty, and therefore I look for gratitude: and
let all three, thy fear, thy love, and thy gratitude tie thee fast unto me the
Lord and thy God, and thy mighty deliverer, and oblige thee to an attention and
obedience to my Law.

Now although this historical passage concerning the delivery out of Egypt be
peculiar to the children of Israel* yet the obligation and the force of the
argument will reach all people whatsoever; and the Preface is by Analogy, of
as large and universal an extent, as the Law it self. For at Christ's death the
vail of the Temple was rent in twain, and the wall of separation which
distinguished the Jews (formerly the only people of God) from the rest of the
nations (who had been till then heathen, and as it were excommunicate out of
the pale of the Church,) was broken down; so that all the nations of the world,
are now engaged in Covenant with God, and have undertaken, and made a
stipulation in Baptism, to be his people, and He to be their God. And this
History is turn^d into Allegory, and denotes the salvation purchased by Christ,
who has redeemed us from a spiritual Egypt, and the slavery of sin, and has
led us forth out of the regions of darkness, and the bondage of servile fears,
to the inheritance of light, and the glorious privileges of the Gospel.
Besides if we take the deliverance in a temporal sense, who is there, that,
when he recounts the several passages of his life, will not acknowledge God's
gracious dealings, and his wonderful mercies, in providing for him in his
wants, preserving him from imminent dangers and delivering him from his fears,
and the evil consequencies many times of his follies? so that if he have any
ingenuity, upon so many instances of divine favor, and particular kindness, he
must needs confess, that God is the Lord his God.

These words may be looked on also more particularly to relate to the first
Commandment, not only as an indication of him, whom we are to own, as our God;
but as a reason too, why we should own him. Nor will it so have the less
influence upon the other Commandments, since all religous duties depend upon
the knowledge and fear of God; and Atheism is that root of bitterness, from
whence all transgressions spring: for. Psalm. 14. 1.
The fool has said in his heart, There is no God, and then it follows, They
have corrupted their way, they have done abominably.

The first Commandment.
THOU SHALL HAVE NO OTHER GODS. Thou shall not follow the example of blind
Pagans, and entertain a multitude of gods, nor pay that devotion to any of the
creatures which is due to the creator alone; nor set up in thy heart any thing
in opposition to me, or give thy self up to the obedience of any lust, nor
hearken to the suggestions of Satan, nor be ruled by the vanity of this wicked
world, nor turn Atheist and live without God in the world; but shall
acknowledge me the only one God in three Persons, and shall learn to know me,
the Infinite, Almighty, Everlasting, and Ever blessed God; and shall fear
before me, and have thy thoughts taken up with the meditation of my Nature and
my Will, my Word and my Works: and shall admire me in my Attributes, and obey
me in my Commands; thou shall set me always before thee, that thou may walk
in my ways; thou shall perform to me that Homage, as is due by right of
creation; thou shall observe my providence, stand in aw of my Judgments, and
have regard to my mercies; nor shall thou ascribe whatever befalls thee to
chance or fortune, to thy own wit or strength, but look on all events as the
contrivances of my wisdom, and the effects of my power; Thou shall bear a love
to my name, and take thy delight in my Law; Thou shall give up thy heart to me,
and serve me with truth in the inward parts; Thy understanding shall be busily
employed in feeling after me, and finding me out, according as I have made
manifestations of my self, in my word and in my works, and shall guide thee by
the dictates of my holy Spirit. Thy will shall be inclined to a perfect
compliance with my will, according to the rules of Holiness and Righteousness,
and thy affections shall be wholly carried out to me as to their proper and
only object; Thou shall believe in me, and put thy trust in me, and love me,
and love those that do love me, and hate those that hate me, and what I hate
with a perfect hatred Sin; thou shall rejoice in my favor, and delight thy
self in me; nor shall thou take any occasion of sadness but from my
displeasure, and let fall thy countenance when I hide mine; thou shall meekly
submit to my disposals, and burn with zeal for my glory; thy soul shall cleave
fast unto me, and thou shall serve me faithfully all the days of thy life;
Thou shall behave thy self always as in my presence, and shall have respect to
me, and be afraid of doing any thing that may offend me, in the deepest
retirements of thy most private thoughts, for all things lie open and naked
before me.

BEFORE ME. This is added to show God's Omnipresence, as a grievous aggravation
of the sin, that the setting up another God, though never so secretly, though
never so much out of the sight of men, will be a down right affront to the
searcher of hearts, to God who sees in secret; and that he will not endure the
competition of any rival, for he alone is the God that made Heaven and Earth,
and whatsoever else fond superstition has found out for the object of worship,
is either the work of his hands, or the work of men's hands. This circumstance
may justly affright us into a great circumspection and wariness, for the
ordering our thoughts and composing our desires, of settling our spirits and
governing the inward man, since God's all piercing eye is upon us, and he
understands even our thoughts afar of. Some Interpreters render it. (...). so
the Chald. Sir. etc.
Beside me. And this though it be not so Emphatical as the other particle, yet
it more plainly infers the affirmative part of the precept, i.e. Thou shall
have no other Gods, but thou shall have me for thy God. The Hebrew affords a
pretty note from the Syntax, (...). Non erit tibi Dii alli.
the Verb being of a different number from the Noun, that Singular and this
Plural, as if it would be a solecism and irregular construction, to own more
Gods then one, since there can be but one Infinite, one first cause, one
supreme; and if we should fancy a Plurality of Gods, in a coordination, the
one would bound, and hinder and countermand the other; and if we fancy them in
a subordination it is only the highest is God, the rest are no Gods. There are
indeed ( 1. Cor. 8. 5, 6.
as the Apostle says) Gods many, and Lords many, i.e. such as are called Gods,
titular Gods; yet we have but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we
through him; for as he said immediately before. We know that an Idol is
nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one.

If now we would but search into our selves, and make inquiry into our hearts,
how little (I fear) should we find of God there? How full should we see our
selves of superstition and profaneness? Having placed worse things in God's
stead, then any of his own creatures, which was the folly of Heathenism;
setting up self in the Throne, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, preferring
every vanity before him, making our Belly, our interest, our sport, our sin,
our God. Setting not his fear before our eyes, nor living at all to his glory;
and in short, being by profession indeed, Christians, but in conversation,
Atheists, who know that there is a God, and yet glorify him not as God, so
that we may justly make use here of the Churches Prayer, Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

The second Commandment.
The first prescribes the object of our worship, and forbids a false God; This
regulates the manner and way of worship, and prohibits a false service of the
true God. And herein the confidence of the Roman-Church is to be admired, which
to defend its Idolatry, fears not to commit sacrilege, and casheirs this
Commandment from being one of the ten, thinking they make good amends, by as
absurdly parting the Tenth, as they have audaciously removed this. And what
they say for themselves, that they do not worship the Image it self, but God
at, or by, or through the Image, and that the service is transient to the Idol
and terminated upon God, is no more then an ingenuous Idolater of Heathen Rome
would have said; seeing no man of understanding could be so blockish, as to pay
the civility of his devotions to a log of wood, or to an Artist's phantasm, and
caress a dead thing; but they surely meant their Adoration to the Deity
represented and understood by that gross resemblance. Possibly the vulgar sort
looked no farther then the Idol it self, which may (I suppose without breach of
Charity) be thought of a great part of the Laity amongst these Christian
Idolaters, whose Ignorance is the mother of their Devotion, who if they knew
God better according to the first Commandment, would not worship Images
contrary to the second.

This Commandment has two parts, an Explication, and a Reason; The
explication first of the object what is meant by Idol, set down in two terms,
Graven Image, or any likeness, amplified by Induction or a particular
enumeration of things in Heaven above, in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth, which are the three great parts of the Univers, wherein all
things are contained: by this means leaving no evasion for Idolatry, no thing,
no place unnam'd, that might be abused to such a purpose. Secondly of the Act,
what the making to ones self means, and that in two terms too, Bowing down to
them, or Adoration, and worship or service, For so the word in the original
expresses it, forbidding the Dulia the lower worship, as well as the Latria,
the higher, and voiding that idle distinction of two sorts of religious
worship. The Reason is fetched from the nature of God, represented here by four
attributes, His power for he is a strong God, so the Hebrew word El signifies,
and so the Septuagint render it. His jealousy; He is a jealous God. His
Justice, demonstrated in his vengeance upon sinners; And his mercy, that he
deals kindly with the righteous; where he aggravates the guilt of the one, and
heightens the respect of the other, by the title he gives them; Those he styles
his enemies and haters, i.e. those which transgress his Laws, especially this:
These his friends and lovers, to wit, that keep his Commandments. And he is
just and merciful not only to them, but to their posterity after them also, yet
with this difference that his vengeance stops at the third or fourth
generation, but his kindness propagates it self to thousands.

THOU SHALL NOT MAKE UNTO THEE. This does not then simply forbid making Images
or pictures, nor condemn the Art of the graving tool and the Pencil, as if
carving and painting were sinful employments. Statues and Pictures may be had
for civil use, i.e. for ornament, for memorial or some historical
representation; but the religious use of them is forbidden, so as to set them
up to worship, as Nebuchadnezar gave order for his Image, and as the Israelites
caused Aaron to make them a calf, which whether they had from the Egyptians
practice, or transcribed from the copy of the Tabernacle, where the Cherubs
were in the same shape, it was so provoking a sin, that Exodus 2^. 1^.
Moses in zeal broke all the Commandments in pieces to see them break this
one; yet these Cherubs and other pictures, in all manner of curious work, were
in the Tabernacle and afterward in the Temple, without scandal; for it is not
the Image but the Image Worship that God is offended at.

ANY GRAVEN IMAGE OR ANY LIKENESS. The former word is of a limited sense, but
this latter is so general as to denote all pictures, or resemblances
whatsoever, whither carved, and cut out, in wood or stone, or cast in brass or
other mettle, or limn'd and drawn in colors, or interwoven and embroidered in
cloth, or whatever other way art and fancy can find out.

OF ANY THING THAT IS IN HEAVEN ABOVE. The Sun, Moon and Stars, such as the
horses of the Sun, (we read of,) and the star of Remphan, and Diana, Lucina,
and Luna all One.
Diana of the Ephesians; or in the highest heavens, Saints and Angels, blessed
spirits.

OR THAT IS IN THE EARTH BENEATH. As trees, groves and high places, herbs, as
those of Egypt worshipped their leeks and onions, birds and beasts it being the
heathen fashion ( Romans 1. 23.
as the Apostle too observes it) to change the glory of the incorruptible God
into such unworthy similitudes. Or men themselves, though a diviner creature,
whether living, as Herod was adored; or dead, it being a common use, to
canonize those after death who deserved well in their life; nay even the worst
of Tyrants, that have lived the prodigies of mankind, have had a fear and
reverence survive them, so far as to have their names consecrated, and get the
opinion of divinity, after their deaths.

OR THAT IS IN THE WATERS UNDER THE EARTH, as fishes, Sea Monsters, such as
from (...) piscis, rather then (...) frumentum.
Dagon. for the mistaken devotion of the poor Heathens filled all the Elements
with imaginary Deities. Nor did Heaven; Earth, and Sea, afford room enough to
their busy fancy, but they have searched Hell too, for some what to worship,
and the Devil himself has not escaped the base flatteries of men: The Indians
to this very day worshipping him, and persuaded by those frightful apparitions
he makes, to think that their devotion is not misplaced; nor is it much wonder,
when his instruments, grand Usurpers and Impostors of the world, have been
owned by abused people, into a divine esteem, and honored with blasphemous
Idolatry.

THOU SHALL NOT BOW DOWN TO THEM, by prostration of thy body, falling flat on
thy face, or bending thy knee, show them any respect, as the manner was to
worship Baal i.e. the image of Baal, for so (...). Romans 11. 4.
the Apostle renders it, Baal or Belus himself having been a great Prince, and
for his magnificence and great achievements, consecrated by his countrymen to
divine worship.

NOR WORSHIP THEM or NOR SERVE THEM, for the (...).
other word is more frequently used for worship* thou shall not give them any
honor, nor wait upon them with any attendance, but look upon them as they are
in themselves, as dead liveless things, that cannot help themselves, that have
eyes and see not, etc. Thou shall not offer to them sacrifice, nor do any other
act of service as belongs to God's worship; And it is strange to consider how
furious even the Israelites were grown, in their Idolatrous practices, when
they caused their own children to pass through the fire to Moloch, performing
that to the Devil, which Abraham was not permitted to do to the true God.
Where we see the difference betwixt true Religion and Idolatry, that God
restrains his servants, from those austerities which he might require, but the
Devil puts on his worshippers upon the most bloody, and unnatural cruelties.
Thus Baal's priests, and Corybantes, Galli, etc.
some others were instructed to cut and slash themselves, and as it were offer
up themselves, an unreasonable service. Thus far the precept, now follows the
reason of the precept.

FOR I THE LORD THY GOD AM A STRONG GOD; or as the Septuagint and Vulgar read
it, I am the Lord thy God, repeating that double obligation which was used in
the Preface, taken from the power of God, and his goodness. That he is a strong
God, implies how much he differs from any Idol, for an Idol is nothing in the
world. God is El, but these Idols are Elilim, Gods of no force and of no worth,
and Gelilim, dunghill gods. The Devil at best (which is one of his dreadfullest
titles) is but Beelzebub, a god of flies, but God is the Lord of Housts. It Is
God's usual challenge to these Idols that rob him of his worship, when he tells
them that he made Heaven and Earth, and they sorry things were themselves made
by the hands of men. The Prophet Isaiah has in a hansom Irony, put Idols
themselves out of countenance, chap. 44. a place worth the turning to, for any
one that is in danger of being tempted to sottish Idolatry.

JEALOUS Who will not part with his honor to another that will be loved
without a rival; and though he despise not a broken heart, yet will not accept
a divided one, but will have all or none; and which is the effect of jealousy,
when he finds the affections go astray from him and wander after other loves,
he turns his extreme love into extreme hatred, and those flames burn into rage.
It Is an Allegory God often delights to use, comparing his Church, (his beloved
ones) to a spouse or betrothed wife and himself to a kind but jealous husband.
Idolatry he accounts disloyalty to his bed, and frequently expostulates with
his people for their going a whoring after their own inventions, and their
spiritual fornications, and threatens a Bill of divorce, yet so that upon the
Harlot's return and amendment he will receive her again into the embraces of
his love. There are two qualityes in jealousy, which render it terrible; that
it is very watchful, to find the offense; and as revengeful, to punish it. And
these the more dreadful in God, in that his knowledge is infallible, his power
irresistible, and his vengeance unsufferable. And if God allowed such Number 5.
21, 22.
cruel trials to the bare surmises of men, to prove the fidelity of their
wives; how will the cup of his wrath rot the thighs, and the wombs, the
posterity (I mean) of Idolatrous worshippers, that provoke him to jealousy with
their abominations?

VISITING. A word taken from the manner of Magistrates dealing with offenders,
who first go with a commission to examine and enquire into the fact; to show
God's leisurely proceeding to sentence; as in the case of Sodom, he went down
to see whether the sin was according to the cry; and so before, came down to
view the tower of Babel, and take a judicial cognizance of the bold attempt of
the builders, before he confounded them and their language. He visits then in
judgment, when he comes to punish, and to afflict for sin: whence it is usual
to say of the plague or any grievous sickness, it is Gods visitation.

THE INIQUITY. If an iniquity will not escape, what will become of gross
transgressions? And if children must smart for the iniquity of their parents,
what judgments are prepared for an Idolatrous posterity? what penaltyes must
the parents themselves, (who are wilful transgressors, and Idolaters) expect
to undergo? Thus the words afford a gradation.

OF THE FATHERS. Men's sins do not dye with them, but survive; and the wicked
man leaves a sad legacy to his relations, and makes divine vengeance his
executor. So much is posterity concerned, in the virtues or vices of their
Ancestors, that according as the fathers are good or bad, so the children are
to inherit a blessing or a curse. Happy are those children, who can challenge a
share in God's favor, by their interest in their Father's Covenant with God;
and as unhappy that family, which has God's wrath entailed upon it, by the
wickedness of a progenitour. What load of judgment is to fall upon the latter
ends of the world, when not only our own sins go over our head, as a burden
too heavy for us to bear but the iniquityes of former times are also added to
the heap.

UPON THE CHILDREN. This procedure seems to thwart the rules of Justice; if the
fathers eat sour grapes, shall the childrens teeth be set an edge? God himself
has Ezekiel. 18. 20.
other where disclaimed this course. The son shall not bear the father's
iniquity, nor the father the son's, but the soul that sins, that shall dye: it
must be an extraordinary offense needs, that puts God upon such an
extraordinary way, that makes him involve posterity in the calamity of their
predecessour's guilt. It Is answered, and the (...) qui pergunt peccare post
patres suos.
(...) speaks it plain, that (...) is conditional, and supposes the children to
tread in the steps of their fathers; and then it will be but just that, if the
sin run in a blood, the punishment should descend too, And indeed the Text
affords this answer; for though we render it of them that hate me, the (...).
Greek is more close to the Hebrew, to them that hate me; to intimate, that
only those children shall suffer for their father's Idolatry, who practice it
themselves; And it is commonly observed, that children rather become worse then
their parents then better, by adding their own personal wickedness to that
which they draw from their loins; besides the great advantages, which domestic
examples have, powerfully to recommend any vice to childrens imitation. This
then will be no more then what we do to young wolves, whom we execute not only
for the mischiefs the old (...) for a mischievous nature of their own. Thus
treason to a (...) the blood of the whole family down-ward, and Idolatry is no
less then high Treason to the King of Kings. Another answer is, that temporal
afflictions are here meant, which many times lay hold upon innocent persons,
for the guilt of their relations. For we must not suppose, that all are wicked
who appear wretched, seeing that Innocence may be exercised with the miseries
of this life, which will be acquitted from the torments hereafter; justice so
contriving it, that the fathers shall see themselves punished in the affliction
of their children.

TO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION. Gods glory is so much concerned in this
Commandment, that upon the violation of it he gives the reins to his fury, and
vengeance reaks it self upon the offender, and those that belong to him so
fiercely, that the children unborn shall rue it. Upon other occasions he thinks
it enough, As in the third.
to bring the delinquent himself to punishment; but in this, the whole family
lies at stake, and his anger, as if he had designed them immediately for
Hellfire, burns from generation to generation. One will not afford fuel
enough for wrath, nor sacrifice sufficient for atonement; nor will the Three
Persons of the Godhead, whose Majesty is wounded by Idolatrous worship, be
contented with two; but there must be a third generation to satisfy the injured
Trinity; And because the sinner may live to see his great grandchildren, there
shall be added a fourth, in the sight of whose miseryes he may suffer. Thrice
then and four times i.e. completely and fully accursed, are Idolaters. The
meaning may be too, that judgment may sleep a while and forbear, till one or
two generations are over; but God will awake, and pursue, and overtake the
sinner, at the least in his third, or fourth generation, and account with him
in his posterity.

OF THEM THAT HATE ME. And who those are, the opposition will show; for who are
those that love God? 'ris added by way of explanation, Those that keep his
Commandments, who are those that hate him then, but those that break them? A
Character which he particularly fixes upon Idolaters, as if this Commandment
were most dear to him, and he had no enemies but those that wrong him in his
worship.

AND SHOWING MERCY. This looks like Sun shine after a storm; As God's justice
deterrs from evil, so his mercy invites to good. The command is tempered and
mixed with threat and promise, which though it come last of the two, is not the
least; but what it wants in the have of proposal, it has in the proportion of
its extent; for whereas justice reached but to three or four generations, mercy
spreads it self.

UNTO THOUSANDS. i.e. thousand generations; or else it does not answer the
third and fourth of the threat. How merciful an expression this to stretch out
mercy for many centuryes of years, for some hundreds of generations beyond the
end of the world; Ramum mill sime ducis is hyperbolical.
for by computation Adam himself in strait line cannot be conceived to have so
many generations descending from him, when three fourteens i.e. forty and two
generations make up the whole Genealogy of Christ, up to Abraham; and from
Abraham upward are not very many. This was to show the Infinite excess of his
mercy over his Justice, even to a boast, which will be made good too; for if
God's servant have not generations enough to be partners with him in glory, his
own glory will receive the greater additions, and himself inherit the blessing,
which would have been due to his posterity.

OF THEM THAT LOVE ME, AND KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS. Or as (...).
the Hebrew has it, and the Greek renders it, To those that love me; seeing
that the children of the Godly forfeit their share in the promises, if they be
not godly too, and their wickedness makes them incapable of a blessing; Ezekiel.
18. 10.
as God himself has declared it: For Heaven is indeed an inheritance, as God
the Father of mercyes of his free grace bestows it; but it is a purchase too, as
we are bound to strive to enter, and to work out our salvation. Yet it is true
in a temporal sense, and observation will make it good, that the wicked
children of godly parents have some what extraordinary providence attend them
in this world, and (...) much (...) for their fathers (...) God (...) tender of
their concerns, (...) for his, and (...) promised, that it shall be well with
those that fear him, and with their (...) after them. He owns them here as
friends, and will not forget them in their relations, but will show them all
the kindness, which the^ are capable of. And thus the Israelites in their
distresses thought it a great argument in their Prayers to plead with God, not
the merits, but the memoryes of their forefathers, Abraham, (...) and Jacob.
What better portion can a loving father provide for his children? what greater
legacy of love leave behind him, then God's favor, and (...) est in divine
mercy?

Who are those God here calls his Lovers, his Friends? those (...) keep his
commands, that observe his precepts. For indeed friendship consists in the
union of minds, and the compliance of wills: And it is the nature of love to
seek by all means to please the party loved, and not to cross his desires or
give him any offense. This is the true mark of our love to God, if we are
careful to keep his commands, to do what he would have us do. And who would
not love God, that loves himself? and seek his friendship, who is so ready to
engage his kindness to us and our heirs for ever, and requite our love a
thousand fold?

This reason, as it contains a threat and a promise, and is grounded upon the
Justice and mercy of God, is common to all the Commandments; but is peculiarly
annexed to this, as that which God takes the greatest care of, and is most
jealous of the breach; and it may justly occasion our wonder, to consider that
notwithstanding God's strictness in propounding the command, and his severity
upon the breaches; yet his own people have been ever forward to run into
Idolatry, and to take example from those very nations, whom they themselves for
this very sin, have by God's command rooted out of their land and country: So
that it should seem there was but too great reason, why this reason should be
set particularly to back this command.

The meaning of the precept is this. Thou shall not make use of any Image,
whether graven of whatsoever metal, gold or silver; or cut out of stone, or
carved in wood, or fashioned in wax, or what other material soever, or any
picture drawn or portrayed in cloth, paper, etc. or any likeness and
resemblance of any creature in the whole world, for a religious purpose, in the
way of worship, upon any pretense. Thou shall not worship the work of men's
hands, or the work of their brains, neither Image nor imagination; none of my
creatures, much less any of thine own. Thou shall neither worship them, nor me
by them; but shall consult my word, and fetch thence the rules and ways of
worship; Thou shall not be led by the example of Heathen-people, whose
ignorance of me may be some excuse to their Idolatry, to follow their
practices, and turn my glory into the likeness of any corruptible thing. The
Sun and Moon and Stars above thee shall not dazzle thy mind by their luster, so
as to forget me, and pay that homage to those glorious lights, which is due to
me, who live in unapproachable light; The trees and springs, bread and wine,
and other blessings of life, shall not for their usefulness and for that
helpful virtue, which I their Creator have put into them, win so much upon thy
affections, as to asscribe that honor to them, which belongs to their Maker;
nor shall the wonders of the deep, and the prodigious secrets, which I have
laid in the womb of the seas, swallow up thy admiration, so as to drown that
respect which thou oughtst to have for me; the sight of whatsoever excellency,
or convenience, or dreadfulness in any of the creatures, shall but serve to
give thee an occasion of magnifying my glorious perfections, and goodness and
power; not to fix thy devotion upon them; for I commanded and they were made
for my own glory, and for thy use, not for thy worship; The Angels thou shall
respect as my messengers, and receive my errands with reverence, but shall not
by worshipping them make them my fellows* The Saints who now rest from their
labor, and have left thee their examples of a holy life, thou shall remember
with thanks and endeavor to imitate, and thus make them the object not of my
jealousy, but of thy (...) in Deuteronomy. is rendered by the Vulg. Deus aemulator.
emulation. The evil spirits shall not fright thee into religious observance,
being able to do no more hurt then I let them; Thou shall not with base
flattery Idolize the persons of men, whether they be Good or Great, but carry a
respect subordinate to me; In fine, Thou shall not set thy affections, and
respects upon any thing, so as to make it an Image of jealousy. Thou shall not
fall flat on thy face before any creature, or its resemblance, nor bow thy knee
nor kiss thy hand, nor make any other sign of adoration, nor pray to them, or
before them, or use any other gesture of worship, however thou may pretend to
direct thy intention; nor shall thou pay them any religious service or
attendance, by building groves, temples and altars, by making priests, and
appointing sacrifices or any other rites. But thou shall worship me the Lord
thy God, and me alone shall thou serve, in body as well as soul; for I am the
Creator of both; and though I am a spirit, and am to be worshipped in spirit
and in truth, yet your bodies also shall be temples of my holy spirit, and I
will be sanctified in them in the use of such holy rites and Ceremonies, as I
have appointed, and shall hereafter appoint in my word and by my Church; that
all things in my service may be done decently, and in order. Thou shall
therefore worship me according to my appointments, come to my house in my fear,
and behave thy self with care and reverence in the holy place, whilst thou art
in my presence, in the performance of all religious acts, and shall bow down to
me, and kneel before the Lord thy Maker. Thou shall not consult with witches,
or use other unlawful means, nor shall thou regard sorceries, or any
superstitious observances. Lastly, thou shall give thy self up wholly, both in
body, soul and spirit, to my worship, and shall dedicate thy self so to my
service, that thy body also may become a Temple of the holy Ghost. And all this
thou must be the more careful of, that thou may not deprive me of that
homage, which I expect from thee, and give away my glory to another, when thou
considerst my jealousy to observe such indignityes, and my power to avenge
them; the severity of my Justice in punishing Idolaters and their posterity
after them, and the multitude of my Mercyes to them and theirs after them, who
have a respect for me, and a care to keep my commands.

Now if we would take notice, how full the world is of Idolatry, when near
three parts of four in the whole habitable world are Mahumetans and Pagans; and
the greatest part of Christianity is engaged in Image Worship; what cause have
we to fear the severest judgments of a jealous God? How guilty has this Land
of late been of the basest Idolatry, in the blasphemous addresses to usurping
powers, and imputing the villainous artifices of wicked men, to the holy Spirit
of God? How have schisms, like armies of locusts over-spred, and eat up the
Churches of God in these Nations? every one severally inventing fal^^ ways of
worship, and setting up th^^ abomination of desolation. How has Idolatry and
Antichristian doctrine prevailed amongst us, and been eagerly* assisted by a
seeming opposition? How many Corahs, Dathans and Abirams, have been owned and
followed by giddy multitudes, that have offered strange fire, and maintained
rebellion against the sacred orders, and institutions of the Church? What
credit has Sorcery, and Astrology, of late years, gotten, that many have
forsaken their own prudence, and God's providence too, and given themselves up
to a lying spirit. How is Self and Sin made the great Idol of all our
devotions, and how do we every day provoke God to jealousy with our lusts? Sure
then we have great reason to pray in the Churches words, Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

As the second gives order for the carriage of our Body, so the third sets down
a rule for the chief part of the body, the Tongue; That prescribes postures,
This regulates our speech; That takes care for Gods Worship, This for his Name.
It likewise consists of two parts, the Precept it self, and the Reason of the
precept.

THOU SHALL NOT TAKE, to wit, into thy mouth; thou shall not mention and make
use of God's name in thy ordinary discourse: And more particularly, thou shall
not swear, as the three Ch^ld. Sir. Arab.
Eastern Interpretations have it exactly to the Hebrew phrase; for to lift up
God's Name, signifies to swear; and so in the 24. Psalm, He that has not lift
up his soul to vanity, is expounded by the words immediately following, That
has not sworn deceitfully.

THE NAME OF THE LORD THY GOD. God's Name is here put not only for those
appellations, whereby he is distinguished, but for the divine Attributes also,
for his Word and his Works, and all other discoveries, which he makes, of his
Essence, power, wisdom, goodness, as has been said before in the first Petition
of the Lord's Prayer.

IN VAIN. Idly, to no purpose, Vulg in Deuteronomy. super re vana.
rashly, upon every slight or silly occasion, in common talk, or in any
frivolous matter, without due reverence and heedfulness; or So Sir (...) cum
Arab.
falsely, in the defense and justification of a lie: and thus the word in its
latitude includes the three qualifications of an Oath, that it be made Ier. 4. 2
in judgment, in justice, and in truth. The reason follows,

FOR THE LORD WILL NOT HOLD HIM GUILTLESS, THAT TAKES HIS NAME IN VAIN. i.e.
He will not Vulg in Deuteronomy. Quia non erit impunitus.
clear and acquit him, and let him escape unpunished, that shall dare to call
the all-knowing. God to witness a lie. Two Observes that word Jehovah or Lord
helps us to; as having a double Emphasis; One is, that however a false or a
vain swearer may pass, as to the notice and penalty of humane Laws, God will
find out the offender and punish him. Another is, that it is said here only,
the Lord, whereas before, 'twas said the Lord thy God, to show that perjury and
rash oaths are sins of that nature, that God will not only punish his own
people for, but even the Heathens and Infidels, whose Lord indeed he is, but he
is not their God. And Heathen story is full of such examples, wherein the
breach of oath has been constantly followed with remarkable vengeance. And that
is intimated in that negative threat, which signifies more then it speaks out,
He will not hold him guiltless; meaning, that he will most certainly punish.

The sense of the Command then is this; Thou shall not use my Name upon a
design of cheat, and to cover a lie; thou shall not forswear thy self by
calling me to witness a known falsehood, and thus call some heavy vengeance upon
thine own head: But thou shall, when thou art called by the Magistrate
thereunto, bear faithful witness to the truth which thou know, and shall
make good thy promises. Thou shall not blaspheme my Name, by rash and needless
oaths, nor upon every mean and paultry occasion make mention of it; but show a
reverence and a regard to it, and take it into thy mouth with solemn care and
weighty consideration. When necessity so requires, and Authority commands, for
the decision of strife, and to put an end to controversy, thou shall swear by
me, and by me alone, who only know the secrets of hearts, and am able to
avenge the falsehood. Thou shall have an awful respect for every thing that
belongs to me; thou shall peruse my word with diligence and attention, reading,
and hearing, and meditating in it day and night; It shall never depart out of
thy mouth. Thou shall honor my Ministers the Preachers of my Word, and the
dispens^rs of my holy Ordinances. Thou shall magnify and praise my Name in the
remembrance of all my wondrous works. Thou shall take notice of my Judgments
and my mercyes, and in all events, speak well of my Name, and whatsoever falls
out in the affairs and interests of the world to say still, the Name of the
Lord be praised. And to conclude, Thou shall walk in my fear, in thy distress
call upon my Name, be frequent in Prayer, and in praise, lift up thy heart and
thy voice to me who hear in Heaven, and so order thy conversation, that thou
may not cause my Name to be evil spoken of* but shall live suitably to thy
holy profession, that all that see thy good works, may glorify me, and by thy
example may be taught to love and fear my Name.

Let us but take a view of our selves, and see whether we are such as the Lord
will hold guiltless. Have not we taken the Lord's Name in vain, when generally
it has been used as a stale to base interest, and a cloak for hypocrisy and
tyranny? when our Pulpits have prefixed the Name of the Lord to the blackest
designs, and those who would be thought strictest in prosessing the Name of the
Lord, have set on foot rebellion, under the title of the Cause of God? when
there has been such breaking of Oaths, and making of Covenants, against the
Laws of God and man? In so much that for our swearing backward and forward, as
the villainy of these late times has taught men to do, we may justly be termed
the perjured Nation? when our orthodox teachers have been thrown into corners
with indigence and contempt, that the basest of the people might fill their
hands, and become Priests to a Tyrant's interest? when prosperous villainy has
been blessed in the Name of the Lord, and suffering Innocence has been
impleaded as guilty? when swearing is in so much credit and is looked on as the
Character of Greatness, and rash oaths have the reputation of Gallantry? when
we that have the Name of God called upon us, live unworthy of that calling, and
make his Name be evil spoken of? O! let us pray as the Church has taught us,
Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

The fourth Commandment.
The third was the rule of our words, the fourth of our works, and that which
is consequent to them, rest. That teaches us holy talk, This instructs us in
holy walking for so our Church-Catechism has resolved the sense of this
Command, to serve God faithfully all the days of our life; so that it is not
the seventh day only, but all seven, that we are to serve God in. He that
would serve God well on the Sabbath in a holy rest, must first serve him in his
week's labor, and doing the work of the six days well. The second and third
concern the Manner of his worship, This more especially the Time. It has also,
as the other two had, two parts; the Precept and the Reason of the precept. The
precept is attended with a large explication, what is meant by Sabbath, and
what meant by Keeping it Holy. First we may take notice of the extraordinary
manner, wherein it is delivered; it is ushered in with a Memento; Then what is
to be remembered; the Sabbath and the Sanctification of it: Then follows the
explication, What is the Sabbath? by Opposition first to our days of work, the
other days of the week; six days shall thou labor and do all thy work,
which indeed is precept too, as well as concession, no less a Command to oblige
us to diligence in our calling, then a Grant to give us leave to follow it. And
the injunction is twofold, that we labor, take pains in our employment, set
our selves a work; and that we finish and make an end of our business, and do
all that we have to do. Then secondly by Position, which punctually sets down
the day, But the seventh day is the Sabbath. What is it next to Sanctify the
Sabbath or keep it holy? To do no work on that day, nothing of our ordinary
employment, wherein the strictness of the Command appears, that all of the
family as well as the Master, all of the city as well as the Magistrate are
concerned, being set down here by name. Thou master and mistress or magistrate,
or whatever governor; and thy natural dependencies, thy son and thy daughter:
and thy acquired relations, whether by Covenant or hire, thy man^servant and
thy maid servant; or by purchase and possession, thy cattle; or by sojourning,
the stranger that is within thy gates. The reason is taken from God's own
example, whereof we have first the Narration, how he made all things in six
days and rested the seventh; and then the Design of his so doing, that he
might appoint the Sabbath, wherefore he blessed the Sabbath Day, or (as the
Septuagint have it) the seventh day, and hallowed it.

REMEMBER. We are too apt all over to forget our duty; wordlings especially in
the pursuit of their earthly concernments, would scarce make a stop at the
Sabbath, and therefore this Command summons them with a particular Alarm; a
word of much weight, in the Hebrew Idiom, where the (...) Ellipsis potius
Imperativi. quam Enallage In^in. pro Imp. Recordando re cordare.
Verb should be twice repeated, Remember to remember; i.e. be sure by all means
to remember; and denotes the former old custom of keeping the Sabbath, even
from the beginning of the world, and therefore presents it here as an ancient
institution, to be remembered. And it quickens our care, not only for the
observation of the day when it comes, but for our preparation for it, before it
comes; we must think of it all the week before hand, and provide for it, that
nothing may divert us from the celebration of it.

THE SABBATH DAY. A day of rest and leisure from the works of our ordinary
calling, that ceasing thus from our earthly affairs, we may have opportunity to
meditate on heavenly things, and lift up our souls, from the cares of this
life, to the contemplation of those joys and gloryes, which those that serve
God shall have in the world to come, where there shall be an everlasting
Sabbath.

TO KEEP IT HOLY. To set it aside wholly for the service of God, in public, by
Prayer, reading and hearing God's Word, serving God in the solemn assembly; and
in private, by meditation and study of God's Book, and other holy exercises. We
are to remember both the day, and the keeping the day holy: some are ready
enough to remember the Sabbath, as a time of leisure, out of carnal indulgence,
but they are not so ready to remember the duty of the day, to keep it holy, and
improve it for spiritual advantage.

SIX DAYS THOU SHALL LABOR. This as it declares the precept, so it shows the
equity of it, if God allow us six, we should not grudge him the seventh;
Besides, it has the force of a command, and is delivered in the same manner as
the other Commandments, Thou shall labor. He that is idle all the week, has no
right to the Sabbath-rest. He that is careless in doing his own work on the six
days is unfit to be employed in God's service on the seventh. The Hence (...)
cultus Dei; and (...) in the second Com. (...) (...).
word many times has a peculiar signification, for the service of God, and
thus it will infer, that every day is a Christian's Sabbath, and he is to be
doing God's work, even when he is doing his own.

AND SHALL DO ALL THAT THOU HAVE TO DO. Dispatch all thy business, and leave
nothing undone against the Sabbath, that thou may be wholly vacant, and have
thy thoughts as well as thy body at rest, and, thy mind free from all
distractions of worldly cares, thou may have nothing else to think upon, but
the worship of God. This calls upon us for diligence in our callings, that we
must not do our work by halves, but go thorough with it; And it gives a
Typical intimation too, that we would in this week of our mortality set upon
and accomplish the necessary work of Repentance, Faith, and Obedience; that we
may have all our accounts cleared e're the eternal Sabbath come upon us, when,
if we have left that work undone, we shall have no time allowed us to go on
with it; and bring it to an end.

BUT THE SEVENTH DAY. This is the Ceremonial part of the Command, but that a
seventh should be kept is Moral. For the Jews in memory of the Creation, were
to observe the seventh Day (which with us is Saturday,) as their Sabbath,
whereon God having made all things, rested; But Christians in memory of a
greater work, of Redemption, led by Apostolical practice, have constantly
observed the first day of the week, to wit, Sunday, as their Sabbath, whereon
our Savior rose again from the dead, and showed himself to his Disciples.
Another difference betwixt us is, that we are not obliged to that Iudaical
strictness, but are allowed a cheerful freedom, yet not so as to make it a day
of pastime, for it follows that it is

THE SABBATH OF THE LORD THY GOD, as appointed by him; or (...) Est a^tem (...)
signum fere Dativi.
To the Lord thy God, as dedicated to his especial service; a day, wherein thou
art to contemplate the works of the Lord wrought in the Creation, and the
mercyes of thy God, shown forth in thy Redemption; a time set apart not for thy
business, much less for thy sport, but for God's glory, and public worship; to
be spent wholly in performances of holy duties.

IN IT THOU SHALL DO NO MANNER OF WORK. Nothing of common drudgery, of thy
ordinary vocation, of thy weeks work; none of thy work; for it it is not meant
that we should sit still and do nothing: but works of piety; as going to
Church, and the Priest's offering their Sacrifices in the Old Law, etc. are
God's work; and works of necessity, as provision of food, etc. are the works of
Nature; and works of Charity, as healing the sick, taking the ox or ass out of
the pit, etc. are works of Grace. And these must and may be done without any
violation of the Sabbath.

THOU. God here calls all the family to an account: so careful he is of his own
day. And whereas in the other Commandments Thou is directed to every body,
here it carries a special warrant to the superior, seeming to require of him,
that he not only keep it himself in his own person, but take care also, that
all in his charge keep it too. Thou whether thou art magistrate, master or
mistress of the house, father, tutor, or whatever governor, employ thy
authority, to see my Sabbath duly observed. Yet not so as that the superiors
negligence shall be an excuse for the inferior's; for they are all spoken too
here, by name.

AND THY SON. Children are naturally more apt to neglect their duty, then able
to perform it, or indeed willing to understand it. They must be taught it then
and kept to it. Acquaint thy son therefore with my ways, and instruct him in
my fear. Train him up in good courses, that he may not be prepossessed with
vicious customs; Bring him to Church, let him be couversant in Scripture, and
learn the principles of Religion, and seek me early, that he may grow up, as in
stature so in wisdom, and grace, and favor with God and good men.

AND THY DAUGHTER. No age nor sex priviledg'd from Sabbath-duty. And these two
words include all inferiors, who are not in a servile condition, all children,
pupils, scholars, citizens, subjects, whose respective governors are
particularly to heed their observance of this day.

THY MANSERVANT, AND THY MAID SERVANT. All thy servants whether hired or
bought, all that do thee work and receive thy wages. Neither thy Avarice, nor
their own lust shall employ them, and cause them to absent themselves from my
service. Servants that day (...) God's servants, and their master's
fellow servants; yet to be commanded and overlooked by their masters, that they
do serve God. And indeed it is the master's great interest, to see that this
day be well observed in his family, since he cannot well expect that his own
work should prosper, if God's work be neglected; or that those servants will be
faithful in his service, who do not care to serve God.

THY CATTLE. The Greek reads here, as it is expressed in Deuteronomie, and thy
ox, and thy ass, and thy cattle. i.e. all laboring beasts which man makes use
of, for tillage of the ground, for carriage of burdens, for going of journeys,
etc. that they also may rest from their usual labor, and may have a time of
refreshment; for there is a charity too due to these brute-servants, and the
good man is merciful to his beast. But does God take care of oxen? Though they
have a share in his providence, yet what are they concerned in his Law, which
is spiritual and holy? It Is for man's sake whom they serve, and in whose charge
they are, that they are here mentioned: And indeed should the cattle have been
left out, it might have looked like an allowance to worldlyminded men, to have
set them on work; and the attendance of that would have proved the employment
of men too, for that beasts will hardly work alone, without the direction and
oversight of men.

NOR THY STRANGER THAT IS WITHIN THY GATES. He that sojourns with thee within
thy city, and so the Magistrate is concerned; or thy guest in thy house, and so
it is the duty of the Master of the family; to see, that strangers of what
country or religion soever comply with this Law, and do not violate the
Sabbath-rest, by travel, keeping market, following their merchandise, or any
other worldly occasions. The Hebrew (...).
words are sometimes taken in a special strict sense, so as that the stranger
means one of another country, converted to the Jewish profession and
observances, called otherwise a Proselyte; and the Gates being the place of
session or assize, where the Judges and Magistrates met for the trial and
decision of causes, mean the civil power and jurisdiction; But they are here
questionless to be taken in the larger and more common sense.

FOR IN SIX DAYS, THE LORD. This is the reason of the Command, and shows
farther the equity of it, that we would not think much to do as God himself
did, and indeed the morality of it too: for this reason concerns all mankind,
Heathen, as well as Jew; wherefore to intimate the universal obligation, it
has, it says not the Lord thy God as before, but only the Lord.

MADE HEAVEN AND EARTH, THE SEA, AND ALL THAT IN THEM IS. He finished the work
of creation, and did all which he had to do, in that first week of the world.
And it would be worth our imitation, to consider, how God takes a review of
every day's work, and it would be well for us, that we could every night,
before we take our natural rest, take account of our actions, and see that they
are good; and at the weeks end before we enter upon this spiritual rest, survey
the work of the whole week, and say of it, not that it were exceeding good, but
that at least it were not exceeding evil. Two things in the method of God's
working may be worth our particular notice, that Genesis chapter 1.
the evening is mentioned still before the morning, as if God had taken counsel
over night, what he should do next day; and that God made man last on the very
Sabbath-eve, as if he had made him for no other purpose, then to keep the
Sabbath, in the admiration of his works, and the celebration of his praise.

AND RESTED THE SEVENTH DAY. God might have been working on still, and set
forth his power, in new productions; for Omnipotence cannot be tired, nor
Infinity be exhausted; but he was pleased to put a period to his own
extraordinary actings, and by his own will determine the products of his
boundless power. Again, if he had pleased, he could have dispatched all his
works in a day, in a moment, and not have made such leisurely progress, and
have done all at once; But he chose a number of days to accomplish his great
design in; six days, that there might be an orderly proportion, and distance
of time betwixt the productions of the several creatures; and but six, that the
glory of his workmanship might not receive any disparagement from a seeming
delay; Now whether these six days, in which the world was making, were meant
to signify the continuance of the world for so many thousand years, a thousand
years being in Gods reckoning but as a day, and the seventh day of rest to
typifie another thousand years of Christ's reign, or an everlasting Sabbath in
Heaven; or whether any other mystery lie hid in the number of seven, whence
fond antiquity might appropriate the seven Planets, each to his day; and
fonder Art divide the week according to planetary hours, may be guessed, but
cannot certainly be known. Wherefore it may suffice us, that it pleased God so
to order his work, and so to appoint a holy rest: and he sure had very great
reason for observing that order and making this appointment.

THEREFORE THE LORD BLESSED THE SABBATHDAY, AND HALLOWED IT. He stamped upon it
a particular respect, and set it aside from common employment, and business of
life, for holy and spiritual exercises; that it might be spent in the
commemoration of his wonderful works: And if the institution were so solemn
upon the account of Creation, how much more, will the memory of our Redemption
heighten the solemnity, and improve the observance of this holy day, which our
blessed Lord and Savior the holy Jesus blessed by his rising again from the
dead, and hallowed by his apparition and discourse with his holy Apostles* who
have by their example recommended to the Church of God, as the Christian
Sabbath, the first day of the week, the day of our Lords Resurrection, for
which reason it is also called the Lord's Day.

Besides this weekly solemnity and day of rejoicing, it is acknowledged even by
those who are no great friends to the Churches authority, that the Church has
power, to appoint and set aside for the public worship of God, other peculiar
days, as occasion shall require; such as are Anniversary Fasts and Feasts; nor
is the commemoration of the benefits obtained by Christ, as his Nativity,
Passion, Ascension, etc. and of the holy Apostles, and other Scripture-Saints,
more ancient (though it be handed to us, from the most ancient and the best
times,) then it is convenient: the fundamentals of religion being thus scattered
through the course of the year, and the Holy Days next to the Lord's Day, being
the great remarks and cognisances of Christianity.

This reason drawn from the creation, which is the moral reason of the precept,
is in Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15*
Deuteronomie (which is the repetition of the Law) omitted, and another of a
politic concern brought in stead of it, as if the command were grounded upon
an indulgence to servants, and that upon a reflection upon the condition of the
Israelites in Egypt, where they had been made serve in a cruel bondage
mentioned in the Preface. Though those words there (I suppose) might be added
only as a reason, for the servants and the cattles rest, and an argument to
enforce the equity of that, rather then to be the bottom and ground of the
Sabbath it self; and yet it seems strange, that immediately after, v. 22*
Moses tells them, God spoke these words and no more.

The sense of the command is this, Thou shall take great heed to the
observation of my day, and shall sanctify my Sabbath, and keep it holy with
exercises of public and private devotion; Thou shall wait upon me in my
sanctuary, and appear before me in the great assembly; Thou shall come to my
house in my fear, and enter my courts with due reverence; Thou shall attend to
my word, and obey my voice, and sh^lt bestow this sacred time wholly on the
meditation of my Law; Thou shall receive my word with faith, and wait upon me
in the use of my ordinances; Thou shall set one day in seven aside from all
worldly concernments, and thy usual employment, and dedicate it and thy self to
me; Thou shall prepare thy self, and forecast thy business, that no other
thoughts may distract thee; Thou shall keep it a holy rest to the Lord, and
shall cause all that belong unto thee to keep it; Thou shall not do thy own
works, nor speak thy own words, nor think thy own thoughts on that day, but be
taken up with the study of God's word and with the consideration of his works;
Thou shall serve me faithfully on thy six days of work, in a diligent
attendance upon the duties of thy calling, that thou may on my day of ^est,
meet with a blessing, find pardon for thy failings, and receive strength for
thy performances; Thou shall breed up thy children in my fear, and acquaint
them with my ways; Thou shall instruct thy household, and make me known unto
strangers; Thou shall be merciful to thy servants and thy cattle, and shall let
them enjoy the benefit of the Sabbath-rest; Thou shall so observe this rest, as
not to give thy self up to sloth and idleness, nor spend the time in sports
and vain recreations, but make it a rest from sin, as well as from work; Thou
shall more particularly employ thy self in remembering the Lord thy Creator,
and thy Redeemer, and thankfully acknowledging his benefits. Lastly, Thou shall
so pass this weekly Sabbath in holy meditations, and a heavenly conversation,
that thou may fit thy self for the celebration of an everlasting Sabbath, to
be kept hereafter with Angels and Saints in Heaven, after thou art delivered
from the troubles of a wicked world.

How far have we come short, of the observation of the Sabbath, in these our
times, who forget the day, and neglect the duty; who neither labor on the six
days nor rest on the seventh as we should do; who profane the sanctuary, and
pollute the holy place, using no reverence, and behaving our selves in Gods
presence, with more rudeness then we would in the presence of men; who have
made our devotions but a lip labor, and placed religion in the ear, and have
excluded God's word contained in the holy Bible, and the wholesome forms of the
Church to make room for the bold conceits and seditious discourses of men; who
have preferred Enthusiasms before the written word; who have preached up
rebellion and sacrilege, and demolished the Churches of God in the Land, and
broken down the sacred ornaments with axes and hammers; who have multiplied
sects and heresies, and dishonored God, in his solemn worship, and in the
public assemblyes; who have made void God's ordinances, and refused to
administer and receive the blessed Sacraments; who have had no regard to the
Feasts and Fasts, and other ancient usages of the Church: but have set aside
days of our own, and have fasted for strife, and given thanks for blood; who
do not take care that we and our houses may serve the Lord, nor make any
account of this sacred time; who spend the day in sloth and riot and vain
sports, and do not sanctify it, and keep it holy to the Lord; who do not
improve the blessing of the Sabbath to the advantages of a holy life, but
continue still in gross ignorance, and profaneness; so that we may very well
use the Churches Prayer, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law.

The fifth Commandment.
This is the hinge of the two Tables, the main joint of the whole Law, and
concerns the Magistrate, who is God's Vicegerent ou earth, and the keeper of
both the Tables; wherefore some assign it a place in the first Table. God
having a special care of civil order, and peace in the societyes of men, has
therefore set this Commandment concerning the obedience to superiors, by
which peace and good order are preserved, immediately after those of his own
worship, and in like manner backed it with a reason; whereas all the rest which
follow are set down barely in way of Commands without the addition of any
promise or threat. So then this Command is made up of two parts, the Precept it
self, and the Reason of the Precept: the Precept shows the duty, Honor, and
its object, thy Father and Mother: The Reason is a promise of long life, and
therefore the Apostle has called it, Ephesians. 6. 2.
The first Commandment with a promise; (for the Third contains a threat* and
that of the Second is more threat then promise.) That thy days may be long on
the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

HONOR. This shows a different degree and condition amongst men, and God's Law
maintains the distinction. In all societyes there are some superiors, some
inferiors; The Law is not for levelling. Honor would not be a duty if all
were equal. Now Honor implies respect and obedience, subjection and service.

THY FATHER AND MOTHER, whether thy natural parents, or civil Magistrate, or
spiritual governor, or whatsoever superior, which are all by a usual
propriety of the Hebrew language styled Fathers. Father having been the first
dignity of the world, and all rule and government whatsoever founded on the
right of paternal Authority, which aggravates an offense done to a superior
and makes the offender as ungracious as one that dishonours his father. Here
are meant then all manner of persons in relation, Parents and Children,
Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and People, Master and Scholar, Husband and
wife, Master and Servants, old and young, noble and base, rich and poor, etc.
Nor so only, but here is included also, by the rule of contraryes, the duty of
superiors to their inferiors, that they be kindly affected to them, rule them
in God's fear according to righteousness, and faithfully mind the duties of
their place. Now the duty of Inferiors is only mentioned, because they are the
more likely to fail in their duty, and their neglect is of worse consequence;
Disobedience dissolving and unloosening order and peace, which are the bands of
society, whereas oppression does but strain and gird the ties of government too
close. No Tyranny of the most wicked Prince can be so mischievous and
destructive to the public, as the Rebellion of Subjects, let them pretend
never so much religion for it. The great Interest of society is to obey; since
the resisting of a lawful governor will in the end destroy government it
self, and bring all things into confusion.

THAT THY DAYS MAY BE LONG. Long life is the promised reward of obedience, but
the disobedient shall not live out half their time, but shall be cut off by
some untimely death, and by their seditious actings, and wilful oppositions
forfeit their lives to the Law. The Hebrew (...) in Hiph. Conj. transitiv^
prolongent.
word may be rendered, that they, i.e. thy Father and Mother may prolong or
lengthen thy days; as if the parent's blessing could instate a dutyfull child
into a long life. This is sure that parents at first, and afterward civil
Magistrates had power of life and death, in their familyes and within their own
territories; and so might justly by Capital punishment shorten the lives of the
disobedient.

UPON THE LAND WHICH THE LORD THY GOD GIVES THEE. Here is meant the Land of
promise, which the Israelites were now going to possess, wherefore the
Septuagint call it the good Land; Which (...).
word is now wanting in the Hebrew copy, though possibly expressed at first:
for taking that word in, there are all the Letters of the Alphabet to be found
in the Decalogue, and without it there will be one wanting: And if Moses was
the first Inventor of the Hebrew Letters, as some think, and it is probable, he
being the most ancient writer; it is as probable, that there was a Specimen and
essay of them given in the Commandments, the only speech, which God has by
his own mouth uttered. This part belongs most properly to the Israelites,
wherefore it is added, that the Lord thy God gives thee, but may be extended to
us all. And here are two or three notes in it. upon the Land, that notes that
the loyal and faithful shall not be turned out of his possessions and live an
exiled life in foreign countries, but prolong his days, and live in peace at
home: whereas rebels and traitors forfeit their estates, and loose their
fortunes, by seeking unjustly to greaten them. The Land or the good Land, the
Land of Canaan, notes the Land of thy forefathers, of ancient inheritance, and
a Land abounding with all conveniences of life, to show that obedience shall
possess the ancient demeans of the family, and live in plenty, when the
rebellious shall seek their bread in a strange Land. Which the Lord thy God
gives thee, notes God's particular bounty to the obedient, and that what they
enjoy comes with a blessing; and is the fruit of a promise; it is as if he
should have said, obey thy Father and Mother, and they shall give thee life,
and I will give thee Land. In Deuteronomie are inserted these words, That it
may be well with thee, and that thy days may be long; for otherwise a long
life spent in toil and hardship, exercised with want and misery, is a Curse
rather then a Blessing: and indeed Ab (...) sanitas.
the word, which here signifyes the lengthning of days, has also a
signification of health; for life of it self is not pleasant, but a burden
rather, unless it be attended with those enjoyments and blessings, which make
it comfortable, as Health, Peace, Plenty, Prosperity, etc. And such a life it
is that is here promised, as the reward of obedience.

But it seems in the ordinary economy of Providence to fall out otherwise many
times, when the dutyfull child is caught away with a hasty death, and a Loyal
Subject loses both Life and Lands for his fidelity to his Prince, etc. To
this I answer, That this promise is conditional, as God sees fit, who,
whatsoever he does, does it always for the best, and then if he do not
perform his word, as to the Letter at present, he will be better then his word
hereafter. Those, whom the arrest of death disseizes of an earthly possession,
he instates into a heavenly inheritance, which is indeed the Land of the
living, and the Land of promise, of which Canaan was but a type. The young
Innocent is snatched out of the mother's lap, to be lodged in Father Abraham's
bosom. The Loyal sufferer looses to his advantage, is sequestered into bliss, is
murdered into Immortality, and if he lay down his head, takes up a crown for
it. Everlasting happiness is in the best sense (...) used so often. see Psalm. 21.
length of days. Besides, God may cut him short, who has not failed in his
duty to man, for some disobedience to himself; and he that is guiltless, and
dies Martyr, as to the unjust tribunals of men, may in the account of God's
justice dye as a malefactor: God sometimes reckoning with the transgressors of
his Law, and cutting scores as 'twere with them, depriving them of the reward
of one duty, for the neglect of some other, and washing the stain of a guilty
life, with the blood of an Innocent death. And it is no small comfort to a dying
man, have he been never so great a sinner in his life, that he suffers with a
good conscience, and is permitted in a manner to quit scores with heaven for
his former offenses.

Proceed we now to the sum of the Precept. Thou Inferior whoever thou art,
that art under another's power, or condition, shall give thy superior the due
respect of his place, shall have honorable thoughts of him, shall highly
esteem him, and revear him as an Angel of God; in thy speeches and addresses to
him demean thy self with humility and meekness, and all civil demonstrations of
respect, according to the customs of thy people, giving him the preeminence in
every thing, bearing with and hiding his infirmities; Thou shall not slight his
person, nor think or speak meanly of him; Thou shall be subject to him, and
yield a ready and cheerful obedience to him as to the Lord, in all things, that
are just and lawful, and bear with his humors and his harshness, remembering
that though he be man of like passions with thy self, yet he is in God's stead,
and if he at any time swerve from his rule in commanding, yet do not thou
decline thy duty in obeying; but when he bids thee do any thing, contrary to my
will, carry thy self with submission, and resolve to suffer for a good
conscience rather then to resist, where thou can not with a good conscience
obey, Thou shall hearken to his admonitions, and submit to his corrections, and
shall endeavor by all fair means to give him content; Thou shall not withdraw
or grudge thy obedience, much less shall thou take upon thee, to call him to
account; nor yet shall thou basely serve him in lewd offices, and wicked
designs, so as to be an instrument of his cruelty or his lust, and to flatter
him in an evil way, Thou shall pray for him, and assist him in all his just
undertakings, and shall return him all the good thou can, for that good which
thou receiv'st of him, from the influence of his Authority, or example; Thou
Superior, shall observe the rules of Justice by giving every one their due,
thou shall look faithfully to thy charge, rule with diligence, lay out thy
talents to the best advantage o^ God's glory, and the benefit of thy Brethren;
Thou shall be tender of the concerns of all thy Inferiors, and oblige them with
courtesy and kindness, and study how thou may be most useful to community;
Thou shall not be proud of thy gifts, lift thy self above thy brethren, and
scorn those below thee; Thou shall not be insolent, injurious, nor too harsh
and severe, nor yet too fond and remiss, but keep a mean, so as to gain their
obedience to thy Authority, and their love to thy Person. Thou Child shall
stand in fear, and regard thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother,
and obey thy parents in the Lord; Thou shall not despise them, mock at their
weakness, and with cursed Cham, make merry at their shame, but shall show them
all honor, and do them all service, and with thy virtuous behavior, and
well-doing, cause him that begat thee to rejoice, and her that bare thee to
leap for joy; And when they are old, and their strength fails them, thou shall
provide for them, and see that nothing which they have need of, be wanting;
Thou shall moreover show a singular honor to their person, saluting them upon
thy knee, and often craving their blessing, especially in any business of great
concernment, as choice of life, marriage, etc. And thou Parent shall love and
take care of thy children, and provide fashionably for them, that they may have
a lively^hood, when thou art gone; thou shall breed them up, in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, with sweet methods win them to my fear, and to the love
of virtue; Thou shall not with harshness provoke them to anger, nor yet spare
correction when they offend, or spoil them with indulgence (as Heli did) to
their ruin and thy own sorrow. Thou Subject shall honor and obey the King and
his Ministers, be subject to the higher powers, for conscience sake, the Lord
having set them to be for a terror to evill-doers, Thou shall pay him tribute
and other acknowledgments of thy subjection, according to the Laws and custom
of the country, and in an especial manner make prayers and intercessions for
Kings, and all in authority, that we may under them live a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and honesty; Thou shall not raise sedition, to bring an
odium upon the Magistrates Person, his Authority, or his Council; nor show any
discontent, to the disturbance of public peace, nor take up arms against thy
lawful Sovereign, nor maintain or assist rebellion, nor meddle with those that
are given to change, or any way comply with them, or countenance them in their
unjust usurpations; Thou shall not offer any violence to the King's sacred
Person, but if at any time unrighteous commands are imposed upon thee, have
recourse to thy prayers, and make thy appeals to Heaven, to God the King of
Kings, to whom alone they are accountable, and who will in his due time remove
the oppression, and call the oppressors to an account. And thou Magistrate,
shall govern according to the rules of my word, and the known Laws of the
country; Thou shall judge the fatherless, and regard the widow, and do every
one right; Thou shall take care of both Tables of my Law, and promote the
interests of Religion; Thou shall make wholesome Laws, and see them put in
execution, punish transgressors, reward well-doers, preserve peace and good
order amongst men, Protect thy subjects with the Scepter and the Sword, be
diligent in thy office, and know that thou have a great account to make to him,
by whom Kings reign, who is no respecter of persons; Thou shall not abuse thy
power to license thy own lusts, and become arbitrary, nor oppress thy subjects
with unjust taxes, and insolent carriage; nor yet by a fond clemency endanger
thy Authority, and lessen that reverence which is due to thy place. Ye People,
shall receive my Ministers as my messengers, and Ambassadors from God, and obey
those that are over you, for they watch for your soul's good; and think them
worthy of double honor and S^ (...) may signify.
allowance, who both govern and teach, the Bishops and overseers of the flock,
and own them with all fair respect, who labor amongst you and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and esteem them very dearly for their works sake,
and communicate freely to them in temporals, who impart to you spirituals; ye
shall not slight their sacred function with disgraceful terms, nor rent the
Church with faction and schisms, and heap to your selves teachers, but submit
your selves to all lawful orders and constitutions, and not be carried about
with every puff of doctrine, nor entertain newfangled opinions, and
unwarrantable practices, in the ways of my worship, and Ecclesiastical
Government. And ye Pastors shall look to your selves, and the whole flock, over
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers; ye shall preach in season, and out
of season, ye shall do all for edification, and divide the word aright; ye
shall admonish, exhort, reprove, and be burning as well as shining lights, that
ye may in your lives recommend the power of Godliness; ye shall not Lord it
over your brethren, nor do the work of the Lord carelessly. Thou Servant shall
account thy Master worthy of all honor, and shall serve him with fear and
trembling, with singleness of heart as unto Christ, and shall do him faithful
service. And thou Master shall show kindness forbearing threatenings, knowing
that thy Master also is in Heaven, and shall give thy servant comfortable
maintenance, and shall not defraud the Labourer of his hire, nor keep back thy
servant's wages, and thou shall see to their carriage and govern them in my
fear, that they may become my servants also. Ye Wives be subject to your
Husbands, and Ephesians. 5. 33.
see that you reverence them. Ye Husbands love your wives, as Christ has loved
the Church, and cherish them as your own flesh. Ye young men, rise up before a
gray-head, and have respect to the face of the aged; Hearken to their advice,
and learn by their example. And ye Old men, behave your selves with that
gravity, and wisdom, that ye may gain your selves the reverence of the younger
sort, and be as way-marks for the imitation of posterity. In fine, ye who have
any advantage of learning, wisdom, honor, estate, etc. or any other excellence
above your brethren, so employ it and lay it out to their benefit, that you may
procure honor to your selves, and God may have the glory. To conclude, whoever
thou art, carry thy self with honor and respect to every one, in whom thou
see any part of God's Image, and look on him as thy superior, who has any
gift or ability which thou have not, prefer thy equals, pity and help thy
inferiors.

This Commandment, as was said before, being placed in the middle has an
influence both ways, so as to secure both God's Worship and man's Propriety.
The Magistrates sword must defend the faith, though it may not propagate it;
and if Authority be once trampled upon, every one will do as they did, when
there was no King in Israel, what seems good in their own eyes. When the
hedge of Government is broken down, neither Religion nor Law shall bound us;
all opinions and practices are current, and 'twill be an Usurper's interest to
have the people divided. Lives and Liberties, Estates and Consciences, and all,
lie open to arbit^ary force, as a Prize for him that dares be most Villan. And
this has been England's case in the no less sad then wicked times of Anarchy
and confusion, when damnable Heresies broke forth, numerous sects swarmed up
and down, when there was an intolerable Toleration of all Religions but the
right; when we complied with illegal powers, and were awed by Courts of High
Injustice; when parties bore rule, as false to one another, as they were
injurious to the public; when our sins grew up and multiplied with our
calamityes, and God's judgments, and our provocations improved one another;
when our Oaths of Allegiance were eluded with the Solemn cousenage of a League,
and sinful combination; when we were bewildered with the witch-crafts of
Rebellion, and knew not the things which belonged to our peace, but pretended
to reform abuses by destroying the offices; when with tumults and Libels we
drove our Dread Sovereign from his home, raised a war against him, chased him
as a Partridge over the mountains, and offered violence to the Lord's anointed;
when with undutyful hands we seized his Sacred Person, confined him to prisons,
and vexed his righteous soul; when we (for 'twas our sins did it, and we are
all Accessory) by a villainous mockery of Justice brought him to his trial, and
sentenced him, and (which is more than our posterity will have the heart to
believe done, though we could find hands to do it) barbarously murdered our
Gracious King at his own Palace-gate, adding all the direful circumstances of
aggravation to that hellish impiety; when ever since our Iosiah's death, our
great sin has been our punishment, we have suffered in acting, and been
constantly exercised with unconstancy of wicked changes; when Loyalty has been
persecuted as the greatest Crime, and many have shortened their days for their
faithfulness to their Prince; and after that our Crown, and Head too, was
fallen; when the Father of our Country lived in exile, and our Mother the
Church mourned in private, and was sed with the bread of tears; when Sacred
Orders were despised, and laborers thrust themselves into the harvest, to cut
down dignityes and profits, root and branch; when the Holy Ordinances were
dispensed by the Ignorant, and Civil Offices administered by the Base; when
there was no regard had to the Ancient and the Wise, to the Noble and the
Learned, but contempt was powered out upon Princes. In short, when we have thus
rebelled against King and Priest, and cast off Authority to purchase a freedom
for schism and mischief; what need have we hereafter to pray fervently with the
Church? Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

But as our Litanyes are requisite to deplore the national breach of this
Commandment, and deprecate it for the future; so are our Thanksgivings due to
Almighty God, for his wonderful deliverance of us, from those great in
conveniences and sins, we labored under, and for the miraculous Restoration
of our Dread Sovereign to his Rights, and of us to our Libertyes, which are
wrapped up in his Safety: And now that the Dread Father of our Country, and
the Reverend Fathers of the Church are returned to execute their Offices, and
to govern us with the sword of Justice, and the sword of the Spirit, and that
we have been sufficiently convinced, by the twenty years discipline of a Civil
War, that the grand Interest of the People is Obedience; let us seek the Peace
of our Jerusalem and our Sion, and pray that God would confound the devices of
all Rebels and Schismatics, whom these late mercyes have not converted, and
disappoint their expectations.

The sixth Commandment.
The fifth directs the offices of Relations, the rest show the general duties
that we ow to all men in common; and they are all set down negatively to forbid
all violence and injury, that being in it is very nature destructive to the
constitution of societyes, which cannot be preserved and managed, without
forbearance of wrongs; for Justice is in the Politic, as Health is in the
Natural body, which keeps every part in its due temper, so that none have too
much or too little; but Injury diseases the civil state, and will, if effectual
remedies be not applied, in short time bring it to dissolution. Now the
greatest wrong that can be offered to our selves or our neighbor is in the
life, that being the support of all blessings and comforts, if it be not it
self one, since they are but leased out to us for life, and depart with it.
Nothing survives life, and death by making an end of the person puts a period
to all his contents and joys. Wherefore the security of life is first provided
for, and set immediately after the fifth Commandment, as the Magistrate's
greatest care; since, were our lives exposed to the wild passions of men, Kings
would want subjects, and God worshippers, and two or three mighty hunters would
depopulate the earth. To kill a man is made therefore the greatest crime, as
that which cannot be made amends for (whereas for other losses there may be
some reparation) and as a sign of mortal hatred, which can be content with
nothing but the destruction and annihilation of the thing hated, and is the
greatest breach of Charity.

THOU SHALL NOT KILL, or MURDER. Thou shall endeavor by all fair and lawful
means to preserve thy own and thy neighbor's life; Thou shall not lay violent
hands on thy self, nor bring thy self rashly into danger of thy life, by
tempting providence, by surfeit, or any other sinful or perilous course; Thou
shall not neglect thy self, nor deny thy body fit sustenance and refreshment,
and for the preservation and recovery of thy health, take the advice of the
learned, and honor the Physician; Thou shall defend thy self from injurious
assaults, and make a stout resistance, when force is offered; Thou shall esteem
and set by thy life, and not part with it upon mean and paultry terms, but act
like man, and give a fair account how thou quit'st the stage, and think no
sorry affront or idle abuse deserves the hazard of so precious a thing, or be
so fond of thy reputation, as to clear it with thy blood; and yet when just and
honorable occasions call for thy life, such as are ^he testimony to my truth,
the assistance of thy King, and defense of thy country, thou shall fairly
venture it, and not spare thy life to death, but lay it down for thy brethren;
nor shall thou make self preservation an argument for thy cowardice, since the
Rev. 21. 8.
fearful as well as the dogs, shall be excluded my Kingdom; nor shall thou out
of self love basely sneak and withdraw thy self from thy duty; nor favor thy
self in my service, but love me with all thy strength, and keep thy body under,
and practice austerityes of self-denial, so as to mortify the flesh, not to
procure thy death; Thou shall in like manner do all that lies in thy power, to
maintain thy neighbor's life, and safety; Thou shall not slight him and pass
him by in his distress, but give him seasonable help; Thou shall not out of
passion or thirst of revenge, with sword, or poison, or any other instrument of
death, make him away; for he bears my image, and he that spils man's blood, by
man shall his blood be spilt; Thou shall not beat, nor strike, or any other
ways misuse him, or do any thing to grieve him; Thou shall not hate him in
thy heart, or bear him any grudge, nor owe him spite; for he that hates his
brother is a murderer; Thou shall not vex him with reproachful words, nor jeer
him with upbraiding language, or scornful behavior, to sadden his heart, and
alter his countenance; Thou shall be harmless in thy carriage, and meek, and
gentle, and courteous, and civil, and obliging; Thou shall not do or think any
body any hurt, or so much as wound them with a bitter word; Thou shall not
break out into unruly and boisterous passions, nor be angry without a cause;
Thou shall take wrongs rather then give, nor yet be of so stupid and sheepish a
patience, as to bring a contempt upon thy self, which may make thee useless, or
to let my glory suffer, but on this occasion to boil over with a generous zeal,
and vindicate my name; Thou shall not be too ^igorous and harsh, of a fierce
and cruel, of a dogged and sullen, or of a peevish and froward disposition, but
be mild even in thy corrections and punishments, and pity the person, when
thou chastisest the vice; Thou shall not be strict in asserting thy own right,
and prosecute thy interest to the utmost advantage, but yield of thy right, and
be content to sit down with the loss, rather then engage in quarrel and venture
the loosing of peace; Thou shall not only refrain injurious actions thy self,
but shall do thy best to hinder others too, in their violent attempts; Thou
shall exercise a just severity upon capital offenders, and take heed of
licensing or encouraging villainy, by a fond gentleness; Thou shall for God's
glory, and thy neighbor's safety, venture upon brave hazardous actions, and in
the confidence of thy honest intentions defy danger, yet thou shall not rashly
and presumptuously cast thy self away; nor shall thou upon slight occasion, or
a private account, give or entertain a challenge, and in the wicked folly of
duelling venture thy death and damnation together; but when the Magistrates
authority has armed thee against a publik enemy, whether a foreign Invader or
a domestic Rebel, upon just and necessary reasons, let the goodness of thy
cause embolden thee, and with Christian courage dispute the Interests of
Religion and thy Country, and make not power or pay, but peace and settlement,
the end of thy warlike undertakings; Lastly, thou shall be very tender of every
one's life, as of thy own, and shall not do any thing purposely to prejudice
another's life, or his comforts, and shall be wary of doing ought, which may
indirectly, or by casualty, either deprive him of it, or imbitter it to him;
but shall by thy mild behavior and offices of friendship and kindness, help to
make his life pleasant and lasting.

And now when we do but think, how peccant the Nation has been in this
Command; how we have murdered one another for hire, and improved the heats of
a civil war, with private animosityes, with a blind zeal and the rage of a
mistaken conscience, thinking we have done God good service by sacrificing one
another; How we have pretended public justice to our ambitious designs, and
pulled all down that stood in our way to greatness; How we entitled our selves
to Saint-ship by binding Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron,
and accounted it our duty to God to kill and murder our fellow subjects, and
imbrew our hands in the blood of our Sovereign; How still we are given to
quarrel, and are loath to lay down the cudgels of contention, but are ready to
justify a wicked Cause, to new troubles, and a second trial of war, and by our
discontents tempt providence to remove our peace; How zealous and industrious
we show our selves in promoting faction and making parties; How we sharpen our
tongues and our pens, to shoot bitter words against one another; How peevish
and sullen, how easily provoked, and how hardly reconciled, how eager upon
slight occasion to break peace, and part with charity, and about things
indifferent how not indifferent we are; have we not very great cause to pray,
as the Church teaches us? Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to
keep this Law.

The seventh Commandment.
The sixth secures life, This orders the preservation of chastity; they both
forbid any wicked attempt upon our neighbor's person, That by curbing anger,
This by bridling lust; That prohibits the killing, This the defiling of our
neighbor; and indeed though Life be the first considerable, yet Chastity is a
greater care, seeing that the abuse of the body by uncleanness draws along with
it a greater danger to the injured person, then murder, as that, which being
commonly attended with consent, makes the sufferer accessory, and wrongs the
soul no less then the body. And possibly some such reason there might be for
the LXX. Int. Romans ed. vid. Mar. 10. 19. Luc. 18. 20. Romans 1^. 9.
transposing of these Commandments in some copyes, and placing this of
adultery and that of theft before murder; the staining or impoverishing one,
being as bad as killing one out of the way, and as good have no life at all, as
to live in disgrace or want.

THOU SHALL NOT COMMIT ADULTERY. Thou shall not through lust or intemperance or
any wanton excess, abuse thy own, or thy neighbor's body, or break the rules
of chastity, but shall with great care keep a holy and a clean conversation,
and denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and unlawful pleasures, preserve
thy self pure from all filthy pollutions of the flesh; Thou shall be moderate
in the use of all lawful pleasures and recreations, and order them to serious
ends, to make thee more cheerful in the service of me, and the performance of
the duties of life; Thou shall not greedily devour the creatures I provide for
thy use, and fill thy self with meats and drinks, to indispose thee for prayer
or business; Thou shall avoid surfeting, and drunkenness, and gluttony, nor yet
pinch thy self with unreasonable abstinence or sordid thrift, but allow thy
self honest and suitable refection and recreation; Thou shall not be too nice
and dainty in the choice of food, and other treatments of thy self, but content
thy self with that which is wholesome, and agreeable to thy condition; Thou shall
make a sober and a temperate use of my gifts and allowances, and be watchful
and jealous over thy self at food, in company, in thy delights and pastimes,
and at thy leisures, that the tempter may not take advantage of thee; Thou
shall be careful of thy habit and attire, that it be decent and comely not
garish and immodest, that it be fitted for warmth, to hide nakedness, not to
show pride; Thou shall in thy gesture and behavior compose thy self to a
cheerful modesty, so as to show civility and courtesy, not to discover
wantonness, or invite lust; Thou shall shake of sloth, and take heed of
idleness, as that which betrays to such temptations, and breeds and nurses
lust; Thou shall not too much indulge thy self to sleep, but take a competent
share, which may be convenient for thy health, and employment, to repair nature
not to besot her; Thou shall keep thy vessel in holiness, and forbear all gross
uncleanness; Thou shall not wrong thy neighbor's bed, nor offer violence or
enticement to any one; Thou shall not use, nor allow the use of stews, nor
frequent places of ill fame; Thou shall not burn with unnatural lusts, nor
practice secret villainy, or give thy self up to dishonorable passions, and
beastly sensuality, but learn from the examples of my vengeance to stand in aw
of my judgments; for whoremongers and adulterers God will judge: and thou
shall be holy as I am holy, and pure that thou may see God; Thou shall avoid
filthy communication and foolish speech, and idle jesting, but have thy
discourse seasoned with salt of discretion, that it may not corrupt good
manners, but tend to edification; Thou shall not look upon any one to lust, nor
reach out a desire in thy heart after the appearances of beauty; Thou shall not
be wanton in thy apparel or demeanor, but behave thy self with bashfulness and
with modesty, complying with civil and fashionable customs; Thou shall be ware
of meetings, shows, plays, sonnets, dances, and all other occasions, which may
prove invitements to ill, for fear thou fall into the snare of the Devil; Thou
shall in private have awful thoughts of my presence, and when necessity, or
chance, or duty, brings thee forth into the public and the sight of men, so
behave thy self, with that circumspection, that thou may not get any soil
from converse, nor disimprove thy self; but better thy company, obliging them,
with all civil respect, and yet with the gravity of thy carriage checking vain
thoughts, and hindering the first opportunityes of ill; it being easier, to
master lust in its beginning, then to prevent it is growth; Yet if thou can
not contain thy self in the limits of a single life, thou shall in my fear,
make use of that remedy, which I have appointed, and shall pray to me to direct
thee in thy choice, that thou may have a woman of understanding; Thou shall
not rashly or for carnal satisfaction enter into the holy state of matrimony,
but for my glory, and mutual comfort, and shall look upon marriage as an
honorable institution; Thou shall not place thy affections, where my law and
rules of honesty forbid it, and shall have a reverence for thy near alliances,
and take heed of yoaking thy self unequally; Thou shall faithfully perform the
marriage-covenant, and have a loving and sweet respect to one another persons,
a quiet and affectionate care for one another good, this society having been
the blessed ordinance of Paradise and being the most solemn engagement of
friendship. To conclude, in whatsoever estate of life whether single or
married, let thy conversation be clean, and free from all pollution, both of
body, soul and spirit, and be not fashioned to the world, but keep thy self
unspotted from it.

To reflect upon our selves; we must confess our selves very guilty of the
breach of this Commandment, who are so full of uncleanness; who serve diverse
lusts and pleasures, and are lovers of pleasure more then of God; who make
provision for the flesh, study our ease and carnal content, and give our selves
up wholly to the lust of the eyes; to the lust of the flesh, and the pride of
life; who pamper our bodies and starve our souls; who drink wine to excess, and
sit at it till it inflame us; who spend our time in chambering and wantonness,
in sports and plays, with that constancy, as if recreation were the duty of
our life, and we had nothing else to do in this world, but to take our pastime
in it; who follow wicked counsel and lewd practices, and boast of sins many
times we do not commit, who are immodest in our attire, wanton in our carriage,
filthy in our discourse, abominable and loath-some in our actions, without
shame of sin or fear of judgment; who wallow in all sensuality, and study
fleshly delights; who take up affected garbs, and imitate every foolish
fashion; who think we can never serve our selves enough* nor our God little
enough; who are not ashamed of the appearances of evil, but account our shame
our glory, and think it our gallantry, that we dare seem lewd; who have forgot
modesty, and know not what Temperance means; who take marriage, for an
opportunity of sinning with a greater safety, and use it as a market, rather
then an institution of God's, and besides those purposes, for which it was
appointed; who would willingly have no other God but our belly, no other
religion then Epicurism, no other business or study but our ease and pleasure;
so that we have too just an occasion to make use of the Churches words, Lord
have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

The eighth Commandment.
The sixth and seventh secure our persons, This our goods, and is the fence of
propriety; for estates are not to lie in common, but are bounded with Laws,
that every one may know his own. The seventh forbids the community of wives,
This of other possessions: And indeed the breach of this Command is the great
disorder of society, and the main drift of Laws is to secure estates to the
owners, and to judge of titles, and to punish fraud and cousenage; And the
various condition of men, as it serves to set forth the wisdom of God's
Providence, in contriving suitable accommodations to every family and person,
so it encourages industry, seeing every one may by the labor of his hands
provide for himself, and exspect a success according to his diligence; whereas
were things put in an equality, or laid up in one common stock, the idle would
live upon the labors of the painful, and he that were strongest would invade
other's right, and make himself master of the greatest share: Well then has
this Commandment provided, that men may not think to thrive by idleness or
unjust means.

THOU SHALL NOT STEAL. Thou shall do thy neighbor no wrong in his estate, but
in all worldly concernments observe such a rule of justice and equity in thy
dealing, that thou neither injure him nor thy self; Thou shall not directly nor
indirectly play the thief, by taking away that which belongs to another, either
privily and without his knowledge, or openly and by force, without his consent;
Thou shall not go shares with thieves not consent to them; Thou shall restore
what thou find'st to the right owner, nor conceal and keep it by thee; Thou
shall not take bribes, nor set justice to sale; Thou shall not inveagle
persons, nor steal goods; Thou shall be faithful in thy stewardship, and just
in all thy accounts; Thou shall perform thy trusts, and be upright in thy
place; Thou shall not meddle with any thing dedicated to my service, and the
use of the Church, or think sacrilege an improvement of estate; Thou shall not
remove the ancient bound and land mark, nor encroach upon thy neighbor's
possession; Thou shall not defraud the labourer of his hire, nor detain his
wages, which he has earned with his sweat; Thou shall be true and just in all
thy dealings; in buying and selling thou shall consider and prize things
according to their worth; Thou shall not cheat and overreach in bargains by
putting of false wares, or using false weights and measures, by raising prices,
and setting up monopolyes; Thou shall not borrow, or take up upon trust,
without intention to pay; Thou shall not oppress the poor nor exact more of
him, then he is well able to part with; Thou shall make punctual restitution of
any thing received, and be exact in the discharge of thy debts, and in all
engagements use conscience; Thou shall not purchase preferment in the Church,
nor buy or sell places of justice or public trust, which are to be rewards of
merit, not the acquists of money; Thou shall be grateful to thy benefactors,
acknowledge their courtesies, and to thy ability make requital; Thou shall not
study thy own gain alone, but be helpful to thy poor neighbor, and be moved
with charity toward him, lending and not hoping for any thing back, forbearing
him and sometimes forgiving, if thy condition will permit, and his require it;
Thou shall not put thy money out to (...) foenus a (...) momo^dit. (...) foenns.
biting usury, so as to oppress and disable the debtor; Thou shall honestly
return any pledge or pawn, which is put into thy hand; Thou shall do good with
thy estate, and forget not to communicate, and to distribute; Thou shall be
merciful as I am merciful, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting
the sick, relieving the prisoner, and showing kindness to strangers; Thou shall
be liberal, free hearted and open handed, in thy alms-doings, and upon
occasions of p^blick necessity or design; Thou shall not be niggardly or sordid
in thy way of life, or hard-hearted or uncharitable, nor yet unthrifty, and
lavish, so as to disable thy estate; Thou shall not trouble thy self with
unquiet thoughts, and carking cares for this life, what thou shall eat, and
wherewith all thou shall be clothed; Thou shall not be covetous to gather
wealth any how, and deny thy self those enjoyme^ts, which God has allowed
thee; Thou shall know how to want, and how to abound; Thou shall not murmur and
repine at God's disposals, but submit to his wisdom and trust his providence,
and rest fully satisfied with thy present condition, assuring thy self that a
contended mind, and an estate well got, (be it never so little) is better then
much riches; Thou shall not be too sparing, nor too profuse, but thriftly
husband thy means, that they may hold out to secure thee against want, and to
enable thee for Charity; Thou shall not live an idle life, nor take ill
courses, and follow dishonest ways of get, as cheating, gaming, etc. but shall
take pains in some honest calling, and shall learn to labor and get thy own
living, in that state of life, wherein God shall place thee, that thou may
eat the labor of thy hands, and it may be well with thee; that thou may
provide things fashionable for thy self and thy relations, and may have
wherewith to exercise Charity toward them that are in want.

Let us now take a view of our selves, how our carriage has answered this
Command. Was ever more injustice and illegal oppression, then of late years
amongst us? Has not covetousness been the root of all our evils? Have not the
possessions of the Crown and the Church been made the spoils of War, and the
reward of villainy? Have not men of quiet spirits been rendered Delinquents for
their estates, and their greatest crime been their wealth; when 'twas enough to
make one Malignant, to have any thing to loose, and the great art of the
Usurpers was to secure their fears and jealousies, by satisfying their avarice,
and make good their title to government by getting the riches of the people in
their power? What plundring and pillaging, what rifling and robberies have been
practiced? what Sequestrations, Compositions, Decimations, Contributions, and
other unheard of injuries and insolences have been Committed upon the loyal
gentry, and poor commonalty? what havoc has been made of Sacred things, and
how has Sacrilege been justified by her children? when Intruders have been
bold to expostulate with God, and quarrel the Justice of man, that they are
forced to give place to the right owners, and restore unjust possessions; How
have the noble and the learned been turned out by force, of their ancient
demeans, and just preferments, to seek their bread? How have the old bounds
been removed, and the public coffers exhausted? How are great estates amassed
by cheat and cou^enage, and private men swollen up with ill-got wealth? How is
charity neglected, hospitality shut out of doors, and the love to the poor
grown cold? How many idle and dishonest ways of living are kept on foot? How
does the number of Beggars daily increase to the shame of authority, that
neither imployes the able, nor relieves the weak? How miserable and close are
men upon honest designs? How profuse and lavish upon their lusts? How do we
murmur at the disposals of providence, and how ready are we with our private
discontents to disturb the public peace? What need then have we to cry out
with the Church, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
Law.

The ninth Commandment.
The eighth requires truth in our dealings, This in our discourse and speech;
That provided for our estate and fortune, This for our credit and reputation;
That secures our Goods, This our Good name, which is of deerer concern, then
any other possession; for a good name is better then life it self: Murder,
Adultery and Theft are forbidden in the other three, This prohibits a Lie,
which is the cloak and cover of all other sins, and likely accompanyes them,
especially this last to a proverbial observation, A Liar and a Thief.

THOU SHALL NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS. Non eris testis mendax.
Thou shall not be a lying witness, says the Vulgar, i.e. Thou shall not make
or tell a lie concerning or against thy neighbor. The Greek doubles it, (...).
Thou shall not falsely witness a false testimony, taking in the distinction of
a lie into material and formal. To speak an untruth, and say that which in it
self is not so, though I perhaps may think it so, is a material Lie; for though
I am true to my own thought by speaking as I think, yet I am not right to the
thing: this is a false testimony. Again, to speak contrary to my own sense,
though possibly the thing I say be true, is a formal Lie; for though I be
mistaken, and the thing be otherwise then I think it is, yet, if I speak
otherwise then I think, I lie, and this is to witness falsely. So then we have a
double care lies upon us, to speak according to the thing, and according to our
thought, when our words agree with our thoughts, and our thoughts agree with
the things themselves; when the mind represents the object aright, and the
tongue does as truly report the mind. The Hebrew, as if it meant mainly the
concerns of truth in judicial proceedings, has it thus; (...) Non respondebis.
Thou shall not answer as a witness of falsehood, to wit, when the Magistrate
puts a question to thee, and requires to know the truth. But the meaning of it
is to be enlarged to all affairs; and so in Deuteronomie it is expressed, (...).
a witness of vanity, which implies rash censure, reproaches, and vain
speeches, etc.

AGAINST THY NEIGHBOR, or for thy neighbor, in thy neighbor's cause and
behalf, etc. for the (...) in, cum, per, contra, etc.
preposition carries a great latitude of sense; And it is no less a wrong to
Truth and Justice to speak a Lie in favor, as to speak it out of malice^; and
it is Justice and Truth which are considered in Gods Commands, more then
interest and benefit. Who our neighbor is, our Savior in his Parable has told
us, all mankind, all that we have or may have to do with; whether they live
near or far off, though God does allow in some cases, degrees of charity,
according to Relation, neighbor hood, country, etc.

The meaning of this Commandment, is this. Thou shall in all thy discourse
take heed to Truth, and speak according to thy conscience, nor shall thou
conceal what thou know, when my glory or the benefit of thy neighbor
requires it; Thou shall not give in a false evidence, nor plead a wrong cause,
nor favor injustice, nor tell a lie to advantage; Thou shall not knowingly say
that, which thou think to be false, with a purpose to deceive others, nor
shall thou be over confident in affirming what thou art not sure of; Thou shall
not basely dissemble, and pretend one thing and mean another, for God is the
God of truth; Thou shall not speak or think ill of any one in thy heart, by
entertaining evil surmises, and taking up a reproach, or ill report against
him; Thou shall not be curious to spy out his faults, nor critical and
censorious, nor shall thou slander him with thy tongue, or speak ill of him
behind his back, and flatter him to his face; but thou shall make the best of
his actions, and put the fairest interpretation upon his carriage; Thou shall
speak all the good of him thou know and cover his failings, believe and hope
the best, and not give ear to all thou hear, and in all thy converse show
thy self ingenuous and open breasted, to think no evil of him, and to
acknowledge what thou see good in him, and be as tender of his reputation as
of thy own; Thou shall not be double-minded, nor hasty in thy promises, nor
false in thy purposes, but sincere and constant, that thy sayings and doings
may agree; Thou shall bridle thy tongue, and avoid foolish speaking, and let no
rotten communication come out of thy mouth, but with steady gravity weigh thy
words aforehand, and speak to edification; Thou shall not discover secrets
committed to thy trust, nor vainly babble of every thing thou know, nor yet
conceal necessary truths, but be faithful and trusty in thy silence, and
discreet in thy speech; Thou shall not be churlish, of difficult address, and
hard to be spoke with, nor yet full of insignificant complement and artificial
craft; but shall show thy self courteous and affable, ready to hear and to
answer; Thou shall not be clownish and rude in thy converse, nor yet act the
buffoon by abusing Scripture, or jeering thy betters, or other foolish
drollery, but use civil and cheerful language, and according to thy company and
occasion fit thy discourse; Thou shall not be overforward and magisterial in
finding faults, nor yet cowardly and fearful of displeasing, but tell thy
neighbor freely of his sin, when thy duty requires it of thee, and opportunity
invites; Thou shall not impudently proclaim thy sin, and brag of thy evil
doings, nor be too confident in boasting of thy gifts, but leave it rather to a
stranger to commend thee; nor yet (to shift duty, or out of vain glory) speak
meanly of thy self, and lessen thy endowments, but shall put a just value upon
thy self and thy parts, that they may be useful; and be wanting in no fair and
modest way to keep up thy credit, and maintain thy reputation. Above all, thou
shall by a blameless conversation endeavor to keep a good conscience before
God, and a good name among men, and do those things which may make thee well
spoken of; And yet thou shall not be over fond neither of thy reputation, so as
to affect applause, but design rather to live to conscience then to same, and
whilst thou dischargest thy duty, not to look on good report as thy reward, nor
to be discouraged by evil report from doing good, and to mind more what thou
do, then what others say or think of thee, and refer thy self to God, who
sees in secret, and will make righteous judgment.

If we call our selves to an account for this Commandment, and say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no Truth in us. How has Truth failed
amongst us? How have our Prophets, who should have been the Ministers of truth,
prophesied lies, in the Name of the Lord, calling good bad, and bad good, and
pretended the Lord sent them, when he sent them not? How have our Courts of
Justice been filled with falsehoods, and iniquity been enacted by a Law? How
have false witnesses and wicked Judges rose up, and sentenced the righteous,
and condemned the innocent? How has Justice been perverted to wrong ends, and
Law been made an instrument of oppression? How have we in this Hypocritical age
lied and dissembled to one another, and spoken with a Psalm. 12. 3. (...).
heart and a heart, with flattering lips and a deceitful tongue? How have we
flattered the wicked, whom God hated, and slandered the footsteps of the
righteous? How disingenuous are we? how quick-sighted to spy moats in others
eyes, and not see the beams in our own? How apt to magnify our selves, and
think meanly of others? How ready to believe every flying report, and to take
all things that another does in the worst sense? How little trust or honesty to
be met with? How perfidious and false, how cunning and close, how ill-natured
and sullen have most men been? With what starched gravi^y, and pretenses of
sanctity have we imposed upon one another? What vain babbling and filthy talk,
obscenity and scurrility, are abroad in the world? How forward are we to
censure others, to speak the worst of every body, and to find fault with our
superiors, and meddle with things that concern us not? How do we prize the
commendation of men, and yet slight conscience, and cannot endure to be spoken
ill of, nor yet be at the pains to do well? How highly do we esteem
reputation, and value a good name, and yet care not our selves to be good, and
lead a blameless life free from great offenses? Lord have mercy upon us, and
incline our hearts to keep this Law.

All the other Commandments do more immediately order the outward man, the
first and the tenth look inward, and regulate the thoughts and the desires. The
first Commandment is the groundwork o^ Religion, and the tenth the top-stone
of Morality; That injoyning the Fear of God, and This requiring Contentedness
and self-denial. Atheism affronts the Worship of God, and Covetousness
disorders the Society of Men; That will acknowledge no God, and This will have
no Neighbor. Wherefore it is well placed at the bottom of the second table as
the Master-sin, the great enemy of Charity, and that which all the other
transgressions resolve themselves into; The other precepts indeed hold thy hand
that thou may do thy neighbor no wrong; This holds thy heart that thou
may wish him none. Here is the sin forbidden, Thou shall not Covet: and the
object particularly expressed either for profit or pleasure, Thy Neighbor's
house, his wife, his man servant, his maid, his ox and his ass; and then
generally proposed, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

THOU SHALL NOT COVET or desire. This strikes at inordinate affections, at
concupiscence, which is that root of bitterness; Thou shall not out of envy to
thy neighbor, or out of love to thy self (for so one of the words in
Deuteronomie signifies, (...) in Hithp. Conj reciproca.
Thou shall not desire to thy self;) desire any thing away from him.

THY NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE, his convenience of habitation, the place of his abode,
where he has pitched his tent for his security, and gathered the comforts of
his life about him; be it a fairer or stronger building, seated in a better
air, encompassed with better neighbors, and furnished with better commodities
of life.

THOU SHALL NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOR'S WIFE. This is not a distinct command from
the former, for it is the act not the object which makes the sin; and so the
Romans 13. 9.
Apostle quotes it, Thou shall not covet; and it is plain, that House and Wife
are not meant for several precepts, though the one be coveted out of Avarice,
the other out of Lust; for here follow other things in the former way of
coveting; as, the Ox and the ass: but for particular instances only, the
enumertaion therefore ending with an etc. and all that is thy Neighbor's. The
House is reckoned first, and then the housekeeper, the Wife, to teach the man
that he must first provide a livelihood, and way of subsistence, before he
think of a wife; and to put the woman in mind, that she ought to be a
Hous-wife, not to be a gadder abroad or live at random, but to be the stay of
the family. In Deuteronomie the wife is mentioned first and so by the
Septuagint here, as the Mistress of the House, and one that is not to be
reckoned as a part of possession, but as the man's partner in all his fortune,
and governesse of his affairs. The wife then is not to be desired, for her
beauty, for her portion, for her discretion, etc. The House and Wife are a man's
particular choice; the House his castle, and the Wife of his bosom, the delight
of his eyes and the joy of his heart. It Is most injurious therefore to covet
these. The Samaritan here, (...).
and the Greek make mention of his field, and the Syrick of his vineyard too,
the one for bread and herbage, the other for drink, i.e. Thou shall not covet
any part of his revenue: Men's estates lying generally in houses and lands, and
in former times, in cattle too and servants, wherefore they are also expressed
by name,

NOR HIS MANSERVANT, that tills his ground, that looks to his cattle, that
waits upon his person, and manages his affairs, in whatsoever condition he
serve him; Thou shall not desire him for his fidelity, for his strength, or for
his wit, or any other good quality thou hear of him; for this would be to
disable thy neighbor, and take his right hand from him.

NOR HIS MAIDSERVANT, that looks to the house, that makes provision, that
gives her attendance within doors, and minds the business of the family, under
her Mistresses government and direction; Thou shall not cover her for her care,
or her diligence, or her prudence, or any other good quality; for this would
take away his wives right hand, and make her cares toilsome; much less shall
thou desire her out of lust, for this would bring an infamy and reproach upon
thy Neighbors house.

NOR HIS OX, which helps him in the tillage of his ground, NOR HIS ASS, which
helps him in carriage of burdens: for this would be to lay a load of drudgery
upon the servants, and disappoint the culture of his field and vineyard. The
Greek adds, nor any of his cattle, for they are to maintain his house.

NOR ANY THING THAT IS THY NEIGHBOR'S. This includes every thing else, Moneys,
Jewels, Raiment, etc. Whatsoever he has, be it of great or small concernment,
whether it be for his profit or his delight; Thou shall not meddle with it in
thy thoughts nor hanker after it in thy desires.

The Sum of all may be this. Thou shall not think it enough to do thy
neighbor no wrong in word or deed, but thou shall love him and wish him well
in thy heart; Thou shall not covet any thing that is his, but shall regulate
thy affections, and set bounds to thy thoughts and desires; Thou shall subdue
all carnal lusts, and evil concupiscences, that thou may be sanctified
throughout both in body, soul and spirit, and may be led by no unruly
passions; Thou shall refrain thy appetite, and keep it within the rules of
right reason, the necessityes of nature, and the appointments of God's Law, so
as to be moderate in thy desires, and enjoyments of meat and drink, of ease,
and sleep, and all lawful pleasures; Thou shall gather in thy affections, and
bind them up with my fear; Thou shall not hate thy brother, nor yet love him
with that sondness, as to honor him above me; Thou shall not love the world,
nor the things of the world, nor ingross all thy love to thy self; Thou shall
take heed of all unchaste love, and wanton dalliance, but thou shall love thy
neighbor with unfaigned Charity, and make after whatsoever things are good,
and of good report; Thou shall not give thy self to immoderate joy, or to over
much melancholy; Thou shall not rejoice at any ones misfortunes, nor be
grieved at his well-doing, or look upon him with an evil eye. But thou shall
keep an even and composed spirit, equally tempered to joy and sadness, that
thou may rejoice with them that rejoice and weep with them that weep, that
Iam. 5. 13.
thou may in thy grievances pray, and in thy mirth sing Psalms; Thou shall
not be too confident nor yet too distrustful of thy self, neither shall thou
place thy trust in man, nor too much stand in fear of him, seeing his breath is
in his nostrils: But thou shall hold so even a balance betwixt thy hopes and
fears, that thou may in Charity endure all things, and hope all things, and
that thou may walk with care and circumspection, and set thy heart upon thy
way; Thou shall not break out into passions, upon slight occasion, or study
revenge, but shall keep in thy anger, and when my glory calls for it, employ it
in zeal and sin not; Thou shall cleanse thy heart, the fountain of actions,
denying all ungodly lusts, mortifying the desires of the flesh, wrestling with
temptations, and fighting the good fight against thy three grand enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the Devil; Thou shall not nuzzle thy self in carnal
security, and give thy self to idleness, neglecting thy prayers and thy duties,
and opening the door to temptation, and fatning thy heart for destruction; Thou
shall strive against the first suggestions of thy lust, and shall crush the
cokatrice in the egg, before vanity have got the dominion over thee; Thou shall
withstand the evil one, that he may fly from thee, that having done all thou
may stand; Thou shall not entertain ill thoughts with delight; nor roll the
sweet morsel under thy tongue; Thou shall not give consent to the wicked
enticements of thy own flesh, but arm thy self with holy resolutions; Thou
shall do thy utmost endeavor to root out all evil concupiscence, and to keep
that noisome puddle of original corruption, that body of death which thou
carryest about with thee, from streaming and breaking forth, into inordinate
desires, irregular words or actions, whereby God is offended, or thy neighbor
injured; and lastly, thou shall so bound thy appetite, and keep it within the
limits of that condition wherein providence has placed thee, that thou may
without envying thy neighbor or desiring any thing that is his, quietly rest
satisfied with thy own estate, and carefully mind the duties of thy calling,
knowing that contentedness with what a man has, is both the great duty of
Christian Religion, and the greatest felicity of this life.

That we may inquire into our selves, it has been plain by our actions, how
full of concupiscence our hearts have been, when the Lusts of this Age have
been as wild, and the practices as loose, as the Opinions; and men's minds have
been as free to covet as they have been to think; when appetite has been
boundless, and being goaded by ambition, has rambled over all Sacred and Civil
Rights, and left nothing untouched that belonged to God or man, which the
covetousness of wicked hearts could reach at; when we have coveted God's House
as well as our neighbor's, and made conscience of nothing that might improve
our estates; when instead of Self-denial, which is the principle of
Christianity, Self-preservation has been set up, and Interest made our Idol;
when we have been so far discontented at our present condition, that we have
overrun all orders, and to mend our private fortunes have ruined the public;
when we walk disorderly, and are immoderate in the use of our pleasures, and
are taken up with the love of the world, and impure affections, and cannot
relish the things of God; when we cannot endure one another, and require that
of others we would not allow them, and set our selves at irreconcilable
distances; when we indulge our selves in carnal joys, and have no compassion
for our suffering Brethren; when our hopes depended on an arm of flesh, and the
fear of man deterred us from our duty, so that we would not trust God for our
delivery in the performance of our duty; when every small thing puts us into
passion, and in our zeal we design a revenge on the person, more then a
reformation of his vice; when we follow the guidance of a deluded conscience,
and mistake both covetousness and ambition for zeal; when we prefer public
mischief, before our own disappointments, and had rather Church and State
should be endangered then our design should miscarry; when we hug temptations,
and make much of our lusts, and lull them on the pillows of ease and security;
when we wish for things unlawful, and take unlawful courses to get them; when
all our desires are let out for carnal satisfactions, and we make it the great
business of our lives to provide for our content, and yet can never be
contented; When by our covetousness and evil concupiscences we have thus
broken, not only this, but all Gods Laws and Commandments, we may very well
desire God's pardon for what is past, and his assistance for the time to come,
in the Churches form;

Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we
beseech thee.

FINIS.
AN EXPLANATION Of the SACRAMENTS.

The II. SACRAMENTS. Baptism.
Go ye, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Matt. 18. 19.


Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every ereature. He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he, that believes not, shall
be damned. Mar. 16. 15, 16.


The Lords SUPPER. Mat. 2^. 26, 27, 28. 1. Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.

THe Lord Jesus the same night, in which he was betrayed, took bread: And when
he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave it to his disciples, and said;

Take, eat; this is my body, which is broken [given] for you: this do in
remembrance of me.

Likewise also [he took] the cup after supper, and when he had given thanks, he
gave it to them, saying,

Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed
for you [for many] for the remission of sins.

This do ye as ^ft as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

Of the SACRAMENTS.
THe Sacraments, That is to say, Holy Rites or Ceremonies, or mysteries used in
the Church, appointed by Christ himself. Now Sacrament is a military term, and
signifyes that oath, whereby soldiers were wont to engage to be true and
faithful to their General in the War against the enemies of their country:
And thus it is with us Christians, who have vowed obedience to Christ, the
Captain of our Salvation, and sworn to fight under his Banner, that we may by
his strength overcome the world, the flesh, and the Devil.

The Sacraments are but two, Holy Baptism, and the Holy Supper: which come in
the place of Circumcision, and the Jewish Passover.

By Baptism we are admitted into the bosom of the Church, and as it were entered
into God's family, being by nature aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; and
of the children of wrath become heirs of the promise.

The Supper affords us a spiritual repast, and by it we grow up, and are
intimately united to Christ, and are preserved and fed to life everlasting.

There are two things to be considered in a Sacrament; an outward Sign, and an
inward Grace signified. Sign, in Baptism is Water, which washes the filth of
our body; the Thing signified is the Blood of Christ, whereby our souls are
cleansed from the filth of sin. The outward Elements in the Supper are Bread
and Wine, by which the strength of nature is repaired and maintained: The
Things signified are the Body of Jesus crucified and his Blood shed, which
being partaken by Faith do heighten our graces, and nourish the souls of
believers. Baptism Tit. 3. 5.
then is the laver of regeneration; and the Supper 1. Cor. 10. 16.
is the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ. In a word the Sacraments are
annexed to the Word of God, as the seals of the promise, conveyances of grace,
and evidences of the Spirit, by which he does effectually apply to believers
the love of the Father, and the merits of the Son, assuring their hearts,
confirming their Faith, fastening their Hope, and enlarging their Charity.

Of BAPTISM.
THe Institution of Baptism was after this manner. When Christ had with his
Blood sealed the truth of his Doctrine, and purchased to himself a Church, i.e.
a peculiar people, the chosen ones of God, whom he fore knew from all
eternity; (for he was the Rev. 13. 8.
Lamb slain before the foundation of the world was laid;) and had made good
this his purchase by his resurrection, in that the bands of death sell off, and
he was released out of the prison of the grave, having paid the debt, for which
he as our surety suffered; it was then convenient that this Church thus
purchased, should be gathered, and the chosen ones be called, and converted to
the says by the preaching of the Word, and distinguished from the rest of the
world by a profession of the Gospel, and the use of holy ordinances. Wherefore
being himself to depart hence and to ascend to Heaven, he leaves his Disciples
with instructions, how to propagate the faith, and to order the affairs of his
spiritual Kingdom to the end of the world, and to proclaim throughout all
quarters of the world, the good tidings of peace and pardon to all such as
should by faith and repentance come in and give up their names to Christ; It
being God's will 1. Tim. 2. 4.
that all should be said, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Whereupon he
sends the Apostles to preach, and by Baptism i.e. by a solemn rite of washing
with water, receive into the bosom of the Church as many as should profess
faith in him; giving them this commission before his departue, as it is set
down by the Evangelist, Go ye and teach all Nations baptizing them, etc.
Baptism having bin formerly used by John the forerunner of our Savior, and
honored by the example of our Savior himself, who Ioh. 3. 16, 17.
at his Baptism was signally owned from Heaven for the Son of God, the Spirit
also in the shape of a Dove lighting upon him.

Our Savior in these words, wherein he appoints the form and use of Baptism,
partly commands, partly promises. The command has in it a mission, Go: and a
commission, teach, and Baptize. The promise is that whosoever believes and is
Baptized shall be saved.

GO YE INTO ALL THE WORLD. Christ himself being sent to the lost sheep of the
House of Israel, confined his own walk within the bounds of Iewry; but at his
death the vail of the Temple being rent in twain, and the partition wall broken
down, all other Nations of the world were received into the covenant of grace,
and made partakers of that salvation which the Jews Act. 13. 46.
put from themselves. In order to this, the Apostles were furnished with the
gift of tongues, to the end that they might discourse with all people in their
own language, of which they gave a notable essay at the Feast of Pentecost; and
not long after they had meeting, and agreed amongst themselves, what quarter of
the world every one should take upon him as his Province, and accordingly
traveled, some one or other of them, over all the parts (of the known world at
least) there being yet remaining in several places of the East in Asia (as
amongst the Chinese and the Indians,) and of the South in Africa, (as amongst
the Abyssines under the command of Prester John, that is, the Apostolic
Prince, etc.) several monuments of the Apostles preaching. Nor are there
wanting in America it self footsteps of the Gospel, as in the Island of the
Holy Cross.

AND TEACH ALL NATIONS, or preach the Gospel to every Creature. Now indeed
does the Sun of rightteousness, being the light that enlightens every one that
comes into the world, set forth upon his course, and makes his compass from one
end of Heaven to the other, darting forth the rays of his heavenly Doctrine to
all Nations, and diffusing light and heat by the Apostles no otherwise then the
Sun in the Firmament makes his passage through the twelve signs of the Zodiac.
By this means Churches were planted up and down, Cities and countries converted
to the Faith, and the sound of the Gospel went throughout the world. What an
excellent story would the rest of the Acts of the Apostles have made, if they
had bin committed to writing, or preserved, as St. Paul's and Peter's were?
whereas we have scarce any thing of them but fable, and the variety of changes
since, and ferity of the nations at present makes it almost impossible to find
out the truth of their travels, acts, and strange successes.

BAPTIZING. This has a double meaning: either Teach and Baptize, or Teach by
Baptizing. The former is thus; After you have instructed people in the faith,
and made known to them the Gospel of Christ, and acquainted them with the will
of God touching their salvation; receive them into the Church, and washing them
with water assure them of the pardon of their sins, and engage them into a
profession of the Christian Faith, and of a holy life.

The later speaks thus; Teach by Baptizing, that is to say, preach the Gospel
to all, and whomsoever you shall find willing to renounce their former error,
to give up themselves to the obedience of the Gospel, make them my Disciples
(which indeed is the importance of the Greek (...) disciple them.
word) by dipping or sprinkling them with water: by which ceremony (as by a
peculiar badge) my Church which is the company of believers shall be
distinguished from the rest of the world.

From both we learn, that the administration of the Sacraments does properly
belong to those whose duty it is to preach the Gospel, to wit, the Ministers of
God's Word; and that they are to Baptize, who are to Teach; the Sacraments
being but the seals, and appendages of the doctrine.

THEM. Men, and women, and children; persons of all conditions, sex, age; whole
countries, whole cities, whole families, according as your preaching shall find
success. And this no question was the practice of the Apostles at first, as
has been of the Church ever since, to admit all even little ones, (as Christ
did suffer little children to come to him) and the Infants of believers to
Baptism: for so Circumcision, in place of which Baptism came, was performed
upon children of eight days old: And why should the sign of the Covenant be
denied little babes, who are in Covenant with the God of their Fathers, who
has promised to be our God, and the God of ours? What an unkindness is it,
that a parent should shut the gate of life against his child, and deprive it of
the privilege of a new birth: seeing that believers children are born heirs of
the promise, and have as good title to the spiritual blessing of their Fathers
as they have to their temporal estate; if the word of God be good evidence.
What hard-hearted person can look upon it is child no otherwise then a heathen
brat, then the young one of some brute damm; I will not say lamb, or kid, or
calf, which God appointed to be offered to him, and accepted in the Jewish
service. And will any one then be backward in bringing his child to the Temple,
and presenting him to the Lord, or fear God's displeasure for so doing? O rigid
course to pass a sentence of excommunication upon children, till they come to
years of discretion. And why so? because they have no faith. Suppose they have
not. The very Baptising a child makes him a Disciple, if thou understandest
(...), discipulos facite baptizando.
Greek. And art afraid of making thy child a Disciple too soon? Besides, who
dares to be so peremptory, and void of charity as to deny little ones faith;
since faith though it do ordinarily come by hearing, yet it is a grace infused
by God into the soul, capable of such infusion; nay, holy writings have left it
upon record, that some children were sanctified in the womb, and that John the
Baptist ^eapt in his mother's belly at the entrance of the Virgin Mother; and
lays it down for a general observe, that God has out of the mouths of babes
and suckling^ ordained strength, or prepared for himself a strong and solid
praise.

IN THE NAME, i.e. by virtue and force of a divine command and appointment, and
by that authority which is delivered to the Son by the Father; and which
through the Spirit, I do also impart to you my Ministers. Or into the Name;
for so the words sound in the (...).
Greek. i.e. into the profession of Christian Faith, and of Gospel-obedience.
Now the highest point of Christian Doctrine is to believe in God, distinguished
into three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

OF THE FATHER. Who made us, and begets us a new, by his word and ordinances.

OF THE SON. Who redeemed us, and washes away our stains with his Blood.

AND OF THE HOLY GHOST. Who sanctifies us; for we are born again of water, and
the spirit.

Each Person has its peculiar operation, and is severally represented, in the
holy rite of Baptism. For whereas by washing of water is meant the doing away
of sin, the Father pardons sins, the Son purchased the pardon, the Spirit by
faith applies that purchase. So then we are saved by the mercy of the Father,
by the merit of the Son, and by the efficacy of the Spirit.

This form of Baptism is one of the clearest proofs of Trinity in all
Scripture; and indeed when our Savior was Baptized of John, all Three did show
themselves present. Christ himself whom John did Baptize, was the second
Person; the Spirit descended upon him in the shape of a Dove; and the Father
spoke out of the Cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.

In the Command is set down the rite, or outward action. i.e. the washing with
water. The Promise delivers the grace signified and conveyed by the action, to
wit, remission of sins.

The analogy betwixt the outward sign, and the inward grace lies in this;
that, as Water being powered, or sprinkled on the body, washes off the filth; so
the Blood of Christ, which was the Fountain opened for the cleansing of
iniquity, does purge the conscience, and do away sin, whether original, or
actual, and present us clean without spot in the sight of the Father by the
virtue of the Spirit.

HE THAT BELIEVES AND IS BAPTIZED, SHALL BE SAVED. Faith is the soul's hand, by
which a man receives and applies to himself the benefits purchased by Christ.
By Faith we are justified. Baptism is the laver of regeneration, the seal of
the Covenant, the conveyance of Grace. They are both necessary, neither can
either of them serve turn by it self; There must be an Ordinance to ground
Faith upon and there must be a Faith to make the Ordinance effectual. For every
appointment (as the just man does) lives by Faith. Faith without Baptism, were
a bucket without water; and Baptism void of Faith, were but a well without a
bucket to draw up the waters of life.

He that believes, by confessing his sins, and professing Faith resolves upon
amendment of life, and gives himself up to Christ's discipline; and then is
baptized, obliges himself by vow, and enters into Covenant of strict walking
with God, He shall be saved from his sins, and the punishments due to them;
being free as well from the power, as from the guilt. His nature shall be
renewed; and by the continual supplies of grace (if he make good use of it) he
shall be enabled more and more to withstand temptations, and get ground of his
lusts; he shall be put into a state of salvation, and every day set forward on
his way to bliss through the paths of holiness, till with Christ at last he
arrive at perfection, and have his grace changed into glory.

HE THAT BELIEVES NOT SHALL BE DAMNED This is a threat annexed to the promise,
which holds good by the law of contraries; for if those that believe shall be
saved, then those that believe not must expect nothing but damnation. We must
observe, that, there is not added here any mention of Baptism, because unbelief
it self is enough to shut the gates of Heaven against any one, and send him to
Hell: wherefore it is not said he that believes not, and is not Baptized; for
the unbeliever, whether he be baptized or no, is liable to this sentence; If he
has been baptized, it will be looked upon as a formal cheat, and a cloak to
disguise his hypocrisy: And if he has not, the very neglect of Baptism serves
for an open discovery of his unbelief; so that either way he aggravates his
sin, by being on one side hypocrite, on the other profane. The meaning of these
words then is this. But on the contrary, whosoever does not with true Faith
entertain my Doctrine, and with sure purpose of mind resolve on the keeping my
Commands, but does either so far disbelieve Christian Truth, that he will not
so much as take upon him the outward profession of it, or having been baptized,
is of loose opinions and practices, and disparages his profession with foul
errors, or wicked manners: such an one will have no benefit by Christ, no share
in the salvation wrought by him, but brings upon himself the guilt of his own
sins, and continues still in a state of wrath, and perishing in his unbelief,
will assuredly be cast into everlasting torments.

If the One Sacrament may be termed the Bosom of the Church, by which we are
entered, and have admittance into the fellowship of the Saints; The Other may
not without reason be called the Churches Breast, by which we are nourished to
a spiritual growth, and are refreshed and fed to life everlasting.

Of the Lord's SUPPER.
AFter that our Savior had sufficiently made known by his Doctrine the will of
God concerning man's salvation, and proved by many miracles, that he was the
Son of God that came down from Heaven, to the end that having put on our
nature, he might in our stead satisfy the Law, and undergo the punishments due
to us for our sins, that we through Faith in him might live; It pleased him
(that he might leave with us the Symbols of his presence for ever, and preserve
the memory of his sufferings afresh in the mind of the faithful) to prefigure
his Death by a Sacrament, appointing Bread, and Wine, the usual supplies of
life, for the representing of his sacred Body, which was broken on the Cross,
and torn with the nails and the spear: and his Blood which trickled from his
sacred Head by the pricking of the thorns, gushed out of his hands and feet
when he was nailed to the tree, and brake forth of his side when he was wounded
with the lance, and plentifully streamed forth out of every vein of his sacred
Body, when he was cruelly scourged with whips.

Now his Body thus broken, and his Blood thus shed, do no less feed a
believers soul, and improve the force of grace, then the body is nourished, and
natures strength repaired by Bread and Wine. But this has a spiritual meaning;
not that any one does eat the very flesh of Christ, and drink his very blood in
a gross manner, for that will be as absured to think as it is savage to do; or
that Christ can be received any other way then by Faith, for it is a point of
Faith that the Body of Christ did go up to Heaven, and there is to remain till
the last day; and it is contrary to very reason, to say, that the same Body can
at the same time be in several places; and to bring to pass contradictions, is
a thing out of the power of omnipotence it self; not to say that it is plain
even to our outward senses, that the elements of bread and wine do still
remain after consecration the same in substance as well as in color, and
accidents as they were before. In fine it would indeed be no Sacrament, if the
signs should change their nature, and the thing signified be it self really
there; for a Sacrament is nothing else but a figure, and representation of some
thing that is absent, exhibiting to the understanding that which cannot be seen
with the eye; and by outward actions resembling the inward virtue and efficacy
of that thing of which it is a sign.

This sacred Rite is called the Holy Supper, either by the way of Metaphor to
denote the communion, and fellowship which the Saints have with one another
(for which reason we also usually term it with the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
the Communion.) The whole family meeting together at that time, when all the
business of the day is over, to refresh themselves, and take their repast. Nor
is it otherwise with the household of Faith, who though employed in several
dwellings and duties of life, yet as members of one and the same body, whereof
Christ is the Head, are united to one another by the same spirit, and fed with
the same spiritual food. So that the Mystical body of the Church is made up of
many Saints, just as the bread it self of many corns, and the wine of drops;
whence it is frequently by the Greek Fathers called (...) i.e. the gathering
together of the Saints, whither (as some Interpreters would have it) that place
has allusion, Mat. 24. 28.
where the carcass is, that is, the crucified Body of Christ, thither shall
the eagles, the quick-sighted, high-flown believers, be gathered together. Or,
out of a more particular respect to the Passover, into the place and stead
whereof this Sacrament came; as the other succeeded circumcision: for the Jews
were wont by God's appointment yearly to celebrate a Feast, whereon at evening
in each household they slew a Lamb, dressed it, and eat it together in
remembrance of the deliverance from the Egyptian slavery, and from the Angel,
who striking all the first born of Egypt passed over the houses of the
Israelites, who for that purpose had according to that Exodus 12. 22.
command dashed the Blood of the Lamb upon the lintel of the door. Now Christ
being the substance was to put an end to all ceremonies, and came to make one
perfect sacrifice once for all, who in that he dyed, dyed but once, being the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world; and his death we are to
remember in these pledges of his love, whereby he has delivered us from a
spiritual slavery, and wrought salvation for us. And indeed in that very nick
of time when our Savior had finished the Paschal Supper with his Disciples, he
appointed this as to abide for ever in the room of the other. The Lord's Supper
it is styled, because appointed by the Lord Jesus, and represents him to be fed
on by Faith. The words of the Scripture, wherein the Institution is set down,
express both time when, and manner how it was performed: the manner again
delilivers partly what he did, partly what he said, in consecrating the bread
first, and then the cup.

The Institution of this Sacrament is described by the author, time, and
manner. The Author, the Lord Jesus. The Time, the night wherein he was
betrayed. the Manner consists of two parts, showing partly what he did, partly
what he said; and that severally of these two several signs, by which he would
represent his Body and Blood. For this Holy Supper was to consist of spiritual
meat and drink; as men use both to eat and drink in their other ordinary meals.
The Bread is the sign of his Body; the Cup of his Blood. First, as to the Bread
what did he? He took it, he blessed it, he broke it, he gave it. What said he?
Take, eat; this is my Body. Again for the Cup, what did he? he took it, he
blessed it, he gave it. What said he? Drink ye all of it; for this is my Blood,
etc.

Now let us go over each part again, and explain it more fully.

THE LORD JESUS. Who by the merit of his Passion, and at the price of his Blood
purchased for us Salvation, and for himself glory, and a Name above every Name,
that he might become Head of the Church, and to him might be given all power
from the Father. He alone has authority to appoint Sacraments, and order the
affairs of his Church, by his word and spirit; whereby he has impowerd his
Ministers to act in his Name, and to dispense his ordinances even to the end of
the world.

IN THE NIGHT. For it was a Supper, which he intended, and 'twas at supper or
rather after supper; when he had with his Disciples about him, eaten the
Passover, the type of himself, who was the Lamb slain before the foundation of
the world; when he said at the Table, One of you shall betray me, and
discovered his betrayer by giving him a sop, which some think was no other then
a piece of consecrated bread. Nay, the self-same night,

IN WHICH HE WAS BETRAYED by Judas with a kiss, bringing a multitude along with
him, armed with swords, and staves, the rage of the rulers, and the curses of
the priests, to lay wicked hands on him, after he had sweat drops of blood in
his agony, and powered out his Soul in Prayer, being sad even to death, in a
garden, where he made the praeludium to his Passion.

BREAD, by which the heart of man is strengthened (which is therefore called the
staff of life) is made use of to represent the Body of Christ, who Ioh. 6. 41.
was the bread which came down from Heaven, by which souls are fed to life
everlasting.

HE TOOK IT. That he might by his example show the Ministers of his word, what
they are to do, when they invite their people to the holy Table; himself does
in a solemn manner begin the ceremonies; taking the bread, i.e. lifting it up,
and holding it in his hand, which amongst the Jews was then the fashion
observed by the master of the house.

AND GIVING THANKS. We do not read anywhere, that Christ ever sat down to
meat without Thanksgiving; which especially before the Holy Supper, is
necessary, it being for that reason called the Eucharist. And surely the death
of Christ, which is here set forth, was the greatest blessing, that ever befell
mankind.

Or Blessing it. The meaning may be, that by consecrating it, he did set it
aside from common use, and praying for a special blessing upon it, that it may
become an effectual means of grace, he stamped upon it a kind of reverence,
which was not due to it before.

HE BROKE IT. Whence this mystery is also called the breaking of bread: he
divided it into several pieces, that there might be the better distribution of
it amongst the company at table.

AND GAVE IT, i.e. reaching out his hand he set to every one his part, and
bestowed it amongst them.

TO THE DISCIPLES. Who did then represent the whole Church of Christ, and
society of the faithful, both men, and women, who should give up themselves to
the discipline of Christ, and take upon them the profession of the Gospel; not
so much as Judas excepted, though Christ well knew, what was in his heart.
Wherefore by Christ's own example Ministers might learn, that none should be
excluded, and kept from the table, where Christ himself entertained the
Traitor, the Thief, and the Apostate Judas. All are invited to this heavenly
banquet, and if any one crowd in, having not on his wedding garment, he does it
at his own peril. 1 Cor, 11. 18.
It Is the Apostle's rule in this case, that a man examine himself and so come.
He that shall censure his brother as unworthy to share in this divine worship,
to be sure by his want of charity makes himself unfit to be there, and
incapable of the blessing; charity being as necessary a qualification as
repentance; and we are out of charity to suppose that any scandalous liver, or
notorious offender, would venture upon these sacred mysteries without having
repented him of his sins, since he is told aforehand, that by coming unworthily
he will but eat and drink damnation to himself, delivering himself into Satan's
power, filling up the measure of his sins, and hastening his own destruction, as
it fared with Judas.

AND SAID. Here follow the words of consecration; for this too, as well as the
common 1 Timothy 4. 5.
food, is sanctified by the word and Prayer. It was not enough to have broken
and given it, unless he had also said, Take, eat. God is wont to instruct all
our senses, as he requires Heb. 5. 14.
to have them all exercised in holy things. The outward Sign is proposed to the
eye, the Word to the ear, so that what the eagle-sighted Evangelist 1 Ioh. 1. 1.
says of the Incarnation of Christ, may have here a peculiar place; That which
we have seen, That which we have heard, and our hands have handled of the word
of life, declare we unto you: and accordingly it follows.

TAKE. Stretching out the hand of Faith, lay hold on life, embrace salvation
offered. Take, for ye have it not by nature in your selves; it is the gift of
God through Christ, who took upon him the Humane nature, that he through it
might convey to men the power, and virtue of the Divine nature. He took, that
he might give; we take to enjoy. Take it, not snatch it, take it with reverence
and such devotion of mind, and body, as becomes so great a mystery; and this
indeed has always been the custom of the Church to use an humble posture upon
this occasion, and receive kneeling.

EAT. Apply to your souls the benefit of my death, feed upon me and be
transformed into my likeness, that ye may be united to me, and I may live in
you, no otherwise then the meat, which we daily eat, is turned into juice and
blood, and intimately adhering to us, becomes part of us.

THIS IS MY BODY. This i.e. this bread, for though they disagree in gender, yet
who is so unskil'd in Grammar, as not to know that the Relative this, may agree
either with the former Antecedent, bread, or with the later, body? or This
mystery and Sacrament, This action of my breaking, and giving, of your taking
and eating.

IS MY BODY. Is the representation of my death, and the assurance of salvation
to those that believe; as we commonly say of a writing in Law, This is my
estate. i.e. this gives me a title to such a house and land, and by a sure
conveyance makes me right owner of it, as if the house, and fields, and meadows
were really included in the parchment. Such a manner of speech is frequently
used in Scripture; as where it is 1 Cor 10. 4.
said the rock was Christ, which to take properly and strictly, as the words
sound, were absurd; there being no more meant by it then this, that the rock
was the type, and emblem of Christ. So here that the bread is Christ's Body, is
not to be understood in a gross sense, as if that the substance of the bread
were changed into the very flesh of Christ; but that whosoever does with faith
receive these sacred Symbols, does truly and to all intents partake of the
benefits, which Christ has purchased for us by his death, and is closely
united to Christ, and grows in grace, even as our bodily food being taken in
does pass into our nature, and give nourishment, and increase, to all the parts
of our body.

WHICH IS BROKEN, or Given. The Frequens Enallage; ut (...) venturus, etc.
present Tense here is put for the future, which shortly shall be broken; for
Christ was yet not crucified, but spoke these words before his Passion. Or the
whole life of Christ having been nothing else but an enduring of hardship, it
may be understood not only of the cross, and the nails; the scourges and the
thorns, wherewith his sacred Body was rent, and torn: but also of hunger and
cold, fasting and watching, grief and pains, which he underwent all along from
the Cradle to the Cross: or in a mystical and Sacramental sense; which by this
breaking and giving of the bread is represented and shown forth as broken and
given for them. For the very actions used by our Savior at this Supper have a
spiritual meaning, and do allude to some mystery.

He took bread; and so he took to himself a body, that he might become bone of
our bone, and flesh of our flesh; and suffer in the flesh the punishment due to
us; as it is Heb. 10. 5.
written, Burnt offerings, and sacrifices thou would not; but a body thou
have prepared for me.

He blessed it, i.e. he set it aside from common use: in like manner, the mass
of flesh and blood, which he would put on, he separated from the defilement of
our nature, that he might after an extraordinary manner, be born of the Blessed
Virgin without sin.

He broke it, Just so was that his body used, cut and mangled with cruel whips,
bruised with blows, and buffets, gash'd with a spear, pricked with the thorns,
and bored with nails; that we by his stripes might be healed.

He gave it; hanging on the Cross, with stretched arms and bowed head, he
seemed to invite all men to the well of salvation, which was opened in his
side, for the cleansing of iniquity, and the quenching of spiritual thirst;
laying down his life, like the good shepherd for the ransom of souls. And his
Father gave him, so loving the world, that he gave his only begotten Son to the
death, that whosoever believes in him might have everlasting life.

FOR YOU. For your sake, upon your account, to your benefit; for the appeasing
God's wrath, satisfying his Justice, and obtaining his mercy; for the
redemption of your souls, the purchase of pardon and grace, and the assurance
of salvation, that you by my death may live, by my wounds you may be cured, and
by receiving me thus offered unto you, may be received into favor. Or in your
stead. Behold I suffer, what you should have suffered; I as your Mediator stand
betwixt you and God, betwixt your sins and his wrath, and undergo the penalty
which was due to you: my body is torn and mangled, and my soul powered out to
death, not for any thing that I have done amiss; for there has bin no iniquity
found in my hand, nor guil in my mouth: but I am that Lamb of God slain from
the beginning of the world; I am that good shepherd of souls, that lay down my
life for my sheep. Thus broken and given, thus delivered for you, and to you, I
seal pardon of sins to your hearts, I improve grace, supply strength, and feed
your souls to life everlasting.

Broken or Given, as if it were all one; for this heavenly Bread was given,
that it might be broken, 'twas broken, that it might be given. Christ could not
have suffered for us, had he not had a body given him for that purpose, nor
could that body have done us good, or furnished us with spiritual nourishment,
had it not bin broken; Had not Christ dyed, we could not be sure of living: As
it is with the bread it self, which is the Symbol of his Body. The corn must be
first cut down, and threshed, and winnowed, and grownd, and sifted, and
kneaded, and baked with a hot oven, before it can become bread.

THIS DO YE. These words either have reference to the actions of the
Disciples, who took the bread which Christ gave them, and eat it; and so they
belong to all Christians in general, to the whole company of believers
according as the Church does in more words deliver it; Take, and eat this in
remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy heart, with Faith
and thanksgiving. And so of the Cup afterward it is said; This do ye as often as
ye drink it, i.e. when ever ye drink it, drink it in remembrance of me. Or to
Christ's own actions, who broke it, and gave it; and thus they imply a special
charge to the Officers of the Church, the Ministers of the Gospel, and
Preachers of the Word, such as also were these Disciples; as if he should have
said, you are Apostles, with whom I leave the care of planting Churches, and
preaching the Gospel, whom I trust for the management of the affairs of my
Kingdom, and duly administering the Sacraments: wherefore I charge, and require
of you, that in celebrating this mystery you follow my example, and do no
otherwise then you have seen me do before you; that it may remain pure to all
succeeding ages, according to this first institution. And hither St. Paul 1
Cor. 11. 23.
in this case makes his appeal, where he discourses of the Holy Supper, That
which I received that deliver I unto you, how the Lord Jesus, etc.

This or Thus, This which I have done, or thus, as I have done now in your
company, do ye, and all from hence forward that derive authority from you, in
your several assemblyes; take bread and bless it, and break it, and give it
about to those who rightly prepared come to the holy Table, and use these words
of consecration, which I have done to you.

The (...).
Greek is, make this, hence it is an ordinary phrase amongst the Popish
Priests, when they perform Mass to say, that they do make the Body of the
Lord; thinking possibly that the Doctrine of Transsubstantiation is much
advantaged by the word of making, which in the Greek is indifferently applied
to all manner of actions, and the other (...).
which signifies to do would have bin very improper and not fit to be used in
this place.

THIS DO YE. The word will also in the Psalm. 66. 15. (...). quod antea. (...).
Si^ Virg. C^m faciam vitula.
Latin and Hebrew carry a sense of sacrificing; and then 'twould intimate,
that our Savior's death was our peace offering; whereby God's wrath conceived
against sin was atoned, and his Justice satisfied, we being cleansed by the
sprinkling of his Blood. The Papists therefore call the Mass a Sacrifice
without Blood, and the holy Table strictly and properly without any Metaphor,
an Altar. It Is true, we do here represent and commemorate the death of Christ;
and when we come to partake of these Mysteries, we may use the Psalm. 116. 12.
Psalmist's words; What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward
me? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord: I
will Sacrifice unto thee the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and call upon the Name
of the Lord: I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of all his
people. But he having offered once a perfect Sacrifice for the taking away of
sin, and cried upon the Cross, It is finished, and in that he dyed, dies no
more: 'twere absurd to think, there needed a repetition of that act, which in
it self was all-sufficient, Christ's Blood being of an infinite value, as it
immediately follows in the same Psalm, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints: A (...).
word peculiar to Christ, as in the fourth Psalm, He has set apart the holy
one for himself, and in the 16. Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see
corruption, meaning Christ. Besides to what purpose is it to ground an
unreasonable doctrine upon the nicety of a word, which in ordinary plain
meaning signifies but this, do so hereafter as ye now do; or do ye in your
companies, what ye have seen me now do in mine.

IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME. For a memorial of me, and a monument of my love, who
have not spared my life for your sakes, and with a sense of gratitude to keep
up the memory of my bitter death, which I as your surety upon your account
underwent, and the benefit whereof you will receive by believing on me, by
eating my flesh, and drinking my Blood, and becoming one with me. Or (...) in
meam (potius quam mei) recordationem.
for my remembrance; appointed by me to be one of my sacred ordinances, to be
kept up in the practice of the Church till my second coming in the clouds, as
ye will see me go away. Wherefore in the mean while to leave behind me a
remembrance, and to bear up your hearts in Faith, that what I have suffered
has bin out of love to you, and that those who in following ages shall not see
me in the flesh, yet may have some further assurance then my bare word, I have
provided this to be a standing ordinance in the Church, whereby I may be
remembered to the end of the world.

LIKEWISE ALSO HE TOOK THE CUP. Now follows the other part of this Sacrament,
to wit, the consecration of the Cup; for it would not be a complete meal, were
there not spiritual drink as well as meat, the Blood of Christ being as
necessary to quench the thirst, as his flesh to satisfy the hunger of a
believing soul, that hungers and thirsts after righteousness. But first the
Bread and then the Cup. Why? because there must be a body broken, before there
could be blood spilt. First bread to strengthen, and then wine to refresh the
heart. Again the Cup last as of great importance; for the flesh could have
profited nothing without the blood, and God is said Act. 20. 28.
to have redeemed his Church with his Blood; nor does he only redeem us with
the shedding of his blood, but wash us by the sprinkling of it upon our
consciences from dead works* and preserve his Church spotless till the great
day. Nay the author to the Hebrews Heb. 9. 22.
observes, that in the old Law there was no atonement for sin without blood:
for in the blood lay the life, and the life of the sinner was to answer for his
sin: wherefore 'twas not so much the flesh of the sacrifice, (which was partly
burnt into ashes, partly eaten by the Priest or congregation) that appeased
God's wrath, as the blood, which was sprinkled round the Altar. Nor did the
eating of the Passover (which was the type of this Supper) secure the
Israelites from the destroying Angel, but the blood which was struck upon the
lintell of the door. Nor can the Papists plead the no necessity of administering
the Cup, because the children of Israel in the celebration of their Passover,
and the Priests and people in their sacrifices only eat of the flesh of the
lamb or bullock, and not drank the blood, but either spilt it, or sprinkled it
up and down. For first we have here Christ's express command, Drink ye all of
it; whereas they were bid to the contrary. And then, which is the main thing.
Christ's merit (as was said before) lay most in his blood, so that to give our
selves an interest in his sufferings, we must partake of his blood as well as
of his body.

But why is the Symbol of his precious Blood called a Cup, whereas that by
which his holy Body is represented is plainly termed Bread? now bread and cup
are not direct opposites, nor answer one another, but bread and wine. This by
the Papists own confession must be allowed to be a figure (called Metonymie) of
the vessel containing for the liquor contained, the Cup for the wine in the
cup. Now therefore if the Cup be not really turned into the blood of Christ,
neither is the bread changed into flesh. For just as it is said of the bread,
This is my Body, so he says of the Cup, This is my Blood. And if there be a
figure in one place, why not in both? or can we suppose, that our Savior in a
thing of so great concernment, would not have spoke properly here too, as he
did before. But the truth on it is, we should on all hands run our selves into a
world of absurdities, should we take words strictly as they sound, and not
allow them a fair meaning according to popular use, and custom of speaking. For
by this means we should have cities with walls up to heaven, Christ would be
turned into one rock, Peter into another, Herod would be Metamorphosed into a
fox, and Ovid's fables would hardly seem more strange then Scripture. But
Rhetoric teaches us the convenience, and vulgar custom the necessity of using
figures, and no question but our Savior made use of the liberty in this sacred
Institution.

Now the ground of this figure whereby the Cup is put for the wine (whereas the
other part of the Sacrament is properly expressed by the name of bread) may be
this; because bread being of a solid substance is of it self easily laid hold
on, and taken up with the hands: but wine is of a fluid and liquid nature, so
that it cannot be meddled with to any use, unless it be first put into some
vessel, as a cup, etc.

Likewise also. These two particles imply, partly that Christ did as well
appoint the use of wine as of bread to make this holy Supper an entire
Sacrament; in so much that, if either should be taken away, the mystery would
be maimed and imperfect; partly that he did in like manner, and after the self
same fashion, consecrate the Symbol of his precious Blood, as he did that of
his holy Body, using the same actions, and almost words; for as he took the
bread, and gave thanks, and gave it to his Disciples, bidding them eat, and
telling them, that is was his Body, which was broken for them, and charging
them to do it in remembrance of him: Just so he took the Cup too, and gave
thanks, and gave it amongst them and bid them drink, and told them withal, that
it was his Blood, which was shed for them, and charged them to do it in
remembrance of him. Some little difference we may meet with, both in the
actions and in the words, either by adding or leaving out. First here is added
a more special note of the time, when the cup was appointed, to wit, after
Supper, which is but generally expressed in the other part to be the night in
which he was betrayed: And a more punctual command, when he says, Drink ye all
of it; contenting himself of the bread to have said only, Eat it. with a
particular declaration of the nature of this Sacrament, where he tells them,
'twas the Blood of the New Testament, which he says not of his Body; and of
the use and end for which it was appointed, for the remission of sins. i.e. for
sealing that pardon, which he purchased by his blood. Besides a precept, at
least an advice of frequent receiving, employed in those words, As often as ye
drink it. Then here is left out the action of pouring out of the wine, which
answers the breaking of bread; for he broke the breaa, but it is not said that
he powered out the wine. So that it may be supposed the cup was full of wine,
when he took it. Yet the words of consecration do make out this action also;
for as he said, This is my Body which is broken for you; so he says, This is
my Blood which is shed for you. And lastly, he says of the bread, Take, eat;
but of the wine only, Drink; which yet they could not do without taking it.
Now herein perhaps lay the difference, that of the bread being broken into
small pieces, every one could at once take his part, and all partake together
at the same time: but the cup being not capable of such a partition, they
handed it to one another, the second staying till the first had drunk, and so
on to the last.

The Cup, to wit, being full of wine; for so himself says afterward, that he
would drink no more of the fruit of the vine, till he drank it new with them in
the kingdom of his Father. Now wine was the fittest to express the nature and
use of the Blood of Christ, it being the noblest liquour, that which most
refreshes the heart of man. Give wine (as the Proverb Prove. 31. 6.
says) to the sad in heart, that they may forget their misery. Wine was used
also in the curing of wounds, as it is said Luke 10. 34.
of the good Samaritan, that taking the man that had lighted amongst thieves
into his care, he powered wine and oil into his wounds; the wine to search and
cleanse, as well as the oil to heal and skin them: Christ's Blood has the same
virtue and efficacy to quench the spiritual thirst of a sinner, who being
scorched with his guilt, longs for Christ's righteousness, as the heart pants
after the waterbrooks; to cheer the spirits which lie drooping under the sense
of sin; to supply new strength to a Christian believer, that he shall rejoice
to run his course as a Giant refreshed with wine; and lastly to wash the
defiled conscience, and cleans the foul running sores of the soul, that it may
be fitted for the oil of the spirit the comforter. Besides Christ himself is
often compared to a Vine, whereof all the faithful are branches, I am the Vine
(says he i) and my Father the Husbandman; and he is said to have trod the
winepress of God's wrath alone for us. Yet in case of necessity, where wine
cannot be had, other drinks either natural or made (according to the custom of
the country) may be used, as water, beer, etc. Now as that bread which came
down from heaven was the type of his body, so was the water which came out of
the rock, and followed the Israelites through the wilderness, an emblem of his
Blood; for 1 Cor. 10. 4.
that rock was Christ.

He took it. He lifted it from the table, and held it in his hand, either
having first powered wine into it out of some bigger vessel or flagon, or else
with an intent to power wine into it; as the word shed forth, or powered out
does intimate; for the sign was to represent the thing signified.

AFTER SUPPER. At the end of Supper, when they had done eating, whereas the
other part of this Sacrament was appointed in Supper time, as they were eating.
Or else it is not unlikely, that this particle of time may belong as well to the
bread as to the cup; that the celebration of the whole mystery was not
performed, till they had made an end of the Paschal Supper, into the room and
place whereof this was from thence forward to succeed and be of perpetual use
in the Church.

AND WHEN HE HAD GIVEN THANKS, or blessed it. For the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 16.
calls it, The Cup of blessing which we bless; i.e. before he appointed it to
be a sign of his Blood, he sanctified it by the word and prayer, and begging a
blessing upon it, separated it from common use: using perhaps the ordinary
grace, which amongst the Jews, the Master of the house did at meals make use
of; for no question but our Savior here alludes to their custom, who at the
end of dinner or supper, after thanks was given, drank round the whole company
that was at table of the grace-cup, the Master of the house beginning to the
rest.

HE GAVE IT. He set it down amongst them, that they might one after another
take the cup and drink; or perhaps put it into the hand of some one, that he
might give it about to his fellows.

TO THEM. The Apostles, to wit, or disciples, who at that time stood for the
whole Church; and consequently to all believers whomsoever, that make
profession of the Christian Faith.

SAYING. Speaking almost the same words, as he used before concerning the
bread, that he might declare his own purpose in the institution of this
mystery, and their benefit who should partake of it.

DRINK YE. With Faith receive this Sacrament of my Blood, that like your
natural drink, it being taken into your souls may refresh your souls, quicken
your graces, and keep you to life everlasting.

ALL OF IT. Every one some: for the bread was indeed broken into several
portions, but the cup could not be so divided; wherefore they were to part it
among them, every one drinking so, that there might be left for the rest of the
company.

FOR. That which before was delivered in a declarative way as a bare narration,
eat; this is my Body, is here brought in as a reason. Drink, for this is my
Blood. Which shows to what end and purpose the cup was appointed, and how much
it concerns believers to drink of it, since by it is conveyed the forgiveness
of sins, the main virtue and effect of Christ's Blood being spilt.

THIS. To wit, this cup which I do now deliver to you, this wine which you are
now about to drink, or this action of my giving and your drinking the holy Cup.

IS MY BLOOD. That is, does signify and represent my Blood; and not only so,
but gives out also and conveyes my Blood, and the benefits thereof; so that it
being received with Faith shall prove as much to your advantage, and do your
souls as much good, as if you did really drink my very Blood, even as one finds
himself refreshed with wine which he drinks.

OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. Upon Gospel terms, and the account of grace; whereas
formerly in the time of the Old Testament under the Law they were used to make
atonement for their sins with the blood of bulls and goats: now Christ the Son
of God was come in the flesh, who was the substance, that all those shadows
belonged to, and the truth prefigur'd by those Levitical types, all those rites
of sacrificing were to have an end; when once he had offered up a perfect
sacrifice, blotting out the handwriting of the Law, and sealing a New Covenant
of grace in his Blood: for the word (...), (...) For (...).
will bear that sense too; and we know 'twas the usual custom of making and
ratifying Covenants by sacrifice, as betwixt Genesis 15. 28.
God and Abraham, Genesis 21. 27.
Abraham and the King of the Philistines, when they struck a league of
friendship; and possibly that heap of stones, which was Genesis 31. 44.
raised by Jacob and his Father in law Laban, and was afterward called Gilead,
might serve also for that purpose. Nay Homer takes notice of it, as practiced
amongst the Heathen. But the Greek does more properly denote the Testament or
last will, by which a man does before his death dispose of his estate, and
bequeath legacies, which being ambulatory and uncertain as long as one lives,
is never valid or of force, Heb. 9. 17.
till the Testator be dead: nor could we have bin the better for Christ, or
have had an effectual enjoyment of his benefits, had he not dyed, and by his
death sealed as well as made the purchase. By the New Testament here then is
meant the will of God the Father, concerning the Salvation of mankind; which in
former time he had made his people acquainted with, by visions, and Prophesies,
and other dark representations; but in the fullness of time, by sending his own
Son, made man after our own likeness; when the wisdom of the Father dwelt
amongst the children of men, and the word became flesh; gave out a full
discovery thereof in the light of the Gospel and the clear manifestations of
his grace: And that Covenant of grace, which by the death of his Son (our
Mediator, who reconciled us with the Father) he entered into with men, being
made upon other terms then the Law required, which says, Do this and live,
and calls for an exact obedience, which therefore it was impossible for men to
keep; whereas the conditions we are tied to under the Covenant of grace are
repentance only and Faith; (by which denying our own righteousness, we depend
upon the merits of a crucified Savior,) according as they are proposed both in
the Old Testament, Hab 2. 4.
the Just shall live by Faith. And in the New, Mar. 16. 16.
He that believes shall be saved; That Covenant of Grace, I say, is not without
good reason styled the New Covenant, according as God himself promised by the
Prophet even in the time of the Law, that he would make a new Covenant. I will
be their God ( Ier. 31* 33.
says he) and they shall be my people. And seeing that Christ's death has put
an end to the sacrifices formerly used for the ratifying of that Covenant,
though in substance God's Covenant both with the Jews, and with the Christians
be all one, yet in respect of a different administration, and a new and clearer
dispensation, This may well be called the New Testament, That the Old.

WHICH IS SHED. Truly, yet mystically and spiritually in this Sacrament, as
sure as the wine (by which it is represented) is now powered out into the cup
for your use. For it cannot be conceived, that when he spoke these words he did
really bleed, it being before his Passion; but he having taken our flesh, and
our blood on no other purpose, then to break the one, and shed the other for
us, he speaks of that as already done, which was in God's everlasting counsel
decreed to be done, in which sense he is called Rev. 13. 8.
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Which is shed then is no
more, then which is to be shed, which shortly will be shed, and which partly
had already bin shed; for Christ spilt not all his Blood at once, but at
several times; as at his Circumcision, when he paid the first fruits of it to
the Lord; in his agony, when he swet clots of blood; at his scourging, when he
was cut with whips; at his crowning, when the thorns pierced his sacred head,
and the scoffs more his heart; and lastly at his Passion, when the nails
fastened his hands and feet to the Cross, and the lance gored his blessed side,
so that there gushed out water and blood, in such streams, that his most holy
Soul together with his Blood left him.

FOR YOU. In your stead, and to your benefit. For I having taken upon me the
office of a Mediator, betwixt God and men, am to undergo that punishment which
was due to to man for sin: wherefore because by the decree and Law of God there
is no atonement without shedding of blood; I also am ready to power forth mine,
that you being sprinkled with it, may be acquitted from the sentence of the
Law, and justified in the sight of God. Seeing that it will be but just, that
what I your surety have done and suffered in your behalf, should satisfy the
Justice of God, and discharge you from guilt and the penalty of the Law, all
one as if you your selves had done and suffered it.

One Evangelist has it, For many, or (...).
rather Concerning many; and then it may be understood of things, to wit, Sins
which Christ's Blood did atone; Wrath, which it appeased; the Law, which it
satisfied; Guilt, which it frees from; Filth, which it washes off; and the
Ceremonies, which it put an end to. And to all these purposes was Christ's
Blood shed. But if it be taken for persons, it may have the same meaning as
that, For you: The Greek (...).
word frequently importing the whole multitude, and so the Apostle Romans 5. 19.
to the Romans lays the comparison betwixt the old Adam and the new; that as
by one man's disobedience, all men became sinners, so much more by Christ's
obedience should many be made righteous. Now the advantage of this comparision
would come to nothing, were not Christ's death of as universal influence, for
the justification of mankind; as Adam's sin, was for the condemnation, though
indeed the benefit thereof do redound to none, but those who do with true
Faith lay hold upon it, i.e. to the elect alone, and true believers; who yet
(in respect of the rest that perish in their sins through unbelief) cannot be
called the many. For many are called but few are chosen. And no question but it
was Christ's intent to taste death (as it is said Heb. 2. 9. (...).
) for every man, none excepted, but who would wilfully run into damnation by
despising so great salvation. And that the many may thus mean the All, is clear
by Ioh. 3. 16. 1, 29. 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
other places, where a word of the largest extent is used, to wit, the world,
which cannot in propriety of speech be applied to signify the Church only; God
so loved the world, that he gave his Son. and Christ is the Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world. and is a propitiation not for our sins alone,
viz. that are believers, but for the sins of the whole world also.

FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS. Whereas the Law does pronounce sentence of death
upon those that transgress it; for the soul that sins shall dye; And all men
are concluded under sin; for Romans 3. 10.
there is none righteous, no not one; and Romans 3. ^0.
in thy sight shall no flesh be justified; It was impossible for one that was
mere man either to perform the Law, or avoid the punishment, had not Christ
(who was God as well as Man) interposed. For no man was ever either by gifts of
nature, or by the supplies of grace, advanced to that pitch of perfection, that
he could perform an exact obedience to all God's commands; We have sinned all
(says Romans 3. 23. 1 Ioh. 1. 10.
the Apostle) and if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
there is no truth in us. Nay, supposing one's life never so spotless; yet
cannot we make amends for that natural uncleanness of original sin, which we
are born with, and which as soon as we live forfeits us to death, according to
the threatening, Genesis 2, 17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. Wherefore what
was wanting in us, Christ made up with the merits of his obedience, who having
fulfilled the Law, and being in himself altogether free from guilt, became Cor.
5. 21.
sin for us, and was reckoned amongst transgressors, that we might be
justified by his blood, and sanctified by his spirit. Our sins then are by his
death done away, so that if we lay hold on him by Faith, that we may receive
the benefit of his death, we that are guilty must be acquitted, because our
surety that was guiltless was condemned; we shall live, because he dyed; we
shall escape the wrath which he underwent; and our sins must be forforgiven,
because his innocence was censured; so that now God stands obliged by his
faithfulness and justice too, to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all
iniquity. He is but faithful when he keeps his word, and performs his part of
that Covenant, which he made with us in his Son; and he is but just, when our
surety has paid the debt, to discharge us. Now this Sacrament being a seal of
the Covenant does assure us of that forgiveness; and seals to our heart by the
sprinkling of blood, and the operation of the spirit a pardon of our sins, and
does withal oblige us to Faith and repentance, which are the conditions,
without which we must not expect forgiveness, and to a new obedience, which is
the surest sign and evidence, that we are forgiven.

THIS DO YE AS OFTEN AS YE DRINK IT IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME. That is, this sacred
Rite I thought fit to appoint, and leave behind with you, as a memorial of me,
and a monument of my love toward you, who took upon me your nature, that I
might dye for you, and shall shortly power out my soul to death, even as you
have seen the wine which you now drink powered into the cup; that your souls may
live, being refreshed with the virtue of my blood, as your bodies are
strengthened, and your hearts cheared by the use of wine. This ordinance after
my departure from you; shall serve to represent my death, and my love, (which
is as strong as death) and the benefits thereof: wherefore I charge you, and
all others, which shall profess my name; that, if you expect to enjoy those
blessings, which my death is intended to procure for mankind, and which will
certainly befall those, that do truly believe in me, they would not fail to
testify their Faith in the use of this Sacrament, and apply to themselves the
Salvation wrought by my death; this mystery being appointed as a means of
conveying assurance, and sealing pardon. Do you then in your assemblyes
hereafter, as you have seen me do now amongst you. And let all Christians with
reverence and due preparation attend and partake of these holy mysteryes;
knowing it is not an ordinary and slight business, but a matter of great
concernment both to the honor of my name, and to their souls health: It being
appointed for my remembrance, and their spiritual growth. Nor shall it be
enough once, as in the other Sacrament of Baptism, or some few times, as a
thing at your own choice, to partake of this holy Supper; but it is a thing
must be often done, and you are frequently in this to commemorate my death, as
often as ever occasion shall be given: that so the memory of me may be
continually celebrated in the Church, and you may be drawing virtue continually
from me, grow up from grace to grace, from strength to strength: And
accordingly the primitive Saints communicated every day, Act. 2. 46.
going about from house to house and breaking bread; And how can we call our
selves Christians, that far unlike them neglect so great Salvation and regard
not the Blood of the Covenant, but to the disparagement of Christianity
intermit the use of this sacred mystery; as of late we have done in very many
congregations for several years through the fondness of some, whose ill
tempered zeal had well near eaten up the house of God. It Is true Baptism needs
not, indeed ought not to be reiterated, it being the laver of regeneration: Now
it suffices once to be born: But the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ,
is called, and is, a Supper. Now he that sups once, hungers and thirsts again.
We cannot, if we have a true spiritual hunger and thirst after the
righteousness of Christ, but come to his Table and present our selves before
him often; at least at the three great Festivals of the Church, wherein the
Birth, the Passion, and Resurrection of Christ, and the Descent of the Holy
Ghost are remembered, as the Jews custom was at their three great Feasts to come
up to Jerusalem; if not every month, nay, every week, that every Lord's day,
the Lord's Supper also might be administered, and we considering our frequent
relapses into sin, might be often renewing our vows. Nay it were to be wished,
that our lives were so pure, and our minds so taken up with heavenly things,
and our feet (our affections, I mean) were so shod with the preparation of the
Gospel, that we might with the ancient Christians make it our every day-meal,
and say that Prayer in this sense, Give us this day our daily Bread.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
THis whole Treatise having been taken by several al young pens from the
Author's mouth, He does not conceive himself obliged to maintain the
Orthography every where: seeing 'twould have been an infinite task to have
corrected all over to his own judgment. Truth is, scarce any language has
greater variety, or indeed irregularity, of pronouncing and spelling the same
syllables, then our English has; which is some reason of the difficulty of it
to strangers. I shall instance in some words diversely written; School and
Schole, Virtue and Virtue, Common and Commune, etc. the one being the Vulgar,
the other the Scholastic Orthography: Again, a different meaning sometimes
diversifies the letter, though pronounced alike; as to lie down, and to tell a
lie; foul dirty, and a fowl a bird, etc. But of this He shall have occasion to
discourse more largely in his Tables of the English Tongue, wherein he hopes to
give satisfaction to the Critic, and the Scholar. At present he thinks it his
main concern to be Understood, and therefore takes no notice of any faults
escaped, but such as may disturb the sense, and scandalize an Ordinanary
Reader: and for the rest trusts himself to the candor of the Judicious.

ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 7. Deity r. duty. p. 14. l. 3. affection r. effusion. p, 21. l. 3.
master r. maker. p. 39. l. 21. r. as much as. p. 44. l. 19. signicant r.
significant. p. 48. l. 12. del. up even. p. 69. l. 10. r. their designs. p. 71.
l. 18. r. our destiny. p. 97. l. 14. lift r. lighted. p. 106. l. 14., use r.
use, p. 111. l. 5. meeted r. meted. p. 118. l. 3. serety r. serenity. p. 130.
l. 7. doing r. doings. p. 135. l. 18. For r. So that. p. 157. l. 10.
metonymical r. metaphorical. p. 182. l. 11. he that r. that he. p. 192. l. 10.
soul r. soul, p. 233. l. 8. government r. garment. p. 439. l. 19. yet not r.
not yet.


