A SERMON AT A Solemn MEETING OF The Natives OF THE CITY and COUNTY OF
Worcester, IN The Church of St. Mary le Bow, June 24. 1680. By Adam Littleton,
D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for William Birch, and are to be sold by John Crump at the
three Bibles in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO MY WORTHY FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN, Mr. John Foley, Capt. Tho. Hammond, Mr.
Richard Foley, Mr. Robert Buggin, Mr. John Deacle, Mr. Henry Vernon, Mr. Thomas
Hunt, Mr. Sam. Lowbrige,
Stewards of the Worcester-shire-Feast, 1680.
GENTLEMEN,
IN Obedience to your Desires, I here present you with that Discourse of Mine,
I lately entertained you with: Mine, I say, such as it was, as I then delivered
it in the Pulpit; but Yours now, such as it is, as it appears to the world from
the Press. I could not but look upon it as a Testimony of great Respect, and I
do with Thank-fulness acknowledge it, that you should make choice of Me for
opening the Scene of your anew-intended yearly Feast, after the interruption of
above twenty years. Wherefore I thought fit to pitch my thoughts upon such a
subject as might include most of those Ends, for which such Meetings should be
designed. How well or ill I have handled it, I must leave to the judgment of
the Pious and Ingenuous Reader.

If others shall find any Satisfaction or Benefit in the perusal of This,
whatever it be, they must owe it to You, who Desired, that is, Ordered me to
throw it into the Public; or if they meet with any thing that may Dissatisfie
or Offend them, they ought out of Charity to Excuse Me, who could not but Obey.

Your Affectionate Countryman, and Servant, Adam Littleton.
Westminster, July 22. 1680.
A SERMON Preached at a Solemn Meeting OF The Gentlemen and Natives OF
Worcestershire, 1680.
Right Honorable, Worthy and Dearly beloved Christians and Countrymen, hear
the Word of God, as you will find it written in the

II Epist. of St. Peter, chap. 1. verse. 7. And to Godliness [add] Brotherly
Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity.

THe Words, I have now read unto you, as they are very necessary and suitable
to the general purposes of Christianity, so are they no less seasonable and fit
for the particular occasion and business of our present Meeting.

First, Here is Godliness in a more especial manner to be practiced by us at
the Church, where we are now met, in our attendance upon the service of God and
hearing his Word. Then, Brotherly Kindness to be shown, when we meet at the
Table at our Entertainment, by renewing our interrupted Acquaintances, and
expressing the mutual Offices of Love. And lastly, Charity at our Departure
thence, to be exhibited to those of our absent Brethren, whether here or in the
Country, who may any way stand in need of our Assistance.

We begin this days work with Godliness, we are to continue it in Brotherly
Kindness and I hope to God shall make an end of it in Charity.

This Godliness to be exercised together with those our fellow- Christians, who
come to join with us in the religious solemnity of the Day. This Brotherly
Kindness amongst Our selves, according to the Appointment of our particular
Meeting. And this Charity to be handed to those of our Brethren, whose wants
are to be supplied, that though they are not Guests, yet they may be Partakers
of our Love-feast; that so leaving a Blessing behind us, we may all of us carry
away a Blessing with us to our several homes and habitations.

Now that this our Meeting may not be for the worse, as St. Paul complains of
his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.17.
but for the better; let us Pray unto Almighty God, that he would prevent us in
all our doings with his most gracious favor, and further us with his continual
help, that in all our works of Piety, Kindness, and Charity, begun, continued,
and ended in him, we may glorify his holy Name, and finally by his mercy
obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

In whose Name let us further pray for all our Brethren and Sisters throughout
the world, all the sons and daughters of Adam, that God, whose mercy is over
all his works, would have mercy upon all men.

More especially for all of the household of Faith, for all our fellow-Citizens
of the new Jerusalem, for the whole Catholic Church.

Particularly for that part of it here planted among us; that he would be
favorable to our Sion, that all that love her and her ways, may prosper, and
that all counsels and all weapons formed against her, may ever miscarry and
come to naught, as hitherto (praised be his Goodness) they have done; that
neither Popery nor Schism may ever prevail over Her.

And herein in a most especial manner, for his most excellent Majesty CHARLES,
etc. that he would with the choicest of his gifts and graces crown his Royal
Head and Heart, that he would preserve his Person, establish his Government,
direct his Counsels, and prosper his Undertakings; and that after a long long
and happy Reign over us, he would make his Glory great in his Salvation; that
he would bless him in his Royal Consort Queen KATHERINE, in his Illustrious
Brother JAMES D. of York, etc.

Let us continue our prayers and enforce our requests for the whole Land and
Nation to which we belong, that he would pardon our Sins and heal our Breaches,
that neither our Ungodly provocations on the one hand, nor our Uncharitable
divisions on the other, may ever forfeit or betray that Peace which we do at
present enjoy.

Lastly, let us beg a blessing upon our selves here assembled, that he would
grant us his grace so to order our lives with that Piety to God, that Brotherly
Kindness to one another, and that Charity to the poor of our Brethren,
according to the ability he has bestowed upon every one of us; and that he
would at this time so assist us, both Me the unworthy dispenser of his Word,
and You his beloved People, that both I may so speak, etc.

These and all other our Desires and Acknowledgements, let us again recommend
unto our merciful Father in the Name and Words of his well-beloved Son, saying,
as himself has taught us to pray, Our Father, etc.

And to Godliness [add] Brotherly Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity.

The Apostle having told his Brethren and Countrymen, the Convert- Jews, (for
those were they he writes to, as being the Apostle of the Circumcision) that
through the knowledge of Christ, v. 3.
they had all things given unto them that pertain unto life and godliness, and
that by those exceeding great and precious promises, v. 4.
which were made out to them by him, they might be partakers of the divine
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust; he
puts them in mind what they are more to do in order to this end, what further
progress they are to make in their Christian profession, v. 5.
that besides this they would give all diligence, and add to their faith,
virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, v. 6.
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity. And then
tells them in the two following verses, that if these things be in them and
abound, they will make them that they shall not be barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, that they should not be idle,
empty, formal Professors of the Gospel, but true Christians indeed, who
evidence and justify their profession by their conversation: and on the other
hand, that he that lacks these things, has forgotten that he was purged from
his old sins; that is, his Christianity, notwithstanding his having been
baptized, and his having received the Gospel, does him no good, stands him in
no stead, nor so much as serves to distinguish him from other common men, from
ordinary Heathens; but leaves him, as it found him, still in his sins: and then
v. 10. presses the practice of these things, as the only way to make their
calling and election sure.

Before I go to treat particularly of these three several Virtues or Graces
here recommended to us, give me leave to give you some account of them first in
the General, partly from the Context, as they are reckoned up with other
graces; and partly from the Text it self, as they depend upon and cohere with
one another.

In the whole Context the Apostle has set down, as you have heard, no less
than eight distinct characters or qualifications requisite to constitute and
denominate a man a sincere Christian, one truly Religious; to wit, Faith,
Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, and
Charity, as the Complement and Consummation of all.

From whence I draw this Corollary,That true Religion is in its nature an
Accumulative and Comprehensive thing, that does not consist in any one single
Act, or simple Habit, but requires a Complex of Virtues, a Constellation of
Graces.

In the Text it self we find three of these Virtues or Graces in a more
indearing manner joined together, Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, and Charity.

Hence I gather this Remark, That Godliness, that is, Piety toward God, is not
a morose, ill-natured, and humorous principle, as too many peradventure have
taken it to be, but that which requires to be accompanied with acts of Kindness
and works of Charity to our Brethren and fellow members, especially those who
stand in some nearer relation to us, to whom therefore we have more particular
obligations.

I. First for the Context, that Religion is a thing of an Accumulative and
Comprehensive nature, appears by the Apostles reckoning up several Ingredients
and Integral parts for the making up the Body of it. I shall not dare to say,
that it was S. Peter's design in this place to make an exact and complete
Enumeration of those Virtues, which are to make up the truth of Religion: as
may be made out by those other Lists and Catalogues, which his Brother S. Paul
has given us, Gal. V. 22, 23. and elsewhere; in which we shall find some of
these here named by him omitted, and others mentioned by him, here not taken
notice of. It was enough for the ones and the others purpose, to lay down some
of the principal, wherein the main of Religion lies.

However, this is evident, and plainly appears from them both, that there is
cumulus virtutum, an accumulation of Virtues, an aggregation of good things,
requisite to entitle a man to the truth of Religion, to make him deserve the
name of one truly Religious.

And thus is it in common Morality, where they tell us that all the virtues are
so inseparably linked together, that where any one is wanting, there is really
no one of them. Nay, even in the performance of any single act of any one
virtue, there is that complex consideration of all the circumstances, according
to the Philosophers definition of them, that it be done (...), in that manner,
and at such time, and according to such proportions as it ought to be done, to
make it a virtuous act. This also founded upon a general Maxim or Rule, among
the Moralists, that Bonum ex integra causa, Malum ex quovis defectu; that any
Good action must proceed from an entire cause, and that the defect of any one
circumstance spoils the action, and makes it to become Evil.

If it be so in mere Moral practices, much more is it so in Religious concerns,
since Religion is the Improvement and Perfection of Morality, as Faith is the
Directer and Accomplisher of Reason. It is not then any one simple Habit, any
one single Act can entitle any one to the truth of Religion any more than to
Morality, which are either of them to be made up of a complex of Virtues, that
are, as the Poets fancied of the Graces, to go hand in hand, and to keep their
orderly rounds, and to give their mutual assistances in the conduct and
management of Humane or Christian life.

It is true, he who has Faith, who believes Gospel-mysteries, and professes
this belief, has upon that bare account a title to Christianity as to the
external privilege of it; but that is not enough to denominate him a true
Christian, unless he go on, and add to his faith, virtue. And he who is
Virtuous, who orders his conversation virtuously, may in some sense be called
an honest Good man; but then he must add to his virtue, knowledge. And he who
is a knowing man, and has gotten a competent Theory of the Credenda and Agenda,
things to be believed and things to be done, of the mysteries and duties of
Religion, may be said to be a Wise understanding man; but then he must add to
his knowledge, temperance; or else his knowledge will be no more than what the
Gnostics boasted of, a sort of Heretics who though so named from their
pretended knowledge, yet lived in all kind of impurities. Again, he who is
Temperate, and restrains his natural desires, may so far be looked upon as a
Sober person; but then he must add to his temperance, patience, for the
indurance of afflictions, as well as the forbearance of pleasures. And he who
is Patient, and humbly submits to the divine will in his chastisements or
trials, may be very well taken to be a Meek man, which is one of the chief
marks of a right Christian spirit; but then he must add to his patience,
godliness. Now he that is Godly, that fears God, and often comes before him in
his private and public addresses, frequents his Church and Ordinances, and
orderly performs the duties of family and closet, he surely has made a fair
advance in Religion, and may and must be thought a Pious man; but then to his
godliness he must add brotherly kindness. And he that has a love for the
Brotherhood, is courteous, and gentle, and mild in his converse, and
well-meaning to all of the same Society, may not improperly be termed a
Good-natured man, a thing which is so far from being a disadvantage or
disparagement, that it is a great ornament to Religion; but then he must to
brotherly kindness add charity. And now we are come to the very topstone of
this spiritual edifice, to the very pitch of perfection; Charity being the
fulfilling of the Law, both Moral and Christian.

Here you find that to Faith is to be added Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, and so
on; which rationally infers, that not any one or more of these will serve turn
without the other. So then it is not enough to be a Believer, to be Virtuous,
to be Knowing, to be Temperate, to be Patient, to be Godly, to be Brotherly
kind, to be Charitable; I say it is not sufficient for a man to be any one of
these, but he must be all these, if he will be a good Christian, and mean to
deserve the name of one truly Religious.

Thus much of the first general head; the second is that which more nearly and
immediately concerns us, which is gathered out of the Text it self, that

2. Inasmuch as the Apostle here requires Brotherly Kindness and Charity to be
superadded to Godliness; that Godliness is not a morose, humorous, ill-natured,
much less a cruel, mischievous and bloody principle; but must, to make it a
true genuine godliness, be attended with acts of Kindness and works of Charity.
So S. Peter himself, in his 1 Ep. chapter 2. v. 17. Love the Brotherhood. Fear God,
and then Honor the King as Gods Vicegerent and Lord of the Community. As if
there could be no right fear of God without love of the brotherhood, and
neither one nor other without a due honor to the King, the Head of the
brotherhood.

In like manner S. Paul resolves all Religion into Faith and Love; Philem. 5.
faith toward the Lord Jesus, and love toward the Saints, which make up his
mystical body, whereof we are all fellow members; for in this sense we profess
to believe the communion of Saints.

And so the beloved Disciple tells us, that this is Gods commandment, 1 John
3.23.
that we should believe in the Lord Jesus, and love one another.

Thus Christ himself has stated the business of his Religion, Joh. 8.31.
If ye continue in my Word, that is, keep my commandments, then are ye my
disciples indeed. And how is that? in another place he says it over in these
words, By this shall all men know, Joh. 13.35
that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. It seems then, that our
loving one another is the same thing as continuing in his Word, as keeping his
Commandments: and hereupon it is said that love is the fulfilling of the law.
Romans 13.10
This was that new commandment, Christ brought into the world, Joh. 13.34
that we should love one another. This the great (...) and trial of our love to
God, of our godliness it self, that we love the brethren, 1 John 4.20.
as he tells us; For, says he, he who loves not his brother whom he has seen,
how can he pretend to love God, whom he has not seen?

Nor is this so a new commandment, as himself acknowledges, 2 John 5.
but that it was an old one too. For our Savior's Ancestor David in his short
Catechism, Psalm. 15. has given much-what the same account of Religion. Lord,
says he, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
i. e. who has a right to the privileges of the Church militant? who has
assurance of an everlasting possession in the Church triumphant? He answers
this question in the four following verses. He that walks uprightly, and
works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart. He that backbiteth
not with his tongue, nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach
against his neighbor; and so on. Which are all or most part of them expresses
of brotherly kindness and charity: and then in the close he tells us, that He
which does these things shall never fall.

So then we are to love God with all our heart and strength; that is Godliness:
Luke 10.17
and our neighbor as our selves; that is Brotherly kindness and Charity: as
Christ himself has summed up the duties of the Law.

And many other such passages there are in Scripture to evince this truth, had
I time to insist on them.

If this be so, what shall we say to those who take up Godliness on other
terms, as if their strictness and zeal to God's service, to his worship, right
or wrong, excused them from all offices of love to their fellow-men, their
fellow christians; nay, obliged them to be Unkind, to be Uncharitable, and to
persecute even to death those, who, not out of any evil meaning to them, will
not, but out of conscience to God dare not comply with sinful conditions of
communion with them.

This was foretold by our blessed Lord should be the lot of his followers, that
some such zealots there would be, Joh. 16.2.
who would turn them out of the Synagogue, excommunicate them for Heretics,
and then kill them, and yet by their so doing would think they did God good
service.

Blessed Jesus! where have these men, who take thy holy Name in vain, these
Fellows of thine, (for so they style themselves,) learnt of thee such
principles, such practices as these, that it is lawful so cruelly and
treacherously to deal with men who live quietly by them? with S. Paul's Sword
to destroy them from off the face of the earth, and with S. Peter's Keys to
lock the gates of Heaven against them? to murder them in this world, and to
damn them in the next? This Evangelium armatum, this Sanguinary doctrine, was
no Gospel of thy making, no doctrine of thy teaching. Thy doctrine was sealed
with no blood but that of thy own, who wast the teacher of it, and that of thy
Apostles and Martyrs, who were the propagators of it; and though thou said
thou came not to send peace but a sword, Mat. 10.34
yet that sword was not designed to fight with, but to suffer by; it was a
sword of a passive not of an active persecution as to thy Disciples, by which
they were to fall victims themselves, and not to sacrifice the lives of others.

How contrary to thine and their meek innocent methods of converting souls, are
the traitorous contrivances and hellish conspiracies of those who for the
advantage of Holy Church, plot the murder of Kings, the slaughter of Subjects,
and the ruin of States, and (rare Masters of Christianity, as they are) think
it glorious to Proselyte whole Nations by baptizing them in their blood. May
God ever preserve his gracious Majesty and Us the sinful people of this Land
from such villainous Attempts of his and our Enemies.

I know the like Bigotries and Outrages are charged upon our Sectaries even at
this time, and that with great vehemence. I am heartily sorry, that any, who
delight to wear the name of Protestants, as I think most of those people do,
should give a just occasion for such a charge. But if it be so, if there shall
be any danger hereafter on that side, as there has been lately on the other,
may God in good time discover it as he has done the other, and avert and
defeat them both. For as I have been speaking my utmost abhorrence of
Iesuitical principles, so I am very far from pleading the cause of any party of
men, be they of what denomination soever, who act by such principles.

No; nor would I, nor can I without injury, be so understood, that in the scope
and drift of this discourse I intended a shelter and defense for Schism; as if
the sober execution of penal laws upon offenders in Church as well as State,
were the same thing with that irregular, Unchristian, Inhumane persecution, I
have been declaring against; the case being quite different betwixt the wicked
efforts of an Usurped pretended power without us, and the prudential
proceedings of a lawful authority over us.

Though truly after all it cannot be denied, (with grief I speak it) and so far
at least this Charge must be owned, that since we have run our selves into
these divisions, wherein we now stand, the pretense of Godliness has almost
banished all brotherly kindness and charity from among us.

II. I have done with the General part. I come now to treat of these virtues
severally; Godliness, Brotherly kindness, and Charity.

Godliness in reference to God, Brotherly kindness to one another, and Charity
to all men, especially to our Poor.

1. GODLINESS in the first place, that our Brotherly kindness may be
inoffensive, and our Charity acceptable.

Now there are as several sorts of Godliness, in vulgar acception of the word,
as there are of Religions in the world. At this rate there are godly Pagans,
godly Turks, godly Papists, godly Heretics, and godly Schismatics. Nay, upon
this account perchance the Devils themselves in some sense are not to be quite
exempted from some notion of godliness; Jam. 2.19.
for they believe and tremble, they have a kind of Religion amongst them too,
and though they do not love God, they believe and fear him.

I make no doubt to believe what our S. Peter has affirmed, and to say it
after him, that Now know I of a truth, Act. 10.35.
says he, that God is no respecter of persons, and that in every nation he
that fears God and works righteousness, (whatever his way of worship be, if he
does not know or has not the means to know any better) is accepted of him: This
is but the judgment of charity. But to think or say that an Infidel as an
Infidel, a Mohammedan as a Mohammedan, and so of the rest, that a Papist, a
Heretic, or a Schismatic, as such, is in a salvable condition, is such a
fondness of charity, that it can be little better it self than an heretical, a
damnable opinion. I am sure it is not the judgment of discretion, as being no
where warranted by the Word of God, and having been anathematized by our Church
in her Articles.

Godliness then does not consist in a form, in the mode or dress of worship.
That Is but external and ceremonious: yet a form is necessary; and it is
impossible to serve God otherwise, that is, without some form or other.
However, as necessary as a Form is to Godliness, it is not essential; for which
reason it may be supposed our Savior himself did not think fit to appoint any
form, but lest it to the prudence of his Apostles in their several districts
and provinces, and consequently to particular Churches, pro hic and nunc, to
determine. And herein, as I take it, lies the nature of Schism, for men
wilfully to depart from that public form of worship, which the authority of
that Church they belong to has prescribed, and so to dismember themselves from
their own body.

And upon this ground we of the Church of England may acquit our selves, and
justify our separation from the Church of Rome, as the bold British Bishops
did, when they gave a meeting to Austin the Popes Missionary at a place in our
County, thence called Austins Oak, which Cambden owns, but confesses he knows
not where to fix; where they did with equal truth and bravery disdain the Popes
jurisdiction over the British Churches: I say, we may answer the Romanists,
when they charge us with Heresy and Schism, in S. Paul's words, [as having no
dependence upon the Pope, unless we will foolishly inslave our selves] that
according to that way which they call Heresy, Act. 24.14.
we worship the God of our fathers.

It Is true, some forms are in themselves faulty; but the best of forms is not
of it self saving, sufficient to salvation: since the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy
3.5.
that some having the form of godliness, deny the power thereof.

If then Godliness does not consist in a form, much less does it in cant and
gibbrish, in affected tones and uncouth phrases. No, Godliness lies in the
heart and the life of a Christian; there is the power and the truth of it.

When the Heart is possessed with a reverential aw of the divine power, and
majesty, and justice, and with the love of his mercy and goodness, and all the
affections are exercised upon his adorable perfections: And yet still these
possessions of heart, our good intentions and pious directions of mind are not
enough, but must be set forth to the life in our lives, if we will be truly
godly. For it is a godly life, that is, the life of godliness. The Apostle tells
us of some that live without God in the world. Those are in the strictest sense
the ungodly ones: and he warns us to deny ungodly lusts. Tit. 2.12.
That Is right Godliness.

But then more particularly Godliness is made out in the public worship of
God. So it is said of Enos his time, Genesis 4.25.
that then began men to call upon the name of the Lord, that is, to worship him
in solemn assemblies, and in public devotions. And this godliness, when we can
once agree in Gods public worship, will beget and confirm brotherly kindness,
which is the next virtue to be spoken to.

2. BROTHERLY KINDNESS. Brother in Scripture-use is not always taken in that
narrow sense of relation and kindred, but many times comprehends all mankind,
as we are all descended of Adam. Especially it denotes those of the household of
faith; this being the nearest tie and strictest obligation of brotherhood. And
O that we, who own our selves Christians, Psalm. 133.1.
Protestants, might as brethren dwell together in unity, that we might go to
the house of God in company, Psalm. 55.14.
and take sweet counsel together. But alas! as we stand divided, how can we
call our selves brethren? Such brethren we may be as Esau and Jacob, Isaac and
Ishmael, Cain and Abel were, to hate, and persecute, and ruin one another, if
occasion were offered. Surely, surely, those who have deserted our
Establishments, we may and must call them English brethren; but how to call
them Protestant brethren I do not well know; for of them I may say, what S.
John says of some in his time, 1 John 2.19
that if they had been of us, they would not have departed from us. However, we
must have a love and kindness for them too, and this Kindness to our brethren
is to be expressed in thought, word, and action.

That we think the best of them, put the best interpretation upon their
actions, that we wish them well, rejoice in their well-doing, and condole their
ills: and this is that which by the Schools is called amor benevolentiae, the
love of good will.

That we speak the best of them according to the judgment of charity, and that
we judge not, for fear of being judged. Mat. 7.1.


That we do them all manner of good; for this is the royal law, to do as we
would be done by. And thus our blessed Lord, who as he was our elder brother,
the firstborn of the creation, so was the author of our Religion; he went
about doing good, Act. 10.38.
and seeking opportunities of doing it.

Where this brotherly kindness is, there will be no grudg and hatred, no envy
or malice at the heart, no calumny and detraction, no slander and reproach in
the tongue, no quarrel and strife, no mischief or injury in action.

But then this kindness must not proceed so far as to degenerate into a sinful
compliance with our brothers sins. This would make us brethren in iniquity.
This the Apostle taxes, Romans 1. the last verse; speaking of those who have
pleasure in them that do evil things, (...), that consent with them; as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 50.18
Thou saw a thief, and consentedst with him. To be drunk with the drunken,
to fit with patience and hear my brother blaspheme God and damn his own soul,
to see him run down a precipice, blunder into a pit, and take the ready way for
hell, and not lay hold of him and pull him back, this is such brotherly
kindness as the Devil himself has for any man in the world. What says the rule
in Leviticus? Lev. 19.17
Thou shall love thy brother, and not suffer sin upon him; That Is the truest of
loves. Hence, Correptio fraterna, brotherly reproof in such cases is reckoned
to be one of the chief acts of Charity.

O my dear Brethren, let it not be said of us, that we meet for excess and
riot, for noise and quarrel; but rather let it be seen by our carriage, that we
come together upon a religious, a brotherly, and a charitable account.

And that is the thing we are all to conclude with; where let me beg your
patience as well as charity, that you will not think me tedious, whilst I
enlarge my self upon this blessed subject of charity.

3. CHARITY! where art thou? in what airy Mansion art thou lodged? what
invisible Palace do thou inhabit? Where may we find thee, that we may make
our dutiful addresses to thee? S. Paul indeed has given a fair description of
thee, in 1 Cor. 13. but by those characters there laid down, it is very
difficult finding thee out in any earthly abode; and sure he himself was wrapped
up into the third heaven, when he took the copy of thy celestial countenance,
and drew those amiable lines and features of thy Seraphick beauty.

Thou wast she, who from eternity wast that cement, by which the three Persons
of the glorious Trinity were united in the Unity of the Godhead, and were
satisfied in their mutual enjoyments, when as yet there was nothing without
them, nothing besides them.

Thou she, who afterward by thy charms of love did join the Upper and the
Lower world; who broughtest down the Son of God, and made him descend upon
earth, and who wilt bring us up to heaven after him, whither he is ascended.

Thou art the very foundation and perfection of Christian Religion, who with an
infinite activity fulfillest all God's commandments, Romans 13.10. Prove. 10.12.
and with as infinite a goodness coverest all our sins.

Thou createst and keep up a good understanding betwixt a Prince and his
People, and betwixt the people among themselves; making men of one wind in a
house, in a city, in a Kingdom.

Thou art the very band and ligament of Peace, who preservest and securest all
the Interests of mankind, their lives and liberties, their plenty and
prosperity in their several societies and stations.

He that abides in thee, abides in God, and God in him; 1 John 4.16
for thou and God are all one.

1 Cor. 13.7.
Thou with an omnipotence equal to Gods, bear all things, indurest all
things, believe and hopest all things.

And at last, after thou have wrought thy mighty and glorious acts of kindness
here below, thou shall ascend in triumph through the spangled vault, and shall
enter into heaven with a train of thy good works following thee, leaving thy
two sister-graces behind thee at heaven-gate; for in that blessed state of
Vision and Fruition there will be no need of either Faith or Hope, where thou
alone, O Charity, together with the Three-One God, shall be all in all.

But hold! what mean I in this transport to lose thee by inquiring after thee?
What did I say? lose thee? I have found thee. I see thee. Thou art (blessed be
God) come into the Congregation, and with thy gracious presence have filled the
Church. I see thy holy flame sitting on each pious breast, and inlivening and
enlarging every devout heart with its heavenly warmth. Let me now therefore
look out for objects upon which thou may bestow thy blessed self.

Charity is of that diffusive nature, that it extends it self to all mankind,
as being the emanation of divine goodness, which is as infinite as God himself
is; and more especially reaches its kindly effects over the whole Catholic
Church, to all of the household of faith; it being that which unites and ties
together all the members of that mystical body. But I am not now to speak of it
in that larger sense, but in an importance appropriate to the Poor of our
Brethren, whom God has appointed his Receivers, as he has made the Rich his
Trustees.

That, to wit, that the Poor are his Receivers, appears by the account Christ,
who himself is to be the Judge, gives us of the last judgment, Matthew. 25. that
what we do to any of our poor Brethren, he takes it as done to himself; and
upon this score it is said, Prove. 19.17.
He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord.

This, to wit, that the Rich are but his Trustees, is made good by the parable
of the Talents, which the only way of improving, is to lay them out; and by
that charge the Apostle gives, Charge them that are rich in this world that
they do good, 1 Timothy 6.17.
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.
etc. Why charge them to do so, if it be not their duty so to do?

This kind of charity is expressed in feeding the hungry, in clothing the naked,
in visiting the sick, in relieving the widow and fatherless, and generally in
supplying the wants of all those, especially in the circle of our own society
and brotherhood, who any way want our assistance. And this charity it is, that
as in this world it sanctifies, improves, and secures estates to men and their
posterities after them; so in the next world will be that, by which eternal
rewards will be adjusted to men, as you find in that forecited place, Mat. 25.

Let me conclude this argument for charity with a blessed Promise, Mat. 5.7.
that the merciful shall obtain mercy; and a severe Threat, that those who have
shown no mercy, are to expect in their greatest distress at the day of
judgment, justice without mercy from a righteous God.

Only let me add, that those (for there is such a sort of well-minded persons
in the world) that put off their doing good works till they die, besides that
they may by some sudden unexpected accident be cut off from putting their good
intentions into execution, ought to consider that their charity is not so
thankworthy, that they give then, when they can hold no longer: The surest rule
is, to be continually doing good, as occasions shall offer themselves.

Now as to the objects of our charity, I am persuaded we have enough of them
within our own sphere, I mean of our native Country. It is the opinion of some,
that the object presented does lay a necessity upon the election of the Will. I
wish it were so in the business of charity. Shall I lay some instances before
you?

There are poor Livings, poor Schools, where the Ministers and Masters are so
far from having an honorable allowance, that they have scarce a bare
subsistence. But these things of a public concern are such, as I fear our
annual contributions will hardly reach to: Though I have a prospect, what
hereafter may be done, if we ever come to get such a bank, a stock, as may be
called a Mount of Piety.

There are Ministers poor Widows and Orphans, poor aged persons to be taken
care of, having no ability to help themselves; and poor Children to be educated
and bred up to Callings; of which kind of charity an Eminent Countryman of
ours has shown a great and lasting Example, and by that means raised a
Monument to his own Name amongst us, and I doubt not entailed a great Blessing
upon his whole Family.

Well; but what do I? do I take upon me to direct? No: but I am set here to
give aim. It must be left to the prudence of those worthy persons (with
submission to whose better judgment I speak in this case) I say it is left to
their discretion, who are entrusted with the disposal of our Charities, to make
application of them, as they shall think fit. Only let me be bold to name to
you two sorts of Poor, and press in their behalf, who may most properly
challenge a share in them.

The Clothworking trade has been one of the glories of Worcestershire, and has
maintained when time was many families, who are now I fear most of them
impoverished through want either of Employment or Encouragement. The reason of
it possibly may be this, that our Staple is betrayed into foreign hands; and
that strangers, what by their thrift and other crafts, under-sell us in the
manufacture of our own commodity. It will be a thing very well becoming you,
Worthy Countrymen, and no less agreeable to the place where you are to meet,
Drapers Hall, to take this into your consideration.

Another sort which I must heartily recommend to you, is the Royal Sufferers, I
mean the old Cavaliers; I pray God there may never be any occasion for new
ones; those who have spent their blood, and exhausted their estates in the
service of their King and Country. I cannot forbear, though it be to public
shame, but speak it with grief, that that sort of men have since the Kings
happy Restoration been too too much neglected: when brave persons with their
scars, the marks of their Loyalty upon them, have been forced to beg their
bread, with that great unfortunate General, Date obolum Belisario, I, and have
perished for want of it. And though that were so long ago, as by this time to
put former merits out of mind, and many if not most perhaps of those Sufferers
have been eaten up with their wants, and gone in discontent to their long
homes, and so prevented our Charity; yet some no question of that number have
survived their hard fate, and have been by some extraordinary Providence kept
alive; who knows but for the comfort of this day?

Come, Gentlemen, our City and County has been famous for its Loyalty and
Sufferings, having been one of the first Stages of the Civil War, to fight for
gasping Monarchy; and at last the Scene of that fatal Defeat, when the God of
our Dread Sovereign, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
who dwelt in the Bush, Psalm. 140.7.
covered his head in the day of Battle, and secured his escape amidst the armed
throngs of his enemies that had beset him. I leave it with you; only
remembering you, that we are met here this day for the honor of our Country,
and we cannot do her a greater Honor, than by owning distressed Loyalty, and
relieving those who have been Sufferers upon that honorable account.

Briefly to recapitulate all that I have been saying, the Apostle has sum'd up
all Religion in three words, That we live godly, righteously, and soberly; Tit.
2.12.
which is much what the same with my Text. Godly, in the fear and service of
God. Righteously, by doing by others as we would be done by our selves; which
includes Charity, when out of compassion we make the poors condition our own.
And Soberly, without riot or debosh, without quarrel and strife; which is the
truest and best Brotherly Kindness.

And these three things are those by which the three great Interests of mankind
are provided for and secured; Soul, Body, and Estate. For what other way of
saving our souls, but by serving of God, by Godliness? What better Rule of
Health can there be than Temperance or Sobriety? and what so likely a method of
improving and securing Wealth as Charity, which lays up our treasure in heaven,
Mat. 6.20.
where neither corruption can attaint it, nor violence invade it? So the Poet
himself, Extra fortunam est quicquid donatur.

Whatsoever a man bestows to charitable uses, he puts it out of the power, and
beyond the reach of fortune.

Now as you have with patience and cheerfulness attended the duties of the
Church, which is one part of Godliness; so may your brotherly kindness be
exercised together without excess or tumult, and may your charity now, as it
ought after so many years intermission, be liberal and exemplary.

Thus if you do, you will assuredly, as I said at first, by leaving a Blessing
behind you, carry one home along with you; and I also (which is the last part
of what I have to do) may in a just confidence dismiss you with a Blessing.

The peace of God, etc.
An Advertisement.
THere is a Volume of LXI Sermons of this Author, printed for Richard Marriot,
and sold by most Booksellers.

Also a Sermon lately preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, sold
by Walter Kettleby at the Bishops head in St. Paul's Churchyard.


