HEZEKIAH'S Return of PRAISE For His RECOVERY.

By A. L.

PSALM. L. 14, 15. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most
high.
And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.
LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Samuel Tomson at the Bishops-Head in
Duck-lane. 1668.

To the Pious Reader.
THe Occasion of Preaching this Sermon, was suitable to the Text, a good Man's
Recovery: of Printing it, the desire of Copies; and the Press was for this
judged the readiest way: and thus though intended but for few, may be for the
use of many. The Author is one neither seeks applause, nor fears censure; if it
may do thy soul any benefit, he has his end. To which purpose this Synopsis was
added, that thou might have the Method and Heads of the Discourse before
thee in one view. The Doxology in the close being an Extract great part of it
out of the Psalter (a book, which if thou deserve the name I called thee by,
thou art well acquainted with) needed no references. If by the perusal thou
find'st thy self any whit benefited, give God the praise, and let the Author
have thy prayers. Farewell.

The SYNOPSIS.
The Text divided into IV. Parts.
I. The Affliction: and that either 1. Corporal. A sickness: described by It Is
Quality, Bitterness: and that as it is 1. Undergone by Hezekias. Obs. God's
dearest ones are not exempt from bitter afflictions. 2. Resented by him. Obs.
Natural apprehensions allowed even in Exercises of grace.
It Is Quantity, Great bitterness. Obs. Great Saints exercised with great
Trials. The change, For Peace, i. e. Health. Obs. The truly pious in change of
condition change not; but serve God for God's sake. The surprise, Behold. Obs.
A Christian must stand upon his guard.
2. Spiritual, Trouble of conscience. Obs. A troubled conscience is not always
an evil conscience.
II. The Deliverance: considered in The Author, God: Thou have delivered. Obs.
God is the sole author of all our deliverances. The Motive, In love, and that
to my soul. Obs. Divine mercy is gratuitous. Obs. Soul-love is the best of
loves. The Danger, From the pit of corruption. Obs. All our lifetime we walk
on the pit-brink.
III. The Improvement and Assurance: Pardon of sins. Thou have delivered, thou
have cast my sins, etc. Obs. God uses to accumulate mercies. In love to my
soul; for thou have cast, etc. Obs. Pardon of sins the complement and
perfection of mercy. From the pit; for thou have cast, etc. Obs. Where sin is
forgiven, no fear of hell or the grave. All my sins behind thy back. Obs. God's
pardons are universal and absolute.
IV. The Acknowledgment. Where mark by the way. (The Connection: For the grave,
etc. Obs. The only Return God expects for mercy is Praise. The Synonymy of
Praise and Hope. Obs. To trust in God is to praise him.)
As it is set Negatively, The grave cannot, etc. Obs. Death is a silent and
hopeless state. Positively, The living shall. Obs. Our life to be spent in the
giver's praise. Lastly, exemplified, As I do this day. Obs. Signal mercies
require solemn Thanksgiving.

HEZEKIAH's Return of PRAISE for his RECOVERY.
Is A. xxxviii. 17, 18, and part of the 19, ver. 17. Behold, for peace I had
great bitterness; but thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of
corruption: for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

18. For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that
go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day. --


THESE Words are part, and indeed the principal part of Hezekiah's Song of
Thanksgiving, after he was recovered of a dangerous sickness; as you find in
the ninth Verse, when all his thoughts were, as himself tells us from the 10th.
to the 15th. Verse, that he should not live, that he should never escape this
bout, never come abroad more. I said, that is, by an Hebraism, (...), uti
Graece (...), dicere and cogitare; prout e contra, (...) meditari primum, dein
eloqui.
I thought, in the cutting off of my days, (or as some Versions render it, in
the midst of my days) I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of
the residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the
land of the living. I shall never go more to Church, never have any further
opportunities to wait upon God in his Sanctuary. I shall behold man no more
with the Inhabitants of the World; never go abroad again to converse with men
any more, etc. So that in effect he gave himself up for lost, as to this world;
and perhaps the Physicians did so too. Nay, and which was more, when the
Doctors belike had given him over, the Prophet brings him the unwelcom message,
that he must prepare himself, For dye he should, and not live, v. 1. Yet after
all, when he was in extremis, upon his prayer, God was entreated to renew his
lease, and to lengthen his life. And so as in the former part of his Song he
mournfully commemorates his Sickness: So in the latter part from the 15th.
verse, to the end, he cheerfully returns thanks for his Recovery.

The words, we have made choice of, belong to this latter part; and there are
four things in them observable.

1. A sad heavy affliction. Behold for peace I had great bitterness.

2. A merciful deliverance out of this affliction, But thou have in love to my
soul delivered it from the put of corruption.

3. A blessed improvement of this mercy, For thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back.

4. A thankful acknowledgement of this improved mercy, in the rest of the words.

The Affliction aggravated,

1. By a description of it in its own nature, bitterness; and in the quantity
of it, 'twas great bitterness.

2. By opposition of the contrary blessing which it removed, 'twas for peace; a
word, that comprehends in the notion of it all our worldly enjoyments, all
temporal blessings whatsoever; and more particularly in Holy Writ is taken for
health, a blessing, without which all other blessings have no relish in them,
give no true satisfaction to the enjoyer, For peace I had great bitterness, i.
e. for the health which he had formerly enjoyed, he had had a very bitter
sickness.

And then lastly the bitterness of this change is heightened by the surprise of
it. Behold, as a strange thing! Behold, how all on a sudden, upon my peace came
great bitterness, as the Margin reads it.

Bitterness, and great bitterness, and that in exchange for peace, for a state
of health and prosperity; and all this with a sudden strange surprise. Behold,
for peace I had great bitterness. This was his Affliction.

And this much further aggravated still, if we unde stand it as we must, in a
spiritual sense too; that his sickness calling his sins to remembrance, and
causing some distrusts of God's love, instead of that peace of conscience, and
quiet tranquillity of mind he had had heretofore, his spirit was now troubled,
and greatly imbittered. And Prove. 18. 4.
a wounded grieved spirit who can bear?

On the other hand, the mercy of the Deliverance

1. From the efficient cause, 'twas God delivered him, But thou have delivered.

2. From the motive or impulsive cause, 'twas out of Love; not out of design,
as men usually do courtesy: but out of a free kindeness, and that a love of
the best sort; 'twas in love to his soul.

And 3. From the danger he was delivered out of, and that no ordinary one; it
was a pit, and no ordinary pit neither, 'twas the pit of corruption, even the
Grave, the very state of death.

But thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption.

So then, however he came by his sickness, he is sure 'twas God recovered him
out of it; and he did it out of Love, out of an especial love he bore to the
soul of him, which was sufficiently manifested by this, that his life was
precious in Gods sight, God delivering it from the pit of corruption.

Nor is this all. You heard 'twas a spiritual mercy, Assurance of Divine love
to his soul, and for a further Improvement of this temporal bodily mercy, it is
added; for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back, that, as God had
embraced his soul in the arms of his love; (so the Interlinear Version,
Amplexus es amore animam meam) and as it were put her into his bosom; so he had
cast all his sins behind his back, never to come more into remembrance.

This is the Crown of Mercies, when temporals are thus accumulated with
spirituals; this a recovery indeed of the whole man, when health is improved
into salvation, and strength of body accompanied with pardon of sins. This is
right saving Health, and deserves the returns of a grateful Acknowledgment,
which now follows in the last place.

And that is set forth, first, by showing the impossibility for the dead to
perform this duty, Synonymies.

For the grave cannot praise thee.

Death cannot celebrate thee.

They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

which all come to one meaning.

And then on the contrary, showing not the possibility only, but the
probability that the living will, i. e. such as divine mercy continues in life,
and especially such as are by that mercy preserved from imminent danger of
death. --

-- The living, the living, he shall praise thee. And this probability
exemplified in himself, made good by his own practice; --

-- As I do this day. Thus having opened the several scenes of our intended
meditation, I shall now proceed to draw from them some useful Observations,
interweaving their applications all along, with that brevity and clearness, as
such copious heads of matter may in such straights of time admit; and that
rather in a cursory Explanation, then in an elaborate discourse.

First, then for the Affliction, it is not only bitter, but in the abstract
bitterness it self. The sense of Taste is the most necessary of all our senses,
it being that by which all Animals live, and take in their food and
nourishment; and therefore has in it a power to judge, what is grateful and
convenient to the nature of each kind, what not. Now there is no gust the
palate so much dis-relishes as the bitter; nothing, that nature shows a greater
abhorrence to, or that is less welcome to her: whereupon the Psalmist in the
person of Christ looks upon it as one of his enemies greatest unkindenesses,
that they gave him Ps. 69. 21.
Gall and Vinegar to drink; and Christ himself upon the Cross, (I suppose, out
of his mere natural aversation, as he was man) when he had tasted of it, (...),
S. Matthew. 27. 34.
He would not drink it. Upon this score it is, that by an usual Metaphor every
thing that is highly displeasing to any of our affections and senses, either to
the rational or sensitive appetite, is termed bitter: every thing, I say that
is any way afflictive to flesh and blood, any thing that ails us in Mind, or
Body, or Estate, or good name; whether grief, or pain, or poverty, or reproach,
and the like; we may as Hezekiah here calls his sickness, give it the name of
bitterness: nay, even though those afflictions come from the hand of God
himself our gracious Father, by whose providential dispensations every
particular event, be it good or bad, is so carefully managed, that not a
Sparrow falls to the ground without his order. And yet this bitterness too,
though never so unpleasant, may be made profitable, if we make a right use of
it; as we may learn two things from it here,

1. not to be impatient.

2. not to be insensible,

When we are under Gods hand in any affliction.

Fiezekiah's being in bitterness teaches us one, and his complaining of it the
other.

Who? Good King Hezekiah in bitterness? sick, and that unto death? this is
bitterness indeed, that such a Prince, who was a National blessing; that such a
Saint, who had walked before the Lord in truth, and in the sincerity of his
heart, done that which was V. 3.
good in his sight, should be cut off in the midst of his days at XXXIX. (for
that was his age at this time; the fifteen years which were now added, making
up his See 2. Chron. 29. 1.
whole life LIVE.) and should by a bitter and untimely death be sent away to the
gates of the Grave, after the languishment of a pining distemper. Hence we
observe, that Gods dearest ones are not exempted from bitter afflictions. Obs.
And what are we then, that we should repine, and murmur, and think our selves
hardly dealt with? Are we better then all those Saints, who have gone before
us, who have pledged their Master in hearty draughts of his Passion-Cup, and
have marched after him in the dolorous way toward heaven? This should teach us
not only with patience, but even with cheerfulness to take up our crosses, and
to deny our selves in our healths, in our fortunes, in all our enjoyments. And
to recommend this virtue the more to us, let us take along with us some
considerations, why it pleases God to imbitter many times, as he does, the
condition of his Children and Servants in this world. Now God does it upon such
reasons as these; for the chastisement affliction, during our whole life, are
but Essays and Specimens of that conquest, which we must through Christ make
at last of death; that, as he has overcome the world, and swallowed up Death in
victory, we may be made partakers of his triumphs; and having filled up his
sufferings, may in his name set up our banners and our trophies; the banners of
our confidence, and the trophies of our victory. And now, if we have any
ingenuity to acknowledge our sins, any zeal to employ our graces, any holy
ambition to better and improve our selves, any desires toward heaven, or
savor of spiritual things; in a word, any thought or design of living holy,
and dying happy: what reason have we with more then patience, even with
kindeness and friendship, to entertain afflictions, which are to help us in all
this.

Yet let afflictions be as good as they will in the consequents and effects,
they are afflictions still, and may be so resented. Hezekiah no question made
very good use of his sickness, and found as great benefit by it; and yet still
after his recovery he complains of it, and calls it bitterness. We must be
patient, and yet we may be sensible of our afflictions too. We are allowed the
apprehensions of nature, Obs.
even in the exercises of Grace. A good man may be patient, and yet feel his
pains, and complain of them too: or else indeed it is not a genuine patience. I
do not think him truly valiant, whom armor or amulet has made invulnerable;
but him, that feels the smart of his wounds, and yet fights on. Thus our
Savior, the Captain of our Salvation, in his Agony, prays to have the Cup
pass from him, says bemoaningly of himself, that his Soul was sad unto death;
that, as he hung on the Cross poor man at the stretch of every joint, flouted
by his Adversaries, deserted by his followers, forsaken by his Father, he cries
out, My God, my God, etc. and being roasted with the scorching flames of Divine
Wrath, he calls for drink to allay the raging heat of his thirst. For although
the Divinity could have deaded all the pains, which the humane nature
underwent, and have raptured it into a glorious impassibility: yet that was not
to be, since the main merit of his passive obedience lay in this, that he had a
quick sense of the wrath of God due to sin into the very heart of him; and
that, notwithstanding the natural sentiments of his humanity, which put him
upon the desire of being excused, he yet with perfect submission went through
all the sad stages of his bitter passion. Yet now the world is grown to that
pass, as if Religion were turned Stoicism, and stupidity were Christian Valor;
that people generally take it for a kind of bravery, to be insensible of God's
Judgments, and to walk unconcerned in the midst of public or personal
calamities: but sure those of this temper are no other, then such as the
Apostle tells us of, Romans 1. 31. Void of natural affection.

Thus then Hezekiah's being in bitterness teaches us to be patient, and his
complaining of it allows us to be sensible. And no marvel, that he complains,
for 'twas not only bitterness, but great bitterness; both extensively over all
parts, all over bitterness; and intensively, all kinds, all degrees of
bitterness, and so as the Original doubles the word, (...) one way in Hebrew to
express the superlative^: so S. Hierom renders it, Amaritudo mea amarissima, my
most bitter bitterness, superlatively bitter. Now, why God does thus at any
time with any of us, to make our conditions bitter and bitter again, to put in
great bitterness, more bitter ingredients still; besides those reasons we gave
before, (this enlarging the dose being designed to perfect the cure) we have
two or three more to offer: as first, to beat us quite off from Hezekiah's
temper was a little too apt to be peccant in this, the next Chapter shows us,
where out of 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. it is called, The pride of his heart.
ostentation he shows Merodach-Baladan's Messengers, that came to congratulate
his recovery, his treasury, and armoury, and spicery. And then to put the
higher value upon the following mercy. How sweet would health S. John 16. 21.
and heighten the deliverance. And lastly to teach us a right estimate of our
own graces, and Great Saints must Obs.
look for great afflictions. A more then ordinary strength requires a more then
ordinary trial. Every Child, every Novice in Religion can digest a little
bitterness. Hezekiah is to be treated as a Man, to be put upon a becoming task.
The Sons of Anak, and the Zanzummim are fit for such a champion as Joshua to
encounter. Wherefore if God, who uses not to lay more upon us, then we are able
to bear, has laid his hand heavy upon thee, has increased thy pains, and
enraged thy smart: bear up, brave soul, be of good courage in thy conflicts, be
strong in the Lord when he calls thee forth to such hard service, grudge not to
lay out that strength God has given thee to bear thee up and to bear thee out
in the greatest endurances. Thus Holy Job, when the whole world was against
him, the Chaldeans and Sabeans, the Devil and his friends, and wife and all and
God himself seemed to be an indifferent looker on; bore himself up stoutly
against them all; and by the power of God's Grace in him withstood the worst of
Providence without him. The Saints are made glorious by their sufferings, and
it is their great afflictions put the luster upon their victorious Graces, when
patience has had its perfect work. Hezekiah was a man of great piety, and must
therefore meet with great bitterness. And this bitterness in the next place is
the greater too, because it comes in the place of Peace, Cujus ipsum nomen
dulce est, as the great Orator tells us, whose very name is luscious in the
mouth, and speaks sweetness.

We say, Variety is delightful; and it is the condition of the sublunary world
to be whirled about in perpetual vicifsitudes, to be as mutable and full of
changes, as the Moon it self, who has the Dominion over it. And I confess, that
the daybreak brings comfortable tidings after telling the Clocks of a tedious
and restless night; the verdant Spring is welcome, that has been ushered in by
a hard Winter; and the Sunshine shows pleasant, which follows a bitter storm:
But on the contrary (which was Hezekiah's case here) out of a prosperous state
to be tumbled into adversity, to have new troubles tread upon the heels of our
peace, out of health to be thrown upon a bed of bitter sickness; this is a sad
change, and must needs go to the heart of the stoutest and wisest: when the
remembrance of their former good estate serves only to aggravate their present
ills. Yet so it seems good to the all wise God to exercise his Children, to try
their sincerity to the utmost, whether they have any by-ends in their service;
whether their piety be real, or only a pretense; whether, when their conditions
are altered, their resolutions will not change too, and when a storm comes,
take to the hedge, and keep a dangerous persecuted profession company no
longer; whether they will go along with their Religion, when it goes as Christ
did to be crucified, or with the Disciples desert him and leave him to himself.
This was Satan's argument, Job 1. 9.
Does Job serve God for naught? and therefore strips him to the very skin, and
makes that very skin uneasy too, by clothing it all over with blisters and
sores; that by that time Job had done scraping with his pot-sheard, he had no
skin at all left to cover him, but was So himself complains, Job 7. 5. My flesh
is clothed with worms, and clods of dust, my skin is broken, and become
loathsome.
fain to get him a new covering out of the ashes he rolled himself in. Yet Job,
when he had lost all, would not let go his integrity, but proved in despite of
the Devil's suggestions, that he Obs. The pious man serves God for God's sake.
served God for God's sake, and could fairly trust him for his reward in the
next world. Wherefore it is a brave challenge of that Heroic Apostle, Romans
VIII. 35. Who, says he, shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? as
if he had said, Let me see that Man, or Devil, or Thing in the world, that can
drive me from my just confidences, and blessed assurances of God's love. And
for death, he makes nothing of it, vouchsafes it not the mention, but in a
parenthesis in the next verse; looks upon it as a mere scarecrow, a thing he
has been used to, and now fears it not; but gets him upon a place of Scripture,
and defies it; As it is written, says he, For thy sake we are killed all the
day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. And then in the two last
verses of that Chapter, it is as bravely by him resolved upon the question; I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. So then for peace let bitterness come; nay, let great
bitterness come; yet such a resolution will weather the point of the worst
change.

But yet to aggravate this change, there is another consideration still
behind; that 'twas by way of surprise; it came strangely and unexpectedly,
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. When Scripture bids us behold, it is
worth our while to stand and look about; and this word gives us this lesson,
that A Christian must stand upon his guard; Obs.
prepare for changes, and be provided in omnem eventum, for what ever may
happen. In this posture Job stood, which made him bear the brunt, and receive
the shock the better. The thing which I feared, Job 3. 25.
says he, is come upon me. But it should seem Hezekiah did not make that
preparation, entertained no such jealousies. We read in the Chapter before,
that the Angel had discomfited the Assyrian Host, and that Sennacherib himself
the Monarch was assassin'd by his Sons: which quit the King of Judah utterly of
all apprehensions; he is wrapped up in security; yet see, he is no sooner rid of
this fear, but another arrest is served upon him: In those days, says the
first verse of this Chapter, was Hezekiah sick unto death. There surprises him
a bile worse then Rabshakeh, sticks close to him, and sends him once more to
his prayers. So apt are good men upon little respite to forget themselves.
Judgment comes like a thief in the night, and steals upon us: it concerns us
therefore to watch, and to set a good centry, that we may not be caught
unawares. But alas! how do we generally sleep over our great concerns, and
never heed evils, till they befall us; which are with far more difficulty cured,
then they might have been prevented? Nothing can be more dreadful, then when
judgments give us a camisade, set upon us in the dead of our security, beat up
our quarters, and catch us unprovided.

And still this affliction has a higher step, taking it in the spiritual sense,
for the disquiet of mind, and trouble of Conscience, arising possibly from the
sense of sin, or from the distrust of God's favor, in this his sickness; to
which the deliverance with its improvement has reference. Hezekiah's mind as
well as body was fore; and the Bile was not so much, it should seem, in his
side, as 'twas in's very heart. He had stitches and pains of Conscience; and
his inner man was more afflicted, then the outward; and his spirit labored
under no less distempers then his flesh did. And this is sure a very afflictive
condition; when not only the Cisterns of earthly comfort are filled with waters
of Marah; but even the spring of consolations from within, I mean a good
conscience, runs in troubled streams of Meribah: when a godly man's thoughts
work, and boil, and, as the wicked man is compared by the Isa. 57. 20
Prophet, he becomes like the troubled Sea, which casts up mire and dirt. And
yet thus God deals sometime with his own; to take their peace from them, to
leave them as it were in a state of desertion to themselves; that so they may
put a higher estimate upon his favor, and walk humbly and carefully in the
sense of it. A troubled conscience, then is not always an evil conscience. Obs.
The best of Saints are sometimes put upon these conflicts, to struggle under
the burden of their sins, and the apprehension of wrath due to them: when God
loosens and slacks their confidences, blots and obscures their evidences,
staggers their assurances, fills them full of doubts, and perplexities, and
jealousies of their own estate; and so pursues them with legal terrors, that he
drives them to fly before the face of the avenger, even unto their City of
Refuge, the Merits of Christ: and likely sickness is God's time of Visiting
iniquity in this manner; and then sins come thick to remembrance. The wicked
and the godly may in this respect little differ in their outward Symptoms, as
to the trouble and quiet of Conscience: but in the grounds of either there is a
vast difference. The ungodly man, when his Conscience is awaked with some
rouzing judgment, is possessed with the frightful foresights of unavoidable
vengeance: the godly are troubled at God's displeasure, at the withdrawings of
his favor, and the hidings of his countenance. The one has no Sanctuary to
betake himself to; his troubles immerse him into the gulf of despair: the
other when he is seized with the arrests of the Law, can by Faith lay hold upon
the terms of Evangelical mercy, and has a powerful advocate to plead for him,
and a sufficient bail to fetch him off, even Christ Jesus, the Mediator of the
Covenant. Nor again does their calm and tranquillity of mind proceed from the
same principle, or tend to the same practice; the wicked man's quiet proceeds
from his carnal security; his conscience is cast into a dead sleep, and becomes
insensible, by a kind of spiritual lethargy, that it is not so much want of
trouble as want of sense; wherefore he still runs on securely in his sinful
course: whereas the in ward peace, which a godly man enjoyes, arises from the
assurances of pardon, and the sense of God's favor; and this puts him upon a
careful walking with God, that he may not tempt him to remove his peace. And
this his confidence in God, and resolution of his own integrity bears him up
even in the midst of his dejections and disquiets; that, when he goes mourning
all the day, when he feeds himself with his tears, and in great anxiety and
distress pours out his soul within him, he can say with the Psalmist, Psalm.
XLII. and XLIII. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God. For he knows that however, when God has taken and
pursued all his advantages against him, when he has laid load upon him, he is
sure at last to give him a good issue out of the temptation, and, be his
affliction what it will, to procure him in the end a merciful Deliverance,
which is our next Theme to treat of.

And this a twofold Deliverance, according to his twofold distemper, Bodily,
and Ghostly.

His temporal affliction, his sickness, is cured by the temporal mercy of his
recovery, that God has delivered his soul, i. e. his life, from the pit of
corruption, from the Grave: and his spiritual malady or trouble of conscience
by that spiritual mercy, the pardon of his sins, that God had cast all his sins
behind his back.

First, Here Is the removal of his sickness, and the return of health; and then,
to improve that, here is the removal of his sins, and the restitution of his
peace.

Behold, for peace I had great bitterness.

But thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption.

For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

Thou. 'twas Thou deliveredst me. He imputes his Recovery here wholly to God.
Hence we learn, that God is the sole Author of all our deliverances. His Obs.
sickness might have come by some casualty, might proceed from natural causes
in the general way of a permissive providence: but to be sure, God had a
special hand in the restoration. That was the effect, and a peculiar
disposition of a particular providence, and came with a Mandamus from heaven. I
will not deny, but means may, and must be, and were here used; but then it is
God's blessing that puts virtue into those means, and gives them an effectual
operation. Practicioners of Physic will tell us, that a lump of Figs bruised
and made up into a Plaster may be no unfit Cataplasm to be applied toa plague
sore, to help to ripen and break the Bile? yet here in this case 'twas God
himself by his Prophet gave the Receipt, and in all cases virtuates and
succeeds the means. Wherefore the Syriack Interpreter transposes the two last
Verses of this Chapter, setting the 22. verse before the 21. and that very
appositely to the close of the Song in the 20th. verse, where he says he will
Sing Songs to the tuned instruments all the days of his life in the house of
the Lord. Now, as the Syriack brings it in, Hezekiah had said, What is the
sign, that I shall go to the house of the Lord? That I shall go abroad again,
and wait upon God in his Temple. And Isaias gave this answer, says he, Let
them take a lump of Figs, and spread it upon the Bile. (Which verses in the
common order they stand in, seem to be a (...), out of their due place.) So
that the Lump of Figs should according to this Interpreter, be appointed here
by God for a sign as well as a Plaster, nor only for a medicinal expedient,
but also for a Symbolical token. Thus it is in all our troubles and
afflictions, that befall us, be it what it will, or who it will, the malice of
man or the Devil, Chance or Nature, our own negligence or indiscretion, that
leads us on; it is God that brings us off; and as we pray, that he will not Lead
us into temptation, (which he does but very rarely, and that only by way of
permission) so we must pray to him alone to deliver us from all evil. And yet
this is not intended to lessen our gratitude to too men, whose skill or care
has afforded us any help in our distress, as being instruments under God for
our good. And so the Prophet here no question was concerned in the good King's
acknowledgements, and the very Recipe of Figs is filled up in the Records of
Scripture.

Further, besides the subordination, that men act as instruments, in what they
do for us; God is the sole principal Agent: there is usually this difference
too; that men, what kindeness or good office they may do us, they may do it for
their own sake as well as ours; not out of love to our person so much, as for
some by-respect and selfend. The Physician proportions his attendance to his
fee; and scarce any the best friend we have will do ought for us for
God-a-mercy. Some perhaps may by the sense of former obligations; but most by
the expectation of a future reward are excited and moved to serve us. But all
God's mercies proceed from pure love; out of love thou have delivered me. I
say, Divine mercy is gratuitous; it flows as Obs.
free, as the light from the Sun, as the stream from the Spring. For alas! if
we look into our selves, and consider how vile we are by nature, how more vile
by sin; what can we find in our selves, that may any way deserve the kind
respects, and affectionate regards of an infinite and glorious Majesty? what,
that may be looked upon, as a fit object of Divine Love? Have not we just
reason, the very best of us, with the Psalmist, to hold up our hands in
admiration, and bless our selves, saying, Psalm. 8. 4.
What is man that thou art mindeful of him, or take any knowledge of him? or
the son of man, that thou visitest him, that thou make any account of him? He
does not want us, nor is our goodness any thing to him: neither can our welfare
add ought to his infinite glories, nor our miscarriage substract ought from
them. It is our duty and our happiness to boot, to serve him; nor is he a whit
obliged to us: when we have done all we ought to do, we are to him still
unprofitable Servants. If we are good, we are good to our selves; and if we are
otherwise, we shall have the worst on it, And yet to see, how all his thoughts
and cares run upon us, how he has made man the darling of heaven, and the
charge of Angels; what blessings he daily dispenses among us, and what
unconceivable good things he has prepared for us, if we will but fit our selves
for them; how his providence waits upon us at our up-rising, and our
down-lying, and in all our ways constantly attends us, and takes that
particular care of us, that he has the very hairs of his head in numerato; will
abundantly convince us of his undeserved love to us, and of that love we owe to
him again. O may those passionate concernments, he has for us, move us at least
to be concerned for our selves! The Apostle to justify this Allegorical
exposition of that Text in the old Law, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
Thou shall not muzzle the ox, which treads out the corn; out of which he
argues the maintenance of Gospel Ministers; seems to ask a strange question, to
show that those words could not well be taken literally, Does God, 1 Cor. 9. 9.
says he, take care of Oxen? Why, learned Apostle, does not God take care of
Oxen? I sure, and of all his other creatures too: His meaning is, that God's
thoughts and designs are so much busied and taken up about man, that He seems
to be the only object of his care; insomuch that this very Law of mercy toward
the laboring Beast, (witness (to go no further) the very Deuteronomy. 5 14.
fourth Commandment, where the poor Ass as well as the Ox, comes in for his
share in the privilege of Sabbath-rest) was by the Apostle's argument
primarily and ultimately intended for the temporal support and encouragement of
such men, as are set aside for spiritual ministrations, to labor in the word.
Oves and boves and pecora campi, Psalm. 8. 7.
Sheep and Oxen and all Beasts of the Field he has so absolutely put under
man's feet, as if he took no further care of them, then as they may be for his
use and service. If God so freely love us, how ought we to love one another,
and to help one another with all kind of courtesy and assistance? but above
all, in a due imitation of Divine Charity, not to let it be a carnal affection,
or express it only in service to the outward man; but to improve it
spiritually, that it may be a love from the soul, and a love to the soul of one
another.

In love to my soul. This, Soul-love is the best of loves. This is to oblige a
man into the other world Obs.
with an immortal benefit, to do his soul any good, to serve him any way in
that. It Is the Christian complement, which the great preacher of love St. John
uses in his Epistle to his friend Gaius; 3 John v. 2.
Beloved, I wish above things, that thou may prosper and be in health, even
as thy soul prospers. Let worldlings think what they will; our health and
prosperity is, as our soul prospers and does well: All our worldly enjoyments,
unless we have the art to spiritualize them, and can by grace make them
serviceable to our souls, are but dry chips, and can afford no true real
comfort. The very Breasts of providence, from whence our peace, plenty,
liberty, and all outward blessings flow, without this are but Winde-bags, and
those that draw them most, will find they get nothing but vanity and
emptiness, fill themselves with vexation, and distemper; if God by his Grace do
not sanctify his providence to the good of their souls. This is that, which
makes blessings to be blessings indeed. And indeed God does design all his
temporal mercies to our spiritual advantage, if we would but comply with his
designs. And thus it was here with Hezekiah, whose soul was reprieved from the
Grave at once, and preserved from Hell; for the pit of corruption in
Scripture-style signifies both; from the Grave by his recovery, and from Hell
by his pardon.

To take the words in either of those senses, or in both; what a mercy of God
is it to us all, to every one of us, that are here this day, that we are yet on
this side Hell, yet on this side the Grave? and what care are we obliged to in
our walking, when we consider that All our lifetime we walk upon the
pit-brink? Obs.
We say, that those that are at Sea, are but so many inches removed from death;
but the Ps. 39. 5.
Psalmist tells us, that upon Land too, or wherever we are at the furthest
distance, there is but the breadth of a span betwixt it and us. Now what a
madness were it for any one to dance and frolic about the mouth of such a
dangerous pit, where it is so easy falling in, and impossible to get out again?
And yet, O desperate folly! most people of the world are thus mad, pursuing the
seeming sweets of a momentany life to the hazard of an eternal ruin, and the
irreparable loss of their immortal souls. I have heard a story, and I suppose
many of you have heard it too, of a man, that traveling late, and being in
drink, rode over a narrow footBridge, where there was a great deep water
underneath, that the least trip of the Horses foot would have posted the rider
to his long home: next morning, when he was come to himself, being asked which
way he came, and brought to the place, the apprehension of his last nights
adventure did so surprise and astonish his sober thoughts, that he fell down
dead in the very place at the sight on it. And when we look back upon the
follies and vanities of our past lives, how can we but be justly startled, when
almost every step we have trod, has been upon the pit's brink of destruction?
Those especially, whose desires seem to be as bottomless as this pit is, who
cry, Give, give, and never think they have enough, and are immoderate in
heaping up this world's goods; may look upon this pit as a stop in their
career: when they sit down and consider, that within a score or two of years
hence, very likely in less time, all their toil and gain will come to no
account: Go they must one time or other, and pack up they know not how soon,
and yet carry nothing along with them of all that they have. Beauty, strength,
riches, honor, profits, pleasures, will all be lost and spoiled, and prove at
last but care and refuse in this pit of corruption: this (...) ad f(...)mam
(...) unde (...) ap. J(...) 38. 11. 12 veterament(...) Ang. old ca^^ cloats and
rotten rags
(...), the Wardrobe of our old cast clothes, and the store-hole of our
worm-eaten Lumber. We are all journeying straight onward to the Grave, and
sooner or later, every one in his appointed time, must arrive there: but happy,
thrice happy those, who when they are laid down to rest in the Grave, are
delivered from Hell, that other pit of corruption. And this Hezekiah was
assured of, that God had delivered his soul from this pit; because his sins
were forgiven.

And this is our third stage, the Assurance of God's love to him, and the
Improvement of this bodily mercy: for thou have cast all my sins behind thy
back.

From whence we may make several Observes; Obs.
as first, that God uses to accumulate mercy; to deal with us, as he commands
us to deal with one another, to give us S. Luke 6. 38.
good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over into our
bosom. Here upon Hezekiah's prayer, God gives more then is asked; lengthens his
life, secures him and his Kingdom from the Assyrians, recovers him from his
sickness, and pardons his sins. Thus mercies grow like clusters in the
vineyards of Engaddi, A great encouragement for prayer, which makes such ample
returns. The best Husbandry we can use, to improve our selves, by praying
often. A great comfort this too, to any good man upon the bed of sickness; that
God will both recover and pardon him, both restore him to health and accept him
to favor. Thus our Savior in those Miracles of Mercy he showed upon the
bodies of men, was wont to regard their souls too, and wrought cures both upon
the outward and inward man: as he did to the Paralytick, saying first, *Thy
sins are forgiven thee; then, Rise, S. Mark 2. 9.
take up thy bed, and walk. Thus easing him first of the heavy load of his
sins, and then inabling him to bear the lighter burden of his couch.

2. Pardon of sins is the complement and perfection of mercy. His recovery
without this would have Obs.
done him little good, and the renewing of his Lease have served only for an
opportunity of running farther on the score, and so of making his condition
much worse then it had been. O infinitely happy that man, even in this life,
whose sins are forgiven him! all his enjoyments must needs have a pleasant
relish; whereas to the wicked this Coloquintida, the rank Hogo, which
unpardoned sin gives them, spoils all their comforts, and makes their
condition, be it never so spangled and glorious, never so gay and jaunty to the
outward show, troublesome and vexatious within; like the Emperor's Ermin-Cap,
richly lined with pricking cares, and cutting fears: of which our good King had
now cleared both his Head and Crown; for he had God's promise that neither the
Assyrian should assault his Kingdom, nor Satan his soul.

3. He, whose sins are forgiven, needs not fear hell or the grave. Hezekiah
here is assured, that God Obs.
had delivered his soul from the pit of corruption, because he had cast all his
sins behind his back. The righteous man, say the Prove. 28. 1*
Proverbs, i. e. he that is justified by faith, and has his sins pardoned, is
as bold as a Lion, fearless, and undaunted: for indeed, what need such an one
fear? Let the Devil go about like a roaring Lion; he has the Lion of the tribe
of Judah to defend him: and for death, now the sting is plucked out, he plays
with it as a harmless Snake; and to take off even the natural apprehensions of
it, makes it familiar to him by his daily meditation.

Lastly, God's pardons are universal and absolute. Obs.
They are all his sins; and all cast behind God's back, never more to be
remembered. God pardons totally and finally, not by halves or half way, but
wholly and outright; he forgives and forgets. We are too too apt to throw our
sins behind our own back, and to take no notice of them; our great concern is
to get them cast behind God's back. O let us prize this pardoning Grace of
God's; endeavor to obtain it by confessing and forsaking our sins; and
especially in the time of sickness, or any other affliction, when God's hand
lies upon us, to make our humble and earnest supplications then to the blessed
Spirit, to bring home to our soul this comfort; to renew our repentance, and to
reinforce our resolutions; and having obtained forgiveness, never by any fresh
wilful acts of sin to forfeit the comfort of such an assurance.

Thus have we seen Hezekiah Afflicted, Recovered, Pardoned: we are now in the
last place come to his Thanksgiving, and Acknowledgement, and that, as I noted
before, set down.

1. Negatively, that, if he had miscarried in this his sickness, then he could
not possibly have performed this duty of praise.

2. Positively, that being now recovered, and in a state of life and health, he
will make it his business, as he says in the 20. verse, All the days of his
life to sing his songs in the house of the Lord.

For the Grave cannot praise thee, etc. which words will help us to several
useful observations.

In the first place, that The only Return which Obs.
God expects for his mercies is Praise. This is given here as the reason of
this his deliverance; FOR the Grave cannot praise thee; the living shall. God
the Jehovah being an Infinite Being, and consequently, in his Essence and
Actions, independent of any other being, can have no Principle or End of his
Actions without him. As in a Circle, the whole round being in it self complete,
the beginning and end meet but in an imaginary point, and admit not of a real
distinction. And such a Circle is God, which comprehends all things, and is it
self not comprehended. Wherefore he can have no other principle, but himself;
no other end, but himself, in all that he does or designs. He is the Alpha and
Omega; Romans 11. 36.
From him and to him are all things. He acts all freely from his own will, and
wisely to his own glory: and in this manner we his creatures are to act, if we
will act regularly, from him and to him. He is, as the supreme cause which
excites and impowers all subordinate agents to act; so the Chiefest Good too,
in which all their actions should terminate. And in this subordination all
other creatures, in their several spheres of activity, comply with the rule and
method of their Creator: man only to his shame stands out, who has most reason
to be, and to act like his God, wearing his Image. Good and pious men however
do endeavor after this, which is their perfection; to live by the power to the
praise of God, that is, to act by his Grace to his Glory. Should God require
any greater matter of us, as 2 Kings 5. 13.
Naaman's servants tell him, when we lie on the bed of sickness, when we are
encompassed with distresses, would not we have done it? and when for our
deliverance all, that he looks for at our hands, is praise only; he must be of
an extraordinary disingenuous impiety, that should refuse to testify his
thanks in so cheap a Sacrifice. This civility we deny not to men; it is a
Physician's reputation, when his patient recovers; and we usually, besides his
Salary, allow him our good word. Let not us grudge God the honor of a poor
acknowledgement.

Again, praising and celebrating God, and hoping for his truth, (his mercy, say
the LXX; his Salvation, the Chaldee Paraphrast) are here made Synonyma's, to
mean the same thing. If so, then a generous trust in God's mercy is the right
celebration of it. To trust in God is to praise him. I have Obs.
been afflicted; God has delivered me; I praise him for it: how? by trusting
that he will still deliver me. I have been exercised with grievous sickness;
God has visited me with his loving kindeness: I come to return him due praise
for his goodness: how? by entertaining and professing a just confidence in God,
that he will never fail me, never leave me destitute. And this, as it is a
comfortable, so it is a rational and a natural duty. We ordinarily do it to men:
when we have had trials of their fidelity in matters of any moment, we stick
not to trust them farther, and by so doing recommend their honest just dealing
to the world. Shall we not much more do so to God? whose mercy and faithfulness
we have so often experimented, when no one could help us out but He He that
distrusts God, scandalizes his goodness, and calls his truth in question. David
is not ashamed to make one of the first and earliest acts of God's common
providence toward him, when he was an infant, an argument of his trusting God
his whole life after. Psalm. 71. 6.
Thou art he, that tookest me out of my Mothers Bowels. What then? my praise
shall be always of thee. A little after upon the strength of this confidence,
he prays, Ver. 9.
Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not, when my strength
fails.

Further, in that the Grave cannot praise God, nor they that go down into the
pit hope for his truth; it appears, that Death is a silent and a hopeless
state. The Grave indeed opens a wide mouth; Obs.
but it is to swallow the man, not to praise God with. And how can Divine
Praises be celebrated by death, which puts all the Organs and Instruments of
Speech out of tune? when, as the Preacher phrases it, all the daughters of
music are Eccl. 12. 4.
brought low: and then for those that go down into the pit, they together with
their lives quit their hopes, and are lodged now in a remediless condition. No
hope to be met with at the bottom of that pit, because the pit it self is
bottomless: for so the Septuagint have it, (...), Those that are in hell; they
that are in Gehenna, says the Arabic; and by the Targum the pit is interpreted
(...)
the lake of perdition. Hope is a virtue peculiar to life; and when the man
dies, hope fetches its last gasp, and dies with him. After death there is no
recovery. Faith and repentance can now no longer exercise any vital acts. If
thou dye in thy sins, thou will lie and rot in thy sins, and rise again in thy
sins. No imbalming can preserve thy soul, or take from thee the stench of thy
sins, in that pit of corruption. Death concludes thee to an unalterable
condition. Here thou may manage thy resolutions, and shape thy course, to
please thy self; and, if thou will, to please thy God, if thou will let his
grace pilot thy vessel: but when thou art once put into harbor, the ship then
is laid up, and there is no mending the miscarriages of thy past voyage. Be sure
then to live godly, if thou would dye comfortably; and then thy grave will
prove a bed of spices, and thy dust be preserved, as the Phoenix^ashes in hopes
of a joyful resurrection.

To draw to a conclusion, a 4th. Note may be this, that Life it self is a
blessing to be spent in the Obs.
giver's praise. From these words, The living, the living, he shall praise
thee. The word is twice repeated, to show we should do it with cheerfulness,
with a life; and with constancy, through our whole life If we had a hundred
lives, they would be all well spent in God's service. It will be the business
and employ of our eternity to praise him; and we must aforehand acquaint our
selves with it, and so practice this lesson here, that we may be found worthy
to wait upon the Lamb, and sing Hallelujahs in heaven. But then if we would
praise God to the life, we must live to his praise, by doing things
praiseworthy. Further, consider what this life of ours is; it is but a breath
We must begin this task then out of hand, presently. There Is nothing of our
life ours, but the present, the Nunc instans, this very instant of time. For
all, that is past of our lives, was indeed ours once, but now is not; nor can we
recall what is gone for improvement or amendment: and what is to come, is not
ours yet, and we know not whether it will be in our power, or no; and therefore
the great duty and interest of life is the right husbanding of our present
time. Upon this moment hangs our eternity; and this infinite advantage our
short-lived service has, that he, that lives to God's glory here, shall
hereafter be made partaker of it.

Thus have I as well as I could gathered a posie of Observations, as they grew
in this fragrant piece of Scripture: and if some Rue and Wormwood be found
amongst the sweeter herbs, their wholesomeness will make amends for their
bitterness. Myrrh and Aloes, as they are bitter drugs, so they are rich
perfumes; in either notion, great preservatives they are against corruption.
The Psalmist tells us, Psalm. XLV that Ver. 8.
All the Churches garments smell of them, It Is not amiss, if we have pounded
and mixed somewhat of them with the Frankincense of this days Thanksgiving.
Which brings us to the close of all, the Exemplification; as I do this day.

And that will yield us a considerable remark, to make an end with; that signal
mercies require solemn Obs.
thanksgiving. So Hezekiah is eager to go up to the house of the Lord, and
closes this Ode of his with a resolution there to sing his songs all the days
of his life. And this on purpose to draw in others by his example to partake in
the duty. Thus David after such a deliverance, Psalm. XXXIV. invites others; O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together, In the 6th.
verse as it were pointing to himself, This poor man cried, and the Lord heard
him, and saved him out of all his troubles.

Let us then shut up all with a Form of Praise, wherein we may all join, and
every one of us bear a part: and I am sure there is not any one of this whole
Congregation, that will not be particularly and personally concerned.

WE praise thee, O God; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All the world does
worship thee, the Father Everlasting. Heaven and earth are full of thy glory.

Thou do whatsoever thou please, both in heaven and in earth: and yet do
by thy Providence order all events, as to thy own glory, so to the good and
advantage of the children of men. Thou made all things for the use of man,
and man himself for thine own service.

We bless thee for thy works of Creation. O Lord, how manifold are thy works?
in great wisdom and out of great goodness have thou made them all. The heavens
declare thy glory, and the earth is full of thy goodness.

We stand obliged, as we are thy creatures and the work of thy hands, to do
thee homage, and to pay thee the tribute of Praise; together with all thy
works, which bless thee in all places of thy dominion.

Especially man is bound to praise thee for the dignity of his creation, being
made little lower then the Angels. Thou have crowned him with honor and
majesty, and have put all things under his feet.

We bless thee, that thou have made us Men and Women, after thine own image, in
thy likeness; and have breathed into us the breath of life. We will sing unto
thee therefore, as long as we live; we will sing praises unto our God, while we
have a being.

That thou have given us an immortal soul, capable of eternal felicity, and of
a blessed communion with thy self: faculties of reason, to contemplate the
glories of our Maker; and of speech, to express and set forth thy praises.

All our members were writ down in thy book, when as yet there was none of
them: thou art our God, even from our Mothers womb: when we yet hung at the
breast, thou tookest care of us: we have lived at thy charge, and been
maintained by thy providence, ever since we were born. Oh, let us praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

Thou have all along sent forth thy sun, and powered down thy rain, to provide
us our food in due season; and all thy steps toward us have dropped fatness.
Thou have satisfied our mouth with good things, and have surrounded us with
loving kindness and tender mercies.

Nor have thy preservations over us been less; or less constant, then thy
provisions for us. Thou securest us from the casualties of the day, and from
the terrors of the night.

Thou art at our uprising and our downlying; who keep us both sleeping and
waking, and yet thy self neither slumbrest nor sleep. Thou understandest and
guardest all our way. Day by day we magnify thee for these thy daily favors.

We bless thee for preserving us from the perils of our infancy, and from the
miscariages of our riper years.

Then, when we were not able to help our selves, thou tookest us up, setst thy
Angel-guardians about us, who continually behold thy face; and did graciously
preserve us from those inconveniences, which either the negligence of those
about us, or our own infirmity, or the condition of humane nature, might have
exposed us to.

Since, when we were grown up to discretion, and were apt enough by our
intemperances and indiscretions to do our selves mischief; 'twas thou alone
have kept us from the injuries of weather, from the rage of merciless elements,
from all ill chances and sad accidents, from the power of Devils, and from the
malice of men, and from the calamities of ill times; and have often delivered
us from the dangers and ill consequents of our own folly, even when by
presumptuous sins we have put our selves out of thy protection.

O the unspeakable mercies of a good God, which either we have forgot, or were
never sensible of! What is man, that thou art so mindful of him? or the son of
man that thou should so regard us? who scarce ever mind or regard thee, and
those infinite obligations thou have from time to time laid upon us.

We thank thee for those early advantages of our Christian education, that we
were born within the pale of the Church, under the sound of the Gospel, and not
amidst Turks and Heathen people, which know not thy name; and were betimes by
holy Baptism ingrafted into Christ's mystical body.

O inestimable benefit, and that which can never sufficiently be valued! though
such is our unthankful carriage for this peculiar favor, which thou have
denied to millions of men, that deserve it better then we do; that we loath thy
Word, slight thy Ordinances, and scoff at thy Ministers; and in effect, through
our peevish ingratitude, show our selves as arrant Turks and Infidels, as any
of the Turks and Infidels themselves are.

Further, we bless thee for the love of Friends, and the care of Tutors, which
put us upon good courses; for the vigor of parts, and the integrity of limbs
and senses; for our health and strength; for our peace and plenty; for
blessings, both public and private, personal and national, temporal and
spiritual.

For giving us further time and space of repentance; that thou have not cut us
off in the strength of our years, and the height of our lusts; that we are yet
on this side hell and the grave, yet in a possibility of Salvation, and are yet
alive to praise thee, as we do this day, and to speak well of thy name.

We bless thee for all those opportunities and advantages, thou have so
liberally afforded us, of serving thee, and of saving our own souls; that, if
we miscarry either in this world or the next, it is not thou by thy grace or thy
providence have been wanting to us, but we have been wanting both to thee and
to our selves.

Finally, we return thee our hearty thanks, and praise thy name, for all those
afflictions, thou have at any time laid upon us, and for thy merciful
deliverances out of them.

That, when thou have visited our iniquities, and chastn'd us for sin, thou
have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities, but have remembered mercy in the midst of judgment, and have pitied
us like as a father pitieth his children; (for thou know our frame, thou
remembrest that we are but dust.)

That thou have laid no more upon us at any time, then we were enabled by thee
well to bear, and by thy grace have supported us in our sufferings; and that,
when thou have seen fit to put any bitterness into our cup, thou have designed
it for our soul's health, and to a spiritual advantage; and lastly, that
together with the temptation thou have given a gracious and happy issue out of
it.

And here we humbly entreat thee, O Father of mercies, to accept the
thanksgiving of every particular person in this Congregation, for all thy
favors and merciful deliverances vouchsafed them through the course of their
whole lives; and more especially be graciously pleased to accept the thanks of
that thy servant, who being by thy gracious providence recovered of a grievous
and dangerous sickness, this day in thy house presents his offering of praise.

Grant, that both he and all of us may have that his sickness and all our
afflictions so sanctified, and this his recovery and all our deliverances so
improved to him and to us, that we may ill be fully assured, that out of love
to our souls thou have delivered them from the pit of corruption, and that thou
have cast all our sins behind thy back.

Thus shall our meditation of thee be sweet; we will be glad in the Lord, and
rejoice in thy salvation, who forgivest all our iniquities, and healest all our
diseases, and redeemest our life from destruction.

Who hidest not thy face from us in the day of trouble, but regardest the
prayer of the destitute: who look down from the height of thy sanctuary, to
hear the groaning of those that are confined, and to deliver them that are
appointed unto death.

To declare the name of the Lord in his temple, and his praise in the great
assembly, when the people are gathered together to serve the Lord.

Let us give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: Let us bring our
offerings, and come into his courts: Let us sacrifice the sacrifices of
thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing.

The Lord has chasten'd us sore, but he has not given us over unto death. We
shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Thou art our God,
and we will praise thee: thou art our God, and we will exalt thee. Let us give
thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.

The voice of rejoicing and salvasion is in the tabernacles of the righteous.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him; in those that hope in his
mercy. O Lord, our hope is in thee; Let us never be confounded.

Amen.
Glory be to thee, O God.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 4. read understand. p. 9 l. 24 r. our carnal. p. 17. l. 19. r. a
little. p. 18. l. 9 r. sore. p 21. l. 27. sor disposition, r. dispensation. p.
25. l. 6. r. of our head. l. 11. f. this r. his. l. 19. before His meaning put
in line 24, 25, 26, 27. (witness -- Sabbath-rest) p. 26. l. 21. r. all things.
p. 29. l. 6. for care, r. tare.


