The little Infant TITUS: OR Oats Exalted above his Brethern. WHO Recieved
Sentence at the Kings-Bench-Bar, at Westminster the 16th day of May, 1685.
HERE STAND I FOR PERJURY



August the 9th. to stand in the Pillory at Westminster. August the 10th. at
Charing Cross. August the 11th. at Temple Bar. Septem. the 2d. at the Royal
Exchange. April the 24 1686. to stand in the Pillory facing the Gallows. To lie
in Gaol during Life. And to stand Anually in the Pillory.


AS Bully does Lament when Cully Dy's,
And the poor Bum for Follower rubs his Eyes,
So the Distressed Brethren of the Nation
Weep, Mourn and Sob, with forest Lamentation,
To see their Quondam Saint, this Idol Thing
Thus unto Justice made an Offering:
The Doctor's gone, the Traitor still is here,
Insect of Hell, a Forsworn Murderer:
Oh! Blessed Sight! how we our selves should Bless
If that he now was Cloak'd, the only Dress
That is a Scandal unto Holiness.
Draw near ye Bloodhounds, you that fain would bring
States to Confusion, Ruin to a King;
Draw near, and the great Swearing Master see
With Zeal profound advance the Pillory,
To which his Fathers Copy made him Free:
For since he was Ambitious, he should have
The Pillory conferred as a Grave.
See how he stands, tho Infamous and Base,
And Damn's all those that do not give him Place,
True Swearers glory in a Brazon Face.
Approach, Approach ye Blessed Sons of Hell,
That only do in Villainies Excel
To the Black Book, whether he will or not
You see he is come, and must abide his Lot:
His shameless Actions now might Shame the Devil,
That Scorns not to be thought the sum of Evil:
He was resolved to seek out nothing less
Than the very Quintiscence of Wickedness.
Hence then Geneva Trash, you are out of Date,
When Loyalty appears, you Dissipate:
Shine on ye Loyal Souls, and let these see
Maugre their Hellish Arts and Treachery,
That you shall Shine thus to Eternity.
But if this Imp of Hell shall come to Expire,
Impenitent, how will the Damned Admire
The Flames that he will add unto their Fire!
Thus the Reward of Faction here will be
Shame, or to Dangle on the Fatal Tree,
Hereafter Horror, Pain, and Misery,
This may be Printed,

August the 10th. 1685. R.L.S.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's-Castle. 1685.


