

THE STATESMEN And FAVORITES OF ENGLAND Since the Reformation Their PRUDENCE
and POLICIES, SUCCESSES and MISCARRIAGES, ADVANCEMENTS and FALLS; During the
Reigns of

King HENRY VIII. King EDWARD VI. Queen MARY. Queen ELIZABETH King JAMES. King
CHARLES I.
LONDON: Printed by J. C. for SAMUEL SPEED, at the Rainbow near the Inner
Temple-gate in Fleet Street. 1665.

TO The HOPE of ENGLAND, Its Young Gentry, Is most humbly dedicated The HONOR
of it, Its Ancient Statesmen: A Renowned Auncestry TO An Honorable Posterity.

Whitehall.

BY permission and License of the Right Honorable Mr Secretary Morice. this
book may be printed and published.

Jo: Cook.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
FOr bestowing some, vacant hour. (by that excellent Personages direction, to
whom I am equally obliged for my Employment and my Leisure) in an attempt so
agreeable to the Lord Verulam's judgment, which may be seen in the next page;
and so pursuant of Sir Robert Naunton's design, which may be traced in the
following Book; Another person's abilities might have gained applause, and my
weakness may deserve an excuse, notwithstanding my years, (if yet any man be
too young to read and observe) or my profession (if yet a Divine should not (as
times go) be as well read in Men, as Books:) Especially since I gratify no
man's' fondness, writing not a Panegyric, but an History: Nor pleasure any
persons malice; designing Observations, rather than Invectives: Nor tire any
man's patience; setting down rather the remarkes of men's public capacities,
than the minute passages of their private lives: but innocently discourse the
most choice instances our ENGLISH Histories afford for the three great
Qualifications of men (1. Nobleness in behavior: 2. Dexterity in business;
and 3. Wisdom in Government) among which are twenty eight Secretaries of
State, eight Chancellours, eighteen Lord-Treasurers, sixteen Chamberlains, who
entertain Gentlemen with Observations becoming their Extraction, and their
hopes, touching,

1. The rise of Statesmen. 2. The beginning of Families. 3. The method of
Greatness. 4. The conduct of Courtiers. 5. The miscarriages of Favorites, and
whatever may make them either wise or wary.
The Chancellor of France had a Picture, that to a common eye showed many
little heads, and they were his Ancestors; but to the more curious represented
only one great one, and that was his own.

It Is intended that this Book should to the vulgar Reader express several
particulars, i. e. all this last Ages Heroes; but to every Gentleman it should
intimate only one, and that is himself.

It Is easily imaginable how unconcerned I am in the fate of this Book, either
in the History, or the Observation: since I have been so faithful in the first,
that is not my own, but the Historians; and so careful in the second, that they
are not mine, but the Histories.

DAVID LlOYD.

The Lord Bacon's Judgment of a Work of this nature.
HIstory, which may be called just and perfect History, is of three kings,
according to the object it propounds, or pretends to represent; for it
either represents a Time, a Person, or an Action. The first we call
Chronicles, the second Lives, and the third Narrations, or Relations.

Of these; although the first be the most complete and absolute kind of
History, and has most estimation and glory; yet the second excels it in
profit and use; and the third in verity and sincerity. For history of Times
represents the magnitude of Actions, and the public faces or deportments of
persons, and passes over in silence the smaller passages and motions of Men
and Matters.

But such being the work manship of God, as he does hang the greatest weight
upon the smallest wyars, Maxima e minimis suspendens; it comes therefore to
pass, that such Histories do rather set forth the pomp of business, than the
true and inward resorts thereof. But Lives, if they be well written,
propounding to themselves a person to (...) present, in whom actions both
greater a(...) smaller, public and private, have a commixture, must of
necessity contain a mo(...) true, native, and lively representation.

I do much admire that these times have so little esteemed the virtues of the
Times, a(...) that the writing of Lives should be no mo(...) frequent. For
although there be not man(...) Sovereign Princes, or absolute Commanders, and
that States are most collected into Monarchies; yet are there many worthy
personages that deserve better then dispersed Report, or barren Elogies: For
herein the invention of one of the late Poets is proper, and does well enrich
the ancient fiction. For he feigneth, that at the end of the thread or web of
every man's Life, there was a little Medal containing the person's name; and
that Time waits upon the Sheers, and as soon as the Thread was cut, caught
the Medals and carried them to the River Lethe; and about the bank there were
many Birds flying up and down, that would get the Medals, and carry them in
their beak a little while, and then let them fall into the River. Only there
were a few Swans, which if they got a Name, would carry it to a Temple where it
was consecrate.

THE TABLE.
A
SIr Thomas Audly Page 39 Fitz-Allan Earl of Arundel 232 Master Ascham 429
Arch-Rishop Abbot 522 Sir Edward Anderson 577 Bishop Andrews 796 Sir Walter
Aston 702 Sir R: Armstroder 723 Philip Earl of Arundel 725
B
CHarles Brandon 11 Sir Thomas Bollen 102 Sir Anthony Brown 128 Sir David Brook
205 Sir John Baker 277 Archbishop Bancrost 539 Sir Nieh: Bacon 287 Sir Francis
Bacon 600 Thomas Lord Burgh 401 Sir Thomas Bromley 425 Sir Richard Bingham 426
Thomas Lord Buckhurst 493 Sir Thomas Bodly 578 G. V. Duke of Buckingh. 613 Sir
John Bramston 696 Lord Chief Justice Banks 732
C
Archbishop Cranmer 15 Cromwell 32-138 Sir William Compton 110 Sir Thomas
Cheyney 283 Sir John Cheek 160 Sir William Cordel 195 Sir Anthony Cook 199 Sir
W Cecil L. Burleigh 290 Sir Thomas Challoner 343 Sir James Crofts 379 The
Cliffords Earls of Cumberland 497 Sir R: Cecil Ea: of Salisb. 56 Sir Giles
Calvert 526 Sir Arthur Chichester 529 Sir Lionel Cranfield E. M. 553 Sir R:
Carry 568 Doctor Cousin 589 The Lord Cook 592 The Lord Cottington 676 Sir Dudly
Carleton 680 The Lord Conway 689 Sir Julius Caesar 704 The Earl of Carnarvan
786 The Lord Capel 793 Sir John Culpeper 814 Sir George Crook 721 (...) Thomas
Coventry 750 Secretary Cook 716
D
SIr Thomas Darcy 95 Dudly Duke of Northumberland 237 Edward Earl of Derby 358
Sir William Drury 368 Doctor Dale 374 Sir James Dier 404 Secretary Davison 437
Sir R. Dudley 537 John Lord Digby E. B: 607 The Digges 691 The Earl of Danby
719
E
SIr Ralph Ewers 275 W: Earl of Essex 303 Robert Earl of Essex 449 Sir Thomas
Edmonds 734 The L. Chancellor Egerton 531 Sir Clement Edmonds 547 Sir John
Ereskin E. K. 557
F
SIr Jeffery Fenton 441, 476 Sir John Fineux 48 Bishop Fox 53 Sir Edward Fines
225 Sir John Fortescue 367 Doctor Fletcher 477 Sir H. Sir Lucius, Sir Henry
Lords Vise: Falkland 708 Sir John Finch 742
G
SIr Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset 116 Gardener Bish. of Winch. 268 John Gray
of Pyrgo 379 L. Gray of Wilton 381, 398 Sir Henry Gates 379 Sir Humphrey
Gilbert 441 Sir Fulk Grevil L. Brook 503 Oliver Lord Grandison 542
H
SIr Will: Herbert 274 Sir Walter Haddon 442 Sir Th. Howard 96 Sir Ed: Howard
105 Sir Th. Howard 107
of Surry and Norfolk.

Will: Howard L. Effingh. 218 Sir G. Hume E: of Dunb. 516 James Hay E: of
Carlisle 549 Henry Howard Earl of Northampton. 555 Judge Hyde 701 Christopher
Lord Hatton 333 419 The Lord Hunsdon 335 Sir Richard Hutton 739 Will: M:
Hertford 741 The Earl of Holland 759 The Marquess Hamilton 776 The Lord Hopton
780 The Lord Herbert 789 Archbishop Heath 337
I
SIr John Fitz-James 80 Sir John Jefferies 189 Arthur Ingram 572 Archbishop
Juxon 810
K
SIr William Kingstone 279 Sir Henry Killegrew 395 (...) Knowls 433
L
SIr Anthony St. Lieger 56 The Earl of Liecester 330 (...) Thomas Lake 552, 562
(...) Ja: Ley E: of Marlb. 713 (...) Earl of Lindsey 747 Archbishop Laud 763
(...) Lord Keeper Littleton 775
M
(...) Thomas Moor 21 Sir Rich: Morison 68 (...) Will: Molineux 84 (...) Henry
Marney 111 (...) John Mason 177 (...) Edward Mountague 221 (...) Thomas Manors
275 (...) Walter Mildmay 365 (...) Roger Manwood 386 (...) Lord Mountjoy 479
(...)op Mountague 575 (...) Henry Martin 695 (...) Earl of Manchester 799
N
(...) He Duke of Norfolk 351 The Lord North 374 (...)rls Ea: of Nottingh. 511
(...) Norrices 433 (...) Rob: Naunton 569 Sir Francis Nethersole 569 Sir
William Noy 662 Judge Nichols 699
O
SIr Thomas Overbury 544
P
ED: Plowden 383 Sir William Paget 65 Sir Ed: Poynings 112 The Parrs 156 Sir
Clement Paston 171 Sir John Portman 214 Sir Amias Pawlet 378 William Lord
Pawlet 403 Sir William Pelham 408 Sir Barnab. Fitz-Patrick 229 Sir William
Peter 247 Cardinal Pool 252 Sir John Perrot 322 Sir William Pickering 339 G:
Earl of Pembrook 363 Sir John Puckering 422 The Lord Chief Justice Popham 535
Will: Earl of Pembrook 687 Sir Paul Pindar 735
R
THe Lord Rich 1 E. W. 173 Sir Tho: Randolph 347 Sir John Russel 1 E. B. 259
Sir William Russel 444 Sir Thomas Roper 445 Sir Walter Rawleigh 485 Sir John
Ramsey E: H: 557 Doctor Ridley 693 Esme Duke of Richmond 728 Edw: Earl of
Rutland 482 Sir Thomas Roe 807
S
SIr Ralph Sadler 61 Sir Ed: Stanly 101 Sir Charles Somerset 1 E. W. 114 Sir
Thomas Smith 370 R: Earl of Somerset 518 Stafford Duke of Bucks 122 The
Seymours 142 Sir Will: Stamford 185 The Earl of Sussex 307-416 Sir Philip
Sidney 313 Sir Henry Sidney 412 Sir Thomas Smith 483 The Earl of Suffolk 567
The Lord Spencer 610 Sir John Savil 665 The Lord Say 744 The Earl of Strafford
752
T
BIshop Tonstal 340 Francis Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury 342 Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton 354
V
SIr H: Umpton 447 H: Vere Earl of Oxford 583-714 The Veres 5(...) Sir Henry
Vane Senor 7(...)
W
CArdinal Wolsey 1, 1(...) Sir Thomas Wyat (...) Sir Tho: Wriothsly 1 Ear(...)
Southampton Sir Will: Fitz-Williams (...) Sir Robert Wingfield 1(...) Sir Thom:
Wentworth 1(...) Doctor Wilson 2(...) Lord Willoughby 311-3(...) Sir Francis
Walsingham 3(...) Sir Edw: Waterhouse 3(...) Sir Will: Fitz-Williams 3(...) Sir
Christopher Wray 3(...) The Earl of Worcester 3(...) Sir William Waad 4(...)
Sir Ralph Winwood 5(...) Bishop Williams 6(...) Sir Isaac Wake 6(...) Sir R:
and Sir J: Weston E(...) of Portland 6(...) Sir Henry Wotton 8(...) The Lord
Wilmot 8(...)
Y
SIr Henry Yelverton 5^^
THE Henry 8.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND IN The Reign of King Henry the VIII.
Observations on the Life of Cardinal WOLSEY.
CArdinal Wolsey was not so great in his Fortune, as he was mean in his
Original: his honest and industrious Parents helped him to a good Constitution,
and a great Spirit, (two hopeful steps to Greatness;) and his Ambition gave
the opportunity to increase it: he was as pregnant at Ipswich-School, as he was
promising in Canterbury-Colledge; where his Industry and parts advanced him to
a command over Noblemen in the Earl of Dorset's Family, as a Schoolmaster; as
his Policy had promoted him to an Imperiousness over Kings in the quality of
Statesman. The first step to Greatness in a Scholar, is Relation to a
Nobleman: The best Education for the Court, is in the Palace: Nature made him
capable, the School and University made him a Scholar; but his Noble Employment
made him a Man: At Oxford he read Books, at my Lord's he read Men, and observed
Things: His Patrons two Parsonages bestowed upon him, was not so great a Favor
as the excellent Principles instilled into him; he being not more careful to
instruct the young Men, then their Father was to tutor him: his Bounty makes
him rich, and his Recommendation potent: His Interest went far, his Money
farther. Bishop Fox was Secretary to K. Henry the seventh, and he to Bishop
Fox; the One was not a greater Favorite of the King's, then the other was his;
as one that brought him a Head capacious of all Observations, and a Spirit
above all Difficulties: Others managed the Affairs of England, Wolsey
understood its Interest: His Correspondence was good abroad; his Observations
close, deep, and continued at home: He improved what he knew, and bought what
he knew not He could make any thing he read or heard his own and could improve
any thing that was his own to the uttermost.

No sooner was he in with the Bishop of Winchester, but the Bishop was out with
the Earl of Surrey, to whom he must have stooped, as he did unto Nature and
Age, had not he raised his Servant equal to himself in the Kings Favor, and
above Howard: He was forbid by the Canon, Heirs of his Body; he was enjoined by
his Prudence to make an Heir of his Favor, equally to support and comfort his
old Age, and maintain his Interest. Children in point of Policy, as in point of
Nature, are a Blessing, and as Arrows in the hand of a mighty man; and happy is
that old Courtier that has his Quiver full of them, he shall not be ashamed
when he speaks with his enemies in the gate. The old man commends Wolsey to
Henry the Seventh for one fit to serve a King, and command Others: Foreign
Employment is the Statesmans first School; to France therefore he is sent, to
poise his English Gravity with French Debonairness: A well-poised Quickness is
the excellent temper. From Foreign Employment under an Old King, he is called
home to some Domestic Services under the Young One: He as quickly found the
length of His Foot, as he fitted him with an easy Shoo; the King followed his
Pleasures, and the Cardinal enjoys His Power: The One pursued his Sports
while Youth, the other his Business while Time served him: (Give me to Day, and
take thou to Morrow, is both the Courtier and the Christian's Language:) The
Favorite took in the Council Table Debates and other State Affairs in the Mass
and whole Bulk of them by Day, and the King had the Quintessence of them
extracted, and the sum of them represented to him at Night: All State-Business
was disposed of by him, and most Church-Preferments bestowed upon him; the
Bishoprics of Durham, Winchester and York were in his possesson, and all other
Promotions in his Gift: He was installed in the Kingdom (during King Henry's
youthfulness) and had the Church in Commendam: His great Services indeed could
not be managed without a great Revenue, nor his greater Power supported, but by
an able Purse, which may buy off Expedients as readily as his Greatness may
command them.

Two Corrivals he had, Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Charles Brandon Duke
of Suffolk: Brandon he despised, as rather besides, says my Author, then
against him; he being the Kings Companion in Pleasure, and Wolsey his
Counselor in Policy; the Duke great with young Henry, the Bishop with the
King: Buckingham he feared, as popular; and undermined, as proud: (that Tower
must fall, whose Foundation is hollow) Buckingham was high in Birth, Honor and
Estate; Wolsey higher in Prudence, whose Malice did the brave Duke much
mischief, and his own Folly more: (Vainglory (writes Tho. Full. Holy State. p.
251.
my Friend) ever lies at an open guard, and gives much advantage of play to
her Enemies:) A deboyst King is jealous, and a weak Nobleman ambitious. In
fine, he is attainted of High Treason, (though rather Corrival to the King in
his Clothes then his Crown, in his Vanities then his Authority:) but a cunning
Upstart quickly blows off a young Noblemans Cap and Feather, and his Head too,
when it stands in his way.

His power against Buckingham was his Shield against all others: One Defense
well managed, one Adversary thoroughly suppressed, is a Security at Court, where
two men seldom fall the same way.

Many envied the Archbishop, the Cardinal, the Legate de latere, the Lord
Chancellor; but all feared the Favorite: most were discontented, but none
durst shake their Heads, lest they fell off with Buckingham's: the Bishops
displeasure was more fatal then the Kings, whose wrath was violent, but not
lasting; as the Others anger was of less fury, but more malice: his Power was
great, and his Justice equal; for he was too proud to be bribed, and too
powerful to be overborn. But England was too narrow a Theater for this great
Spirit, and he aspires to Rome; and having been these many years Pope of this
other world, would have been of that beyond the waters: his leap was great from
York to Rome, and his rise as good: Charles the Fifth was his Client, and his
Masters Servant; the Cardinals were his Penfioners; and when they failed (as he
is no Fox whose Den has but one hole, and he no Statesman who when one way is
stopped, cuts not out another) he falls off from the German Emperor to the
French King; where, if he could not carry his own Design, he would hinder the
Emperors; (and Revenge is an Advancement) (so great was he, that his
Friendship balanced Europe, overawed Emperors, threatened Kings, and was fatal
to Queens) if he cannot be Pope of Rome, he will show he is as good as King of
England; for finding that the King wanted a meet Yoak-Fellow for his Bed, and a
lawful Heir-Male to his Crown, and observing Queen Katharines Age above her
Husbands, and her Gravity above her Age, being more Pious then Pleasant, a
better Woman then Wife, and a better Wife for any Prince then King Henry; he
promotes a Divorce (upon some Scruples intimated by the Spaniard some years
before in a Treaty about the Princess Mary's Marriage, which others had
forgot, but the Cardinal laid up) between the King and Queen: but that was not
all; but knowing that King Henry could not have a Wife to his mind, until he
had a Pope of his own choosing, he would help him to a young Wife, but he must
raise him to a new power; Wolsey must be Pope, or King Henry could not be
divorced: and to make all sure, he was no sooner to be parted from a Daughter
of Spain, then he was to be joined to a Princess of France; whose Nuptial Ring
should wed King Henry to Her, and King Francis to Himself.

Missing of Power, he meditates Honor; and instead of lavishing his infinite
Treasure upon airy Expectations, he bestows it on real Monuments, which make
his Memory as Renowned as his Life. That Statesman lives to small purpose,
whose Actions are as short as his Life, and his Exploits of no longer duration
then his Age.

At this time, though King Henry bore the Sword, yet Cardinal Wolsey (as I am
told) bore the stroke all over the Land, being Legate a latere, by virtue
whereof he visited all Churches and Religious Houses, even the Friars
Observants themselves, notwithstanding their stoutnesse and stubbornness, that
first opposed him. Papal and Royal Power met in him, being the Chancellor of
the Land, and keeping so many Bishoprics in Commendam, that his yearly Income
is said to equal, if not to exceed the Revenues of the Crown: He gave the first
blow to Religious Houses, by making one great College of forty small
Monasteries; to make way, as some thought, upon the Popes consent, procured by
him, to the overthrow of all.

He called all Captains and Officers to an account, who bought off their own
small corruption with his great one, and paid him the Penalties of their Cheats
with the Gains of it; the Richest of them escaping, and the Poorest only made
exemplary. Several Courts of pretended Equity he erected; to redress the poor,
that was the Color; to enrich himself, that was the Reality: at whose
constitution the Law-Courts were unfrequented, so specious was their seeming
Integrity; at the last they are deserted, so manifest were their real
Grievances; the people not flocking so fast after the Novelty, as they ran away
from the Cheat.

What he did to reform the Courtiers, as a Favorite, he did to reform the
Clergy as Legate; erecting a Court Legantine (not without danger of a
Praemunire) wherein all Clergy were visited; the Rich in their Purses, that
excused them, the Poor in their Reputation, that compounded for them. Neither
did his profits arise from the Living only, but the Dead; he engrossing the
Probation of all Wills and Testaments within his own Court.

And not long after, he has a Patent under the Great Seal of England, to do
what he pleased in the French Court, in order to the Kings Progress thither;
as he has likewise after, with his Masters leave, under the great seal of
France: After which honor, he was with the Kings order, by the English
Subjects, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc. honored at no less rate then that
of a Prince; and by the Clergy (who kept close to the public temper) with
Processions, etc. at the same rate with a Pope. Great he was in England;
greater in Germany, where all the Nobility attended him, the Great Seal of
England was carried before him; and the Emperor observing his Commission and
Honor, met him with his whole Train, and harangued it with him no less then
two days. He that overruled Empires might well presume on Subjects; and no
sooner therefore does he return, then by his own Authority he levieth four
shillings in the pound of every man that was worth fifty pound per annum; and
when that would not do (pretending to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen that he had
been upon his Knees to revoke those Commissions) other Letters for a
Benevolence, which lost him as much in the Country, as his Reformation of the
Household did him at Court: But the King employeth him to France, as his Second,
and takes his leave of him as his intimate Friend; 1200 Horse attended him:
Calice, Bullein, Amiens honor him with the name of The Peaceable Cardinal; and
the Statue of a Cardinal Rescuing a Church and a Pope from danger.

Cardinal Wolsey going over to France upon an extraordinary Embassy, had for
his Attendance Tonstal Bishop of London, the Lord Sands, late Chamberlain, the
Earl of Derby, Sir Tho. More, Sir H. Guilford, and 200 Horse; and was met two
days journey from Paris by King Francis and his mother, carrying with him
140000 l. though silver was but 20 d. an ounce, to assist that King in the War
against Charles the fifth; and furnished with such a Plenipotentiary
Commission, that he gave Law to France and the Popedom: and he comported
himself with such dexterity and high wisdom, that all the Princes of
Christendom, who had their eyes fixed upon him, admired him.

The King gave him many places, and he bestowed on him his magnificent Palaces;
fitting his humor with pleasant habitations, and he suited his ambition with
power and authority.

But the King broke with him at last about the divorce, being vexed with so
many delays, defers, retardings, and prorogations between two Popes, Clement
that was, and Wolsey that would be: yet rather eased him of his burdens, then
deprived him of his preferments; continuing him Bishop of York and Durham,
(when he turned him out of his Chancellourship of England) where he lived
rather like a Prince then a Priest, providing as magnificently for his
Installation, as a King should for his Coronation: which unseasonable ambition
was improved by his enemies malice and the Kings jealousy to his ruin: for in
the midst of his solemnities he is arrested by the Kings order, whose wrath was
the Messenger of Death; and in his way to London, being distracted between hope
and fear, died at Leicester, giving his servants large rewards, upon condition
they served none but the King; and breathing out his soul in words to this
purpose, viz. If I had served the God of heaven as faithfully as I did my
Master on earth, he had not forsaken me in my old age, as the other has done,
he died, swelling in his body as he had done in his mind. When good men die
suddenly, it is said they are poisoned; and when the bad fall unexpectedly, as
he did, it is said they poison themselves. He died unpitied, because he had
lived feared; being the great Bias of the Christian world.

Too sudden prosperity in the beginning, undoeth us in the end: while we
expect all things flowing upon us as at first, we remit our care, and perish by
neglecting. Every head cannot bear wine, nor every spirit a fortune: Success
eats up Circumspection. How many a man had ended better, if he had not begun so
well? It Is the Emphasis of misery, to be too soon happy: Prosperity growing up
with experience, takes a man in a firm settlement, inured to all events. I will
ever suspect the smooth waters for deepness: in my worst estate I will hope, in
the best I will fear; in all, I will be circumspect and still. Rufiling
Ambition reaches great Honors, a Sedate Humility supports it: the Lower the
Basis, the higher and stronger the Pyramide. Love, the Issue of Humility,
guardeth the weakest; Hatred, the Daughter of Pride, ruins the strongest. Ego
and Rex meus, was good Grammar for Wolsey a Schoolmaster, but not for the
Cardina a Statesman: to be humble to Superiors, is duty; to Equals, is
courtesies to Inferiors, nobleness and to all, safety; it being a virtue that
for a her lowliness commands those souls it stoop to. In a word, as I love
Virtue, so I hate Vice for her inside and her end. Cardinal Wolsey (...) famous
for two things; that he never spoke a word too much, and but one too little.

Observations on the Life of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
SIr William Brandon dying in King Henry the seventh's service, no wonder if
his son lived in his favor; it being as prudent to continue his Loyal spirit
in his son, as it was just to reward it. He was as intimate with Henry the
eighth in his pleasures when a child, as in his counsels when a man. There was
a sympathy between their active spirits, which improved the familiarity of
their tender years to a firm friendship in their age: at a Tilting in Paris, to
which many young Noblemen were licensed to go, Brandon overcame others every
day, and one day himself, (against a Giant Almain) where the Lords looked not
on him with more envious, then the Ladies with gracious eyes; who (says my
Author) darted more glances in love, then the other did spears in anger against
him. He is the complete Courtier, in whom Beauty and Valor, Mars and Venus,
are joined in one happy constitution, which awes and allures Beholders.

Being employed to bring over Queen Mary, King Lewis the twelfth's Relict, to
her Brother, he won her to himself: whether his affections were so ambitious as
to climb up to her, or hers so humble as to condescend to him, may be the
subject of a more amorous discourse: and considering with himself that matters
of this nature are never sure till finished, that so Royal an opportunity
happened but seldom, and that leave for such an enterprise was easier gained
when it is done, then when doing; he humbly requested his Majesty to give way to
that Match, which was indeed already concluded: who after some Statediscontent,
was quickly pleased; the Duke being no less esteemed by him for many years,
then he was beloved by the people. His Genius was more Martial then Mercurial;
and we hear of him oftener in the French Wars, then in the English Councils.

Being vexed with the delays at Rome, and the delusions at Bridewel, (where the
Cardinals proceeded according to their instructions at Rome) one day he knocks
on the Table in the presence of the two Cardinals, and binds it with an Oath,
That it was never well in England since Cardinals had any thing to do therein:
and from that time forward, as an active Instrument, he endeavored the
abolishing of the Popes power in England; against whom he was not more active
in the Parliament 1534, then he was vigilant in the Committee 1535: in the one,
cutting off the head; in the other, weakening the members of that Church. He
made provident, yet moderate use of his Masters favors; thereby obliging
others, and securing himself; being above Mercenary inclinations as much in his
thoughts, as in his fortune: he was neither too near the King, lest he were
weary of him; nor too far off, lest he forgot him, or thought himself neglected
by him. His intermissions of attendance gave others no advantage, but rendered
him more gracious: he neither engrossed nor confined his Masters affection. It
was easy for him to rise, being descended of Noble Blood, (which is never
envied for its advancement) and as easy to keep high, being well studied in
his Princes disposition, whose inclination when found is half fitted; ever
pleasing his Masters Natural humor, never his Vicious. Having attained a
competent height, he chose rather to grow stronger by relation, then higher by
advancements. Some Favorites whose heels have been tripped up by their
adversaries, have with their hands held on their Allies till they could recover
their feet again. His familiarity, and the easy access to him, made him
popular: his pliant temper kept him a Favorite, until he died in the full
favor of his Prince, though (as Cardinal Pool observed) They who were highest
in this Kings favor, had their heads nearest danger. He had a becoming
Bluntness not unlike his Masters, which we call Free-heartedness in Courtiers;
Conscience and Christian simplicity in Clergymen; Valor in Soldiers. He
died anno 1544. much beloved and lamented of all, for his Bounty, Humility,
Valor, and all Noble Virtues since the heat of his Youth was tamed by his
reduced Age: whose two sons Henry and Charles died within twelve hours one of
the other, 155^.

1. A Calm Greatness is next the happiness of Heaven: Give me the man that by a
fair and calm course is still rising to an higher state, yet content with his
present fortune.

2. Integrity out-lasts Power, and Plainness survives Policy: An honest heart
keeps the head on the shoulders; a Noble and clear Virtue is lasting.

3. It Is likeness that makes the True-love-knot of friendship: When a Prince
finds another of his own disposition, what is it but the same soul in a divided
body? what finds he but himself intermutually transposed? And Nature that
makes us love our selves, makes us with the same reason love those that are
like us: for this is a Friend, a more sacred Name then a Brother.

4. He that has a mind contentedly good, enjoys in it boundless
possessions. He is great indeed, that is great in a brave soul.

Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem,
Jucundissime Martialis, haec sunt:
Res non porta Labor sed relicta;
Non ingratus Ager, focus perennis,
Lis nunquam, toga rara, men's quieta:
Viris Ingenuae, salubre Corpus:
Prudens simplicitas, pares amici,
Convictus facilis, sine art Mensa;
Nox non ebria sed soluta curis:
Non tristis torus, attamen pudicus:
Somnus, qui faciat breves tenebras;
Quod sis esse vetis, nihilque malis;
Summum ne metuos diem nec optes.
Observations on Thomas Cranmer, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
CRanmer had a Noble Blood, quickening and raising his spirit, as he had an
indefatigable industry to improve it. He was a Gentleman born in Arselecton in
Nottinghamshire, and a Nobleman bred in Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge. His
Ancestors were no less eminent at Cranmers-hall in Lincolnshire, then he was at
Lambeth in Surrey. They came in with the Conquest, (as one Cranmer a French
Ambassador in Henry the eighth's time, at the Archbishops Table, made it
evident) and he with the Reformation. His Education was as Gentile as his
Birth, only his mild spirit meeting with a severe Master, his memory was
weakened, and his spritefulness allayed: but the austerity of the School was
sweetened with the exercises of the Country, which his Father indulged him when
young, and he indulged himself when aged; handling his great Horse as nimbly,
his Bow and Net as dexterously as any man in his family. His Marriage withdrew
him from the College, and consequent Church-preferment, as the Kings did him
from the Church it self. He whose marriage forbid him a Fellowship in
Jesus-Colledge, had a Lecture in Buckingham-house for his Parts and Reputation,
where at once he prepared others for public Employments, and himself also. He
lived as soberly at the Dolphine-tavern with his wife, (whatever the Papists
have surmized) as he did studiously at Buckingham-house with his Scholars. His
Name was so famous, that Wolsey was not more sollicitous to transplant him as
an Ornament to Oxford, then Fisher was to retain him in Cambridge; where he was
eminent for the Arts, more for Divinity, which (when as one of the three
Cenfors he examined Candidates) he said he expected not in the difficult
trifles of Lumbard, but in the sacred sense of Scriptures, the ancient Doctrine
of Fathers, the grave Canons of Councils, the solid Politeness of the Greek and
Hebrew Learning; and which he lived as well as he taught, in his sober
temperance, his mild meekness, (so placable, so courteous, that to offend him,
was the way to ingratiate with him) his discreet moderation, his grave
resolution equally above the frowns and smiles of fortune. Thus qualified, he
was by a Providence commended to his Majesty: for there being a Plague in
Cambridge, as there was all over England, Dr. Cranmer retired to Waltham with
two of his Pupils, the sons of one Mr. Cressy: where upon the Kings Progress
thither, he met with his Chaplain and Almoner Dr. Fox, (afterward Bishop of
Hereford) who lodging with him at Mr. Cressy's, discoursed the Kings Divorce.
Cranmer conceived that the speediest course were to prove the unlawfulness of
the Match by Scripture; whence it would follow, that the Pope at first had no
power to dispense therewith; and that the Universities of Christendom would
sooner and truer decide the case then the Court of Rome. This passage Fox
reports to the King, who wellpleased thereat, professes that this man had the
Sow by the right Ear: Glad was the King to see him, (indeed he had a comely
Person, and a pleasing Countenance;) more to hear him enlarge himself on the
former Subject, That it was above the Popes power to dispense with Gods Word in
the Kings Case: What he said to the King, he was sent to make it good to the
Pope; whither, invested with the Arch-Deaconry of Taunton, he went with Thomas
Bullen Earl of Wil^shire; whose first Address to the Pope, was to present a
Book of Cranmers, proving Gods Law indispensible with by the Pope: the Author
is preferred to the great Title of Supreme Poenitentiary, and the Treatise is
promised a Consideration and Debate: But the Pope delaying, and according to
Cranmer's Advice ten Universities declaring against him; the Ambassador returns
to England, and the Disputant goes to Vienna, where in Osianders House (whose
Kinswoman he had married) he confirmed those that wavered, satisfied those that
doubted, and won those that contradicted in King Henry's Cause. But he served
not King Henry more faithfully in Germany, then he provided for him honorably
in England; where the Kings Cause waited for his Assistance, and the Sea of
Canterbury for his Acceptance: He was willing to promote Religion, he was
unwilling (for some Formalities he scrupled) to advance himself: but after
seven Weeks delay, it being as fatal to refuse King Henry's Favors, as to
offer him Injuries, he is Archbishop in his own Defense; in which capacity, to
serve the King, and salve his own Conscience, he used the Expedient of a
Protestation to this purpose: In nomine, etc. Non est nec erit meae voluntatis
aut intentionis per hujusmodi Juramentum and juramenta, qualiter verba in ipsis
posita sonare videbuntur, me obligare ad aliquid; ratione eorundem post hac
dicendum, faciendum aut attestandum, quod erit aut esse videbitur contra legem
Dei, vel contra Regem, aut Rempublicam, legesve, aut Praerogativa ejus: and
quod non intendo per hujusmodi juramentum quovis modo me obligare quo minus
libero loqui, consulere, and consentire valeam in omnibus and singulis
Reformationem Ecclesiae, prerogativam Coronae, concernentibus, and ea exequi
and reformare quae in Ecclesia Anglicana reformanda videbuntur. This
Protestation he made three times; once at the Charter House, another time at
the Altar, and a third time at the receiving of his Pall. In his place he was
moderate, between the Superstition of Rome, and the Phrensies of Munster. As he
was chief Instrument in beginning the Reformation, so he was in continuing it:
He withstood the Six Articles, and (though the King sent five prime Ministers
of State to comfort him) would not be satisfied, until he saw them mitigated in
King Henry's time, and repealed in King Edward's.

Gardener would have questioned him for entertaining foreign Heretics, and
promoting Domestic Schisms; the Northern Rebels accused him for subverting
the Church: but the King upheld him against both; suppressing the One, and
checking the Other; and advising the good Man, whom he called Fool, for his
meek disposition, to appeal to him: Whereupon Russel cried The King will never
suffer him to be imprisoned, until you find Him guilty of High Treason. He is
to be pitied for his intermediate failings, but renowned for his final
constancy.

The King having declared before all his Servants, that Cranmer was his best
Servant, he employeth him in his best service, the Reformation of Religion,
wherein all others failed; but the King, Cromwell and Brandon backed him so far,
that he had the Bible and the necessary Offices of the Church translated into
English: He had both Universities at his command: He brought the Lords House
and Convocation to his Lure; and was invested with a Power, 1. To grant
Dispensations in all things not repugnant to Gods Law, nor the Kings safety: 2.
To determine Ecclesiastical Causes, He as charitably as politickly advised the
King to accept of Bishop Fisher's partial Subscription, considering his
Learning and Reputation. As he is King Henry's Instrument at Dunstable, to
divorce him from Queen Katharine; so he is at Lambeth, to divorce him from Anna
Bullen. He promoted in the Convocation all Primitive Doctrines, and condemned
all newfangled Opinions. He was so charitable, that he interceded with the
King for his Enemies; so munificent, that he made the Church and his own House
a Refuge for Strangers; particularly for P. Fagius, P. Martyr, Martin Bucer,
etc. The King loved him for his Integrity, the People for his Moderation: He
was called the Kings Father, and was Queen Elizabeth's Godfather: His Piety
reduced the Church, and his Policy the State: He spoke little to others, he
conferred much with himself: Three words of His could do more then three hours
discourse of Others: He wousd say, as Victorinus, There is a time to say
nothing, there is a time to say something, but there is never a time to say all
things. That King who awed all Others, feared Him. A Second to the Eternal
Power, is the Wise Man incorrupt in his Life. He was the Executor of God's Will
in King Henry's Lifetime, and the first of His, after his Death.

As He spurred King Henry to a Reformation, so King Edward did Him; whose
Prudence was not so forward as the Others Zeal, who looked at what was Lawful,
as He did at what was Convenient. He maintained the Churches Power as
resolutely against Bishop Hooper's Scruples, notwithstanding potent
Intercession; as he reformed its Corruptions against the Popes Interest,
notwithstanding a general Opposition. He allowed not the least Error in, not
the least contempt of the Church: He restored its primitive Doctrine and
Discipline, lest it should be an impure Church; he upheld them, lest it should
be none: He was one of fourteen that compiled the Common Prayer: He was One of
Two that set out the Homilies; and the only man that published the Institution
of a Christian man, and other good Books. With his Advice King Edward did much,
and designed more: He was the chief Author of King Edward's Injunctions, and
the first Commissioner in them: He was President of the Assembly at Windsor,
(for Reformation) and of the Council at London: His Articles were strict and
severe; as much grounded on the Canon of Scripture, as on the Canons of the
Church: He convinced more Papists with his Reason and Moderation, then others
by their Power: His Heart never failed him in his Life, and it was not burned
at his Death. He did so much for the Protestant Religion in King Henry's Days,
that he foresaw he should suffer for it in Queen Mary's: He was unwilling to
wrong Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, therefore he refused at first to sign
King Edward's Testament, but Duke Dudley's Will: He was willing to continue the
Protestant Religion, therefore he signed it at last. It was a Bishop that was
one of the first that abolished Popery in England, and one of the last that
died for Protestantisme: It was a Bishop that maintained the Protestant Cause
with Arguments while he lived, and with his Blood when he died.

Observations on Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England.
HE rise up high, because he stepped out well: Sir Thomas More was half way
Chancellor, when born to Sir John More Chief Justice: The Father's Prudence,
Wit and Nobleness flowed with his Blood to the Sons Veins: Much Honor he
received from his Family, more he gave to it: His Mother saw his Face shining
in and Dream, on her Wedding Night; and his Father saw his Life so really: A
quick City-Spirit made him capable of great State-Employments.

He was saved by a Miracle, and was One: For his Nurse riding with him over a
Water, and being in some danger, threw him over a Hedge, where she found him
not hurt, but sweetly smiling St. Anthonies under New-Hall.
upon her.

A Free School seasoned his forward Childhood; and the grave, wise and
excellent Cardinal Mortons House his Youth: The One with Learning, to make him
a Scholar; the Other with Prudence, to make him a Man: But the Distractions of
that House were not so proper for his promising Ingenuity, as the Retirements
of the University; where in two years time he showed what Wonders Wit and
Diligence could do in Rhetoric, Logic and Philosophy: The Christ-Church.
College kept him strict, and his Father short, so that (as he blessed God
afterward) He had neither the leisure nor the means to be vicious: The Cardinal
said he would be Great, and his excellent Genius said he would be Humble: The
Lord Chancellor would give place to, and ask blessing of the Lord Chief
Justice: The Father being not more happy in his Son, then the Son in his
Father. At 17 his wit was eminent for his Epigrams: His Antilucian Oration
commended by all men but Brixius, for pure, genuine and flowing: At 18 his
wisdom in overcoming his Antagonist Brixius with kindness, and Himself with
Mortifications. His fastings were frequent, his watchings on the hard ground
revere; his Hair-cloath even in his Chancellourship course, his exercises among
the Cartbusians in the Charterhouse for four years austere; his design for the
Franciscan Hood, and a Priesthood with his Friend Lilly, solemn; His prayers
uninterrupted: When the King sent for him once at Mass, he answered, That when
be bad done with God, he would wait on his Majesty: He imitated Picus
Mirandula's Life, and writ it: He heard Dr. Collet his Confessors Sermons, and
followed his life; whose experience was his counsel, whose conversation was his
life. He could not away with the good Sermon of a bad man: Collet was his
Father; Linacre, Lilly, Grocine, were his Friends. He learned more by prayer,
then he did by study: his Poems were acute, his Speeches pure and copious, his
Latin elegant; yet his head was knotty and Logical: his Diet was temperate,
his Apparel plain, his Nature tractable and condenscending (though very
discerning) to the meanest men's counsel; his Virtues solid, not boasted. In a
word, the foundation of his Life was as low as the building was to be high.

He married himself to He married Mr. Colts daughter of New-Hall.
Virtue, and not to an Estate: he likes a younger sister, yet out of civility
he embraces the elder. Happy he was in his modest Wives, happier in his
hopeful Children. His Government of his Family was exact, enjoining all his
Children to take Virtue for their meat, and Play for their sauce. His
proficiency in the whereby he was double Reader.
Law was admirable, his Practice successful, his Judgment solid, his Integrity
eminent; his Determinations in the Sheriffs Court, his Activity for the
Stilyard, his Practice in the Courts of Justice, raised him to a place in
Parliament: where he was so good a Patriot, that he displeased King Henry the
seventh; and so wise a man, that he awed King Henry the eighth: the one by Fox
demands one Subsidy and three Fifteens, and the beardless Boy (as the
Courtiers called Sir Thomas) disappointed him; the other made a motion by
Wolsey, which he overthrew, so that the Cardinal wished him at Rome.

He retires to his studies to avoid Henry the seventh's displeasure, and
improves them to gain his sons favor, who by his Cardinal invited him to
Court, and employed him abroad to France to recover his debts; to Flanders, to
confirm the peace. Employments he avoided a while, to keep his Cityinterest:
and in case of controversy with the King, to prevent their jealousy: his
business was so urgent, that you would think he had no leisure; and his
writings so exact, that you would think he had no business. Not a minute of his
time escaped employment. His History of Richard the third is faithful, his
Vtopia is judicious and elegant, his On St. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
Lectures at St. Laurence were learned and pious.

His Popularity in Parliament commended him to his Majesty: his strong
Arguments for the Popeship in Star Chamber, brought him to him against his
modest inclination, as much as against Wolsey's interest. His ability set him
on the Council Table, his integrity placed him in the Exchequer: His He was
made Chancellor of that Duchy.
Services promoted him to the Duchy of Lancaster, his Dexterity and Prudence
made him the Kings bosome-friend, and his familiar all his spare hours; whose
Questions in every Art and Science were not more useful, then Sir Thomas his
Answers were satisfactory. His advice was his Majesty's and his Queens Oracles
in Counsel; his discourse was their recreation at Table. He was not more
delightful to the King at Court, then he was serviceable to him in appeasing
tumults, etc. in the City. He was the Kings Favorite at White Hall, and the
Peoples Darling at Westminster, where he was Speaker as well with the unanimous
consent of the one, as with the approbation of the other: and between both,
impartial, equally careful of Prerogative and Privileges; neither awed from
right by power, nor flattered with popularity. He declined Foreign services
with as much Dexterity as he managed Domestic ones. He served th(...)
faithfully, but trusted him not, as one that enjoyed and suspected Fortune,
saying, If his Head could win King Henry a Castle in Wales, it would off.

The King and Kingdom trusted him, who Queen Katherine said so.
was that one sound Counselor the King had. The Cardinal told him he was the
veriest Fool in the Council: he replied, God be thanked my Master has but one
fool there.

His Honor was set off by a grave condescension, and a grave humility. Did he
argue? he was very moderate, civil and modest. Did he reprove? he was pitiful,
grave and prudent. Was he with the King at the University? he was ready and
eloquent. Was he abroad? he heard the Lectures attentively, and disputed A
fellow at Bruges would undertake to answer any question: Sir Thomas put up
this, Whether Averia capta in Withernamia sint irreplegiabilia, to that
Thrasoes great amazement.
accurately. To his Friend, as Dr. Tunstal, none more faithful: to learned men,
as Erasmus, none more civil: to devout men, such as Bishop Fisher, none more
firm: to hopeful men, such as Powle, there was none more encouraging: to
painful men, such as Grocinus, Linacer, Crocus, Lupsel, Lilly, Cocklee,
Budlera, Dorpin, Bewald, Luscar, Grannould, Vines, Groclenius, Bus^idian,
Aegidius, Rhenanus, none more familiar, constant or liberal: in his conscience,
none more satisfied and sedate: in his discourse, none more innocent and
pleasant: in his heart, none more devout and sincere.

His meditations were frequent; his retirements to a Chapel built of purpose,
daily; his Prayers constant and zealous; his conversation with his Wives,
loving and debonnair, taking them off their cares to reading and music. His
Servants were always employed either in his, or Gods service, suffering them
not by idleness to be at leisure for sinnor by wanton converse to be tempted to
it. H(...) Table-talk after the Chapter was pleasing and useful, his counsels
useful, his converse exemplary his family-instructions to bear afflictions
patiently to withstand temptations resolvedly, to mind heavenly matters
devoutly, to go plainly and soberly, to recreate themselves moderately and
virtuously, were effectual. There went a blessing along with all his Servants,
and happiness with his whole Family.

His Apophthegms were grounded on experience and judgment. He would say, 1. He
was not always merry that laughed. 2. The world is undone by looking on things
at distance. 3. To aim at Honor here, is to set up a Court of Arms over a
Prisongate. 4. If I would employ my Goods well, I may be contented to loose
them; if ill, I should be glad. 5. He that is covetous when he is old, is as a
Thief that steals when he is going to the Gallows. 6. Bags of Gold to us when
Saints, will be but as a bag of pebble-stones when men. 7 The greatest
punishment in the world were to have our wishes. 8. Pusillanimity is a great
temptation. 9. Affliction undoes many; Pleasure most. 10. We go to Hell with
more pain then we might go to Heaven with. Of Heresy he said, Like as before a
great storm the Sea swells, and has unwonted motions without any wind
stirring; so may we see here many of our Englishmen, which a few years ago
could not endure to hear the name of an Heretic or Schismatic, now to be
contented both to suffer them, and to praise them somewhat, yea, to learn by
little and little, as much as they can be suffered, to find fault, and to tax
willingly the Church, the Clergy, and the Ceremonies. 11. The more of any thing
else we have, but Riches, the more good we are. 12. Who would not send his Alms
to heaven? who would not send his Estate whither he is to be banished? 13. Some
men hate Hypocrisy, and love Impudence. 14. When any detracted others at his
Table, he said, Let any man think as he pleases, I like this room well. 15.
It Is easier to to prevent, then redress.

Indeed throughout his Works he argues sharply, he reasons profoundly, he
urges aptly, stateeth exactly, expresses himself elegantly, and discourses
learnedly. He would rather convince, then punish; yet he would rather punish
then indulge them: his Epitaph bespeaking him grievous to Heretics, Thieves
and Murderers.

When King Henry scrupled his first marriage, Sir Thomas told him, That neither
he nor my Lord of Durham were so fit to advise him in that case, as St.
Augustine, St. Jerome, and the other Fathers. His advice was so unseasonable,
that it opposed the King; yet so grave and honest, that it pleased him. His
Experience and Prudence had a foresight next door to Prophecy; and from the
unquiet times of King Henry, did he guess the ruin of King Charles. He
converted many with his Arguments, more with his Prayers, which workt wonders
of reformation on the erroneous, as they did of recovery on the weak. He wished
three things to Christendom: 1. An Universal Peace: 2. An Uniform Religion: 3.
A Reformation rather of Lives then Religion. He never asked any thing of his
Majesty but Employment, and never took any thing more acceptable then Service.
His Alms were liberal to his Neighbors, and good works numerous He built a
Chapel at Chelsey, and hired an Almshouse there.
toward God. He would take no Fees from the Poor, and but moderate ones from
the Rich. All London was obliged to him for his Counsel at home, and all
England for his Peace at Cambray, where he out-did expectation.

The King raised him to the Chancellourship, but not to his own opinion: he
professed he would serve his Majesty, but he must obey his God: he would keep
the Kings conscience and his own. His Wisdom and Parts advanced him, his
Innocence and Integrity ruined him: his Wit pleased the King, but his
Resolution crossed him. Wolsey was not so proud and reserved, as Sir Thomas was
open and free to the meanest: his mind was not so dazzled with honor, but he
could foresee his fall. When his sons complained how little they gained under
him, I will do justice (said he) for your sakes to any man, and I will leave
you a blessing; decreeing one day against his own son that would not hear
reason. First, he offered the Judges the Reformation of Grievances; and when
they refused, he did it himself. -- No Subpoena was granted but what he With
the cause attested by the Attorney, in token whereof when one Tubbe brought him
a Subpoena to subscribe, finding it frivolous, he writ under it a tale of a tub.
saw, no Order but what he perused; nothing passed from him toward the
subject, but what became a good Magistrate; nothing toward his Master, but
what became a faithful servant. Neither King nor Queen could corrupt, neither
could the whole Church in Convocation fasten any thing upon him. To one who
told him of his Detractors, he said, Would you have me punish those by whom I
reap more benefit then by all you my friends? Perfect Patience is the Companion
of true Perfection.

But he managed not his trust with more integrity and dexterity, then he left
it with honor; leaving not one cause undecided in the Chancery: foreseeing
that he could not at once content his Majesty and his own heart. His Servants
upon his fall he disposed of as well as his children; and his Children he
taught to live soberly in a great Estate, and nobly in a mean one. He never put
an Heretic to death when Chancellor, neither would he suffer Heresies to live
when a private man. When my Lord Cromwell came to him in his retirement, he
advised him to tell the King what he ought, not what he can do; so shall you
show your self a true and faithful servant, and a right worthy Counselor: for
if a Lion knew his own strength, hard were it for any man to rule him. The King
feared him when he could not gain him, and therefore he was sifted in his
former carriage and present temper, which continued constant to his duty, and
even under his changes. He was open-hearted to all that came, yet so wary in
his discourse with the Maid of Kent, that his enemies confessed he deserved
rather honor then a check for that matter. When the Duke of Norfolk told him,
that the wrath of a Prince is death; he said, Nay, if that be all, you must die
to morrow, and I today. He behaved himself at all Examinations at once wisely
and honestly. When Archbishop Cranmer told him, he must obey the King which was
certain, rather then follow his conscience which was uncertain; he replied,
It Is as certain that I must not obey the King in evil, as that I must follow my
conscience in good. When the Abbot of Westminster told him, his conscience
should yield to the wisdom of the Kingdom, he said, He would not conform his
conscience to one Kingdom, but to the whole Church. He underwent his
sufferings with as much cheerfulness as his preferment; pleasing himself with
his misfortunes, and enjoying his misery; resolving to obey God rather then
man, to leave others to their own consciences; to close with the Catholic
Church rather then the Church of England, and to submit to general Councils
rather then to Parliaments.

Mr. Rich put to him this Question, Whether if the Parliament made a Law that
he were Pope, would he not submit to it? and he replied, If the Parliament made
another that God should not be God, would you obey it? Though he could not own
the Kings Supremacy, yet he would not meddle with it either in his Writings or
discourse; showing himself at once a civil man, a good Christian, and a noble
Confessor. His soul was well settled; his stature was mean, but well
proportioned; his complexion phlegmatiqne; his countenance amiable and
cheerful; his voice plain and distinct; and his temper sound and healthful.

WHo is the honest man?
He that does still and strongly good pursue, Herbert.

To God, his Neighbor and Himself most true:
Whom neither force nor fawning can
Vnpin or wrench from giving all their due.
Whose honesty is not
So loose and easy, that a ruffling wind
Can blow away, or glittering look it blind:
Who rides his sure and even trot
While the world now rides by, now lags behind.
Who, when great trials come,
Nor seeks, nor shuns them; but does calmly stay,
Till he the Thing and the Example weigh:
All being brought into a sum,
What Place or Person calls for, he does pay.
Whom none can work or woo
To use in any thing a trick or slight;
For above all things be abhors deceit:
His words and works and fashion too
All of a piece, and all are clear and straight.
Who never melts or thaws
At close tentations: when the day is done,
His goodness sets not, but in dark can run:
The Sun to others writes Laws,
And is their virtue; Virtue is his Sun.
Who, when he is to treat
With sick Folks, Women, those whom passions sway,
Allows for that, and keeps his constant way;
Whom others faults do not defeat,
But though men fail him, yet his part does play.
Whom nothing can procure,
When the wide world runs Bias, from his will
To writhe his limbs, and share, not mend the ill.
This is the Mark-man, safe and sure,
Who still is right, and prays to be so still.
Observations on the Life of Thoma^ Cromwell Earl of Essex.
PVtney saw his Cradle in a Cottage, and England saw his Coffin in a Ditch: His
Original was mean, his End meaner: A suddai^ height in an unsettled time ruined
him: A mode rate and leasurely Greatness is safe. His Bloo^ ran low, but pure,
ennobling the veins it flowed i^ with a Spirit that was to raise a Family, and
Deserve that Honor that others Inherit. His hone(...) Parents conveyed him a
strong Constitution tha^ could support stronger Parts: The poor man good Temper
is an Inheritance, and the Rich hi(...) Effeminacie his Disease.

A private School civilized his Parts; Trave^ and Employment improved them: His
Necessity when at home, made him a Soldier abroad; and hi^ Observations abroad
made him a Man at Home The Experience of Travel enlarged his Soul, an^ the
Hardship of War knitted and consolidated it(...) His hard Fortune at Cambray
was the occasion o(...) his good One in England; and had he not been un(...)
done, he had been undone: For his promising look(...) commended him to
Frescobald the Merchant fo(...) Relief, and to Cardinal Wolsey for Service; in
whos^ private Service of Secretary for his Embassy i^ France, he prepared
himself for that more public of Secretary of State in England. Great Scholar
h(...) was none, (the Latin Testament gotten by hea^^ being his Masterpiece)
nor studied Lawyer: never admitted to the Innes of Court; nor experienced
Soldier, though Necessity cast Him upon it, when the Duke of Burbon befieged
Rome; nor Courtier (till bred up in Cardinal Wolsey'^ Court:) yet that of the
Lawyer in him so helped the Scholar, that of the Soldier the Lawyer, that of
the Courtier the Soldier, and that of the Traveller all the rest; being no
Stranger to Germany, well acquainted with France, most familiar with Italy; so
that the result of all together made him for Endowments eminent, not to say
admirable. His Apprehension was quick and clear; his Judgment methodical and
solid; his Memory strong and rational; his Tongue fluent and pertinent; his
Presence stately and obliging; his Heart large and noble; his Temper patient
and cautious; his Way industrious and indefatigable; his Correspondence well
laid, and constant; his Converse insinuating and close: None more dexterous to
find out, none more reserved to keep a Secret. He was equal (says my Author)
to the French Politicians, when under his Master; he overreached them when
alone; doing more in one month with his subtle Head, then the other in twelve
months with his stately Train: The King of France would have pensioned up his
parts, but the Viceroy of England advanced them. His Master brought him first
to serve his Country in Parliament (that great School of Experience) and then
his King at Court; where defending his Masters great actions, he made it
evident he could perform greater: such was his Wit, such his Eloquence, that
they who hated the Client, admired the Advocate: And thoug^ he could not keep
his Patron from falling, yet he raised himself; that being the first time his
Eminent Parts were observed: An advantageous starting is more then half way in
the Race of Preferment: For hereupon he is first Master of the Kings Jewels,
and then of what was more precious, his Secrets. His conscience inclined him to
the Churches Reformation, his Interest complied with the Kings; he unlocked the
secrets of Monasteries by his Spies, and put the King upon destroying them by
his Power: The University of Cambridge made him Chancellor, to save it self;
where though he did no great good, yet his Greatness kept others from doing
harm, in an Age wherein Covetousness could quarrel a College, as well as an
Abbey, into superstition. He was trusted by the King with the Rolls and Records
of England; and by the Scholars, with the Charters and Statutes of their
Universities: He reforms the University, in order to the Reformation of the
Church; enjoining the study of the Scripture and the Tongues, instead of
School Divinity and Barbarism; recommending Aristotle, Agricola, Melancthon, to
their reading; and the Doctrine which is in Spirit and in Truth to their Faith:
and razing the Popes Bulls, to make way for the Kings Favor.

He was an eminent Minister of State, and chief Governor of the Church;
proceeding in Convocation very discreetly, modelling the Church-Laws very
prudently and moderately: looking into Monastical Abuses very narrowly and
industriously; mawling Religious Houses, violently pulling down those Nests,
that the Rooks might not return: His Master had disobliged the Pope, and he
weakeneth him: It was not safe to disown his Supremacy, and entertain thousands
of his Creatures. If a Kingdom be divided against it self, it cannot stand; and
if one part of the English pay their devotion to a supreme Head at Rome, and
another to a supreme Governor in England, they must both fall. If the persons
might disturb the Government, it is fit their Estates should secure it; and if
the Papists should foment a War, their Lands should maintain it: But Cromwell
contrives that the Pope should confirm Alienations in Wolsey, before he should
practice it for the King. As the King knew whom he employed, when he trusted
him: so he knew whom he trusted, when he employed Doctor Lee (an able servant
to an abler Master) He first decoyed Religious Men out of their Covents by the
allurement of Liberty, and then forced them out by Power and Authority. As the
Abbeys improved his Estate, so his Master advanced his Honor: he had one Privy
Seal always to act by, and was Keeper of another: He had no sooner attained an
Earldom for himself, but foreseeing the alteration of Affairs, he secured a
Barony for his Son, not forfeitable by the Attainder of the Father: Within five
years he was Master of the Jewelhouse, Secretary of State, Baron,
Vicar General, Master of the Rolls, Knight of the Garter, Keeper of the
Privy Seal, Lord High Chamberlain, and Earl of Essex: within five months he
quitted place, and in five minutes lost all. He must needs be envied, whose
Birth was so much beneath all others, and his Preferment above them: especially
when the King in preferring him injured others; as, the Citizens, in managing
the Jewels; the Courtiers, in undertaking State Affairs; the Lawyers, in the
Rolls When Master thereof.
; the Nobly Descended, at When Knight of the Garter.
Windsor; the Clergy, in the When Vi(...). General
Convocation; the Earl of Oxford, and the Family of the Bourchiers, in the
great Chamberlainship and Earldom of Essex. But he cares not whom he
displeases, if he can oblige his Master; whose power he advances in the
Parliament and Synod, as he improveth his Revenue in the Office of
First Fruits, and the Court of Augmentation. His Greatness was allayed with his
Goodness; and the Envy of the One, mitigated by the Liberality of the Other: He
had not more Suitors at his door then Alms, (two hundred at a time:) Sir Thomas
was a Name of Awe and Reverence to the Rich, and blessed by the Poor: That Name
Stow Sur. London.
levelled the proudest Citizens House for his convenience, and bowed the
poorest man's Knee to his Honor. He could at pleasure work upon the Lords by
the Commons, and on the Commons by the Lords; as Cardinal Wolsey persuaded the
Commons to four shillings in the pound upon the Lords president; and the Lords
to as much upon the Commons: and he kept up the Cardinals way of Anticipation,
that the people should be always one Subsidy beforehand: He set up the old
Taxation of Knighthood at Queen Anne's Coronation, and levied it.

He confirms the Kings Supremacy by a Law, and establishes his Daughter
Elizabeth's Succession by an Oath, first taken by the Parliament, and then by
the Kingdom; for whose support he contrives the lesser Monasteries should be
first escheated, and then the greater. He was so honest, that he acquits Queen
Anne in his Letter to the Queen; yet so much a Statesman, that he condemned her
upon the Bench.

But to secure the Interest of England, he improved its Religion; that as some
few late Acts had disobliged the Pope, a new frame of Christianity might
exclude him: The differences between Us and Rome, were to be widened, lest they
should close; and he judged it prudence to engage the conscience and the estate
in one bottom, that he might hold the One out of the tenderness of the Other.
The Kings Supremacy cut off the Papists, and the Six Articles the Protestants:
Reformation must be managed leasurely, and alteration of Religion by just
degrees; Instruction preceding execution, and the peoples capacity growing up
with their Governors Regulation.

The times are troublesome, but Cromwell calm and quiet, and watchful over
Occurrences; Insurrection giving him an advantage of a new Settlement. He takes
down the Occasions and Ornaments of Idolatry, Images, Shrines, Pilgrimages,
etc. and then the Thing it self: Take off the paint of Rome, and you undo her:
As the Laws and Injunctions, so the Alliance of England must secure its
Interest: A Protestant Queen must be married to the Reformed King; the Duke of
Cleve's Sister must woo the King, that Essex might have that whispered in the
Kings Bosom abed, where he was best disposed, which he insinuated into his Ear
at the Council Table where he was worst: But the King was not so well pleased
with her Beauty, as Cromwell was with her Religion; which Stephen Gardener (who
hated her for her Religion, and Cromwell for his Greatness) observing, showed
the Kings loose Affections, at once how to be rid of his Match, and, which he
was as weary of, his Match-Maker. The Queen is divorced (being never known by
Henry, who disliked her at first view, and kept her rather in Policy, to oblige
the German Princes, then of pleasure to fill his own Bed.) Cromwell is arrested
for presuming to act in some matters of State, without the Kings privity or
Commission, and attainted by a procedure he had invented; dying as cunningly as
he had lived, for some As when one said he was accused for disloyalty to the
King, he said, He would stab him with his dagger if he were.
ambiguous words which Power interpreted to his Ruin.

His last words were so wary, that they might become Bellarmine and Luther at
once; that the Protestants call them his Confession of Faith, and the Papists
his old Religion: for confessing his Offenses against God and the King, in his
many Employments, he said he died in the Catholic Faith: Some will say the
Protestants think no great gain to have him, and the Papists no loss to part
with him; yet we must needs confess that he was a Wise Man, because he always
consulted the Learned in the Laws a out all his proceedings: He was a Good man,
witness Frescobald, whose mean Person he took notice of, whose small Kindeness
he acknowledged, whose Services he condescended to, whose Wants he relieved,
and whose Debts he recovered: He was a Noble man, because he refused another
man's Coat of Arms who was of his Name, saying, What shall I do with it? for he
may pull it off my back at pleasure. In a word, He was so Mean before he rise,
so Worthy afterward, that no Times had Raised but those more troublesome, none
Ruined him but those most loose of Henry the VIII.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Audley.
SIr Thomas Audley's Birth was Generous, his Education more: Essex bred him to
that Honor which his Ancestors lost: His Soul ennobled his Body, and his Body
graced his Soul: The one quick, solid, apprehensive and judicious; the other
tall and majestic: King Henry loved a Man; and here was one whose Austerity
was allayed with Debonairness, whose Gravity was sweetened with Pleasantness;
whose Knowledge was as large as his Authority, whose Wit was equal with his
Wisdom; whose Memory was strong, and Judgment solid. His fair Estate brought
him to the Temple; his proficiency in the Law, to the Court: His reading upon
the Statute of Privileges commended him to the Kings Service, his speaking for
the Prerogative in Parliament brought him to the Kings Favor. Although the
Liberties of the People can never be secured without the Prerogative of the
Sovereign (who cannot do the good they would, if he wants a power to do the
evil they fear;) yet his first Preferment was to withdraw him from Popularity,
and the second only to confirm him to Sovereignty. Noble Service is the way to
a Royal One: His Stewardship to the Duchy of Suffolk, raised him to the
Attorneyship of that of Lancaster. But in troublesome and designing times a
popular Orator is a good Courtier; and leading Parts in Parliament or
Convocation are great Merits: In the black Parliament he was a Member by his
own Interest, and a Speaker by his Majesty's Choice: Sir Tho. More was to serve
the Crown in the Lords House, and Sir Tho. Audley was to succeed him in the
House of Commons. When Abbey-Lands were bestowed on the King in grofs, and
returned by him to the leading Lords and Commons in the Retayl, most of that
Parliament looked for shares; Sir Thomas for the first cut, to secure himself
with the King: He was always in favor with the Queens, who had no less
Interest in the Kings Heart, then the Kingdom had in his Head. The. Age was
uncertain, Interest nor so; Sir Thomas was fixed on the One, above the
alterations of the Other: understanding what was most convenient at a time when
there was nothing lawful. He was well seen in the flexures and windings of
Affairs, at the depth whereof other Heads not so steady turned giddy: He had
the Arts of a Statesman, and the closeness of a Politicion: Reserved he was,
but no Dissembler: For if a man have that penetration of judgment, as he can
discern what things are to be laid open, and what to be kept secret, and what
to be showed with half sights, and to whom and when, (which indeed are Arts of
States and Arts of Life) to him an Habit of Dissimulation is a hinderance and a
poorness. He (as an able man) was always frank and open, but wary; knowing how
to stop and turn within the compass of Equity and Honesty. He understood
business well, and men better; and knew King Henry's Temper better then
Himself, whom he surprised always to his own bent, never moving any of his
suits to him, but when in haste, and most commonly amusing him with other
matter until he passed his Request. His Actions were managed for applause as
well as service: for when made Sergeant, he was the first of eleven; his
Entertaining-Day was the last of six: The King, who paid for his Dinner, was
invited to it. He watched the Circumstances of his Actions, that they might be
Taking, as well as their Issue, that they might be Useful; and contrived that
the least of his public Actions should come off with Reputation. He followed
the most passable rather then the most able men living, in a time when active
men were more useful then the virtuous. Sir Thomas at once gratified the
present Humor of the King, and the constant Temper of the People, in six Bills
against the Clergy: 1. Against the Extortions of their Courts. 2. The Exaction
of their Corpse and Morturies. 3. Their worldly Occupations, as Grazing,
Tanning, etc. 4 Merchandise. 5. Their Non-Residencies. 6. The Pluralities of
the Ignorant, and the mean Salaries of the Learned. When in some Debates
between the Lords and Commons, Custom was urged; Sir Thomas replied, The usage
has ever been for Thieves to rob at Shooters Hill, is it therefore lawful? He
brought the Clergy within a Praemunire, to awe them; and afterward in their
pardon, he and other Members included their own; which the knowing King would
not pass, when it was demanded as of Right; yet afterward granted it of his
own accord, when it was received as of Grace. When Sir Thomas More could not
act with the times, Sir Thomas Audley could; the One being weary of the Seal,
the other takes it; being made Lord Keeper in Sir Thomas his lifetime, and
Lord Chancellor after his death: owning no Opinion against the Government of
England, nor any Design against its Interest. The King might well trust him
with his Conscience, when he trusted the King with his, owning no Doctrine but
what was established, ever judging the Church and State wiser then himself. He
was forced to take Q. Anne, but he would not condemn her; rather escaping then
refusing unwelcome Employments, wherein he must either displease his Master or
himself. He was tender, but not wilful; waving such services dexterously,
wherein he must oppose his Master dangerously. Those Insurrections which others
Rigor had raised, his Moderation allayed; breaking the Factions with
Indulgence, which might be strengthened with Opposition: Cromwell pulled down
Popery with his Power, Audley kept it down with his Policy, enjoining the
Preachers to detect the follies of that way, which is reckoned the wisdom of
this World, He had a moderate way to secure the Privileges of Parliament, by
freedom from Arrests; and the good will of the Citizens, by an Order about
debts.

By these courses he died as much in the Kings Favor as he lived: Patience can
weather out the most turbulent Age, and a solid Judgment the most intricate
times: The reserved and quiet man is the most secure. Activity may raise a man,
Wariness keep him up. If he had done nothing, he had no^ been seen; if he had
done much, he had not been suffered. Between two extremes Audley could do well.

Treasure of Arms and Arts, in whom were set
The Mace and Books, the Court and College met,
Yet both so wove, that in that mingled throng
They both comply, and neither neither wrong.
But poised and tempered, each reserved its seat;
Nor did the Learning quench, but guide the Heat.
The Courtier was not of the furious strain,
The hand that acts, does first consult the brain.
Hence grew commerce betwixt Advice and Might,
The Scholar did direct the Courtier right.
And as our Perfumes mixed, do all conspire,
And twist their Curles above the hallowed fire,
Till in that Harmony of Sweets combined,
We can nor Musk nor single Amber find;
But Gums meet Gums, and their delights so crowd,
That they create one undistinguished cloud:
So to thy mind these rich Ingredients pressed,
And were the Mould and Fabric of thy breast.
Learning and Courage mixed, and tempered so,
The Stream could not decay nor overflow.
And in that equal Tide, thou did not bear
From Courage, Rashness; nor from Learning, Fear.
Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wiat.
SIr Thomas Wiat was born at Allington-castle in the County of Kent, which
afterward he repaired with beautiful Buildings. He fell out of his Master King
Henry the eighth his favor, about the business of Queen Anna Bullen, till his
industry, care, discretion and innocence freed him. Very ingenious he was; or,
as his Anagram tells us, he was [A Wiat.
Wit] in the abstract. Cambden says he was, Eques auratus splendide doctus.


Holy he was and heavenly minded, and that appears by his translation of
David's Psalms into English Meter; and Leland gives him this great Commendation:

Bella suum merito jactet Florentia Dantem,
Regia Petrarchae Carmina Roma probat,
His non inferior Patria Sermon Viatus,
Eloquii secum qui decui omne tulit. Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast,
And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet,
In English Wiat both of them does coast,
In whom all graceful Eloquence does meet.


This Knight being sent Ambassador by King Henry the eighth, to Charles the
fifth Emperor, then residing in Spain, before he took Shipping, died of the
Pestilence in the West-Country, Anno 1541.

Queen Anne's favor toward him, raised this man; and his faithfulness to her,
ruined him: So fickle is that man's station that depends only on humor, or
holds of love and hatred! Let my friend (says Malvezzi) bring me in, but let
my merit and service keep me there.

Four things a man went to Dine with Sir Thoms Wiat for: 1. For his Generous
Entertainment 2. For his free and knowing discourse of Spain and Germany; an
insight in whose interest was his Masterpiece, studied by him as well for the
exigen(...) of that present juncture, as for his own satisfaction. 3. For his
quickness in observing, his civility in entertaining, his dexterity in
employing, and his readiness in encouraging every man's peculiar party and
inclinations. 4. For the notice and favor the King had for him. So ready was
he to befriend worthy men, and so ready was the King to entertain his friend,
that when a man was newly preferred, they said, He had been in Sir Thomas Wiat'
s Closet. Happy is the Prince that has a faithful Favorite, to look him out
serviceable men! and happy those useful persons, that have a familiar and
hhonest Favorite, by whom they may have access to the Prince! a Favorite that
serves not his Country so much by employing and pleasing its active members, as
he secures his King, who has ^o less need of Counsel in reference to men, then
things.

His Wit pleased the King, and his Wisdom served him: He could not be without
his Advice at the Council Table, nor without his Jests in his Presence Chamber:
where yet he observed his decorum to exactly, that his Majesty could by no
means win him one night to dancing; this being his grave resolution, That he
who thought himself a wise man in the daytime, would not be a fool at night:
otherwise one carried himself more handsomely, none conversed more ingeniously
and freely, none discoursed more facetiously or solidly; in a word, it was his
peculiar happiness, that his deportment was neither too severe for King Henry
the eighth's time, nor too loose for Henry the seventh's, neither all honey nor
all gall, but a sweet mixture and temperament of affability and gravity,
carrying an equal measure of Sir Thomas More's ingenuity in his head, and Sir
Thomas Cromwell's wisdom in his heart; equally fashioned for discourse and
business: in the ^^st whereof, he was active, but not troublesome; (...) the
first, merry, but innocent.

A Jest if it hit right, may do more good then so ber Counsels. Archee made
King James sensible of the danger the Prince was in, in Spain, by telling him
that he came to change Caps with him: Why said the King. Because thou have sent
the Prince in: Spain, from whence he is never like to return. B(...) (said the
King) what will thou say when thou see him come back again? Marry (says he) I
will ta(...) off the Fools Cap which I now put upon thy head f(...) sending him
thither, and put it on the King of Spain for letting him return.

A Jest of Sir Thomas Wiat's began that Reformation, which the seriousness of
all Christendom cou(...) not commence. King Henry was at a loss concening the
Divorce, which he no less passionately dered, then the Pope warily delayed:
Lord, says he that a man cannot repent him of his sin but by (...) Popes
leave! Sir Thomus hinted, Doctor Gran(...) opened, and the Universities of
Europe made to way to Reformation.

His Majesty was another time displeased with Wolsey, and Sir Thomas ups with a
story of the C(...)baiting of the Butchers Dog, which contained (...) whole
method of that great man's ruin.

The Pope was incensed, Christian Princes we(...) enraged, and the numerous
Clergy discontented and King Henry afraid of a Revolution: Better (...) Rooks
Nests, (that is, sell and bestow the Pa(...) Clergies Habitations and Lands
among the Nobils and Gentry) said Sir Thomas, and they will ne(...) trouble
you. One day he told his Master he his found out a Living of an hundred pounds
the year more then enough, and prayed him bestow it on him: Why? said the King,
we (...) no such in England. Yes, Sir, said Sir Thomas, the Provostship of
Eaton, where a man has his Diet, his Lodging, his Horse-meat, his Servants
wages, his Riding-charge, and an 100 l. per annum besides. What Lewis the
eleventh said of one Kingdom, i. e. France, may be true of all, That they want
one thing, i. e. Truth. Few Kings have such discreet Courtiers as Cardinal
Wolsey, to look into things deeply; fewer so faithful Servants as Sir Thomas
Wiat, to report things as they see them, honestly.

His Jests were always confined to these Rules:

1. He never played upon a man's unhappiness or deformity; it being inhumane.

2. Not on Superiors: for that is saucy and undutiful.

3. Nor on serious or holy matters: for that is irreligious.

4. He had much Salt, but no Gall; often jesting, but never jearing.

5. He observed times, persons and circumstances; knowing when to speak, and
knowing too when to hold his peace.

6. His apt and handsome Reparties were rather natural then affected; subtle
and acute, prompt and easy, yet not careless; never rendering himself
contemptible to please others.

7. Not an insipid changing of words was his gift, but a smart retort of
matters, which every body was better pleased with than himself.

8. He always told a story well; and was as good at a neat continued discourse,
as at a quick sentence; contriving it in an handsome method, clothing it with
suitable expressions, without any Parenthesis or impertinencies, and
representing persons and actions so to the life, that you would think you saw
what you buchear: A notable way, that argued the man of a ready apprehension,
an ingenious sins fancy, a tenacious memory, a graceful Elocution, a(...) exact
judgment and discretion, and perfect acquaintance with things and
circumstances. His phrasi was clean and clear, the picture of his thoughts and
language, (even in an argument) not harsh or severe, but gentle and obliging;
never contradicting but with an Under favor Sir; always subjoyning to his
adversaries discourse, what the Dutch do the all Ambassadors Proposals, It may
be so.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Fineux.
SIr John Fineux born at Swink field in the County of Kent, a place bestowed on
h(...) Ancestors by a great Lord in Kent, called (...) Criol, about the reign
of King Edward the second He followed the Law twenty eight years before he was
made a Judge; in which Office he continued twenty eight years, and was twenty
eight years of Age before he betook himself to this study: when(...) it
necessarily follows, that he was four-score and four when he died. He was a
great Benefactor t^^ St. Augustines in Canterbury; the Prior whereof William
Mallaham thus highly commends him (...) (good deeds deserve good words.) Vir
prudentissimus, Genere insignis, Justitia praeclarus, Pietate refertus,
Humanitate splenditus, and charitate foecundus.



He died in 1526. and lies buried in Christ-church in Canterbury, having had a
fair habitation in this City, and another in Herne in this County, where his
Motto still remains in each Window: Misericordias Domini cantabo in Aeternum.


Nile's original is hidden, but his stream is famous. This Judge's Ancestors
were not so obscure, as he was illustrious. His Device upon his Sergeants Ring
was, Suae quisque fortuna faber; and his was always to this purpose, That no
man thrived but he that lived as if he were the first man in the world, and his
father were not born before him.

Forty years he said he lived by his industry; Twenty by his reputation; and
Ten by favor. King Henry the seventh knew not how well this Gentleman could
serve him, until he saw how effectually he did oppose him about the Tenth Penny
raised for the War in Britain, which raised another in York, where though the
Rabble (that murdered Henry Earl of Northumberland, who was to levy the Tax)
had not his Countenance for their Practice, yet had they his Principle for
their Rule, which was this, Before we pay any thing, let us see whether we have
any thing we can call our own to pay. So able, though reserved a Patriot,
thought the wise King, would be an useful Courtier, and he that could do so
well at the Bar, might do more at the Bench. Cardinal Morton was against his
advancement, as an encouragement to the Factious: (whose Hydra-heads grow the
faster by being taken off by Preferment, and not by an Ax) the King was for it,
as the most probable way of weakening of them, as who when the most sober and
wise part of them draws off, are but a rude multitude, and a rope of sand:
when a Commoner, none so stiff for the subjects privilege; when a Judge, none
so firm to the Princes Prerogative: two things however, (they fatally clashed
of late) that are solid felicities together, and but empty notions asunder: for
what is Prerogative but a great Name, when not exercised over a free people?
and what is Privilege but a fond imagination, when not secured under a
powerful King, that may keep us from being slaves one to another by Anarchy,
while we strive to be free from his Tyranny? That People is beyond president
free, and beyond comparison happy, who restrain not their Sovereigns power to
do them harm so far, as that he has none left him to do them good. Careful he
was of the Law; for he was a Judge: and as careful of his Sovereigns Right; for
he was a Subject. No ominous clashing between Courts in his time; nor setting
the Kings Conscience in Chancery against his Will in the Kings Bench. A man
tells Aristides, to make him party in his cause, that his Adversary had abused
him: I sit not here (says that Impartial Judge) to right you, but my self.
When a notorious enemy of Judge Fineux had a cause depending before him, It
might have gone against you, my friend, (said he) had you been my Enemy.

Ten things, which are indeed ten of the most remarkable particulars of his
life, raised him.

1. An indefatigable industry, 1. In his reading, leaving behind him 23
Folio's of Notes. 2. In his practice, bequeathing 3502 Cases he managed himself
to his Executor.

2. A freedom of converse, as about his business, none more close; so in
company, none more open; having so complete a command of himself, that he knew
to a minute when to indulge, and to a minute too when to restrain himself. A
gay and cheerful humor, a sprightful conversation, and cleanly manners, are an
exceeding useful accomplishment for every one that intends not to wind himself
into a solitary retirement, or be mewed in a Cloister.

3. A rich and a well-contrived marriage, that at once brought him a large
Estate, and a larger Interest: the same tie that allied him to his Wives
Family, engaged him to many.

4. A great acquaintance with Noble Families, with whose dependants he got in
first, devoting an hour a day for their company; and at last with themselves,
laying aside his vacation-leisure for their service. He was Steward of 129
Manors at once, and of Counsel to 16 Noblemen.

5. His Hospitality and Entertainments: None more close then he abroad, none
more noble at home; where many were tied to his Table, more obliged by his
company and discourse.

6. His care and integrity in managing, his Repute in promoting, his Reason and
Eloquence in pleading, and his Success in carrying his causes.

7. His eminence and activity in the two profitable Parliaments of Henry the
seventh, where he had the hearts and purses of the people at his command, and
the eye of his Sovereign upon his person. It was thought a reward adequate to
the greatest merit and adventure in the Grecian Wars, to have leave to play the
Prizes at Olympus before Kings. It was judged the most ambition could be aimed
at in King Henry the seventh's time, to show a man's parts before his judicious
and discerning Majesty; then whom none understood Worth better, none valued it
higher.

8. His Opposition to Empson and Dudley's too severe Prosecution of Poenal
Laws, while Henry the seventh was living; and his laying of it before him so
faithfully, that he repented of it when he was a dying. He is high a while,
that serves a Princes private interest; he is always so, that is careful of his
public good.

9. His entire Devotion to that sacred thing called Friendship, that Bliss on
this side Heaven, made up of Peace and Love. None a worse Enemy, none a better
Friend. Choice he was in commencing, but constant in continuing Friends: Many
Acquaintance, but few Friends, was his Observation; saying, He had been undone
by his Acquaintance, had he not been raised by his Friends.

10. His care of time. To day I have not reigned, said the Emperor when he had
done no good: To day I have not lived, said the Judge when he had done nothing.
So much he prayed Morning, Evening, and at Noon, according to the way of those
times, as if he never studied; so much he studied, as if he never practiced; so
great his practice, as if he never conversed; and so free his converse with
others, as if he lived not at all to himself: Time (of which others are so
prodigally expensive) was the only thing he could be honestly covetous of:
full whereof he died, leaving this instruction to posterity, That we should not
complain we have little time, but that we spend much either in doing nothing,
or in doing evil, or in doing nothing to the purpose.

Observations on the Life of Edward Fox, Bishop of Hereford.
EDward Fox born in Dursley in Gloucestershire, was first brought up in Eaton,
then in Kings College in Cambridge, and died Provost thereof. He was Almoner
to King Henry the eighth, and was the first that brought Doctor Cranmer to the
knowledge of the King, as he brought the King to the knowledge of himself.
Being after wards Bishop of Hereford, was a great Instigator of the Politic
and Prudential part of the Reformation, and was not less able, but more active
then Cranmer himself: yea, so famous was he, that Martin Bucer dedicated unto
him his Comment upon the Gospel: so painful, that he wrote many Books, whereof
that, de Differentia utriusque potestatis, was the chief: so worthy he was,
that the King employed him on several Embassies into France and Germany. He
died May 8. 1538.

In his first years, none more wild; in his his last, none more stayed. The
untoward Youth makes the able Man. He that has mettle to be extravagant when
he cannot govern himself, has a spirit to be eminent when he can. His friends
devotion to the Church, and relation to the Bishop of Winchester, made him a
Scholar; his own Inclination, a Politician: an Inclination that brake through
all the ignoble restraints of pedantique studies and coertions, (wherewith many
a great Soul in England, (enjoying not the freedom of foreign parts, but tied
to such employments, though never so unsuitable, as their friends put them to)
are debased and lost) to an eminency (more by observation and travel, then by
reading and study) that made him the Wonder of the University, and the Darling
of the Court. When he was called to the Pulpit, or Chair, he came off not ill;
so prudential were his parts for Divinity! when advanced to any Office of Trust
in the University, he came off very well; so incomparable were his parts for
Government!

His Policy was observed equally in the subject, and in the contrivance of his
Sermons and discourse; where though all knew he read but little, yet all saw
that (by a Scheme and method his strong head had drawn up of all Books and
Discourses) he commanded all Learning: his Explications of the Text were so
genuine, so exact, as if he had spent his time in nothing else but Critics and
Commentators. His Divisions so Analytical, as if he had been nothing but
Logic: His Enlargements so copious and genuine, as if he had seen nothing but
Fathers and Schoolmen. The curious and pertinent mixture of Moral Sentences, so
various, as if he had been but a Humanist: the drift and design of all, so
close, that it argued him but (what indeed he was) a pure Pate-Politician. His
Parts commended him to Cardinal Wolsey as his support: the Cardinal brings him
to his Master as his second, and he thrusts out Wolsey as his Rival; but yet
pretended to advance that ambitious Man more highly, that he might fall more
irrecoverably. He sets him upon his designs of being Pope in Rome, and those
make him none in England. He caught the Cardinal by his submission, as he would
have done Sir Thomas More by his Interrogations; at which he was so good, that
he would run up any man either to a Confession or a Praemunire. Fox was his
name, and Cunning his nature. He said, His Fathers money helped him to his
Parsonage, meaning his small Preferments; and his Mothers wit to his
Bishopric, meaning his greater.

Discoursing one day when Ambassador, of terms of Peace, he said, Honorable
ones last long, but the dishonorable no longer then till Kings have power to
break them: the surest way therefore, said he, to Peace, is a constant
preparedness for War. Two things he would say must support a Government; Gold
and Iron: Gold, to reward its Friends; and Iron, to keep under its Enemies.
Themistocles after a Battle fought with the Persians, espying a Prize lying on
the ground, Take up these things, (says he to his Companion) for thou art not
Themistocles. Take the Emperors Money, said Fox to his Followers, (that were
afraid to accept what he had refused) for you are not all the King of England'
s Ambassadors.

Often was this saying in our Bishops mouth, before ever it was in Philip the
second's, Time and I will challenge any two in the world.

Portugal being revolted, the Conde d' Olivares came smiling to King Philip the
fourth, saying, Sir, I pray give me las Albricius to hansel the good news: for
now you are more absolute King of Portugal then ever: for the people have
forfeited all their privileges by the Rebellion, and the Nobility their
Estates; and now you may confirm your old Friends with their money, and make
you new ones with their estates. When the Clergy began to ruffle with the King,
I tell you News, said this Bishop, we are all run into a Praemunire: you shall
have Money enough to make your own Courtiers, and Places enough to advance your
own Clergy.

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony St. Lieger.
WE may say of him, he was born in Kent, and bred in Christendom: for when
twelve years of Age, he was sent for his Grammar-Learning with his Tutor into
France, for his Carriage into Italy, for his Philosophy to Cambridge, for his
Law to Grays-Inne; and for that which completed all, the government of
himself, to Court; where his Debonnairness and Freedom took with the King, as
his Solidity and Wisdom with the Cardinal. His Masterpiece was his Agency
between King Henry the eighth and Queen Anne, during the agitation of that
great business of the Divorce between the said King and his Queen Katherine.
His Policy was seen in catching the Cardinal in that fatal word, The King may
ruin me if be please! but that ruined him. His service was to be Cromwell's
Instrument in demolishing Abbeys, as he was the Kings. Caesar was the first
that came to undo the Commonwealth, sober; Sir Anthony St. Lieger was the first
that saved this Kingdom drunk: for in being abroad one night very late, and
much distempered, he must needs fancy an extraordinary light in the Cardinal's
Closet; with which Fancy he ran to the King, and although much in drink,
prevailed with him so far, that he sends to the Cardinal, and there finds that
Juncto that threatened his Kingdom.

He was the first Viceroy, because Henry the eighth was the first King of
Ireland. King Henry's affection would promote him any where, but his own
resolution and spirit commended him to Ireland.

He was a man whom all Ireland could not rule; therefore (as the Jest goes) he
should rule all England. Three times had the Irish Rebels made their soremn
submission to other Deputies: the fourth time now they make it to him, throwing
down their Girdles, Skins and Caps. So great a man was the Lieutenant, so great
his Master! No sooner was be possessed of the Government, but he thought of
Laws, those Ligaments of it: The most rational and equitable Laws were those of
England, but too rational to be imposed on the Brutish Irish: therefore our
Knight considering (as he says in the Preface of his Constitution) that they
(poor souls) could not relish those exact Laws, to live or be ruled by them,
immediately enacted such as agreed with their capacity, rather then such were
dictated by his ability; his Wisdom (as all men's must) doing what was most fit
and convenient, rather then what was most exact; what they could bear, more
then what he could do: as remembering he had to do with Faeces Romuli, rather
then Respublica Platonis; a rude, rather then a reduced people. What he could,
he ordained according to the incomparable Rule of the English Laws; what he
could not, he established according to his present judgment of the Irish
capacity. He saw the Kingdom could never be subject to his Masters power,
while the Church was obedient to the Popes: therefore as he persuaded the
Nobility to surrender their Estates to his Majesty at London, so he compelled
the Clergy to make over theirs at Dublin: There remains but little of the first
in his Majesty's hands, so honorable was he in restoring it; and as little in
his Successors, so religious and just were they in resigning it to the same use
for substance to which it was at first designed. But in vain it is to reform
Laws, unless we reform persons too: therefore as he sent Orders to reduce the
Irish Nobility in their several Countries, so he sent for themselves (to the
respective Houses built for them by his Majesty near Dublin) to be civilized in
the Court. Caesar came, saw, and overcame; Sir Anthony came, saw, and settled: A
man had thought there had not been so much corruption in the Romish Church, as
to admit Children to Church Livings, (for which Men are hardly sufficient!) but
that Sir Anthony St. Leiger was forced to make this Law, That no Children
should be admitted to Benefices. We had not known this sin, had not the Law
said, You shall not invest any under sixteen years of age in Benefices. The
Clergy he found there too many, and the Nobility too few; he lessened the
number of the one to weaken the Pope, and improved the other to strengthen his
Master, of whom they held not only their Estates, but their Baronies too, as
obliged to duty in point of Honor as well as in point of Interest. But in vain
does he civilize the present Generation, and neglect the future: as therefore
he provided Cities for the Parents, so he erected Schools for the Children,
that the one might forget their Barbarism, and the other never know it. Three
things he said would settle a State: 1. Good Godfathers and Godmothers
performing their Vows: 2. Good Householders overlooking their Families: 3. And
good Schoolmasters educating Youth; this last, the most useful, though the
most contemptible profession.

An Athenian being asked what God was, said, He was neither Bow-man, nor
Horseman, nor Pike-man, nor Footman, but one that knew how to command [all
these.] Sir Anthony St. Leiger was neither Soldier, nor Scholar, nor
Statesman, yet he understood the way how to dispose of all these to his
Countries service, and his Masters honor; being all of them eminently, though
none of them pedantickly and formally in himself.

The Athenians (as Anaximander said) had good Laws, but used them ill; our
Deputy had bad Laws, but governed by good.

It was thought by many wise men, that the preposterous rigor and unreasonable
severity which some men carried there before him, was not the least incentive
that kindled and blew up into horrid flames the sparks of discontent, which
wanted not pre-disposed fuel in that place; where despair being added to their
former discontents, and the fears of utter extirpation to their wonted
oppressions. It is too easy to provoke a people too prone to break out to all
exorbitant violence, both by some principles of their Religion, and their
natural desires of Liberty; both to exempt themselves from their present
restraints, and prevent after-rigours: wherefore he was inclined to that
charitable connivence and Christian indulgence which often dissipates their
strength whom rougher opposition fortifieth, and puts the oppressed Parties
into such Combinations as may most enable them to get a full revenge on those
they count their Persecutors; who are commonly assisted by that vulgar
commiseration which attends all that are said to suffer for Religion or Liberty.

To conclude this: Four things Sir Anthony St. Leiger was eminent for:

1. That there was none more grave in Counse then he, in the morning: none more
free at Table, at noon: none more active in the afternoon: none more merry at
night.

2. That his Orders were made but slowly, so wary he was; but executed quickly,
so resolute he was too.

3. That he contrived all his Designs so well beforehand, that in the course of
affairs they were done to his hand; and he was the Deputy that made no noise.

4. That as the Soldier (finding his first admission to Alexander to be
difficult) danced about the Court in an Antique fashion, until the strangeness
of the show made the King himself Spectator, and then throwing off his
disguise, he said, Sir, thus I first arrive at the notice of your Majesty in
the fashion of a fool, but can do you service in the place of a wise man, if
you please to employ me: So this Gentleman came to Court a Swaggerer, but went
off a Statesman. All Prudence is not lodged under a demure look and an austere
carriage: There are those that can be merry and wise; whose Spirit is as
lively, as their Judgment solid.

Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Sadler.
Sir Ralph Sadler was born at Hackney in Middlesex, where he was Heir to a fair
Inheritance, and servant to the Lord Cromwell, and by him advanced into the
service of King Henry the VIII, who made him chief Secretary of State. He was
one that had much knowledge, therefore much employed in all, but especially in
the Intrigues of the Scots affairs: In the Battle of Muscleborow he ordered and
brought up our scattered Troops, inviting them to fight by his own Example; and
for his Valor was made There were two sorts of these Knights, the first made
by way of encouragement, the second by way of Reward: Sir Ralph was of the
second sort, and the last that survived of that sort.
Knight-Banneret. Queen Elizabeth made him Chancellor of the Duchy. During
his last Embassy in Scotland, his house at Standon in Hertfordshire was built
by his Steward in his absence, far greater then himself desired, so that he
never joyed therein; and died soon after, Anno 1587, in the 80 year of his Age.

King Henry understood two things: 1. A Man: 2. A Dish of Meat; and was seldom
deceived in either: For a Man, none more complete then Sir Ralph, who was at
once a most exquisite Writer, and a most valiant and experienced Soldier;
qualifications that seldom meet, (so great is the distance between the Sword
and the Pen, the Coat of Mail and the Gown) yet divided this man and his time;
his nights being devoted to contemplation, and his days to action. Little was
his Body, but great his Soul; the more vigorous, the more contracted. Quick and
clear were his thoughts, speedy and resolute his performances. It was he that
could not endure the spending of that time in designing one action, which might
perform two or that delay in performing two, that might have designed twenty. A
great Estate he got honestly and spent nobly; knowing that Princes honor them
most, that have most; and the People them only that employ most: A Prince has
more reason to fear money that is spent, than that which is hoorded because it
is easier for Subjects to oppose a Prince by Applause then by Armies. Reward
(said Sin Ralph when he was offered a sum of money) should not empty the Kings
Coffers; neither should Riches he the Pay of Worth, which are merely the Wages
of Labor: He that gives it, embaseth a Man; he that takes it, vilifieth
himself: who is so most Rewarded, is least. Since Honor has lost the Value of
a Reward, Men have lost the Merit of Virtue, and both become mercenary; Men
lusting rather after the Wealth that buyeth, then after the Qualities that
deserve it.

Two things he observed broke Treaties; Jealousy, when Princes are successful;
and Fear, when they are unfortunate. Power that has need of none, makes all
confederacies, either when it is felt, or when it is feared, or when it is
envied.

Three things Cato repented of: 1. That he went by water when he might go by
land. 2. That he trusted a Woman with a secret. 3. That he lost Time. Two
things Sir Ralph relented for: 1. That he had communicated a secret to two. 2.
That he had lost any hour of the morning, between four a clock and ten.

He learned in King Henry the Eighth's time, as Cromwell's Instrument, what he
must advise (in point of Religion) in Queen Elizabeth's time, as an emiment
Counselor: His Maxim being this, That Zeal was the Duty of a private Breast,
and Moderation the Interest of a public State. The Protestants Sir Ralph's
Conscience would have in the commencement of Queen Elizabeth, kept in hope; the
Papists his Prudence would not have cast into Despair. It was a Maxim at that
time in That of the Queens Marriage.
another case, That France should not presume, nor Spain be desperate.

He saw the Interest of this State altered six times, and died an honest Man:
The Crown put upon four Heads, yet he continued a Faithful Subject: Religion
changed, as to the public constitution of it, five times, yet he kept the
Faith.

A Spartan one day boasted that his Contrymen had been often buried in
Athens; The Athenian replied, But we are most of us buried at home. So great
was Sir Ralph's success in the Northern Wars, that many a Scotch man found his
Grave in England; so exact his conduct and wariness, that few English men had
theirs in Scotland; the same ground giving them their Coffin, that did their
Cradle; and their Birth that did their Death. Our Knights two incomparable
Qualities were Discipline and Intelligence; the last discovered him all the
Enemies advantages, and the first gave them none.

His two main designs were, 1. An Interest in hi(...) Prince, by service. 2. An
Alliance with the Nobility by Marriage: upon which two Bottoms he raised
himself to that pitch of Honor and Estate, that time could not wear out, nor
any alterations embezle; he bequeathing to his Worshipful Posterity the
blessing of Heaven upon his Integrity; the lov(...) of Mankind for his Worth;
and (as Mr. Full(...) says) a Pardon granted him when he attended my Lord
Cromwell at Rome, for the sins of his Family for three immediate Generations,
(expiring (...) R. Sadler Esquire, lately dead.) His last Negotiation was that
in Scotland, during the trouble there about Queen Mary: so searching and
pier(...)cing he was, that no Letter or Adviso passed whereof he had not a
Copy; so civil and obliging that there was no Party that had not a Kindness for
him. So grave and solid, that he was present at all counsels; so close and
industrious, that his hand though unseen was in every motion of that State
(...) and so successful, that he left the Nobility so divided that they could
not design any thing upon the King(...) and the King so weak, that he could not
cast off the Queen; and all so tottering, that they must depend on Queen
Elizabeth.

Three things he bequeathed such as may have the honor to succed him, 1. All
Letters that concerned him since of years, filed: 2. All Occurrences, since he
was capable of Observation, registered(...) 3. All Expenses, since he lived of
himself, booked(...) Epaminondas was the last Grecian, and Sir Ralph Sadler was
one of the last English men.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Paget.
SIr William Paget was born in the City of London, of honest Parents. He was so
able and trusty a Minister of State, that he was privy Counselor to four
successive Princes: He was Secretary to King Henry the Eighth; who employed him
Ambassador to Charles the Emperor and Francis King of France. King Edward the
Sixth made him Chancellor of the Duchy, Comptroller of his Household, and
created him Baron of Beaudefert. Queen Mary made him Keeper of the Privy Seal.
Queen Elizabeth highly respected him, dispencing with his Attendance at Court,
in favor to his great Age. Duke Dudley in the days of King Edward,
ignominiously took from him the Garter of the Order, saying, He was not
Originally qualified for the same: But this was restored unto him by Queen
Mary. He died very old, Anno 1563. and was buried in Lichfield. His Education
was better then his Birth, his Knowledge higher then his Education: His Parts
above his Knowledge, and his Experience beyond his Parts: A general Learning
furnished him for Travel, and Travel seasoned that Learning for Employment. His
Masterpiece was an inward Observation of other Men, and an exact knowledge of
Himself. His Address was with state, yet insinuating: His Discourse free, but
weighed; his apprehension quick, but staid: His ready and present mind keeping
its pauses of thoughts and expressions even with the occasion and the
emergency: neither was his carriage more stiff and uncompliant, then his soul.
Gundamore could not fit King James so well as Sir William did Charles the
Fifth, who in a rapture once cried, He deserved to B E a King, as well as to
REPRESENT One: and one day as he came to Court, Yonder is the Man I can deny
nothing to.

Apollonius coming to Vespatian's Gate betimes in the morning, and finding him
up, said, Surely this man will be Emperor, he is up so early. This Statesman
must needs be eminent, who was up(...) the earliest of all the English Agents
in discovering Affairs, and latest in following those Discoveries. Three sorts
of Ambassadors the Emperor Charles observed were sent him from England(...)
the first was Wolsey, whose great Train promised much, as his great Design did
nothing: The second was Morisin, who promised and did much: The third Paget,
who promised nothing, and did all(...) What Scholars observed then of Luther,
Melancthon, Carolostadius.
three Divines(...) that a Statesman has set down of our three Agents: the
first was words without matter; the second was matter without words; the third
was words and matter. Quick and regular were hi(...) Dispatches when Secretary,
pleasing all with his proceedings, even when he could not but displease many
with his Decision. It was much none went away ever sad from Augustus an
Emperor, it was more none was dismissed ever in discontent from Sir William
Paget a Secretary of State. The King was not happier in his abilities to serve
him, then he was i(...) their dexterity who waited upon him: These are my eyes,
(says the discreet man) these are my right hands. For his service he would
choose a Man before a Scholar, a Traveller before a Homebred: Parts he
preserred in his Office, a Presence in his Chamber; Parts and Presence in his
Closet.

Beecber was King Henry the Eighth his Map of England, (so well skilled he was
in our English Customs, Trade, Improvements, Situation, Interest and
Inclination) Paget was his Table of Germany, France, and Rome, so exact an
account could he give of their Situation, Havens, Forts, Passages, Provision,
Policies, Revenue and Strength: secured he was, in King Henry's changeable
times, by his foreign Travels and Employments. Escape he did King Edward's
Reformation, by his Moderation and peaceableness: He complied with Queen Mary's
Zeal, out of conscience; and submitted to Queen Elizabeth's Authority, out of
Duty and Allegiance: being one of those moderate men that looked upon the
Protestants primitive Foundations of The Creed, The Lords Prayer, and the
Commandments.
Faith, Duty and Devotion, as safe; and on the Papists superstructures, as not
damnable: Whose Life was Grotius and (...)ssander's Wish, An Accommodation to
the Christian World. Privacy is the Favorites Interest, and concealment his
care: Sir William wished for success for his Masters sake, but dissembled it
for his own: He is the man, that loses neither his Privacy nor his Reputation.
Quiet was his temper, though noble his resolution: Troublesome is a witty man
on a stage, as a Monkey in a cupboard of glass. Placed, sweet and composed is
the prudent Man, like an Intelligence in the Heavens, or a god in the World. Up
he went, but by just degrees; that if down he must, he might do so with the
same leisure and safety.

When he had managed the Secrets and Negotiations of Henry the Eighth, with
Dexterity and Faithfulness; the Lands of King Edward the Sixth, with Skill and
Improvement; the Purses of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, with good Husbandry
and Care: When he had lived enough to his Countries, to his Sovereigns, to his
Friends, and the Public Good; he retired to live to Himself first, and then
to his GOD.

Observations on the Life of Sir Richard Morisin.
SIr Richard Morisin born in Essex (or in Oxfordshire Says Sir Richard Baker.
) was brought up Per celebriora Anglorum Gymnasia arts excoluit.
at Eaton, Cambridge, and Inns of Court. He was so skilful in Latin and Greek,
and in the Common and Civil Law, that he was often employed Ambassador by King
Henry the VIII, and Edward the VI, unto Charles the Fifth Emperor, and other
Princes of Germany; which he discharged with all honesty and ability. After the
death of King Edward the VI, he was forced to fly beyond the seas; and
returning out of Italy, died at Strasburgh, on the 17 of March 1556.

Three things made a complete man in those days* 1. A public School, where
their School-fellows Genius's instruct much more then their Schoolmasters
pains; where a man attains at once to Learning, Prudence, and a Spirit: 2. A
comprehensive insight into Tongues and Sciences; by the first whereof they
unlocked Men, and by the second, Things:

3. Travel, where they saw what they read, and made that a solid apprehension
and observation, which was before but a fluid notion and a floating
imagination: Our Knight was happy in all Three, but so complete in the last,
that he had the Virtues and Port of a German, as if he had been a Native of
that place; and loathed the Vices, as if he had never seen it: Thereby he could
get so far within that people, that he saw all their Intrigues; and be yet so
reserved, that they could see nothing: The ablest German Divines guided his
conscience, and the greatest Statesmen his Negotiation. He kept under the
Emperor by the Princes, the French by the Emperor, and the Pope by them all.
So much service did the good Knight to King Henry the Eighth, in his Wife
Katharine's Case; and so much the whole Kingdom, in that of Religion; that he
equally fled Queen Mary's wrath, and her Religions Persecutions. His strong
parts set off his comprehensive knowledge; his resolute spirit, his parts; and
his presence and mien, all: King Henry always choosing an Ambassador that might
represent his Person as well as his Power: And Sir Richard had his Hogh in
Germany, as well as Henry in England.

His knack was his foresight, which made that an Adviso in England, which was
hardly a known design there: saying usually, His Master maintained not
Ambassadors so much to write Histories as Prophecies. The Trojans sent to
condole with Caesar for his Son that was dead two year ago; he thanked them,
and condoled with them for Hector, that was slain as many hundred years. Our
Ambassador in France advises Sir Richard of a Battle fought a Week before, and
he in answer makes a large discourse of the Battle of Spurs fought many years
before; and adds, I and You are not here to tell old stories.

Two things, he said, he was troubled with, Envy and Malice; and two Remedies
he had against them, Patience and Resolution. Always he wheeled with the first
Mover, yet he had private motions of his own: Singular, but modest: So faithful
he was, that he would declare his Opinion; yet so wary, that he would not stand
in it against his Prince; knowing, that if he did it out of prudence, he
rendered the Princes Ability suspected; if out of his own sagacity, it
blemished his Integrity: Both equal inconveniences, to intimate the Master
Unable, or the Servant Corrupt.

When others pressed for an over-strict Reformation, this Gentleman urged, That
Distempers in the Body and State are reduced by Physicians and Politicians not
to what they should be, but to what they can be: Freedom, Moderation and
Impartiality are the best tempers of Reforming Counsels and Endeavors: What is
acted singularly, must offend more then it pleases; a study to gratify some
men, being a likely way to injure all: The novelty of excessive and immoderate
undertakings giving not so much content to the vulgar of a present Age, as the
mischiefs of them give offense to the Generations of ^utu^e times.

And Melancthon's discourse to him was to this purpose: That the Reformation of
hearts should go before that of Churches; and men should try that on their own
hearts which they design upon the Church: For Deformities within, will soon
betray the Pretenders of public Reformation to such private designs as must
needs hinder the public Good. It would be an easy matter for Favorites to
reform Kings Palaces (says Malvezzi) if it were not a hard thing to reform
their own houses.

One asked him, Why his Embassy tended so much more to preserve his Masters
Dominions, then to augment them? And he replied what is fathered on Henry the
Fourth, That Getting is a Chance, but Keeping is a Wit.

After a long residence abroad, he thought of an Habitation at home; which he
no sooner began at Cashobery in Hertfordshire, but King Edward going out of the
World, the good Knight was forced out of his house and the Kingdom.

He was the first that said, Policy is not the learning of some Rules, but the
Observation of Circumstances, with a present mind in all junctures of affairs;
which (he would say) was their happiness only, that had good memories: For
when one said he had seen much, heard more, and read most: You were (said he) a
more complete man, could you say, I remembered as much. Secretary Walsingham
would say, My Lord, stay a little, and we shall have done the sooner: Secretary
Cecil said, It shall never be said of me, That I will defer till to morrow what
I can do to day: And Sir Richard Morisin, Give me this day, and take the next
your self. Noble was his Resolution, when he said, He scorned to take pensions
from an Emperor of Germany, since an Emperor of Germany took pay of the King
of England.

His statute was something tall, and procured him reverence; his temper
reserved, and commanding security to his person and his business. He that
knows to speak well, knows also where he must hold his peace, said the old
Grecian: Think an hour before you speak, and a day before you promise, said
this English-Roman. With Ferdinand the Emperor he prevailed for the Popes
assistance, and with Maximilian for his Masters against the French.

Never was his Master Henry so high, as to set him above treating; nor his
Sovereign Edward so low, as to make him afraid of War; although he looked upon
the way of Treaties, as a retiring from fighting like Beasts, to arguing like
men; whose strength should be more in their Understandings, then in their
Limbs. I have (said a great Prince) greater confidence in my Reason then in my
Sword; and am so resolved to yield to the first, that I thought neither my self
nor others should use the second, if once we rightly understood one another.
It Is humane to use Reason rather than Force, and Christian to seek peace and
ensue it.

Christian was his Temper, and Religious his carriage; so charitable, that he
relieved the Confessors, as though he had been none himself; and so constant,
that he continued his sufferings, as if there were no other. Much good did his
Countenance do the Exiles in the Courts of Foreign Princes; and more his
Authority at the Troubles of Frankford, where his Motive to love, was the
hatred of the Enemy.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Nicholas Wotton.
NIcholas Wotton, son to Sir Robert, born at Bockton-malherb in the County of
Kent, (a place so named, from some noxious and malignant herbs growing therein)
was bred in Oxon, Doctor of the Civil Laws; and was the first Dean ^f the two
Metropolitan Churches of Ganterbury and York. He was Privy-Counsellour to four
successive Sovereigns, viz.

(...)ing Henry the VIII. Edward the VI. Queen Mary. Elizabeth.



He was employed thirteen several times in Emassies to Foreign Princes.

Five times to Charles the Fifth Emperor.

Once to Philip his son, King of Spain.

Once to Francis the First, King of France.

Once to Mary Queen of Hungary, Governess of he Netherlands.

Twice to William Duke of Cleve.

Once to renew the peace between England, France and Scotland, Anno 1540.

Again to the same purpose at Cambray, Anno 1549.

Once sent Commissioner with others to Edinburgh in Scotland, 1560.

He refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury, proferred him in the first of
Queen Elizabeth. He died January 26. in 1566. being about seventy years of Age,
and was buried in Canterbury.

Justinian reduced the Law of Nations to one Body, and Doctor Wotton
comprehended them in one Soul: Public was his spirit, and such his thoughts:
That profession that was designed for the settlement of the worlds commerce,
was now confined to a Bishops Court, a Churchwardens Oath, or a rich man's Will;
when this excellent Person first enlarged it as far as the sea, in the Cases of
the Admiralty; and as wide as the world, in the Negotiations of Embassy.
Others were trusted with the Interest of Princes, He with that of Nations. He
that saw him, would think he could deny nothing so modest Scholar-like his
looks! He that heard him would judge he would grant nothing, so undeniable his
Reason! so irrefragable his Arguments* His speech was as ready as his
resolution was present* His apprehension quick and clear: his method exact: his
reading vast and indefatigable: his memory (strong as to things, though not to
words) tenacious: his elocution copious and flowing. What (...) Henry Wotton
said of sir Philip Sidney, I may say (...) Nicholas Wotton, That he was the
very measure of congruity. What that Counselor writ to the Frence King in a
great sheet (when he required his Advice) that our Doctor advised our Princes
in several Discourses, viz. Madus, A Mean. Sir, (said King Henry to him, now
not forty years old) I have sent a Head by Cromwell, a Purse by Wolsey, a Sword
by Brandon, and I must now send the Law by You, to treat with my Enemies.

Augustus lamented for Varrus his death, because, he said, Now I have none in
my Country to tell me the truth: With Wotton went off that faithfulness that
Peasants have, and Princes want: None more resolute abroad, none more bold and
downright at home. His plain dealing saved King Henry some Treasure, King
Edward the North, Queen Mary Calice for a while, and Queen Elizabeth her Faith
and Crown: A Virtue that made him the Overseer of most Foreign Ministers
Actions abroad, and one of the sixteen Executors of King Henry's Will and
Testament at home. Gardener was sly and close, but Wotton prudent and wise. In
the Treaty at Calice there are two things remarkable of our Doctor, 1. That he
first insisted on the peace with France, before that of Scotland: 2. He would
say, Rather give away Calice, then reserve a Right in it fifteen years hence:
for never was the Interest of any Nation so constant, as to keep a promise half
so many years.

Indeed Sir William Cecil's reach went no further for a Layman, then Doctor
Wotton for a Churchman: Therefore they two were pitched upon for the management
of the Intrigues and Affairs of Scotland.

Many envied this happy man, but none could be without him, who was the Oracle
of both Laws at Councels; who could sum up the merit of any Cause, recollect
the circumstances of any Affair; and show Tables of Trade, Commerce,
Situations, Counsels, Revenue, Interest, etc. the readiest and exactest any in
England.

But all these Qualifications must die, and he with them: leaving it as his
Advice,

First, To Churchmen: To understand well the Common and Canon Law, as well as
the Divine; by the first whereof, they might understand their right as by the
second, they informed themselves and others^ their duty.

Secondly, To Statesmen: Travel and History.

Thirdly, To Ambassadors: 1. A good Purse: 2. A noble and sober Train: 3.
Constant correspondent and observation: 4. A happy medley of Debonai^ ness and
Complacency, Reservedness and Gravity with the first he had taken Princes, and
with the l(...) Statesmen; the one discovers others, while the other conceals
you. 5. Resolution: I made often (said he as if I would fight, when they knew
my calling allow me only to speak: 6. Civility: That man (said the Prince of
Orange) is a great bargain, who is bought with a bare salutation.

Fourthly, To Privy-Counsellours: That excellent caution, Always to speak last,
and be Masters (...) others strength before they displayed their own.

This was that rare man that was made for all but siness, so dexterous! This
was he that was made for all times, so complying! This was he who live Doctor
of both Laws, and died Doctor of both Gospels; the Protestant, which had the
Statesmans parts of this man; and the Popish, who had the Christiat Noah Being
called Bifrons Janus,
had two faces, because he was a son of the old world before the flood, and a
father of the ne(...) one after: Wotton sure had four faiths, who was Favorite
in King Henry's days, of the Counsel is King Edward's, of the Juncto in Queen
Mary's, and the Cecil was the first.
second Statesman in Queen Elizabeth's.

With these two things of this person, I shall conclude:

1. His refusal of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, which argued his
extraordinary humility of wariness.

2. His admission of Doctor Parker, as Dean of Canterbury, to that See; which
argues the legality of his calling, there being no circumstance with any
likelihood omitted, by so exquisite a Civilian as Doctor Wotton; or forgotten,
by so great an Antiquary as Doctor Parker.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Wriothesly, the first Earl of Southampton.
THomas Wriothesly Knight of the Garter, was born in Barbican, Son to William
Wriothesly (descended from an Heir general of the ancient Family of the
Dunsterviles) King of Arms. He was bred in the University of Cambridge, as it
appears by Mr. Ascam's Letter unto him, writing in the behalf of the
University, when he was Lord Chancellor.

Quamobrem Academia cum omni literarum ratione, ad te unum conversa (cui uni
quam universis aliis ^se chariorem intelligit) partim tibi ut alumno suo, cum
authoritate imperat: partim, ut patrono summo, demisse and bumiliter supplicat,
etc.

His University-Learning prepared him for the Law, and his indefatigable study
of the Law promoted him to the Court; where, for his Honor, he was created
Baron of Tichbourn, Jan. 1. 1543. and for his Profit, the next year, May 3.
Lord Chancellor; a place he discharged with more Applause then any before him,
and with as much Integrity as any since him: Force (he said) awed, b^ Justice
governed the world.

It is given to that Family to be Generous are Resolute: This incomparable
Person was under cloud in King Edward's time, for being a rigidly conscientious
Papist; and his great Granchild suffered in King Charles his time, for being a
sincere honest Protestant: Yet so reverenced was the first of this Family by
his Adversaries, that he was made Earl of Southampton; and so honored was the
other by his Enemies, that they courted him to the party. Integrity has a
Majesty in its full, and Glory in its lowest Estate; that is, always feared
though not always loved.

No Nobleman understood the Roman Religion better then the first Earl of
Southampton; and non the Protestant better then the last, the Right Honorable
and truly Excellent Thomas Earl of Southampton, and Treasurer of England.

His Court, he said, gave Law to the Kingdom His constant and exact Rules, to
the Court; and h^ Conscience guided by the Law of the Kingdom, (...) his Rules.
Affable and acceptable he was, as More quick and ready, as Wolsey; incorrupt,
as Egerton apprehensive and knowing, as Bacon. Twice were all Cases depending
in Chancery dispatched; in Sir Thomas Wriothesley's time, 1538. and in Sir
Thomas More's, 1532. Truly did he judge intra Cancellos, deciding Cases with
that Uprightness, that he wished a Window to his Actions, yea and his Heart
too. King Philip was not at leisure to hear a poor Woman's Cause; Then, said
she, cease to be King. My Lord over-hearing a servant putting off a Petitioner,
because his Master was not at leisure, takes him up roundly, and replies, You
had as good say, I am not at leisure to be Lord Chancellor. Two things he
would not have his servants gain by, his Livings and his Decrees; The first, he
said, were Gods, the second the Kings, (whom every man, he said, sold, that
sold Justice:) To honest men, your places, said he, are enough; to Knaves, too
much. Every Week he had a Schedule of his own Accounts, and every Month of his
Servants. Cato's greatest Treasure was his Account-Book of Sicily; and my Lord
of Southampton's was his Table of the Chancellours place. A great Estate was
conferred upon him, which he took not in his own name, to avoid the odium of
Sacrilege; as great an Inheritance he bought, but in others names, to escape
the malice of Envy.

He loved a Bishop, he said, to satisfy his conscience; a Lawyer, to guide his
Judgment; a good Family, to keep up his Interest; and an University, to
preserve his name.

Full of Years and Worth, he died 1550. at Lincoln-place, and was buried at St.
Andrews Church in Holborn, where his Posterity have a Diocese for their Parish,
and a Court for their Habitation.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Fitz-James.
JOhn Fitz-James Knight, was born at Redlinch (...) Somersetshire, of Right
Ancient and Wort(...) Parentage, bred in the study of our Municip(...) Laws;
wherein he proved so great a Proficie(...) that by King Henry the Eighth he was
advanced (...) be Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. There needs (...) more to
be said of his Merit, save that King He(...) the Eighth preferred him; who
never used eith(...) Dunce or Drone in Church or State, but Men (...) Ability
and Activity. He sat thirteen years in (...) place, demeaning himself so, that
he lived and di(...) in the Kings Favor. He sat one of the Assista(...) when
Sir Thomas More was arraigned for refu(...) the Oath of Supremacy, and was
shrewdly put (...) it, to save his own Conscience, and not incur (...) Kings
Displeasure: For Chancellor Audley, (...) preme Judge in that place, (being
loath that (...) whole burden of More's condemnation sho(...) lie on his
shoulders alone) openly in the Court a(...) ed the Advice of the Lord Chief
Justice Fi(...) James, Whether the Indictment were sufficient (...) no? To whom
our Judge warily returned, (...) Lords all, by St. Gillian, (which was ever his
Oat(...) I must Mr. More in the printted Life of his Grandfather Sir Tho.
More, page 334.
needs confess, That if the Act of Parliam(...) be not unlawful, then the
Indictment is not in my co(...) science insufficient.

He died in the Thirtieth Year of King Henry the Eighth; and although now there
be none left (...) Redlinch of his Name and Family, they flourish still at
Lewson in Dorsetshire, descended from Allured Fitz-James brother to this Judge,
and to Richard Bishop of London.

The two main Principles that guide humane Nature (says Judge Dodderidge) are
Conscience and Law: By the former we are obliged in reference to another world,
by the latter in relation to this. Priests and Judges are the Dispensers of
these Principles: No Prince more unhappy in his Priests then King Henry (whose
unhappiness it was, that all the juggle, prevarication and imposture of his
time was in the Pulpit,) none more happy in his Judges, (to whose Reason his
People were more willing to submit, then they were to hearken to his Clergy's
Instruction) among whom none more renowned then Sir John Fiz-James, who was so
fearful of the very shadow and appearance of corruption, that it cost his chief
Clerk his place but for taking a Tankard, after a signal Cause of 1500 l. a
year, wherein he had been serviceable, though not as a Bribe, but as a
Civility. Caesar would have his Wife without suspicion of lewdness, and
Fitz-James his servants without the appearance of corruption. What was Law
always, was then a Resolution, Neither to deny, nor defer, nor sell Justice.
When our Judge came upon the Bench, he knew no more then Melchisedech or Levi,
Father or Mother, neither Friend nor Interest: for when his Cousin urged for a
kindeness, Come to my House (says the Judge) I will deny you nothing; come to
the Kings Court and I must do you justice? And when the Attorney General
bespake his favor in a public Cause; Trouble not your self, (said he) I Will do
the King right: The King is cast, the Attorney expostulates; the Judge
satisfies him, That he could not do his Majesty Right, if he had not done
justice.

His Prudence so tempered his zeal for his Sovereign, that he over-strained not
the Prerogative to bring in fears and jealousies of Tyranny on the one hand;
and his Integrity so balanced his Popularity, that he never depressed it to
broach bold opinions and attempts of Liberty, on the other: complying with none
of those humors that an imaginary dread of oppression, or a dangerous
presumption of freedom may transport to irregular excesses either for the one,
or against the other.

As his Majesty was secured by his Loyalty, so his Subjects were by his
Patience, a Virtue he carried with him to the Bench, to attend each
circumstance of an Evidence, each allegation of a Plea, each plea in a Cause;
hearing what was impertinent, and observing what was proper. His usual saying
(as Sergeant Mandevil reports it) being, We must have two souls, as two sieves,
one for the Bran, the other for the flour; the one for the Gross of a
Discourse, the other for the Quintessence.

The same day that there was no Cause to be tried in the Chancery in Sir Tho.
More's time, there were but three in the Kings Bench, in Sir John Fitz-James
his time: the reason whereof some imagine was Cardinal Wolsey's extraordinary
power (that engrossed all Causes to his Legantine Court;) others know it was
the Judges Integrity, who was too honest to allow, as that Age was too plain to
contrive delays and obstructions.

Lewis the Eleventh of France would say, when he was advised to take Revenge of
those that had affronted him before he came to the Crown, That it became not
the King of France to revenge the Injuries done to the Duke of Orleans. A
Person that had notoriously wronged Sir John when a Templer, in the case of his
Chamber, was to be tried before him for his whole Estate when a Judge; the
Adversaries among other shifts made use of this old Quarrel; whereupon Sir John
said, It does not become a Judge upon the Bench to revenge a wrong done in his
chamber.

Two things upheld him in those boisterous times: 1. Silence, 2. Patience: both
wary Virtues that seldom endanger their Owner, or displease their Superiors.
The People of those times would live and die with the Pope and Council; and
this Judge, with the King and Parliament: The grand Article of his Faith was, I
believe as the Church believes: and the great Rule of his Practice was, I will
live as the Law directs.

He was a tried Man, whose Faith and Honor was above his Life and Fortune;
whose Generosity was above that first temptation of Money, as his Spirit was
above the second of Danger: No fear here of delivering up Privileges to day,
for fear of the King; or Prerogative to morrow, for fear of the Subject: No, an
unbiased Temper between both, make up this honest man; who came on to
preferment with great Expectations, and went off with great Applause: being one
of the three men of whom it is said, That because they never pleased their
Master in doing any thing unworthy, they never displeased him in doing any
thing that is just. When base compliance goes off with the contempt of those
it has humoured, a Noble Resolution comes off with the Reverence of those it
has discontented.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Molineux,
SIr William Molineux Junior, Descendent from from the former That is, from
Will. Molineux Knight, of Sefton in Lancashire
, flourished under King Henry the Eighth, being a man of great command in
Lancashire; bringing the conside able strength thereof to the seasonable
succor of the Duke of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal service in
Flodden Field.

It is confessed on all sides that the Scots lost the day, by not keeping their
Ranks, but not agreed on the cause thereof. Buchanan (who commonly makes the
too much Courage of his Countrymen, the cause of their being conquered) imputes
it to their indiscreet pursuing of the English routed at the first: Others say,
They did not break their Ranks, but were broken, unable to endure the
Lancashire Archers, and so forced to sunder themselves. In this Bittel the
Scotch King and chiefest Gentry were slain, the English losing scarce any; of
the Scots scarce any but of prime note. The King afward wrote his Gratulatory
Letter to Sir William Molineux, in form following.

TRusty and Well-Beloved, We greet you well: And understand as well by the
Report of Our Right Trusty Cousin and Counselor, the Duke of Norfolk, as
otherwise, what acceptable service You amongst Others lately did Us by your
valiant Towardness in the assisting of Our said Cousin against Our Enemy, late
King of Scots; and how courageously you, as a very hearty loving Servant
acquitted your self for the overthrow of the said late King, and distressing of
his Malice and Power, to Our great Honor, and the advancing of your no little
Fame and Praise; for which We have good cause to favor and thank you, and so
We full heartily do; and assured may you be, that We shall in such effectual
wise remember your said Service in any your reasonable pursuits, as you shall
have cause to think the same right well employed to Our comfor and weal
hereafter. Given under Our Signet, at Our Castle at Windsor, the seven and
twentieth of November.


It appears by our Author, that the like Letters, mutatis mutandis, were sent
unto Sir Edward Stanley, and some other men of principal note in Lancashire and
Cheshire.

There is more in the Education then the Birth (though that be Noble too) of
this Gentleman: much Generous Blood sparkled in his Veins, more Arts and
Sciences thronged in his Soul: A learned Prince brought up a learned Gentry,
the most hopeful of whom think themselves as much obliged to imitate his
Virtues, as the most degenerate were inclined to practice his Vices. Four
excellent Artists were at once entertained in his Fathers House: 1. A complete
Grammarian and Linguist, Parker: 2. An exact Mathematician and Historian,
Calvius: 3. A skilful Musician, Pallevicino; and 4. An active Dancing Master
and Soldier.

The Latin Tongue then wearing out its Barbarism, he spoke and writ elegantly:
Cicero's Works he kenned particularly: Plutarch's Lives and Morrals (that Book
which, as Gaza said, would furnish the World, if Learning were lost) he
epitomized punctually: The active and practical part of Geometry, he studied
intently. And, as the complaisance of his Nature, and sweetness of his Temper,
he added to these severer studies, those more airy of Music, Poetry and
Heraldry.

Si ad naturam eximium cruditio accesserit tum demum Cic. pro Archia Poeta
singular quoddam existere solet. This Noble Nature advanced by this Heroic
Education, must needs do Wonders, as it did: first, In the University: where
his Company was choice, his Carriage even and staid, his time exactly observed
and prudently spent: secondly, abroad: where his Converse was wary, his Conduct
Noble and Plausible, his observations and exercises manlike and knowing:
thirdly, at Court: where his presence was graceful, his discourse solid,
digested, distinct and clear; much improved by reading, more by traveling,
most by conference with those that speak well: fourthly, in the Country: where
his Hospitality was renowned, his Equity and Prudence beloved, and his Interest
large and commanding. None pleased the King at Court more, such his Learning to
satisfy him, such his Debonairness to delight him; (for, as Cardinal Wolsey,
so Sir William Molineux got in with King Henry the Eighth by a Discourse out of
Aquinas in the morning, and a Dance at night:) None served him better in the
Country; such his obligations upon Tenants and Neighbors, that he had six
thousand men at command: such his prudence and justice, that there were more
differences ended in his Parlour, then in Westminster Hall: such his care and
watchfulness, that no Treason stirred, but his Agents discovered, and his
Militia was at an hours warning to suppress it: The Idea of an English
Gentleman! In Favor at Court! In Repute in the Country! At once Loved and
Feared!

Four things he took special care of: 1. That the Poor might have their stated
Alms. 2. That the Priests might enjoy their known Dues. And 3. That his Tenant
might be so well used, that he might thrive; and but so well, that he should
not be idle. 4. That every Body should be employed: saying, He had rather they
should be busy, though doing nothing to the purpose, at the charge of his
Purse; then that they should be idle, doing nothing at all, at the charge of
their own precious time. In a world, he lived in all Capacities a public Good,
and died a common Loss: Leaving in his Family that best Legacy, A good
Example; and his Country that lasting Monument, A good Name, for two things
that he hated; 1. Depopulating Enclosures: 2. Unworthy Inhancements of Rents:
For he died with this Advice to his Son, Let the Underwoods grow. The Tenants
are the supports of a Family, and the Commonalty are the strength of the
Kingdom. Improve thriftily, but force not violently either your Bounds or Rents
above your Forefathers. His Popularity never failed of being called to the
Parliament, nor his Activity of being useful there: None understood better how
to move, to press, to quit, to divert, to escape, to watch and mould a
business: None knew better the confederacy of Contrivers, Speakers, Sticklers,
Dividers, Moderators, and the I and No-Men, their Method and Correspondence:
None more patient and industrious, when a lower Faction was firmer in
conjunction, and a few that were stiff, tired out many more moderate: He had no
easiness to be imposed upon, no weakness to be deluded no low Interest to be
corrupted by fond hopes or fair promises of Preferment, to wave the very pinch
of a dispute; no pleasure or vanity to be debauched, while the vigilant Faction
steals a Vote worth a Kingdom; no sloth nor neglect, to be surprised; no
vanity of discourse, to lose his Master, no partiality to be biassed, no
discontent to satisfy, no passion to misguide: As one that hated nothing, but
what was Dishonest; feared nothing, but what was Ignoble; and loved nothing,
but was Just and Honorable.

Observations on the Life of William Fitz-Williams.
HIs Judgment in Parliament brought him to the notice, and his Activity in the
Wars recommended him to the service of King Henry. The Bishops pleaded for the
Catholic Religion, the People for a Reformation; Sir William offered his
Opinion for a mean between both; That since it was unreasonable to tie up
Mankind in blind obedience one toward another, and impossible to run through
all Difficulties and Controversies our own selves, (so much Time and Money must
be spent in such an Undertaking, so many Languages learned, so many Authors
read, so many Ages looked into, so many Faiths examined, so many Expositors
conferred, so many Contradictions reconciled, so many Countries traveled, for
any considerable satisfaction) to believe all, is inconsistent; to neglect all,
is impious: There remains no other way for the Laics, but to recollect and
stick to the most Common, Authentic and Universal Truths, tending to Virtue
and Godliness; apart from what is doubtful and controverted, and tending only
to strife and perplexity; and by these to live our selves, and examine all
other pretensions whatever; there being no part of Religion but what has
Virtue and Grace as its Foundation and Design: A way that would keep men from
Atheism, under a sense of Religion; from endless controversies, in the solid
practice of Virtue; from fatal Divisions, in peace and concord. Let us (said
he) establish and fix these Catholic and Universal Notions, and they will
settle our Souls, and not hinder us to believe whatsoever is faithfully taught
by the Church, or submit to what is authoritatively enjoined by the State. So
that whether the Eastern, Western, Northern or Southern Teachers, etc. and
particularly whether my Lord of Rochester, or Luther, etc. be in the Right, we
Laics may so build upon those Catholic and infa^lible Grounds of Religion, as
whatsoever superstructures of Faith be raised, these Foundations may support
them.

This Discourse opened a Door to the Refor^ation intended, and shut out all
those prejudi^es it might lie under from the State, and Religion (...)f
Forefathers, etc.

Hereupon Sir William is invited to Court; and then the air and softness of
that place suited not his more severe and stirring Temper, he is promoted to^
Authority first by Land, and then by Sea; where^ none was more watchful in the
Wars between Us and France, none so active in those between Us and Scotland:
With thirty six Ships he gave Law to the narrow Seas, as Poynz with forty more
did to the Main: There was not a serviceable man belonging to him, but he knew
by name; not a Week but he paid his Navy; not a Prize but his Soldiers share^
in as well as himself: It being his Rule, That now fought well, but those that
did it for a fortune.

While he watched the Coast of France, he discovered twelve French Ships, in
which the Archbishop of Glasco, and diverse others of Quality were, (who(...)
the Duke of Albany had sent before him into Scotland;) these he chased to a
shipwreck: and leaving a Squadron to shut up the French Heaven^ went along the
French Coasts, landing in dive^ places, wasting the Country, till at last he
came (...) Treport, a Town strongly situated, and garison^ with three thousand
men, which yet he took; an^ finding it not his Interest to dwell there,
pill^ged and burned it, going off with Success an^ Glory: Insomuch that King
Henry joined hi^ with the Bishop of Bath in the Commission for the Treaty at
Paris, where such Articles were agree^ on touching a Marriage with the Princess
Mary, an^ the joint Embassy to the Emperor, as spoke S(...) William as well
seen in the state of Europe, as any particular Person in the seven Kingdoms of
it whereof one was, That they should unite by all (...) Ties of Alliance,
Friendship and Interest, against the growing Power of Austria, so far as that
there should be no League, Correspondence, War or Peace, wherein they both
should not be concerned.

From his foreign Negotiations he returns to his home-Services: and the next
view we have of him ^s in the Parliament, bringing up with Sir Anthony
Fitz-Herbert, a Bill against the Cardinal:

1. For encroaching upon his Sovereigns power by his Legantine Authority.

2. For treating between the Pope and the King of France, without his Masters
privity and consent; as likewise between Himself and the Duke of Fer^ara.

3. For joining Himself with his Majesty; saying, The King and I.

4. For swearing his Houshold-servants only to himself.

5. For speaking with the King, when infected with the pox, pretending it was
only an Impost^ume.

6. For giving by prevention diverse Benefices away, ^s Legate.

7. For receiving Ambassadors before they came to the King: As also for opening
all the Kings Letters, and taking an account of all Espials, concealing what he
pleased.

8. For carrying things with an high hand in the Privy Council.

9. For transporting Grain, and sending advertisements of the Kings Affairs
abroad.

10. For taxing or alienating Religious men's lands, to the great decay of
hospitality and charity.

11. For controuling the Nobility, and engrossing all Causes in his
Jurisdiction.

12. For taking all Ordinary Jurisdiction from them by prevention, and seizing
their Estates, as he did all other Ecclesiastical persons upon their death.

13. For persuading the Pope by indirect practices to suppress Monasteries.

14. For passing judgments without hearing, and reversing such judgments as
had duly passed.

15. For suspending the Popes pardons until he was fee'd.

16. For turning out his old Tenants.

17. For his general encroachments upon the Rights of Religious Houses, and the
encroachments of Courts of Justice.

18. For saying to the Pope, in order to the obtaining of a Legantine power, to
the indelible shame of the Church of England, That the Clergy of England were
given in reprobum sensum.

19. For embezling the Goods of the most wealthy Prelates that died in his time.

20. For bringing off his servants from the Law against extortion, at York.

21. For dividing the Nobility.

22. For keeping as great state at Court, and exercising as great authority in
the Country for purveyance, etc. as the King.

23. For forbidding petitions and purveyances within his Jurisdictions.

24. For engrossing all Copy-holds within his power, to his Lemans, Procurers,
etc.

25. For altering the Market-prices set under His Majesty's Hand and Seal.

26. For impressing his Hat under the Kings Crown, in the Coin at York.

27. For Hindering the due course intended by visiting the Universities to
suppress heresies.

28. For disposing of men's Estates and Proprieties at his pleasure.

This Bill was aggravated most effectually, by three most pinching
considerations: Viz. That the Kings Honor was by him diminished: That the
state of the Realm was by him decayed and discontented: That the course of
Justice was by him obstructed. A great Undertaking, this! To bring down this
lofty Prelate! (whom his Master created the When Cardinal.
Kings Fellow, and his own pride made his Superior) But as Wise as Great, if
we regard the five Politic circumstances:

1. The Queen was engaged.

2. The People were oppressed.

3. The King was needy and covetous.

4. The Nobility were kept under.

5. The Clergy were harrassed: And all by this proud man: And at that juncture
is he convened before the Parliament, and charged home by this excellent
Knight, who never left him till he was humbled, as Justice Fitz-Herbert did not
his servants, until they were reformed.

Neither did the Pope escape him abroad, better then the Cardinal at home: For
his next action we find is a Declaration drawn by him, Jo. Fitz-Warren, Tho.
Audley and Others, to Pope Clement the Seventh, expostulating his Delays, and
conjuring his Dispatch in the Business of the Kings Marriage.

Very serviceable he was to his Master in time of Peace, more in time of War;
and particularly at the Insurrection 1536. where he cut off the Rebels Passes,
distressed their Arms, and when they refused (...) Treaty but upon condition
that Ash their Leader was pledged, advised an engagement with them out of
hand; saying, No English man should be undervalued so far as to be an Hostage
for a Villain: and adding further (so good was his Intelligence) That if they
were not defeated speedily, the Scots and Germans would discover that they had
but too much hand^ in this plot.

For which his services, his Master raised him to the Admiralship of England,
and the Earldom of Southampton; in which Quality he was one of the three
Noblemen that managed the Business of Divorce between the King and Anne of
Cleve, with that applanse that made him Lord Privy Seal, Nov. 14. Anno 1541.
and the grand Examinant of the particulars in the Lady Katharin Howard's Case,
matter of great trust and secrecy; which he performed with a searching and deep
Judgment, beyond that Ladies fear, and the Kings expectation; as appears from
the exact Account given under Sir Tho. Audley and his own hands, touching that
matter.

Having provided for the Kings Safety at Home he is One of Four that treat for
his Interest Abroad I mean upon the Borders of Scotland; where our excellent
Persons dexterity was observed, in gaining that time by various Proposals for
Peace, tha^ served his Master to provide against the War; in the beginning
whereof, the brave Lord died (...) York: so much esteemed, that for the Honor
of his Memory his Standard was born in the Fore-ward all this Expedition. A
Person in whom Prudence was even with Activity, Resolution with Prudence (...)
Success with Resolution, Moderation with Success Honor and Favor with All.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Darcy.
SIr Thomas Darcy was one of King Henry the Eighth's first Counselors, so
advanced (as most of his Fellows) not for Affection, but Interest; owing his
Promotion to his own sufficiency, rather then his Masters favor. His Counsel
was weighty at Home, his Assistance necessary Abroad; where in behalf of Pope
Julius the second and the Emperor, he did more with 1500 Archers in a year for
the ballancing of Europe, then had been done before in an Age.

No Employment so dangerous at that time as that of the Warden of the West
Marches of Scotland, none so able for that Employment as my Lord, who was
equally knowing and stout, and at once most feared, and most loved.

The Earl of Shrewsbury made some Inroads into Scotland, the Lord Darcy seconds
him: But being surprised by the Duke of Albany's preparations, he had as much
Wit to make Peace, as he had Resolution to carry on the War. None knew better
when to yield, none better when to conquer; so great a command had he over
himself! so great over the Enemy, that he brought them to request his Wish, and
offer what was his Interest! With the Duke of Surrey's assistance by Land, and
Fitz-Williams his by Sea, he reduced that Nation to a good Inteligence with Us
that year, and a Peace the next; a Peace (as he observed) that would be no
longer kept, then we had a Sword in our Hands, and an Army on their Borders:
For Conscience guided other parts of the World, (he said) and Fear Scotland:
Whence he invaded them duly once a year.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Howard.
SIr Edward's Brother in Worth, as well as Blood: His Fathers Interest set him
up, and his own Industry kept him so: All the Children were brought up for
Sea-Services, this Gentleman for Sea-Commands. He immediately succeeds his
younger Brother in the Admiralty; and wisely considering the advantage of the
French Galleys in a calm, the number of their ships, the danger of their winds
for us, if they blew Southwest, desired of the King so many Soldiers a^ might
man the ships, and make good the landing, wherewith he scoured the seas, and
secured the Kings passage, with so much Honor, that he was able to assist his
Father at Court, as much as Well(...) did Fox: his Gallantry being no less
pleasing to his Master, then the other young Favorites Compliance; and both
these young men had no less Art to govern this Prince, then he had to govern
his Kingdom: These Arts, which all other Favorites use, being Hopes and Fears,
which as Doors and Passages to the heart, are so guarded by their vigilance,
that they can both let themselves in, and keep all others out: the two Ends
upon which the Thread of Government depends: His Father is made Duke of
Norfolk, and he Earl of Surrey; both are an eyesore to the Cardinal, whose
Fortune had no Superior in the Kings Favor, whose Ambition would endure no
Equal. The Old Man's years and cares are fitted with a Retirement in the
Country; the Young Man's ambition and activity, with a Government in Ireland,
which he reduced as speedily to obedience (notwithstanding Desmond's Rebellion)
as he had to civility, had it not been for Wolsey's Underminings, who endured
no public service but what he did himself; and would choose rather that the
Kingdom should perish by a Traitor, then be saved by a Nobleman. Beloved he was
by that Country (where he left a Peace and a Parliament, Anno 1521.) so that
they were loath to part with him: Wanted he was by the King, to scour the narrow
seas for the French War; so that he must have him. The King had made him
formerly His Admiral, the Emperor upon his return from England makes him his;
and with both their Commissions he lands in Normandy, wastes the adjacent
Countries, (sparing only Religious Houses) takes and sacks Morlais in Bretaign
(which he entered under the smoke) burns their ships, commands the sea, and
sets the Emperor safe in Spain; advising his Majesty from thence to make a
general Muster of his Subjects for his own satisfaction and others terror,
March 27, 1522. The troubles in Scotland required an able Head and a stout
Heart, two Endowments that no man was more Master of then the Earl of Surrey,
now Duke of Norfolk (upon his beloved Fathers decease) whose Prudence toyled
the Scots to deliver up their King, as his Prowess frighted them to yield up
themselves, as they did in that most exquisite Treaty, where the Earl of
Worcester beat the Bush, says my noble Author, and our Duke catched the Hare.

A while after he is Earl Marshal, and Ambassador to King Francis about those
two grand points:

1. That the French King should set up a Patriarch: 2. That he should stop up
all the payments made to Rome, with fair promises of that supply of men and
money he then most wanted.
When the Pope stuck to Queen Katharine, three things he advised the King to:

1. To teach the people that a general Council was above the Pope, and proclaim
that he did appeal to it.

2. To fix upon every Church-Door the Dowagers Appeal to Rome, and the late
Statute against it.

3. To consederate with the Kings of Hungary and Poland, the Estates of the
Empire and the Hanse Towns. Three things that would settle his People at home,
and strengthen his Interest abroad: To which he added the Statute of
Succession, the Oath of Supremacy, sir William Howard's Embassy to the Scotch
King, the suppression of Religious Houses, the War in Ireland under sir William
Sheffington, and a through search into the bottom of the Rebellion in the North,
by a connivance and delay.

But all his services could not quit him from suspicion, nor his popularity
from envy: The Lord Darcy accuses him to excuse himself, and Cromwell seconds
him to secure himself: and (as unhappinesses follow one another in the same
order as one wave flows after another) his Nieces miscarriages threatened his
fall; but that the honest man (as appears from a Letter the whole Council sent
to sir William Paget then resident in France) was the first that declared
against her, and put the King upon the most safe and honorable ways of trying
her; which satisfied his Majesty so far, that he employed him as chief in the
Treaty upon the Borders, and General in the War when that Treaty failed; Sir
Anthony Brown, upon his Recommendation, being added to the Commissioners in
Scotland, and to the Privy Council in England, as Master of the Kings Horse, as
Sir John Gages was Comptroller of his House.

Several Persons came to London for a Reward of their Scotch services; this
Duke gave the King a wary and grave counsel, to bestow upon them as much Land
as they could win in Scotland.

But Greatness is fatal: The King is old and testy, the Government disordered
and irregular, the Duke too stiffly honest to comply, the Council envy him; and
in this Juncture his Wives passion discovers his Minions, and they, to save
themselves, his privacies and secrets: His son, a man of a deep understanding,
of a sharp wit and great valor, bred up with Henry-Fitzroy at Windsor, and
afterward at Paris, was beheaded before his face. His Favorite Mrs. Holland
deposed, That he said many looked for the Protectorship (when the King, who
lived and moved by Engines and Art, rather then by Nature, should die) but he
would carry it: That the King did not love him because he was loved by his
Country; but he would follow his Fathers Lesson, which was, That the less
others set by him, the more he would set by himself: That he had a Daughter for
the King as well as others, etc. His Estate was great, his power greater; the
Kings occasions had swallowed up the one, and his Enemies ambition the other,
notwithstanding his humble submission before the Council, and his many services
to the King; had not his Majesty's death saved his Life.

As the deepest Hate is that which springs from violent Love, so the greatest
Discourtesies often arise from the largest Favors. It is indiscreet to oppress
any, dangerous a Prince with Kindenesses; which being Fetters, are Treason on
that Person: But Suspicion! Ah sad Suspicion! The Companion of the Weak or
Guilty! The Cloud of the Mind! The Forfeiture of Friends! The check of
Business! Thou that disposest Kings to Tyranny! Husbands to Jealousy! Wise men
to Irresolution and Melancholy! Trust, and you need never suspect: But Policy
and Friendship are incompatible, I see; where Norfolk begs that Life from the
Block at last, which he had ventured two and thirty times for his Sovereign.
Who knows the Cares that go to Bed with Statesmen! Enemies Abroad, Treacheries
at Home, Emulations of Neighbors, Dissatisfaction of Friends; Jealousies of
most, Fear of all: unwelcome Inventions to palliate unjust Courses: fears of
Miscarriage and Disgrace; with Projects of Honor and Plausibility, with
restless thoughts how to discover, prevent, conceal, accommodate the
Adversaries, or his own Affairs. Let us live, and love, and say, God help poor
Kings!

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Stanley.
THe Stanley's service to Henry the seventh, was a sufficient pledge of their
faithfulness to Henry the eighth. Honor floated in Sir Edward's blood, and
Valor danced in his spirits: His stirring childhood brought him to Henry the
eighth's company, and his active manhood to his service. The Camp was his
School, and his Learning was a Pike and Sword; therefore his Masters Greeting
to him was when they met, Hob, my Soldier! In many places did he show himself,
but no where more then at Flodden, where his Archers fetched down the Scots
from their fastness, and relieved the English from their distress; the Earl of
Surrey beginning the Conquest, and Sir Edward crowning it: for which the King
immediately set him high in his favor, and not long after, as high in the
world, being made Baron Stanley, and Lord Mounteagle. Twice did he and Sir John
Wallop land with only 800 men in the heart of France, and four times did he
and Sir Tho. Lovell save Callis; the first time, by intelligence; the second,
by a stratagem; the third, by valor and resolution; and the fourth, by
hardship, patience and industry.

In the dangerous insurrection by Ash and Captain Cobbler, his Zeal for the
States welfare was above scruples, and his Army was with him before his
Commission: for which dangerous piece of Loyalty, he asked pardon, and received
thanks. Two things he did toward the discomfiture of the Rebels, (whose skill
in Arms exceeded his Followers, as much as his policy did their Leaders) first,
he cut off their provisions, and then secondly, sowed sedition among them,
whilst his Majesty gained time by pretended Treaties to be even with them,
drawing off the most eminent of the factions every day, and confounding the
rest.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bolen.
THe City enriched this Family, their Parts raised them: His Activity was as
taking with King Henry, as his Daughters Beauty. He was the Picklock of
Princes: upon his word only would the King model his Designs, and upon his
alter them. He discovered Ferdinand's underhand-treaty with Lewis, and his
Design upon Navarre; and writ to his Master to press the ambiguous man to a
conclusion, and to send over some treasure: for, said he, the whole World is
now to be sold; adding, the necessity of a peace, or at least a truce with
Scotland. Sir Tho. Bolen was against the Kings going to France in person before
he had some more issue, or One of the house of York.
Edmund de la Pool were dispatched out of the way. Sir Tho. Howard was for it,
it being dangerous to entrust so Noble an Army, or so renowned an Action with
any subject, especially when Maximilian the Emperor offered to serve under his
Majesty as Lieutenant, and the Pope to attend him as Chaplain. There is nothing
more remarkable of Sir Thomas Bolen, then, 1. The Education of his Children;
his eldest son being bred at the Emperors Court, his youngest with the Pope at
Rome, and his Daughter with Q. Mary in France. 2. His Negotiation with the Lord
St. John's in Germany, where he overreached the Emperor no less then the Earl
of Worcester did the French King: so cunningly binding him, that he understood
nothing of our Affairs; and yet so narrowly sifting him, that we knew all his
Intrigues. Visible was all the world to our State then, and invisible our State
to all the world.

From Germany he is sent with Richard Sampson, D. H. to Spain, to set Charles
as forward against the French, as he had done Maximilian. His service advanced
him to the honor of a Barony and a He is made Viscount Rochford.
Viscountship, and the profit of the Treasureship of the Household; and his
success upon the Malecontent Duke of Bourbon by Sir Jo. Russel, who treated
with him in Disguise, set him as high in the Kings favor, as his Wife was; a
virtuous Lady, that was the Kings Friend, but not his Mistress; his delight,
and not his sin.

In Spain so earnestly did our Sir Thomas mediate for the delivering up of the
French Hostages, that (as Sandoval says) Charles protested to him, that for
his sake only he would relinquish his Demand for the restitution of Burgundy,
in which the difficulty of the peace consisted: adding further, That for the
same reason he would accept as well for Francis his two sons ransom, as his
charge, what was freely offered, viz. 2000000 Crowns: and he with Sir Robert
Poyntz make up that treaty, the great Arbitrators of Europe! at whose disposal
Kings set their Crowns, and Kingdoms their Peace; in whose breast fate the
fate of Christendom, by their voices to stand or fall.

As faithful is he to the King at home, though to his own prejudice, as he is
serviceable abroad, to his honor: for when the people talked oddly out of envy
to his Daughter, (now visibly in favor) and pity to Queen Katharine, Sir
Thomas advises his Majesty to forbid his Daughter the Court, and declare that
those proceedings were more to satisfy his Conscience, and secure Succession,
then to gratify any other more private respect: so far to his Daughters
discontent, that she would not come near the King until her Father was
commanded (not without threats) to bring her thither; who by representing the
common danger to them both, obtained at length (says my Lord Herbert) though
not without much difficulty, the consent of his unwilling Daughter to return:
where yet she kept that distance, that the King might easily perceive how
sensible she was of her late dismission. Sir Thomas would have married her to
the Lord Percy, but the King and Cardinal forbad it; deterring old
Northumberland from it, and he his son. Many Love Letters between King Henry
and Anne Bolen are sent to Rome: one Letter between the Cardinal and his
Confederates is fetched thence by Sir Thomas his Dexterity; who advised Sir
Francis Bryan, then Resident, to get in with the Popes Closetkeepers Courtezan,
and show her the Cardinals hand, by which she might find out and copy his
Expresses; as she did to his ruin, and our Kings great satisfaction. To which
Letter is annexed a Declaration under his hand, and the Lords Darcy, Mountjoy,
Dorset and Norfolk, of 44 Articles against the great Cardinal. His hand being
now in, he must through: He advises the King to consult the Universities of
Christendom: He goes in person when made Earl of Wiltshire to the Pope, and
contrives that a Declaration of the whole Kingdom in Parliament should follow
him: which so amused his Holiness with our Earls stratagems, that he was asleep
as it were until the state of England was quite altered. To this he adds, the
peace with France, and the interview with King Francis, where his Daughter is
married privately, and her Brother made Viscount Rochford. Convening a
Parliament to his mind at Blackfriars, and advancing an Archbishop to his
purpose in Canterbury, he is secure of the Church and of the Kingdom; whereof
the first hallowed the action, and the second confirmed it.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Howard.
HE set out with his Fathers Reputation, and came home with his own: Britain
feels his Arm to this day, and the French his success. Desperate were his
Undertakings, yet happy; rash his Engagements, yet honorable: it being his
Maxim, That never did Seaman good, that was not resolute to a degree of
madness. The French Fleet he pursues to the Haven under their own Forts
closely. Sir Edward considering the order wherein the French lay, thought fit
to advertise his King and Master thereof; advising him withal, (says my
Author) to come in person, and have the glory of this Action: but the Kings
Council taking this Message into consideration, and conceiving that it was not
altogether fear, (as was thought) but stratagem and cunning that made the
French thus attend their advantage, thought the King was not invited so much to
the honor, as to the danger of this Action; therefore they write sharply to
him again, commanding him to do his duty: whereof that brave person was so
sensible, that he landed 1500 men in the sight of 10000, and wasted the
Country, until being too confident, he fell a while after into his enemies
hands; the Lord Ferrers, Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir Richard Cornwall, and Sir John
Wallop looking on, but not able to relieve him. Four Reasons he would usually
give against a War with the Low Countries: 1. The decay of Trade, 2. The
diminution of Customs: 3. The strengthening of France: 4. The loss of their
industry and inventions, and so of the improvement of our Commodities and
Manufactures. In the youth of this State, as of all others, Arms did flourish
(...) in the Middle-age of it, Learning; and in the Declining, (as Covetousness
and Thrift attend Old Age) Mechanic Arts and Merchandise: and this Gentleman
was made for each part, being not so much a Soldier as a Scholar, not so much
a Scholar as a Merchant But a private spirit is most unfortunate; and (as my
Oracle assures me) whereof men of that temper all their time sacrifice to
themselves, they become in the end themselves sacrifices unfortune, whose wings
they thought by their wisdom to have pinioned.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey.
SIr Thomas Howard was this Kings prime Counselor; a brave and an
understanding man: who was obliged to be faithful to his Master, because an
Enemy to Winchester: (emulation among Favorites is the security of Princes.)

Four motives he offered for a Marriage with the Princess Katharine:

1. A League with Spain, against the growing power of our dangerous Neighbor
France.

2. The saving of much time and expense in Marriage, by her being here.

3. The consideration of that vast sum of Money that must be exported if she
goes away. And

4. The great Obligation laid on the Pope by that Dispensation, which would
secure to him the King and his Posterity, not otherwise Legitimate but by his
Authority.

His Estate was much wasted in the service of Henry the seventh, and as much
improved by the treasures of Henry the eighth, which amounted in the beginning
of his Reign to 11800000 l. i. e. at the rate of money now adays, six millions
and an half; which he dispensed so thriftily, that old Winchester could not
trapan him; and yet so nobly, that young Henry was pleased with him. Sir
William Compton set up the Kings They were 50, with an Archer, a Demilance and
a Constillier apiece: They and their horses being vested in Cloth of Gold.
Rich Life-guards, (under Bourchier Earl of Essex as Captain, and the valiant
Sir Jo. Peachy who kept Calais in so good order with 300 men, as Lieutenant)
but this wary Earl put them down again. When News was brought that Empson and
Dudley were slain, it was this Earls opinion that his Majesty had done more
like a good King then a good Master. When the narrow Seas (whereof the Kings of
England have been very tender) were infested, this old Treasurer and
Earl-Marshal cleared it by his two sons Edward and Thomas, saying, The King of
England should not be imprisoned in his Kingdom, while either he had an Estate
to set up a Ship, or a son to command it. In three weeks did he settle the
North against the Invasions of James the fourth, now inclining to the French;
and in a fortnight did he raise 40000 l. to pay the Army, now ready to mutiny:
insomuch, that when King James denounced War against King Henry, he said, He
had an Earl in the North that would secure his Kingdom; as he did with much
resolution, prudence and success at Flodden-Field, where he saw a King at his
feet, and a whole Kingdom at his mercy; where he was forced to fight, so
barren the Country! where yet he pitched upon the most advantageous place and
time; so great his Command of himself, and so noble his Conduct!

He sends Rouge Croix to the Scotch King, to tell him, That though he saw no
Enemy at Sea, he hoped to find some upon the Land: That he came to justify
Bretons death, which it was as much below a King to revenge, as it was below a
Privy Counselor to have deserved: That he expected as little mercy as he
intended; his sword being commissioned to spare none but the King, whom no hand
must touch. To this Defiance, he added a Caution to the Herald, That he should
bring no messenger from the Enemy nearer then two miles of the Camp. So well
were the Scots encamped, that when neither Arguments nor Stratagems would draw
them out, the Earl cuts off their provision there; and under the covert of a
smoke got the Earl under the hill, and under another of mist got they atop: The
Scots played the men, until Stanley and Darcy did more then men: and the old
man's Reserve concluded the doubtful day in so complete a Conquest, as brought
12000 Arms, 16 Cannons, 4000 Prisoners, and a Peace to the English Borders.
Upon which, the General retires to those more necessary exercises of Justice
and Government, until his Masters return: When all his Services advanced him
(at that time, when it was a Maxim of State, That Honors are the Luster and
Security of Crowns) to his Fathers Dukedom of Norfolk, as his Sons Merits
promoted him to his of the Earldom of Surrey.

The Kings Coffers decay, and his Occasions grow: The old man retires to his
Country House, having enjoyed his Honor Thirty years, to enjoy Himself Three:
One of his last Undertakings being the appeasing of the London-Tumult, May 1.
1517. when he left this behind him, A potent and wanton City, is a shrewd Enemy.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Compton.
HE was chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Henry the Eighth, and next to the
chief in the affections of the same Prince: If his spirit had been as even with
his favor, as his favor was with his Merits, he had been the most useful as
well as the most eminent man in England: but he was too narrow for his Fortune,
and more attentive to his private advantage, then to the public affairs: This
Saying is at once his History and Monument; Kings must hear all, but believe
only one: for none can give a solid advice but he that knows all, and he
must not be every body. As to the affairs of Europe, Sir William was clearly
for the League against France, as an opportunity to regain our Right in France,
and strengthen our Interest in the Church and the Empire. My Lord Darcy was
against it; because France was too hard for us before it swallowed up our a
Confederates, and much more since: advising * Of Bretany and Normandy
some more noble attempts for our just Empire upon the Indies. The young King
is for a War with France, as an Engagement upon the Pope to advance England
above all other Kingdoms; and declares himself as much Sir William's in opinion
as he was his in affection.

This Gentleman had a deep insight in any thing he undertook, because he had a
great patience to consider, an advantageous slowness to recollect, a strong
memory to grasp, and an indifferent temper to judge: but when a matter exceeded
his capacity, or out-reached his sphere and orb, he had either a peremptory and
great word to urge it, or a slight to wave it, or a subtlety to perplex it,
(that his amazed fellow-Commissioners should as little unstand it) or a
countenance and gesture to overbear it. However, in general he was close and
reserved, (he had need go softly that cannot well see) leaving himself without
observation or hold to be taken what he was. He studied the Kings nature,
rather then his business; and humoured rather then advised him. The referring
of all to a man, becomes a Prince, whose self is not himself, but the
community, (their good and evil being (as my Lord Bacon writes) at the peril of
a public fortune) but not a subject, whose private advantage may be a public
ruin; not a Favorite; whose benefit by that selfishness may be narrow as his
own Fortune, but the hurt done by it is as large as his Master, who must needs
be undone, when his servants study to please Him, and to profit Themselves.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Marney.
SIr Henry Marney was one of young Henry's first Council, who loved his Person
well, and his Prosperity better; and impartially advised him for his good, and
modestly contested with him against his harm; that Council that was hand as
well as head, and could perform as well as advise: This was the searching
Judgment that discovered Buonviso the Lucchess his Letters to the French King,
betraying our designs as soon as thought on, and instructing him for
prevention, before our King was ready for the attempt. Industry and Thrift
overrules Princes: This Personage had no time to transcribe Intelligence, but
what he borrowed from his sleep; nor money to buy it, but what he saved out of
his allowance: yet he understood more then any one Prince in Europe, and was
more consulted then any one Statesman. His Judgment was much valued, his
Integrity more; ever offering what was solidly safe, rather then what was
superficially plausible: as one who was a stranger to the wisdom of the latter
Age, (as Sir Francis Bacon describes it, which is rather fine Deliveries and
shifts from Inconveniences, then solid and grounded courses for advantage. His
foresight was large, and his spirit larger: he considered all Circumstances
that occurre^ to him; judged what he considered, and spo(...) what he judged
with that resolution as to his opinion, that argued he understood the matter in
question; with that modesty as to his Superiors, th(...) showed he understood
himself.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Poynings.
SIr Edward Poynings was the third of eighteen Counselors bequeathed by Henry
the V(...) to his Son, with his Kingdom; a Pri(...) Council wherein there was
not one Lawyer! an^ a Cabal that never condescended for advice to an^ below
themselves, or for performance of any of their Decrees to any besides
themselves; being a complete Body of active and knowing men in their own Orb.
Who more prudent then Surrey? who more resolved then Poynings? whose Vigilance
made him Master of the Cincue Ports, as his Valor advanced him General of the
Low Country Forces, whom he led on to several services with success, and
brought off (with the loss of not above an hundred men) with Honor from the
Lady Margaret, and Applause from the whole Country.

No less happy was he in his Government of Tournay, until the Council at home
(now grown thin by the secession of Warbam, Fox and Norfolk) had more need of
him then Garrisons abroad: Vainly is that spirit penned within a City, that was
equal to a Kingdom. It is the unhappiness of other Monarchies, that they have
not Men answerable to their Employments; it was the unhappiness of this, that
it had not Employment suitable to its Men.

He lived and di'd in Arms: Bulioign saw him first a Soldier, and Bulloign saw
him last the best Camp-Master in all Christendom: always observing three things:

1. The Situation of his Camp, to secure his Army.

2. The Accommodation of it, to supply it.

3. His Retreat, to draw off: the Avenues, to be guarded with Soldiers, and
strengthened with Redoubts; which he made Triangular, that more men might
engage the Enemy at once; during erection whereof, the Army was pallisado'd in
the Front with stakes headed with iron on both Ends five foot long, and stuck
slope-wise into the ground, to keep off both Horse and Foot: the Foot-Sentinels
were without the Redoubts, the Horse-Guards beyond them, at distance enough to
descry the Enemy, and not too much, to retire to their works. A serious and
plodding brow bespoke this Noble Knights deep Prudence, and a smart look his
resolved Valor.

Observations on the Life of Sir Charles Somerset.
SIr Charles Somerset, afterward Lord Herbert of Gower, etc. endeared himself
to King Henry as much for his Maxim, That Reason of State was Reason of Law;
as for his Advice, That the King should never stick at Law, in case of Public
God; and yet that all his Acts for public Good should come as near as
possible to the Law. So Popular was this Gentleman, that he received all the
Petitions against Empson and Dudley; yet so loyal, that he advised his Master
neither to spare those Leeches, lest any should presume to alienat^ his Peoples
affections from him by Extortions for the future; nor yet too severely to
punish them, left any should be discouraged to serve the Crow^ for the present:
(for indeed Empson and Dud(...) suffered for that which others were advanced
for^ the Parliament punished them for putting their Laws in execution, and the
King deserted them for improving his Exchequer to a Treasury.)

Two things this Lord advised his Master to, before he put the Crown upon his
head.

1. To redress the Peoples Grievances under his Father.

2. To marry not in France, where he had a Title: A Kingdom so near us, that by
reason of mutual jealousies we may have peace with it sometimes, but Friendship
never.

In the Household he was Lord Chamberlain, so discreet his Carriage! In the
French Expedition, Anno 1513. he was General, so noble his Conduct! His
Assistants were the Earls of Northumberland, Shrewsbury, Kent and Wiltshire;
his Followers, the Lord Audley, De la Ware, Master of the Ordnance, who was
killed the first night before Therouene.
Carew and Curson, etc.

Therouene he besieges in good Order, and with Welsey's advice, who had lived
long in that Town; understands all the Avenues of it; and with Sir

Oughtred, Sir Henry Guilford, Sir Edward Poynings, Sir Charles Branden and Sir
Alexander Baynam's assistance, sprung several Mines, repulsed the French Relief
and the City-Assailants, so that the Town was yielded August 22. 1513. and upon
Maximilian's Entreaty razed, as he did Tournay, September 22. Herbert was for
razing this place, as farther from us than Therouene; but Wolsey for the
Bishoprics sake, is for the garisoning of it, as a Trophy. The King
recollecting his former occasions, Febr. 3. 1514. thought he could not do a
more just or a more prudent Act, then recompense his Noble Servants (but the
cheapest way, I mean that of Honor) as he did old Somerset with the Earldom of
Worcester.

With this Honor at home, is joined another abroad, viz. That of Embassy to
Maximilian, where he reached that Germans depths, and clearly demonstrated that
those fond and impossible Offers of the Empire, were but Artifices rather then
Kindnesses; to drain the Kings Treasure, rather than enlarge his Dominions:
Advising him to raise a Citadel at Tournay, and an Army in Normandy: He
finished the Espousals between the Princess Mary and the Dolphin; and delivered
Tournay, by the same token that he would not let the Marshall de Chastilion to
enter with Banner displayed, but rolled up, it being (as he said, who when Lord
Herbert was at the taking of it) voluntarily yielded up, and not gotten by
Conquest: and then bestowed himself with Sir Richard Wingfield for the great
enterview between King Francis and King Henry; an interview I know not whether
more solemn or more dangerous: Kings cannot meet without great state, and they
seldom part without much envy; who never are further asunder, then when they
meet. His most eminent Action here, was the Device of that Motto, Cui adhaereo
praeest; a Motto that speaks the Honor of England, and the Interest of Europe.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset.
THe Kings Wars called for Soldiers, and his Peace for Statesmen; and here is
a Person ex utroque magnus: When the whole design for the Invasion of France
was ripened, this Marquess is made General, and attended by the Lord Thomas
Howard, the Lords Brook, Willoughby and Ferrers, with diverse Knights,
Gentlemen, and others, to the number of ten thousand men, armed not only with
Bows but Halberts: He distresseth Navar to a submission to his Master; forces
his way to Bayon, and with Sir John Styles assistance, kept up the English
Honor above that of France and the Empire, keeping close to his Commission,
and not stirring a foot without express Orders from Ireland: although his
presence countenanced some actions his hands could not perform.

Three things he was very careful of:

1. Of Good pay, lest his Soldiers mutined. 2. Of Good Diet and Quarters, lest
they failed. 3. Of Order, Discipline and Temperance, especially in strange
Climates, lest they should be distempered.
Two things he was unsuccessful for:

1. The narrowness of his Commission. 2. The reach of Ferdinand, who designed
the conquest of Navar, rather than of France.
Yet what reputation he lost by Land, Sir Edward Howard gained by Sea,
commanding the French ships to their Harbors: overrunning Britaign, and with
Sir Tho. Knevet the Master of the Horse, Sir Jo. Carew and Sir Henry Guilford's
assistance, gave Law in the Mediterranean, until he awed the Neighbour-Princes
to terms as honorable for his Master, as dishonorable for themselves: now we
find him valiant in earnest at Sea, anon so in jest at Court (at the solemn
Justs proclaimed by Francis de Valois, Duke of Angoulesm in France) his Nature
being not stinted, but equally free to debonair and serious Enterprises of
Pleasure or of Honor; where six Germans were at his mercy, and four Frenchmen
at his feet. His spirit equalled those active times, and his temper his spirit.

Three things set him up:

1. His large expenses for show at Court. 2. His strength and manhood at Justs.
3. His skill and experience in the Field.
He was the best for embatteling an Army in those times: observing,

1. The number, strength and experience of his Camp.

2. The nature and extent of the place, whether champaign or enclosed, hilly or
plain, woody or moorish, straight or large; that he might accordingly dispose
of distances and stands.

3. Enclosures he aimed at for his Foot, and Champaign for his Horse, together
with the advantages of wind and sun.

4. He impales the Flank and Rear with Muskets, Pikes and Carriages.

5. His Divisions were sundry, but well ordered to relieve one another: His
main Battles three: the largest in the front, the next in the middle, with some
spaces between for the first to rally it self, or embody with the second; the
third and strongest in the Rear, so divided that the two first Battles may
retreat into it, and draw up in its Rear, to watch the Enemies disorder in
pursuit.

It Is observed of the Turks, that they never put their Janissaries (their best
Soldiers) in the Front, but make use of them for Reserves, by which they have
been very successful: This Noble Marquess went not by rote or fore-conceived
Rules, but by present Prudence, observing time, place and persons; neither
would he lie open to an Enemies design by a constant Method, but alter his
Stratagems, and contradict all the Rules of Discipline, to disorder the Enemy,
and disappoint his expectation.

He has sometimes compounded the wings of his Battle of the ablest men, and
the Battle it self of the meanest; ordering them, if overpowered, to make
their retreat to the Rear of the other Divisions, through the spaces appointed
for that end; which the Enemy perceiving, follows (not smelling the drift)
not without disorder, (as in all pursuits) between the two strong wings, who
crush them in pieces: his Fieldpieces after once or twice discharging, were
drawn within the Divisions of the main Battle, to fire the Enemy at his next
approaches, if the front were disordered: and to avoid the execution of his
Enemies, his files were thin, and his Dragoons ready to seize theirs, whereby
at least they were hindered from shooting; his Forlorn retired to the main
Battle, and out of the Flanks thereof issued with Fire-pots and Grenades upon
the engaged Enemy.

His Horse were in four Battalia's, whereof the first was the greatest, lined
with shot, placed on each wing of the main Army; always opening upon the
opening of the Enemy.

The greatest trust between man and man, is the trust of giving Counsel: For in
other confidences (says my Lord Bacon) men commit the parts of life, their
Lands, their Goods, their Children, their Credit, some particular affair; but
to such as they make their Counselors, they commit the whole, by how much the
more they are obliged to faithfulness and integrity. None was more trusted then
the Marquess, none more trusty: none understood clearer what was fit, nonespoke
plainer what he understood. What wants a Sovereign? (said a flattering
Courtier:) Truth; (said a serious King.) Never had King more need of it then
Henry, never less of it then he; whom it was less fatal to Ruin, then to
Displease. But this Soldier was as much above Fear as Flattery, that told him
when pensive, That never was that man merry, that had more then one Woman in
his Bed, more then one Friend in his Bosom, more then one Faith in his Heart.

So wary was this Gentleman, that he was not rash, and so lost his advantage:
so valiant, that he was not contemptible, and so lost his command: He led
others by the strongest authority of his own forwardness, his own Example; he
was led himself by the best Guide, his own Observation, his own Experience: His
Book limited not his Design, nor his Paper-plot his Undertakings.

Land-service was his Exercise, but the Sea his Delight: the Compass his Study,
the Stars his Care, Trade his Thoughts, our own and foreign Havens his
Discourse, a Seaman his Familiar, and three Seafights his Triumph: His
converse and speech was Souldier-like, plain, short, smart and material: there
was a time when he would say nothing, and a time when he would say something;
but never a time when he would say all.

He was, in a word, the happy man, who notwithstanding that the times could not
endure his Virtues, nor he their Vices, died at once full of honor at Court,
and applause in the Country, with this Monument from the King, That Honest and
Good Man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Wingfield.
HIs Parts and Person endeared him to the English Court, his Travel and
Experience recommended him to Foreign Negotiations; particularly in the
Emperor Maximilians Court, whom his arguments and his own Interest drew off
from France; Sir Robert helping him to some Observation touching the breach of
the Articles of Cambray, as his pretense to this alteration, and offering him
what men and money he pleased, as his encouragement to this undertaking:
sending in the mean time one Nicholas West, D. L. and Dean of Windsor, to feel
the Pulse of all the Princes in Christendom; and advising, upon an entire
reflection on their several Interests, the repair of our frontier Towns and
Forts, an Army ready in the North, and a constant Parliament. He is Deputy of
Calice, and Viceroy of France: What the French lost in the Field, they got by
Treaty, until Sir Richard's time, whose Policy went as far as his Masters
Power, in that Accord, Which tied up (they said) the French Kings bands behind
his back, and the Scotch between his legs. Yea, he almost persuaded Maximilian
out of his Empire, 1516. though he wished the King not to accept of it until
the French were out of Italy. Some do better by Friends or Letters, Sir Robert
best by himself; observing that he never failed, but when he entrusted others
with what he could do himself; his person breeding regard, and his eye seeing
more then any he could employ; and his present mind being more ready in his
own affairs upon any alteration to come on, draw back, o^ otherwise accommodate
matters, then any Substitute, who sees not the bottom of things, nor turn to
occasions. He had about him his Blades and Gallants, to expostulate; his
Orators and fair spoken men, to persuade; his close and subtle ones, to enquire
and observe; his froward men, to perplex; and his plain Agents, to report:
Attendants for all services, whose experience made them knowing and confident.
Doctor West, Pace, Lee and Gardener's way was the Circuit afar off; Sir
Robert's was the Surprise, quick and nicked: no man observing time more
closely; no man watching Natures tempers, interest, advantages and ends, more
indefatigably. It was the observation of those days, That Sir Robert Wingfield
was the best to prepare and ripen Designs, and Sir Thomas Bolen to execute
them: But that Age was too boisterous, and he too wary to advance beyond the
reputation of (...) knowing Agent, in which capacity he lived; or (...) a
resolved Patriot, with which honor he dies.

Observations on the Life of Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.
HIs Blood was high, his Revenue large; and he was born to adorn the Court,
rather then to serve it. He vied with the King in Gallantry, and with the
Cardinal in Pride: of the one he speaks irreverently, That women governed him
more then he did the Kingdom; of the other and screetly, That Francis governed
France, and Harry England, and Wolsey both; adding, That the Commonalty might
well complain, when we had two Kings to maintain. That which ruineth the world,
ruineth him, his Tongue. Fate never undid a man without. his own indiscretion;
and her first stroke is at the Head. Abroad, none more Gorgeous; at Home, none
more Noble: at Court, splendid; among his Tenants, Prince-like; to his
Relations, impartial. A Servant always pulled down the house of the Staffords;
and now one Knevet his Steward, whom he had discharged for oppressing his
Tenants, undoeth him: for his Father-in-law the Earl of Northumberland is set
under a Cloud, and his Son-in-law the Earl of Surrey is removed, on pretense of
honorable employment, out of the way; and Wolsey's malice at the Duke has its
full scope, who now deals with Knevets discontent to discover his Masters life,
and suggest that the Duke by way of discourse was wont to say how he meant to
use the matter, that if King Henry died without issue, he would attain the
Crown, and punish the Cardinal. George Nevil Lord Abergavenny his Son-in-law,
impeached him, to save himself. His Title to the Crown was, his Descent from
Anne Platagenet, Daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, Son to Edward the third. His
Accusation was,

1. That he had conferred with a Cunning-Man, (Hopkins, Monk of Henton)
concerning the future state of this Realm; who advised him to Popularity: for
he should have all, if he had but the love of the People: the Wizard confirming
this by Revolutions, and the Duke rewarding it with great encouragements.

2. That he disparaged the present Government and used Arts to secure the
succession.

3. That he had threatened King Henry with the same Dagger that should have
murdered Richa(...) the third.

He denied the Charge very eloquently, and disclaimed his Life very rashly; his
foolish words, rather then any designed malice, deserving rather pity then
judgment. Much lamented was he by the People, and as much was the Cardinal
maliced, being now called by the whole multitude, The Butchers Son. When
Buckingham fell, three things f(...) with him:

1. The Splendor of the Court. 2. Hospitality, and good Landlords in the
Country. And, 3. The High-Constableship of England.
All Greatness is subject to Envy; but none more then that which is infolent
and affected, being never its self without its pomp and show. Plain and modest
Greatness is only safe: A Witch then blasts a man when most prosperous, and
the Envious (the only Wizard in the world) when most glorious Wisemen
therefore have eclipsed themselves, than they might not be gazed on; and great
Ones have shrunk, and suffered themselves to be overborn to be secure.
Vainglorious men are the scorn of the Wise, the admiration of Fools, the Idols
of Parasites, and the envy of the Unworthy, the Busy, the Unfortunate, the
Ambitious, and the Rivals. He lives well, that lives in peace; and he is safely
great, that is great in his Conscience. Anger ^ure is but a weakness in any
man, (it belongs so much to the Aged and the Childish) and an indecency in a
Nobleman: yet it might have been a Gallantry in this Duke, had it not, 1.
Revealed secrets, and so betrayed him; 2. Broke off his Designs, and so
confounded him; And, 3. Spoke bitterly and dangerously, and so abused him. So
far will Discontent carry Nature, that it easily believes what it wishes: So
much does a Prophetic Vanity sway Englishmen, (that have the most of men of
any in the world in Divinations, and an itch to know things to come) that the
wittiest Sir Thomas More, the most devout Bishop Fisher, the wisest Cardinal
Wolsey, and the most Noble the Duke of Buckingham, have been undone by
harkening after Predictions; the two first, of Elizabeth Barton; the third, of
John Sacheverel; and the fourth, Monk Hopkins. Always are these Divinations
(like the Astrologers in Rome) by severe Laws forbidden; yet always are they by
vain persons obtruded. Many Wives, woe England, hardened many a Malcontent to
his ruin in King Henry the eighth's time: When HEMP is spun, England is done,
encouraged many a Papist to his undoing in Queen Elizabeth's time: Leo, Nulius,
confirmed many a deluded soul to his downfall in our days.

It was as fatal to this great man to trust his Steward, as his Wizard; the one
deluded, the other betrayed him. It undoeth a man to be too close; therefore we
have friends to ease our selves: it ruineth a man to be too open; therefore
there is a secret not to be communicated to a friend. When the Duke of
Buckingham made Knevet his Confessor, he made him his Master. He that is
Master of my Heart, is Master of my Life: If my Shi(...) said Metellus, knew my
mind, I would burn it. (...) my Servant or Friend knows my intentions, I
mu(...) either undo him, or be undone by him, unless (...) be so much above a
man, as not out of weakness (...) discover me; or so much above a sinner, as
not o(...) of corruption to betray me. Wild Beasts dwell(...) Dens, Fishes bed
in Mud, and Birds in Nests, and(...) Wise Man is wrapped up in secrecy. Gyges
his Ring was his wisdom, whereby he understood others and was reserved
himself. It Is pity he ever learned to speak, that knows not how to be silent.
(...) would first be so wise, (faith a Wit and Wisdom (...) our Age) as to be
my own counselor, and next so secret as to be my own counsel-keeper. Some of
my servants may be of my Bedchamber, but none shall be of my closet. Before I
told you of this, (says Charles the Fifth of a Design discovered upon the
seventeen Provinces to his Favorite Lunembergh) I was Emperor, but now you
an^ so.

But the height of the Dukes spirit was equally unfortunate with the openness
of it; and he fell no^ less because he despised Knevet, then because he trusted
him.

Contemned Dangers ruin surely, while they surprise us at once naked, and
careless; as ill prepared to offend the slighted Adversary, as to defend our
misunderstood Selves. The least Beings have their spleen, and command our
caution: No creature too mean to be mischievous; none too inconsiderate to be
feared. As long as Weakness can cling to Power, and Power to Malice, what
Kn^vet would, but could not, that Wolsey could and would. If my Enemy be
strong, he shall awe; if weak, he shall guard my Life. Two things are necessary
in this Life, Faithful Friends, or Severe Enemies: The fewer of the former men
of the Dukes fortune have, the more use they should make of the latter. The
greatest Enemy when observed, may do me a great kindness; the least neglected,
can do no little mischief: Security is the only misfortune, and Carelessness
the only fate that distresseth the World.

But the Duke threw away his life in a fatal word that could not be recalled,
(I Will not ask the King for my Life.) Great need have we to guard that Tongue,
whence flow the issues of Life and Death; and weigh those words that go abroad
for the measure of our Weal or Woe; our words being given us to treat with the
World about either, discreetly to our happiness, or weakly to our ruin. It
has repented men that they have spoken at all times; it repented none to have
been silent in King Henry's, when there was no security but to the Reserved,
and the Pliable.

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony Brown.
HE was always one of the Council to King Henry at home, and of his
Commissioners abroad: no Treaty passing without his presence no Negotiation
without his advice; the first carrying as much Majesty with it, as the second
did Authority: the Court having bred the one to a noble Mein, as Experience had
done the other to an Oracle; Experience, I say, whereby he saw more, as
Alexander boasted, with his eye, then others comprehended in their thoughts;
that being knowledge in him, that was but conjecture in others.

He was the best Compound in the World; a learned, an honest, and a traveled
man; a good Nature, a large Soul, and a settled Mind, made up of Notes and
Observations upon the most material points of State he could learn at Courts;
of Religion, among the Clergy; of Discipline, among Soldiers; of Trade, among
Merchants; or of the situation, interest, avenues and strong holds, by his own
eyes. It Is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see ships tossed upon the
sea; it is pleasure to stand in the window of a Castle, and to see a Battle,
with the adventures thereof below: but no pleasure is comparable to the
standing upon the Vantground of Truth: (An Hi(...) (says my Noble Author) not
to be commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene;) and to see the
Errors and Wanderings, the Mists and Tempests in the Vale below: That content is
better felt then expressed that this Noble Person took in his own clear
thoughts, when it was Mist all round about him; and King Henry cried, What say
Cromwell and Brown?

Vespasian asked Apollonius, What was Nero's overthrow? and he answered him,
Nero could tune the H^rp well; but in Government sometimes he wound the pins
too high, and sometimes he let them down too low. Sir Anthony told Henry the
Eighth, That his Government had been more easy, if he had either set it not so
loose at first, or not so strict at last: (as there was indeed no King so
various as his Master, no State so changeable as his Government.) An even
temper begets aw and reverence; whilst the wide extremes create either on the
one hand contempt and insolence, or on the other discontent and murmuring.
Haughty and violent Courts never bless the Owners with a settled Peace.

This deep man was Leiger in Rome six years, and Agent in France ten: A Person
of great dispatch, because of an orderly method and procedure; which he
observed to a superstition, saying, Time and Method are my Masters. There are
(says my Oracle) three parts of business; Preparation, Debate and Perfection:
The middle King Henry communicated to the whole Council, the first and last to
few, viz. to my Lord Cromwell and Sir Anthony Brown.

The highest matters were his care; as the Interview in France, 1533. the most
eminent Statesmen his fellows, as the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Rochfort and
the Lord Paulet; those Noble Persons bearing the state, and he managing the
business of the Embassies.

The wise man of Florence took care that Ferdinando of Naples, Medices of
Florence, Sforza of Millain should gain nothing of one another, to the great
security of Italy: Sir Anthony watched our Neighbors Conquests, Trade,
Approaches, etc. so closely, that none of those Potentates, Charles the Fifth
or King Francis, could win a spot of Ground, but his Master would balance it,
and so secure Europe.

The Interviews between Princes he disallowed; yet to satisfy his Master, he
provided for that in France so sumptuously, as one that understood the
formality of a Pageant was a real advantage to a Government whose Interest is
as much to gain a reputation by pomp and show, as support a welfare by prudence
and strength: others apprehension of our greatness, contributing as much to our
welfare, as our welfare it self: Opinion governs the World: Princes with their
Majesty, may be often envied and hated; without it, they are always scorned and
contemned: Circumstances are often more then the main, and shadows are not
always shadows: Outward Esteem to a great Person, is as skin to Fruit, which
though a thin cover, preserves it: King Henry's Person and State did England
more Right in a Year, then his Predecessors Arms in an Age; while they only
impressed a resolution in the Neighbors, he a reverence.

As Princes govern the People, so Reason of State the Princes: Spain at that
time would command the Sea, to keep us from the Indies; and our Religion, to
keep us from a Settlement: France suspected our Neighborhood, and engaged
Scotland; the Pope undermined our Designs, and obliged the French. Sir Anthony
at Rome, in respectful terms, and under Protestation that his Majesty intended
no contempt of the Sea Apostolic, or Holy Church, intimated his Masters Appeal
to the next General Council lawfully assembled; exhibiting also the Authentic
Instruments of the same, and the Archbishop of Canterbury's at the Consistory,
where, though the Pope made forty French Cardinals, yet our Agent and his money
made twelve English, and taught Francis to assume the power of disposing
Monasteries and Benefices, as King Henry had done; advising him to inform his
Subjects clearly of his proceedings, and unite with the Princes of the
Reformation, taking his Parliament and People along with him, and by their
advice cutting off the Appeals to and Revenues of Rome, by visitations, etc.
with a Praemunire, together with the Oath of Supremacy, and the publication of
the prohibited Degrees of Marriage: He added in his Expresses, That his Majesty
should by disguised Envoys divide between the Princes and the Empire.

The next sight we have of him is in Scotland; the French Kings passage to
England, (as he calls it:) Where in joint Commission with the Earl of
Southampton, and the Bishop of Durham, he with his variety of Instructions
gained time until the French King was embroyled at home, the season of Action
was over there, and the Duke of Norfolk ready to force that with a War, which
could not be gained by Treaty. Fortune is like the Market, where many times if
you can stay a little, the Price will fall: The ripeness and unripeness of the
Occasion must be well weighed: Watch the beginning of an Action, and then
speed! Two things make a complete Politician, Secrecy in Counsel, and Celerity
in Execution.

But our Knights Prudence was not a heavy Wariness, or a dull caution, as
appears by his preferment at Court, where he is Master of the Horse; and his
service in the North, where he and the Comptroller Sir Anthony Gage, are in the
head of 10000 men: In both these places his excellence was more in choosing his
Officers and Followers, then in acting himself: His servants were modest and
sober, troubling him with nothing but his business, and expecting no higher
conditions, then countenance, protection and recommendation; and his Retayners
peaceable, reserved, close, plain and hopeful: the deserving Soldier and the
promising were seen often at his gate, not in throngs, to avoid popularity:
equal was his favor, that none might be insolent, and none discontented; yet
so discreetly dispensed, as made the Preferred faithful, and the Expectants
officious. To be ruled by one, is soft and obnoxious; by many, troublesome: to
be advised by few, as he was, is safe: because (as he said in some things out
of his element) the Vale best discovers the Hill.

Although he understood not the main matter of War, yet he knew many of its
falls and incidents; his prudence being as able to lay a stratagem, as others
experience was to embattail an Army. Sir Thomas W^arton Warden of the Marches
he commands with 300 men behind an Ambush, whither he draws the rash Scots, and
overthrows them more with the surprise then his power, taking the Lord
Admiral Maxwel, etc. who was committed to his custody; and putting that King to
so deep a melancholy, that he died upon it. His death suggests new counsels,
and Sir Anthony watches in Scotland to gain his Daughter for our Prince, or at
least to prevent the French, whom Sir William Paget watches there, as Sir
Ralph Sadler did in Rome, and Sir John Wallop at Calais: and when that Kings
design was discovered, we find our Knight with Charles Duke of Suffolk,
Lieutenant General; Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, Lord General; Will.
Pawlet, Lord St. John, Stephen Bishop of Winchester, with a rich and strong
Army, expecting the King before Montrevil, (which they took with Bo^logn) and
forcing the French to a Peace and Submission that secured England, and settled
Europe.

Three things facilitate all things: 1. Knowledge, 2. Temper, 3. Time.
Knowledge our Knight had either of his own or others, whom he commanded in what
ever he went about, laying the ground of matters always down in writing, and
debating them with his friends, before he declared himself in Council. A
temperance he had, that kept him out of the reach of others, and brought others
within his. Time he took, always driving, never being driven by his business;
which is rather a huddle, then a performance, when in haste: there was
something that all admired, and which was more, something that all were pleased
with, in this man's actions. The times were dark, his carriage so too: the Waves
were boisterous, but he the solid Rock, or the well-guided Ship that could go
with the Tide. He mastered his own passion, and others too, and both by Time
and Opportunity; therefore he died with that peace the State wanted, and with
that universal repute the Statesmen of those troublesome times enjoyed not.

By King Henry's Will he got a Legacy of 300 l. for his former Service; and the
Honor to be of Prince EDWARD's special Council for the future.

By his Order he had, as his share of Abbey-Lands, Battle-Abbey in Sussex,
enjoyed by his Heirs Males in a direct Line to this day: And by his Authority
he had the Honorable Garter.

He was the first man that durst bring his Master the sad news, That He must
die: And no wonder he durst it, for the next news is, That he is dead himself.
How dare thou to be so plain? said Heliogabalus to the Courtier: Because I
dare die, said he: I can but die, if I am Faithful; and I must die, though I
Flatter.

The Lord Herbert's Character of Cardinal Wolsey, in his Life of Henry the
Eighth, page 314.
ANd thus concluded that great Cardinal: A man in whom ability of parts and
Industry were equally eminent; though, for being employed wholly in ambitious
ways, they became dangerous Instruments of power, in active and mutable times.
By these arts yet he found means to govern not only the chief affairs of this
Kingdom, but of Europe; there being no Potentate, which, in his turn did not
seek to him: and as this procured him diverse Pensions, so, when he acquainted
the King therewith, his manner was, so cunningly to disoblige that Prince who
did fee him last, as he made way thereby oftentimes to receive as much on the
other side. But not of secular Princes alone, but even of the Pope and Clergy
of Rome he was no little courted; of which therefore he made especial use,
while he drew them to second him on most occasions. His birth being otherwise
so obscure and mean, as no man had ever stood so single: for which reason also
his chief endeavor was not to displease any great Person; which yet could not
secure him against the diverse Pretenders of that time. For as all things passed
through his hands, so they who failed in their suits, generally hated him: All
which, though it did but exasperate his ill nature, yet this good resultance
followed, that it made him take the more care to be Just; whereof also he
obtained the reputation in his public hearing of Causes: For as he loved no
body, so his Reason carried him. And thus he was an useful Minister of his
King, in all points, where there was no question of deserving the Roman Church;
of which (at what price soever) I find he was a zealous Servant; as hoping
thereby to aspire to the Papacy, whereof (as the factious times then were) he
seemed more capable then any, had he not so immoderately affected it. Whereby
also it was not hard to judge of his Inclination; that Prince, who was ablest
to help him to this Dignity, being ever preferred by him; which therefore was
the ordinary Bait by which the Emperor and the French King, one after the
other did catch him. And, upon these terms, he doubted not to convey vast
treasures out of this Kingdom, especially unto Rome, where he had not a few
Cardinals at his devotion; by whose help, though he could not attain that
Supreme Dignity he so passionately desired, yet he prevailed himself so much of
their favor, as he got a kind of absolute power in Spiritual Matters at Home:
Wherewith again be so served the Kings turn, as it made him think the less of
using his own Authority. One error seemed common to both, which was, That such
a multiplicity of Offices and Places were invested in him. For as it drew much
envy upon the Cardinal in particular, so it derogated no little from the Regal
Authority, while one man alone seemed to exhaust all: Since it becomes Princes
to do like good Husbandmen, when they sow their Grounds, which is, to scatter,
and not to throw all in one place. He was no great Dissembler, for so qualified
a Person; as ordering his businesses (for the most part) so cautiously, as he
got more by keeping his word then by breaking it. As for his Learning, (which
was far from exact) it consisted chiefly in the subtilties of the Thomists,
wherewith the King and himself did more often weary then satisfy each other.
His style, in Missives, was rather copious then eloquent, yet ever tending to
the point. Briefly, if it be true (as Polydore observes) that no man ever did
rise with fewer virtues, it is true that few that ever fell from so high a
place had lesser crimes objected against him: Though yet Polydore (for being at
his first coming into England committed to Prison by him, as we have said) may
be suspected as a partial Author. So that in all probability he might have
subsisted longer, when either his pride and immense wealth had not made him
obnoxious, and suspected to the King, or that other than Women had opposed him:
Who, as they are vigilant and close Enemies, so for the most part they carry
their businesses in that manner as they leave fewer advantages against
themselves then men do. In conclusion, As (...) cannot assent to those who
thought him happy for enjoying the untimely compassion of the People (...)
little before his end, so I cannot but account it (...) principal Felicity,
that during his favor with the King, all things succeeded better then
afterward; though yet it may be doubted whether the Impressions he gave, did
not occasion dives Irregularities which were observed to follow.

The Lord Herbert's Character of Cromwell, in his Life of Henry the Eighth, page
462.
AND to this end came Cromwell, wh^ from being but a Blacksmiths Son, found
means to travel into foreign Countries, to learn their Languages, and to see
the Wars (being a Soldier of Bourbon at the sacking of Rome;) whence
returning, he was received into Cardinal Wolsey' s service: To whom he so
approved himself by his fidelity and diligence, that the King after his fall,
voluntarily took him for his servant; in which place he became a special
Instrument for dissolving the Abbeys and other Religious Houses, and keeping
down the Clergy; whom, in regard of their Oath to the Pope, he usually termed
the Kings half Subjects: And for expelling the Monks, he said it was no more
then a restoring them to the first Institution, of being lay and laboring
persons: Neither did (...)t move him that so much strictness and austerity of
Life was enjoined them in their several Orders, since, he said, they might keep
it in any condition: But as these Reasons again were not admitted by diverse
learned and able Persons, so he got him many Enemies, who at last procured his
fall; but not before he had obtained successively the Dignities of Master of
the Rolls, Baron, Lord Privy Seal, Vicegerent to the King in Spirituali^ies,
Knight of the Garter, Earl of Essex, Great Chamberlane of England, etc. He was
much noted in the exercises of his Places of Judicature, ^o have used much
Moderation; and in his greatest pomp to have taken notice and been thankful to
mean persons of his old acquaintance; and wherein had a Virtue which his Master
the Cardinal wanted.

As for his other descriptions, I leave them to be taken out of Cranmers Letter
formerly mentioned, with some deduction; For it seems written to the King in
more then Ordinary Favor of his entient Service.

Archbishop Cranmer's Character of Cromwell, in a Letter to King Henry the
Eighth.
WHo cannot be sorrowful and amazed that he should be a Traitor against your
Majesty? He that was so advanced by your Majesty, He whose Surety was only by
your Majesty, He who loved your Majest (as I ever thought) no less then God; He
who stadied always to set forwards whatsoever was you Majesty's will and
pleasure; He that cared for (...) man's a spleasure to serve your Majesty; He
the was such a Servant in my judgment, in wisdom diligence, faithfulness and
experience, as no Prine in this Realm ever had: He that was so vigilant (...)
preserve your Majesty from all Treasons, that f(...) could be so secretly
conceived, but he detected the same in the beginning. If the Noble Princes of
memory, King John, Henry II. and Richard Il^ had had such a Counselor about
them, I supposed they should never have been so Traitorously abandoned and
overthrown as those good Princes were. After which, he says again, I loved him
as my Friend, for so I took him to be; but I chiefly loved him for the love
which I thought I saw him bear ever toward your Grace, singularly above all
other: But now, if he be a Traitor, I am sorry that ever I loved him or trusted
him; and I am very glad that his Treason is discovered in time: But yet egain I
am very sorrowful; for who shall your Grace trust hereafter, if you might not
trust him? Alas! I bewail and lament your Graces chance herein! I wot not whom
your Grace may trust. But I pray God continually night and day to send such a
Counselor in his place whom your Grace may trust, and who for all his
Qualities can and will serve your Grace like to him; and that will have so much
solicitude and care to preserve your Grace from all dangers, as I ever thought
he had.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
THE Edw. 6.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King Edward the VI.
Observations on the Lives of the Seymours.
EDward Seymour and Thomas Seymour both sons of Sir John Seymour of Wolful in
Wiltshire. I join them together, because whilst they were united in affection,
they were invincible; but when divided, easily overthrown by their enemies.

EDward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector and Treasurer of England, being the
elder THomas Seymour the younger brother, was made Baron of Sudley; brother,
succeeded to a fair Paternal inheritance. He was a valiant Soldier for
Land-service, fortunate, and generally beloved by Martial men. He was of an
open nature, free from jealousy and dissembling, affable to all people. He
married Anne, Daughter to Sir Edward Stanhop, a Lady of a high mind, and
haughty undaunted spirit. and by Offices and the favors of his Nephew, King
Edward the sixth, obtained a great Estate. He was well experienced in
Sea-affairs, and made Lord Admiral of England. He lay at a close posture, being
of a reserved nature, and more cunning in his carriage. He married Queen
Katherine Parr, the Widow of King Henry 8.

Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives; the Duchess refusing to bear
the Queens Train, and in effect justled with her for precedence: so that what
betwixt the Train of the Queen, and long Gown of the Duchess, they raised so
much dust at the Court, as at last put out the eyes of both their Husbands, and
occasioned their Executions.

Their Sisters Beauty commended them to the Kings favors; (but a frail support
that! which is as lasting only as a Fancy, and only as certain as Passion:)
therefore their Parts recommended them to his service. Affection shall lead me
to Court, but I Will take care that Interest keeps me there.

Sir Edward Seymours temper suited with the Kings Inclinations, and his spirit
with his times; both high, both stirring. In the throng of Courtiers, there are
but three steps to raise a man to observation: 1. Some peculiar sufficiency; 2.
Some particular exploit; and, 3. An especial Friend: This Noble Person showed
the first with advantage, in that draught of Military Discipline presented to
Henry the eighth, wherein the embattling is most remarkable, viz. Twenty two
complete Companies make up four Squadrons; every Squadron of Pikes and Muskets
being drawn up apart, the Pikes and Colors on the left hand, and the
Musketeers on the right. These Squadrons makeup a Brigade, to be drawn up as
follows, viz. Ten Corporalships of Musketeers being 34 Rots divided into
five Plattons, every Platton being nine or so in front, led by a Major, and
even division by a sufficient Commander. Next after these, 36 Rats of Pikes are
to follow, (being twelve Corporalships) with their Colors following them, till
they are drawn up even in from with the 32 Rots of Musketeers: This make the
Right Wing of the Brigade. 2. The Batter of Pikes moves forwards in division,
doing in a^ respects as the former, till they range even in front with the
Pikes of the Right Wing: Then the other 32 Rots of Musketeers belonging to the
middle Squadron, (who are appointed to make the Battle of the Brigade) are led
up as the first Musketeers in all points, but at a reasonable distance behind
the Pikes of their own Squadrons. Then the last Squadron of Pikes marches up,
in all respects observing the same order, until they have attained to range in
front even with other Pikes.

This being done, the Battle or middle Squadron of Pikes and Muskets advances
in one body, until it is clear of the Wings. Lastly, the Surplus of the three
Squadrons being 48 Rots of Musketeers, are drawn up behind the Brigade, where
they are to attend the Commands of their Officers, to guard the Baggage or
Cannon, to be Convoys for Ammunition or Victuals to the rest, or continue a
reserve to wait upon all occasions.

2. Eminent was his ability for this Draught, more eminent for his performance
agreeable to it in Bretaign; where he sat before a Town six weeks to no
purpose, while it expected relief from Italy: but at last he insinuates a
jealousy between the Pope and the French King touching that City, that
obstructed all relief: He with as much speed as policy sets upon the two main
Sconces for defense of the Town, and took them both; battering the Town and
Castle with that violence and noise, that they say it was heard 100 miles off.
A Train of Powder is laid to blow them up when they should enter; but this
succeeded not: for the French in passing the Ditch had so wet their clothes,
that dropping upon the Train, the Powder would not take fire; and so all things
conspiring to crown his Valor with success, he takes the Castle first; and
then dividing the Town, and weakening it by several assaults at once, brought it
to his own terms. Here his Valor had been eminent, but that his Conduct was
more; and his Conduct renowned, but that his nobleness toward the Conqueror,
his civility and obligingness toward the Soldiery, and his integrity toward
all persons, had outdone that.

There are but two things that a subject can honestly oblige his Prince in: 1.
Keeping his subjects in peace at home, 2. Keeping his enemies under abroad: 1.
Those soft, but prudent Acts of Peace; 2. Those resolved, but well-managed ways
of War: Sir Thomas wanted neither a resolution for the one, nor a temper for
the other.

But sufficiency and merits are neglected things when not befriended: (Princes
are too reserved to be taken with the first appearances of worth, unless
recommended by tried judgments: it is fit, as well as common, that they have
their Counselors for persons as well as things:) his Sister therefore was
married on Whitsunday, and he is on the Tuesday following created Viscount
Beauchamp. But ne(...) year his. Nephew is born; the hope and stay of his
Majesty and his Realms, and he is made Earl (...) Hertford.

King Henry understanding that the Pope upon his own and Cardinal Pool's
account stirred up all the Princes of Europe against him, as a provident
Prince, rode himself to the Seacoasts to see then fortified. Admiral
Fitz-Williams is old, Sir Thomas Seymour assists him to rig the Navy to be in
rediness in six days time: Sir Edward is to muster the Landforces, and
particularly the City of London, where were 15000 Armed men ready, May 8. in
St. Jameses, at which place the City seemed (...) Camp, and the Citizens men
not of the Gown, but of the Armor. Great this Lords interest in, and respect
with the people; as great his brothers with the Seamen: the Multitude would
leave all for their good Lord of Hertford, and the Seamen would die with their
noble Lord Seymour. When the King of Scots had deluded King Henry in his
correspondencies with France beyond all patience, and had been forborne beyond
all safety or prudence, Sir Edward Seymour is first sent to treat, and then to
sight; which he did with that success, that 300 of his men, and a stratagem,
(to possess the Scots with an apprehension that the whole English Army was upon
them) took and killed 30000 Scots, had more prisoners then they could keep,
more booty then they could dispose of; and adding this to their Victory, That
they broke the Kings heart.

There was no end to be expected of a War with Seotland, but by marrying that
Kings Daughter to our Sovereigns Son. This Match was my Lord Seymour's interest
as well as the Kings: his prudence and experience is therefore employed first
to persuade it; and when that would not do, (so great and so cross the Papal
power there by Cardinal Betons means) his Valor and Resolution is sent with
10000 to compel it: in order whereunto, May 4. landing at Granther Gray, he
marches in order toward Leith, which (after a defeat given the Cardinal, the
Earls of Arran, Huntley, etc. by his Harquebusiers) they entered, and thence
proceeded to Edinburgh: (my Lord Dudley leading the Front, our Earl the Battle,
and the Earl of Shrewsbury the Rereward:) there the Keys are offered them upon
conditions; which they refusing, (and so making the Enemy desperate, who
resolves rather to perish nobly, then be undone by submission) the Town holds
out, and they are able to do no more, with some considerable loss, then burn
the suburbs, waste the Country to an utter desolation for seven miles compass,
demolish Leith, Dunbar, etc. take all their Ships and Ammunition, returning to
Berwick with the loss only of 14 men.

Two things he was eminent for:

1. His Advice, that not the least Punctilio of the Law should be neglected:
whereupon the Earl of Surrey and other Nobility were imprisoned for eating
Flesh in Lent. A secret and unobserved contempt of the Law, is a close
undermining of Authority; which must be either its self in indulging nothing,
or be nothing in allowing all. Liberty knows no restraint, no limit, when
winked at.

2. For his Popularity, in advancing the Benevolence 52000 l. beyond
expectation.

The Scots must have War as long as there is Poverty in their Country, and
Interest in France: This Noble Earl cutteth off the Invaders, lays waste the
Country, and (that the source of those troubles might be damned up) enters
France with 80000 men; and after some skirmishes, brought the King thereof to a
peace and submission.

In pursuance whereof, while King Henry was in Bologn, he made his Will,
wherein the Earl of Hertford Lord High Chamberlain is appointed Principal
Counselor to his Nephew: and not long after he dies, and leaves the Kingdom
to his son, and his son to his Uncle, whom the common Vote made Protector, and
Interest a Moderator of the Council, which the times required able, but their
humors made factious. The peace with King Francis and the Emperor was but
uncertain, the Scots were irreconcilable, the Pope implacable, Religion
unsettled, the Clergy out of frame, the People distracted, and the Nobility at
variance. A great Counselor King Henry leaves his son, and a greater his
Uncle makes him: In Bacons Ess. 116.
counsel is stability: things will have their first or second agitation: if
they be not tossed upon the Arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the
Waves of Fortune. But yet this Lord miscarried, in that the Council understood
him better then he did them: And he advised with them rather in public, where
men speak warily, and in compliance with others humor; then in private, where
they deliver themselves more freely, and agreeably to their own humors. (The
Rule is, Ask an inferior man's advice in private, that he may be free; and a
superiors in public, that he may be respectful.) But he did well, 1. In that
the same matter if weighed, was never propounded and resolved the same day. 2.
In that he had fixed days of petitions, for the peoples and his own ease. 3. In
that he poyzed his Committees of contrary Inclinations; that watched and
balanced each other to a moderation most safe for the Kingdom and himself. 4.
That he had of all Professions such at his command as opened the state of a
business before any Commissioners debated it. 5. That he seldom discovered his
own inclination, left it biased his Counsel. 6. That to prevent a Combination
in the Council, he weakened their power and privileges, their credit, their
dependencies, either by office or expectation, their opportunities and
correspondencies, so that he could easily remove any when faulty, discover any
when dangerous, disgrace any when bold, and not fit to be entrusted with the
Counsels, Resolves, Deliberations and Necessities of the State. In order to
which, he had two useful Resolutions, 1. To suppress Calumnies, 2. To encourage
Accusations. His first Acts were Show and Pomp, (necessary for Greatness) viz.
The Knighting of the King, and making himself Duke. His next are Realities: as,
1. His modelling the Country for a Parliament, considering the temper of the
people, and the pulse of the last Parliament; redressing Grievances, settling
Elections by such Legal Rules, as that the people should not be corrupted with
money, overborn by importunity, transported by fear or favor to an unworthy or
an unsuitable choice; and taking a just time to prepare the people for the
designed settlement, by his grave and sober Injunctions, by godly and good
Books of Instructions, by a wholesome form of Prayer, (composed at Windsor) by a
more exact translation of the Bible, by several Proclamations for moderation
and order on all hands, by inhibiting all Preachers but such learned, sober,
grave and discreet men as were Licensed thereunto under the Lord Protector's
and my Lord of Canterbury's hand.

2. His promoting the Match with Scotland first by Ambassadors, and then by an
Army, whose order was this: viz. The avant-guard of 3 or 4000 The Duke of
Somerfet's march.
footmen at Arms, and 600 light horse led by the Earl of Warwick; the main
Battle of 6000 foot, and 600 men at Arms, and 1000 light horse, led by the
Protector; and the Rear of half so many, led by the Lord Dacres; the Artillery
of 16 Pieces of Ordnance making one Wing, the men at Arms and Demilances the
other. For the Avant-guard and half of the Battle riding about two flight-shot
from their side, the other half of the Battle: and the whole Flank of the Rear
was closed by the Carriages, being 12000 Carts and Wagons; the rest of the men
at Arms and Demilances marching behind. A few skirmishes and stratagems passed,
when a Trumpeter is sent by Huntley to challenge the Protector; to whom the
Protector replying like a wise man, That it was not for a person of his trust
to duel it with a private man; The Earl of Warwick said, Trumpeter, bring me
word that thy Master will perform the Combat with me, and I Will give thee 100
Crowns. Nay, rather, said our Duke, bring me word that he will give us Battle,
and I will give thee 1000 l. But in 25 days he gains a greater The same day
that 30 years ago they were beaten at Flodden.
Battle, over-runs the Country with the loss of no more then 65 men, to that of
25000 Scots.

3. His third Exploit was, Dispensing He made the first and last Bannerets.
Honors so nobly, that they were due encouragements to Virtue; though yet so
warily, that they should not be either a burden or a danger to the Crown.

4. He gave the Commonalty great content, in pulling down Enclosures by
Proclamations; and the Nobility no less, by setting up Land-improvements by
Rule.

5. He engaged both, by a good bargain of Church Lands, confirmed by this
Parliament.

6. He weakneth the Papists, 1. By conniving at them until they broke out to
such outrages as made them liable. 2. By dividing them when engaged, with hope
of mercy on the one hand, and fear of his Army on the other.

7. The French taking the advantage of our seditions to break off their Treaty,
and proclaim a War, he confiscates their Estates, and secures the persons of as
many of them as lived in England.

But Greatness is fatal; and his Brother that should have supported this great
man, ruins himself and him. He had married a Lady high in spirit; his Brother
the Queen-Dowager, higher in place: The Lady Stanhope,
the Ladies quarrel first, and then (as it must needs follow) the Lords. Thomas
the Admiral is questioned for aiming at the Crown, 1. By marrying the Lady
Elizabeth, and then by seizing the Kings person and the Government: so honest
this Protector, (a plain man, and of no over-deep insight into Practices) that
he gave way to his Trial, saying, (though somewhat ominous as it happened) I Will
do and suffer Justice: so Uxorious, that he sealed his death. And now he stands
alone, wanting his Brothers cunning to reach Warwick, or his resolution to
check Norfolk. The people are troubled at that one weak and unjustifiable Act
of his, The pulling down of so many of Gods Churches in the City, to build one
Someset-house in the Strand.

The Earl takes notice of their discontent, and assembleth eighteen
discontented Counselors, who arm themselves and their Whom they put in new
Liveries.
followers, calling the City and the Kingdom to their assistance by a
Proclamation. The Protector flees with the King and a Guard to Hampton Court:
the City sometimes resolved to assist the Lords, out of malice to the
Protector; sometimes to forbear out of such consideration of its many
misfortunes in opposing Kings, set forth not with more Integrity by George
Stadlow, then Eloquence and Life by John Ayliffe. They delay: Sir Anthony
Wingfield Captain of the Guard perswardes the King of the Lords moderation and
and Loyalty; the Duke is to answer for himself: the Laywers charge him with
removing Westminster Hall to Somerset House, where he kept a Court of Requests,
and determined Title of Lands; the Soldiers with the detaining of their pay,
and betraying our-French Garrisons; the Statesmen with the engrossing of all
Authority. The Earl of Warwick vigilantly but closely manageth all discontents
to his design with this great advantage, that he was subtle, close, and
implacable, while the other was free-spirited, open-hearted, humble, hard to
distrust, easy to forgive. His friend the Lord Russel is absent: he is first
tried and acquitted, but with the loss of his Protectorship, Treasurership,
Marshalship, and 2000 l. of Land more.

But Warwick's design for the Crown ripening, and Somerset being the most
eminent obstruction in his way, having weakened, before he ruins him, now he
charge him with Treason, to make a noise; and with Felony, to do execution:
the Council is packed, he loses his life (for a small crime, and that on a
For contriving the death of a Privy(...)Counselor.
nice point, subtly devised and packed by his enemies) forgetting to ask the
benefit of the Clergy, that had saved it. This Person, as Mr. Fuller
charactereth him, was religious himself, a lover of all such as were so, and a
great promoter of the Reformation: Valiant and successful, generally beloved by
Soldiers, envied by Statesmen, though the most conscientious of them all;
doing nothing irregularly, but in compliance with the necessities of
Government; open to dangers, as one that could not be jealous; better to act,
then design; to perform, then plot. When he was discharged of Treason, there
was so loud a shout in Westminsterhall, as was heard to Long-acre; when
condemned of Felony, there was a silence and amazement for three hours.
Beheaded he was on Tower Hill, with no less praise for his piety and patience,
then pity and grief of the spectators. His Death was attended with many signs
and wonders, and his Name with an indelible character, his house being called
Somerset House to this day, though solemnly proclaimed by King James
Denmark-house, because inhabited by the King of Denmark and his Sister. Surely
(says my Author) this Duke was well beloved since his Name made such indelible
impression on (...) house, whereof he was not five years in possession Death
has this also, That it opens the Gate (...) good Fame, and extinguisheth
Envy. Philip asked Demetrius if he did not fear to lose his head; He answered,
No: for if he did, the Athenians would give him one immortal; He should be
statued in the Temple of Eternal Fame.

Nil non Mortale tenemus,
Pectoris exceptis ingeniique bonis:
En ego, cum Patria caream vobisque domoque
Raptaque sint, adimi quae potuere mibi,
Virtute attamen ipse mea comitorque fruorque
Caesar in hoc potuit juris habere nibil.
Quilibet hanc saevo vitam mihi, finiat ense,
M^ tamen extincto fama perennis erit.
All that we hold will die,
But our brave Thoughts and Ingenuity:
Even I that want my Country, House and Friend,
From whom is ravished all that Fate can rend,
Possess yet my own Genius, and enjoy
That which is more then Caesar can destroy.
Each Groom may kill me: but whensoe'er I die,
My Fame shall live to mate eternity.
Brave men never die: Worth begets in weak and ^ase minds, Envy: in the
Magnanimous, Emulation; in Posterity, Renown: A Renown, that is as the beams
about the Sun, or the glory about an holy picture, that shows it to be a Saint,
though it be no essential part: it rises from the body of that Virtue, which
cannot choose but shine, and give a light through all the clouds of error and
destruction. And though sometimes the mists and vapors of the lower earth
impede the light it gives, yet there will be apparent Rays, that show there is
Desert unseen, which yields those ^leams of brightness to the whole Horizon,
that it moves and shines in, which survive to a glorious kind of immortality,
when the Good Man is dead and gone; a Good Name being the embalming of the
Virtuous to an eternity of love and gratitude among posterity. For my own
Honor (says the Royal Martyr) I am well assured, that as mine Innocence is
clear before God in point of any calumnies they object; so my Reputation shall
like the Sun (after Owls and Bats have had their freedom in the night) rise
and recover its self to such a degree of splendor, as those feral birds shall
be grieved to behold, nd unable to bear.

Observations on the Lives of the Pars.
SIr William Par Uncle and Lord Chamberlain There was another of his name
Sheriff, Nephew to this Knight, in 25 of H 8.
to Queen Katharine Par, was by King Henry the Eighth created Baron Par of
Horton: he left two Daughters only, married into the Families of Tressam and
Lane. His Relation called him to Court, but his Age forbid him the pleasures,
and his own Reservedness the freedom of that place* before which he preferred
the pious, peaceable, and hospitable way of the Country, where Popularity
affected him, more then he affected it; No man being more beloved by the
vulgar, no man less in love with them: It being his Observation (...)there then
his Countryman Sir Edward Mou(...)gue's saying, That if you do the common
sort of people nineteen courtesies together, yet you may lose th(...) love, if
you go but over the style before them.

His Cousin Sir William was brought by his Sister to Court, and advanced by his
Brother to Honor; being for his Majesty's sake as well as his own, made Lord
Far of Kendal, Earl of Essex, by King Henry the Eighth, and Marquess of
Northampton by King Edward: Queen Mary deprived him of his Estate and Honor
for siding with the Lady Jane, and Queen Elizabeth restored him to both, for
favoring the Protestant Religion.

His Delight was Music and Poetry, and his Exercise War; being a happy
composure of the hardest and softest Discipline, equally made for Court and
Camp, for Delight or Horror: But his skill in the Field answered not his
industry, nor his success his skill: Yet King Edward called him, His Honest
Uncle; and King Henry, His Integrity. The whole Family was made by a Marriage,
but died Issueless.

The common Rule of Favorites is, to bring in all their Relations about them,
to adorn and support them: but this Marquess would say, A wall that has a firm
Bottom, had need of no Buttress; and that which wants it, is often rather
thrust down then upheld by it. The Antiquaries crouch, as though they upheld
the Church, when they are upheld by it: Clients are more a burden then a
strength: and when the chief Favorite dares not displease his Sovereign
because he is so near him, they dare, because he is between them and Majesty.
His Followers were not gaudy, to render him suspicious; nor discontented, to
breed ill blood, and a misunderstanding; nor too open, to discover him: but
deserving, to honor him; and hopeful, to be advanced by him. Active men were
recommended by him to King Henry's busy Occasions, and Virtuous to King
Edward's pious Inclinations.

In his last years he found that there was little love in the World, and least
of all among Equals; and that that which was, is between Superior and
Inferior, whose fortune may comprehend the one the other. To ease his mind
therefore, to satisfy his Judgment, to observe his oversight, he adopted Sir
William Cholmley, bringing him first to his House, and then to his Heart, to
show him that impartially, which he could not discern in himself. There is no
such Flatterer as a man's self; and there is no such Remedy against Flattery of
a man's self as the liberty of a Friend: Counsel is of two sorts; (to go on in
my Authors words) the one concerning manners, the other concerning business:
for the first, the best preservative to keep the mind in health, is the
faithful admonition of a Friend: The calling of a man's self to a stri(...)
account, is a medicine sometime too piercing and corr(...)ding; reading good
Books of Morality is a little flat and Lord Bacon's Essays.
dead; observing our faults in others is sometimes improper for our case: but
the best receipt (best I say; (...) work, and best to take) is the Admonition
of a Friend.

So much solid Worth he had, that he had no use of Ambition; so much Modesty,
that he made little use of his Worth: Mean thoughts he entertained of himself,
and as mean thoughts did he by his down-cast though grave look, his sparing
though pertinent discourse, and his submissive though regardful carriage,
suggest of himself. But (...) well-manag'd boldness is the Virtue of Monarchick
Courts, and a discreet submission that of a Republican; no advantageous
admission into the one, without the first, nor safety in the other, without the
second: Here, if you are bold, you must look for an Ostracism: there, if you
are modest, for Neglect: Yet a sober and moderate man may be in fashion once in
an Age. The Soldier and the Gentleman are the Warlike Princes Darlings;
Churchmen, the Religious; Physicians, the Sickly and Old; Scholars, the
Learned; Exchequerers, the Poor, Covetous, or Prodigal; Lawyers, the Just; and
They of a Healing, Soft and Pliable Temper, (King James his character and
commendation of my Lord Bacon) the Settling and the Peaceable, such as Edward
the VI, in whose Reign he was advanced, and Queen Elizabeth, in whose Reign he
was restored.

It was in pursuance of King Henry's Statute, that he closed with King Edward's
Will: For this Clause he produced for himself:

Provided, That if the Lady Mary do not keep nor perform such Conditions, which
shall be limited and appointed, as aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth,
for lack of Heirs of the Kings Body, and the said Lord Prince, lawfully
begotten, the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premises, shall be, come and
remain to such Person and Persons, and of such Estate and Estates as the Kings
Highness by his Letters Patents sealed under His Great Seal, or by His last
Will in Writing, signed with His Hand, shall limit and appoint.

Isocrates was a man of an excellent Wit, but finding himself destitute of
countenance, gesture and confidence, he never durst speak in public,
contenting himself to teach, even to his decrepit days; and commonly saying, He
taught Rhetorique for a thousand Ryals, but would give more then ten thousand
to him that would teach him confidence: This Marquess brought up many a
Courtier, yet had not the face to be One himself, until Queen Elizabeth, who
balanced her Council in point of Religion in the beginning of her Reign, as she
did her Court in point of Interest throughout, threatened him to the
Council Board first, and then to her Cabinet; where none more secret, to keep
counsel; none more faithful, to give it; and more modest, to submit. A sincere,
plain, direct man; not cra^ty nor involved.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Cheek.
SIr John Cheek, born over against the Market. Cross in Cambridge, became
Tutor to King Edward the Sixth, and Secretary of State: Not so meanly descended
as Sir John Heyward pretends, (who writes him, The Son of his own Deserts)
being a Branch of the Cheeks of Moston in the I(...) of Wight, (where their
Estate was three hundred pound a year, three hundred years ago, and no more
within this thirty years:) happy in his Father, Mr. Peter Cheek, whose first
tuition seasoned him; happier in his good A Duffeild.
Mother, (that grave Matron) whose good Recommending to him the care of three
thrings: 1. His God. 2. His Soul. 3. His Company.

counsel and Christian charge when he was going to Court, settled him; and
happiest of all in the place of his birth, where he fell from his Mothers Womb
to the Muses Lap, and learned as soon as he lived, being a Scholar sooner then
he was a man. A German had the care of his younger studies, and a Frenchman of
his carriage; his parts being too large to be confined to the narrowness of
English Rules, and too sprightly to attend the tediousness, and creep by the
compass of an English method. The same day was he and Mr. Ascham admitted to
St. John's, and the same week to Court, the one to the T^ition of Edward the
Sixth, the other of Queen Elizabeth: there they Both happy in their Master
Doctor Metcalf, who though he could not (as The^istocles said) fiddle, yet he
could make a little College a great one, and breed Scholars, though he was
none: His advice deterred them from the rough Learning of the Modern Schoolmen,
and their own Genius led them to the more polite studies of the ancient Orators
and Historians; wherein they profited so well, that the one was the copious
Orator, the other the Greek Professor of that University.

A contest began now, between the Introducers Full. Hist. Cambr. p. 119
of the New, and the Defenders of the Old Pronunciation of the Greek: the
former endeavored to give each Letter, Vowel and Dip^thong its full sound:
whilst Doctor Caius and others of the Old stamp, cried out against this
Project, and the Promoters of it; taxing It for novelty, and Them for want of
experience, and affirming Greek it self to be barbarous, so clownishly uttered;
and that neither France, Germany nor Italy owned any such Pronunciation. John
Cheek and Thomas Smith maintained that this was no Innovation, but the ancient
utterance of Greek, most clear, and most full. Chancellor Gardener then
interposed against the Pronunciation, and the Authors of it: But custom has
since prevailed for the use of the one, and the due commendation of the other.

Sir John Cheeke's Authors were Isocrates and Thucydides; his Auditors the
youngest that came thither, for Language; and the oldest that heard him, for
his Discourse and Policy: The one preferred him to the ample Provo(...)ship of
Kings, the other to the great Trust of Secretary of State: Prince Edward
studied not his Book more sedulouslously, then he studied him, that his Rules
might comply with his Inclination, and his Lectures with his temper: Lectures,
that were rather Discourses instilled to him Majestically, as a Prince; then
Lessons beaten into him pedantiquely, as a Schoolboy. The wise man would not
be debasing his Royal Pupils mind with the nauseated and low crumbs of a
Pedant, but ennobling it with the free and high Maxims of a Statesman;
sugaring the more austere parts of Learning with the pleasures of Poetry,
Discourse, Apologues; and so deceiving the Royal Youth to an improvement before
his own years, and others comprehension. His very Recreations were useful, and
his Series of lighter exercises (for he observed a method in them too) a
constant study; his Table, his School; his Meat, his Discipline: the
industrious Tutour filling up each space of his time with its suitable
instruction; it being his Maxim, That time and Observation were the best
Masters, and Exercise the best Tutor. While others doated over their Rules, his
Pupils practiced them; no day passing without his Letters to the King, as that,
Literae meae unum semper babet Argumentum Vid. Full. Eccl. Hist. Edw. 6.
(Rex Nobilissime and Pater Illustrissime) hoc est, in omnibus Epistolis ago
tibi gratias, etc. or to the Queen, as that, Quod non ad se jamdiu scriberem in
causa fuit non negligentia, sed studium; non enim hoc feci ut nunquam omnino
scriberem, sed accuratius scriberem, etc. I have two Tutors, (said King Edward
to Cardan) Diligence and Moderation, Sir Jo. Cheek and Doctor Coxe. So exact
an account he gave Prince Edward of his Fathers Kingdom, and its Interest,
that King Henry designed him for Secretary, and King Edward made him one.

Three years he had that place; and in that three years did England more
service, so great his Parts, Learning and Religion! more kindness, such his
eminency in both! and gave the people more satisfaction, such his Integrity and
Dexterity! then all that went before him, and most that came after him. He was
the first that brought in the use of a Diary, and his Pupil the next that
practiced it: His Aphorism it was, That a dark and imperfect reflection upon
Affairs floating in the memory, was like words dispersed and insignificant;
whereas a complete view of them in a Book, was like the same words pointed in a
period, and made significant.

Much did the Kingdom value him, but more the King: for being once desperately
sick, the King carefully enquired of him every day; at last his Physician told
him there was no hope for his life, being given over by him for a dead man: No,
said the King, he will not die at this time; for this morning I begged his life
from God in my Prayers, and obtained it. Which accordingly came to pass; and he
soon after, against all expectation, wonderfully recovered. This (says Doctor
Fuller) was attested by the old Earl of Huntington, (bred up in his childhood
with King Edward) to Sir Tho. Cheek, who anno 1654. was alive, and 80 years of
Age.

But though his Prayers saved his Tutors life, none could save his; who died
with the Protestant Religion in his heart and arms: and Sir John had died with
him, but that being outed of all his preserments, he outed himself from the
Kingdom: loving to all the English Exiles at Strasburgh, and well beloved all
over Germany; until trusting to the Stars too much, (would he had either not
gone so high, or gone a little higher for advice) and his friends too little,
he went to meet his dear Wife in Brabant; where neither my Lord Paget's
promise, nor Sir John Mason's pledges, nor Abbot Fecknam's intercession, could
excuse him from being unhorsed and carted, imprisoned and tortured, vexed with
all the arts of power, and perplexed, until his hard usage meeting with some
fair promises, brought him to a Recantation that broke his heart; and after
much melancholic sighing and silence, brought him to his Grave; The great
example of Parts and Ingenuity, of frailty and infirmity, of repentance and
piety. Forced he was to sit with Bonner in his Courts, but forced he would not
be to join with him in his Judgment: look on he did, but weep and groan too.

A good Christian he was, witness his pious Epistles; an excellent Statesman,
as appears by his True Subject to the Rebel; a Book as seasonably republished
(by Doctor Langbaine of Queens College in Oxford) in the excellent King
Charles his troubles, as it was at first written in the good King Edward's
commotions.

Vespasian said of Apollonius, That his gate was open to all Philosophers, but
his Heart to Him: And Sir John Cheek would say to Father Latimer, I have an
Ear for other Divines, but I have an Heart for You.

A Countryman in Spain coming to an Image enshrined, the extruction and first
making whereof he could well remember, and not finding from the same that
respectful usage which he expected, You need not (quoth he) be so proud; for we
have kn^wn you from a Plum-tree. Sir John Cheek one day discoursing of the
Popes Threats, said, He need not be so high; for we have known him a Chaplain.
He took much delight in that saying of Herod the Sophist, when he was pained
with the Gout in his hands and feet: When I would eat, (said he) I have no
hands; when I would go, I have no feet: but when I must be pained, I have both
hands and feet. Applying it thus: When we would serve God, we have no soul;
when we would serve our Neighbors, we have no body: but when we suffer for
neglecting both, we shall find we have both a body and a soul.

Gustavus Adolphus some three days before his death, said, Our affairs answer
our desires: but I doubt God will punish me for the folly of my people, who
attribute too much to me, and esteem me as it were their God; and therefore he
will make them shortly know and see I am but a man: I submit to his will, and I
know he will not leave this great Enterprise of mine imperfect. Three things
Sir John Cheek observed of Edward the sixth: 1. That the peoples esteem of him
would loose him. 2. That his Reformation should be overthrown. 3. That yet it
should recover, and be finished.

As to Public Counsels: 1. Sir John was against the War with Scotland, which
he said was rather to be united to England, then separated from it. 2. He was
against King Edwards Will, saying, He would never distrust God so far in the
preservation of his true Religion, as to disinherit Orphans, to keep up
Protestantism. 3. He laid a Platform of a War with Spain. 4. He kept Neuter in
the Court-factions. 5. Bishop Ridley, Doctor Coxe, seconded; and Sir John
Cheek contrived all King Edward's Acts of Charity.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wentworth.
SIr Tho. Wentworth of Nettlested in Suffolk, so a younger Family, (confessed
by the Crescent in his Coat) descended from the Wentworths of
Wentworth-wood-house in Yorkshire, and was created Baron Wentworth by King
Henry 8. He was a stout and valiant Gentleman, a cordial Protestant, and his
Family a Sanctuary of such Professors; John Bale comparing him to the good
Centurion in the Gospel, and gratefully acknowledging him the cause of his
conversion from a Carmelite. The memory of this good Lord is much (but
unjustly) blemished, because Calis was lost the last of Queen Mary under his
Government: The manner was huddled up in our Chronicles, (least is best of bad
business) whereof this is the effect: The English being secure by reason of the
last Conquest at St. Quintin, and the Duke of Guise having notice thereof, he
sat down before the Town at the time (not when Kings go forth to, but return
from battle) of mid-winter, even upon New-years-day. Next day he took the two
Forts of Risebank and Newman-bridge, (wherein the strength of the City
consisted) but whether they were undermined or undermoneyed, it is not decided,
and the last left most suspicious. Within three days the Castle of Calis, which
commanded the City, and was under the command of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, was
taken, the French wading through the Ditches, (made shallower by their
artificial cut) and then entering the Town, were repulsed back by Sir Anthony
Ager Marshal of Calis, the only man, says Stow, who was killed in the fight,
(understand him, of note) others, for the credit of the business, accounting
fourscore lost in that service. The French re-entring the City the next day,
being Twelfth-day, the Lord Wentworth Deputy thereof made but vain resistance,
which (alas) was like the wrigling of a Worms tail after the head thereof is
cut off; so that he was forced to take what terms he could get, viz. That the
Townsmen should depart (though plundered to a Groat) with their lives, and
himself with 49 more, such as the Duke of Guise should choose, should remain
prisoners to be put to ransom.

This was the best news brought to Paris, and worst to London for many years
before: It not only abated the Queens cheer the remnant of Christmas, but her
mirth all the days of her life. Yet might she thank her self for loosing this
Key of France, because she hung it by her side with so slender a string, there
being but five hundred Soldiers effectually in the Garrison; too few to manage
such a piece of importance. The Lord Wentworth the second of June following,
was solemnly condemned for Treason, though unheard, as absent in France: which
was not only against Christian charity, but Roman justice; Festus confessing
it was not fashionable amongst them to deliver any man to die, before he which
is accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him. It was well for this Lord that
he was detained in France till his ransom was paid, and Queen Mary dead, who
otherwise probably had lost his life, if he had had his liberty. But Queen
Elizabeth coming to the Crown, he found the favor, or rather had the justice
to be tried again, and was acquitted by his Peers; finding it no treachery,
cowardice or carelessness in him, but in Sir John Harlston and Sir Ralph
Chamberlain, the one Governor of Risebank, the other of Calis-Castle: for
which they were both condemned to die, though their judgment was remitted.
This Lord was the only person I have read of, who thus in a manner played
Rubbers when his head lay at stake; and having lost the fore, recovered the
after-game. He died a very aged man, 1594. Thus far Mr. Fuller.

Two ways a Courtier advances himself: the first, that more leisurely, slow,
though sure, of watching Offices, Preferments and Dignities that may by steps
bring them to the Kings presence: The second, that more quick and short, but
most practiced, of following the Court for such extraordinary Commissions and
particular services to the Empire, as may (without the danger of delays that
must be fatal amidst so many Competitors) recommend him to his favor. It was
below Sir Thomas his Estate to stoop to that first method; it suited more with
his activity to embrace the second. Two usually-inconsistent qualities he had,
The closeness of an Agent, and The Valor of a Soldier. To Rome he was sent in
disguise, and to Treport with an Army: so graceful his carriage, so insinuating
his affability, so clear and well-weighed his discourse, so searching and
comprehensive his judgment; so gravely Aerie, so Majestically pleasant his
countenance, so becoming his gate and apparel, so watchful his Negotiations, so
winning his Addresses, so discreetly smart his Reparties, (darting a sudden
luster and vigor to the darkness and heaviness of his graver Discourses,
neither common nor unsavory; neither affected nor far-fetched, neither abusive
of others, nor mis-becoming himself) so discreet and well-managed his
complaisance, (with reference to circumstances, person, place, time, matter and
cause) that he had Cardinal Senhault's Secretary, to bring him to the Popes
Closet; the Emperors Agent Randolphus, to introduce him to Court; that he won
Friar paul, to show him the mysteries of the Church; Engineer Palvino, to
represent the Popes Cities, Towns, Fortifications, Havens, Harbors,
Antiquities, Seminaries, Exercises, Ships, Treasure, Armories, Arsenals,
Maga^ines, (having always by him a Card of the Territories) and the Popes
Bedchamber-man, to show him all the Papers and Transactions that concerned
Henry the eighth. So well experienced his Conduct, so well disciplined his
Army, so watchful and industrious his Nature, so good his pay, (though he
pawned, as once in Normandy, his own Estate to satisfy his Soldiers) so noble
his rewards of valor and service, (it being his rule, That every man should
enjoy as much as he could conquer) so prevalent his example, that he did more
with 2000 men in three months, then the Duke of Suffolk had done with 8000 in
three years. The Duncery and idleness of the Monks in his time, (as he writes
himself) made Erasmus a Student: the sloth and carelessness of Commanders in Sir
Thomas his time, made him a Soldier.

Edward the third of England having sent to France to demand the Crown by
Maternal Right, the Council there sent him word, That the Crow of France was
not tied to a Distaff. To which he replied, That then be would tie it to his
Sword. Sir Thomas Wentworth demanding Normandy in right of the Dukes thereof,
Kings of England, was told, That Dukedomes were never given away in France by
the Wills of the Dead: Nay then, replied he, we will have them against the
Wills of the Living.

It Is written of our Henry the fifth, that he had something of Caesar in him,
which Alexander the Great had not, That he would not be Drunk; and something of
Alexander the Great, which Caes(...) had not, That he would not be Flattered:
Sir Th(...) was had both their Virtues, none of their Vices; Non tam extra
Vitia, quam cum summis Virtutibu(...) Though he could not avoid misfortune, and
p(...)sper; yet he could yield to it, and retire: (that (...) perienced File
that could not withstand the enemi(...) shot, could fall down and escape it.)
Privacy at once secured and supported this unfortunate Gentleman. It is much to
know how to lead and bring on successfully; it is more to retreat, and come off
handsomely, and give over a bad game.

Since he heard ill, I hear no more of him but this: One being designed an
Agent, waited upon this knowing and experienced Lord for some Directions for
his conduct and carriage; he delivers himself (says my Author) thus: To
secure your self, T. F. p. 9.
and serve your Country, you must at all times, and upon all occasions, speak
truth: for (as he added) you will never be believed; and by this means your
truth will secure your self if you be questioned, and put those you deal with
(who will still hunt counter) to a loss in all their disquisitions and
undertakings.

Observations on the Life of Sir Clement Paston.
SIr Clement Paston was a Soldier, and a Soldiers Son; Valor running in the
Blood for three Generations, and maturated by Noble and Heroic Actions for
Glory and Success. Designed he was by his Friends for the Gown, but by his own
Nature for Armor: Born for Action rather then Contemplation. When his Father
asked him what he would desire of him, he desired a Horse and a Sword. He was
tried in the King of France his service in Henry the Seventh's time, for his
overthrow in Henry the Eighths. He was the first that made the English Navy
terrible, and the last that made our Army so: He took the Admiral of France,
and saved him of England: 30000 Crowns he received by way of Ransom from the
first, and 1000 l. by way of Gratitude from the other: A Cup he would show that
the first gave him every Holy Day, and a Ring of the seconds every Christmas.

Two Kings made use of his Person, and two Queens of his counsel, which he gave
even on his Deathbed. His advice was short, but resolute; his words few, but
pertinent; his discourse commanding, and Souldier-like: his word, the Decr(...)
of the Medes. King Henry the Eighth called him His Champion; the Protector, in
Edward the Sixth time, His Soldier; Queen Mary, Her Seaman^ and Queen
Elizabeth, Her Father. When W(...) was overthrown, he would deliver himself up
to Gentleman, and therefore only to Sir Clement P(...) ston.

The two great Interests of Soldiers is Pay and Honor: He mortgaged his
Estate twice, to satisfy them for the one; and pawned his Credit (...) Court
often, to encourage them for the other getting his Commanders always power and
authority enough to do their Masters business, but never enough to do their own.

There being always a contest between the Po(...) lacy and the Soldiers, (whom
nothing reco(...) ciles but downright force and necessity) it Wa^ death to his
Followers to be irregular, because one of their miscarriages exasperates a
million, and d(...) stastes a Kingdom; so necessary is a strict Discip(...) in
the Camp, and an impartial Justice in the Country.

Outward occasions help fortune, a man's own temper makes it, when there be, as
my Lord Ba(...) writes, no stops or restiveness in a man's mind, but that the
wheels of that keeps even with those of fortune. Sir Clement and Cato Major
were both of (...) make, both having tantum robur corporis and any(...) ut
quocunque loco nati esset fortunam sibi facturi videbantur.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Rich.
HE must needs be preferred, who was so richly descended and nobly allied, as
to show at Court upon his first appearance sixty Noblemen and Knights of his
Relation, and a hundred and fifty thousand pound a year revenue among his
Friends. He was more beholding to the Temple for his Law, then to the
Universities for his Learning. His severe and active Nature aspiring above the
pedantiqueness of a Scholar, to the usefulness of a Statesman: I could never
endure (says he) those studies that furnish me only with unactive thoughts
and useless discourse, that teach me only to think and speak.

His staid and solid parts commended him to Cromwell, and Cromwell recommended
him to King Henry the Eighth: He was Solicitor-General to His Majesty, and
Steward to his Master: Cromwell was the Mawl and Rich the Hammer of Abbeys: He
laid open to the Monks their faults, and his Master made use of it to force
them to a surrendry: For as he said, when those religious Societies saw they
had faults enough discovered to take away their Lands, they had wit enough to
give them up. His Counsels overthrew Popery, and his Deposition cut off Sir
Thomas More: for being sent to Sir Thomas, after much discourse with him, he
asked him this subtle Question, Whether be would acknowledge the King supreme
Head if it were enjoined by an Act of Parliament? Sir Thomas asked him (...)
again, If the Parliament enacted that God should (...) be Lord, whether he
should consent to it? And those words undid him. He saw that the Protestant
Religion was the interest of England, as well as the Doctrine of Scripture; and
therefore he carried it on in point of policy, as Archbishop Cranmer di^ in
point of conscience. King Henry the eighth admired his distinct reasoning, and
stayed judgment and Queen Anne Bullen was taken with his grace(...) cloquence,
and ingenious discourses: In the morning his plyant soul, that could answer all
the turnings and windings of business, was as reserved and solid as that of a
demure Statesman; in the evening, as cheerful and merry as that of a
Debona(...) Courtier. He was the wisdom of the Court in the Presence, and its
wit in the Closet; its Oracle there, and its pleasure here.

King Henry the eighth made him one of his L^gators, and King Edward the sixth
one of his Council: Under him he carried on the Protestant Religion in point of
conscience, which others managed in point of interest. He designed the degrees
of the Reformation, and he set out its method, then whom none more zealous in
things necessary, none more moderate in things indifferent. Active he was, but
wary; stirring, but cautious. To him the Reformers resorted in point of Law, as
to Cranmer and Ridley in point of Religion. Such his Prudence, that the
Protector made him his Friend; such his Integrity, that the King made him
Chancellor: where his Decrees were just, his Dispatches quick, his Judgments
speedy, his Sums of Debates full and satisfactory, his Sentences irreversible;
his Assistants in the Rolls, and other Courts, able and honest. None more
complyant to Reason, none more stiff in things against Reason: He would do any
thing for King Edward the sixth's interest, nothing for Duke Dudley's ambition;
therefore he observing the course of Affairs, would rather resign his Place,
then his Integrity: when he could not with a safe conscience keep it, he with a
contented mind parted with it; being honored with the Barony of Leez, and
enriched with the Western Abbeys; it being the Prudence of that time to
interest the Nobility in the Papal Revenues, that so they might be engaged
against the Authority.

R. Rich Lord Chancellor, (says my Author) then living in Great St.
Bartholomews, though outwardly concurring with the rest, began now secretly to
favor the Duke of Somerset, and sent him a Letter, therein acquainting him
with all passages at the Council Board, subscribing the same (either out of
haste or familiarity) with no other Direction save To the Duke; enjoining his
servant, a new Attendant, as newly entered into his Family, safely to deliver
it. The man made more haste then good speed; and his Lord wondering at his quick
return, demanded of him where the Duke was when he delivered him the Letter: In
the Charter House, (said the servant) on the same token that he read it at the
Window, and smiled thereat. But the Lord Rich smiled not at the Relation, as
sadly sensible of the mistake, and delivery of the Letter to the Duke of
Norfolk, no great friend of his, and an utter enemy to the Duke of Somerset.

Wonder not if this Lord rose early up the next morning, who may be presumed
not to have slept all night: He hieth to the Court; and having gotten
admittance into the Bedchamber before the This story is related from the mouth
of his Grandchild the Earl of Warwick that last was.
King was up, fell down on his knees, and desired that his Old Age might be
eased of this burden* some Office; pleading that there ought to be some
preparatory intervals in Statesmen between their temporal business and their
death: in order to which, he desired to retire to Essex, there to attend his
own Devotions. Nor would he rise from the ground till the King had granted his
Request. And thus he saved himself from being stripped by others, by first
pulling off his own clothes, who otherwise had lost his Chancellours place for
revealing the secrets of the Council Board.

There are few places so impregnable, but Nature has left in them some place
or other by which they may be taken: none being armed at all points so well,
but there is some way left whereby he may be surprised. He is the strongest
that has fewest accesses. He was a wise man that said, Delay has undone many
for the other world, Haste has undone more for this, Time well managed saves
all in both.

But there is a Wheel in things, which undoeth all those that have not a Wheel
that answers it in their Souls; I mean a great capacity to comply and close
with those grand Vicissitudes that with small and unobserved circumstances turn
round the World, which this great Man was Master of, who had his eye upon the
turns, flexures and points of things and business, and his state and interest
ready to correspond: He knew when to proceed, when to make a stand, and when to
retire. It Is said of Grandees, That they are the first that find their own
Griefs, and the last that find their faults: Our Lord was quick in both, and
has taught us this, That certainly men of great fortunes are strangers to
themselves; and while they are in the puzzle of business have no time to tend
the welfare either of Body or Soul; and that they must withdraw from this
world, before they retire into another: For, Illi mors gravis incubat, qui
notus nimis omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi.

There are no more Remarques of this Noble Personage, than that he was the
Father of this Apophthegme, Well done, if warily; and Great Grandfather to the
present Earl of Warwick.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Mason.
HE had his Birth at Abingdon, and his Education at Oxford: His Birth commended
him to All Souls, and his Breeding to the Court: His Study was like his
Inclination, rather active then contemplative, his present thoughts foreseeing
and providing for his future Employments. But Industry and Parts may prepare a
man, it is opportunity and occasion that must advance him; and never had a man
fairer opportunity, never made a man better use of it.

None but Mr. Mason would the University pitch upon, to complement Henry the
Eighth; none but Mr. Mason could please him, although he was as great a Scholar
as he was a King, and as much an Humorist as both: as he was inclined, so he
studied; as he studied, so he writ; not with a Pedants impertinence, but a
Statesmans prudence: so elegant was his Latin, that a Critic would have
advanced him Professor; so various his Learning, that Cranmer would have
preferred him Prebend; and yet so grave and wise the matter and composure of
his speech, that the King designed him a Statesman.

When King Henry the Eighth came to Oxford, Sir John is deputed to congratulate
his coming: who considering that a man cannot every day speak to Kings,
contrived (says my Author) the matter of his speech most manlike, politic and
pertinent, the phrase of it polite and majestic; so that what with his comely
presence, his becoming carriage, his flowing expression, his graceful
elocution, he gained that applause from the Court and University, that the one
was as eager to have him, as the other was loath to part with him: the
University was proud of him, but King Henry commanded him, and disposes of him
in foreign parts, to add practi(...) experience to his speculative studies:
It was the excellent way of that time, to pick out the choice youths of both
Universities, and maintain then some years abroad, to make such Observations as
might render them serviceable at home.

Dwelt with Books he had long enough, now he must converse with men, and open
his recluse and retired soul, to a practicable and social temper, by
debonairness and freedom, too long mewed up with study and melancholy: Think
and speak he could very well already, now he must learn to act and live: Books
furnished, Travel must enlarge and settle his soul.

Four things made a Statesman in those days:

1. The University and good Letters. 2. The City and Converse. 3. The Court and
Freedom of spirit. 4. Travel and Observation.
It was the politic Discipline of those days to select (says mine Author) the
pregnancies of either University, and breed them in foreign parts for public
Employments. Agreeable whereunto, Mr. Mason is sent beyond sea with
Instructions to guide him, and a Pension to support him: With Order,

1. To keep exact correspondence with the Secretary at home.

2. To entertain 1. the most eminent Scholar, who might represent the Church:
2. the ripest Undersecretary, who might decipher to him the ^tate: 3. the
ablest Soldier and Seaman, that might open to him the Interest of both Nations.

3. To take an exact account of the Havens, Forts, Cities, Avenues, Passages,
Ways, Treasure and Interest of the place he lives in.

4. To follow the respective Ambassadors Directions in every Court.

5. To appear in each place upon any solemnity, Civil or Military, suitable to
the occasion, all charges to be defrayed from the English Exchequer.

His Pension was two hundred and twenty pounds a year; his Circuit wa^ France,
the Netherlands and Italy; his Commission was to engage any knowing person of
those respective Courts that could transcribe their Edicts or Orders, give
exact Intelligence, make any Interest, or had any influence upon their
respective Governments: His Rules were,

1. To correspond with his Majesty's Agents.

2. To have few and choice Acquaintance.

3. To make Collections of, and Observations upon the Histories, the Laws,
Customs, and the most considerable Statesmen, Governors, and Great men, with
their Relations and Dependencies in those Courts.

4. To give a monthly account of such Remarques as occurred, at large to the
Secretary, and in brief to the King and Cardinal.

His first undertaking was in France, where his Gravity was too severe, beyond
the dalliances of that place. His next was to Italy, where he showed as great a
reach in countermining, as the inhabitants of that place do in managing their
plot: None designs (says the Character) further off then the Italian: None
sees (said Sir Tho. Audley) further off then Sir John Mason. His last voyage
was to Spain, where he out -engraved the Don Himself, and then returned with the
Italians quickness, the Spaniards staidness, the Frenchmans Air, the Germans
Resolution, and the Dutchmans Industry: Qualities that demonstrated he
understood other Countries, and could serve his own.

There this pregnant Gentleman being at some distance, could look more inwardly
into the Constitution, Situation, Interest, State and Complexion of his own
Country; and being near, could discern those of other parts with the mutual
aspect of England upon them, and theirs upon it. They that lived in those times
say that none understood the affairs of England and France, together with their
mutual advantages or disadvantages, better than Sir John Mason.

He that had seen the mysteries of four Courts, might be trusted with those of
one, as he was in King Henry the Eighth's time, in the capacity of a Privy
Counselor; and in Edward the Sixth's, in the Trust of chief Secretary. At the
Board, none clearer in his Proposals; in his Office, none quicker for Dispatch:
Let me hear Sir John Mason, said the King; Let us to Sir John Mason, said the
Subjects: so much the reputation of his prudent integrity with the one, and of
his familiar access with the other!

Four things he said kept him in, under all the Revolutions, during the four
Princes Reigns whom he served:

1. That he thought few Things would save a man. 2. That he was always intimate
with the exactest Lawyer, and ablest Favorite. 3. That he spoke little, and
writ less. 4. That he had attained to something which each party esteemed
serviceable to them, and was so moderate, that all thought him their own.
When a complete man, he was called home, to be first Clerk of the Council, a
place of great Trust; secondly, Secretary of State, a place of great
Employment; thirdly, Master of the Requests, an Office of great Dispatch and
Business; and fourthly, Treasurer of the Household, an Employment of constant
care.

No Age wanted an able man more, no Age had one more willing to secure the
Universities, than that which chose him to be Chancellor of Oxford, at the
same time that his Prince made him Treasurer of the Household. Sacrilege it
self then gaping after the University-Lands, durst not tempt so honest a Man,
nor persuade so great a Scholar, nor fright so resolute a Statesman to betray
or yield up those ancient Encouragements of Learning and Virtue. Loath was
Oxford to part with him when a Scholar, glad to entertain him a Statesman, with
a power to protect her, well tempered with Obligations to love her; he who is
now the Father being lately the Son; maintained by a part of it, as he now
maintained the whole. That was a scrambling time, when it was catch who catch
can. I find not any particular favor conferred, or benefaction bestowed by
him in person on the University; but this great good he did, That his Greatness
kept others from doing any harm. Many hungry Courtiers had hopes to catch Fish,
(and Fish it would be, whatever came into their Nets) on this turning of the
tide, and alteration of Religion: How easy was it for covetousness in those
times to quarrel the Colledge-Lands into superstition! Sacrilege stood ready
to knock at their Gates; and alas! 'twas past their Porter's power to forbid it
entrance, had not Sir John Mason vigorously opposed it, and assisted the
University on all occasions.

He inciteth them to the study of the Tongues; because sensum alicujus rei non
potest ille assequi qui rudis est Idiomatis quo traditur: and directed the
reading of Aristotle, Agricola, Melanc^bon, etc. instead of Scotus, Burleus,
Bricot: calling for all their Charters, Donations, Satutes, Popes Bulls, with
an exact Rental of their Lands, and Inventory of their Goods, which were
restored entire and safe.

The University, that could not enjoy his presence, craves his protection; and
foreseeing in the fall of Abbeys, their danger, especially when Foundations
erected for superstition were given by statute to the King, chose Sir John
Mason their Chancellor, who was at once a Favorite of Power and of Learning;
the greatest Lay-Statesman that was a Scholar, and the greatest Scholar that
was a Lay-States-man: He was not contented to secure, but he must improve
Oxford, gaining it New Privileges, when it feared the loss of its old ones.

A grave and reserved man he was, who understood the Intrigues and Motions of
those dark and uncertain times, and his nimble and present Prudence could
accommodate them. His Maxim was, Do, and say nothing: Commending the active
and close man, whose performances were as private, coherent, continued and
sudden as his counsels; who would not spend that time in advising, that would
serve for executing: Many were his pensions to Scholars at home, more to Agents
abroad that assisted either his studies or employments, whom he designed an
honor to his middle, and a support to his old age. He had a peculiar way of
satisfying suitors by plain dealing and dispatch: he would divide all suits
either into matter of Equity, or a suit of Controversy; or into matter of
Desert, or a suit of Petition: In the first he had his Referrendaries, to see
the matter compounded between both Parties, rather then carried by either: In
the second, he preferred all suitably to their Abilities. No man understood
better the nature of Court-places than he, and none saw further into
Court-Persons.

Two things, he said, always promoted a matter:

1. Secrecy: (Boasting, which is the way of some Courtiers, though it
discourageth some Competitors, yet it awakeneth Others.) 2. Timing of it, with
an Eye to those about us.
He would advise a Man to begin with a little and mean suit: For though (as my
Lord Bacon observes) iniquum petas and aquum feras, is a good Rule, where a man
has strength of favor; yet otherwise a man had better rise in his suit: For
he that would have ventured at first to have lost his Suitor, will not in the
conclusion lose both the Suitor and his own former Favor.

It Is from him, while he lived, that we learned Celerity is the best Secrecy;
Prudence and Resolution is the only Fortune; Converse is the great Education;
Boldness a man's surest Success; Good Nature is the eminent Nobility; and a
well-weighed Honesty the only Favorite.

It Is by him, when he died, we are taught that Moderation out-lasts Violence,
Modesty Ambition, a Public Spirit a Private One: That to act alone may be as
Profitable as Honorable, but to join with others, most safe: That to study the
nature of a Prince, may for the present advance; but to understand the Interest
of his Kingdom, is always secure: The one way being as uncertain as the frail
Person it depends upon, the other as sure as the lasting State it serves.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Stamford.
SIr William Stamford was of Straffordian extraction; Robert his Grandfather
living at Rowley in that County: but William his Father was a Merchant in
London, and purchased Lands at Hadley in Middlesex, where Sir William was born
August 22. 1509. He was bred to the study of our Municipal Laws; attaining so
much eminence therein, that he was preferred one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas. His most learned Book of The Pleas of the Crown, has made him for ever
famous amongst men of his own Profession. There is a spirit of retraction of
one to his Native County, which made him purchase Lands, and his son settle
himself in Straffordshire. This worthy Judge died Aug. 28. and was buried at
Hadley in this Shire, in the last year of the reign of Queen Mary, 1558.

King James had a Judge that would give no money, and King Henry had one that
would take none. There have been those Lawyers that turned the point of Law
upon the Law it self; that wounded the Eagle with a feather from his own Wing,
and stabbed the person of Princes with their Authority; that dethroned Kings
with a moot-point, and overthrowed a Government at a Reading. This Judge
understood, that as the Law is the security of the people, so Prerogative is
the strength of the Law; and that that is the best temper of Government where
Kings have so much power to do evil, that they may be able to do good.

Miserable experience has taught us, that since power has been wrested from
Princes, that neither they nor their people can be safe, if both be not in such
a way as the Law has entrusted the public safety and welfare; which consists
in a full power belonging to the King, to secure Liberties, preserve Property,
and protect their People in the enjoyment of the fruits of their industry, and
the benefit of those Laws to which themselves have consented. He sets himself
good Rules, as well to create good presidents, as to follow them; reducing
things to their first institution, and observing wherein and how they have
degenerated: yet still taking counsel of both times; of the ancienter time,
what is best; and of the latter, what is fittest. He made his course regular,
that men might know what to expect; but not peremptory, that Knaves might not
know how to impose upon him: always expressing himself well, when he digressed
from his Rule. Preserve the right of his place he would, but not stir Questions
of Jurisdictions; rather assuming his right in silence, and de facto, then
voice it with claims and challenges. He directed in most Affairs, but was busy
in none: none readier to give, none readier to take helps and advices. His
speech was more discreet then eloquent; rather particularly suitable to the
present things and persons, then generally orderly and artificial. He could
speak quick and deep too, never using many circumstances, lest he were tedious;
ever some, lest he were blunt: so warily did he deliver what he knew, that he
was sometimes thought to know what he did not. He knew what might be said, so
good his fancy; and he knew what should be thought, so great his judgment:
commanding the discourse wherever he was, by that prudence that could bring
it on and off; and that variety that happily intermingled Arguments with Tales,
Reasons with Opinions, and earnest with jest. His Decrees were the Hedges of
Propriety, his Dispatches cool, his Cases rightly stated; his Reports savor of
Integrity and Prudence, of Books and Men. How discreetly would he moderate the
rigorous circumstances of Petty and Poenal Laws! how exactly observe the
design and drift of the more fundamental and reasonable! Here no Intrigues to
perplex, no Attendance to tire, no Hazards to discourage, no Checks or Delays
to vex, no surreptitious advantages to surprise; no defeats of hopes, or
falseness of friends to disappoint; no negligence of Agents, or interest of
Parties to betray; no Oratory or Sophism to varnish or hide a matter: all
things clear as Justice, and smooth as Integrity.

By diligence and moderation, with their gentle degrees and augmentations, and
his own watchful observance, he climbed to Excellency. A man is neither good,
nor rich, nor wise at once; it being a double work to be great: 1. To remove
Obstruction, and accommodate Adversaries: 2. To watch and assume the advantage.
What is longest in proving, is longest declining: the Rose that buds one day,
withers the next: The Oak that is an Age a growing, is five standing. He had
those lower Virtues that drew praise from the Vulgar, which he neglected,
(knowing that they were more taken with appearances then realities) he had
middle that they admired, and good men observed; he had his highest Virtues,
which they perceived, and great men honored: In a word, a fragrant fume he
had, that filled all round about, and would not easily away. Although he
despised the Flatterer praise, as base; and avoided the Cunnings, as dangerous;
yet he would say of a deserved Fame, That being nothing, or but air at best, it
does all: for it is sufficient to breed Opinion, and Opinion brings on substance.

He observed of himself, that he came very hardly to little Riches, and very
easily to great Riches: For when a man's Stock is come to that, as my Lord
Verulam observes, that he can expect the prime of the Markets, and overcome
those Bargains which for their greatness are few men's money, and be Partners in
the Industries of younger men, he cannot but mainly increase with those two
Advancers of Gain, 1. Diligence; and, 2. A good Name.

He has left these two Principles behind him for See Ep. ad Lect. Lees Plees
des Coron.
those of his own profession:

1. That that they should reduce every Statute to the Common Law and Custom
whereon it is grounded.

2. That they should as well look into the History of former times for the
Reasons and Circumstances of our Laws, as into their Law Books for the matter
of them.

Some Lawyers assert the Subjects Liberty, and retrench the Prerogative (as too
much power to be trusted for a mortal man) within the known Limits of Law, that
so Subjects may be at a certainty how to square their Loyalty and Obedience. He
always upheld that Prerogative, saying, That the discretion of the Scepter as
Guardian for the general good of the Commonwealth, must be trusted against all
Emergencies, with the management of its own might: concluding always thus;
Submission is our Duty, and Confidence our Prudence. Bishop Bancroft of Oxford
said in King Charles the first his time, E^^empore occubui quo mallem
Episcopatus rationem coram Deo dare, quam Episcopatum coram bominibus exercere.
Judge Stamford said in Q. Mary's time, In quae reservamur tempora! det Deus ut
Magistratus rationem coram eo reddam potius quam Magistratum coram hominibus
exerceam.

His Book contains two parts; One of The Pleas of the Crown, the other of The
Kings Prerogative. In him (says Mr. Fulbeck) there is force and weight, and no
common kind of style; in matter very few have gone beyond him, in method none
have overtaken him: in the order of his writing he is smooth, yet sharp;
pleasant, yet grave: and surely his method may be a Law to the Writers that
succeed him.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Jeffrey.
SIr John Ieffrey was born in Sussex, where he left behind him a fair Estate to
his Daughter. He so profited in the Study of our Municipal Law, that he was
preferred secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, and thence advanced by Queen
Elizabeth, in Michaelmas-Term, the nineteenth of her Reign, to be Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer: which place he discharged for the Term of two years, to
his great commendation. He le(...) one Daughter and Heir, married to Sir Edward
Montague, (since Baron of Boughton) by whom he had but one Daughter, Elizabeth,
married to Robert Barty Earl of Lindsey, Mother to the truly honorable
Montague Earl of Lindsey, and Lord great Chamberlain of England. This worthy
Judge died in the 21 of Queen Elizabeth.

This was he who was called the Plodding Student, whose industry perfected
Nature, and was perfected by experience. He read not to argue only; for that
is vanity: nor to believe and trust for that is easiness: nor to discourse; for
that is idle: but to weigh and consider; for that is prudence. He had his
Studies for pleasure and privacy, for ornament and converse, and for judgment
and business. To spend too much time on his Book, was sloth; to talk by Book,
was affected; and to act by it, was humoursome and Scholar-like

Four things he would say helped him.

1. His Inclination: (It Is a great happiness to a Eth. l. 10. c. 7.
man (says Aristotle) when his Calling is one of the (...), of those things
that agree with his nature)

2. Method.

3. Religion, with that just and composed mind that attends it.

4. A great happiness in all the four faculties that make a Lawyer: 1. A sharp
invention, and clear apprehension to search all the circumstances of a case
propounded. 2. Judgment to examine and weigh the particulars invented and
apprehended: for truth lies in things, as Gold in Mines. 3. Memory to retain
what is judged and examined. 4. A prompt and ready delivery of what is
conceived and retained, set out with ingenuity and gravity. Oration praesta non
audax. What he said, was close and pinching, and not confident and earnest;
allowing passion not to disturb either the method or delivery of his discourse,
but to quicken it. To speak well and much, he said, was not the work of one
man: yet if a Philosopher be eloquent, said Cicero, we must not despise him; if
he be not, he must not affect it, so that he can comprehend in words what he
conceives, and speak them plainly, that he may be understood. His Latin and
French were Grammatical, his Rhetoric Natural, his Logic Reason: The first,
opened the terms; the second, pressed the vigor; the last, collected and
disposed of the Axioms, Grounds and Rules of the Law, and all prepared him for
that comprehensive Profession; in the ashes whereof, the sparks of all other
Sciences were raked up.

His gesture and habit was grave, but not affected; speaking as much to the
eye, as his tongue did to the ear: (the gesture being a great discoverer of the
constitution, and a great direction to business: what a man misseth in the
speech, he may sometimes find in the looks) His temper was moderate and sober;
a Virtue, and a seasoning of all others, attended with the Lawyers gift, and
that is Patience. Modest he was, but not fondly bashful; his prudence, and not
his softness. His humility begat affableness; his affableness, society; that,
conference; conference, parts, and they acquaintance; and that, practice; and
practice, experience; experience, renown; and that, preferment.

Sir John's inclination was studious; his mind, constant, solid, and settled,
and able to dive into the whirl-pools of that intricate and perplexed Faculty;
his thoughts being orderly, and his conceptions methodical: his search
comprehensive, avoiding Epitomes, as the banes of Learning. Nullus illi per
otiam dies exit, partem noctium studiis vindicat non vacat semno, sed
succumbit, and oculos vigilia fatigatos cadenteque in opere detinet.

Considerable were the Parts he had, but more so the making up of those he had
not: his covering of his defects being of no less importance then the valuing
of good Parts, which he did three ways:

1. By caution, ingeniously and discreetly waving and putting off things
improper. 2. By color, making his Defects his Virtues, and his Faults his
Endowments. And 3. By that freedom of Spirit that daunts the weakest, and
prevails with the wisest.
He proposed to himself five things to enquire into, Vid. Waterhouse in
Fortesc. de laud. Leg. Angl.
in order to that compleatness he arrived unto:

1. The ancient Maxims and Principles, or the more ancient Customs that make
up the Common Law of England.

2. The Acts and Constitutions that make up its Statute Law.

3. The particular Privileges, Liberties, Immunities and Usages of Counties,
Buroughs, Cities, etc. that do swerve from this Law.

4. The ancient Grounds and Reasons (as far as History can direct) of all
these: our Law being an exact Reason.

5. The most satisfactory explanations of the Law: 1. From Commentaries, as
Bractons: 2. Abridgements, as Stathams: 3. History, as the years and terms of
the Common Law: And 4. From more particular Tracts, that handled their peculiar
subjects, as Fortescue, Glanvil, Britton, Fleta, Littleton, which he thought
not unprofitable to read, though dangerous to rely upon: (with the Lord Cook,
not liking those that stuff their minds with wandering and masterless reports:
For, as he said, they shall find them too soon to lead them to error:)
Beginning with the terms of Art; and then to the matter; perusing what is
antiquated, and observing what is suitable to the present constitution and
complexion. It Is my Lord Cook's Rule, That for the most part the latter
Judgments and Resolutions are the surest, and therefore fittest to season a
man withal in the beginning; both for settling of his Judgment, and retaining
them in memory; yet as he goes on, out of the old field^ must spring and grow
the new Corn.

Our Lawyers course was slow and leisurely, his reading digested and
deliberate: His considerations wary, and distrust his way to knowledge. He that
begins with certainties, ends in doubts; and he that begins with doubts, ends
in certainties, and looks into the bottom of things.

Upon serious and solid Books he bestowed a double reading; the one cursorily,
by way of preparation; and the other exact, by way of digestion.

Three things made him a Pleader:

1. Reading. 2. Observation. 3. Exercise.
And indeed, in ancient times, the Sergeants and Vid. Cok. in Littl. Prefat.
Apprentices of Law did draw their own pleadings, which made them good Pleaders.

He observed the affections, the intent, the analogy, the validity of the Law,
putting all his reading to writing; having the places he was most to handle in
all the variety that could be, with his Rules and Maxims, as far as reading,
hearing, meditation, conference and memory could help him.

Thus his first thoughts were upon his Profession, until that advanced him to
the highest Eminence; and his last upon his Interest, until that was improved
to as much fortune as lies in a well-laid Estate and Alliance.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
THE Q. Mary.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of Queen MARY.
Observations on the Life of Sir William Cordel.
SIr William Cordel, wherever he was born, had a fair Estate at Long-Melford
in Suffolk, and lies buried in that fair Church, under a decent Monument: We
will translate his Epitaph, which will perfectly acquaint us with the great
Offices he had, and good Offices he did to Posterity.

Hic Gulielmus babet requiem, Cordelliae avito,
Stemmate qui clarius, clarior ingenio:
Hic Studiis primos consumpsit fortiter annos,
Mox and causarum strenuus actor erat.
Tanta illi doctrina inerat facundia tanta,
Vt Parlamenta publica lingua foret:
Postea factus Eques, Reginae arcana Mariae
Consilia, and Fatriae grande subibat opus.
Factus and est Custos Rotulorum; urgente senecta,
In Christo moriens caepit ad astra viam.
Pauperibus largus victum vestemque ministrans,
In super Hospitii condidit ille domum. "Here William Cordel does in rest
remain;
"Great by his Birth, but greater by his Brain:
"Plying his studies hard, his Youth throughout,
"Of Causes he became a Pleader stout.
"His Learning deep such Eloquence did vent,
"He was chose Speaker to the Parliament:
"Afterward Knight Queen Mary did him make,
"And Counselor, State-Work to undertake;
"And Master of the Rolls: Well worn with Age,
"Dying in Christ, Heaven was his utmost Stage.
"Diet and Clothes to poor he gave at large,
"And a fair Almshouse founded on his charge.


He was made Master of the Rolls November the fifth, in the fifth of Queen
Mary, continuing therein till the day of his death, the 23 of Queen Elizabeth.
Eight weeks and upwards passed between the Proclaiming of Queen Mary, and the
first Parliament by her assembled; during which time, two Religions were
together set on foot, Protestantism and Popery; the former hoping to be
continued, the latter laboring to be restored: And as the Jews Children after
the Captivity spoke a middle Language, betwixt Hebrew and Ashdod; so during the
foresaid Interim, the Churches and Chapels in England had a mixed celebration
of their Divine Service between Reformation and Superstition: The same day
there was a Mass sung for Edward the Sixth's soul in the Tower, and the English
Service for his Burial in Westminster. No small justling was there between the
zealous Promoters of these contrary Persuasions: The Protestants had the Law on
their side, and the Papists the Prerogative: These the Queens Opinion, the
other her Promise. Besides, seeing by the Fidelity of the Suffolk and Norfolk
Protestant Gentry, the Queen was much advantaged Fuller Eccles. Hist. B. 8.
Cent. 15.
for the Recovery of her Right; they conceived it but reason that as she by
them regained the Crown, so they under her should enjoy their Consciences: Thus
it is in the Evening Twilight, wherein Light and Darkness at first may seem
very equally matched, but the later in a little time does wholly prevail. The
Catholic canvass for the next Parliament upon the Queens credit and authority,
the Reformed upon the Nations Inclination.

The Body of the Kingdom meets, and chooses our Knight for Speaker, whose
temper was a Representative of the Parliament, as that is of the Kingdom: A
temper made up of an equal mixture of Loyalty and Piety, that could at once
stand to their Religion, and submit to their Sovereign; Render to Caesar what
was Caesar's, and to God, what was Gods: Long did he expect that the Queen would
comply with the Parliament, and as long did she stay for their compliance with
her: Unite they could not unanimously among themselves, dissolved they are
therefore peaceably by her.

But Cordel was too Popular to be neglected, and too honest to be corrupted:
Useful Parts will find Preferment, even when the Dissenting Judgment finds
not Favor. The Speaker of the unhappily healing Parliament was made Master of
the Rolls in Queen Mary's days, and of a more happily healing one was made so
in Charles the Second's Reign: The one was of that Primitive Faith that was
before the Modern names of Papists and Protestants; the other of a Moderation
that was elder then the new Heat^ of Disciplinarians and Anti-Disciplinarians.

The miscarriages of Authority are chiefly six:

1. Del^y. 2. Faction. 3. Roughness. 4. Corruption. 5. Ambition. And 6. Private
Designs.
No delay hindered: where set times of hearing were observed, access was easy,
the order and method of business uninterrupted. No corruption, where there
durst be no suspicion of it; insomuch as that it was as (...)einous to offer a
Bribe to him, as to (...) it in another. Here was severity that awed men to a
discontent, but no austerity that sowred them to discontent; all was smooth and
grave, pleasing and becoming, yet nothing easy or soft; it being worse to
yield to importunities that are daily, then to be bought with money, which
comes but seldom.

Virtue in Ambition is violent, but in Authority, is here, it was calm and
settled. He sided with no Faction in his rise, but balanced himself by all: He
had no design when he lived, but to be spent in the ^ublique Service; and none
when he died, but to spend himself in public charity, a charity that is at
once the continued blessing and grace of that worshipful Family. Cato Major
would say, That wise men learn more of f^^ls, then fools do of wise men: And
King Charles the first would say, That it was wisdom in fools to jest with
wise men, but madness for wise men to jest with fools: and Sir William Cordel
bequeathed us this Observation, There is no man that talks, but I may gain by
him; and none that holds his tongue, but I may loose by him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony Cook.
SIr Anthony Cook, great Grandchilde to Sir Thomas Cook Lord Mayor of London,
was born at Giddy-Hall in Essex, where he finished a fair House begun by his
great Grandfather, as appears by this Inscription on the Frontispice thereof:
Aedibus his frontem Proavus Thomas dedit olim,
Addidit Antoni caetera sera manus.


He was one of the Governors to King Edward the sixth when Prince, and is
charactered by Mr. Cambden, Vir antiqua serenitate. He observes Cambd. Eliz.
an* 1576.
him also to be happy in his Daughters, learned above their Sex in Greek and
Latin: namely,

1. Mildred 2. Anne 3. Kathering married unto William Cecill, Lord Treasurer of
England. Nicholas Bacon, Lord Chancellor of England. Henry Killigrew, Thomas
Hobby, Knights.
Ralph Rowlet,

4. Elizabeth 5.
Sir Anthony Cook died in the year of our Lord 1576. leaving a fair Estate
unto his Son, in whose name it continued till our time. Gravity was the Ballast
of his Soul, and General Learning its Leading. In him met the three things that
set up a Family:

1. An Estate honestly gotten in the City. 2. An Education well managed in the
University. And, 3. Honor well bestowed at Court.
Yet he was somebody in every Art, and eminent in all the whole circle of Arts
lodging in his soul. His Latin, fluent and proper; his Greek, critical and
exact; his Philology, and Observations upon each of these Languages, deep,
curious, various and pertinent: His Logic, rational; his History and
Experience, general; his Rhetoric and Poetry, copious and genuine; his
Mathematiques, practicable and useful. Knowing that souls were equal, and that
Women are as capable of Learning as Men, he instilled that to his Daughters at
night, which he had taught the Prince in the day; being resolved to have Sons
by Education, (...)or fear he should have none by birth; and lest he wanted an
Heir of his body, he made five of his mind, for whom he had at once a
Gavel-kind of (...)ffection and of Estate.

His Childrens maintenance was always according (...)o their quality, and their
employment according (...)o their disposition; neither allowing them to live
(...)bove their fortunes, nor forcing them against their (...)atures. It is the
happiness of Foreigners, that (...)heir Vocations are suited to their Natures,
and (...)hat their Education seconds their Inclination; and (...)oath bias and
ground do wonders. It Is the un(...)appiness of Englishmen, that they are bred
ra(...)her according to their Estates, then their temper; (...)nd Great Parts
have been lost, while their Calling (...)rue one way, and their Genius another;
and (...)hey sadly say, Multum incolae fuere animae nostrae, (...)e have dwelt
from home. Force makes Nature (...)ore violent in the return; Doctrine and
Discourse (...)ay make it less importune; Custom may hide (...)r suppress it,
nothing can extinguish it: Nature (...)en in the softer Sex runs either to
Weeds or (...)erbs: careful was this good Father therefore, sea(...)onably to
water the one, and destroy the other. (...)ch was done by his grave Rules, more
by his (...)raver life, that Map of Precepts. Precepts teach, (...)ut Examples
draw. Maxima debetur pueris reve(...)ntia, was Cato's Maxim. Three things
there (...)e before whom (was Sir Anthony's saying) I can(...)ot do amiss: 1.
My Prince; 2. My Conscience; (...). My Children. Seneca told his Sister, That
(...)ough be could not leave her a great portion, be would (...)ve her a good
pattern. Sir Anthony would write (...)o his Daughter Mildred, My example is
your inberitance, and my life is your portion. His first car(...) was to embue
their tender souls with a knowing* serious, and sober Religion, which went with
the(...) to their graves. His next business was to in(...) their younger years
to submission; modesty and obedience; and to let their instructions grow
wi(...) their years. Their Book and Pen was their Recreation; the Music and
Dancing School, the Cou(...) and City, their accomplishment; the Needle i(...)
the Closet, and House-wifry in the Hall and Kitching, their business. They were
reproved, b(...) with reason that convinced and checked, th(...) wrought as
well an ingenious shame, as an unfeigned sorrow, and a dutiful fear. Fondness
never loved his Children, and Passion never chastised the(...) but all was
managed with that prudence and discr^^tion, that my Lord Seymour standing by
one da^ when this Gentleman chid his Son, said, Some (...) govern Families with
more skill then others do Kingdoms; and thereupon commended him to the
Government, of his Nephew Edward the sixth. Su(...) the Majesty of his looks
and gate, that Awe governed; such the reason and sweetness, that love obliged
all his Family: a Family equally afraid (...) displease so good a Head, and to
offend so great. (...) their marriage they were guided by his Reas(...) more
then his Will; and rather directed by (...) Counsel, then led by his Authority.
They we(...) their own portion: Parts, Beauty and Breedi(...) bestow
themselves. His care was, that his Daughters might have complete Men, and that
their Husbands might be happy in complete Women: nev(...) promising, yet always
paying a great Dowry. Their spirit and business kept them from that weak
pass(...) of love that embaseth Mankind; their Noble con(...)se improved that
friendly love that perfecteth (...); and their marriage completed that Nuptial
(...)ve that makes it. He said first, and his Grandchild my Lord Bacon after
him, That the Joys of Parents are Secrets, and so are their Griefs and Fears.
Children sweeten Labors, but they embitter Misfortunes: they increase the care
of Life, and m(...)gate the remembrance of Death. Very providently did he
secure his Eternity, by leaving the (...)age of his nature in his Children, and
of his (...)ind in his Pupil. The Recreations he indulged were moderate,
lawful, sober, becoming, useful, and seasonable: the Expenses he allowed, not
so il^iberal as to acquaint them with shifts, make them (...)ort with mean
company, nor surfeit when they came to plenty; nor yet so prodigal, but that
they were taught how to live in the world. The Books he advised were not many,
but choice: the business ^e pressed was not reading, but digesting. The King of
Sweden's men were but six deep; and Sir Anthony's exercises were not thick, but
methodical and armed: the Diet he prescribed, moderate: in Apparel he allowed
for necessity, for decency, and in some cases for magnificence, provided that
it were neither too costly, nor too vain; neither above the Purse, nor beyond
the Calling, nor besides the Estate.

Sir Anthony took more pleasure to breed up Statesmen, then to be one.
Contemplation was his Soul, Privacy his Life, and Discourse his Element.
Business was his Purgatory, and Publickness his torment: yet so serviceable was
he in Edward the sixth's time, that he was an Exile in Queen Mary's: An Exile,
whose exemplary resolution supported Religion, whose obliging Authority
maintained Peace, and whose inexhaustible charity provided for the Poor at
Zuricke and Frankford. A Sussex (and not a Kentish) Knight having spent a great
Estate at Court, and brought himself to on(...) Park, and a fine House in it,
was yet ambitious to entertain not the Queen, but her Brother at it* and to
that purpose had new-painted his Gates with a Coat of Arms, and a Motto
overwritten, thus, OIA VANITAS, in great Golden Letters* Sir Anthony Cook (and
not his Son Cecil) offering to read it, desired to know of the Gentleman what
he meant by OIA? who told him, it stood for O^nia. Sir Anthony replied, Sir, I
wonder having made your Omnia so little as you have, you notwithstanding make
your Vanitas so large. King Edw(...) would say of his Tutors, That Rodolph the
Germ(...) spoke honestly, Sir John Cheek talked merrily, D(...) Coxe solidly,
and Sir Anthony Cook weighingly: A faculty that was derived with his blood to
his Grandchilde Bacon, which informs the world of this great truth, That
Education does much toward Parts; Industry more; Converse, Encouragement and
Exercise, more yet; but a sound temper and nature, an wholesome blood and
spirit, derived from healthful and well-constitutioned Parents, does all.

Observations on the Life of Sir David Brook.
DAvid Brook Knight, born at Glassenbury, Son to John Brook Esquire who was
Sergeant at Law to King Henry the Eighth. Our David was also bred in the Study
of our Laws, and in the first of Queen Mary was made chief Baron of the
Exchequer: but whether dying in, or quitting the place in the first of Queen
Elizabeth, I am not informed. He married Katharine Daughter of John Lord
Chandois, but died without issue.

A Lawyer, and a Lawyers son: yet one whose Zeal for the Religion of that time
advanced, rather then his Law; to serve rather his Princes interest, then his
Court: that being the happy, shall I say? or unhappy time when the Sovereign
and the State did often consult with Judges, and the Judges more often consult
with the Sovereign and State. Yet although a particular respect raised, a
general fair carriage kept him up; He observed not only things, but times; not
only times, but persons: therefore when old Poenal Laws came before him, he
confined them in the execution, that that which was made for terror, should
not be for rigor; and the Instrument of Government should not be the snare of
the People. When Informers of that Court were too busy, he checked them: when
violent prosecution, cunning advantages, combinations, power, or great counsel
balanced an honest cause, he set all things even. His invention was good to
improve his Mistresses Revenue, his conscience was as tender to diminish it. Q.
Mary w(...) ready of her own inclination, but readier upon S(...) David Brooks
motion, to part with the Church Profits. Patient and grave he was in hearing,
sparing and weighty in speaking: None would direct an Evidence more orderly,
none moderated the length or impertinency of Pleaders more discreetly: None
would recapitulate, select, collate the material points of what had been said,
more exactly; none gave judgment more satisfactorily; always commending a good
Lawyer that miscarried; a good way to uphold in the Client the reputation of
his counsel, and beat down in him the conceit of his cause. He died with some
projects in his breast for the Revenue, and some for the Law; whereof one was a
composition for the Purveyances, and another a regulation of the Wards: both at
that time thought, till regulated, as unprofitable for the Crown, as they
seemed to be burdensome to the subject. He had a close way of discovering
Concealments, as he had a severe one of punishing frauds. His word was, One Law
executed, is worth twenty made. None more austere in case of others wrong, none
more mild in that of his own; and he would say, What is done, is done. Weak men
concern themselves in what is past, while the wise take care of what is present
and to come. If a man wrongeth me once, God forgive him, (says the Italian:)
if he wrongeth me the second time, God forgive me. Others may be even with
their enemies in revenge, he would be above them in forgiveness. An enemy, I
say, though otherwise to a perfidious and an unworthy friend, he was much of
Cosmus Duke of Florence his temper, who said, You shall read that we are
commanded to forgive our ^nemies, but you never read that we are commanded
(...)o forgive our friends.

Many have inveighed against Usury, none have done more against it then this
Knight; who if he ^ad lived, was resolved to reduce it to these Rules.

1. That it should be declared unlawful.

2. Being declared so, if any practiced it, (as men must do, or Traffic will
fall) that there should be a penalty upon the Usurer, which might amount to an
Excise or Custom that would arise from that money if employed in merchandise.

3. That yet if any exacted above five in the hundred, they should loose the
Principal. A rate that on the one hand would keep up the necessary Commerce of
Lending and Borrowing among the Old and the Idle, and yet direct men to that
more ne(...)ssary of buying and improving Land, and other Commodities that are
more industrious and inge^ious.

4. That none yet presume this, but in some principal places of Merchandising:
for then (as my Lord Bacon has projected it) they will hardly be able to
color other men's moneys in the Country: for no man will lend his money far
off, or put it into unknown hands.

Or, Lastly, That there be no money lent out upon terms but to the State, which
may make its advantage of it.

Indeed, considering on the one hand that Usury decays the Kings Custom,
brings money to few hands, damps Industry and Invention, beats down the price
of the Land, and by eating up private Estates breeds a public Poverty: It were
to be wished it were forbidden. And on the other, That Borrowers trade most;
that, No Usury, no young Merchants; that, Without Usury men must sell their
Estates at under-Rates, more sad then Usury; that, No borrowing, no living; no
Usury, no borrowing: It were wished it were regulated, so that the
inconveniences of it were avoided, and the advantages retained, and Extortion
be checked, as Traffic is encouraged.

Thus he that has no private care, advances the public Good, and the
childeless man is most thoughtful for Posterity: Certainly the best Works and
of greatest Merit for the Public, have proceeded from the unmarried, or the
childless man; who both in Affection and Means have married and endowed the
Public: He that has Wife and Children has given Hostages to Fortune: For
they are Impediments either to Virtue or Mischief.

A fat man in Rome riding always upon a very lean Horse, being asked the Reason
thereof, answered, That he fed himself, but he trusted others to feed his
Horse. Our Judge being asked what was the best way to thrive; said, Never do
any thing by another, that you can do by your self.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Thomas Wilson.
THomas Wilson born in Lincolnshire, was Doctor of Laws, bred Fellow of Kings
College in Cambridge, and afterward was Tutor in the same University to Henry
and Charles Brandon, successively Dukes of Suff^lk. Under Queen Elizabeth he
was made Master of the Hospital of St. Katharine's nigh the Tower of London. At
last he became Secretary of State to the Queen for four years together. He died
Anno 15

He had the breeding of Courtiers so long, until he was one himself: At once
reading Machiavel for my Lord Burleigh's Instruction, and observing it for his
own use. His Parents designed him for study, his Nature for business. His
presence assisted his inclination, and his complaisance his presence; and his
good Nature, both: A good Nature that would have spoiled a Politician in any
other but Doctor Wilson, whose Wisdom was the largeness of his Soul, not the
narrowness of a shift. He had that comprehensive and penetrating judgment,
that he could at once show the greatest prudence in laying his design, and the
greatest Integrity in managing it, as rather securely knowing than warily
close. But he that is only real, had need have exceeding great Parts of
Virtue; as the Stone had need be rich; that is set without foil: Therefore He
was something a Courtier: There are small matters that win great commendation,
because they are continually in use; whereas the occasion of any great action
comes but on festivals, and it is enough to attain so much ceremony and
courtship not to despise it. He had a way of conveying effectual and imprinting
passions among complements, suitable to persons and business: He had his
familiarity to Inferiors, that made him not cheap: his state among Equals,
that made him not envied: and his observance to Superiors, that made him no
Flatterer: His Behavior like a well-made suit, not too straight, or point
devise, but justly measured, and free for exercise or motion. He had a slow but
a sure way to honor, which was nothing else in him but a discovery of his
Virtues and Worth upon any occasion without any disadvantage.

It was his Interest as well as his Gift, to be more learned then witty, more
reverend then plausible, more considerate then active. His thoughts were as his
inclination, grave; his discourse as his reading, subtle; his action as his
Education, well weighed, regular as his temper, even and smooth as custom, and
resolved as a habit gotten in that advancement of Virtue, A well-disciplined
Society; where Example teaches, Company comfort, Emulation quickneth, Glory
raises. None had a more skilful method to sway Nature in others, none more
prudent minutes and seasonable degrees to check it in himself: His Rule being,
Never to practice any thing until perfect: for so he might exercise his
weakness as well as his abilities, and induce one habit of both.

Three things he aimed at:

1. The search of Truth by Industry. 2. The attainment of it by Apprehension.
3. The enjoyment of it by Assent.
He is a happy man that is above the troubled and confused Regions of Opinions,
Fancies, Prepossessions, in that clear and undisturbed one of Truth and
Reality: Though yet my Lord Verulam observes, That if there were taken out of
men's minds vain opinion, flattering hope, false valuations and imaginations,
as one would, and the like, etc. it would leave the minds of a number of poor
men poor shrunken things, full of melancholy and indisposition, and unpleasing
to themselves.

Neither took he greater pleasure in knowing than in relating and doing what is
true, sound and plain, without those crooked courses that show a creeping
rather then a raised nature; and, as Mr. Mount aigne observes, is a bravery and
facing of God, and a shrinking from and being coward before man.

He said, what all great men know, That he was six times a Slave:

1. To Himself and his Inclination, till he had advanced Reason. 2. To the
World and its Insolence, till he had improved his Fortune. 3. To his Pupils and
their Tempers, till he understood their Genius. 4. To Fame and its Reports,
till he was known in the World. 5. To his Sovereigns and their Humors, till he
found their Interest. And 6. To his Business, till he had attained Experience.
Thus it is with all Grandees, who exchange their power over themselves for
that over others, and with great pains come to greater.

Two things he wished when called to the world, Power and Resolution. A naked
Man is contemptible, (for it is Power that begets Fear, it is Fear that makes
Gods, and rules the world) an easy Man is useless: a facile-natured man may be
a good Companion for a private person, but no Servant to a Prince: Remissness
and Connivance are the ruins of unsettled Governments. The Game of Authority
will not admit of too open a play.

In a word, he was one that knew the resorts and falls of business, though he
could not sink into the main of a matter; being one that packed the Cards
better then he played them.

Three things completed this Secretary:

1. Quick dispatch and industry. 2. Constant intelligence and correspondence.
3. A large and strong memory.
Queen Elizabeth would needs at first favor my Lord of Leicester against the
Earl of Sussex, which this Doctor and my Lord Burleigh dissuaded upon this
account, Because if she who should be the common Mother of all, inclined to one
party, and leaned to a side, the Ship of the Commonwealth would be as a Boat
overturned by too much weight on the one side, and too little on the other.
Take heed (said the Royal Martyr to his Son our Sovereign) of abetting any
Faction, or applying to any public Discrimination: your partial adhering as
head to any one side, gains you not so great advantages in some men's hearts,
(who are prone to go on in the Kings way) as it loses you in others, who
think themselves first despised, and then persecuted by you. Take such a course
as may either with calmness and charity quite remove the seeming differences
and offenses by impartiality; or so order affairs in point of power, that you
shall not need to fear or flatter any faction: for if ever you stand in need of
them, or stand to their courtesy, you are undone.

His Place called upon him to suppress with seveverity such seditious
reflections upon the State, as came to his knowledge: but his inclination was to
dissipate them with connivance and contempt. To be opposed, renders a Faction
considerable; to he despised, (and watched) ridiculous: To go about to stop the
first appearances of sedition, is (says my Lord Bacon) but to make a wonder
long-lived.

His knack was a politic and artificial nourishing and entertaining of hopes;
and keeping men in suspense is one of the best Antidotes against the poison of
discontent: it being observed by the foresaid Statesman, to be a certain sign
of a wise Government and Proceedings, to hold men's hearts by hopes, when it
cannot by satisfaction; and when it can handle things in such manner, as no
evil shall appear so peremptory, but that it has some outlet of hope: which
is the easier done, because both particular persons and factions are apt enough
to fiatter themselves, or at least to boast what they believe not.

In a word, although he made not so much noise as other men, yet he as
effectually promoted the three main Supporters of this Nation, 1. Its Native
Commodities, 2. Its Artificial Manufactures, 3. Its Vecture and Carriage; and
so died with that content and resolution, that they do who are overtaken by
Fate in the pursuit of great Actions, and public Designs.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Portman.
JOhn Portman Knight, was born of wealthy and worshipful Extraction at
Portman's Orchard in Somersetshire, a fair Manor, which descended to him by
inheritance, the Heir of the Orchard being matched into his Family. He was bred
in the study of the Common Law; attaining to such eminency therein, that June
11. 2 of Queen Mary, he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, continuing
two years in the place, and dying therein for ought I find to the contrary;
and a Baronet of his Name and Lineage flourishes at this day with a great and
plentiful Estate. No doubt but he died in his place, there being none of those
things that carry disgrace and downfall with them, incident to him.

For the first thing that ruins a Courtier, is a boasting of his own service;
and then our Knight, The things that overthrow a Favorite.
none more modest.

The second, is an undutiful observation of our Princes actions; and none more
faithful and meek.

The third, is the revealing or abusing of secrets; and none more reserved and
civil.

The fourth thing, is either provoking the Nobility against himself, or
dividing them among themselves: he was too wise for the one, his design being
rather alliance then quarrel, to add interest to his Estate, and honor to his
Riches; and too quiet for the other. Many have an Opinion not wise, (says that
Oracle) that for a Prince to govern his Estate, or for a great Person to guide
his Proceedings, according to the respect of factions, is a principal part of
policy: whereas contrariwise, the chiefest wisdom is either in ordering those
things that are general, and wherein men of several factions do nevertheless
agree; or in dealing with, or correspondence to particular persons one by one.
Mean men in their rising must adhere; but Great men that have strength in
themselves, were better to maintain themselves indifferent and neutral.

The fifth particular that pulls down a man, is a misunderstanding of his own
interest, or the Princes: Our Judge understood both, being equally made up of
The first of these loved Alexanders interest, the other his person.
Craterus and Haephestion, faithfulness and compliance.

The sixth, is the hatred of the many, (whom this persons integrity always
obliged, there being no herd more feral then an enraged multitude) or the envy
of the great, whom his wariness disobliged not; it being more fatal to incense
a Favorite who would be above all affronts by his greatness, then a Prince who
is so by Law.

The seventh misfortune, is to be too much concerned in the secrets of Princes;
wherewith Sir William never meddled without assistants, never acted without a
Warrant.

The eighth, is unsuccessful Counsel; and our Knight went the safe and middle
way, neither to be feared nor envied, which he was always present to second,
prosecute or correct, as he saw most cause.

His sharp and sound judgment to distinguish Persons, Affairs, and other
Circumstances, and accordingly how to order the manner of his Proceedings, was
much; his well-weighed and wary, though quick apprehension and experience from
Men and Books, more; his particular memory, and its minute observation for his
conduct and business, most of all. His care of vain and idle Prepossessions
balanced his soul, his temper managed it: his love was choice and cautious; his
hope moderate and knowing; his confidence slow, but certain; his desires and
joys allayed and checked, or quickened by the edge of his anger, or the caution
of his fear; and all sedate with his foresight.

Nature did this person some wrong in his Body, but made him amends in his
Soul: the fails of the One, are foils to set off the Other: the first comes off
with more Glory, by the pully and defect of the second: Besides that the
unkindness of Nature puts men often upon being eminent in Art; that the
happiness of this, may divert men from observing the unhappiness of that.

But of all the Virtues his constant and growing Soul raised him to, this was
one, That he durst not entertain a Gift, which (as he said) conquers both the
foolish and the wise: which in public places it is a Vice to accept, and not a
Virtue to offer: It being a snare rather then a favor.

His next was Diligence: Neglect wastes a man as insensibly as Industry
improves him: We need no more but sit still, and Diseases will arise only for
want of exercise. Man's a Watch that must be looked to and wound up every day:
the least incuriousness steals to improficiency or offense, which degreeingly
weighs us down to extremity: Diligence alone is a fair Fortune, and Industry a
good Estate.

There are five men's Activities that raise to Estates:

1. The Divine to a small, but an honest one. 2. The Physician to a competency,
but uncertain. 3. The Courtier to a great one, and an honorable. 4. The
Citizen to a large one, but not lasting. And 5. The Lawyer to one large, and
firm too.
Seldom does his Family fail, who is sure to tie his Estate to his Child by
an Entayl, and his Child to his Estate by an Education and an Employment. When
we observe the several alterations in Gentry, we find four principal Actors on
the Theaters of great Families* the Beginner, the Advancer, the Continuer, and
the Ruiner.

1. The Beginner, who by his Virtues refineth himself from the dross of the
Vulgar, and lays the foundation of his house.

2. The Advancer, who improveth it.

3. The Continuer, who conveyeth it to his Posterity as he received it from his
Ancestors.

4. The Ruiner, that degenerates from his Fathers. Our Judge began not, but
advanced that excellent Family, whose original I cannot find, so ancient it
is; and whose end I hope none will see, it is so noble.

Observations on the Life of William Howard.
WIlliam Howard, son to Thomas Howard, second of that Surname Duke of Norfolk,
was by Queen Mary created Baron of Effingham in Surrey, and by her made Lord
Admiral of England; which place he discharged with credit. He was one of the
first Favorers and Furtherers with his Purse and Countenance of the strange
and wonderful discovery of Russia. He died anno Done. 1554.

This Noble Person had his plainness from his Father, his ingenuity from his
Mother, his experience by Travel and Navigation: his Blood endeared him to his
Sovereign, and his Abilities advanced him to her service: He promised no less
to his Mistress, then his Father and Uncle had performed to her Father. The
Ancestors merit is security for Posterities, who will hardly forfeit that
favor with one act of their own unworthiness, that was gained by so many of
their Predecessors service. Like a well-drawn picture this Lord had his eye on
all round: on his Queen, to be faithful; on his Country, to be
publick-spirited; on his Family, to be honorable; on the present Age, to be
active; and on the future, to be renowned.

The old Lord Burleigh, sometime Treasurer of England, coming to Cambridge with
Queen Elizabeth when he was led into the public Schools, and had much
commended their convenience, beauty and greatness, together with their Founder
Humphrey the good Duke of Gloucester; Yea, marry, (said he) but I find one
School wanting in our Universities, and that is the School of Discretion When
Private Tutors had initiated, Public Schools had seasoned, and the University
had improved this Gentleman's sprightly and noble Parts; yet did his Father
observe one great defect in his Education, and that i^ Discretion; Discretion
in Carriage, for which he sent him to Court; Discretion in business, for which
he sent him to travel and fight. Not long had he been abroad to furnish himself
with experience, but he is called home to e^noble himself with action. The
Alvaes of Spain were for four Generations together Commanders by Land, and the
Howards of England for as many, Admirals at Sea. None ever had more Power, none
used less then he: The more Authority he had allowed him over others, the more
Command he obtained over himself.

Twice did he mortgage his Estate for his followers Pay; many times did he
venture his Life for their encouragement. None directed more skilfully and yet
none acted more resolutely. Equally did he divide the profit, equally share the
honor with his followers, who under him never dared, and never feared a
danger. Manners make a man, says the Courtier; Money makes a man, says the
Citizen; Learning makes a man, says the Scholar: but Conduct makes a man,
says the Soldier. This Lords spirit never put him on so forwardly, but his
wariness took care how to come off as safely. He that fights should despair,
but he that commands should hope. The Soldier among the Persians is drawn with
his eyes before him, and the General with his behind him. Young men in the
manage of Affairs embrace more then they can hold, stir more then they can
quiet, flee to the end without consideration of the means and degrees; pursue
some few principles, and extreme remedies they have chanced upon rashly, which
they will neither confess nor reform. Old men object too much, consult too
long, adventure too little, repent too soon, and seldom pursue things home to
their full period. My Lord was an happy composition of both himself, and had of
either about him, that the coldness and wariness of Age might correct the heat
of Youth, and the Activity of Younger might be directed by the Experience of
Riper Ones: The one gave Authority, and the other Life to his Actions. He
himself was better to invent then to judge, fitter for Action then Counsel, and
readier for new Projects then for settled business. The Lord Clinton's Prudence
served him in old and usual matters, but in new things abused him: My Lord
Howard's was quick for present Emergencies, but not comprehensive of ordinary
transactions. Of the three Admirals of those times, we may say as they did of
the France, Spain and England.
three Kingdoms, Lisle was wise before the Action, my Lord Howard in it, my
Lord Clinton after it.

England without a freedom of commerce, was but a larger Prison: others opened
the Trade to the Indies, to Asia, and other parts of the world; but we wanted
the Hemp, the Flax, the Pitch, the Fur, and the other useful Commodities of
Russia, serviceable to our selves, and more to our Ships. His Purse in this
case did much, his Direction more, his servant Jenkinson most of all, who made
curious observa^ions of Russia, set forth a Geographical description of it, and
was the first of the English, that sailed through the Caspian Sea. With his
assistance the Muscovia Company was set up in Queen. Mary's days; and with his
servants it obtained the Privilege of sole Traffic into the Northern Parts of
Russia in Elizabeth's.

Nihil habet fortuna magna majus, nec natura bona Cicero.
melius quam ut ^elit bene-facere quam plurimis.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Mountague.
EDward Mountague, Son of Thomas Mountague, born at Brigstock in
Northamptonshire, was bred in the Inner Temple in the study of the Laws, until
his ability and integrity advanced him Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
in the Thirtieth of Henry the Eighth. He gave for his Motto, Aequitas Justitiae
Norma: And although Equity seems rather to resent of the Chancery than the
Kings Bench, yet the best Justice will be Wormwood without a mixture thereof.

In his times though the golden showers of Abbey-Lands rained amongst greatmen,
it was long before he would open his lap, (scrupling the acception of such
Gifts) and at last received but little, in proportion to Others of that Age.

In the thirty seventh of King Henry the Eighth he was made Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, a descent in Honor, but ascent in Profit; it being given to
old Age, rather to be thrifty then ambitious: Whereupon he said, I am now an
old man, and love the Kitchen before the Hall; the warmest place best suiting
with my Age.

In drawing up the Will of King Edward the Sixth, and settling the Crown on the
Lady Jane, for a time he swam against the tide and torrent of Duke Dudley, till
at last he was carried away with the stream.

Outed of his Judges Office in the first of Queen Mary, he returned into
Northamptonshire; and what contentment he could not find in Westminster Hall,
his Hospital-hall at Bough(...) afforded him. He died Anno 1556. and lies
buried in the Parish Church of Weekly.

His well-managed Argument in Dodderidge his Case, brought him to Cromwell's
knowledge, who was vexed with his Reason, but well pleased with his Parts.
Cromwell's recommendation and his own modest nature set him up with Henry the
Eighth, who could not endure two things: 1. A Lawyer that would not be guided:
2. A Divine that would not be taught. Yet as modest as he was, he was honest;
and though he would submit to the Kings Power, yet would he act by his Law: For
his Apophthegm was, Meum est Jus dicere, potius quam Jus dare: It Is my duty to
interpret rather then give Law.

He never denied or delayed Justice; always discouraging those cunning Laws
that perplexed a Cause, those contentious Clients that delayed a suit, and
those nice Cummin-^eed men that strained inferences, and wrested constructions.

Patient, stayed and equal he was in hearing, grave in speaking, pertinent in
interrogating, wary in observing, happy in remembering, seasonable and civil in
interposing. The Counsel durst not chop with him, neither would he chop with
the Counsel, unless he defended his cause over-boldly, urged indiscreetly,
informed slightly, neglected gro^ly, renewed the debate unseasonably, or
ensnared his Adversaries cunningly; in those and other the like cases, he would
do the Public Right by a check, and the Person by an admonition.

Six sorts of persons he discountenanced in his Courts:

1. The scandalous Exactors.

2. The sly shifters, that, as that Chancellor observed, pervert the plain
and direst courses of Courts, and bring Justice into oblique Lines and
Labyrinths.

3. Those that engaged Courts in quarrels of Jurisdiction.

4. Those that made suits.

5. Those that hunted men upon Poenal Statutes.

6. Those that appeared in most Testimonies and Juries.

His Darling was, The honest Clerk, who was experienced in his place, obliging
in his carriage, knowing in Presidents, cautious in Proceedings, and skilful in
the affairs of the Court.

Two things he promoted in King Henry's days:

1. The Law against Gaming. And 2. The Order against Stews.
And two in King Edward's:

1. That Act against spreading of Prophecies. 2. That Statute against embasing
of Coin.
But King Edward's Testament and the Duke (...) Northumberland's Will is to be
made: The piou(...) Intentions of that King wishing well to the Reformation,
the Religion of Queen Mary obnoxious to exception, the ambition of
Northumberland who would do what he lifted, the weakness of Suffol(...) who
would be done with as the other pleased, the flattery of the Courtiers most
willing to comply* designed the Crown for the Lady Jane Gray. Mr. Cecil is sent
for to London, to furnish that Will with Reason of State; and Sir Edward to
Sergeants In^, to make it up with Law. He according to the Letter sent him,
went with Sir Jo. Baker, Justice Bromley, the Attorney and Solicitor-General to
Greenwich, where his Majesty before the Marquess of Northampton declaring
himself for the settlement of Religion, and against the succession of Queen
Mary, offered them a Bill of Articles to make a Book of; which they,
notwithstanding the Kings Charge, and the reiteration of it by Sir William
Peter, declared upon mature consideration, they could not do, without involving
themselves and the Lords of the Council in High I reason, because of the
Statutes of Succession.

The Duke of Northumberland hearing of their Declaration by the Lord Admiral,
comes to the Council Chamger all in a rage, trembling for anger; calling Sir
Edward Traitor, and saying, He would fight in his shirt with any man in that
Quarrel.

The old man is charged by the King upon his Allegiance, and the Council upon
his Life, to make the Book; which he did, when they promised it should be
ratified in Parliament. Here was his obedience, not his invention; not to
devise, but draw things up according to the Articles tendered unto him. Since
shame is that which ambitious Nature abhors, and danger is that which
timorous Nature declineth; the honest man must be resolute. Sir Nathaniel Brent
would say, A Coward cannot be an honest man; and it seems by this Action, that
modesty and fear are great temptations. Give me those four great Virtues that
make a man:

1. A clear Innocence. 2. A comprehensive Knowledge. 3. A well-weighed
experience. And 4. The product of all these, A steady Resolution.
What a Skein of Ruffled Silk (says the ingenious Resolver) is the incomposed
man!

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Fines.
EDward Fines Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Admiral of England
for more then thirty years. He was wise, valiant, and very fortunate, as
appears by his Masterpiece in Museleborough-field, in the reign of King Edward
the sixth, and the Battle against the Scots. He was afterward created Earl of
Lincoln, where he was born, May 4. 1474. and where he had a proportionable
Estate to support his Dignity, which he much increased, beside his Paternal
Inheritance. He died January 16. 1558. and lies buried at Windsor, in a
private Chapel, under a stately Monument, which Elizabeth his third Wise,
Daughter to the Earl of Kildare, erected in his remembrance. His Fortune made
him a younger Brother, and his Industry an Heir; coming to Court, where they
that have Estates, spend them; and they that have none, gain them. His
recreation was at Court, but his business in the Country; where notwithstanding
the Statute in Henry the sevenths time against Pasturage for Tillage, he Grazed
11000 Acres of Ground: then a noble and gaining Employment, that advanced many
a Family in one Generation; and now a saving one, that has kept up as many ten.

The best tempered Swords will bend any way, and the best metalled men will
comply with any occasion. At White Hall, none more affable and courteous then
our Lord; at Sea, none more skilful; in the field, none more resolute; in the
Country, none more thristy and hospitable. His Entertainments were orderly and
suitable, made up of solid particulars, all growing upon his own Estate. King
Charles would say, Every man has his vanity, and mine (speaking of the
Sovereign) is Building: Every man has his humor, and mine (said he, speaking
of the Fens) is Drayning. Adding withal, He that would be merry for a day, let
him be trimmed; he that would be merry for a week, let him marry; he that would
be merry for a year, let him build; he that would be merry for Ages, let him He
meant land.
improve. Now you would have him among his Workmen and Stewards in Lincoln,
anon among the Commissioners either in France or Scotland; by and by before
Bulloign or Calice, and a while after at Spieres or Muscleborough, and on a
sudden at a Mask in Court. Neither was his Soul less pliable to persons, then
things: as boysterously active as King Henry could expect, as piously meek as
King Edward could wish, as warily zealous as Queen Mary's times required, and
as piercingly observant as Queen Elizabeth's perplexed occasions demanded. It
was by him and my Lord Bacon said of business, That it was in business as it is
in ways, that the next and the nearest way is commonly the foulest; and that if
a man will go the fairest way, he must go somewhat about.

Sitting in a Committee about invading Scotland, whereof Sir Anthony Brown then
Viscount Mountacute presented a Draught, there arose as great a debate between
him and my Lord in Council, as afterward in the Field, about the point of
Entrance; Nay, said my Lord in the heat of the Discourse, with as much power on
others passions, as command over his own, We stand quarrelling here how we
shall get in, but here is no discourse how we shall get out.

It Is a Rule, Whosoever has any thing fixed in his person that does induce
contempt, has also a perpetual spur in himself to rescue and deliver himself
from scorn, either by virtue or malice; And my Lord having some disadvantage
from Nature, made it up by Art: None more bold, none more industrious and more
successful, because that disadvantage took off envy on the one hand, and
jealousy on the other: so that upon the matter, in a great Wit, Contempt is a
great advantage to rising.

Judge Brook had a Project against Usury, which came up to the Lords House:
this rich Peer upon the first motion of it, stands up, and says, Show me a
State without Usury, and I Will show you a State without Men and Trade.

Rich he was for expense, and expend he did upon honor and good Action: his
ordinary expenses were the third of his Estate, and his extraordinary none of
it; his Rule being, Extraordinary disadvantages must be balanced with
extraordinary advantages. He would not stoop to petty gains, but he would
abridge petty charges: but his occasions calling him often from his Estate, he
turned it all to certainties; often changing his Servants, who being
unacquainted with him and his Estate, were less subtle, and more timorous. Much
behindhand he was when he came to the Estate, and as much before when he left
it. Neither was he too sudden or too slow in paying his Debts; equally
avoiding a disadvantageous sale on the one hand, and devouring interest on the
other: and so inuring himself by degrees into an habit of frugality, he gained
as well upon his Mind, as upon his Estate. For husbanding the English Treasure
in Scotland, he was Knighted in the Field May 11. 34 H. 8. by the Earl of
Hertford: for the Clause concerning Scotland he put in at the Treaty of
Guisnes, 35 H. 8. he was made Baron by Patent: for his discreet Conduct in
demanding the young Queen of Scots, together with the performance of the
Articles made in Henry the eighth's time, with 60 sail of Ships before the
battle of Muscleburgh, he had 600 l. a year assigned him by the Protector: for
his great experience at Sea, his interest in Seamen, and his nown among the
Neighbour-States, he was made Earl of Lincoln.

Observations on the Life of Sir Barnaby Fitz-Patrick.
BArnaby Fitz-Patrick had the honor of being King Edward the sixth his Proxy
at School, and one of his Bedchamber at Court. In King Henry the eighth's time
he was sent to School, in King Edward the sixth's to travel, where he had these
Directions following from that King, how he might learn fashions there, and
send intelligence hither.

EDWARD.

WE understand by your Letters received the eighth of this present month, your
good entertainment, being glad thereof; and also how you have been once to go
on Pilgrimage: Wherefore we think fit to advertise you to desire leave to go to
Mr. Pickering, or to Paris, in case hereafter any such chance happen. And if
that will not serve, to declare to some person of estimation, with whom you are
best acquainted, that as you are loath to offend the French King by reason of
his kind usage of you; so with safe conscience you cannot do any such thing,
being brought up with me, and bound to obey my Laws; also, that you had
commandment from me to the contrary. Yet if you be vehemently procured, you may
go as waiting upon the King, not as intending to the abuse, nor willingly s^e
the Ceremonies: and so you look on the Mass, but in the mean time regard the
Scripture, or some good Book, and give no reverence to the Mass at all.

Furthermore, remember when you may conveniently be absent from the Court, to
tarry with Sir William Pickering, to be instructed by him how to use your self.
For Women, as far forth as you can, avoid their company; yet if the French King
command you, you may sometime dance, so measure be your mean: else apply your
self to Riding, Shooting, Tennis, or such honest Games; not forgetting
sometimes (when you have leisure) your Learning, chiefly reading of the
Scriptures. We would not have you live too sumptuously as an Ambassador, but so
as your proportion of living may serve you; we mean, because we know many will
resort to you, and desire to serve you. I told you how many I thought
convenient you should keep. After you have ordered your things at Paris, go to
the Court, and learn to have more intelligence if you can; and after to the
Wars, to learn somewhat to serve us. By your Letters of the second and
fifteenth of April, we perceive that you were at Nancy, ready to go together
with Mr. Pickering to the French Camp; and to the intent you might be better
instructed how to use your self in these Wars, we have thought good to
advertise you of our pleasure therein. First, we would wish you, as much as you
may conveniently, to be in the French Kings presence, or at least in some part
of his Army, where you shall perceive most business to be; and that for two
causes: One is, because you may have more experience in the Wars, and see
things as might stand you in stead another day: The other is, because you might
be more profitable in the Language. For our Ambassador, who may not wear
Harness, cannot well come to those places of danger, nor seem so to serve the
French King, as you may, whom we sent thither for that purpose. It shall be
best for you therefore hereafter, as much as you may, to be with the French
King; and so you shall be more acceptable to him, and do your self much good.
This I write, not doubting but you would have done it, though I had not
written, but to spur you on.

Adding withal, To learn the Tongue, to see the manner of the Court, and
advertise his Master of Occurrences, keeping close to the King of France, to
whom he shall offer his service in the Wars, where be is to observe the
fortifications of the Cities, the Conduct of the Armies, the advantages and
disadvantages of both Parties; their Skirmishes, Battles, Assaults, and the
Plots of the chief Towns, where any enterprises of weight have been done. His
Exercises were to be Hunting and Riding; his Company few, but choice, etc.


This Gentleman after his return out of France, was created by the King Baron
of Upper Ossory in Ireland; where he died a good Protestant, a Publick-spirited
Patriot, and an honest man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Fitz-Alane, Earl of Arundel.
HIs first appearance in the World was to adorn the Court, his next was to
serve it. First his Estate and Train attends King Henry to the Interview with
France, and a while after his Anno H. 8. 24.
Valor and Conduct is commanded by him to the War.

Equally prepared is he to please and awe that Country: The Duke of Suffolk
is made General for his Popularity, and the Earl of Arundel Lord Marshal, for
his Spirit and Prudence; and both being before Bulloign, this Noble Lord run up
his Squadron under a running shelter about eleven at night, to the very Walls
of the City; which being battered down by the Canon, which was mounted some
forty yards higher, opened to the close Besiegers a passage that gained the
whole Town by composition.

Neither was he less active in Peace than War: A piercing apprehension, a
strong memory, a large and capacious judgment, a dexterous prudence, a
discerning wisdom, was the least of his happiness: For to his sufficiency and
capacity, he added a good disposition and integrity; and to that, vigor and
gracefulness. He was the excellent Personage, that 1. Discerned, 2. Embraced
and performed what was Noble and Public: (To know, to will and effect what is
good, make up a God.) To these were added a strong Nature, a deep Study, and a
very great Experience; qualities separated in others, but united in him: Nature
will out, Education is rude; Education without Resolution, is loose; Resolution
without Experience, is heady; Experience grounded upon particular Events, is
uncertain, without the study of General and Immovable Principles: Knowledge of
things in their sources and original causes, without Nature, is a Burden: All
these without Exercise, are a Notion.

This Nobleman thus furnished, derived much Honor from his Ancestors, more to
them; ennobling that Blood to a Glory, which some had debased to a Blush. That
great Name after four hundred years shining in that Honor with various luster,
setting in him as the Sun he bore with a full splendor: The last effort of
Nature is a Masterpiece; the last blaze of the Candle a shine.

Other Noblemen were made King Edward's Overseers for their Integrity; he one
of his Assistants for his Ability: When an Enemy was to be awed to a
submission, he was General, such his Fame! When the Country was to be obliged
to a loan, he was Agent, such his Popularity! The first advanced him to the
Comptrollership under Henry the Eighth; the second to the Chamberlainship under
Edward the Sixth.

Nature has provided that ravenous Beasts should not associate, le^t they
should be too hard for it; and Government, that prime Counselors should not
agree, le^t they overthrow it: Warwick envied the Protectors Greatness, and
Arundel would limit his Power: both with the rest of the Council declare
against him. But le^t he should urge the same things against Warwick that he
did against Somerset; they, who love the Treason, bu(...) hate the Traitor,
turn him first out of Favor, and then out of Council, until Queen Mary's time
when he as an ancient Nobleman of England, (tha(...) owned no upstart-designs
against the old way of succession) stood for her Right, and as a stiff
Catholic promoted her Religion: So that July 21* 1553. he came from the Queen
to Cambridge, where the Duke of Northumberland was, and entering his Chamber,
the Duke fell at his feet, desiring him for Gods sake to consider his case, who
had done nothing but by Warrant from the Council: My Lord, (said the Earl) I am
sent hither by the Queen to arrest you. And I (said the Duke) obey your Arrest;
beseeching your mercy for what I did by Commission. You should have thought of
that sooner, (said the Earl.) Here you might have seen at once the vicissitude
of Fortune, the frailty of Man, the dejectedness of Guilt, the bravery of
Innocence, who would neither be trampled on by Greatness, nor trample on
Misery; of an equal temper between pity and resolution. As long as his Youth
bore it, we find him for Action; but when years came upon him, we find him in
Council, as with Wotton (...) the great Treaty at Cambray: Yet not so unactive,
but that as Sir William Pickering for his sweet Demeaner, so he for his Estate
was voiced an Husband to Queen Elizabeth.

When the rest of the Council were for dealing with the Queen of Scots
underhand and at distance, he was for treating with her plainly; and said in
the Queens presence, The wisdom of the former Age was so provident that it
needed not, and so plain that it endured not shifts. Leicester would persuade
the Duke of Norfolk to court the Queen of Scots, but Arundel would not hear of
it without the Queen of England's consent: Experience is always wary, yet has
its weaknesses, wherein it may be surprised. For this Noblemans Kindness to his
Friend, balancing his Duty to his Mistress, brought him, the Earl of
Southampton, the Lords Lumley, Co^ham, Piercy, etc. to a Praemunire: whereupon
he said, He is never wise, that is not distrustful.

Fear, that betrayeth the succors of Reason, when predominant, guardeth them
when moderate, and is more safe, though not so Noble as that valiant confidence
that bequeaths a dilated Freedom to all faculties and senses.

But of all his Actions this is most remarkable: Treating with the Scots, he
writ to his Majesty King Henry the Eighth, what he had gained already,
requiring to know his further pleasure: The King takes advice with his Council,
who all agree that the Peace should be concluded: Whereupon the King caused his
Secretary the Lord Paget to write to him to that purpose; but withal, he called
Mr. Cecil secretly to him, bidding him tell my Lord, That whatsoever he had
written in his Letter, yet with all speed possible he should break the Treaty.
Mr. Cecil replying, That a message by word of mouth being contrary to his
Letter, would never be believed: Well, (said the King) do you tell him as I bid
you, and leave the doing of it to his choice. Upon Mr. Cecil's arrival, the
Earl of Arundel showed the other Commissioners as well the Message as the
Letter; they are all for the Letter: he said nothing, but ordered that the
Message should be written before, and signed by his fellow-Commissioners, and
thereupon immediately broke up the Treaty, sending Cecil with the advertisement
of it to the King: Who, as soon as he saw him, asked aloud, What, will he do
it, or no? Cecil replied, That his Majesty might understand that by the
enclosed. But then the King, half angry, urged, Nay tell me: Will be do it or
no? Being then told it was done, he turned to the Lords and said, Now You will
hear news, The fine Treaty is broken: Whereto one presently answered, That he
who had broke it deserved to lose his Head; to which the King straightly
replied, That He would lose a dozen such heads as his was that so judged,
rather than one such Servant as had done it: and therewith commanded the Earl
of Arundel's Pardon should be presently drawn up, the which he sent with
Letters of Thanks, and assurance of Favor.

Five things must a Statesman comprehend.

1. The Law. 2. The Government. 3. The Time. 4. The People. And 5. The Prince.
Under an active Prince, you must regard the Prerogative; under an easy one,
the Law; under a complete one made up of a just measure of Greatness and
Goodness, those two things are distinguished only in the nice discourses of
some Speculative, being but one great Rule in the solid actions of that Prince.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Dudley Duke of Northumberland.
HIs favor was first purchased by his Fathers blood, and improved by his own
cunning. King Henry sacrificed Sir Edmund Dudly to allay the Peoples rage, and
raised his Son to appease his Ghost. He that disobligeth a multitude, must fall
himself; but he that in so doing serves his Match* Prince, p. 56.
King, may advance his Posterity. Something high he was in the Kings favor,
because standing on his fathers Grave; but higher as he stood on his own Merit:
He knew his Fathers service made his way to favor; his own Education therefore
must prepare him for employment. Favor without Parts is a reproach; Parts
without favor are a burden. The King restored him to his Fathers blood, and
his own industry recovered his Abilities. There are those that under the notion
of wisdom commit the greatest folly, either in too much conversing with the
world without, or in too much reflecting on themselves within: Sir John was
made up of both; some time he allowed for Action, more for Consideration. There
is not any thing so prejudicial to Action, as to be bent upon Action without
intermission: for as the eye sees not the Objects touching it, but those only
more remote; so the understanding continually plunged in Affairs, is not so
quick-sighted in occurrents, as his who sometime retireth himself from public
Action, beholding it aloof off by consideration. In the heat and tumult of
Affairs, Reason has not that power as may give conduct and motion to active
life: besides, experience teaches us, that the eye having lost its quickness
with too much looking upon the light, recovereth it again in the dark: the
spirit in like manner dazzled, weakened, transported and distracted among the
multitude and variety of Affairs, ought to recollect and recover its force in
the privacy of some small retreat; which Sir John made to Italy, the seat of
policy and experience; whence I pray God he brought no more (says my Author)
then his closeness and reach.

His Sovereign saw he deserved Honor, but saw not without offense to the
Populacy how to confer it, until the subtle Youngster showed him a middle way,
(upon the strange death of the Viscount Lisle, who lost his life for joy that
it was saved) by petitioning for that honor as a favor, which upon his
Mothers account was his right: The crafty Youth entered himself of the
Cardinals Retinue first, and then of the Kings. Much was he employed by him at
Sea, as an Overseer of the Navy; more in the Field, as Director-General; most
of all in the Romish and French Court, as a Spy. He was too good a Proficient
in his School to fall with him, therefore we immediately observe him rising
with Cromwell, until the King made him Admiral, and he with his 200 sail upon
the Coast of Scotland made himself renowned; insomuch that the King left him
the next year Viceroy of France, and Deputy of Calice and Bulloign: where to
revenge the French attempts upon the Isle of Wight, he drew his Fleet up to the
Coasts of Normandy, landed 6000 men at Treport, burned the Suburbs of that Town
with the Abbey, destroyed 30 Ships there in the Haven, and then returned, not
having lost above fourteen persons in the whole Voyage: insomuch that in a
Treaty between Ard and Guisnes, wherein he was Commissioner with the Earl of
Hertford, Secretary Paget, and Dr. Wotton, the French were contented that we
held Bulloign till they paid us 800000 Crowns within the term of eight years.
For the further Establishment whereof, he and the Bishop of Duresm are employed
to take Oath of the French King and the Daulphine. His Master Henry dies, but
not his design with him: Norfolk is out of his way; Seymour will be so: he is
now Executor of King Henry's Will, he will be of his own. But as Nature, so
Policy works by degrees; first the graft, then the tree; after that, the
blossom: next that, the fruit: first meaner Essays, and then higher Actions.
There was nothing to be attempted at home, until we were secured and feared
from abroad; he therefore leads the Vantguard against the Scots so
successfully, that he is made Earl of Warwick. Here his spirit had ensnared
him, had not his conduct brought him off. When the Protector refused a Combat
as not becoming him, Warwick offers one: Bring me word (said he to the Herald
that brought the Protector a Challenge from the Lord Huntley) that thy Master
will perform the Combat with me, and thou shall have an hundred Crowns for thy
pains. But a public Conduct becomes a General better then personal Valor; and
he must so far only remember he is a Soldier, as not to forget he is a
Commander, and so a whole Army too.

Against the Rebels in Devonshire so happy he was that upon his discreet
Overture of Pardon, (Mercy is a Virtue with Valor, and but a Weakness with
Cowardice) and coming in person to assure(...) them of it, they saying, They
knew him so honorable, that if he came himself they would embrace it; threw
down their Arms, and submitted to Mercy.

Against the French, that took the opportunity of those Turmoyls, he was so
prosperous, that he sent them home from Jersey and Guernsey with the loss of
two thousand men.

Honor he had enough, and Power too, yet not what he aimed at; (our Souls are
infinite as in their duration, so in their capacity.) Ambition is like choler,
which is an humor that makes men active, earnest, full of alacrity and
stirring, if it be not stopped; but if it be stopped, and cannot have its way,
it becomes adust, and thereby malign and venomous: So aspiring men, if
progressive and successful (their passage to advancement being clear) are
rather active then perilous; but if curbed with some obstructions, their secret
discontent casts an evil aspect upon all persons and actions, and becomes
rather dangerous than serviceable.

This great Earl's greater mind was useful, when prosperous abroad; but at
home troublesome, when finding a plain man in his way to height, great in his
power, greater in his Sovereigns affections, and greatest of all in his knowing
Brother; whose Spirit bare up his Authority, as his Authority supported His
Courage: In that Viz. The Lord Tho. Seymour.
man's Breast there was a Prudence that could reach, and a stoutness that could
balance this at once close and fierce man.

Interest and Blood united these Brothers so strongly, that there was no
dividing of them, but by practicing on their Wives, whose Humors were above
their Interest, and Fancy above their Relation. Their precedence is made a
question at Court, where it bred first a distance, and upon an Interview
contrived in this Lords house, a difference; that difference is improved to an
animosity, (he can do little that cannot blow up a spark in a Woman's Breast to a
flame) that animosity to malice, and malice cannot dwell long in those weaker
breasts without a mischief; mischief they cannot do themselves: (The Ivy cleaves
to the Oak, and these Women to their Husbands, though both ruin the things
they cling to:) What suggestions! What insinuations! What pretty fears and
jealousies* What little tales and passions! Yet continual droppings wear a
Stone: The Women's discords derive themselves into the Husbands hearts, until
the Admiral falls, and leaves the Protector to his own Integrity: Whose large
Trust and infinite Business could not but bewray him to some Error, as his
great Power did to much Envy, that first divested him of that Power, and then
of his Life.

There is not a more admirable Wisdom directing the contrarieties of Nature to
an Harmony, than there is a close reach in some men to reconcile variety of
Humors, Affections, Oppositions, Rancounters, Events and Changes to one
Design. The Protectors easiness is betrayed to confidence; his too late fears,
to a confidence at first, and at last to irregularities: the hopes of some were
encouraged; the grievances of others were aggravated and pitied; the envy of a
third part was excited; and He the soul in all and every part of the action.
The Protector was free spirited, open-hearted, humble, hard to distrust, easy
to forgive: The Earl was proud, subtle, close, cruel and implacable; and
therefore it was impar congressus between them, almost with as much
disadvantage as between a naked and an armed person. Two nets are laid to take
the Protector; the one breaks, the other holds: The Treason was only to give a
Report, the Felony for designing the death of the Earl of Warwick a Privy
Counselor, did the execution.

He being removed out of the way, this Earl of Warwick, as his Predecessor,
meditates the honor of King-making. To this purpose he joins himself by
alliance to the best Families, and advances his children by employments to the
greatest trusts; particularly (what Sir Richard Baker says had been better if
it had never been) his Son Robert (afterward Earl of Leicester) was sworn one
of the six ordinary Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber: upon which particular the
foresaid Historian observes, That after his coming into a place so near him,
the King enjoyed his health but a while. The Duke of Somerset is trained by his
enemies to such fears and jealousies, as transport him beyond his own good
nature, to an attempt one morning upon the Earl of Warwick, now Duke of
Northumberland, abed; where being received with much kindness, his heart
relented, and he came off re infecta. At his coming out, one of his company
asked him if he had done the deed? he answered, No. Then said he, You are your
self undone. And indeed it so fell out: for when all other Accusations were
refelled, this only stuck by him, and could not be denied; and so he was found
guilty by a Statute of his own procurement, viz.

That if any should attempt to kill a Priby-Counsellour, although the fact were
not done, yet it should be Felony, and to be punished with death.

This, notwithstanding many Divertisements used, went so near the consumptive
Kings heart, that he prepares for death. The Duke now within ken of his
design, considering the Kings affection for Reformation, the Lords and other
Purchasers kindness for Church Lands, the Judges fear, the Courtiers
compliance, carried on a Will with a high hand, (trembling with anger, says
Judge Mountague, if any opposed him; yea, saying, That he would fight in his
Shirt with any that contradicted it) wherein the Crown was bestowed on Jane
Gray, his fourth Sons Wife, (the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth being laid
aside.) But he forgot (as what man, though never so reaching, can consider all
things?) that there is an invisible Power in Right, that there is a natural
Antipathy in English men against Usurpation, and as great an inclination for
the succession: A Point they had conned so well of late out of the Statute made
for that purpose, that they could not well be put out of it by this new-started
Design. The People stand by Queen Mary: the Council notwithstanding their
Engagement to stand by him at his going away, (when he observed in Shore-ditch
that the People gazed on him, but bid him not God speed; and he told the Lords,
They might purchase their safety with his ruin. To which one of the Lords
replied, Your Grace makes a doubt of that which cannot be: for which of us all
can wash his hands clear of this business?) proclaimed the Queen at London, as
he does at Cambridge; where yet the Earl of Arundel (who offered his life at
his feet when he marched out: O the Vicissitudes of this lower world!) arrests
him resolutely, and he submits weakly, first to an Imprisonment, and then to a
Trial and Execution.

The first night he came to Cambridge, all the Doctors supped with him; and
Doctor Sandys is appointed to preach before him next day. The Doctor late at
night betakes himself to his Prayers and Study, desiring God to direct him to a
fit Text for that time. His Bible opens at the first of Joshua, and (though
he heard no voice with St. Augustine, saying, Toll and lege) a strong fancy
inclined him to fix on the first words he beheld, v. 16. And they answered
Joshua, saying, All that thou command us, we will do; and whithersoever thou
sendest, we will go: A Text he so wisely and warily handled, that his Enemies
got not so full advantage against him as they expected.

The next day the Duke advanced to Bury with his Army, whose feet marched
forward while their minds move backward. Upon the News brought him, he returned
to Cambridge, with more sad thoughts within him, then valiant Soldiers about
him. Then went he with the Mayor of the Town, and proclaimed the Queen; the
Beholders whereof more believing the grief in his eyes when they let down
tears, then the joy professed by his hands when he threw up his Cap. Slegge
Sergeant at Arms arrests him in Kings-Colledge; and when the Proclamation of
Pardon set him at liberty, the Earl of Arundel re-arrests him, at whose feet he
craves mercy; a low posture in so high a person! But what more poor and
prostrate then Pride it self, when reduced to Hist. Camb. p. 131.
extremity? Behold we this Duke as the Mirror of Humane Unhappiness!

As Nevil Earl of Warwick was the make-King, so this Dudley Earl of Warwick was
the make-Queen. He was Chancellor of the University, and Steward of the Town
of Cambridge; two Offices which never before or since met in the same person.

Thus as Cambridge was his Vertical Point, wherein he was in the height of
Honor; so it was his Vertical, where he met with a sudden turn, and a sad
Catastrophe. And it is remarkable, that though this Duke (who by all means
endeavored to aggrand his Posterity) had six sons, all men, all married, none
of them left any issue behind them. Thus far better it is to found our hopes of
even earthly happiness on Goodness, then Greatness. Thus far the Historian.

It was Lewis the eleventh's Motto, Pride and Presumption go before, Shame and
Loss follow after. In three sorts of men Ambition is good:

1. In a Soldier, to quicken him.

2. In Favorites, to balance others.

3. In great Statesmen, to undertake invidious Employments: For no man will
take that part except he be like a seeled Dove, that mounts and mounts because
he cannot see about him. And in these men it is safe if they are mean in their
original, harsh in their nature, stirring in many little, rather then in any
great business. Greater in his own interest then in his Followers. Humility
sojourneth with safety and honor, Pride with danger and unworthiness. No man
below an Anointed One, is capable of an unlimited Power; a temptation too great
for Mortality, whose highest Interest if indulged, is Self; and if checked,
Malice. Dangerous is the Power of an aspiring Person near a Prince, more
dangerous his Disguise, as who acts all things against his Master by his
Authority.

Let no man upon this example ever repose so much upon any man's single Counsel,
Fidelity or Discretion, as to create in himself or others a diffidence of his
own Judgment, which is likely to be most faithful and true to a man's own
Interest. Let every man have some things that no man shall obtain, and some
things that no man must dare ask; because you see here, if we let all go
without reserve, our Reputation is lost in the world by the Reputation our
Favorite gains with us.

There was in Rome a certain man named Enatius, somewhat entered in Age, and of
natural condition mutinous, ambitious, and troublesome: Adrian being advertised
that he was dead, fell into a great laughter, and swear, That he could not but
wonder he could intend to die, considering what great business he had night and
day. Considering how many Affairs he had to manage, how many cross accidents to
accommodate, I wonder what time he had to die: And considering his many
pretenses for the Protestant Religion, especially that for King Edward's, I
wonder with what face he could die a Papist.

But I have forgot my self: for there are two sorts of persons in Machiavel
that must either not believe, or not profess any Religion: The first, the
Statesman, that acts in public Affairs; the second, the Historian, that
writes them.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Peter.
HE was born in that great Nursery of Parts, Devonshire; and bred in a greater,
Exeter-Colledge. That College made him a Scholar, and All Souls a Man. His
capacity was contemplative, and his Genius active; observing, rather then
reading; with his eye more on men, then Books; studying behavior, rather then
notion; to be accomplished, rather then knowing; and not to err in the main,
rather then to be excellent in circumstance. His Body set off his Parts with a
grave dignity of presence, rather then a soft beauty of aspect: His favor was
more taking then his color, and his motion more then his favor; and all such,
as made his early Vices blush, and his riper Virtues shine.

The Earl of Wiltshire first pitched upon him for his Sons Tutor, and then for
his own Companion. Noble Families set off hopeful Parts, and improve them.

Cromwell's quick eye one day at my Lord, spyeth his Personage, and observes his
Carriage. (He was a man himself, and understood one.) Nothing would satisfy
him, but that the young Gentleman should come to Court, and go to Travel. King
Henry loved any All Souls man, but was enamoured with him, in whom concurred
the three Perquisites of that Society.

1. A Gentile Extraction. 2. A graceful Behavior. 3. Competent Learning.
The young man designed for business, was to travel for Education, and the
Scholar for Experience.

1. His Pension is allowed him, 125 l. a year.

2. His Tutor is assigned, who had been there before, and could instruct him
what he should see, where he should go, what acquaintance to entertain, what
exercise or discipline to undergo.

3. His Instructions were drawn up: as,

1. That he should keep a Diary of what the chiefest places and the eminent
persons, either apart or in Conventions, yielded worthy of Remarque and
Observation.

2. To have before him a Map or Card of every place he goes to.

3. Not to stay long in any one place.

4. To converse with no Englishmen but Agents, Ambassadors, or such grave
persons as his Majesty would direct him to.

5. To endeavor after Recommendations from persons of quality in one place, to
those in another; keeping still his correspondence with the most public and
eminent persons of every respective place.

Within five years he returned a complete Gentleman, correcting the Vices of
one Country with the Virtues of another; and being one happy Composition of
every Region. Sir John Philpot was not so much the worse, as Sir William was
the better for travel; He returning the shame of all Nations; of his own, by
his weakness abroad; of others, by their follies at home: This coming home the
honor of his own by his abilities abroad, of others by his perfections at home.

Two things improved his travel:

1. An Artificial and careless freedom, that opened others. 2. A natural
gravity, that shut him up, and was more capable of observing their Virtues, and
escaping their Vices.
Peter Earl of Savoy came to do his homage to Otho the fourth in a double
attire; on the one side Cloth of Gold, on the other shining Armor: the
Emperor asked him what meant that Lindsey-Woolsey? he answered, Sir, the
attire on the right side is to honor your Majesty, that on the left is to
serve you. Sir William Peter returns with those Gayeties of carriages on the
one hand that might adorn a Court, and with those abilities on the other that
might support it. His first employment was the Charts, the Latin Letters, and
the Foreign Negotiation; the next, was Principal Secretary: In which Office,
Wriothesley was rough and stubborn, Paget easy, Cecil close, Mason plain,
Smith noble; Peter was smooth, reserved, resolved, and yet obliging. Both the
Laws he was Doctor of, and both the Laws he made use of; the Civil Law to
direct Foreign Negotiations, and the other t(...) give light to Domestic
Occasions.

In the Kings absence in France 1544. Cranm(...) and Thorleby are to assist the
Queen in matters o(...) Religion, the Earl of Hertford in Affairs of War* the
Lord Parr of Horton, and Doctor Peter, in th(...) Civil Government; (whose
Maxim it was, It i(...) the interest of the Kings of England to be the
Arbit(...) of Christendom.) Thus much he was to the Que(...) by Henry the
eighth's Deputation, and no less to King Edward by his Will.

A man would wonder how this man made a shift to serve four Princes of such
distant Interests as King Henry, King Edward, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth;
until he recollects the French King, who enquired of a wise man how he might
govern himself and his Kingdom? the wise man took a fair large sheet of Paper,
and in stead of an infinite number of Precepts, which others use to offer upon
that subject, he only writ this word, Modus, A Mean. In King Henry's time he
observed his Humor, in King Edward's he kept to the Law, in Queen Mary's he
intended wholly State Affairs, and in Queen Elizabeth's he was religious, his
years minding him of death, and his death of his faith. He moved with the first
Movers in most transactions to his apparent danger, yet he had motions of his
own for his real security. Able he was at home, and very dexterous abroad;
particularly at Bulloign. The Philosophers exercising their Gifts before an
Ambassador, he asked one that was silent what he should say of him? Repart to
your King (says he) that you found one among the Graecians that knew how to
hold his tongue. Ab, (said Mounsieur Cha^illon) we had gained the last 200000
Crowns without Hostages, had (...)t not been for the man that said nothing,
(meaning Secretary Peter.)

Neither was he better at keeping his own counsel, then at discovering other
men's; as appeared by the intelligence he had, that the Emperor had sent Ships
to transport the Lady Mary into Germany, in case the King would not allow her
the practice of her Religion, (though three men knew not that Design in the
German Court) whereupon he fetched her to Leez; and thence, under the notion of
preparing for Sea-matters, he sent over five thousand pounds to relieve the
Protestants.

Active he was about the Will in compliance with his duty to King Edward, but
as nimble in his intelligence suitably to his Allegiance to Queen Mary; whom he
assisted in two Particulars: 1. In making the Match: 2. In searching the bottom
of Wiat's Insurrection: therefore,

1. When the Church Lands went against her conscience, Sir William peter must
be sent for. 2. When the Pope sent another Legate to turn out Pool, he must be
sent for; (who advised her to forbid him this Land, as she very resolutely
did.)
As serviceable was he to Queen Elizabeth, till his Age not being able to go
through the difficulties, and his Conscience being impatient of the severities
of those busy and harsh times, he retired to Essex, where his Estate was
great, and his Charity greater: both which he bequeathed his Son John, who was
by King James made Baron of Writtle in that County.

Observations on the Life of Cardin(...) Pool.
HIs Extraction was so high, that it awakene(...) King Henry the Eighth's
Jealousies and his Spirit so low, that it allayed i(...) When he reflected on
his Royal His Mother was Daughter to the Duke of Clarence, and Granchild to
Edward the IV
Relation, he w(...) enjealousied to hard thoughts of restraint and security;
when he observed his modest Hopefulness, he was obliged to those more mild of
Education and Care, as more honorable than the other, and a safe: Religion and
Study would enfeeble that Spirit to quiet contemplation, which more manlike
exercises might ennoble for Business and Action. It was but mewing him up in a
study with hopes of a Mitre, and there would be no danger of his ambition to
the Crown. The Privacies of the School and College made him a stranger to the
transactions of Court; and he was to follow his Book, that he might not
understand himself.

His preferments were competent to content him, and yet but mean to expose him.

Three things concurred to his escape from King Henry's Toil.

1. His Relations ambition, that could not endure he should be wrapped in
Black, that was born to be clothed in Purple. 2. His own Inclination to add
Experience to his Learning. 3. The Kings Policy, to maintain him abroad, who
could not safely keep at home.
No sooner arriveth he at Paris, than the Pope ca(...)esseth him as a person
fit to promote his Interest: The House of York supports him, as one that kept
(...)p their Claim; and the general Discontent cries him up as one that was
now the Hope of England, and might be its Relief.

That he might not come short of their Expectation, or his own Right, his large
capacity takes in the Learning of most Universities, observes the way of most
Nations, and keeps correspendence with all eminent men: The first of these
improved his Learning, the second his Experience, the third his Converse.

The Marquess of Exeter, the Lord Mountacute, Sir Nicholas Carew, Sir Edward
Nevil, Sir Geoffery Poole, would have made him a King, (but to gain him a
Crown, they lost their own Heads) and Pope Julius made him a Kings Fellow; but
he was never Head of this Church since he put the Red Hat on this Cardinal.

The King had him declared for a Traitor in England, and he him excommunicated
for a Heretic at Rome. His Friends are cut off by the King at home, and the
Kings Enemies cherished by him abroad.

But Princes are mortal, though their hatred not so: For before the Kings
death, he would needs be reconciled to Pool, and as some thought, by him to
Rome; wherefore he sends to him now in great esteem in Italy, desiring his
opinion of his late Actions clearly, and in few words: Glad was Pool of this
occasion to dispatch to him his Book de Union Eeclesiarum, inveighing against
his Supremacy, and concluding with an advice to Henry to reconcile himself to
the Catholic Church, and the Pope(...) Head thereof. Our King having perused
this, a(...) knowing it could not lie hid in Italy (though P(...) had promised
not to publish it) sends for him b^ Post to come into England, to explain some
Passag(...) thereof: but Pool knowing that it was declar(...) Treason there to
deny the Kings Supremacy, refused; desiring the King nevertheless in Letters
to him and Tonstal, to take hold of the present time, and redintegrate himself
with the Pope; whereby he might secure his Authority, and advance it with the
honor of being the cause of a Reformation of the Church in Doctrine and
Manners.

King Edward is King of England, and the Cardinal like to be Pope of Rome,
keeping pace with the Royal Family; He Head of the Church Catholic, They of
that in England: But King Edward's weakness of Body suffered him not long to
enjoy his Throne, and the Cardinals narrowness and easiness of spirit suffered
him not at all to sit in his chair.

For upon Paul the Third's death, the Cardinals being divided about the
Election, the Imperial part, which was the greatest, gave their voice for
Cardinal Pool; which being told him, he disabled himself, and wished them to
choose one that might be most for the glory of God, and good of the Church. Upon
this stop, some that were no friends to Pool, and perhaps looked for the place
themselves, if he were put off, laid many things to his charge; among other
things, That he was not without suspicion of Lutheranism, nor without blemish
of Incontinence: but he cleared himself so handsomely, that he was now more
importuned to take the place then before, and therefore one night (they say)
the Cardinal came to him being in bed, and sent word they came to adore him, (a
circumstance of the new Popes Honor) but he being waked out of his sleep, and
acquainted with it, made answer, That this was not a work of darkness, and
therefore required them to forbear until next day, and then do as God should
put in their minds. But the Italian Cardinals attributing this put-off to a
kind of stupidity and sloth in Pool, looked no more after him, but the next
day chose Cardinal Montanus Pope, who was afterward named Julius the Third.

I have heard of many that would have been Popes, but could not; I write this
man one that could have been one, but would not.

But though he would not be Pope of Rome, yet when Mary was Queen, he was one
of England; where he was Legate, and if it had not been for the Emperor, had
been King: For as soon as she was in the Throne of England, he was sent for out
of Italy into the Chair of Canterbury; but Charles the Emperor, by the Popes
power, secretly retarded his return, fearing it might obstruct the propounded
marriage between his Son and the Queen. Indeed the Queen bare the Cardinal an
unfeigned affection for six reasons:

1. For his grave and becoming presence, that endeared him no less to those
that saw him, then his parts and prudence did to those that conversed with him:
The Diamond is then orient, when set in Gold.

2. For his disposition, as calm as her Majesty's, and as meek as his
Profession.

3. For his Age: being about ten years older, the proportion allowed by the
Philosopher between Husband and Wife.

4. For Alliance: she being daughter to Henry the Eighth, and he Grandchild to
Edward the Fourth.

5. For his Education with Her, under his Mother.

6. For his Religion, for which he was an Exile, as she was a Prisoner, and
both Confessors.

But now when the marriage with Prince Philip was consummated, Pool at last got
leave for England; and to wipe away all suspicion of Lutheranism, wherewith he
was formerly taxed, he became a cruel, that he might be believed a cordial
Papist: For Full. Hist. Cent. 16. p. 14.
meeting in Brabant with Emanuel Tremelius, requesting some favor from him, he
not only denied him relief, but returned him railing terms; though formerly he
was not only his very familiar Friend, but his Godfather too, when of a Jew
he turned Christian. Arrived in England, (as the Historian goes on) he was
first ordained Priest, being but Deacon before, and then consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Queen being present, at Bow; where rich in costly Robes, and
sitting on a gilded Throne, his Pall was presented to him: Adorned, he
presently mounts the Pulpit, and makes a dry Sermon of the use and honor of
the Pall, without either Language or matter; all admiring the jejuness of his
Discourse, as if putting off his Parts, when putting on his Pall.

He made the breach formerly between England and Rome, by exasperating both
sides: he now reconciles it, obliging many by his carriage, awing as many by
his presence, dazzling all by his pomp and splendor. Now he confirms the
Institution of Clergymen into their Benefices; he legitimateth the Children of
forbidden marriages; he ratifieth the Processes and Sentences in matters
Ecclesiastical; and his Dispensations were confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Two things he was intent upon:

1. The Church Priviledges; whereof one he procured was, That the Clergy should
not show their Horses with the Layty, but under Captains of their own choosing.

2. The Spanish Interest; and therefore Paul the fourth, who was as intent upon
the French, and looked upon the Legate as the principal Promoter of the last
War in France, sends Cardinal Peito to ease him of his Legantine Power in
England. But the Queen so ordered the matter, that by her Prerogative she
prohibited Peito entrance into England, and got the foresaid Power established
and confirmed on Cardinal Pool, as she did likewise 1000 l. 2 year for his
better support out of the Bishopric of Winchester. The more he lived in
England, the more he was Italianized; conversing with their Merchants, and
practicing their thrift; his Pomp being (says my Author) rather gaudy then
costly, and his attendance more ceremonious then expensive. Fearful he was of a
Bank here, (if Queen Mary died) careful of one beyond Sea if he lived:
therefore as he sends all his Estate to Italy by his* Will when he died, so he
did most of it by Bills of Exchange while he lived: the first was judged his*
Policy, (the heart whereof is prevention) the second his Gratitude, bestowing
his Superfluities on them who had relieved his Necessities. Of all his Estate,
Aloisius Priol took but the Breviary he had always in his Pocket, so devout he
was! and the Diary he had always in his Closet, so exact he was to observe what
was done by others, and recollect what had escaped himself* Die he did not of
Italian Physic wilfully taken by himself, as Mr. Fox suggests; nor of English
Poison, given him by the Protestants, as Osorius affirms; but of a Quartain
Ague, then Epidemical in England, and malignant above the ordinary nature of
that Disease. This man was a Catholic in his Interest and Charity, and a
Protestant in his Conscience. We cannot (was his saying) give too much to Gods
grace, nor too little to our own merits. He said when he came to England, I
came hither not to condemn, but reconcile; not to compel, but desire. He would
burn the Ashes of one or two Protestants when dead, to avoid the suspicion of
Heresy; but the Bodies of none when alive, to contract the real guilt of
Cruelty. In Council sound were his Debates for the main; circumspect his
Suggestions of Circumstances; reaching his foresight of Consequences: wary his
Precautions of Impediments; moderate and soft his Advices; prompt and steady
his Expeditions; happy his Memory; many his Observations; large his Reading;
strong his Spirit; solid his Judgment; sharp his Apprehension; fluent, but
weighed; full, but pertinent; grave, but quick his Discourse: what he
pronounced, was a Decree with Queen Mary; what he said, was Law with King
Philip(...) His naked Proposition was Demonstration; his Word Reason, fetched
from the Principles of things, and grounded on their Causes. His Modesty never
sued for Greatness, though that sued for him: for great men he said were lave
to six things: 1. To men's humors; 2. To business; 3. To Fortune; 4. To their
own Followers; 5. To Fame; and, 6. To the Public I will say no more of him,
but that Modesty undoeth a Maid, and is the fool only that puts Virtue out of
Countenance. Bashfulness is at best but a weak and treacherous Virtue.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Russel.
HIs Name and his Valor is as ancient as the Conquest; Virtue flowing in every
Age of that Family with its Honor and Worth, keeping pace with their
Advancements. In every man that we meet with, there are three things that
immediately offer themselves to our Consideration:

1. The Mind. 2. The Behavior. And 3. The Person.
His Mind was befriended by Nature with a quickness and a capaciousness, helped
by public Education to a solidity and stayedness; improved in Travel with
Observation, and raised by the slow, but happy degrees of his Preferments to
Skill and Experience. They had need be slow and wary in that place where there
is no failing the second time, the first error being irremediable: therefore
well-ordered Policy imitateth Nature, which works slowly, and step by step,
causing the Blade to come from the Grain, the Tree from the Graft, the Blossom
from the Tree, and Fruit from the Blossom: so (says my Author) ought Policy to
raise great persons from one degree to another; to the end, that having made
their Essays in meaner matters, they may finish their Masterpieces in more
eminent Affairs. 2. He that demeans himself well, is ever ushered in by a
friend that recommends him to the company that knew him not.

Sir John had a moving beauty that waited on his whole Body, as that standing
one does upon the Face and Complexion: Such a grace and comeliness waited on
his Noble Mien, as exacted a liking, if not a love from all that beheld him.

A midling Clarity and quickness is best in Wine, that is, neither too thick
upon the Lees, nor yet too quick: our Knights comportment and carriage was
neither dull nor vapouring, neither gross nor affected, but of a becoming
temper, at equal distance with the Clown and the Pedant, what is contemptible,
and what is invidious. 3. But both these were set off with his Person, of a
middle stature, neither tall to a formidableness, nor short to a contempt:
straight and proportioned, vigorous and active, with that pure blood and
spirits that flowed and flowred within his swelling Veins, and disposed him to
those natural and innocent, those manly and noble Exercises of Dancing, etc.
Dancing, I say, which he was not exquisite in, for that is vanity; nor ignorant
of, for that is meanness: but a graceful exercise, (wherein he was carelessly
easy, as if it were rather natural motion, then curious and artificial
practicing) which endeared his severer Virtues to that place where the worth
that rises must be complaisant and pleasing, as well as serviceable and
useful. But the favor which proceeds from personal grace and comeliness,
although it seem to be doubly united, yet it is that which is soonest dissolved
and dissipated, there being nothing so inconstant as men's humors, which not
only change through Ages, but also by some small occasion or accident which
may arise: Sir John therefore brought himself into Court by what humoured, but
kept himself in there by those things that did oblige him; and stood not upon
his Majesty's pleasure, but his Interest; adding to his more aerie Courtships,
more solid Employments. From the softer Court therefore we must follow him to
the Camp, and that before Terwyn, where we find him daring and active: 1. In
skirmishing the French every day; 2. In recovering the red Gun overthrown in a
Lane from 10000 French, under the Earl St. Paul as General, with 250 resolute
Reformades under himself but Captain; although he was once taken Prisoner, as
before Calice, where he redeemed himself from the Officer that had taken him
for 250 Crowns, on condition he would conduct him safe from the French Quarter,
as the man did, until they were gone so far, that Sir John takes him Prisoner,
compelling him to the Reimbursement of his money, with 200 Crowns more, to be
bestowed on the Common Soldiers. As severely active was he at the siege of
Tournay, as the oldest Soldier; and yet as innocently pleasant at the Mask
there, as the youngest Courtier. One of the sixty he was that went with the
King to cut off the Passage between that City and the Army, and one of the
eleven that went with his Majesty to entertain the Ladies at Lisle. From
serving one King in France, he had the honor as it was thought to kill another
in England, (I mean James of Scotland) and challenge a third in Paris. The same
thing raised him, that advanced Wolsey: for he being sent to Maximilian, (after
Treasurer Napbant had brought him to Court) dispatched his business so soon,
that the King chid him for not being gone, when he was returned; and withal
asked him, Whether he had seen the Post that he had sent after him about a
circumstance that had escaped him? He answered, He met him in his return; but
he had presumed to add that particular of his his own head, for which he asked
his Majesty's pardon, and had his favor too for the Deanery of Lincoln, and
the Almonership. Sir John was commanded with 1500 men to cut off the Convoy to
Terwyn: which he performed with that speed and success, that when the King saw
him, he said, I, I, Sir John, while we are fooling, the Town is relieved. So it
is indeed, (said he) for I have sent them 2000 Carcases, and they have spared
me 1200 Wagons of Provision. I but, said the King, I sent after you to cut off
the Bridge Dreban. That, replied the Knight, was the first thing I did:
wherefore I am upon my knees for your Majesty's grace and pardon. Nay then,
(said the King) by Lady, thou have not my pardon, but my favor too. He is the
man for a Princes service, whose mind is present, and prudence is ready to
meet with sudden occasions, and accommodate unexpected emergencies. The first
effect of that favor, was his Nomination for one of the sixteen that answered
the French Challenge at the Lady Mary's Marriage, at Paris, November 7, 1513.
which showed his manhood, and how valiant he was. The second was, that he was
one of the Forty five that were to be about his Majesty at the instant of his
Interview with the King of France at Guisnes; which was an Argument of his
presence, and how goodly a man he was. The third was, that he was one of the
Twenty two that with the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral, and Sir William
Fitz-Williams Vice Admiral, proposed that secret, and therefore successful
Design upon Britain, under pretense of Scowring the Narrow Seas, (for now he
is as good in the Sea as he had been in the Field) for which he and eight more
of his fellow-Captains, Sir Joh. Cornwallis, etc. are Knighted by the aforesaid
Lord Admiral: which speaks him a Seaman, and indeed one of a general capacity.
The fourth was, the great Trust his Majesty reposed in him, when he was sent in
disguise to widen the difference that was newly broken out between the Duke of
Bourbon, the High Constable of France, and the French King; which he managed so
well, that the discontented Duke declares for the Emperor and the King of
England; to the great encouragement of the English, the satisfaction of his
Majesty, and the success of his Design upon Anchor, Boungard, Bray, and other
places, where Sir John showed himself as active now, as he was before cunning;
as much surpassing the French Spirit in action, as he had overreached their
Prudence in Negotiation.

But in vain was it to serve that King, unless a man obliged the Cardinal, (he
that courts the Virgin Mary, must not neglect her little Saints) him he
attended in his second Journey to France, first to honor, and then to serve
him. And now after his decease, when King Henry had done the work of mercy
(which was most proper for himself, as being most popular) upon the
Lincolnshire Rebels, he deputed the Duke of Suffolk, Sir Francis Bri^ns and Sir
John Russel to perform that of Justice, which is most distastful: wherein yet
he behaves himself with that exactness, that the Country was very well pleased,
and the King as well satisfied; insomuch that we find our Knight now called
from a Commander in the Field, to be Controller at Court: where he managed his
Masters Expenses thriftily, reduced his Family discreetly, reformed his
followers effectually, and filled up his place with the awe of his presence,
and the influence of his Authority, that he was at once its support and its
glory. Indeed Courts being those Epitomes wherethrough strangers look into
Kingdoms, should be Royally set off as with Utensils, so with attendance, that
might possess all Comers with reverence there, and fear elsewhere.

His Person graced his Employment, and therefore his Majesty honored his
Person with the Order of the Garter, and the Title of Lord Russel; and that his
Preferment might keep pace with his Honor, he is made Lord Privy Seal, and his
Nephew Sir John Gage Controller. His Honor slacked not his Activity, but
improved it; neither was his Virtue only violent in Ambition, and dull in
Authority. Power to do good, is the true and lawful end of aspiring: therefore
my Lord to his Staff, added his Sword; and to his Court-honour, his
Fieldservice, as Lieutenant General before Muttrel, and Marshal before Bu^oign;
to the relief of the first whereof, he drew Mounsieur Governor of Bi^^.
Bies, that his Majejesty might take the second. In the Camp he drew up the
Designs, in the Field he managed the Treasure, and in Action to him was
entrusted the Conduct and manage. In the Kings last Will and Testament he was
the fifth person, and in his Sons Council the fifth; to whom he discovered a
French Plot the first year of his Reign, and for whom he broke the Devonshire
Rebels, what with delays, what with stratagems, to divide them according to
their several Inclinations, the second, for which service he was made Earl of
Bedford: The third, in the Faction at home between the Seymours and the
Dudleys, he was Neuter: in the Treaties abroad between the French King and his
Majesty of England, he was Principal; where he observed three Rules: 1. That
there should be a general Muster at home, while this Treaty went on abroad. 2.
That there should be a blow given the Scots before there was a Peace made with
the French. 3. That we should first know the French Overtures before we made
our own.

But while he was here, he discovered a Plot that the Emperor had to transport
the Lady Mary over to his Dominions, and thereby bring her Brother to his
terms: whereupon he with 200 men watches one Port, the Duke of Somerset with
200 more a second, and Master St. Leiger with 400 men a third, while the Lady
was fetched by my Lord Chancellor to the King. But while he was serving his
Master the King abroad, his Friend the Protector wanted his advice and
assistance at home(...) he being of purpose sent out of the way, while tha^
unfortunate Duke is first betrayed by his own folly, and then ruined by his
Enemies Power. I find his hand among the rest of the Counselors in a Letter
to Queen Mary, but not in Arms against her* He was concluded by the major Vote
to a Commission for Peace, but not to Action for conscience sake. Faithful he
is therefore to her in Council, and serviceable in Spain and France; from the
first of which places he brought her a Husband, and from the second a Treasure.
He understood her Right, and disputed not her Religion; regarding not so much
her Opinion, as his own Duty; not what she was, but what he should be. And thus
he behaved himself, until his dear Mistress Elizabeth took him for one of her
Protestant Counselors to balance her Popish ones: and not only of her
Council, but of her Cabinet: (for as every man must have his Friend to ease his
heart, so Princes have their Favorites to partake of their cares) and the
Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir William Cecil, were the
only Persons to whom the Queen communicated her design of Reformation, and
correcting the Common Prayer; and they ordered affairs so, that the Protestants
should be in hope, and yet the Papists should not be out of hope.

King Philip had a quarrel with the Queen for rejecting his suit, the King of
Sweden for slighting his Son, the King of France in his Wives Right, the Queen
of Scots in her Own, and the Pope for excluding his Supremacy; her Subjects
were as unsettled in their Loyalty as in their Religion: What remained? but
that my Lord of Bedford and Sir William Cecil should make up a well-tempered
House of Commons by their Interest, who should carry along an indifferent House
of Lords by their Resolution?

When he had served the Queen in Parliament for the settlement of her Kingdom
at home, he served the Kingdom in an Embassy to Scotland, to set up its
correspondence abroad.

The Earl of Leicester aimed at the Queen of England, and the Earl of Bedford,
to divert him and secure Scotland, designed him for the Queen of Scots; whom he
watched for two things: 1. That she should either match with an English
Subject, or 2. With a soft and weak Forreigner; that either the Scots might be
in league with us, or have no peace at home.

His last service I find is a complement, when he was sent by the Queen as her
Deputy, with a font of massy Gold worth 1043 l. to hold King James at his
Baptism; with express command not to acknowledge my Lord Darley as King. This
his service was as lasting as his life, which ended in old Age and Renown. He
conveyed his Virtue and Honor to the Excellent Francis, as he did to the Right
Honorable William Earl of Bedford, now living.

Observations on the Life of Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester.
THe tuition of the Earl of Dorset's Children raised Wolsey; traveling with
the Duke of Norfolk's, raised Gardener: Fox his service in the quality of
Secretary, made the first; and his in the same quality, made Gardener.

There are three kinds of Understanding: The one, that is advised by its self;
the second, that understands when it is informed by another; the third, that
neither is advised by its self, nor by the assistance of another. If this
Doctor failed in the first, and his own invention, he exceeded in the second,
of making use of others; for he was one of them that never heard or read what
was not his own. His Profession was the Civil Law, that guides foreign
Negotiations: His Inclination was that general Policy that manageth them.

His Eminencies were three:

1. His Reservedness: Whereby he never did what he aimed at, never aimed at
what he intended, never intended what he said, and never said what he thought;
whereby he carried it so, that others should do his business, when they opposed
it; and he should undermine theirs, when he seemed to promote it. A man that
was to be traced like the Fox, and read like Hebrew, backward: If you would
know what he did, you must observe what he did not.

2. His Boldness. Authority sometimes meets with those impediments, which
neither power can overcome, nor good fortune divert, if Courage and Fortitude
break not through and surmount them; and the motions of the irascible
faculties, such as Hope, Boldness and Choler, being well ordered, and conducted
by Reason, engage those difficulties she encountereth in the execution of her
designs: Reason discovered him his enterprises, his Will inclined him to them,
and the noble transports of his regular passions set out both with that ardour
and vehemency, as bear down obstacles, and compass the design: A hope he had,
that never rashly engaged him in desperate undertakings; an audacity that
precipitated him not weakly into impossibilities; and a choler that led him not
blindly to inevitable ruins: Consideration managing the first, Discretion and
Foresight the second, and Reason the third. What does it avail a man to be
wise, in knowing what is fit to be done; prudent, to invent means; just, to
appropriate affairs to public good; authorized and happy, to cause them to
succeed; if a Courage, guided by Reason, accompanied with Prudence, ruled by
Discretion, animated by a generous Boldness, be not diligent, quick and prompt
for Execution? His Nature was generous and constant: His Education (like that
of the Roman Youth among Statesmen) manifold and solid: His Soul was free, and
dis-engaged from any particular Design.

3. Eloquence: That added to his Parts what colors do to a Picture; state,
grace and light: Reason is the Ornament of a Man, Speech the Interpreter of
Reason, and Elequence the grace of Speech; wherein the Orator excels other
men, as much as they do other creatures. His Wisdom advised his Prudence
contrived, his Courage resolved, and his Eloquence persuaded; adding at once
gracefulness to his Designs, and vigor to his Enterprises; as that wherewith
he could satisfy men's Reasons, and master their Passions, by which he carried
them whither he pleased: His lively Expression animates his Reason, his
Eloquence his Expression, and his Gesture his Eloquence; whereby he charmed the
Senses, mollified Hearts, incited Affections, framed Desires, checked Hopes,
and exercised a sacred Empire over every man he dealt with.

These qualities improved with Travel, raised the Doctor to be the
Chancellour's Secretary, and the Kept at Black Friars.
Legantine Courts chief Scribe at home, a sly Agent in Italy, a successful
Orator in Germany, and Leiger Ambassador in France. In Italy, he with Doctor
Fox (having the King of France his Agent to second them) gained the Popes
Commission for hearing of the Cause between King Henry the VIII, and Queen
Katharine.

In Germany he undermined the French King, and in France the Emperor.

Upon the poor Pope (whom he found not worth 20 l.) perplexed between the King
of England, who had set him at liberty, and the King of Spain, who had
maintained him, he wrought so far, as to gain a dubious Letter in Cipher to the
King, and a clear promise to the Cardinal, both about the suppression of some
Monasteries, and the Divorce; which the crafty Agent extorted from the fearful
man, with his Necesse est, etc. although all this while he palliated this his
main business, with some impertinent overtures about King Henry the seventh's
Canonization: None better understanding the just degrees, seasons and methods
of Affairs, then this Doctor: Where he spoke one word for his Majesty's
Divorce, he spoke two for the Cardinals Advancement, having the French Kings
Letter with him to that effect, in omnem eventum: In order whereunto he
threatened the Pope from Germany, and Germany from Rome; so that their mutual
jealousies forced them to a compliance with his Royal and Sacred Master. A
great Agent he was in this business while Wol^ey's Secretary, a greater when
the Kings; in which capacity he writ, they say, one Book for the Pope's
Supremacy in his Masters Name, and another for the Kings in his own.

He draws the Kingdom's Remonstrance against Upon Record in Sir Rob. Cotton's
Library.
the Pope, and the Pope's against the Kingdom: He and Doctor Fox are employed
to gain the Vote of Cambridge for the Divorce; where he brought it from the
Negative to even Voices, and from even Voices to a Disputation, and upon that,
to a Determination on the Kings side: for which we find him now Bishop of
Winchester, Archbishop Cranmer's Assistant at pronouncing the Divorce at the
Priory of Dunstable, and one of the two Ambassadors at the Interview between
King Francis and King Henry.

As he had declared himself by writing, so he drew up a Form whereby others
might declare themselves by oath for the Kings Supremacy: And as he owneth the
Kings Authority, so he maintains it in his Apology for Fisher's Death.

But because no power is lasting, when Religion is not v^nerable, the wary
Bishop promotes the Statutes of six Articles in the House of Commons, in spite
of Cromwell and Cranmer; and urges the retaining of some essential Latin As,
Ecclesia, poenitentia, Episcopus, Sacrificium, Pontifex.
words in the translation, in the Convocation; Words, for their genuine and
native meaning, and for the Majesty of the matter in them contained, not to be
Englished: Though he could not keep the word from shining, yet had he wit
enough to keep it in a dark Lanthorn, to keep the Laity at their distance, and
bear up the Will Worship of Rome.

Had he kept here, King Henry had been satisfied; but when his success improved
his boldness, and that precipitated his undertakings, he must be quarreling
with the Protestant Queens, and so fall out with the Uxorious King, under whose
displeasure he continued while he lived, as he did under his sons afterward:
(First, for refusing a confession of his fault, and then for not subscribing
some Articles proposed unto him, though he owned the Supremacy, the
Reformation, and said of the Common Prayer, That though he would not have made
it so himself, yet be found in it such things as satisfied his conscience; and
therefore be would both execute it himself, and cause others of his Viz. Those
of his Diocese.
Parishioners to do it: and if be were troubled in conscience, he would reveal
it to the Council, and not reason openly against it:) so that he lost his
Liberty and his Bishopric, until he was restored to both by Queen Mary, (who
kissed and called him her Prisoner in the Tower) and likewise advanced him to
the Chancellourship; wherein he did more harm by others then himself; keeping
always behind the Curtain, and acting in Oxford by Visitors, in London bv
Bonner, and in his own Diocese by Suffragans: Only in two Particulars he
declared himself:

1. Against the Princess Elizabeth: saying, In vain it is to lop the Branches,
while the Root remains. 2. Against the Exiles: Threatening that he would watch
their supplies, so that they should eat their nails, and then feed on their
fingers ends.
But threatened Folks live long; and before the Confessors were brought to that
Bill of fare, the Bishop was eaten of worms himself, dying suddenly and
strangely; wholly a Protestant in the point of merit, who had been in other
things so zealous a Papist.

One piece at once of his Prudence and Resolution, and I have done: The Lord
Protector by Letters solicited Gardener to resign Trinity-Hall to the Kings
hand, who designed one College out of that and Clare-Hall: Most politic
Gardener (says my Author) not without cause suspecting some design or casualty
might surprise the Interval between the dissolution of the old, and the
erection of this new Foundation, civilly declined the motion, informing his
Grace, That the way to advance the study of the Law, was by promoting the
present Professors of that Faculty, (now so generally discouraged) and not by
founding a new College for the future Students thereof; seeing Trinity-Hall
alone could breed more Civilians then all England did prefer according to their
deserts.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Herbert.
HIs Family had not endeared its self to the ancient Kings by its service, nor
his Grandfather himself to King Henry the Seventh by his Relation, more then
He did Himself to King Henry the Eighth by his Merit. He was a great Pattern of
ancient Virtue, that in the greatest Fortune enjoyed the least Liberty:
Vigilant and careful: One whose Power was attended with Solicitude, (there was
an Eye in the ancient Scepters) and his Solicitude with Temperance; (he that
commands himself, commands the World too.) While some men's imprudent integrity
can do no harm, and others base cunning can do no good; Sir William's Prudence
and Integrity was equally able for both, as there was occasion. Very close and
successful were his and my Lord Sheffield's Negotiations abroad: Very resolute
and manly his Conduct at home. He was one of the twenty four Counselors to
Henry the Eighth while he lived, and one of the sixteen Executors of his Will
when he died. All great Undertakers must avoid softness and effeminacie, the
bane of great Natures and Actions: For where there is love and pleasure, there
is fear; and where there is fear, there is that which enchains Generosity and
confines Courage.

He had his double Diary; the first for Actions, the second for Observations
upon them: And indeed his and Sir William Kingston's Manuscripts give a great
light to the History of those times: In which Diary we find what actions he
did against the Scots by constant alarms with three thousand Welsh, and what
against Ket's Rebels by notable stratagems with two thousand. The man is
complete that has a Head and a Heart.

As to the Faction in King Edward's time, he would not concern himself, looking
on accusations in a Commonwealth as great advantages to check ambition, and
vent discontent; that the one may not aspire too dangerously, nor the other
break out too irregularly. And as little concerned was he in King Edward's
Will; his business being rather obeying the Sovereign that was, then
determining who should be.

He was a thoroughly advised man: one that gazed not on the issues, but enquired
into the reasons and springs of Actions.

Very useful he was in Queen Mary's Council, and no less in King philip's War;
where he got St. Quintin for him, and a lasting Renown for himself: who died in
Queen Elizabeth's time, and left this plain Character behind, That he was a
noble Gentleman, of a trusty, a free and an open Nature.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Tho. Manors, and Sir Ralph Euers.
IJoyn them both in my Observations, because they agreed both in their
dispositions:

1. Both Nobly Religious, and so blessed themselves, and being a blessing unto
others: Their Religion was attended with Magnanimity, Constancy, Wisdom,
Prudence, Valor and Counsel, as the Products of it; and with Success as the
Issue.

2. Both famous and renowned; having Honor, as the shadow does the Sun, going
before them in their younger years, to make their way to action; keeping even
with them in their middle age, to countenance and credit their proceedings; and
following them in old Age to eternize and embalm them: Both making their way to
Honor as Agesilaus in Plutarch, or Epictetus in Strabo, by saying what was
well, and doing what was better; or with Socrates, by being what they appeared,
and appearing no more then they were: (Virtue, though obscure, may satisfy me;
it must be renowned, or it cannot serve others:) But action is the life of
things, and good dispositions are rather a man's Inclinations than his Virtue.
Both therefore were in their Courage regular, in their Conduct observant, in
their Addresses obliging, in their Passions even, in their Enjoyments severe,
and in their Services equal.

Sir Thomas Manors first weakened the In King H. 8's time, when they rise
against the Resormation.
Northern Rebels, by such discreet Propositions as met with many of their
Humors and Interests, and then resolved to engage them, but that the little
Brook Dun swelled miraculously to a River, between both Armies: And at the same
time Sir Ralph Euers held Scarborough-Castle, where he had no Soldiers but his
own Servants, nor any sustenance for twenty days, but bread and water. For this
service he is made Lord Warden of the Marches, as Sir Thomas is Lord Governor
of the North.

Both did his Majesty as much service in Peace for his Revenue, as in War for
his Security: Both against the Cardinal's way of raising Money, which was but
the relieving of a present need by laying the foundation of a lasting
inconvenience; being very careful that their Master did not lose in the
president what he gained in the money.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Baker.
THere is one of this Name remarqueable in every Kings Reign since the
Conquest; here is one now renowned in this: 1. For Integrity, to be neither
awed nor corrupted: 2. For a Spirit public as Nature, neither moved with
particular respects, nor terminated in a private Design.

The French were so insolent in London the eighth year of Henry the Eighth,
that when one Williamson a Carpenter was about to pay for two Pigeons he
bought, a Frenchman takes them out of his hand, saying, They were no meat for
Carpenters, but for my Lord Ambassador; who concerned himself so much in the
case, that he had Williamson imprisoned: Sir John sued to the Ambassador for
the man, who answered, That the English Knave deserved to be banged for denying
any thing to a Frenchman. Whereupon Sir John replied, You know not that you are
in London: A notable reply, considering that the City was up next day against
Strangers, in so desperate a tumult, that none could suppress but Sir Thomas
More, and none settle but Sir William Kingston and Sir John Baker. No sooner
had he allayed the disorder at home, but he with the Bishop of St Asaph, are
sent to appease a Rebellion abroad, I mean in Denmark, though in vain; when the
Kings cruelty exceeded their apology, and ruin was more elegible with that
people, then duty or obedience: Where he observed these six Maxims, in order
to a newly-conquer'd-Kingdom:

1. That the Royal Line should be extinguished. 2. That the old Customs in Laws
and Taxes should be observed. 3. The Prince must be there to observe their
humors in person. 4. That the Officers be moderate and honest. 5. That there
be Colonies planted in one or two places that are the Keys of the State. 6.
That the Neighbors should be weakened and divided, and the Inland Forts
demolished.
As he would have composed the troubles of foreign Princes, so he served the
necessities of his own, being the most successful Commissioner for the
Benevolence in the Country; and the most active Agent for the loan in London:
Wherefore I find him Chancellor of the Exchequer, An. 1545, and one of the
assistants to the Trustees for King Edward, 1547.

Judge Mountague was the only person that durst dispute King Edward's Will:
Judge Hales and Sir John Baker were the only Counselors that durst refuse
it; the first whereof stood to the Law, against Power; the second, to his
Allegiance against Interest; and both to the Rights of the Crown which are
lasting, rather then the Designs of some Favorites that are as momentary as
their Greatness, and as uncertain as their Grandeur.

This constant and firm resolution to stick to his Duty and Loyalty, brought
him to his Grave in peace and honor; having been a faithful Counselfour and
Servant to King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Kingston.
HE was one of the greatest Courtiers at Masks and Revels, one of the best
Captains at Sea, and one of the most valiant and skilful Commanders by Land.
None more pleasing to the English Ladies, none more terrible to the French
King. Cunningly did he discover the King of Spains Design upon Navarre to his
Majesty, by pretending a Revolt to that King of Spain; and as cunningly did he
draw the French Troops into a snare, by counterfeiting a retreat toward
Britany. His Advice had saved the Admiral at Breast, and his Foresight did
rescue Sir Edward Belknap near Guisnes. He was Knighted for his Service at
Tournay, and made Marshal for his Success at Flodden. He was one of them that
persuaded the City to its duty at When the rising was there.
Shoreditch; and if that would not do, he was to command it from the Tower;
being Commissioner in the first place, Aug. 2. and Lieutenant of the second,
September 6. (The Multitude is rather to be awed then reasoned with. Some
Princes have disarmed their Subjects, others have divided them, a third sort
have obliged them; others yet have kept up Plots amongst them: but all have
built and commanded Fortresses to secure themselves.) It were well if Love did,
it is necessary that Fear should guide this World. The King condescended one day
to Just with him; and he, though invincible, to fall by his Majesty. (You must
let a Prince be a Prince in every thing.) So complaisant he was, that he was
one of the six Maskers at Court at 50; and yet so grave, that when diverse young
men that were familiar with the King after the French mode were banished, he
kept his Station, as one of the stayed men, at 30. He was one of the 16 that
attended the King in his first Interview with the Emperor; and one of the 40
that waited on him in the two last with the King of France; narrowly escaping
at the last that poison as some thought, or ill vapors, as others conclude,
whereof the open-hearted Lord Brooks, the valiant Sir Edward Poynings, reserved
Sir John Pechy, and active Sir Edward Belknap, died: whereupon with his advice,
all Frenchmen were put to their Fines, and all Scotch to their ransom.
Neither was he only for show, but service too, leading the Right Wing of the
Army at Guisnes, when Sir Everard Digby commanded the Left, the Lord Sands the
Vanguard, Sir Edward Guilford then Marshal of Callis the Horse, Sir Richard
Wink field the Rear, and the Duke of Suffolk the main Battle. Where his
Assaults on Cappe and Roy spoke him a Soldier, as his underhand correspondence
with the Lord Isilstein argued him a Statesman.

Sir Thomas Manors the first Earl of Rutland of that Name discovered, and Sir
William Kingston told his Majesty the Cardinals Plots against the Kings
Marriage with Queen Anne, and his Design to marry him to the Duchess of
Alanzon: A Design, that because it seemed to overreach his Majesty in
cunning, and really did cross his Inclination in malice, that incensed his
Majesty to a passion which could be appeased with no less a sacrifice then the
Cardinals fall: in order to which, the next service of this Knight, is as
Lieutenant of the Tower to take him to custody: which he did at Leicester with
a Noble resolution, considering that man's greatness, with a due reverence
regarding his calling, and with a tender compassion respecting his condition;
persuading him gently of the Kings Favor, at that very time when he was come
to be an Instrument of his Justice. And what he did to a Cardinal now, he did
to Queens afterward: never Prince commanding higher services then King Henry,
nor subjects discharging them more undauntedly then Sir William: because
therefore he was so severe a Lieutenant in the Tower, he is made a
Provost-Marshal in the Field; in which capacity, after the Devonshire-Rebels
defeat, we have these two remarkable stories of him.

1. One Bowyer Mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall, had been amongst the Rebels, not
willingly, but enforced: to him the Provost sent word he would come and dine
with him; for whom the Mayor made great Provision. A little before Dinner the
Provost took the Mayor aside, and whispered him in the Ear, that an Execution
must that day be done in the Town, and therefore he must set up two Gallows.
The Mayor did so. After Dinner Sir William Kingston thanks him for his
Entertainment, and then desires him to bring him to the Gallows: where when
they were come, Sir William asked him, Whether they were strong enough? I, I Will
warrant thee, says the Mayor. Then, says Sir William, get you up upon them. I
hope, says the Mayor, you do not mean as you speak. Nay, Sir, says he, you
must die; for you have been a busy Rebel. And so without any more ado hanged
him.

2. A Miller that had been very active in the late Rebellion, fled, and left
another to take his Name upon him. Sir William Kingston calls for the Miller,
His Servant tells him that he was the Man. Then, says he, you must be hanged.
Oh Sir* says he, I am not the Miller. If you are not the Miller, you are a
lying Kn^ve: if you are the Miller, you are a traiterous one, and however you
must die. And so he did.

Punish the Multitude severely once, and you oblige them ever: for they love
that man only for his Good Nature, whom they fear for his Resolution.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Cheyney.
THree things advanced men in King Henry the Eighth's days: 1. Their
Extraction: 2. Their Wit: 3. Their Comeliness and Strength. For the First, his
Name was up since Battle-Abbey-Roll; as to the second, it was enough that he
traveled with Wolsey: and touching the third, there need be no other instance
then that at Paris, where upon the Daulphin's Proclamation of solemn Justs, the
Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess of Dorset, Sir Edward Nevil and He, answered the
Challenge; as not long after he encountered King Henry himself at Greenwich,
where he had the great Honor of a strong and valiant Knight, and a greater of
being overthrown by his Majesty.

Having engaged his Majesty's Person at home, he had the Honor to represent it
abroad; where his Commission was to complement the French King about his
Liberty, but his Business to observe the state of that place: Where he saw that
a Kingdom governed by a Prince who has under him other independent Lords, as
that of France, is no longer safe, than those Lords are either in Humor, or in
Purse; being always in danger either from their discontent or corruption: 2.
That Faction is always eager, while Duty is modest and temperate.

This Occasion ennobled his Virtue, and his Virtue improved the Occasion so
well, that I find him so eminent a Parliament Man the 22th of King Henry, that
as Sir Brian Tuke had the Honor to open the several Boxes sent from the
respective Universities, with their opinions about the Kings Divorce; so Sir
Thomas had the happiness in a set Speech to insist upon them all in general,
and every one in particular. And at Queen Anne's Coronation my Lord Vaux, Sir
John Mordant, Sir Thomas, and ten more, are made Knights of the Bath.

Having acquitted himself Nobly in Court and Council, he attends the Earl of
Hertford against the Scots, as Commissary; and Sir John Wallop with Sir John
Rainsford, as Marshal: for his Services in both which capacities, he is made
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in England; and with the Comptroller, Sir John
Gage, made Field-Marshal, and Treasurer of the Army before Bulloign: And not
long after* Treasurer of the Household, and one of the Assistants for the
Over-seeing of King Henry's Will.

When some were joining Others with the Protector, others for limiting him, Sir
Thomas would say, That (as Machiavel says, No Laws, so) No good could be done
by a Governor that was not absolute, without either a Restraint or a
Competitor.

Upon the Reformation he would say, That the disestcem of Religious Ceremonies
argued the decay of the Civil Government: good Princes have first kept their
People Religious, and thereby Virtuous and united: both old and new Rome stand
by this.

In a word, what makes all men, made him, A generous industry of Mind, and a
well-set hardiness of Body, which were attended while he lived with Honor and
Success, and since he is dead, with Repute and Renown.

Where eminent and well-born Persons out of a habit of sloth and laziness,
neglect at once the Noblest way of employing their times, and the fairest
occasions of advancing their fortunes; that State, though never so flourishing
and glorious, wants something of being completely happy: As soon as ever
therefore the Kingdom is settled (sedate times are the best to improve a
Commonwealth, as his quiet hours are the best to improve a man) he and Sir
William Howard addressed themselves as vigorously to the opening of Commerce
and Traffic, for the enriching of this Nation, as they had before to the
exercise of Arms, to secure it: Pursuing the Design with Resolution, and
keeping the frame of it in order with Industry, their constant Spirit
surmounting all Difficulties that stood in the way of their own Glory, or their
Countrey's Happiness; working so well upon the Russians, that they not only
obtained their Desire, but gained so far upon the Affections of that People,
that they obtained the greatest Privileges any Tradesmen ever enjoyed in
Muscovy; which the Russians were not easier in the promise of, then just in the
execution of that promise: So that that Trade is advanced not only beyond our
hopes, but our very pretenses too, by those three Particulars that never fail
of success: 1. Union: 2. Conduct: 3. Courage in enterprises vigorously begun
and watchfully pursued: Until Queen ELIZABETH concerned her self so far in the
Undertaking, as to influence it with a Character peculiar to the Dignity of
such a Constitution: which carried that Commerce higher then Others could raise
their Imaginations, as we see; whose profit by it is as remarqueable in this
Age, as their zeal for it was in the last: When Fear and Distrust, those
ignoble Passions that disparage all great Undertakings, which judged that
Design a Piece of extravagant Folly, sees it now an Act of profound Wisdom;
especially when it may be improved under CHARLES the Second and the Great, a
Prince who by admirable order of his conduct, the just administration of his
Revenue, and by his fatherly goodness toward his people, has put himself into
a condition to undertake without fear whatsoever may be put in execution with
Honor or Justice.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of Queen Mary.
THE Q. Eliz.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Observations on the Life of Sir Nicholas Bacon.
SIr Nicholas Bacon, a man full of wit and wisdom, was a Gentleman, and a man
of Law, and of great knowledge therein; whereby, together with his other parts
of Learning and Dexterity, he was prompted to be Keeper of the Great Seal; and
being kin to the Treasurer Burleigh, was brought by his help into the Queens
favor.

This Gentleman understood his Mistress well, and the times better: He could
raise Factions to serve the one, and allay them to suit the others. He had the
deepest reach into Affairs of any man that was at the Council Table: the
knottiest Head to pierce into difficulties: the most comprehensive Judgment to
surround the Merit of a Cause: the strongest memory to recollect all
circumstances of a Business to one View: the greatest patience to debate and
consider; (for it was he that first said, Let us stay a little, and we will
have done the sooner:) and the clearest reason to urge any thing that came in
his way in Court or Chancery. His favor was eminent with his Mistress, and his
Alliance strong with her Statesmen. No man served his Sovereign more
faithfully, none secured himself more wisely. Leicester seemed wiser then he
was, Bacon was wiser then he seemed to be; Hunsdon neither was nor seemed wise.
Much Learning my Lord Bacon gained in Bennets College in Cambridge, more
Experience in Paris of France: His Dexterity and Dispatch advanced him to the
Court of Wards, his deep Experience made him Lord Keeper. Alliance was the
Policy of that time. Bacon and Cecil married two Sisters; Walsingham and
Mildmay two more: Knowles, Essex and Leicester were linked; the prudent Queen
having all her Favorites Relations and Dependencies in her eye, and disposing
of them according to their several Interests. Great was this States-mans Wit,
greater the Fame of it; which as he would say, being nothing, made all things:
For Report, though but Fancy, begets Opinion; and Opinion begets Substance. He
was the exactest man to draw up a Law in Council, and the most discreet to
execute it in Court. When others urged the repeal of that Act whereby Queen
Elizabeth was declared Illegitimate, he rather suppressed it, choosing the
closure of a festered Wound more prudent then the opening of it; and judging it
more wisdom to satisfy the world with the old Law, That the Crown takes away
all defects; then to perplex it with new disputes, Whether Queen Elizabeth were
Legitimate. State-miscarriages are rather to be privately connived at, then
publicly redressed; the remedy it may be doing no more service then putting
the people in mind of the mishap. He neither affected nor attained to
Greatness: Mediocria firma, was his Principle and his Practice. When Queen
Elizabeth asked him, Why his House was so little? he answered, Madam, my House
is not too little for me, but you have made me too big for my House. Give me,
said he, a good Estate, rather then a great one. He had a very Quaint saying,
says Robert Naunton, and he used it often to very good purpose, That he loved
the Jest well, but not the loss of his Friend. He would say, That though
unusqnisque suae fortunae faber, was a true and good Principle; yet the most in
number were those that marred themselves: but I will never forgive that man
that loses himself, to be rid of his Jest. The Excellency of his Parts was
set off with the Gravity of his Person; and the Queen would say, My Lord Bacon'
s Soul lodges well. His Account of England and all its Affairs, was punctual:
his use of learned Artists, was continual: his correspondence with his
fellow-States-men, exact: his apprehension of our Laws and Government, clear;
his Model of both, methodical: his faithfulness to the Church, eminent: his
industrious invention for the State, indesatigable. He was, in a word, a Father
of his Country, and of Sir Francis Bacon. Sir Nicholas Bacon was that moderate
man that was appointed to preside at the Disputation between the Protestant and
Popish Doctors in the first of Queen Elizabeth. He was that Judicious
Statesman, to whom was trusted the management of that Parliament and
Convocation: The satisfaction of the People and Kingdom, and those Delatory
Proceedings with France, Spain and Rome, that were at the bottom of the great
work of Reformation, and settlement at that time.

Observations on the Life of William Cecil Lord Burleigh.
WIlliam Descended of the Roman Cecilii, say some.
Cecil was born with the advantage of being Richard Cecil's Son, (who was of
the Robes to King Henry, and a Legatee in his Will) and bred with that of being
Commoner of St. John's in Cambridge, and Student at the Grays Inn.
Innes of Court in London: whence he was advanced by his Pregnancy to serve the
Duke of Somerset in quality of Master of Requests, as he was afterward by his
Master to attend King Edward the sixth, in the capacity of Secretary of State;
where he furnished all Acts and Orders with Reasons of State, as he had them
fitted by able Lawyers with Arguments of Law. He loved always, they say, to
wrap the Prerogative in the Laws of the Land. He was constant, but not
obstinate in his Advice. Fuller Holy State ex Arist. l. 2. de Coelo, c. 4. and
10.
As the Planets are whirled about daily from East to West by the motion of the
Primum Mobile, yet have a contrary motion of their own from West to East, which
they slowly, yet surely move at their leisures: so our Statesman, though
yiedling in some things to Greatness of some Persons in an Age wherein it was
present drowning not to swim against the stream; Yet had he his
counter-endeavours against the prevailing strain, and privately advanced his
rightful Intentions against others wrongful Ambitions. If dissenting from his
Superiors, he did it with all humility and moderation; yet choosing always
rather to displease then betray. He was in much favor with King Edward, in
some with Queen Mary, in most with Queen Elizabeth; who though sparing of her
Honors, yet heaped on him the trust of Secretary of State, the Profits of the
Master of the Wards, the Advancement of Lord Treasurer, and the degree of Baron
of Burleigh: for as he followed the Marquess of Winchester in his Employment,
so he did in his Compliance. When he was out of Place, he was not out of
service in Queen Mary's days; his Abilities being as necessary in those times
as his Inclination; and that Queens Council being as ready to advance him at
last, as they were to use him all her Reign.

In Queen Elizabeth's time he settled the Crown by settling Religion; and by an
utter separation from Rome, strengthened England. He made equal use of those
that were then Protestants by Interest, and they who were so in Conscience:
Those that had affections for Church Lands, and those that had affections for
the Church. The Pope would by a Bull confirm the sale of Abby-Lands; But who,
said Burleigh, can confirm the Popes Bull? The King of Spain secured the Queen
in hope of her Bed, the Pope winked at her in hope of her Heart: Burleigh
overreached the one by a fair complaysance, and the other by insensible
alterations.

During the Queens ten years calm, Cecil provided for a tempest; and improved
her Shipping and Ammunition to a dreadfulness at Sea, as he did her Army to a
great skill and experience by Land. He made Holland our Stage of War, and our
School of Discipline; where England gained the security and experience of War
without its calamity and desolations; always Offensive, and once only
Defensive.

His Intelligence abroad, was no less then his Prudence at home; and he could
write to a friend in Ireland what the King of Spain could do for two years
together, and what he could not do. His Advices from his Pensioners abroad,
were presented Queen Elizabeth once a fortnight; 1. clearly and plainly; 2.
methodically and distinctly; 3. speedily and seasonably; 4. truly and fully. He
exchanged his Interest for Walsinghams Intelligence, who commanded what he
could do, as he did what the other knew. The Bull clapped at London-house, was
first in our States-mans Study; where they might learn what they were to do,
and Protestants what to expect, many years before any thing was visible.

When Leicester would have no Equal, and Sussex no Superior, then Cecil as
Neu^er served himself of them both. He would wrestle with neither of them, yet
he would trip them both: they having many rubs in their way, yet never saw who
laid them. He never quarrelled with any; neither, says Cambden, did he ever
sue, or was he ever sued. Prudens qui Patiens, was his saying, before it was
Sir Edward Cooks Motto: and he had rather tire out Opposition by his
Moderation, then improve it by his Impatience. Others were raised to balance
Factions, he to support the Kingdom: Fickle Favor tossed them, constant
Interest secured him. No fewer then the Marquess of Winchester, the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earls of Northumberland, Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester and
Westmorland contrived his fall; but reason of State and his Mistress kept up
his standing. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton advised them to clap him up, saying,
That then men would open their mouths to speak freely against him: but the
Queen understanding hereof, and standing, as I may say, Camb. Eliz. anno 15 79.
/ 80.
(says my Author) in the very prisondoor, quashed all their Designs, and
freed him from the mischief projected against him. Great was the value the
Queen set upon him, as her ablest Minister of State: for coming once to visit
him being sick of the Gout at Burleigh-house in the Strand, and being much
heightened with her Head-attire then in fashion, the Lords servant who conducted
her through the door, said, May your Highness be pleased to stoop. The Queen
returned, For your Masters sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spain.
She would make him always sit down in her presence: saying, My Lord, we make
use of you not for your bad Legs, but your good Head.

He was a good friend to the Church as then established by Law; advising his
son Thomas never to build a great House, or bestow any great charge upon an
Impropriation, as fearing the foundation might fail hereafter: yet conniving at
sober Non-conformists, to strengthen the foundation at present, he checked the
forwardness of private men, and advanced the honor of the public
Establishment on all hands. Good my Lord, (says he in his Letter to Archbishop
Whitgift, in the behalf of some squeamish Ministers) bear with my scribbling; I
write with the testimony of a good Conscience: I desire the peace of the
Church; I desire concord and unity in the exercise of our Religion: I fear no
sensual or wilful Recusant. I would not make Offenders, neither would I protect
them. And I pray your Grace bear this, (and perchance a fault) and yet I have
sharply admonished them, that if they will be Disturbers in their Churches,
they must be corrected: and yet upon your Graces answer to me, Ne suitor ultra
Crepidam: neither will I put Falcem in alterius Messem. (Was his Chaplain
Traverse his hand in all this?) And then again: If I had known his fault,
(says he of Brown) I might be blamed for Writing for him. Thus he carried
matters without passion and prejudice prudently, as became so great a
Statesman. He was not rigid, yet he was careful: He would help the
good-natured, yet punish the stubborn: He would rather be where nothing is
lawful, then where all things are so. He would never skrue up the Law to the
pitch of cruelty, nor unloose it to the remissness of Libertinism.

He was no less honorable a Patron of the University, then he was a faithful
Son of the Church: (the Church strengthens the State, and the Universities
furnish both:) particularly in the case of Rent-corn, which (says my Author)
first grew in Sir Thomas Smiths head, yet was ripened by Burleighs assistance;
whereby, though the Rents of the Colleges stand still, their Revenues increase.

He was not surer of all Churchmen and Scholars by his Obligations upon them,
then he was of all by his complaisance and pleasantness. None more grave then
he in Public, none more free in Private; especially at his Table, where he
drew something out of his heaviest guests; having an admirable Dexterity in
reading and observing men, their own occasional openings in common discourse;
there being more hold to be taken of a few words casually uttered, then of set
solemn Speeches, which rather show men's Arts then their Natures, as indicted
rather of their brains then hearts. His power awed many, his conversation
obliged more. He had his hour to put on his Gown, and his hour to put it off:
When he would say, Lie thou there, Lord Treasurer; and bidding Adieu to all
State Affairs, he disposed himself to his quiet and rest.

He laid the Designs of War by his own Theory, and his friends Intelligence;
yet he advised peace, and died before the Question was determined, Whether a
War with Spain? Others understood the Nature of War, but he only the
Expediency and Convenience. If War was necessary, none more forward to promote
it, none more careful to maintain it: knowing, that in vain do the brows beat,
the eyes sparkle, the tongue threaten, the fist bend, and the arm strike, if
the belly be not fed, and the back clothed: and indeed this was his
Masterpiece, that the Queen vying Gold and Silver with the King of Spain, had
Money or Credit when the other had neither; Her Exchequer, says my Author,
though but a Pond in comparison, holding water, when his River fed with a
Spring from the Indies, was dreined dry. It was with his advice* that that
Queen paid her Obligations in Preferments, rather then Money; giving away not
above two Largesses of that nature in her life. In a word, when others set in a
Cloud, he shined clear to his last: He saw Essex dead, Leicester slighted,
Mountjoy discountenanced; and what with the Queens constant favor, which
lodged where it lighted, and his own temper and moderation, when more violent
men failed, he died as great a Favorite as he lived; leaving his son Thomas so
much Estate as advanced him to the Earldome of Exeter; and his son Robert so
much State-Discipline as raised him successi^e to be Secretary of State, Master
of the Court of Wards, Lord Treasurer, and Earl of Salisbury.

He was a very exact and a wary Observer of Foreign Transaction; witness this
passage to Sir Henry Norris Ambassador in France: The rare manner of your
Entertainment, has moved the Queens Majesty to muse upon what score it should
be, being more then has been used in like cases to her Ambassadors, and such
as besides your own report has been by others lately advertised: And for that
in such things Guesses be doubtful, I pray you by your next advertise me what
your self do think of it; and in the mean time I know you are not untaught to
judge of the difference between fair words and good deeds, as the saying is,
Fortuna cum adblanditur Capitum advenit.

His thoughts of a Rebel that submitted, take in these words: Of late Shane
Oneal has made means to the Lord Deputy of Ireland to be received into grace,
pretending that he has meant no manner of unlawfulness toward the Queen: by
which is gathered that he grows weary of his lewdness: yet I think he is no
therwise to be reformed then by sharp prosecution, which is intended to be
followed no whit the less for any his fair Writings, as reason is.

Of Intelligence he writes thus: I doubt not but you shall have of his hand no
lack of Intelligence, which you must credit as you see cause by proof of the
event.

About Ambassadors Dispatches he says, He must write apart to the Secretary in
matters containing trouble and business, and to his Sovereign of Advice.

In a particular Negotiation about Pirates, he advised, That the King of France
and his Council might perceive that it is well known how the Pirates are
suffered to do what they will, notwithstanding it be contrary to Proclamation.
And yet you shall so order the matter, (says he to a French Ambassador) as not
that you shall find fault with this manner of suffering: for that ought
properly to be to the Spanish or Portugal Ambassador, with whom you may
sometime deal, to understand how they do, know what is done, and how they do
interpret it.

Touching the King of Scots murder, he would say, There are words spoken which
I hold best to suppress: Neither would I have you (says he to his friend)
utter any of these things, not doubting but shortly God will cause the truth to
be revealed.

Of an underhand Traitor he writes to his friend, I pray write unto me somewhat
more particularly for the proof of his traiterous speeches, whereby there might
be some ground made how to have him demanded.

Of the demanding of a Town promised in a Treaty: Sir Thomas Smith went to
demand Callis, not that we think the Governor will deliver it, but to avoid
all cavillation which they might invent: (for by Law it must be demanded upon
the very place; and being not delivered, the sum of 500000 l. is forfeited) Mr.
Winter shall pass secretly with him to take possession thereof, if they deceive
our expectation: but not past three of the Council know of Winters going.

Concerning the unreasonable words of Princes, he says, If hereof the
Ambassador (meaning the French) shall make any sinister report, you may as you
see cause well maintain the Queens answer to be very reasonable, as having
cause to mislike the manner of Writing of the Queen thereon: which nevertheless
you may impute to the unadvisedness of the Secretary: for so the Queens Majesty
does impute it.

Of the troubles in Scotland, he observed the French made their present
advantage to the damage of England: and you know that Scotland is the French
King to it, as Ireland is the Spanish.

Of Foreign News he writes to Sir Henry Norris, That he would be glad to have
a Note of the Names of the chiefest Nobility of France, and with whom they be
married: adding thereto any other thing that may belong to the knowledge of
their lineage and degrees, as you shall think meet.

He writes, That her Majesty being a Prince her self, is doubtful to give
countenance to subjects. I wish (says he) to have a Calendar of them who are
with the Prince, and also to see the Edicts that have lately passed from the
King against them, and that in these troublesome times, wherein accidents are
so diversely reported, your advices were large and repeated, and that we had
such Articles as pass on both sides.

Of France he says, You must think that seeing all the parts of Christendom
are intentive to hear of the matters of France, we cannot be careless to whom
the same belongs next of all, whatsoever the end thereof shall be.

Of the Distractions of France, thus to our Ambassador in France: If you told
the Queen Mother so as of your own head, as a thing you hear spread abroad in
the world, I think you might do well, and speak truly: for as for the Popes
Ministers, their Profession is to prefer the Weal of their own Church before
the good state of any Kingdom on earth; and whatsoever come of any thing, they
look only to the continuance of their own ambitious Ruling. And as for other
Ministers of Princes, or for men of War, it is a truth infallible, The more
they do impoverish that Monarchy of France, the better they think their own
Estates.

Of a plot discovered, he writes: We can truly hit no man, wherefore it is
necessary that you speak again with the Party that gave you this Intelligence;
and if the matter be of truth, and not a disguising to some other purpose, he
can as well obtain you the knowledge of the party in certainty, as thus to give
a guess at him: for as he has his Intelligence of the matter which he uttered
to you, so may be attain to a more perfect knowledge.

For the Protestants he says, I pray you put them in comfort; that if
extremity shall happen, they must not be left: for it is so universal a cause,
as none of the Religion can separate themselves one from another. We must all
pray together, and stand fast together.

Of a Professor he writes, The Queens Majesty will in no wise hear of such
matters, which she thinks are but changeable, and without fruit; although I
had earnestly moved her Majesty to have adventured some small piece of money
upon such a man: therefore I see no remedy but to pay him as well as may be
with good words.

Touching the Plot again: Methinks that the Parties that tell you such pieces
of tales, if the whole were true, might as well tell you the whole, as such
obscure parts: which if they do not, you might well allege them to be but
devices to breed unquietness and suspicion; and as I wrote before unto you,
they might be tempted with offer of rewards, that the truth of the matter might
be disclosed: and surely me thinks still, since the Informers will not be known
of the particulars in more certainty, that these things are intended to bring
us into their places: but yet no diligence is to be omitted.

Touching the delivery of an Embassy, he writes, And I think if you would in
the Translating thereof distribute it into sundry members by way of Articles,
you should the better carry it in your mind; making thereby an account with
your self of the better delivery thereof. And you shall do well to let some
such as favor the intention of the Queens Message, to see the Copy of the
Letter; whereby they may percase being called to give advice to the King,
further the cause, to the benefit of them of the Religion. I would be glad to
hear a Brief, or as they call it, a List of the Names of the princip^l persons
that have a charge now in these Wars of France on both parts, with the Contents
as near as you can of their numbers.

Of the Queen of Scots Affairs, he concludes: God send her Majesty clear of
these Scottish matters, whereinto the entry is easy, but the passage within
doubtful; and I fear the end will be monstrous: I am thrown into a maze at
this, that I know not how to walk from dangers. Sir Walter Mildmay and I are
sent to the Scottish Queen, as by the Queens Majesty's Letters you may see: God
be our Guide; for neither of us like the Message.

1. Knowledge is the Treasure of the Mind, Discretion is the Key: the Practick
Part of Wisdom is the best: a native Ingenuity is beyond the watchings of
industrious Study.

There are no such Guards of safety as Virtue and Wisdom: Danger cannot make
impression on the Virtuous, nor Fortune subvert the Wise: The Wise man cannot
fall. Prudence is a safe Conduct through the various Casualties of Mortality.
He declines in Wisdom, that falls in Fortune. Discretion sways the Stars and
Fate.

Ad summum sapiens uno minor est Jove; dives,
Liber, Honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique regum. "Take all; there is but one Jove
above him: He
"Is Rich, Fair, Noble, King of Kings, and free.


The World is a shop of Instruments, whereof the Wise man is Master; and a
Kingdom but a Frame of Engines, whereunto he is the Wheel.

2. Smoothness declineth Envy and Danger, Humility advances to Honor,
Moderation preserves in it. Men come down by Domineering. Haste undoeth that,
which a just Delay ripeneth. Our Wise man would say, Stay a little, and we will
have done the sooner. An Estate evened with these thoughts, endures. It Is an
excellent Motto:

Nolo Minor me timeat, despiciat ve Major. "My Inferior shall not fear, my
Superior shall "not despise me.


3. Humility shuns Honor, and is the way to it: The purest Gold is most
Ductile. It Is commonly a good Blade that bends well. The Reed that bends and is
whole, is better then the strong Oak that not bending breaks.

4. There is no such prevalent Workman as Sedulity and Diligence: A man would
wonder at the mighty things which have been done by degrees, and gentle
augmentations. Patience, Diligence and Moderation are the common steps to
Excellency. It Is for Omnipotence to do mighty things in a moment; but
degreeingly to grow to Greatness, is the course he has left for Man.

Observations on the Life of Walter Devereux Earl of Essex.
WAlter Devereux was by his Cicely, Daughter of Thomas Bourchier, late Earl of
Essex.
Mothers side born to, and by his Sovereigns favor possessed of the Earldom of
Essex: His Spirit was as the time, martial and active, equally impatient of
rust in his Soul, and in his Sword: Foreign Countries bred then those
Soldiers that England employed: The University made a Scholar, the Court a
Man, and Flanders the Soldier.

His Actions brought him to the presence, and his Presence commended Him to the
Heart of Queen Elizabeth: But the shadow does not more naturally attend the
Sun, then Envy does Favor: Since he must rise, its contrived he should rise so
high, that he must fall: Yet he might have lived longer, it was thought, if his
Wife had not there more favor then himself: Abraham was afraid of, and Sir
Walter was undone by his Sarah's Beauty: This is certain, he was no sooner in
his Grave, than the same great man whom he declared his Enemy at his Death, was
his Successor in his Marriage Bed.

Ambitious was he of the Irish Service, and subtle were others to fill up his
Sayls so wide, as to be over-turned; at once diving into, and ruining him by
his Humor: Weary was he of the Court, and weary, as he observed, was that of
him: In comes Leicester in this juncture, and advances him to the Sovereign
Honor of maintaining an Army at his own charge, and the Royalty of Claudboy in
Vlster; the first he knew would (as it fell out) undo him; the other was the
Bears skin, when he could catch, kill and fley it; and the whole plot was but
the supplanting of him out of a real Estate in England and Wales, to an
imaginary one in Ireland. Over he goes with as splendid a Retinue of Kindered,
Friends, supernumerarie Volunteers, as his Son to the same Service, or his
Grandson to one more unhappy: Sir William Fitz-William's Jealousy heard of his
Parade, and his Industry out-reached him so far, that all that preparation
amounted to no more honor, than to have been commissioned, after much
importunity and attendance, by him; nor to any more advantage than the bare
Government of Vlster: Little good did he in Vlster, (now under the discouraging
and heartless impressions of discontent) less in the South of Ireland, whither
he was remanded by the Deputy, whose design was not to see how successfully he
would conquer, but how dutifully he would obey; in six months time spending
4000 l. to ruin himself: But alas! in vain does he conquer, who was always
forbid to pursue and improve his Victory: no sooner did his Fortune favor him
in one place, but he was called to his Misfortune in another: for no sooner
does he by experience and acquaintance with the situation of any Place, the
humor or interest of any People, the weaknesses and strengths of any Enemy,
the advantages or disadvantages of any Undertaking, ripen circumstances toward
success, but he is called off to a new and unacquainted scene of action, where
he shall lose his Army, before he knows how to employ it. His friends at
Court grew few and cold, his foes many and active; his affronts continual to
disorder him by passion, or sink him in despair.

His Commission was but short before, but is none now; only three hundred men
stick to him: his Money failing, his Noble Followers withdrawing, his Common
Soldiers mutiny, and he is recalled. And happy had he been, could he have been
quiet: but nothing would complete some men's Designs, but his Ruin; and
nothing could ruin him but Honor, that at once pleased his humor, and wasted
his Estate. Earl-Marshal of Ireland he is made, and thither he goes in great
state to die, anno 1576, and the 36 of his Age: a year fatal to that Family,
which none of them exceeded but the last, who had been (...)ppy if he had died
sooner, or lived longer then he did. Although Sir Walter Devereux had not that
success over others which his Valor deserved, yet he had that conquest of
himself that Virtue only gives; showing himself as good at the Buckler, as at
the Sword; at suffering, as well as acting. All his changes from without he
bore with, none within; his even and solid mind that fashioned its own fate,
enjoying its constant calm amidst all the tempests of malice and ambition.
Those ignoble courses were not greater Arguments of his Enemies narrowness and
degeneracy, then his resolved Patience was of his largeness and generousness of
spirit; he being as much above those smaller tricks, as they were below his
Adversaries. We make our selves more Injuries then are offered us; and the
apprehension of wrong does more harm then the smartest part of the wrong it
self. It Is the Wise-mans glory, and the States-mans prudence, to pass by
Offenses. A Fool struck Cato in the Bath; and when he was sorry for it, Cato
had forgot it: for, (says Seneca) Melius putavit non agnoscere quam ignoscere.
Light Injuries are made none by a not-regarding: which with a pursuing Revenge
grow both to height and burden, and live to mischief us, when they might die
to secure us. It Is Princely (says one) to disdain a Wrong, who when
Ambassadors have offered Undecencies, use not to chide, but deny them
audience: as if silence were the way Royal to revenge a Wrong. The upper Region
is most composed; The wisest Rage the least, knowing that Observation and
Resent^ent do but provoke and encourage that Malice which neglect and silence
deads and dissipates. And it was Sir Walter's Fathers Maxim^, That Discontent
was the greatest weakness of a generous Soul, which is always so intent upon
its unhappiness, that it forgets its remedies.

This Lord was a great instance of that Maxim, That it is an equal mischief to
distrust all, as to believe all; although of the two, the safest is to
distrust: for Fear had secured this Noble Person, while Confidence ruined him;
it being a Virtue only when men were innocent, but ever since, the bane of
those that own it.

Three things undid this Earl:

1. That he could not imagine he was to be ruined by his Advancement. 2. That
he never mistrusted an Oath. 3. That he never considered, that as Princes, so
Favorites, have many eyes, and long hands.
He that is so open as to reserve nothing from friends, is renowned for
Charity; but he that is so to lie at the mercy of all, is marked for ruin. No
sooner understood my Lord of Leicester Essex his Disposition, but the bitter
Fool Pace could tell his Fortune, begging of my Lord at his departure the
making of his Mourning; and adding, You and I have done for this world.

Walter Earl of Essex had been happy if he had not lived in my Lord of
Leicester's time: his son Robert renowned, had he not been Sir Robert Cecil's
Contemporary; and his Grandchilde an Hero, had he not known my Lord Say and
Mr. Hampden.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Sussex.
THomas Radcliff Earl of Sussex, was of a very Noble and Ancient Lineage,
honored through many Descents by the Title of Viscounts Fitz-Walters. He was a
goodly Gentleman, and of a brave noble Nature, true and constant to his friends
and servants, noted for honesty: a very excellent Soldier, being one of the
Queens Martialists, who did very good service in Ireland at her first
accession, till she recalled him to the Court, where she made him Lord
Chamberlain; and though he was not endowed with the cunningness and dexterity
as others were, yet upon his Deathbed he gave his friends a caveat whom they
should beware. His words, (says Sir Robert Naunton) are these: I am now
passing into another World, and must leave you to your Fortunes, and to the
Queens Graces: but beware of the Gypsy, for he will be too hard for you all;
you know not the beast so well as I do. His Prowess and Integrity drew the
Soldiers after him, Leicester's Courtship and Cunning the Courtiers, Cecil's
Prudence and Service the Statesmen.

He succeeded his Father in his Fortune, and in his Favor; his Prudence and
Resolution promoting him to the Government of Ireland and the North; his good
husbandry and skill in Surveying, making him Justice in Air of all the Parks
beyond Trent; and his comely Presence advancing him Lord Chamberlain. Queen
Elizabeth poyzed her State by Factions abroad, and Parties at home; her
chiefest wisdom lying in her general correspondence and compliance with each
Party, as her Interest lay in their incomplyance and distance from one another.
My Lord of Sussex left this Memorial behind him, That for Rising Men to stick
to a side, is necessary; For Great Men to be indifferent, is wise: and this,
That he and my Lord of Leicester cleared and purged the Court: their cross
Observations refining each person that was admitted to Court; none daring any
injustice while Leicester observed him on the one hand, and Sussex punished him
on the other. Then no deserving Person could be excluded by the one, that could
serve his Prince; nor any undeserving one admitted, that might disparage him:
one Interest being sure to receive the one, as the other was to exclude the
other.

Diverse persons (says one) of equal Authority, though both wicked, do in
experience produce more Justice then a greater Probity in a single individua^
has been heard to pronounce; in a divided Court the Creatures of one Party
being the Enemies of another, no less powerful; and so they both become liable
to accusation, or capable of defense: and from the sparkles of this clashing,
not only Persons and Actions, but the Public Councils came to be refined from
the Rust and Cankers that grow by an Unanimity. Faction can be as little spared
in a Monarchy, as an Eye or an Ear, as through which the Prince has a clearer
apprehension of his own and others Affairs, then he can have when his followers
are all agreed: through the percussion of equal Factions, as through that of
Flint and Steel, all things coming to light by Debates, that might either
advance or eclipse a Princes glory.

When my Lord of Sussex could not overbear Leicester with Power, he did it with
Policy; and by yiedling to him, conquered him: for (as he observed) when he and
his friends retired, Leicester and his subdivided; and he was checked more by
the Ambition he taught his own Followers, then by the competition of his
Adversaries.

When Factions are carried too high, and too violently, it is a sign of
weakness in Princes, and much to the prejudice of their Authority and Business:
The motions of Factions under Kings, ought to be like the motions (as the
Astronomers speak) of the Verulam's Essays.
Inferior Orbs, which may have their proper Inclination, but yet are still
quietly carried by the higher motion of the Primum Mobile. Queen Elizabeth had
an happy time of it, if it were but for this, That her Favorites Divisions
were her support: for thereby she attained the knowledge of all things that
happened, so as no Suit or Design passed the Royal Assent, before she
understood as much of Reason as Enemies or Friends could bring for or against
it.

The Character this third great Lord of his Family left behind him, was, This
year died a man of a great spirit and faithfulness to his Country: and
therefore none freer then he of his thoughts, none sounder then he in his
counsels. Nor did this freedom of Communication betray his future Resolutions
to the discovery of his Enemies, as they opened his heart to the observation of
his Prince: for through a seeming unconstancy, not of words, but of action; not
his weakness, but his nimbleness, (the Bird on the wing is safe) he could so
often vary, as it was not easy to discover where or when he would be buzzing,
and give the blow: by which unsteady carriage, He so befooled his Adversaries
with their Spies and Pensioners, as they were at a loss what to inform their
Patrons of, or themselves how to resolve. Fortune and Conduct set up this
Favorite, it falling in his Character as at Primero, and other Plays, wherein
Fortune is directed and conducted by Art. The best and subtilest Gamester may
loose, if it cross him; but if it smiles and favors, he knows best how to
manage and govern it.

Five things raised this person to a respect as great as his fortune; to be as
high in the Queens favor, as he was in his Descent.

1. A Civility set off with State. 2. A pleasing Modesty of Countenance, and
A^^ability of Speech, ennameled with Gravity. 3. A Boldness attended with
Patience. 4. A great Capacity, enlivened with as great Dexterity. And 5. An
Integrity secured with wariness.
Observations on the Life of the Lord Willoughby.
THe Lord Willoughby was one of the Queens first Swordmen: he was of the
ancient extract of the Bartues, but more e^^obled by his Mother, who was
Duchess of Suffolk. He was a great Master of the Art Military, and was sent
General into France, and commanded the second of five Armies that the Queen
sent thither in aid of the French. As he was a great Soldier, so was he of a
suitable Magnanimity, and could not brook the obsequiousness and assiduity of
the Court at that time. He had more favor then he courted, and he courted more
(rather to comply with the Queens humor, then his own inclination) then he
desired. He would say, and that saying did him no good, (says Sir Robert
Naunton) That he was none of the Reptilia, being made rather to march as a
Soldier, then to creep as a Courtier. But Civility must allay Nature in a
Courtier, Prudence regulate it in a Statesman, and modest submission check and
soften it in a Subject. It Is as dangerous to be stubbornly above the
Kindnesses, as it is to be factiously against the Power of Princes. Willoughby
got nothing, Stanley lost all by his haughtiness; which when it cannot be
obliged, is suspected. But his service in France, Holland, and on the Borders,
compounded for his roughness: so that to he who could not endure he should be
high at Court, were pleased he should be so in the Field. Stiffness which
displeased when looked on as Pride at home, took when heard to be Resolution
abroad. Each Nature is advanced in its own Element: Leicester among the Ladies,
my Lord Willoughby among the Soldiers. It Is a step to Greatness to know our
own way to it; to exercise and show our proper Virtues as he did: his
Magnanimity in these two instances, among many others.

1. When one challenged him then sick of the Gout, he said, That though he were
lame in his feet Cambden Eliz. 13.
and hands, yet he would carry a Rapier in his teeth to fight his Adversary.

2. Having taken a Spanish Gennet designed a present to that King, and being
offered either 1000l. or 100 l. a year in exchange for it, he nobly answered,
If it had been a Commander, he would have freely released him; but being only
a Horse, he saw no reason be could not keep a good Horse as well as the King of
Spain himself. Sir Christopher Hatton was to an excess a Courtier, and my Lord
Willoughby so a Soldier.

Observations on the Life of Sir Philip Sidney.
HE was Son to Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales.
A Person of great Parts, and in no mean grace with the Queen. His Mother was
Sister to my Lord of Leicester, from whence we may conjecture, how the Father
stood up in the place of Honor and Employment; so that his Descent was
apparently Noble on both sides. For his Education, it was such as Travel and
the University could afford: for after an incredible proficiency in all the
Species of Learning, he left the Academical life for that of the Court, whither
he came by his Uncles invitation, famed aforehand by a Noble report of his
Accomplishments; which, together with the state of his Person, framed by a
natural propension to Arms, he soon attracted the good opinion of all men; and
was so highly prized in the good opinion of the Queen, that she thought the
Court deficient without him: and whereas (through the fame of his deserts) he
was in the election for the Kingdom of Poland, she refused to further his
advancement, not out of Emulation, but out of fear to loose the Jewel of her
times. He married the Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Francis Walsingham, then
Secretary of State; a Lady destinated to the Bed of Honor, who (after his
deplorable death at Zutphen in the Netherlands, where he was Governor of
Flushing, at the time of his Uncles being there) was married to my Lord of
Essex, and since his death to my Lord of St. Albans; all persons of the Sword,
and otherwise of great Honor and Virtue. He had an equal temperament of Mars
and Mercury, Valor and Learning, to as high a pitch as Nature and Art could
frame, and Fortune improve him: so Dexterous, that he seemed born for every
thing he went about. His representations of Virtue and Vice, were not more
lively in his Books, then in his Life: his ^ancy was not above his Virtue: his
Humors, Counsels and Actions, were renowned in the Romancer, Heroic in the
States man. His Soul was as large as his Parents, and his Complexion as Noble;
an equal Line of both; the modesty of the Mother allaying the activity of the
Father. A man so sweetly grave, so familiarly staid, so prettily serious he was
above his years: Wisdom gained by travel, Experience raised from Observations,
solid and useful Learning drawn from knowing Languet his three years Companion,
and choicest Books, accomplished him for the love of all, and the reverence of
most. His Converse was not more close at home, then his Correspondence abroad;
equally mixed with Policy, Pleasure, Wisdom and Love: his Worth being penned
up, and smothered within the narrowness of his fortune, sallied not out to
discontent, but pleasure; sweetning the Affairs of State with the Debonnairness
of the Stage; his Romance being but Policy played with Machiavil in jest, and
State-Maximes sweetened to a Courtiers Palate. He writ men as exactly as he
studied them, and discerned humors in the Court with the same deep insight he
described them in his Book. His Infant-discourses teach men, O what had his
riper years done!

He put Life into the dead Notions of Ancestors, made Philosophy practicable;
joined the Arts as closely in him, as they are in themselves. His Book is below
his Spirit: a Spirit to be confined with Kingdoms, rather then Studies; to do
what was to be written, then only to write what was to be done. All eyes were
upon him but his own: at first, in all Affairs he was the last; at last, he was
the first: obliging all men that ever he saw, and seeing all that were worth
obliging. All were pleased with his Arcadia but himself, whose years advanced
him so much beyond himself, as his Parts did beyond others: He condemned his
Arcadia in his more retired judgment to the fire, which wise men think will
continue to the last Conflagration. His private Correspondence with William of
Nassau about the highest Affairs of Europe, was so exact and prudent, that he
assured Sir Fulke Grevil he deserved a Kingdom in Foreign Parts, though he had
not an Office in England. The Earl of Leicester held his Authority in the
Low Countries by his Counsel when alive, and gave it over when he was dead.

Sir Francis Walsingham was so much overshot by him in his own Bow, that those
with whom Sir Philip were acquainted with for his sake, were his friends for
Sir Philips. King James was honored when King of Scotland with his friendship,
Henry the fourth with his correspondence, Don Juan highly obliged with his
Visits, the King of Spain himself concerned in his death, whom England (he
said) lost in a moment, but could not breed in an Age. The Universities were
proud of his Patronage, the Field of his Presence: the Studious in all Parts
communicated with him; the Hopeful were encouraged by him; all excellent
Persons thronged to him; all serviceable men were entertained by him; and he
among them a Prince, whose mind was great, but his spirit greater. He taught
England the Majesty of Honest Dealing, the Interest of being Religious. He
looked deep into men and Counsels, and found no Wisdom without Courage, no
Courage without Religion and Honesty: with which solid and active reaches of
his, I am persuaded (says my Lord Brooks) he would have found or made a way
through all the Traverses even of the most weak and irregular times. Although a
private Gentleman, he was a public Good; of a large, yet uniform disposition:
so good, that the great Monarch might trust; so great, that a little one must
fear him: something he did for Fame, most for Conscience: His public spirit,
which might have enjealoused the cautious wisdom of other Princes, promoted
the concerns of his own. He was sent to complement Rodalph, but he dealt really
with the Protestant Princes, and raised a Ceremony to a piece of Interest. He
showed that long-breathed and cautious people, that imminent danger from Romes
Superstition, joined with Spains Power, their private confederacies and
practices, their cruelty and design; which awaked their drowzie wariness into
an association for Conscience and Religion more solid, as he demonstrated, then
a Combination out of Policy. He went against the stream and current about the
French Match, which he dissuaded from the consequent inconveniences of
Engagements and charge to England, and the little advantage from France;
backing his Argument with a late experience; and so staying Queen Elizabeth's
Match by some reflections on Queen Mary's: which was, A five years Design or
Tax, rather then a Mrriage: adding withal, That in a Foreign Match, besides
the unequalness and danger of it, (when a strange Prince has such an influence
on our Constitution) the different Religion would make the Queen either quit
the reputation of a good Protestant, or the honor of an obedient Wife.

Ten ways he laid down a Foreign Prince might endanger our Religion by.

1. Opposing and weakening the reverend Fathers of our Church. 2. By disgracing
her most zealous Ministers. 3. By Latitude and Connivance. 4. By a loose and
too free a behavior, steering men's Consciences which way he pleased, and
setting up indifferency. 5. By decrying Customs and Statutes, and enhansing
Proclamations to the Authority of Laws. 6. By provoking the English with French
Oppressions. 7. By entrenching on the British Liberties with Gallicane
Prerogatives. 8. By breaking our League and Correspondence with other
Protestant States. 9. Frighting our Queen to a Compliance. 10. And at last
attempting the Protestant cause.
He would say to his ^^end the Lord Brook, That if the Netherlands join with
France, they are terrible to Spain: if with Spain, they are dreadful to France:
if with us, they support the Reformation: if they stand on their own legs, they
are too strong to be forced to Pyracy. He, though a private person, opposed her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth in that Affair, with that sincerity, with that
ingenuity, that freedom, that duty and peaceableness, that angered and pleased
her. His Opinion was not more against her humor, then his Manage of it was to
her mind: in which Affair, when most were hood-winked with ignorance, and many
captived with fear, he enjoyed the freedom of his own thoughts with daily
access to her Majesty, hourly converse with the French, and constant respect
from the people. None more dutiful to his Sovereign then Sir Philip, none more
resolute against Eucroachers upon Gentlemen and Freemen, none more dear to the
whole State: which when he had designed Sir Francis Drake's second Voyage, and
stolen to him at Windsor, commanded his stay by an Earl, and for his sake the
whole Fleets, although his stay disturbed, and his death destroyed his most
exact Model for the Conquest of America, the exactest Europe ever saw: A
Conquest not to be enterprized but by Sir Philips reaching spirit, that grasped
all circumstances, and commanded all interests on this side the Line.

When his great Soul could not improve Europe, he considered it; and made that
the Field of his mediation, that could not be the stage of his Actions. England
he saw so humoursome and populous, that it was to be refined with War, and
corrupted with Peace. Her interest was, he said, to balance Neighbor-Princes.
France he observed weak and effeminate, the Empire enslaved and secure, the
Hanses too big, Rome subtle and undermining, Spain crept to the Power and
Councils of Europe, the Protestant Princes enjealoused and distrustful, Poland
divided, Denmark strong, Sweden environed or imprisoned, the Muscovite
distressed and ignorant, the Switz enemies, yet servants to Monarchs, (a
dangerous body for the soul of any aspiring Monarch to infuse defignes into)
the Princes of Italy awed by their Superiors, and cautious against their
equals; Turkey asleep in the Seraglio; but Spain all this while Master of Rome,
and the wisest Council or Conclave in the Word; Lord of the Mines of America,
and the Sword of Europe: Concluding, that while the Spaniard had Peace, Pope
Money or Credit, and the World Men, Necessity or Humors, the War could hardly
be determined upon this Low-Country-stage: And that there were but two ways to
conquer Spain, the one, That which diverted Hannibal; and by setting fire on
his own House, made him draw his spirits to comfort his heart: The other, that
of Jason, by fetching away his Golden Fleece, and not suffering any one quietly
to enjoy that which every man so much affected. The assistance of Portugal, the
surprise of Cales her key, and Sevi^ her treasure; the drawing in of other
Wellwillers; the command of the Sea, an exact Intelligence; the Protection of
Rochel, Breast, Bourdeaux, or some other distressed Protestant, to balance the
over-mytred Countries, the encouragement of religious or ambitious Roytolets to
advance and secure themselves, the engaging of the French and Spaniards, a
League with Venice and the Maritime States: some temptations to Italy to remove
their French and Spanish Garrisons, an opportunity to recover Sicily, some
insinuations to the Pope of the Austrian Greatness, the setting up of the World
in an Aequilibrium, the invasion of America, removing the diffidence,
overpoyzing the Neutrality, and working upon the Complexions of Kings and
Kingdoms, was this young, but great man's design.

An Expedition to the Indies he would persuade with these motives:

1. That Honor was cheaper abroad then at home; at Sea, then at Land. 2. That
the Spanish Conquests like the Jesuits Miracles, made more noise at distance
then nearer hand. 3. That the Indians would join with the first Undertaker
against their cruel Masters. 4. That Spain was too far for supply. 5. That the
Spaniard was Undisciplined, and trusted more to the Greatness of his Name, then
to Order, Policy or Strength. 6. That England was populous. 7. That it was an
Action complyant with the present Humor, and not subject to Emulations. 8.
That it would either cut off the Spanish treasure, or make it chargeable. 9.
And at last set up a Free Trade by Sea, open a great Door to Valor or Ambition
for new Conquests, and to Zeal for new Converts.
He said the Inquisition would overthrow Spain, being a design upon Humane
Nature, and freedom; to govern men at the rate of beasts. His great Abilities
recommended him to Leicester's Cabinet, whose Horse he commanded in the Field,
whose Counsel he guided at home. Prudent and valiant he was in contriving and
executing the surprise of Axil: Liberal and Noble to his Soldiers at Flushing;
wary and deep-sighted in his Counsel about Graveline; wise and stayed in the
jealousies between Leicester and Hollock. His Patience and Resolution before
Zutphen, his quiet and composed spirit at Arneim, his Christian and religious
comportment in his sickness and death, made his Fame as lasting as his Life was
wished. And why died he lamented by the Queen, mourned for by the Court,
bemoaned by Europe, wept over by Religion and Learning, the Protestant
Churches, celebrated by Kings, and K. H. 4. K. Ja^es.
eternized by Fame? because he was one whose Parts were improved by early
Education, whose Education was raised by Experience, whose Experience was
enlarged by Travel, whose Travel was laid up in Observations, whose
Observations were knit up to a solid Wisdom, whose Wisdom was graced with his
Presence; and the one was as much admired by Kings, as the other was by Queens.
One whose Learning guided Universities, whose Alliance engaged Favorites,
whose Presence filled Courts, whose Soul grasped Europe, whose Merit could fill
a Throne, whose Spirit was above it. It was he who was deserving and quiet,
neglected and patient, great and familiar, ingenious and devout, learned and
valiant, sweet and solid, contemplative and active. It was he whom Queen
Elizabeth called her In Opposition to him of Spain.
Philip, the Prince Orange his Master, and whose friendship my Lord Brook was
so proud of, that he would have no other Epitaph on his Grave then this, Here
lies Sir Philip Sidneys Friend. It was he whose last words were, Love my
memory, cherish my Friends; their faith to me may assure you they are honest:
but above all, govern your will and affections by the Will and Word of your
Creator. In me behold the end of this world, and all its vanities.

THey that have known thee well, and search thy parts
Through all the chain of Arts: In Ll.

Thy apprehension quick as active light,
Clear Judgment, without Night:
Thy Fancy free, yet never wild or mad,
With wings to fly, but none to gad:
Thy Language still in rich, yet comely dress,
Not to expose thy mind, but to express.
They that have known thee thus, sigh, and confess,
They wish they would known thee still, or known thee less.
To these, the wealth and Beauties of thy mind,
Be other Virtues joined.
Thy modest Soul, strongly confirmed and hard,
Never beckned from its Guard.
Observations on the Life of Sir John Perrot.
SIr John Perrot was a goodly Gentleman, and of the Sword: and as he was of a
very ancient descent, as an Heir to many Exstracts of Gentry, especially from
Guy de Bryan of Lawhern; so was he of a vast Estate, and came not to the Court
for want. And to these Adjuncts he had the Endowments of Courage, and height
of Spirit, had it lighted on the allay of temper and discretion: the defect
whereof, with a native freedom and boldness of speech, drew him into a Clouded
setting, and laid him open to the spleen and advantage of his Enemies. He was
yet a wise man, and a brave Courtier, but rough, and participating more of
active then sedentary motions, as being in his Constellation destinated for
Arms. He was sent Lord-Deputy into Ireland, where he did the Queen very great
and many Services: Being out of envy accused of High Treason, and against the
Queens will and consent condemned, he died suddenly in the Tower. He was
Englands professed Friend, and Sir Christopher Hattons professed Enemy: He fell
because he would stand alone. In the English Court at that time he that held
not by Leicesters and Burleighs favor, must yield to their frowns: What ground
he gained in Foreign Merits, (as the Sea) he lost in Domestic Interests. The
most deserving Recesses, and serviceable absence from Courts, is incompatible
with the way of interest and favor. His boisterous carriage rather removed
then preferred him to Ireland, where he was to his cost, what he would have
been to his advantage; chief in Command, and first in Council. His spirit was
too great to be ruled, and his Interest too little to sway. He was so like a
Son of Henry the They say his father married a Familiar of King Henry's.
eighth, that he would not be Queen Elizabeth's subject: but Hattons sly
smoothness undermined his open roughness; the one dancing at Court with more
success then the other fought in Ireland. He was born to enjoy, rather then
make a Fortune; and to command, rather then stoop for respect. Boldness indeed
is as necessary for a Soldier, as Action for an Orator; and is a prevailing
quality over weak men at all times, and wise men at their weak times: yet it
begins well, but continues not; closing always with the wiser sorts scorns,
and the vulgars laughter. Sir John Perrot was better at Counsel then
Complement, and better at Execution then Counsel. None worse to command first
on his own head, none better to be second, and under the direction of others.
He could not advise, because he looked not round on his dangers: he could not
execute, because he saw them not. His alliance to his Sovereign commended him
at first to her favor, and gave him up at last to her jealousy; being too
near to be modest, and too bold to be trusted: and the more service he
performed, he was thereby only the more dangerous, and withal unhappy; his
Successes only puffing up his humor, and his Victories ripening his ambition
to those fatal Sallies against the Queens honor and Government, that had cost
him his life, had he not saved it with those very Rants he lost himself by: for
when he had out of an innocent confidence of his cause, and a haughty conceit
of his Extraction, exasperated his Noble Jury to his Condemnation, he had no
more to say for himself then Gods death! will the Queen suffer her Brother to
be offered up as a sacrifice to the envy of my frisking Adversaries? On which
words the Queen refused to sign the Warrant for his Execution, though pressed
to it from Reason and Interest, saying, They were all Knaves that condemned
him. It Is observed of him, that the Surplusage of his services in Ireland
abated the merit of them; and that it was his oversight to have done too much
there. His mortal words were those in the great Chamber of Dublin, when the
Queen sent him some respectful Letters after her Expostulatory ones, with an
intimation of the Spaniards Design: Lo, now (says he) she is ready to piss
her self for fear of the Spaniard; I am again one of her white Boys.

A great Birth and a great Mind are crushed in Commonwealths, and watched in
Kingdoms: They who are too tall to stand, too stubborn to bow, are but too fit
to break. Ruffling Spirits raise themselves at the settlement of Governments,
but fall after it; being but unruly Waves to a steady Rock, breaking themselves
on that solid Constitution they would break. Few aimed at Favorites as Sir
John did at the Lord Chancellor, but their Arrows fell on their own heads;
Sovereignty being always struck through prime Counselors, and Majesty through
its chief Ministers. Sir John Perrot no sooner clashed with Hatton, then he
lost the Queen; and ever since he reflected on his Dancing, he lost his own
footing, and never stood on his legs.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Walsingham.
HE was a Gentleman (at first) of a good house, but of a better Education; and
from the University traveled for the rest of his Learning. He was the best
Linguist of the times, but knew best how to use his own tongue, whereby he came
to be employed in the chiefest Affairs of State. He was sent Ambassador into
France, and stayed there a Leiger long, in the heat of the Civil Wars. At his
return he was taken Principal Secretary, and was one of the great Engines of
State, and of the times, high in the Queens favor, and a watchful servant over
the safety of his Mistress. He acted the same part in the Courts of France
about that Match, that Gundamor, if I be not mistaken, (says Sir Robert
Naunton) did in the Court of England about the Spanish. His apprehension was
quick, and his Judgment solid: his Head was so strong, that he could look into
the depth of men and business, and dive into the Whirlpools of State. Dexterous
he was in finding a secret, close in keeping it: Much he had got by Study, more
by Travel; which enlarged and actuated his thoughts. Cecil bred him his Agent,
as he bred hundreds. His Converse was infinuating and reserved: He saw every
man, and none saw him. His Spirit was as public as his Parts; and it was his
first Maxim, Knowledge is never too dear: yet as Debonnair as he was prudent;
and as obliging to the softer, but predominant parts of the world, as he was
serviceable to the more severe: and no less Dexterous to work on humors, then
to convince Reason. He would say, he must observe the joints and flexures of
Affairs; and so could do more with a Story, then others could with a Harangue.
He always surprised business, and preferred motions in the heat of other
diversions; and if he must debate it, he would hear all; and with the advantage
of aforegoing speeches, that either cautioned or confirmed his resolutions, he
carried all before him in conclusion beyond reply. He out-did the Jesuits in
their own bow, and overreached them in their own equivocation, and mental
reservation; never telling a Lie, but warily drawing out and discovering truth.
As the close Room sucketh in most Air, so this wary man got most intelligence,
being most of our Papists Confessor before their death, as they had been their
Brethrens before their treason. He said what another writ, That an habit of
secrecy is policy and virtue. To him men's faces spoke as much as their tongues,
and their countenances were Indexes of their hearts. He would so beset men with
Questions, and draw them on, and pick it out of them by piece-meals, that they
discovered themselves whether they answered or were silent. This Spanish
Proverb was familiar with him, Tell a Lie, and find a Truth; and this, Speak
no more then you may safely retreat from without danger, or fairly go through
with without opposition. Some are good only at some affairs in their own
acquaintance; Walsingham was ready every where, and could make a party in Rome
as well as England. He waited on men's souls with his eye, discerning their
secret hearts through their transparent faces.

He served himself of the Factions as his Mistress did, neither advancing the
one, nor depressing the other: Familiar with Cecil, allied to Leicester, and an
Oracle to Sussex. He could overthrow any matter by undertaking it, and move it
so as it must fall. He never broke any business, yet carried many: He could
discourse any matter with them that most opposed; so that they in oppofing it,
promoted it. His fetches and compass to his designed speech, were things of
great patience and use. Twice did he deceive the French as Agent, once did he
settle the Netherlands as Commissioner, and twice did he alter the Government
of Scotland as Ambassador. Once did France desire he might be recalled,
because he was too hard for the Counsel for the Hugonots; and once did Scotland
request his remand, because he would have overturned their Constitution: 53
Agents did he maintain in Foreign Courts, and 18 Spies: for two Pistols an
Order, he had all the private Papers of Europe: few Letters escaped his hands,
whose Contents he could read and not touch the Seals. Bellarmine read his
Lectures at Rome one month, and Reynolds had them confuted the next. So
patient was this wise man, Chiselhurst never saw him angry, Cambridge never
passionate, and the Court never discomposed. Religion was the interest of his
Country, (in his judgment) and of his Soul; therefore he maintained it as
sincerely as he lived it: it had his head, his purse, and his heart. He laid
the great foundation of the Protestant Constitution as to its policy, and the
main plot against the Popish as to its ruin. He would cherish a plot some
years together, admitting the Conspirators to his own and the Queens presence
familiarly, but dogging them out watchfully: his Spies waited on some men every
hour, for three years; and lest they could not keep counsel, he dispatched them
to foreign parts, taking in new Servants. His training of Parry who designed
the murder of Queen Elizabeth, the admitting of him under the pretense of
discovering a Plot to the Queens presence, and then letting him go where he
would, only on the security of a Dark Sentinel set over him, was a piece of
reach and hazard beyond common apprehension. But Kingdoms were acted by him,
as well as private persons. It is a likely report (says one) that they father
on him at his return from France, when the Queen expressed her fear of the
Spanish design on that Kingdom with some concernment, Madam, (said he) be
content not to fear; the Spaniard has a great appetite, and an excellent
digestion: but I have fitted him with a bone for this twenty years, that your
Majesty shall have no cause to doubt him: Provided that if the fire chance to
slack which I have kindled, you will be ruled by me, and now and then cast in
some English ^uel which may revive the flame. He first observed the great
Bishop of Winchester fit to serve the Church, upon the unlikely Youths first
Sermon at St. Al^allows Barking: He brought my Lord Cook first to the Church
upon some private discourse with him at his Table. The Queen of Scots Letters
were all carried to him by her own Servant, whom she trusted, and decyphered to
him by one Philips, as they were sealed again by one Gregory, so that neither
that Queen or her correspondents ever perceived either the Seal defaced, or the
Letters delayed to her dying day. Video and Taceo, was his saying, before it
was his Mistresses Motto.

He could as well ^it King James his humor with sayings out of Xenophon,
Thucydides, Plutarch, Tacitus; as he could King Henry's with Rablais's
conceits, and the Hollander with Mechanic Discourses. In a word, Sir Francis
Walsingham was a studious and temperate man; so publick-spirited, that he spent
his Estate to serve the Kingdom; so faithful, that he bestowed his years on
his Queen; so learned, that he See his Negotiation in France, in his Letters to
Cecil in The complete Ambassador.
provided a Library for Kings College of ^is own Books; which was the best for
Policy, as Cecil's was for History, Arundels for Heraldry, Cottons for
Antiquity, and Ushers for Divinity: finally, he equalled all the Statesmen
former Ages discourse of, and hardly has been equalled by any in following
Ages.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Leicester.
THe Lord Leicester was the youngest son then living of Dudley Duke of
Northumberland: he was also one of the first to whom Queen Elizabeth gave that
honor to be Master of the Horse. He was a very goodly person, and singular
well featured, and all his youth well favored, and of a sweet aspect, but high
foreheaded, which was taken to be of no discommendation: but toward his latter
end grew high-colored and red-faced. The Queen made him Earl of Leicester for
the sufferings of his Ancestors sake, both in her Fathers and Sisters Reigns.
The Earl of Essex his death in Ireland, and the marriage of his Lady yet
living, deeply stains his commendation. But in the Observations of his Letters
and Writings, there was not known a Style or Phrase more religious, and fuller
of the streams of Devotion. He was sent Governor by the Queen to the United
States of Holland, where we read not of his wonders; for they say, Mercury, not
Mars, in him had the predominancy. To the Policy he had from Northumberland his
Father, and the Publican Dudley his Grandfather, he added, they say, Magic and
Astrology; and to his converse with Wise men, his familiarity with Wizards.
Indeed he would say. A Statesman should be ignorant of nothing, but should
have all notices either within his own or his Confidents command.

His Brother Ambrose was the Heir to the Estate, and he to the Wisdom of that
Family. He was the most reserved man of that Age, that saw all, and was
invisible; carrying a depth not to be fathomed but by the Searcher of Hearts.
Many fell in his time, who saw not the hand that pulled them down; and as many
died that knew not their own Disease. He trusted not his Familiars above a
twelvemonth together, but either transported them for Foreign services, or
wasted them to another world. His Ambition was of a large extent, and his
Headpiece of a larger. Great was his Influence on England, greater on
Scotland, and greatest of all on Ireland and the Netherlands; where this close
Genius acted invisibly, beyond the reach of friends, or the apprehension of
enemies. Declining an immediate opposition in Court-factions, the wary Sir
raised always young Favorites to outshine the old ones: so balancing all
others that he might be Paramount himself. The modern policy and practices were
but shallow to his; who by promoting the Queens Match, could hinder it; who
could decoy Hunsdon to Berwick, Pembroke to Wales, Sidney to Ireland; while
what with his great Train, what with his growing Popularity, he was called the
Heart of the Court.

To make his Basis equal to his Height, he enlarged and strengthened his
Interest by Alliance with the chief Nobility, to whom he was related. By his
Patronage of Learning, over which he was Chancellor; by kindness to the
Clergy, whose Head he seemed to be; by his command over all men, whom either
his favors had won, or his frowns awed; everybody being either within the
Obligation of his Courtesies, or the reach of his Injuries. He advised some
compliance with Philip of Spain for the Match he proposed; while by degrees he
altered Religion so, as it must be impossible; designing Queen Elizabeth for
his own Bed, while she made his way to the Queen of Scots: whose refusal of him
he made as fatal to her, as his Marriage would have been advantageous; (The
Queen of England promising to declare her next Heir to the Crown of England, in
case she failed of Issue, upon that Match.) Leicester trepans Norfolk to treat
a Match with the Scotch Queen; and her to accept it, to both their ruin: both
being engaged in such foolish Enterprises by their enemies practices, as made
Leicester able in the head of a new Association in the Queens defense, to take
off Norfolk and his Ladies head. He was always beforehand with his Designs,
being a declared enemy to After-games.

His Interest was Popery, until my Lord North put him upon Puritanism, but his
Religion neither: He promoted the French and Polish Match at Court, and
disparaged them in the Country. When Cardinal Chatillian advertized her Majesty
how Leicester drove Royal Suitors from her Court, he was sent to another World.
He that would not hold by his favor, must fall by his frown; Archbishop
Grindal not excepted. His hand bestowed all favors, and his brows all frowns:
the whole Court was at his Devotion, and half the Council at his beck. Her
Majesty suspected, but durst not remove him. His Intelligence was good in
Scotland, better in Ireland, best in Spain. The Country was governed by his
Allies, and the Court by himself. The Tower was in his servants hands, London
under his Creatures Government, and the Law managed by his Confidents. His
treasure was vast, his gains unaccountable, all passages to preferment being in
his hand at home and abroad. He was never reconciled to her Majesty under 5000
l. nor to any Subject under 500 l. and was ever and anon out with both. All
Monopolies are his, who commanded most men's Purses, and all men's Parts. A man
was oppressed if he complied with him, and undone if he opposed him. In a word,
his design was thought a Crown, his Parts too large for a Subject, his
Interest too great for a Servant, his depth not fathomable in those days, and
his Policy not reached in these.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Hatton.
SIr Christopher H^tton was a Gentleman, who for his activity and Person was
taken into the Queens favor. He was first made Vice-Chamberlain, and shortly
after advanced to the place of Lord Chancellor: A Gentleman, that besides the
Graces of his Person, and Dancing, had also the Adjectments of a strong and
subtle capacity: one that could soon learn the Discipline and Garb both of
Times and Court. The truth is, he had a large proportion of Gifts and
Endowments, but too much of the season of Envy. As he came, so he continued in
the Court in a Mask. An honest man he was, but reserved. Sir John Perrot
talked, and Sir Christopher Hatton thought. His features set off his body, his
gate his features, his carriage his gate, his parts his carriage, his prudence
his parts, and his close patience his prudence. The Queen loved him well for
his activity, better for his parts, best of all for his abilities, which were
as much above his experience, as that was above his learning, and that above
his education. The little the wary man did, was so exactly just and discreet;
and the little he said, was so prudent and weighty, that he was chosen to keep
the Queens Conscience as her Chancellor, and to express her sense as her
Speaker: the Courtiers that envyed the last capacity, were by his power forced
to confess their errors; and the Sergeants that would not plead before him in
the first, by his prudence to confess his abilities. The Chancellourship was
above his Law, but not his Parts; so pregnant and comprehensive, that he could
command other men's knowledge to as good purpose as his own. Such his humility,
that he did nothing without two Lawyers: such his ability, that the Queen did
nothing without him. Two things he said he was jealous of, His Mistresses the
Queens Prerogatives, and his Mother the Churches Discipline: the one, that
Majesty might be at liberty to do as much good; and the other, that Iniquity
might not be free to as much evil as it pleased. His enemies advanced him, that
they might weaken him at Court by his absence, and kill him at home by a
sedentariness. This even and clear man observed and improved their practices,
closing with Malice it self to his own advancement, and tempering the most
perverse enmity to the greatest kindness.

None Nobler, none less aspiring: none more busy, yet none more punctual in
his hours and orders. Corpulent he was, but temperate; a Bachelor, (and the
only one of the Queens Favorites) yet chaste: quick were his Dispatches, but
weighty; many his Orders, and consistent: numerous were the Addresses to him,
and easy the access. Seldom were his Orders reversed in Chancery, and
seldomer his Advice opposed in Council. So just he was, that his sentence was
Law with the Subject; so wise, that his Opinion was Oracle with his Sovereign:
so exact was Queen Elizabeth, that she called upon him for an old debt, though
it broke his heart; so loving, that she carried him a Cordialbroath with her
own hand, though it could not revive him.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Hunsdon.
THe Lord Hunsdon was of the Queens nearest Kindred; and on the decease of
Sussex, both he and his Son took the place of Lord Chamberlain. He was a fast
man to his Prince, and firm to his friends and servants, downright, honest, and
stout-hearted, having the charge of the Queens Person both in the Court, and in
the Camp at Tilbury. The integrity of his temper allayed the greatness of his
birth; which had rendered him dangerous, if the other had not vouched him
faithful. He spoke big, but honestly; and was thought rather resolute then
ambitious. His words were as his thoughts, and his actions as his words. He had
Valor enough to be an eminent Soldier in ruffling times, and a renownedly
honest man in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. His Latin, faith Sir Robert Naunton, and
his dissimulation, were both alike. His custom of swearing, and obscenity in
speaking, made him seem a worse Christian then he was, and a better Knight of
the Carpet then he should be. The Politicians followed Cecil, the Courtiers
Leicester, and the Soldiers Hunsdon, whose hands were better then his head,
and his heart then both. He led so brave a Train of young Gallants, as after
another threatened a Court, but after him secured it; whose Greatness was not
his Mistress jealousy, but her safeguard. One of his blunt Jests went further
then others affected Harangues; the one being Nature, the other forced. His
faithfulness made him Governor of Berwick; a place of great service: and
General of the English Army; a place of great Trust. He had something of
Leicesters Choler, but none of his Malice. A right Noble Spirit, not so stupid
as not to resent, not so unworthy as to retain a sense of Injuries. To have the
Courage to observe an Affront, is to be even with an Adversary: to have the
patience to forgive it, is to be above him. There goes a story of him, that
when his Retinue, which in those times was large, would have drawn on a
Gentleman that had returned him a box on the ear, he forbad them in these
Souldier-like words: You Rogues, cannot my Neighbor and my self exchange a box
on the ear, but you must interpose?

He might have been what he would, for relieving Queen Elizabeth in her
distress: he would be but what he was: Other Interests were offered him to
stand upon; he was contented with his own. He suppressed the Court-Factions,
and the Nothern Commotions; the one by his Interest, the other by his Valor:
for the one, he had always the Queens Heart; for the other, he had once a most
Gracious Letter.

His Court-favour was as lasting as his Integrity See Fuller in his Worthies.
One has left this remarque concerning him: That he should have been twice
Earl of Wilishire in right of his Mother Bollen. And the Queen, when he was on
his Deathbed, ordered his Patent and Robes to his bedside: where he who could
dissemble neither well nor ill, told the Queen, That if he was not worthy of
those Honors when living, he was unworthy of them when dying.

In a word, Sir William Cecil was a wise man; Bacon was reaching, Leicester
cunning; Walsingham was a Patriot, and my Lord Hunsd^n was honest.

Observations on the Life of Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, and Lord
Chancellor of England.
AT once a most wise and a most learned man, of great Policy, and of as great
Integrity; meek and resolute: more devout to follow his own Conscience, then
cruel to persecute others. It is enough to intimate his moderate temper, equal,
and dis-engaged from violent extremes; that the first of Queen Elizabeth, in
the Disputation between the Papists and Protestants, he was chosen by the
Privy Council one of the Moderators, when Sir Nicholas Bacon was the other.

The Civility he showed in Prosperity, he found in Adversity: for in Queen
Elizabeth's time he was rather eased, then deposed, [like another Abiathar, sent
home by Solomon to his own fields in Anathoth] living cheerfully at Cobbam in
Surry, where he devoted his Old Age to Religion and Study, being much comforted
with the Queens Visits and kindness, and more with his own good conscience;
that (as he would often say) he had been so intent upon the service, as never
to enjoy the greatness of any place he was advanced to.

Sir Henry Wotton being bound for Rome, asked his Host at Siena, a man well
versed in men and bufiness, What Rules he would give him for his Port, Conduct
and Carriage? There is one short remembrance (said he) will carry you safe
through the world; nothing but this, (said he) Gli Pensiere stretti, and el
viso Sciolto: (i. e.) Your Thoughts close, and your Countenance loose.

The Character of this Prelate, a man of a calm and reserved mind, but of a
gravely obliging carriage: wise and wary; and that a solid wisdom rather then
a formal; well seasoned with practice, and well broken to Affairs: of a fine
Composition, between Frugality and Magnificence: A great Cherisher of Manual
Arts, especially such as tended to splendor or ornament; entertaining the most
exquisite Artists with a settled Pension. Equally divided he was between the
Priest and the Statesman; Great with his double Power, Ecclesiastical and
Civil: by Nature more reserved then popular, with Virtues fitter to beget
estimation then love. In his Chancellourship he was served with able followers,
rather by choice then number, and with more neatness and service then noise. As
Midland Countries in busy times are most secure, as being farthest, and most
participating of the common Interest: so your moderate and middle men in
troublesome and perplexed times, are most quiet, as least concerned in the
respective Controversies, and most intent upon the common good.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Pickering.
HIs Extraction was not noble, his Estate but mean; yet was his Person so
comely, his Carriage so elegant, his Life so gravely reserved and studious, and
his Embassies in France and Germany so well managed, that in King Edwards days
he was by the Council pitched upon as the Oracle, whereby our Agents were to be
guided abroad; and in Queen Elizabeth's, designed by common vote for the Prince
by whom we were to be governed at home. He received extraordinary favors, no
doubt, so deserving he was: he was wished to more, he was so popular: and when
his service was admitted to her Majesty's besome, all fancies but his own
placed his person in her Bed. And I find him a Prince in this, That retiring
from those busy Buslings in the State, wherein he might be matched or
outdone, he devoted his large Soul to those more sublime and noble researches
in his Study, wherein he sat Monarch of Hearts and Letters. Anxious Posterity
no doubt enquires what great Endowments could raise so private a man to such
public honor and expectation; and it must imagine him one redeemed by the
Politure of good Education, from his younger vanities and simplicities, his
Rustic ignorance, his Clownish confidence, his Brutish dullness, his Country
solitude, his earthly ploddings, his Beggarly indigencies, or covetous
necessities; racked and refined from the Lees of sensual and inordinate lust,
from swelling and surely pride, from base and mean designs, from immoderate
affections, violent passions, unreasonable impulses, and depraved aspects; of a
strong and handsome body, a large and public Soul, of a gentle and patient
access, of benign and just resentments, a grand awful presence. This is he that
is born to teach the world, That Causa virtus a Deo, vel ipse Deus.
Virtue and Wariness make Kings as well as Gods.

Observations on the Life of Cuthbert Tonstal, Bishop of Durham.
A Man passing well seen in all kind of polished Literature; who having run
through many degrees of honor at home, and worthily performed several
Embassies abroad, was very hot against the Popes Primacy in his young days,
very moderate for it in his middle years, and very zealous in his old age: like
the waters in Curtius, that are hot at midnight, warm in the morning, and cold
at noon. In the Reign of Queen Mary he spoke more harshly against the
Protestants, (calling Bishop Hooper Beast for being married) then he acted,
being politickly presumed to bark the more, that he might bite the less; and
observed to threaten much in London, and do little in his own Diocese: for I
meet (says my Author) with a Marginal Note in Mr. ^oxe, which indeed justly
deserved even in the Vol. 3. p. 95^.
fairest letters to be inserted in the body of his Book: Note, that Bishop
Tonstal in Queen Mary' s days was no great bloody Persecutor: for Mr. Russel a
Preacher was before him, and Dr. Hinmer his Chancellor would have had him
examined more particularly: the Bishop staid him, saying, Hitherto we have had
a good report among our Neighbors; I pray you bring not this man's blood upon
my head.

When the more violent Bishops were confined to close prisons, primo
Elizabetha, he lived in Free Custody at my Lord of Canterbury's, in sweet
Chambers, warm Beds, by warm Fires, with plentiful and wholesome Diet at the
Archbishops own Table: differing nothing from his former Grandeur, save that
that was at his own charges, and this at another; and that he had not his
former suit of superfluous Servants, that long Train that does not warm but
weary the Wearer thereof. In a word, his custody did not so much sour his
freedom, as his freedom sweetened his custody; where his Soul was most free,
using not once those Oracles of Seneca, That the good things of Prosperity are
to be wished, and the good things of Adversity to be admired. It Is true
Greatness to have at once the frailty of a man, and the security of a god.
Prosperity (says my Lord Bacon) is the blessing of the Old Testament, and
Adversity of the new: the first wants not its fears and distastes, therein
therefore our Prelate was temperate; nor the second its comsorts and hopes, and
therein he was resolved: in the one ( -- virtus vel in host) he was not
vicious, under the other he was virtuous.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
NObility without Virtue is a disgrace, Virtue without Nobility low; but
Nobility adorned with Virtue, and Virtue embellished by Nobility, raises a man
high as Nature reaches: and he in whom these two concur, has all the glory a
man can attain unto, viz. both an Inclination and a Power to do well.

This is the man whose Greatness was but the servant to his Goodness, and whose
Honor the Instrument of his Virtue; who was reverenced like the Heavens he
bore, for his Beneficence, as well as for his Glory. He saw four troublesome
Reigns, but not troubled himself, as one that was so espoused to the common and
grand Concerns of Mankind, as to be uninterested in the particular and petty
Design of any party of it.

He had friends (and none more sure to them, or more devoted to that sacred
thing called Friendship) to ease his heart to, to support his judgment by, to
reform, or at least observe his defect in, to compose his mind with; but none
to countenance in a Faction, or side with in a quarrel: Usefulness is a Bond
that tieth great and good men, and not respects.

How low Learning ran in our Land among our Native Nobility some two hundred
years since, in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, too plainly appears by the
Motto in the Sword of the Martial Earl of Shrewsbury, (where (says my Author)
at the same time a man may smile at the simplicity, and sight at the
barbarousness thereof) Sum Talboti pro occidere inimicos meos: the best Latin
that Lord, and perchance his Chaplain too in that Age could afford. The case
was much altered here, where this Lords Granchilde was at once the chiefest
Camb. Eliz. 1560.
Counselor, and the most eminent Scholar of his Age. It Is a reverend thing to
see any ancient piece standing against Time, much more to see an ancient Family
standing against Fortune. Certainly Princes that have able men of their
Nobility, shall find ease in employing them, and a better slide Bacon Ess. 7.
into their business: for people naturally bend to them, as born in some sort
to command.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Challoner.
THis Gentleman's birth in London made him quick, his Education in Cambridge
knowing, and his travail abroad expert. In Henry the eighth's time he served
Charles the fifth in the expedition of Algier: where being ship-wracked, after
he had swum till his strength and arms failed him, at the length catching hold
of a Cable with his teeth, he escaped, not without the loss of some of his
teeth. (We are consecrated by dangers to services; and we know not what we can
do, until we have seen all we can fear.) In Edward the sixth's Reign, he
behaved himself so manly at Muscleborough, that the Protector honored him with
a Knighthood, and his Lady with a Jewel; the delicate and valiant man at once
pleasing Mars and his Venus too. The first week of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he
is designed an Ambassador of Honor to the Emperor; such his port and
carriage! and the second year, her Leiger for business in Spain; such his trust
and abilities! The first he performed not with more Gallantry, then he did the
second with Policy; bearing up King Philips expectation of the Match with
England for three years effectually, until he had done the Queens business
abroad, and she had done her own at home. In Spain he equally divided his time
between the Scholar and the Statesman, his recreation and his business: for he
refreshed his more careful time with a pure and learned Verse, de rep. Anglorum
instauranda, in five Books, whilst as he writes in the Preface to that Book, he
lived Hieme in furno, aestate in Horreo: i. e. Wintered in a Stove, and
Summered in a Barn. He understood the Concerns of this estate well, and those
of his own better; it being an usual saying, engraven on all his Plates and
Actions, Frugality is the left hand of Fortune, and Diligence the right.
Anthony Brown Viscount Mountacute urged with much Zeal and many Arguments the
Danger and Dishonor of revolting off from the Catholic and Mother Church: Sir
Thomas Challoner with more Eloquence enlarged on the just Cause for which we
deceded from the Errors of Rome, the true Authority by which we deceded from
the Usurpation of Rome, and the Moderation in what we deceded from the
Superstition of Rome.

When the Spanish Ambassador urged that some Catholics might with the Queens
leave remain in Spain; he answered him in a large Declaration, That though the
instance seemed a matter of no great moment, yet seeing the Parties concerned
would not receive so much advantage by the license as the Commonwealth would
damage by the President, it was neither fit for the King of Spain to urge, or
for the Queen of England to grant. He was very impatient of Injuries, pressing
his return home when his Co^^ers were searched; but admonished by his Mistress,
That an Ambassador must take all things in good part that has not a direct
tendency to the Princes dishonor, or his Countries danger. His death was as
honorable Oct. 15. 1565.
as his life, Sir William Cecil being chief Mourner at his Funeral, St. Paul's
containing his Grave, and he leaving a hopeful Sir Tho.
Son that should bring up future Princes, as he had served the present; being
as worthy a Tutor to the hopeful Prince Henry, as his Father had been a
faithful Servant to the renowned Queen Elizabeth.

Observations in the Life of Sir Edward Waterhouse.
SIr Edward Waterhouse was born at Helmstedbury Hartfordshire: of an ancient
and worshipful Family, deriving their descent lineally from Sir Gilbert
Waterhouse of Kyrton in Low-Lindsey in the County of Lincoln, in the time of
King Henry the third. As for our Sir Edward, his Parents were,

John Waterhouse Esquire, a man of much fidelity and sageness, Auditor many
years to King Henry the eighth; of whom he obtained (after a great
Entertainment for him in his house) the grant of a weekly Market for the Town
of Helmsted. Margaret Turner of the ancient House of Blunts-Hall in Suffolk,
and Cannons in Hertfordshire.

The King at his departure honored the children By the learned, industrious
and ingenious Edward Waterhouse Esquire, of Si^n. College.
of the said John Waterhouse, being brought before him, with his praise and
encouragement, gave a Benjamins portion of Dignation to this Edward;
foretelling by his Royal Augury, that he would be the Crown of them all, and a
man of great honor and wisdom, fit for the service of Princes. It pleased God
afterward to second the word of the King, so that the sprouts of his hopeful
youth only pointed at the growth and greatness of his honorable Age. For,
being but twelve years old, he went to Oxford; where for some years he
glistered in the Oratorick and Poetic sphere, until he addicted himself to
conversation, and observance of State Affairs, wherein his great proficiency
commended him to the favor of three principal Patrons. One was Walter Devereux
Earl of Essex, who made him his bosome-friend; and the said Earl lying on his
deathbed took his leave of him with many kisses: Oh my Ned, Oh my Ned, (said
he) Farewell: thou art the faithfullest and friendliest Gentleman that ever I
knew. In testimony of his true affection to the dead Father in his living Son,
this Gentleman is thought to have penned that most judicious and elegant
Epistle, (recorded in Holinshed's History, page 1266.) and presented it to the
young Earl, conjuring him by the Cogent Arguments of Example and Rule to
patrizare.

His other Patron was Sir Henry Sidney, (so often Lord Deputy of Ireland)
whereby he (...)ame incorporated into the familiarity of his Son Sir Philip
Sidney; between whom and Sir Edward there was so great friendliness, that they
were never better pleased then when in one another companies, or when they
corresponded each with other. And we find after the death of that worthy
Knight, that he was a close-concerned Mourner at his Obsequies, as appears at
large in the printed Representation of his funeral Solemnity.

His third Patron was Sir John Perrot, Deputy also of Ireland; who so valued
his counsel, that in State Affairs he would do nothing without him. So great
his Employment betwixt State and State, that he crossed the Seas thirty seven
times, until deservedly at last he came into a port of honor, wherein he
sundry years anchored and found safe Harbor. For he receiving the honor of
Knighthood, was sworn of her Majesty's Privy Council for Ireland, and
Chancellor of the Exchequer therein. Now his grateful soul coursing about how
to answer the Queens favor, laid it self wholly out in her service: wherein
two of his Actions were most remarkable. First, he was highly instrumental in
Modelling the Kingdom of Ireland into Shires, as now they are; showing himself
so great a lover of the Polity under which he was born, that he advanced the
Compliance therewith (as commendable and necessary) in the Dominions annexed
thereunto. His second service was, when many in that Kingdom shrouded
themselves from the Laws, under the Target of power; making Force their
Tutelary Saint, he set himself vigorously to suppress them. And when many of
the Privy Council, terrified with the greatness of the Earl of Desmond, durst
not subscribe the Instrument wherein he was proclaimed Traitor, Sir Edward
amongst some others boldly signed the same, (disavowing his, and all Treasons
against his Friends and County) and the Council did the like, commanding the
publication thereof. As to his private sphere, God blessed him, being but a
third Brother, above his other Brethren. Now, though he had three Wives, the
first a Villiers, the second a Spilman, the third the Widow of Herlakenden of
Wood-church in Kent, Esquire; and though he had so strong a brain and body, yet
he lived and died childless, intercommoning therein with many Worthies, who
are, according to Aelius Spartianus, either improlifick, or have children in
Genitorum Vituperium and famarum Laesuram. God thus denying him the pleasure of
posterity, he craved leave of the Queen to retire himself, and fixed the
residue of his life at Wood-church in Kent, living there in great Honor and
Repute, as one who had no design to be popular, and not prudent; rich, and not
honest; great, and not good. He died in the 56 year of his Age, the 13 of
October 1591. and is buried at Wood-church under a Table-Marble-Monument,
erected to his memory by his sorrowful Lady surviving him.

Queen Elizabeth on the Lord Willoughby.
Good Peregrine,
WE are not a little glad that by your Journey you have received such good
fruit of amendment; specially when we consider what great vexations it is to a
mind devoted to actions of honor, to be restrained by any indisposition of
body from following those courses, which to your own reputation and our great
satisfaction you have formerly performed. And therefore (as we must now out of
our desire of your well-doing) chiefly enjoin you to an especial care to
increase and continue your health, which must give life to all your best
Endeavors; so we must next as seriously recommend to you this consideration,
That in these times, when there is such appearance that we shall have the trial
of our best noble Subjects, you seem not to affect the satisfaction of your own
private contentation beyond the attending of that which Nature and Duty
challenges from all persons of your Quality and Profession. For if necessarily
(your health of body being recovered) you should Eloign your self by residence
there from those Employments whereof we shall have too good store, you shall
not so much amend the state of your body, as happily you shall call in question
the reputation of your mind and judgment, even in the opinion of those that
love you, and are best acquainted with your Disposition and Discretion.

Interpret this our plainness we pray you to our extraordinary estimation of
you; for it is not common with us to deal so freely with many: and believe that
you shall ever find us both ready and willing in all occasions to yield you
the fruits of that interest, which your Endeavors have purchased for you in
our Opinion and Estimation: Not doubting, but when you have with moderation
made trial of the success of these your sundry Peregrinations, you will find
as great comfort to spend your days at home as heretofore you have done: of
which we do wish you full measure, howsoever you shall have cause of abode or
return. Given under our Signet at our Man^or of Nonsuch, the seventh of October
1594. in the 37 year of our Reign.

Your most loving Sovereign, E. R.

Observations on the Life of the Duke of Norfolk.
HIs Predecessors made more noise it may be, but he had the greater fame: their
Greatness was feared, his Goodness was loved. He was Heir to his Uncles
Ingenuity, and his Fathers Valor; and from both derived as well the Laurel as
the Coronet.

His God and his Sovereign were not more taken with the ancient simplicity that
lodged in his plain breast, then the people were endeared by that noble
humility that dwelt in his plainer clothes and carriage. (The most honorable
Personages, like the most honorable Coats of Arms, are least gaudy.) In the
election of the first Parliament of Queen Elizabeth, and as a consequent to
that in the settlement of the Kingdom, Sir William Cecils Wisdom did much,
the Earl of Arundels Industry more, but the Duke of Norfolks Popularity did
most. Never Peer more dread, never more dear: as he could engage the people to
comply with their Sovereign at home, so he could lead them to serve her abroad.
That Martial but unfortunate Gentleman William Lord Gray, draws first toward
Scotland, (for the first Cloud that would have darkened our glorious Star, came
from the North, Whence all evil, is equally our Proverb and our experience) as
Warden of the middle and East Marches: but he is seconded by the Duke, as
Lieutenant General of the North-parts; where his presence commands a Treaty,
and his Authority a League, Offensive and Defensive, to balance the French
Interest, to reduce the North parts of Ireland, and keep the peace of both
Kingdoms. Now as the watchful Duke discovered by some private Passages and
Letters that Scotland was to be invaded by the French: so he writ to his
Sovereign, That notwithstanding the Spanish and French Ambassadors Overtures,
she would proceed resolutely in her preparations for Scotland; as she did under
his Conduct, until the young Queen was glad to submit; and the King of France,
by Cecil and Throgmortons means now busied at home, to come to terms.

He brought the Kingdom to Musters, the People to ply Husbandry, the Nobility
to keep Armories, and the Justicers to Salaries. The Ensigns of St. Michael
were bestowed upon him as the Noblest, and on Leicester as the dearest Person
at Court: Now Arundel, who had spent his own Estate in hope of the Queens,
under pretense of recovering his health, traveled abroad to mitigate his
grief. When the Earls of Pembroke and Leicester were openly for the Queens
Marriage, for the future security of our present happiness; the Duke, though
privately of their mind, yet would discourse,

1. That Successors take off the peoples eyes from the present Sovereign.

2. That it was the safest way to keep all Competitors in suspense.

3. That Successors, though not designed, may succeed.

4. Whereas when known, they have been undone by the Arts of their Competitors.

5. And that most men (whatever the busy Agitators of the Succession
pretended) have no more feeling in public matters then concerns their own
private interest. But he had a private kindness for the Queen of Scots, which
he discovered in all the Treaties wherein she was concerned. 1. In Love Letters
to her, notwithstanding that Queen Elizabeth bid him take care what pillow he
rested his head on. 2. In his Mediations at Court so importune for her, that
the Queen would say, The Queen of Scots shall never want an Advocate while
Norfolk lives. And, 3. By some private transaction with the Pope and Spaniard:
to which Leicesters craft trepanned him against his friend Cecils advice, which
in a dangerous juncture cost him his life. For the people wishing (for the
security of the succession in a Protestant and an English hand) that the good
Duke were married to the Mother, and his only Daughter to her young Son;
subtle Leicester and Throgmorton laid a Train for the plain man by Conferences
with Murray, Cecil, etc. until a Plot was discovered: and the Duke,
notwithstanding Cecils advice to marry a private Lady, retiring to Norfolk to
finish the Match with the Queen, was upon Letters taken with Rosse surprised,
and committed to the Tower, he saying, I am betrayed, and undone by mine own,
whilst I knew not how to mistrust, which is the strength of wisdom. After a
solemn Trial, he is beheaded for Indiscretions rather then Treasons, loosing
his head because he wanted one. Never any fell more beloved, or more pitied:
such his singular Courtesy, such his magnificent Bounty, not unbecoming so
great a Peer. High was his Nobility, large his Interest, singularly good his
Nature, comely his Person, manly his Countenance, who (says Cambden) might
have been a great strength and Ornament to his Country, had not the cunning
practices of his malicious Adversaries, and slippery hopes, under color of
public good, diverted him from his first course of life. His death was a blot
to some men's Justice, to all men's Discretion that were concerned in it, as
generally odious, though quietly endured: which proves (says one) That the
common people are like Rivers, which seldom grow so impetuous as to transcend
the bounds of Obedience, but upon the overflowing of a general Oppression.

Observations on the Life of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.
SIr Nicholas Throgmorton, fourth Son of Sir George Throgmorton of Coughton in
Warwickshire, was bred beyond the Seas, where he attained to great experience.
Under Queen Mary he was in Guild Hall arraigned for Treason, (in compliance
with Wiat) and by his own wary pleading, and the Juries upright Verdict, hardly
escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him her Leiger a long time, first in France,
then in Scotland, finding him a most able Minister of State: yet got he no
great Wealth; and no wonder, being ever of the opposite party to Burleigh Lord
Treasurer: Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and Chief Butler of England, were his
highest Preferments. I say, Chief Butler; which Office, like an empty-covered
Cup, pretends to some State, but affords no considerable profit. He died at
Supper with eating of Sallats: not without suspicion of poison; the rather,
because it happened in the house of one no mean Artist in that faculty, R. Earl
of Leicester. His death, as it was sudden, was seasonable for him and his,
whose active (others will call it turbulent) spirit had brought him unto such
trouble as might have cost him, at least, the loss of his Personal Estate. He
died in the 57 year of his Age, Febr. 12. 1570. and lies buried in the
South Side of the Chancel of St. Martin Cree-church London.

A stout and a wise man, that saw through pretenses, and could look beyond
dangers. His skill in Heraldry appears in his grim Arguments against the King
of France, in right of his Queen of Scots Usurping of the Arms of England; and
his experience in History, in his peremptory Declarations of the Queen of
Englands Which he made out from Dr. Wottons Discourse on that subject at
Cambray.
Title in right of her twelve Predecessors to those of France. But his Policy
much more, by putting Montmorency, the great Enemy of the Guizes, upon
persuading his Master out of the humor of wearing those Arms, with this
Argument, That it was below the Arms of France to be quartered with those of
England; those being comprehensive of these and all other of his Majesty's
Dominions. An Argument more suitable to that Prince his ambition, then
convincing to his Reason. Wise men speak rather what is most fit, then what is
most rational; not what demonstrates, but what persuades his, and takes. But
being endangered in his Person, affronted in his Retinue, and served with
nothing at his Table but what had the Arms of England quartered with those of
France, he dealt underhand with the Earl of Northumberland, to understand the
scope the Reformed propounded to themselves, their means to compass what they
aimed at, and (if at any time they were assisted) upon what terms a League
might be concluded between the two Kingdoms. The Advices collected from all
his Observations he sent to the Queen, were these:

1. That she should not rest in dull Counsels of what is lawful, but proceed to
quick Resolutions of what is safe.

2. That to prevent, is the policy of all Nations; and to be powerful, of ours.
England is never peaceable but in Arms.

3. That how close soever they managed their Affairs, it was a Maxim, To which
Queen Elizabeth adds a saying of Valentinians, Have the French for thy
Friend, not for thy Neighbor.
That France can neither be poor, nor abstain from War three years together.

Francis Earl of Bedford bore the state of the French Embassy, and Sir Nicholas
the burden, who gave daily Directions to Sir Thomas Challoner in Spain, Sir
Henry Killigrew in Germany, and Sir Thomas Randolph and Sir Peter Mewtas in
Scotland: to the two first, to enjealous the Princes of those Countries; and to
the last, to unite the Nobility of Scotland; he in the mean time suffering
himself to be taken prisoner by the Protestants at the battle of Dreux, that he
might with less suspicion impart secret Counsels to them, and receive as secret
Advices from them; until discovering their lightness and unconstancy, they
secured him as a person too cunning for the whole Faction, and too skilful in
raising Hurley-burleys and Commotions. When the young Queen of Scots would
needs marry the young Lord Darley, he told her that was long to be deliberated
on which was to be done but once. And when that would not do, he advised, 1.
That an Army should appear upon the borders: 2. That the Ecclesiastical Laws
should be in force against Papists: 3. That Hertford should be secured: and, 4.
That the Lord Dudley should be advanced. But the Queen being married to the
Lord Darley, an easy and good-natured man, whom Queen Elizabeth wished to her
Bed next Leicester, and affronted by her subjects, Throgmorton disputes the
Queens Authority and non-accountableness to any against Bucbanans damned De
jure Reg. apud Scotos.
Dialogue of the Peoples power over Kings; until smelling their design of
revolt to the French, and cruelty upon the Queen, he persuaded her to resign
her Government, saying, That her Resignation extorted in Prison, which is a
just fear, was utterly void. The next news we hear of this busy man, was in
his two Advisoes to the Queen of Scots friends: 1. To clap up About moneys
transported beyond Sea.
Cecil, whom they might then (he said) deal with: 2. To proclaim the Queen of
Scots succession; and in the Train he laid to serve Leicester in the Duke of
Norfolks ruin. But he was too familiar with that Politicians privacy, to live
long: anno 1570, he died. A Man, says Mr. Cambden, of great experience,
passing sharp wit, and singular diligence; an overcurious fancy, and a too
nimble activity: like your too fine Silks or Linen, and more for show then
service; never blessing their Owners but when allayed with something of the
heavy and the wary; nor rising, but when stayed.

Observations on the Life of Edward Earl of Derby.
HIs Greatness supported his Goodness, and his Goodness endeared his Greatness;
his Height being looked upon with a double aspect: 1. By himself, as an
advantage of Beneficence: 2. By others, as a ground of Reverence. His great
Birth put him above private respects, but his great Soul never above public
service. Indeed he repaired by ways thrifty, yet Noble, what his Ancestors had
impaired by neglect. Good Husbandry may as well stand with great Honor, as
Breadth may consist with Height. His Travel when young, at once gained
experience, and saved expenses; and his marriage was as much to his profit as
his honor. And now he shows himself in his full Grandeur, when the
intireness of his Mind, complied with the largeness of his Soul.

1. In a spreading Charity. Other Lords made many poor by Oppression; he and my
Lord of Bedford, as Queen Elizabeth would jest, made all the Beggars by his
liberality.

2. In a famous Hospitality: wherein, 1. His House was orderly; a College of
Discipline, rather then a Palace for Entertainment; his Servants being so many
young Gentlemen trained up to govern themselves by observing him; who knew
their Master, and understood themselves. 2. His Provision Native, (all the
Necessaries of England are bred in it) rather plentiful then various, solid
then dainty, that cost him less, and contented his guests more. His Table
constant and even, where all were welcome, and none invited. 3. His Hall was
full most commonly, his Gates always; the one with the honest Gentry and
Yeomen, who were his Retainers in love and observance, bringing good stomachs
to his Table, and resolved hearts for his service; the holding up of his hand
in the Northern business, being as effectual as the displaying of a Banner: The
other with the, 1. Aged, 2. Maimed, 3. Industrious Poor, whose craving was
prevented with doles, and expectation with bounty; the first being provided
with meat, the second with money, and the third with employment. In a word, Mr.
Cambden observes, That Hospitality lies buried since 1572, in this Earls
Grave: whence may that Divine Power raise it, that shall raise him; but before
the last Resurrection, when there will be plenty to bestow in one part of the
world, and no poor to be relieved; poverty in the other, and no bounty to
relieve.

Neither was he Munificent upon other men's charge: for once a month he looked
into his Incomes, and once a week to his Disbursements, that none should wrong
him, or be wronged by him. The Earl of Derby, he would say, shall keep his own
House: wherefore it is an Observation of him and the second Duke of Norfolk,
That when they were buried, not a Tradesman could demand the payment of a
Groat that they owed him, nor a Neighbor the restitution of a penny they had
wronged him. They say, The Grass grows not where the Grand Seigniors Horse
treads; nor does the People thrive where the Noblemen inhabit: But here every
Tenant was a Gentleman, and every Gentleman my Lords Companion: such his
Civility toward the one, and great penyworths to the other. Noblemen in those
days esteemed the love of their Neighbors more then their fear, and the
service and ^ealty of their Tenants more then their Money. Now the Landlord
has the sweat of the Tenants brow in his Coffers, then he had the best blood
in his Veins at his command.

That grand word, On mine Honor, was security enough for a Kingdom, and the
only Asseveration he used. It was his privilege, that he need not swear for a
testimony; and his renown, that he would not for his honor. Great was this
Families esteem with the people, and eminent their favor with their
Sovereigns; as which ever bestowed its self in obliging their Liege-people,
improving their interest, and supporting their Throne: for though they were a
long time great Kings of Man and Hearts, yet were they as long faithful
subjects to England.

Oservations on the Life of Sir Williliam Fitz-Williams.
A Child of Fortune from his Cradle, made up of confidence and reputation:
never unwarily showing his Virtue or Worth to the world with any disadvantage.

When Britain had as little sleepiness and sloth as night, when it was all
day, and all activity; He, as all young Sparks of that Age, trailed a Pike in
the Netherlands, (the Seminary of the English Soldiery, and the School of
Europes Discipline) as a Soldier, and traveled as a Gentleman; until that
place graced him civilly with a Command, which he had honored eminently with
his service. His friends checked him for undertaking an Employment so
boisterous; and he replied upon them, That it was as necessary as it seemed
irregular: for if some were not Soldiers, all must be so. He said, He never
durst venture on War with men, till he had made his Peace with God: A good
Conscience breeds great Resolutions, and the innocent Soul is impregnable: None
more fearful of doing evil, none more resolved to suffer: there being no
hardship that he would avoid, no undecency that he would allow. Strict he was
to his Commission, and yet observant of his advantage: never tempting a danger,
never flying it: careful of his first life and himself, but more of his other
and his name. When the methods of Obedience advanced him to the honor of
commanding, six things he was Chronicled for.

1. Never making the Aged, the Young, or the Weak, the Objects of his Rage,
which could not be so of his Fear.

2. That he never basely killed in cold blood, them that had nobly escaped his
Sword in hot.

3. That he never led the Soldiers without pay, or quartered in the Country
without money.

4. That though he was second to none that acted in War, such his Valor! yet
he was the first that spoke for Peace, such his sweet Disposition!

5. That he would never suffer that a Clergyman should be abused, a Church
violated, or the Dead be unburied.

6. That he would never force an Enemy to a necessity; always saying, Let us
disarm them of their best Weapon, Despair: nor fight an Enemy before he had
skirmished him, nor undertake a defigne before he consulted his God, his
Council, his Friends, his Map and his History.

His own Abilities commended, and his alliance with Sir Henry Sidney Lord
Deputy, whose Sister he married, promoted him to the Government of Ireland.
Once did the Queen send him thither for his Brothers sake, four times more for
his own sake; a sufficient evidence (says my Friend) of his Ability and
Integrity, since Princes never trust twice, where they are once deceived in a
Minister of State. He kept up his Mistresses Interest, and she his Authority;
enjoining the Earl of Essex, so much above him in honor, to truckle under him
in Commission when Governor of Vlster, and he Lord Deputy of Ireland. Defend
me, said Luther to the Duke of Saxony, with your Sword, and I will defend you
with my pen. Maintain my Power, says the Minister of State to his Sovereign,
and I will support your Majesty.

Two things he did for the settlement of that Kingdom:

1. He raised a Composition in Munster. 2. He established the Possessions of
the Lords and Tenants in Monahan.
Severe he was always against the Spanish Faction, but very vigilant in -- 88,
when the dispersed Armado did look, but durst not land in Ireland, except
driven by Tempest, and then finding the shore worse then the Sea. But Leicester
dies, and he fails; when his Sun was set, it was presently night with him. Yra
la soga con el Calderon; where goes the Bucket, there goes the Rope; where
the Principal miscarrieth, all the Dependants fall with him: as our renowned
Knight, who died where he was born, (there is a Circulation of all things to
their Original) at Milton in Northamptonshire, 1594.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Pembroke.
AN excellent Man, and one that fashioned his own Fortune: His Disposition got
favor, and his Prudence wealth, (the first to grace the second, and the second
to support the first) under King Henry the eigth, whose Brotherin-law he was by
his wife, and Chamberlain by his place. When others were distracted with
Factions in King Edwards Reign, he was intent upon his Interest, (leaning (as
he said) on both sides the stairs to get up) for his service, being promoted to
the Master of the Horses place; for his relation to the Queen Mother, to the
Order of St. George; and in his own Right, to the Barony of Caerdiffe, and the
Earldome of Pembroke.

Under Queen Mary his Popularity was very serviceable when General against
Wiat; his Authority useful, when President of Wales; and his Vigilance
remarkable, when Governor of Calice: And under Queen Elizabeth, for his
Fidelity and ancient Honesty he was made great Master of the Household. But
herein he failed, That being more intent upon the future state of the Kingdom
under the succession, then his own under the present Sovereign, he was cajoled
by Leicester to promote the Queen of Scots Match with Norfolk so far, (neither
with an ill will, (says the Annalist) nor a bad intent) as to loose his own
favor with the Queen of England, who discovered those things after his death
that made him weary of his life: which was an instance of my Lord Bacons Rule,
That ancient Nobility is more innocent, though not so active as the young one;
this more virtuous, but not so plain as that; there being rarely any rising but
by a commixture of good and evil Arts. He was richer in his Tenants hearts then
their Rents: Alas! what has not that Nobleman, that has an universal love
from his Tenants? who were observed to live better with their encouraged
industry upon his Copyhold, then others by their secure sloth on their own
Free-land. 2. His Chaplains, whose Merits were preferred freely and nobly to
his excellent Livings, without any unworthy Gratuities to his Gebazi's or
Servants, or any unbecoming Obligations to himself. 3. His Servants, whose
youth had its Education in his Family, and Age its Maintenance upon his Estate,
which was favorably Let out to Tenants, and freely Leased to his Servants; of
whom he had a Train upon any occasion in his Family, and an Army in his
Neighborhood: an Army, I say, in his Neighborhood; not to enjealous his
Prince, but to secure him; as in Wiats case, when this King of Hearts would be
by no means a Knave of Clubs.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Mildmay.
WAlter Mildmay, that upright and most advised m^n, was born at Chelmsford
Cambden Eliz. 1566
in Essex, where he was a younger son to Thomas Mildmay Esquire. He was bred in
Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, where he did not (as many young Gentlemen) study
only in Complement, but seriously applied himself to his Book. Under King
Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth, he had a gainful Office in the
Court of Augmentations: during the Reign of Queen Mary, he practiced the
Politic Precept, Been vixit, qui been latuit. No sooner came Queen Elizabeth
to the Crown, but he was called to State-employment; and it was not long before
he was made Chancellor of the Exchequer. It is observed, That the Exchequer
never fares ill but under a good Prince; such who out of Conscience will not
oppress their People, whilst Tyrants pass not for that they squeeze out of
their Subjects. Indeed Queen Elizabeth was very careful not to have her Coffers
swelled with the Consumption of her Kingdom, and had conscientious Officers
under her; amongst whom, Sir Walter was a principal one. This Knight, sensible
of Gods blessing on his Estate, and knowing that, Omne beneficium requirit
Officium, cast about to make his return to God. He began with his Benefactions
to Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, only to put his hand into practice: then his
Bounty embraced the Generous Resolution, (which the painful piety of St. Paul
propounds to himself, viz.) Not to build on another man's foundation, but on his
own cost he erected a new College in Cambridge, by the name of Immanuel. A
right godly Gentleman he was; a good Man, and a good Citizen; though some of
his back friends suggested to the Queen that he was a better Patriot then
Subject: and he was over-popular in Parliaments, insomuch that his Life set sub
nubecula, under a Cloud of a Royal Displeasure: yet was not the Cloud so great,
but that the beams of his Innocence meeting those of the Queens Candor, had
easily dispelled it, had he survived longer, as appeared by the great grief of
the Queen, professed for the loss of so grave a Counselor, who leaving two
Sons and three Daughters, died anno Domini 1589.

This Gentleman being employed by virtue of his place to advance the Queens
Treasure, did it industriously, faithfully, and conscionably, without wronging
the Subject, being very tender of their Privileges; insomuch that he
complained in Parliament, That many Subsidies were granted, and no Grievances
redressed: which words being represented to his disadvantage to the Queen, made
her to disaffect him, setting in a Court-Cloud, but (as he goes on) in the
Sunshine of his Country, and a clear Conscience, (though a man's Conscience can
be said no otherwise clear by his opposition to the Court, then a man is said
to have a good heart when it is but a bold one.) But coming to Court after he
had founded his College, the Queen told him, Sir Walter, I hear you have
erected a Puritan foundation. No, Madam, said he, far be it from me to
countenance any thing contrary to your established Laws: But I have set an
Acorn; which when it comes to be an Oak, God alone knows what will be the fruit
of it.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Fortescue.
AN upright and a knowing man, a great Master of Greek and Latin, and Overseer
of the Qu: Studies in both the Languages; Master of the Wardrobe, one whom she
trusted with the Ornaments of her soul and body: succeeding Sir Walter M^ldmay
in his prudence and piety, and in his place of Chancellor and Under-treasurer
of the Exchequer.

Two men Qu: Eliz. would say out did her expectation; Fortescue for Integrity,
and Walsingham for Subtlety, as Cambden writes, and Officious services. His and
Rawleigh's failure was their design of Articling with K. James at his first
coming, not so much (say some in their behalf) for himself, as for his
followers, in regard of the known seud between the Nations. However, conditions
unworthy of English Subjects to offer, and below the K. of Great Britain to
receive, who is to make no more terms for his Kingdom than for his Birth. The
very solemn asking of the Peoples consent, which the Archbishop of Canterbury
in all the corners of the stage at a Coronation makes, importing no more than
this; Do you the People of England acknowledge, that this is the Person who is
the Heir of the Crown? They being absolutely obliged to submit to the
Government upon supposition that they absolutely believe that he is the King.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Drury.
SIr William Drury was born in Suffolk, where his Worshipful Family had long
flourished at Haulsted. His name in Saxon sounds a Pearl, to which he
answered in the pretiousnesse of his disposition, clear and heard, innocent and
valiant, and therefore valued deservedly by his Queen and Country. His youth
was spent in the French Wars, his middle-Age in Scotland, and his old Age in
Ireland. He was Knight-Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had
possessed themselves of the Castle of Edinburgh, in the minority of King James.
Queen Elizabeth employed this Sir William with 1500 men to besiege the Castle;
which service he right worthily performed, reducing it within few days to the
Owner thereof. Anno 1575. he was appointed Lord President of Munster, whither
he went with competent Forces, and executed impartial Justice in despite of
the Opposers thereof. For as the Sign of Leo immediately precedeth Virgo and
Libra in the Zodiac; so I hope not that Innocence will be protected, or
Justice administered in a barbarous Country, where power and strength do not
first secure a passage unto them. But the Earl of Desmond opposed this good
President, forbidding him to enter the County of Kerry, as a Palatinate
peculiarly appropriated unto himself. Know by the way, as there were but four
Palatinates in England, Chester, Laneaster, Durbam and Ely, (whereof the two
former many years since were in effect invested in the Crown) there were no
fewer then eight Palatinates in Ireland, possessed by their respective Dynasts
claiming Regal Rights therein, to the great retarding of the absolute Conquest
of that Kingdom. Amongst these, (says my Author) Kerry became the Sanctuary
of Sin, and Refuge of Rebels, as outlawed from any Jurisdiction. Sir William no
whit terrified with the Earls threatening, and declaring that no place should be
a privilege to mischief, entered Kerry with a competent Train, and there
dispensed Justice to all persons, as occasion did require. Thus with sevenscore
men he safely forced his return through seven hundred of the Earls, who sought
to surprise him.

In the last year of his Life he was made Lord Deputy of Ireland; and no doubt
had performed much in his place, if not afflicted with constant sickness, the
forerunner of his death, at Waterford, 1598.

He was one of that Military Valor which the Lord Verulam wishes about a
Prince in troublesome times, that held a good esteem with the Populacy, and an
exact correspondence with the Nobless; whereby he united himself to each side
by endearments, and divided them by distrust; watching the slow motions of the
people, that they should not be excited and spirited by the Nobility; and the
ambition of the Great Ones, that it should not be befriended with the
turbulency, or strengthened with the assistance of the Commonalty. One great
Act well followed did his business with the Natives, whom he sometimes
indulged, (giving their Discontents liberty to evaporate) and with the
strangers, whom he always awed. In those that were commended to his service, he
observed two things: 1. That they were not advanced for their dependence,
because they promote a Party; which he noted to be the first ground of
Recommendation: 2. Nor for their weakness, because they cannot hinder it; which
he remarked to be the second.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Smith.
SIr Thomas Smith was born at Cambd. Eliz. anno 1577.
Saffron-Walden in Essex, and bred in Queens College in Cambridge; where such
his proficiency in Learning, that he was chosen out by Henry the eighth to be
sent over, and to be brought up beyond the Seas. It was fashionable in that Age
that pregnant Students were maintained on the cost of the State, to be
Merchants for experience in Foreign Parts; whence returning home with their
gainful Adventurers, they were preferred according to the improvement of their
time to Offices in their own Country. Well it were if this good old Custom
were resumed: for if where God has given five talents, Men would give but
pounds, I mean, encourage hopeful Abilities with hopeful Maintenance, able
persons would never be wanting, and poor men with great Parts would not be
excluded the Line of Preferment. This Sir Thomas was first Servant and
Favorite to the Duke of Somerset, and afterward Secretary of State to Queen
Elizabeth, and a grand Benefactor to both Universities.

Anno 1577, when that excellent Act passed, whereby it was provided, That a
third part of the Rent upon Leases made by Colleges, should be reserved in
Corn, paying it either in kind or in money, after the rate of the best prices
in Oxford or Cambridge -markets, the next Market-days before Michaelmas or our
Lady Day: For the passing of this Act, Sir Thomas Smith surprised the House;
and whereas many conceived not the difference between the payment of Rents in
Corn or Money, the knowing Patriot took the advantage of the present cheap
year, knowing that hereafter Grain would grow dearer, Mankind daily
multiplying, and License being lately given for Transportation; so that now
when the Universities have least Corn, they have most Bread. What his foresight
did now for the University, his reach did the first year of Q. Eliz. for the
Kingdom: for the first sitting of her Council he advised twelve most important
things for the public safety.

1. That the Ports should be shut.

2. That the Tower of London should be secured in good hands.

3. That the Deputy of Ireland's Commission should be renewed and enlarged.

4. That all Officers should act.

5. That no new Office should be bestowed in a month.

6. That Ministers should meddle with no Controversies.

7. That Ambassadors should be sent to Foreign Princes.

8. That no Coin should be transported beyond Sea.

9. That no person of quality should travel for six weeks.

10. That the Train-bands should be mustered.

11. That Ireland, the Borders, and the Seas, should be provided for.

12. And that the dissenting Nobility and Clergy should be watched and secured.
Adding withal a Paper for the Reading of the Epistle, the Gospel, and the
Commandments in the English Tongue, to encourage the Protestants expectation,
and allay the Papists fear. In the same Proclamation that he drew up the
Sacrament of the Altar was to be reverenced, and yet the Communion to be
administered in both kinds, He advised a Disputation with the Papists one day,
(knowing that they could not dispute without leave from the Pope, and so would
disparage their Cause; yet they could not say but they might dispute for the
Queen, and so satisfy the People) and is one of the The Marquess of
Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, John Gray of Pyrgo, Sir William Cecil, and
Sir Tho. Smith
five Counselors to whom the Design of the Reformation is opened, and one of
the The Doctors Parker, Bill, May, Cox, Grindal, Whitehead, Pillington, and Sir
Tho. Smith
eight to whom the management of it was entrusted. There you might see him a
Leading man among the Statesmen, here most eminent among Divines; at once the
most knowing and pious man of that Age. As his Industry was taken up with the
establishment of our Affairs at home, so his Watchfulness (upon Sir Edward
Carnes deposition of his Embassy) was intent upon the plots of France and Rome
abroad: in the first of which places he made a Secretary his own, and in the
second a Cup Bearer. At the Treaty of Cambray my Lord Howard of Effingham, the
Lord Chamberlain, and he, brought the King of Spain to the English side in the
business of Calice: 1. That France might be weakened: 2. That his Netherlands
might be secured: 3. That the Queen his Sweetheart might be obliged, until he
discovered Queen Elizabeth's averseness to the marriage: whereupon had it not
been for the Viscount Mountacute (who was not so much a Papist as to forget
that he was an Englishman) and Sir Thomas, the Spaniard had stolen over
Catharine Gray, Queen Elizabeth's Niece, for a pretense to the Crown, as the
French had the Queen of Scots her Cozen. After which, he and Sir William Cecil
advised her Majesty to that private Treaty apart, without the Spaniard, which
was concluded 1559; as much to the bonour of England, now no longer to truckle
under Spain, as its interest, no longer in danger from France. Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton was the Metal in these Treaties, and Sir Thomas Smith the Allay:
the ones mildness being to mitigate that animosity which the others harshness
had begot; and the others spirit to recover those advantages which this man's
easiness had yielded. Yet he showed himself as much a man in demanding, as Sir
William Cheyney in gaining Calice; replying smartly upon Chancellor Hospitals
Discourse of ancient Right, the late At Cambray.
Treaty; and upon Montmorency's Harangue of Fears, Conscience. Pitying the
neglected state of Ireland, he obtained a Colony to be planted under his base
Son in the East-Coast of Ulster, called Ardes, at once to civilize and secure
that place. So eminent was this Gentleman for his Learning, that he was at once
Steward of the Stannaries, Dean of Carlisle, and Provost of Eaton in King
Edward's time, and had a Pension (on condition he went not beyond Sea, so
considerable he was!) in Queen Mary's.

Well he deserved of the Commonwealth of Learning by his Books; 1. Of The
Commonwealth of England, 2. Of The Orthography of the English Tongue, and of
the Pronunciation of Greek; and 3. an exact Commentary of matters, says Mr.
Cambden, worthy to be published.

Observations on the Lives of Dr. Dale, the Lord North, Sir Thomas Randolph.
I Put these Gentlemen together in my Observations, because I find them so in
their Employments: the one Agent, the other Leiger, and the third Extraordinary
Ambassador in France; the first was to manage our Intelligence in those dark
times, the second to urge our Interest in those troublesome days, and the third
to represent our Grandeur. No man understood the French correspondence with the
Scots better then Sir Thomas Randolph, who spent his active life between those
Kingdoms: none knew better our Concerns in France and Spain then Valentine
Dale, who had now seen six Treaties; in the first three whereof he had been
Secretary, and in the last a Commissioner: None fitter to represent out state
then my Lord North, who had been two years in Walsinghams house, four in
Leicesters service; had seen six Courts, twenty Battles, nine Treaties, and
four solemn Justs; whereof he was no mean part, as a reserved man, a valiant
Soldier, and a Courtly Person. So sly was Dale, that he had a servant always
attending the Queen Mother of France, the Queen of Scots, and the King of
Navarre: so watchful Sir Thomas Randolph, that the same day he sent our Agent
in Scotland notice of a design to carry over the young King, and depose the
Regent, he advised our Queen of a Match between the King of Scot's Uncle and
the Countess of Shrewsbury's Daughter; and gave the Earl of Huntington, then
President of the North, those secret instructions touching that matter, that
(as my Lord Burleigh would often acknowledge) secured that Coast. My L. North
watched the successes of France, Dr. Dale their Leagues; and both took care
that the Prince of Orange did not throw himself upon the Protection of France,
always a dangerous Neighbor, but with that accession a dreadful one. Sir John
Horsey in Holland proposed much, but did nothing; Sir Thomas Randolph in France
performed much, and said nothing: yet both with Dr. Dales assistance made
France and Spain the Scales in the balance of Europe, and England the tongue or
holder of the balance, while they held the Spaniard in play in the Netherlands,
watched the French Borders, and kept constant Agents with Orange and Don John.
Neither was Sir Thomas less in Scotland then in France, where he betakes
himself first to resolution in his Protestation, and then to cunning in his
Negotiation; encouraging Morton on the one hand, and amusing Lenox on the
other; keeping fair weather with the young King, and yet practicing with Mar
and Anguse. Nothing plausible indeed, says Cambden, was he with the wise,
though youthful King James; yet very dexterous in Scottish humors, and very
prudent in the Northern Affairs; very well seen in those interests, and as
successful in those Negotiations; witness the first and advantageous League
1586. Video and rideo, is Gods Motto upon Affronts; Video and Taceo, was Queen
Elizabeth's; Video nec vident, was Sir Thomas Randolphs. These three men treated
with the Spaniard near Ostend for Peace, while the Spaniard prepared himself on
our Coast for War. So much did Sir James Crofts his affection for Peace exceed
his judgment of his Instruction, that he would needs steal over to Brussels to
make it, with no less commendation for the prudent Articles he proposed, then
censure for the hazard he incurred in the Proposal. So equal and even did old
Dale carry himself, that the Duke of Parma saw in his Answers the English
spirit, and therefore (says my Author) durst not try that Valor in a Nation,
which he was so afraid of in a single person; That he had no more to say to the
old Gentleman, then only this, These things are in the hand of the Almighty.

None more inward with other men then Sir Francis Walsingham, none more inward
with him then Sir Thomas Randolph: well studied he was in Justinians Code,
better in Machiavils Discourses; both when a learned Student of Christ-church,
and a worthy Principal of Broadgates: thrice therefore was he an Ambassador to
the Lords of Scotland in a Commotion; thrice to Queen Mary in times of Peace;
seven times to James the sixth of Scotland for a good understanding; and thrice
to Basilides Emperor of Russia for Trade: Once to Charles the ninth King of
France, to discover his design upon Scotland; and once to Henry the third, to
open a Conspiracy of his Subjects against him: Great Services these, but meanly
rewarded; the serviceable, but moderate and modest man, (though he had as many
children at home as he had performed Embassies abroad) being contented with the
Chamberlainship of the Exchequer, and the Postermasters place; the first but a
name, and the second then but a noise: to which were added some small Farms,
wherein he enjoyed the peace and innocence of a quiet and retired Life; a Life,
which upon the reflections of a tender Conscience, he wished a great while, as
appears by his Letters to his dear Walsingham, wherein he writes, How worthy,
yea, how necessary a thing it was, that they should at length bid Farewell to
the snares, be of a Secretary, and himself of an Ambassador; and should both
of them set their minds upon their Heavenly Country; and by Repenting, ask
Mercy of GOD.

Observations on the Life of Sir Amias Poulet.
SIr Amias Poulet, born at Hinton St. George in Somersetshire, Son to Sir Hugh,
and Grandchild to Sir Who put Cardinal Wolsey, then but a Schoolmaster, in
the Stocks.
Amias Poulet, was Chancellor of the Garter, Governor of the Isles of Jersey
and Gernsey, and Privy-Councellour to Queen Elizabeth. He was so faithful and
trusty, that the Queen committed the keeping of Mary Queen of Scots to his
custody, which he discharged with great fidelity.

As Caesar would have his Wife, so he his Spirit, above the very suspicion of
unworthiness; equally consulting his Fame and his Conscience. When he performed
his last Embassy, with no less satisfaction to the King of France, then honor
to the Queen of England, (at once with a good humor and a great state) he would
not accept a Chain (and all Gifts are Chains) from that King by any means,
until he was a League from Paris: then he took it, because he would oblige that
Prince; and not till then, because he would not be obliged by any but his
Sovereign, saying, I will wear no Chains but my Mistresses. It is the Interest
of Princes, that their Servants Fortune should be above the temptation; it is
their happiness, that their Spirits are above the respects of a private concern.

Observations on the Lives of Sir James Crofts, John Gray of Pyrgo, Sir Henry
Gates.
EMblems of Honor derived from Ancestors, are but rotten Rags, where ignoble
Posterity degenerates from their Progenitors: but they are both glorious and
precious where the children both answer and exceed the Virtues of their
extraction; as in these three Gentlemen, whose Ancestors fill both Pages of
former Kings Chronicles, as they do the Annals of Queen Elizabeth: Three
Gentlemen whom it is pity to part in their Memoires, since they were always
together in their Employments. All three were like to die in Queen Mary's days
for the profession of the Protestant Religion, all three spending their Lives
in Queen Elizabeth's for the propagation of it: 1. Sir Henry Gates lying in
Rome as a Spy, under the Notion of Cardinal Florido's Secretary, six years;
John Gray drawing up the whole Proceedings and Methods of the Reformation for
ten years; and Sir James Crofts being either the vigilant and active Governor
of Berwick, or the prudent and successful Commissioner in Scotland for seven
years. When the French threatened us by the way of Scotland, the Earl of
Northumberland was sent Northward for his interest, as Warden of the middle
March; Sir Ralph Sadler for his wisdom, as his Assistant and Counselor; and
Sir James Crofts for his Conduct, as both their Guide and Director-general. An
Estate in the Purse, credits the Court; Wisdom in the Head, adorneth it; but
both in the Hand, serve it. Nobly did he and Cutbbert Vaughan beat the French
that sallied out of Edinburgh into their Trenches, but unhappily stood he an
idle Spectator in his quarter the next Scalado, while the English are
overthrown, and the Duke writes of his infidelity to the Queen, who discharged
him from his Place, though not from her favor: for in stead of the more
troublesome Place, the Government of Berwick, she conferred on him that more
honorable, the Controllership of her Household. Great Service did his Valor at
Hadington in Scotland against the French, greater his Prudence in Vlster
against the Spaniards. Although his Merit made his Honor due to him, and his
Blood becoming: though his Cares, Travels and Dangers deserved pity; his quiet
and meek Nature love: though he rise by wary degrees, and so was unobserved;
and stood not insolently when up, and so was not obnoxious: yet Envy reflected
as hot upon him as the Sun upon the rising ground, which stands firm though it
does not flourish, as this Gentleman's resolved Honesty did; overcoming
Court-envy with a solid worth; waxing old at once in years and reverence, and
dying (as the Chronicle wherein he dies not but with Time, reports it) in good
favor with his Prince, and sound reputation with all men, for three infallible
sources of Honor: 1. That he aimed at Merit more then Fame: 2. That he was not
a Follower, but an Example in great Actions: and, 3. That he assisted in the
three great Concerns of Government, 1. in Laws, 2. in Arms, and 3. in Councils.
In Aesop there is a slight Fable of a deep Moral: it is this: Two Frogs
consulted together in the time of Drowth (when many plashes that they had
repaired to were dry) what was to be done; and the one propounded to go down
into a deep Well, because it was like the water would not fail there: but the
other answered, Yea, but if it do fail, bow shall we get up again? Mr. Gray
would Nod, and say, Humane affairs are so uncertain, that he seems the wisest
man, not who has a spirit to go on, but who has a wariness to come off; and
that seems the best course, that has most passages out of it. Sir James Crofts
on the other hand hated that irresolution that would do nothing, because it may
be at liberty to do any thing. Indeed, says one, Necessity has many times an
advantage, because it awaketh the powers of the mind, and strengthens
Endeavor. Sir James Crofts was an equal Composition of both; as one that had
one fixed eye on his Action, and another indifferent one on his retreat.

Observations on the Life of William Lord Gray of Wilton.
THat great Soldier and good Christian, in whom Religion was not a softness,
(as Machiavil discourses) but a resolution. Hannibal was sworn an Enemy to
Rome at nine years of Age, and my Lord bred one to France at fourteen. Scipio's
first service was the rescue of his Father in Italy, and my Lord Grey's was the
safety of his Father in Germany. He had Fabius his slow way, and long reach,
with Herennius his fine Polices, and neat Ambuscadoes; having his two
Companions always by him, his Map and his Guide: the first whereof discovered
to him his more obvious advantages, and the second his more close dangers. His
great Conduct won him much esteem with those that heard of him, and his greater
presence more with those that saw him. Observable his Civility to Strangers,
eminent his Bounty to his Followers; obliging his Carriage in the Countries he
marched through, and expert his Skill in Wars, whose end he said was Victory,
and the end of Victory Nobleness, made up of pity and munificence. It lost him
his Estate to redeem himself in France, and his Life to bear up his Reputation
in Berwick. Having lived to all the great purposes of life but Self-interest,
he died 1563, that fatal year; no less to the public sorrow of England which
he secured, then the common joy of Scotland, which he awed. Then it was said,
That the same day died the greatest Scholar, and the greatest Soldier of the
Nobility; the right honorable Henry Manners Earl of Rutland in his Gown, and
the honorable Lord Gray in his Armor; both, as the Queen said of them,
Worthies that had deserved well of the Commonwealth by their Wisdom, Counsel,
Integrity and Courage.

Two things my Lord always avoided: the first, To give many Reasons for one
thing; the heaping of Arguments arguing a neediness in every of the Arguments
by its self; as if one did not trust any of them, but fled from one to another,
helping himself still with the last. The second, To break a Negotiation to too
many distinct particulars, or to couch it in too compact generals: by the first
whereof we give the parties we deal with an opportunity to look down to the
bottom of our business; and by the second, to look round to the compass of it.
Happy are those Souls that command themselves so far, that they are equally
free to full and half discoveries of themselves, always ready and pliable to
the present occasion. Not much regarded was this gallant Spirit when alive, but
much missed when dead: we understand what we want, better then what we enjoy;
and the beauty of worthy things is not in the face, but the backside,
endearing more by their departure then their address.

Observations on the Life of Edmund Plowden.
EDmund Plowden was born at Plowden in Shrop-shire; one who excellently
deserved of our Municipal Law in his learned Writings thereon. A plodding and a
studious man; and no wonder if knowing and able: Beams in reflection are
hottest, and the Soul becomes wise by looking into its self. But see the man in
his Epitaph! Conditur in hoc Tumulo corpus Edmundi Plowden Armigeri. Claris
ortus Parentibus, apud Plowden in Comitatu Salop, natus est; a pueritia in
literarum Studio liberaliter est educatus, in Provectiore vero ^tate Legibus,
and Jurisprudentiae operam dedit. Senex jam factus, and annum aetatis suae
agens 67. Mundo Valedicens, in Christo Jesu Sancte obdormivit, die Sexto Mensis
Februar. anno Domini 1584.



I have the rather inserted this Epitaph inscribed on his Monument on the
North-side of the East End of the Quire of Temple-Church in London, because it
has escaped (but by what casualty I cannot conjecture) Master Stow in his
Survey of London. We must add a few words out of the Character Mr. Cambden
gives of him:

Vitae integritate inter bomines suae professionis nu(...) His Eliz. 1584.
secundum. As he was singularly well learned in the Common Laws of England,
whereof he deserved well by writing; so for integrity of life he was second to
none of his profession. And how excellent a Medley is made, when Honesty and
Ability me in a man of his Profession! Nor must we forget how he was Treasurer
for the honorable Society of the Middle Temple, Anno 1572, when their
magnificent Hall was builded; he being a great Advancer thereof. Finding the
Coin embased by Henry the eighth, so many ways prejudicial to their State, as
that which first dishonored us abroad; secondly, gave way to the frauds of
Coyners at home who exchanged the best Commodities of the Land for base Moneys,
and exported the current money; into Foreign parts; and thirdly, enhansed the
prizes of all things vendible, to the great loss of all Stipendiaries: He
offered, 1. That no man should melt any Metal, or export it: 2. That the
Brassmoney should be reduced to its just value: 3. That it should be bought for
good; by which silent and just methods, that defect of our Government for many
years was remedied in few months, without any noise, or (what is proper to
alterations of this nature) discontent.

The middle Region of the Air is coolest, as most distant from the direct beams
that warm the highest, and the reflexed that heat the lowest: the mean man,
that is as much below the favor of the Court, as above the business of the
Country, was in our Judges opinion the most happy and composed man; this being
the utmost of a knowing man's wish in England, That he were as much out of the
reach of contempt, as to be above a Constable; and as much out of the compass
of trouble, as to be below a Justice. A Mean is the utmost that can be
prescribed either of Virtue or Bliss, as in our Actions, so in our State.

Great was the Capacity, and good the Inclination of this Man; large the
Furniture, and happy the Culture of his Soul; grave his Mien, and stately his
Behavior; well-regulated his Affections, and allayed his Passions;
well-principled his Mind, and well-set his Spirit; solid his Observation,
working and practical his Judgment: and as that Roman Hero was more eminent
whose image was missing, then all the rest whose Portraictures were set up; so
this accomplished Gentleman is more observable because he was not a Statesman,
then some of those that were so. There is a glory in the obscurity of worthy
men, who as that Sun (which they equal as well in common influence as luster)
are most looked on when eclipsed.

Observations on the Life of Sir Roger Manwood.
SIr Roger Manwood born at Sandwich in Kent, attained to such eminency in the
Common Law, that he was preferred second Justice of the Common Pleas by Queen
Elizabeth: which Place he discharged with so much Ability and Integrity, that
not long after he was made chief Baron of the Exchequer: which Office he most
wisely managed, to his great commendation, full fourteen years, to the day of
his death.

Much was he employed in matters of State, and was one of the Commissioners who
sat on the trial of the Queen of Scots. He wrote a Book on the Forest-Laws,
which is highly prized by men of his Profession. In vacation-time he constantly
inhabited at St. Stephens in Canterbury, and was bounteously liberal to the
poor Inhabitants thereof: and so charitable was he, that he erected and endowed
a fair Free School at Sandwich, dying in the 35 of Queen Elizabeth, anno Dom.
1593.

Clothes for necessity, warm Clothes for health, cleanly for decency, lasting
for strength, was his Maxim and Practice, who kept a State in decent
plainness; insomuch that Queen Elizabeth called him her Good-man-Judge. In
Davison's Case, Mildmay cleared the man of malice, but taxed him with
unskilfulness and rashness: Lumley said he was an ingenuous and an honest man,
but presumptuous. I will ever esteem him an honest and good man, said Gray. The
Archbishop of Canterbury approved the fact, commended the man, but disallowed
of the manner and form of his proceedings. Manwood made a narrative of the
Queen of Scots proceedings, confirmed the sentence against her, extolled the
Queens clemency, pitied Davison, and fined him 10000 l.

A man he was of a pale constitution, but a clear, even, and smooth temper; of
a pretty solid consistence, equally sanguine and flegmatique: of a quiet soul,
and serene affections: of a discreet sweetness, and moderate manners; slow in
passion, and quick enough in apprehension; wary in new points, and very fixed
and judicious in the old. A plausible, insinuating, and fortunate man; the Idea
of a wise man; having (what that elegant Educator wishes) that great habit
which is nothing else but a promptness and plentifulness in the flore-house of
the mind, of clear imaginations well fixed: which was promised in his erect and
forward stature, his large breast, his round and capacious forehead, his
curious and observing eye, (the clear and smart argument of his clearer and
quicker soul, which owned a liveliness equally far from volatileness and
stupidity) his steady attention and his solid memory, together with what is
most considerable, a grand Inclination to imitate and excel. What Plutarch
says of Timoleon with reference to Epaminond, that we may say of this
Gentleman, That his Life and Actions are like Homer's Verses, smooth and
flowing, equal and happy: especially in the two grand Embelishments of our
Nature, Friendship and Charity. (...). Friendship, that sacred thing whereof he
was a passionate Lover, and an exact Observer, promoting it among all men he
conversed with. Surely there is not that Content on Earth like the Union of
Minds and Interests, whereby we enjoy our selves by reflection in our Friend; it
being the most dreadful Solitude and Wildness of Nature, to be friendless. But
his Friendship was a contracted beam to that Sun of Charity, that blessed all
about him. His Salary was not more fixed then his Charity; He and the Poor had
one Revenue, one Quarter-day: In stead of hiding his face from the Poor, it was
his practice to seek for them; laying out by Trustees for Pensioners, either
hopeful or indigent, whereof he had a Catalogue that made the best Comment upon
that Text, The liberal man devises liberal things. This is the best Conveyance
that ever Lawyer made, To have and to hold to him and his Heirs for ever.

Observations on the Life of Sir Christopher Wray.
SIr Christopher Wray was born in the spacious Parish of Bedal, the main motive
which made his Daughter Francis, Countess of Warwick, scatter her Benefactions
the thicker in that place. He was bred in the study of our Municipal Law; and
such his Proficiency therein, that in the sixteenth of Queen Elizabeth, in
Michaelmas-Term, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. He was not
like that Judge, who feared neither God nor man, but only one Widow, (lest her
importunity should weary him;) but he heartily feared God in his religious
Conversation. Each man he respected with his due distance off of the Bench, and
no man on it to bias his Judgment. He was pro tempore, Lord Privy Seal, and
sat Chief in the Court when Secretary Davison was sentenced in the
Star Chamber. Sir Christopher collecting the censures of all the Commissioners,
concurred to Fine him: but with this comfortable conclusion, That, as it was in
the Queens Power to have him punished; so, Her Highness might be prevailed with
for mitigating or remitting of the Fine: and this our Judge may be presumed no
ill Instrument in the procuring thereof.

He bountifully reflected on Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge; which
Infant-foundation had otherwise been starved at Nurse for want of Maintenance.
We know who says, The righteous man leaves an inheritance to his childrens
children; and the wellthriving of his third Generation, may be an evidence of
his well-gotten Goods. This worthy Judge died May the eighth, in the thirty
fourth of Queen Elizabeth. When Judge Mounson and Mr. Dalton urged in Stubs his
Case, (that Writ against Queen Elizabeth's marriage with the Duke of Anjou)
That the Act of Philip and Mary against the Authors and sowers of seditious
Writings was mistimed, and that it died with Queen Mary; my Lord Chief Justice
Wray, upon whom the Queen relied in that case, showed there was no mistaking in
the noting of the time; and proved by the words of the Act, that the Act was
made against those which should violate the King by seditious writing; and that
the King of England never dies: yea, that that Act was renewed anno primo
Eliz. during the life of her and the heirs of her body.

Five Particulars I have heard old men say he was choice in: 1. His Friend,
which was always wise and equal; 2. His Wife; 3. His Book; 4. His Secret; 5.
His Expression and Garb. By four things he would say an Estate was kept: 1. By
understanding it; 2. By spending not until it comes; 3. By keeping old
Servants; 4. By a Quarterly Audit. The properties of Infancy, is Innocence; of
Childhood, Reverence; of Manhood, Maturity; and of Old Age, Wisdom: Wisdom!
that in this grave Person acted all its brave parts; i. e. was mindful of what
is past, observant of things present, and provident for things to come. No
better instance whereof need be alleged then his pathetick Discourses in the
behalf of those two great Stays of this Kingdom, Husbandry and Merchandise:
for he had a clear discerning Judgment, and that not only in points of Law,
which yet his Arguments and Decisions in that Profession manifest without
dispute; but in matters of Policy and Government, wherein his Guess was usually
as near Prophecy as any man's: as also in the little mysteries of private
manage, by which upon occasion he has unravelled the studied cheats and
intrigues of the Closetmen: to which when you add his happy faculty of
communicating himself, by a free and graceful elocution, to charm and command
his Audience, assisted by the attractive dignity of his presence, you will not
admire that he managed his Justiceship with so much satisfaction to the Court,
and that he left it with so much applause from the Country: for these two
Peculiarities he had, That none was more tender to the Poor, or more civil in
private; and yet none more stern to the Rich, I mean Justices of Peace,
Officers, etc. or more severe in public. He delighted indeed to be loved, not
reverenced: yet knew he very well how to assert the Dignity of his Place and
Function from the Approaches of Contempt.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Worcester.
THe Lord of Worcester, (a no mean Favorite) was of the ancient and noble
Blood of the Beauforts, and of the Queens Grandfathers line by the Mother;
which she could never forget, especially where there was a concurrency of old
Blood with Fidelity, a mixture which ever sorted with the Queens Nature. He was
first made Master of the Horse, and then admitted of her Council of State. In
his Youth (part whereof he spent before he came to reside at Court) he was a
very fine Gentleman, and the best Horseman and Tilter of the Times, which were
then the manlike and noble recreations of the Court: and when years had abated
these exercises of Honor, he grew then to be a faithful and profound
Counselor. He was the last Liver of all the Servants of her favor, and had
the honor to see his renowned Mistress, and all of them laid in the places of
their rest; and for himself, after a life of a very noble and remarkable
reputation, he died in a peaceable Old Age, full of Riches and Honor. His
Fathers temperance reached to 97 years of Age, because he never eat but one
Meal a day; and his sparingness attained to 84, because he never eat but of one
Dish. He came to the Queens favor, because as her Father so she loved a man;
he kept in, because as her Father too so she loved an able man. His Man-like
Recreations commended him to the Ladies, his prudent Atchievments to the Lords.
He was made Master of the Horse because active, and Privy Counselor because
wise: His Mistress excused his Faith, which was Popish; but honored his
Faithfulness, which was Roman; it being her usual speech, that my Lord of
Worcester had reconciled what she thought inconsistent, a stiff Papist to a
good subject. His Religion was not pompous, but solid; not the show of his
life, but the comfort of his soul. A great Master he was of others affections,
and greater of his own passions: many things displeased, nothing angered my
Lord of Worcester, whose Maxim was, That he would not be disordered within
himself, only because things were out of order without him: He had this Maxim
whence he had his Nature, from his prudent Father Sir Charles Somerset, the
first Earl of Worcester of that Name, whose temper was so pliable, and nature
so peaceable, that being asked (as it is usually reported of him) How he passed
so troublesome a Reign as King Henry's, so uncertain as King Edward's, so
fierce as Queen Mary's, and so unexpected as Queen Elizabeth's, with so quiet,
so fixed, so smooth, so resolved and ready a mind and frame? answered, It was
because he understood the Interest of the Kingdom, while others observed its
Humors. His first Public Service was to represent the Grandeur of his
Mistress at the Christening of the Daulphine of France, and his last the like
at the marriage of the King of Scots, whom he honored with the Garter from his
Mistress, and advised to beware of Papists from the Council.

The frame of this Noble Man's body, (as it is delineated by Sir W. P.) seems
suited to the Noble use it was designed for, The entertaining of a most pure
and active Soul; but equally to the advantage of strength and comeliness,
befriended with all proportionate Dimensions, and a most grave, yet obliging
Carriage. There was a clear sprightfulness in his Complexion, but a sad
reservedness in his Nature; both making up that blessed compositon of a wise
and winning man, of as great hardship of body, as nobleness of spirit. Of a
quick sight, and an accurate ear; a steady observation, and ready expression;
with the Torrent whereof he at once pleased King James, and amazed King Henry,
being the most natural Orator in the world. Among all which Endowments, I had
almost forgot his memory, that was very faithful to him in things and business,
though not punctilio's and formalities. Great Parts he had, the range and
compass whereof filled the whole circle of generous Learning in that Person, as
it has done in the following Heroes of that Family to this day.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Killigrew.
Travelers report, That the place wherein the body of Absalom was buried is
still extant at Jerusalem, and that it is a solemn custom of Pilgrims passing
by it to cast a stone on the place: but a well-disposed man can hardly go by
the memory of this worthy person without doing gratefu^ homage thereunto, in
bestowing upon him one o^ two of our Observations. It Is a question sometime^
whether the Diamond gives more luster to the Ring it is set in, or the Ring to
the Diamond: This Gentleman received honor from his Family, and gave renown to
it. Writing is the character of the speech, as that is of the mind. From Tully
(whose Orations he could repeat to his dying day) he gained an even and apt
style, flowing at one and the self-same height. Tully's Offices, a Book which
Boys read, and men understand, was so esteemed of my Lord Burleigh, that to his
dying day he always carried it about him, either in his bosom or his pocket,
as a complete piece that, like Aristotle's Rhetoric, would make both a Scholar
and an Honest man. Cicero's magnificent Orations against Anthony, Catiline and
Verres; Caesar's great Commentaries that he wrote with the same spirit that he
fought; flowing Livy; grave, judicious and stately Tacitus; eloquent, but
faithful Curtius; brief and rich Salust; prudent and brave Xenophon, whose
Person was Themistocles his Companion, as his Book was Scipio Affrieanus his
Pattern in all his Wars; ancient and sweet Herodotus; sententious and observing
Thucydides; various and useful Polybius; Siculus, Halicarnasseus, Trogus,
Orosius, Justine, made up our young man's Retinue in all his Travels, where (as
Diodorus the Sicilian writes) he sat on the stage of Humane Life, observing
the great circumstances of places, persons, times, manners, occasions, etc. and
was made wise by their example who have trod the path of error and danger
before him. To which he added that grave, weighty, and sweet Plutarch, whose
Books (said Gaza) would furnish the world, were all others lost. Neither was he
amazed in the Labyrinth of History, but guided by the Clue of Cosmography,
hanging his Study with Maps, and his Mind with exact Notices of each place. He
made in one View a Judgment of the Situation, Interest, and Commodities (for
want whereof many Statesmen and Soldiers have As Cyrus at Thermopylae,
Crassus in Parthia: therefore Alexander had exact Maps always about him to
observe Passages, Streights, Rocks, Plains, Rivers, etc.
failed) of Nations: but to understand the nature of places, is but a poor
knowledge, unless we know how to improve them by Art; therefore under the
Figures of Triangles, Squares, Circles and Magnitudes, with their terms and
bounds, he could contrive most tools and instruments, most Engines, and judge
of Fortifications, Architecture, Ships, Wind and Waterworks, and whatever might
make this lower frame of things useful and serviceable to mankind: which
severer Studies he relieved with noble and free Poetry-aid, once the pleasure
and advancement of the Soul, made by those higher motions of the mind more
active and more large. To which I add her Sister Music, wherewith he revived
his tired spirits, lengthened (as he said) his sickly days, opened his
oppressed breast, eased his melancholy thoughts graced his happy pronunciation,
ordered and refined his irregular and gross inclination, fixed and quickened
his floating and dead notions; and by a secret, sweet and heavenly Virtue,
raised his spirit, as he confessed, sometime to a little less then Angelical
Exaltations. Curious he was to please his ear, and as exact to please his eye;
there being no Statues, Inscriptions or Coyns that the Vertuosi of Italy could
show, the Antiquaries of France could boast of, or the great Hoarder of
Rarities the great Duke of Tuscany, (whose antic Coyns are worth 100000 l.)
could pretend to, that he had not the view of. No man could draw any place or
work better, none fancy and paint a Portraicture more lively; being a Dure^ for
proportion, a Goltzius for a bold touch, variety of posture, a curious and true
shadow, an Angelo for his happy fancy, and an Holben for Oyl-works.

Neither was it a bare Ornament of Discourse, or naked Diversion of leisure
time; but a most weighty piece of Knowledge, that he could blazon most noble
and ancient Coats, and thereby discern the relation, interest, and
correspondence of great Families, and thereby the meaning and bottom of all
transactions, and the most successful way of dealing with any one Family. His
Exercises were such as his Employments were like to be, gentile and man-like,
whereof the two most eminent were Riding and Shooting, that at once wholsomely
stirred, and nobly knitted and strengthened his Body. Two Eyes he said he
traveled with; the one of wariness upon himself, the other of observation upon
others. This complete Gentleman was Guardian to the young Brandon in his
younger years, Agent for Sir John Mason in King Edward the sixth's time, and
the first Ambassador for the State in Queen Elizabeth's time. My Lord Cobham is
to amuse the Spaniard, my Lord Effingham to undermine the French, and Sir Henry
Killigrew is privately sent to engage the German Princes against Austria in
point of Interest, and for her Majesty in point of Religion: he had an humor
that bewitched the Elector of Bavaria, a Carriage that awed him of Mentz, a
Reputation that obliged them of Colen and Hydelbergh, and that reach and
fluency in Discourse that won them all. He assisted the Lords Hunsdon and
Howard at the Treaty with France in London, and my Lord of Essex in the War for
France in Britain. Neither was he less observable for his own Conduct then for
that of others, whose severe thoughts, words and carriage so awed his inferior
faculties, as to restrain him through all the heats of youth, made more then
usually importunate by the full vigor of a high and sanguine Constitution;
insomuch that they say he looked upon all the approaches to that sin, then so
familiar to his Calling as a a Soldier, his Quality as a Gentleman, and his
Station as a Courtier, not only with an utter disallowance in his Judgment,
but with a natural abhorency and antipathy in his very lower inclinations. To
which happiness it conduced not a little, that though he had a good, yet he had
a restrained appetite (a Knife upon his Throat as well as upon his Trencher)
that indulged it self neither frequent nor delicate entertainment; its Meals,
though but once a day, being its pressures; and its fasts, its only
sensualities: to which temperance in diet add, but that in sleep, together
with his disposal of himself throughout his life to industry and diligence, you
will say he was a spotless man, whose life taught us this Lesson, (which if
observed, would accomplish Mankind; and which King Charles the first would
inculcate to noble Travelers, and Dr. Hammond to all men) To be furnished
always with something to do: A Lesson they proposed as the best expedient for
Innocence and Pleasure; the foresaid blessed man assuring his happy Hearers,
That no burden is more heavy, or temptation more dangerous, then to have time
lie on ones hand; the idle man being not only (as he worded it) the Devils
shop, but his kingdom too; a model of, and an appendage unto Hell, a place
given up to torment and to mischief.

Observations on the Life of Arthur Gray Baron of Wilton.
ARthur Gray Baron of Wilton is justly reckoned amongst the Natives of
Buckingham-shire, whose Father had his habitation (not at Wilton a decayed
Castle in Herefordshire, whence he took his Title, but) at Waddon, a fair House
of his Family not far from Buckingham.

He succeeded to a small Estate, much diminished on this sad occasion. His
Father William Lord Gray being taken Prisoner in France, after long ineffectual
soliciting to be (because captivated in the public service) redeemed on the
public charge, at last was forced to ransom himself with the sale of the best
part of his Patrimony. Our Arthur endeavored to advance his Estate by his
Valor, being entered into Feats of War under his Martial Father at the siege of
Leith 1560, where he was shot in the shoulder, which inspirited him with a
constant antipathy against the Scots. He was afterward sent over Lord Deputy
into Ireland, anno 1580; where before he had received the Sword, or any Emblems
of Command, ut acricribus initiis terrorem incuteret, to fright his foes with
fierce beginnings, he unfortunately fought the Rebels at Glandilough, to the
great loss of English Blood. This made many commend his Courage above his
Conduct, till he recovered his credit, and finally suppressed the Rebellion of
Desmond. Returning into England, the Queen chiefly relied on his counsel for
ordering our Landforces against the Spaniards in 88, and fortifying places of
advantage. The mention of that year (critical in Church-differences about
discipline at home, as well as with foreign force abroad) minds me that this
Lord was but a back-friend to Bishops; and in all divisions of Votes in
Parliament or Council Table, sided with the Anti-prelatical Party. When
Secretary Davison, that State-Pageant, (raised up on purpose to be put down)
was censured in the Star Chamber about the business of the Queen of Scots, this
Lord Gray only defended him, as doing nothing therein but what became an able
and honest Minister of State. An Ear-witness says, Haec fuse oratorie and
animose Greium disserentem audivimus. So that besides bluntness, (the common
and becoming Eloquence of Soldiers) he had a real Rhetoric, and could very
emphatically express himself. Indeed this Warlike Lord would not wear two heads
under one Helmet, and may be said always to have born his Beaver open, not
dissembling in the least degree, but owning his own Judgment at all times what
he was. He deceased anno Domini 1593.

Three things he was observed eminent for: 1. Dispatch; San Joseph having not
been a week in Ireland, before he had environed him by Sea and Land. 2. For his
resolution, that he would not parley with him till he was brought to his mercy,
hanging out a white flag with Misericordia, Misericordia. 3. For his Prudence:
1. That he saved the Commanders, to oblige the Spaniard: 2. That he plundered
the Country, to enrich his Soldiers: 3. That he decimated the Soldiery, to
terrify Invaders; and hanged all the Irish, to amaze the Traitors.

Henry Fitz-alan Earl of Arundel when Steward at King Edward's Coronation, or
Constable at Queen Mary's, was the first that rid in a Coach in England; my
Lord Gray was the first that brought a Coach hither: one of a working Brain,
and a great Mechanist himself, and no less a Patron to the Ingenious that were
so. That there was an emulation between him and Sussex, was no wonder; but that
the instance wherein he thought to disgrace him, should be his severity to the
English Traitor, and the Foreign Invadors, would seem strange to any but those
that consider, 1. That Princes of late would seem as they look on the end, and
not the means; so they hug a cruelty, and frown on the instrument of it; who
while he honestly sacrifices some irregular particulars to the interest of
Sovereignty, may be made himself a sacrifice to the passion of populacy. And,
2. which is the case here, That aspiring Princes may employ severer Natures,
but settled ones use the more moderate. Love keeps up the Empire which Power
has set up.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Lord Burge.
THomas Lord Burge or Borough was born in his Fathers noble House at
Gainsborough in the County of Lincoln. He was sent Ambassador into Scotland in
1593, to excuse Bothwel his lurking in England, to advise the speedy
suppression of the Spanish Faction, to advance the Protestants in that Kingdom
for their Kings defense, and to instruct that King about his Council; which was
done accordingly.

He was made Lord-Deputy of Ireland anno 1597, in the room of Sir William
Russel. Mr. Cambden says thus of him: Vir acer, and animi plenus, sed nullis
fer^
Castrorum rudimentis.


As soon as the Truce with Tyrone was expired, he straightly besieged the Fort
of Black-water, (the only receptacle of the Rebels in those parts, besides
their Woods and Bogs.) Having taken this Fort by force, presently followed a
bloody Battle, wherein the English lost many worthy men. He was struck with
untimely death before he had continued a whole year in his Place; it being
wittily observed of the short Lives of many worthy men, Fatuos a Nethersole
Fun. Orat. Prince Hen. p. 15, 16, 17.
morte defendit ipsa insulsitas, si cui plus caeteris aliquantulum salis insit
(quod miremini) statim putrescit. Things rare destroy themselves; those two
things being incompatible in our nature, Perfection and Lastingness.

His Education was not to any particular Profession, yet his Parts able to
manage all. A large Soul and a great Spirit apart from all advantages, can do
wonders. His Masterpiece was Embassy, where his brave Estate set him above
respects and compliance, and his comely Person above contempt. His Geography
and History led to the Interest of other Princes, and his Experience to that of
his own. His skill in most Languages helped him to understand others; and his
resolution to use only his own, to be reserved himself. In two things he was
very scrupulous: 1. In his Commission, 2. In his Servants, whom he always (he
said) found honest enough, but seldom quick and reserved. And in two things
very careful: viz. 1. The time and humor of his Addresses; 2. The Interest,
Inclinations and Dependencies of Favorites. A grave and steady man, observing
every thing, but affected with nothing; keeping as great distance between his
looks and his heart, as between his words and his thoughts. Very exact for his
privileges, very cold and indifferent in his motions, which were always guided
by the emergencies in that Country, and by his intelligence from home. Good he
was in pursuing his limited instruction, excellent where he was free; and his
Business was not his obedience only but his discretion too: that never failed
but in his last enterprise, which he undertook without any apparent advantage,
and attempted without intelligence: An Enterprise well worthy his invincible
Courage, but not his accustomed Prudence; which should never expose the person
of a General to the danger of a common Soldier.

Observations on the Life of William Lord Pawlet.
WIlliam Pawlet (wherever born) had his largest Estate and highest Honor
(Baron of Basing, and Marquess of Winchester) in Hantshire. He was descended
from a younger house of the Pawlets in Hinton St. George in Somersetshire, as
by the Crescent in his Arms is acknowledged. Sir Rob. Naunton in his Fragmenta
Regalia.
One tells us, That he being a younger Brother, and having wasted all that
was left him, came to Court on trust; where, upon the stock of his Wit, he
trafficked so wisely, and prospered so well, that he got, spent, and left, more
then any Subject since the Conquest. Indeed he lived at the time of the
dissolution of Abbeys, which was the Harvest of Estates; and it argued idleness
if any Courtier had his Barns empty. He was Servant to King Henry the seventh;
and for thirty years together Treasurer to King Henry the eighth, Edward the
sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth: the later in some sort owed their
Crowns to his Counsel, his Policy being the principal Defeater of Duke Dudley's
Design to dis-inherit them. I behold this Lord Pawlet like to aged Adoram, so
often mentioned in Scriptures, being over the Tribute in the days of King 2 Samuel 20 2^.
David, all the Reign of King 1 King. 4. 6.
Solomon, until the first 1 King. 12
year of Rehoboam. And though our Lord Pawlet enjoyed his Place not so many
years, yet did he serve more Sovereigns, in more mutable times, being (as he
said of himself) No Oak, but an Osier. Herein the Parallel holds not: the hoary
hairs of Adoram were sent to the Grave by a violent Ibidem.
death, slain by the People in a Tumult; this Lord had the rare happiness of
(...), setting in his full splendor, having lived 97 years, and seen 103 out
of his body. He died anno Domini 1572. Thus far Mr. Fuller.

This Gentleman had two Rules as useful for Mankind, as they seem opposite to
one another.

1. That in our Considerations and Debates, we should not dwell in deceitful
Generals, but look into clear Particulars.

2. That in our Resolutions and Conclusions, we should not rest on various
Particulars, but rise to uniform Generals.

A Man he was that reverenced himself; that could be virtuous when alone, and
good when only his own Theater, his own applause, though excellent, before the
world; his virtue improving by fame and glory, as an heat which is doubled by
reflection.

Observations on the Life of Sir James Dier.
JAmes Dier Knight, younger Son to Richard Dier Esquire, was born at Round-hill
in Somersetshire, as may appear to any by the Heralds Visitation thereof. He
was bred in the study of our Municipal Law, and was made Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, primo Eliz. continuing therein twenty four years. When Thomas
Duke of Norfolk was, anno 1572, arraigned for Treason, this Judge was present
thereat, on the same token, that when the Duke desired Counsel to be assigned
him, pleading that it was granted to Humphrey Stafford in the Reign of King
Henry the seventh, our Judge returned unto him, That Stafford had it allowed
him only as to point of Law, then in dispute, viz. Whether he was legally taken
out of the Sanctuary? but as for matter of Fact, neither he, nor any ever had
or could have Counsel allowed him.

But let his own works praise him in the Gates, (known for the place of public
Justice amongst the Jews) let his learned Writings, called, The Commentaries or
Reports, evidence his Abilities in his Profession. He died in 25 Eliz. (though
married) without any issue; and there is a House of a Baronet of his Name
(descended from an elder Son of Richard, Father to our Judge) at great
Stoughton in Hunting tonshire, well improved I believe with the addition of the
Judges Estate.

There is a Manuscript of this worthy Judge, wherein are six and forty Rules
for the preservation of the Commonwealth, as worthy our Observation as they
were his Collection.

1. That the true Religion be established. 2. To keep the parts of the
Commonwealth equal. 3. That the middle sort of people exceed both the extremes.
4. That the Nobility be called to serve, or at least to appear at the Court by
themselves, or by the hopes of their Families their Children. 5. That the Court
pay well. 6. That Trade be free; and Manufactures, with all other Ingenuities,
encouraged. 7. Thgt there be no coequal Powers, nor any other Usurpations
against the Foundation. 8. That there be notice taken of wise and well-affected
Persons to employ them. 9. That Corruption be restrained. 10. That the Prince
show himself absolute in his Authority first, and then indulgent in his Nature.
11. That the first ferment of sedition, want, etc. be considered. 12. That
Preferments be bestowed on merit, and not faction. 13. That troublesome persons
be employed abroad. 14. That Emulations be overruled. 15. That the ancient and
most easy way of Contributions when necessary, be followed. 16. That the Youth
be disciplined. 17. That Discourses and Writings of Government, and its
mysteries, be restrained. 18. That the active and busy be taken to Employment.
19. That the King show himself often in Majesty, tempered with familiarity,
easy access, tenderness, etc. 20. That the Prince perform some unexpected
actions at Court himself. 21. That no one man be gratified with the grievance
of many. 22. That Acts of Grace pass in the chief Magistrates Name, and Acts of
Severity in the Ministers. 23. That the Prince borrow when he has no need. 24.
That he be so well furnished with Warlike Provisions, Citadels, Ships, as to be
renowned for it. 25. That the Neighbour-States be balanced. 26. That the Prince
maintain very knowing Agents, Spies and Intelligencers. 27. That none be
suffered to raise a Quarrel between the Prerogative and the Law. 28. That the
People be awaked by Masters. 29. That in cases of Faction, Colonies and
Plantations be found out to receive ill humors. 30. That the Seas, the
Seacoasts and Borders be secured. 31. That the Prince be either resident
himself, or by a good natured and popular Favorite. 32. To act things by
degrees, and check all the hasty, importunate, rash and turbulent, though
wellaffected. 33. That the Inhabitants have Honor promisouously, but that
Power be kept in the Well-affected's hands. 34. That there be as far as can be
plain dealing, and the people never think they are deceived. 35. That there be
a strict eye kept upon Learning, Arms, and Mechanical Arts. 36. That there be
frequent Wars. 37. To observe the Divisions among Favorites, though not to
encourage them. 38. That an account be given of the Public Expenses. 39. That
Inventions be encouraged. 40. That the Country be kept in its due dependence on
the Crown against the times of War, Elections, etc. and to that purpose that
the Courtiers keep good houses, etc. 41. That no disobliged person be trusted.
42. That Executions be few, sudden and severe. 43. To improve the benefit of a
Kingdoms Situation. 44. That the Liberties and Privileges of the Subject be
so clearly stated, that there may be no pretenses for worse purposes. 45. That
the Coin be neither transported nor embased. 46. That Luxury be suppressed.
Maxims these! that spoke our Judge so conversant with Books and Men, that
that may be applied to him, which is attributed to as great a Divine as he was
a Lawyer, viz. That he never talked with himself.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Pelham.
SIr William Pelham was a Native of Sussex, whose ancient and wealthy Family
has long flourished in Laughton therein. His Prudence in Peace, and Valor in
War, caused Queen Elizabeth to employ him in Ireland, where he was by the
Privy Council appointed Lord Chief Justice to govern that Land in the interim
betwixt the death of Sir William Drury, and the coming in of Arthur Gray, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.

Say not that he did but stop a gap for a twelvemonth at the most, seeing it
was such a gap, Destruction had entered in thereat, to the final ruin of that
Kingdom, had not his Providence prevented it. For in this juncture of time,
Desmond began his Rebellion 1579, inviting Sir William to side with him; who
wisely gave him the hearing, with a smile in to the Bargain. And although our
Knight for want of Force could not cure the wounds, yet he may be said to have
washed and kept it clean, resigning it in a recovering condition to the Lord
Gray, who succeeded him. Afterward he was sent over into the Low Countries
1586, being Commander of the English Horse therein. It is said of him,
Brabantiam persultabat, He leapt through Brabant; importing celerity and
success, yea, as much Conquest as so sudden an expedition was capable of.

He had a strong memory whereon he built his experience, and a large experience
whereon he grounded his actions: There was no Town, Fort, Passage, Hill or
Dale, either in Ireland or Holland, but he retained by that strong faculty,
that was much his Nature, more his Art; which observed privately, what it saw
publicly; recollected and fixed in the night, what he observed by day;
trusting his head with solids, but not burthening it with impertinencies.
Company is one of the greatest pleasures of Mankind, and the great delight of
this man, (it is unnatural to be solitary; the world is sinked together by love,
and men by friendship) who observed three things in his converse, that it
should be, 1. even, 2. choice, and 3. useful; all his friends being either
valiant, ingenious, or wise: that is, either Soldiers, Scholars, or
Statesmen. Four things he was very intent upon during his Government in
Ireland: 1. The Priests, the Pulpits, and the Press: 2. The Nobility: 3. The
Ports: 4. The Foreigners. Which he pursued with that Activity, the Earl of
Ormond assisting him, that anno 1580, that Kingdom was delivered to my Lord
Gray after his one years Government, in a betteter condition then it had been
for threescore year before; the Populacy being encouraged, the Nobility
trusted, Feuds laid down, Revenue settled, the Sea-towns secured, the Soldiery
disciplined and the Magazines furnished. Whence he returned to overlook others,
settling England against the Spaniards, as he had done Ireland; himself being a^
active Commissioner in England in 88, and an eminent Agent in Scotland in 89.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Waad.
A Scholar himself, and a Patron to such that were so; being never well but
when employing the Industrious, pensioning the Hopeful, and preferring the
Deserving. To his Directions we owe Rider's Dictonary, to his Encouragement
Hooker's Policy, to his Charge Gruter's Inscriptions. As none more knowing, so
none more civil. No man more grave in his Life and Manners, no man more
pleasant in his Carriage and Complexion; yet no man more resolved in his
Business: for being sent by Queen Elizabeth to Philip King of Spain, he would
not be turned over to the Spanish Privy Council, (whose greatest Grandees are
Dwarfs in honor to his Mistress) but would either have audience of the King
himself, or return without it; though none knew better how and when to make his
close and underhand Addresses to such potent Favorites as strike the stroke in
the State: It often happening in a Commonwealth, (says my Author) that the
Masters Mate steers the Ship better then the Master himself. A man of a
constant toil and industry, busy and quick, equalty an enemy to the idle and
slow undertakings, judging it a great weakness to stand staring in the face of
business, in that time which might serve to do it. In his own practice he never
considered longer then till he could discern whether the thing proposed was fit
or not; when that was seen, he immediately set to work: when he had finished
one business, he could not endure to have his thoughts lie fallow, but was
presently consulting what next to undertake.

Two things this Gentleman professed kept him up to that eminence: 1. Fame,
that great incitement to Excellency. 2. A Friend, whom he had not only to
observe those grossnesses which Enemies might take notice of, but to discover
his prudential failings, indecencies, and even suspicious and barely doubtful
passages. Friendship (says my Lord Bacon) eases the heart, and clears the
understanding, making clear day in both; partly by giving the ^urest counsel
apart from our interest and prepossessions, and partly by allowing opportunity
to discourse; and by that discourse to clear the mind, to recollect the
thoughts, to see how they look in words; whereby men attain that highest
wisdom, which Dionysius the Areopagite says, is the Daughter of Reflection.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Sidney.
SIr Henry Sidney, eminent for his Son Sir Philip, and famous for his own
Actions, w^^ born well, and bred better: His Learning was equal to his
Carriage, his Carriage to his God Nature, his Good Nature to his Prudence, his
Prudence to his Resolution. A little he learned a School, more at the
University, most at Court His Reading was assiduous, his Converse exact, (...)
Observations close: His Reason was strong, and (...) Discourse flowing. Much he
owed to his Stud^ousness at home, more to his Experience abroad where Travel
enlarged and consolidated his Son His own Worth fitted him for Advancement, an
his Alliance to my Lord of Leicester raised him to a Merit must capacitate a
man for Interest, and Intrest must set up Merit. His Person and his An(...)ry
invested him Knight of the Garter, his Moderation and Wisdom President of
Wales. His Resolution and Model of Government made him Lo(...) Deputy of
Ireland; a people whom he first studied and then ruled; being first Master of
their Humor and then of their Government. Four things he said would reduce
that Country: A Navy well furnished, to cut off their correspondence with
Spain. An Army well paid, to keep up Garrisons; Law well executed, to alter
their Constitutions and T(...)res; A Ministry well settled, to civilize and
instrud them; and an unwearied Industry to go through all Nine things he did
there to eternize his Memory.

1. Connaught He divided to six Shires.

2. Captainships, something answering to Knighthood here, He abolished.

3. A Surrendry of all Irish Holdings He contried, and the Irish Estates He
settled on English Te^ures and Services.

4. That the ablest five of each Sept should undertake for all their Relations,
He ordered.

5. One Free School at least in every Diocese He maintained.

6. Two Presidents Courts in Manster and Con(...)ught He erected.

7. Their Customs He reduced to the Civility, and their Exchequer to the
Exactness of England.

8. Their Purveyance He turned to Composision.

9. Their Statutes He printed, and a constant correspondence He kept;
especially with the English Ambassador in Spain, and King James in Scotland.

Fitz-Williams was mild, Essex heady, Perrot stout; but this Lieutenant or
Deputy was a stayed and resolved Man, that Royally heard ill, and did well;
that bore up against the clamours of the people with the peace of his
conscience. His Interest he had devoted to his Sovereign, and his Estate to he
Public; saying as Cato, That he had the least here of himself. From the Irish
he took nothing See Davies of Ireland, and Ware and Powel of Wales.
but a Liberty to undo themselves; from Court he desired nothing but Service;
from Wales he had nothing but a Good Name. It Is observed of him, that He bad
open Virtues for Honor, and private ones for Success, which he said was the
daughter of reservedness: there being not (says my Lord V^rulam) two more
fortunate properties, then to have (...) little of the fool, and not too much
of the honest man The Crown was obliged by his Services, the Nobility engaged
to him by Alliances, the People enamoured with his Integrity, and himself
satisfies with a good Conscience. Much good counsel he gave at Court, more at
home in Shropshire, where his Dexterity in composing the private Quarrels of
the Country, was as eminent as his Prudence in setline the Affairs of Ireland.
He had that Majesty in his Countenance that he awed, and Affability in his
Speech that he obliged the Country. His Counsel would be smart and solid, his
Reproof grave and affectionate, his Jests quick and taking; doing more with a
quick Droll toward the peace of the Country, then others did with longer
Harangue. Secretary Bourns Son kept a Gentleman's Wife i^ Shropshire; when he
was weary of her, he cause her Husband to be dealt with to take her home, an
offered him 500 l. for reparation. The Gentleman went to Sir Henry Sidney to
take his advice telling him, That his Wife promised now a new life and to say
the truth five hundred pounds would be very seasonable at that time. By my
troth (said Sir Henry) take her home, and the Money; then whereas other
Cuckolds wear their Horns plain, you may we^ yours gilt. His great word after a
difference ended, was, Is not this easier then going to London as Ludlow? When
a man fretted against himself of others, My Friend, he would say, take it from
me a weak man complains of others, an unfortunate man of himself, but a wise
man neither of others nor of himself. It was his Motto, I Will never threaten. To
threaten an Enemy, is to instruct him; a Superior, is to endanger my Person;
an Inferior, is to disparage my Conduct. Old Servants were the Ornament and
stay of his Family, for whom he reserved a Copyhold when aged, a Service when
hopeful, an Education when pregnant. Twice was he sent underhand to France, and
once to Scotland, to feel the pulse of the one, and to embroyl the other. It Is
for settled Kingdoms and for Wealthy men to play above-board, while the young
State as the young Fortune should be least in sight.

He and Sir Thomas Randolph amuse the Queen of Scots with the hope of the Crown
of England, and the King of France by a League with his Protestant Subjects; to
whose assistance Sir Adrian Poynings arrives as Field-marshal, and the Earl of
Warwick as General.

Sir Nicholas Arnold had disposed Ireland to a settlement, when Justicer; and
Sir Henry Sidney formerly Justicer and Treasurer, was now to complete it as
Deputy, being assisted in Munster by Sir Warham St. Leiger, and elsewhere by
the brave Earl of Ormond, having procured his Antagonist the Earl of Desmond to
be called to England in order to a peace and tranquillity. Great was his
Authority over, far greater his love to, and esteem of the Soldiers, with whom
he did wonders against Shane Oneals Front, while Randolph charged his Rear
until the wild Rebel submits, and is executed. When he resigned his Authority
and Honor to Sir William Drury, he took his farewell of Ireland in these words,
When Israel departed out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from a barbarous
people. A singular man he was, (says the Historian) and one of the most
commendable Deputies of Ireland, to whose Wisdom and Fortitude that Kingdom
cannot but acknowledge much, though it is as impatient of Deputies as Sicily
was of old of Procurators.

Alter idem, or other Observations on the Life of Thomas Ratcliffe.
THomas Ratcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter, second Earl of Sussex of that surname,
twice Lord-Deputy of Ireland, was a most valiant Gentleman. By his Prudence he
caused that actual Rebellion brake not out in Ireland; and no wonder (...) in
his time it rained not War there, seeing his diligence dispersed the Clouds
before they could gather together. Thus he who cures a Disease may be
skilfullest; but he that prevents it, is the safe Physician.

Queen Elizabeth called him home to be her Lord Chamberlain, and a constant
Court-faction was maintained between him and Robert Earl of Leicester: so that
the Sussexians and the Leicesterian divided the Court, whilst the Cecilians as
Neuters did look upon them. Sussex had a great Estate left by his Ancestors,
Leicester as great given or restored him by the Queen: Sussex was the honester
man, and greater Soldier; Leicester the more facete Courtier, and deep
Politician; not for the general Good, but for his particular Profit. Great the
Animosity betwixt them; and what in vain the Queen endeavored, Death
performed, taking this Earl away; and so the Competition was ended. New-Hall in
Essex was the place if not (as I believe) of his Birth, yet of his principal
Habitation. He died anno Domini -- and lies buried in the Church of St. Olives
Hartstreet London.

The first of Queen Elizabeth found this brave Earl commanding Ireland in peace
and plenty, with three hundred and twenty Horse, and eight hundred and sixty
Foot, prudently garisoned, and well paid: And the second employed him thither
again, with Instructions, That he should beware above all things, lest the
Irish, being an uncivil people, and therefore the more superstitious, should by
the cunning practices of the French, be excited to rebellion under the pretext
of Religion. 2. That he should fortify Ophale with Castles and Forts. 3. That
he should engage the Soldiery with large Possessions. 4. That the Irish
Nobility should hold their Estates in Fee. 5. That he should improve the Queens
Revenues moderately, and reduce her Exchequer there to the form of that in
England.

At what time Maximilian the Emperoun courted Queen Elizabeth, whom all English
men wished married, all Protestants married to a Protestant, and the Earl of
Leicester had designed for himself, there arose a deadly feud in the English
Court between the Earl of Sussex, that favored the Match upon common
Principles of Government; and the Earl of Leicester, who opposed it upon a
private design of his own. Certainly very great and shameful hopes do they
foster, who have already attained things beyond hopes. The open-hearted Earl
would call his Antagonist an Upstart, that had but two Ancestors, his Father, a
Traitor; and his Grandfather, a Publican. The Court is divided, the Earls are
always attended with their armed Guards, until the Queen, who took pleasure in,
and made use of the innocent emulation of her women, but was afraid of the
dangerous contests of her Favorites, rather skinned over, then healed the
rupture.

At the Emperors Court, whither he is sent with the Order of Saint George, he
presses the Marriage closely, as much out of love to his Country, as hatred to
Leicester; having nothing more ordinary in his discourse then that a Foreign
Prince was to be preferred before the noblest Englishman for the three grand
things of Honor, Power and Wealth. But what he promoted publicly, the Lord
North, who was joined with him rather as his Guardian then his Colleague,
opposed privately, until a few fond scruples broke the most solemn Negotiation;
wherein yet this Earl behaved himself with a Gallantry that gained him a
familiarity from the Emperor, a reverence from the Archduke, a respect from
all the people, and his Mistress a kindness in that Court, that stood her in
great stead against the attempts of Spain and Rome.

From Germany he returned with much honor, to Command in the North with more,
where he and his old setters at Court discovered the grand Plot in the North,
as Hunsdon and his old Soldiers at Berwick defeated it, and both harassed the
Scottish Borders: all things yiedling to those two grand Disposers of the World,
now predominant in England, Wisdom and Cecil at home, Arms and Hunsdon
abroad; and both with Sussex at home, now for his approved Wisdom and Fidelity
made Privy Counselor, and abroad always Lord General.

Of many, I pitch on this one Argument, Of the greatness of his Mind, that he
scorned to trample the Prostrate; that he had a just Passion, but not an
unworthy Malice for an Enemy whom he had a generous goodness to pity when
unhappy, as well as a brave spirit to contest with when injurious. The lesser
fry of adversaries railed against, this great one pleaded for Leicester, when
his practices against Anjou's marriage with the Queen confined him to the
Castle of Windsor; and his Menaces had cast him to the Tower of London, had not
my Lord, minding more the common Interest then his private resentments, first
moderated the Queens Passion with Reason, and then overcame it with this Jest,
You must allow Lovers their jealousy.

Alter idem, or other Observations on the Life of the Lord Hatton.
HHis first Preferment at Court was to be one of the fifty Pensioners; whence
his modest sweetness of Manners advanced him to the Privy Chamber: where he had
not been long, but his face and tongue (which most eloquent, which most
powerful, was in those days a question) made him Captain of the Guard; his
presence and service Vice-Chamberlain; and his great improvement under my Lord
Burleigh, placed him in that grave Assembly, (the wisest Convention in Europe
at that time) the Privy Council; where he had not sat long, when his enemies
as well as his friends made him Chancellor and Knight of the Garter: the one
to raise him, and the other by that rise to ruin him. The Eagle-eyed men of
those times carried up on high the Cockleshel they had a mind to crack. A man
of a pious Nature, very charitable to the Poor, very tender of dissenting
Judgments, (saying, That neither searing nor cutting was to be used in the
cause of Religion) very bountiful to Scholars, (who chose him Chancellor at
Oxford) very exact in his Place; whence he went off, though not with the
applause of a great Lawyer to split Causes, yet with the Conscience and comfort
of a just man, to do equity.

Take his Character from his own words, those words that prevailed with the
Queen of Scots to appear before the Commissioners at Fotheringaz, when neither
Queen Elizabeth's Commission, nor the Lord Chancellours Reason, nor the Power of
the Kingdom could persuade that good Lady to it. The words are these:

You are accused, but not condemned. You say you are a Queen; be it so: if you
are innocent, you wrong your Reputation in avoiding trial. You protest your
self innocent, the Queen fears the contrary not without grief and shame. To
examine your innocence are these honorable, prudent, and upright Commissioners
sent: glad will they be with all their hearts if they may return and report you
guiltless. Believe me, the Queen her self will be much affected with joy, who
affirmed to me at my coming from her, that never any thing befell her more
grievous, then that you were charged with such a crime: Wherefore lay aside the
bootless privilege of Royal Dignity, which here can be of no use to you,
appear in Judgment, and show your Innocence; lest by avoiding trial, you draw
upon your self suspicion, and lay upon your Reputation an eternal blot and
aspersion. Four things I observe he did that deserve a Chronicle:

1. That he delayed the Signing of Leicesters Patent for the Lieutenancy of
England and Ireland, the Preface to his Kingdom, until that Earl was sick.

2. That he reduced the Chancery, and all other Courts, to Rules.

3. That he stood by the Church against the enemies of both sides. Archbishop
Whitgift when checked by others for his due severity, writes to him thus: I
think my self bound to you for your friendly Message as long as I live: It has
not a little comforted me, having received unkind speeches not long since,
etc. And therefore (after an expostulation about some States-mens Proceedings
against the Law and State of the Realm, and a Declaration of his own
resolution) says he, your Honor in offering that great courtesy, offered
unto me as great a pleasure as I can desire. Her Majesty must be my Refuge, and
I beseech you that I may use you as a means, when occasion shall serve; whereof
I assure my self, and therein rest, John Cant.

4. That he promoted the Proclamations for Plain Apparel, for Free Trade, for
Pure Religion, and the Laws against the Papists.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Puckering.
SIr John Puckering was born at Flamboroughhead in Yorkshire. He was second Son
to his Father, a Gentleman that left him neither a plenteous nor a penurious
Estate. His Breeding was more beneficial to him then his Portion; gaining
thereby such skill in the Common Law, that he became the Queens Sergeant,
Speaker in the House of Commons, and at last Lord Chancellor of England. How
he stood in his Judgment in the point of Church Discipline, plainly appears
by his following Speech, delivered in the House of Lords 1588.

And especially you are commanded by Her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be
given, nor time afforded to the wearisome Solicitations of those that commonly
be called Puritans, wherewithal the late Parliaments have been exceedingly
importuned: which sort of men, whilst that (in the giddiness of their spirits)
they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing else but
disturb the good repose of the Church and Commonwealth: which is as well
grounded for the body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the
Discipline, as any Realm that professes the Truth. And the same thing is
already made good to the world by many of the Writings of godly and learned
men, neither answered nor answerable by any of these newfangled Refiners. And,
as the present case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits,
do offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For, albeit the
Jesuits do empoyson the hearts of Her Majesty's Subjects, under a pretext of
Conscience to withdraw them from their Obedience due to Her Majesty; yet do
they the same, but closely, and in privy-corners: But these men do both teach
and publish in their printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles, sundry
Opinions, not only dangerous to a well-setled Estate, and the Policy of the
Realm, by putting a Pike between the Clergy and the Layty; but also much
derogatery to her sacred Majesty and her Crown, as well by the diminution of
her ancient and lawful Revenues, and by denying Her Highness Prerogative and
Supremacy, as by offering peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In
all which things, (however in other Points they pretend to be at war with the
Popish Jesuits) yet by this separation of themselves from the unity of their
fellow-subjests, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do both join and concur with the Jesuits in opening the Door, and
preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion that is threatened against the Realm.

And thus having according to the weakness of my best understanding delivered
Her Majesty's Royal Pleasure and wise Direction, I rest there, with humble Suit
of Her Majesty's most gracious Pardon in supplying of my defects, and recommend
you to the Author of all good counsel.

He died anno Domini 1596, charactered by Mr. Cambden, Vir Integer. His Estate
is since descended, (according to the solemn settlement thereof) the Male Issue
failing, on Sir Henry Newton; who, according to the Condition, has assumed the
surname of Puckering.

Sir Thomas Egerton urged against the Earl of Arundel methodically what he had
done before, in, and since the Spanish Invasion: Sir John Puckering pressed
things closely, both from Letters and Correspondence with Allen and Parsons,
that few men had seen; and from the saying of my Lord himself, (which fewer had
observed) who when Valongers Cause about a Libel was handled in the
Star Chamber, had said openly, He that is thoroughly Popish, the same man cannot
but be a Traitor. A man this was of himself of good repute for his own
Carriage, but unhappy for that of his Servants; who for disposing of his
Livings corruptly, left themselves an ill name in the Church, and him but a
dubious one in the State. David is not the only person whom the iniquity of
his heels, that is, of his followers, lays hold on.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bromley.
SIr Thomas Bromley was born at Bromley in Shropshire, of a right ancient
Family. He was bred in the Inner Temple, and made, before he was forty years of
age, General-Sollicitor to Queen Elizabeth; and afterward, before he was
fifty, succeeded Sir Nicholas Bacon in the Dignity of Lord Chancellor: yet
Bacon was not missed while Bromley succeeded him; and that loss which otherwise
could not have been repaired, now could not be perceived; which Office he
wisely and learnedly executed with much discretion, possessing it nine years,
and died anno 1587, not being sixty years old.

My Lord Hunsdon first employed this Gentleman, and my Lord Burleigh took first
notice of him. He had a deep head to dive to the bottom of the abstruse Cases
of those times, and a happy mean to manage them, with no less security to the
Estate, then satisfaction to the People. A man very indudustrious in his Place,
and very observant of the Court: happy in his potent friends, happy in his able
followers; men of great faithfulness toward him, and of great integrity and
respectfulness toward any that made Addresses to him. He never decided the
equity of any Case before he had discoursed with the Judge that heard it, of
the Law of it. He never disposed of a Living without the Bishop of the Diocese
his consent where it lay: nor ever engaged he in any State-business without
direction from my Lord Burleigh, the Earl of Leicester, my Lord Delaware. Sir
Ralph Sadler was to observe the Policy, Dr. Wilson the Civil Law, and Sir
Thomas Bromley the English Law, in the Queer of Scots Answer to Queen
Elizabeth's last Expostulation. The Spanish Soldier never takes wages against
his King, and Sir Thomas Bromley never took fees against the Crown. He would
have the Cave opened clearly by his Client in the Chamber, before ever he would
declare it at the Bar: He lo(...) money for not admitting all Causes
promiscuously at first, but he gained it at last; when never failing in any
Cause, says my Author, for five years: during which space, what he wanted in
the retayl of advantage, he made up in the gross o(...) esteem; being by that
time the only person that the People would employ, and one of the three the
Court would favor; being excellent (because industrious) in a leading and an
untrodden Case Physicians, they say, are best like Beer when stale, and Lawyers
like Bread when young: This Person was eminent in all the periods of his Age;
each whereof he filled with its just and becoming accomplishment. In that Lord
of Northumberland's Case that Pistolled himself, none more subtle to argue his
guilt; in the Queen of Scots, none more strict to keep to the Law: for when the
Queen of Sco(...) would explain something in the Queens Commission, he
answered, We are Subjects, and not come hither to explain the Queens words, but
to perform them. None more discreet and grave, prefacing that great business
with these words; The High and Mighty Queen our Sovereign, that she might not
be wanting to her God, her Self, her People, or your Honor, sent us hither,
not so much to try, as to elear you; not so much to urge her Accusations, as to
hear your Defense. And none more steadfast to his Sovereign: for when that
unfortunate Lady protested her unaccountableness to the English Laws, he
replied, This protestation is vain: for whosoever, of what place soever,
offends against the Laws of England in England, was subject to the same Laws,
and might be examined and tried. The Sentence against her he declared had three
things in it: 1. Justice, 2. Security, 3. Necessity: but added presently, And
that wisely too it should no ways prejudice King James his Title or Honor.

Observations on the Life of Sir Richard Bingham.
SIr Richard Bingham, born in Binghams-Melcolm in Dorsetshire, of a very
ancient Family, in his youth trayelled most parts of the world: He was at the
Siege of St. Quintin in France; the Sacking of Leith in Scotland; served in
Candia under the Venetians against the Turk; then returned into the
Netherlands, being strong and fortunate in all his Undertakings. After all
this, he went into Ireland, and was there President of Connaught, and conquered
the great and dangerous Rebel O Rorke.

A Gentleman this, rather skilful in many mysteries then thriving in any: of a
fancy too high and wild, too desultory and over-voluble: yet Imagination has
often produced Realities, and Fancy done the work of Judgment; as in this
Gentleman, whose Daringness went for Conduct, whose Spirit passed for
Resolution, whose Activity had the honor of skill, and whose Success the glory
of prudence. It Is a wonder of parts that Casar could write, read, dictate, and
discourse at the same time; it is a miracle of fancy that thisman should Command
a Regiment in the Netherlands, preside in a Province of Ireland, manage a Trade
in Russia, carry on a Plantation in America, and husband a Manor in England.
But as the King of Spain is painted with a handful of sand running out between
his singers, in reference to his many, but unprofitable Dominions; so might
this grand Projector be described, who attempted so many things, that he did
nothing. Yet one thing his Quicksilver Soul was good for, and that is
Stratagems: Now you should have him surprise a Town by Butter-women, another
time by Workmen; anon he would face the Enemy, and draw them with success upon
a Train of Gunpowder he would lay for them, and Iron Pricksteds he would sow
for them: He would steal their hands and seals, buy the very keys of their
Closets; and so amuse them with Letters, and distract them with Jealousies,
while in the mean time the vigilant man alarmed them every hour of the day, and
each watch of the night; so that he tamed those wild Irish as we do some wild
beasts, by watching.

Observations on the Life of Roger Ashcam.
FRom his Cradle a Royal Servant, and to his Grave a Favorite: a good man,
(says Cambden) and if his ambition had been but as great as the occasion was
fair, a great one too. Born he was honestly in York shire, and bred handsomely
at Cambridge; and both born and bred for that Age which was to refine Greek and
Latin to a politeness, and raise them to an Eloquence. He was the
University-Orator at Cambridge, and at Court; there using his Eloquence, here
his Interest against that Sacrilege, that having Dined on the Church, as he
writ, came to Sup on the Universities. Thence he was rather removed then
advanced, more suitably to his merit then his expectation, to be Queen
Elizabeth's Schoolmaster for the Latin Tongue in her Sisters time, and her
Secretary for the same in her own.

What he got by his Ingenuity, he lost by his Gaming, viz. at Dice and
Cock-fighting, dying rich only in those two Books, his Estate and Monument,
whereof the one is entitled Toxophilus, and the other Scholarcha. He and his
dear Smith were the happiest men in the Nation; their large and ingenious Souls
clasping together in an entire friendship, made up of kindness and integrity,
apart from the little fears, the jealousies, the suspicions that vex Mankind.
What learned Letters! what loving Expostulations! what discreet Intimations!
what faithful Advertisements! what indifferent Community! what common Cares and
Pities! How they loved! how they chid! and how they loved again! how plain! how
malleable! how sweet! What little Observations upon one another
inadvertencies, neglects or miscarriages! how they improved their Mollia
tempora to the great end of friendship, information and advice! How secretly
they vented their thoughts into each others breasts, and there looked upon them
by reflection, and the advantage of a second consideration! And it is a happiness
to have another self to show our selves to before we appear to the world, that
all men wish, and the good men only enjoy. An honest man this, that abhorred
all artifice and cunning, and hated all concealments and pretensions, which he
had sagacity enough to discover and look through, but a spirit too generous to
practice it; none being more able for, yet none more averse to that
circumlocution and contrivance wherewith some men shadow their main drift and
purpose. Speech was made to open Man to Man, and not to hide him; to promote
Commerce, and not betray it.

HOw happy is he born and taught H. W.

That serves not another will,
Whose Armor is his honest thought,
And simple Truth his utmost skill?
Whose Passions not his Masters are,
Whose Soul is still prepared for death;
Untied unto the world by care
Of public Fame, or private breath.
Who envies none that Chance does raise,
Nor Vice bath ever understood;
How deepest wounds are given by praise,
Nor Rules of State, but Rules of Good.
Who has his life from rumors freed,
Whose Conscience is his strong retreat:
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
Nor ruin make Oppressors great.
Who God does late and early pray,
More of his Grace, then Gifts to lend;
And entertains the harmless day
With a Religious Book or Friend.
This man is freed from servile bands
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall:
Lord of himself, though not of Lands;
And having nothing, yot has all.
Observations on the Life of Sir John Packington.
SIr John Packington was a Person of no Sir Robert Naunton.
mean Family, and of form and feature no way despiseable: for he was a brave
Gentleman, and a very fine Courtier; and for the time which he stayed there,
was very high in the Queens Grace: but he came in, and went out, and through
disassiduity lost the advantage of her favor; and then Death drawing a vail
over him, utterly deprived him of recovery. They say of him, says the same
Author, that had he brought less to the Court then he did, he might have
carried away more then he brought: for he had a time of it, but he was an ill
husband of Opportunity. His handsome features took the most, and his neat parts
the wisest at Court. He could smile Ladies to his service, and argue Statesmen
to his design with equal ease. His Reason was powerful, his Beauty more. Never
was (...) brave Soul more bravely seated: Nature bestowed great Parts on him,
Education polished him to and admirable frame of prudence and virtue. Queen
Elizabeth called him Her Temperance, and Leicester His Modesty. It is a
question to this day, Whether his Resolution took the Soldiers, his Prudence
the Politicians, his Compliance the Favorites, his Complaisance the Courtiers,
his Piety the Clergy, his Integrity and Condescension the People, or his
Knowledge the Learned, most? This new Court-star was a nine-days wonder,
engaging all eyes until it set satisfied with its own glory. He came to Court,
he said, as Solomon did, to see its vanity; and retired as he did, to repent
it. It was he who said first what Bishop Sanderson urged afterward, That a
sound Faith was the best Divinity, good Conscience the best Law, and Temperance
the best Physic. Sir John Packington in Queen Elizabeth's time was virtuous and
modest, and Sir John Packington in King Charles his time Loyal and valiant; the
one did well, the other suffered so: Greenbam was his Favorite, Hammond his;
the one had a competant Estate, and was contented; the other has a large one,
and is noble: this suppresseth Factions in the Kingdom, the other composed
them in the Court, and was called by Courtiers Moderation. Westmerland tempted
his fidelity, and Norfolk his stedfastness: but he died in his Bed an honest
and an happy man, while one of them goes off tainted on the Scaffold, and the
other dies a Beggar in Flanders.

Observations on the Lives of the Norrises and Knowles.
MY Lord Norris had by his Lady an ample Issue, which the Queen highly
respected: for he had six sons, all Martial brave men; of haughty courage, and
of great experience in the conduct of Military Affairs. Greater was not the
Faction between Leicester and Sussex at Court, then that between the Knowles
and the Norrises in the Country: both Families of Oxfordshire; the one resolute
at Greyes, the other valiant at Rycote: the former got great Estates at home,
the latter attained to great Honor abroad. The Knowles were beloved by the
Queen for their own sakes, the Norrises for theirs and her own sake: the
Knowles were of the same blood with her Majesty, the Norrises spent theirs for
her.

1. My Lord Norris died at Court an honest man.

2. Sir Francis at Bulloign a good Soldier.

3. Sir William at Berwick a brave Governor.

As the first eminent Norris suffered for Anne Bullen, the Queens Mother: so
the first eminent Knowles suffered with Protestantism her Religion. 4. Sir
Thomas at Munster a wise President.

5. Sir Maximilian at Bretaign an expert Engineer.

6. Maximilian at Groen a renowned Hero.

7. Sir John was a most accomplished General, no less eminent for his safe
retreats, then for his resolute onsets. France has recorded this testimony of
him, That he brought on his men so warily, as one that could bring them off:
and England this, That he brought them off so resolutely, as one that durst
bring them on. His fortune often overthrew his enemy, and his wisdom oftener
saved his friends: His Conduct was famous, and his Discipline exact: His
Actions are Presidents, and his Orders Laws of War to this day. He was bred
under Castilion, and out-did him. Ireland was always possessed, but never
conquered till Norris came, who could lie on the coldest earth, swim the
deepest Rivers,

Norris could not rise though he deserved his Honor, because of Leicester that
favored his Brother, Knowles and Essex that envyed him; neither could Knowls
advance because of Sussex that feared, and Cecil that suspected him. The
Knowles were deserving, but modest; favored, but humble; powerful, but quiet;
rather firm at Court, then high; allied to the Queen, and faithful to the
Crown. Queen Elizabeth advanced Sir Francis to the Vicechamberlainship,
Treasurership of the Household, Captainship of the Guard, and the Order of the
Garter, because she said, He was an honest man; and King James and King Charles
raised his Son Sir William to the Earldome of Banbury, because he was a
serviceable man. force the straightest Passes, find out the most secret
corners, and tread the softest Bog; who could endure any thing but an affront,
and a Superior: the first whereof, upon a repulse at Court, saddened his
heart; as the second, upon another Deputies being sent over him, broke it.
Unsuccessful he was with Don Antonio in Spain, because he understood not the
Country. In the Low Countries he gained experience first, and then victory: in
Ireland he had Connaught for his Grave, Mount- Norris his Monument, and the
Letter of Queen Elizabeth to his Mother his Epitaph. Honestly faithful was that
family to their Mistress that was, and providently so were they to their Master
that should be. Handsome men they were when attending at Court, and valiant when
called to the Camp.

Norrises. Knowles. 1. The Norrises are employed in Embassies of War, wherein
they were active. 1. The Knowles are abroad in religious Negotiations, for
which they had been Confessors, Sir Francis in France, and Sir Henry in
Germany. 2. My Lord Norris his resolution was very becoming in the demand of
Calice. 2. Francis Knowles his meekness was suitable to his persuasions for
Religion: 3. The Irish Conspirator Thoumond opened a Plot against the
Government in Ireland to the Agent Norris. 3. And the Scots Schismatic Humes
discovered a design against the Church in England to the Ambassador Knowles.

In 88,

My Lord Hunsdon guarded the Queens person with 34000 foot, and 2000 horse; the
Earl of Leicester commanded the Midland Army of 22000 foot, and 1000 horse: Sir
Roger Williams and Sir Richard Bingham were in the head of 20000 in the Thames
mouth, and Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Knowles with other Assistants sat
in the Council of War to overlook all. Sir John advised three things: 1. The
Guarding of the Havens. 2. The Training of the Militia, and the preparing of
them to be at an hours warning upon a signal given, which was then the firing
of a Beacon. 3. That if the Enemy did land, the Country should be laid waste
before him, the Train-bands alarming him day and night. Sir Francis added, 1.
What Shires and what numbers should assist each Coast, how the men should be
armed, how commanded, and in what order they should fight. 2. That the Papists
should not be massacred, as some would have it, but secured. 3. That the Deputy
of Ireland should be instructed. 4. That the King of Scots should be engaged.
5. That Agents should be sent to the Netherlands and to France. And, 6. That
the Queen should encourage the people with her own presence. Sir John Norris
died when he saw beyond others expectation and his own merit, the Lord Burghe
made Lord-Deputy, and himself but President of Munster; his great mind sinking
under one affront from his Sovereign, which had born up against all the
assaults of her enemies; leaving this honor behind him, That he laid the best
grounds of Military practice in England. But who can stand before Envy?

A further Character of Sir John Norris from Queen Elizabeth's Letter to his
Mother.
My own Crow,
HArm not your self for bootless help, but show a good example to comfort your
dolorous yoak-fellow. Although we have deferred long to represent to you our
grieved thoughts, because we liked full ill to yield you the first reflection of
misfortune, whom we have always rather sought to cherish and comfort; yet
knowing now, that Nec'ssity must bring it to your ear, and Nature consequently
must move both grief and passion in your heart; We resolved no longer to
smother, neither our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for
your loss. Wherein if it be true, That Society in sorrow works diminution, We
do assure you by this true Messenger of our mind, that Nature can have stirred
no more dolorous affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, then Gratefulness
and memory of his Service past, has wrought in Us his Sovereign apprehension
of our miss for so worthy a Servant. But now that Natures common work is done,
and he that was born to die has paid his Tribute, let that Christian
discretion stay the flux of your immoderate grieving, which has instructed you
both for example and knowledge, that nothing in this kind has happened but by
Gods Divine Providence. And let these Lines from your loving gracious Sovereign
serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively Character of our
Estimation of him that was, in our gracious care of you and yours that are
left, in valuing rightly all their faithful and honest Endeavors. More at this
time we will not write of this unpleasant subject, but have dispatched this
Gentleman to visit both your Lord and you, and to condole with you in the true
sense of your love; and to pray that the world may see what time cures in a
weak mind, that Discretion and Moderation helps in you in this accident,
where there is so just cause to demonstrate true Patience and Moderation.

Your Gracious and Loving Sovereign, E. R.

Observations on the Life of Secretary Davison.
THat Meteor of the Court! raised only in an excess of heat and vapors, to
fall in a clearer day: for having good parts to act, an easy nature to comply,
and a good disposition to be imposed on, he was raised to play others parts
rather then his own, in those intricate and dark times, when fools were put to
execute what wise men advised; and the world saw but the plain-side of the
great watch of State, within which all the Springs were enclosed and hid.

That he was but of a private capacity, and so safely to be raised, as one that
would neither outshine nor outdare his Patron, (Machiavil has a Rule, (Disc.
l. 3. c. 2.) That it is a very great part of wisdom sometimes to seem a fool,
and so lie out of the reach of Observation and Jealousy) appears from his
Negotiations, that were either payment of money in the Netherlands, a Merchants
business; or taking security of the Merchants in France, a Scriveners part; or
pacifying the tumult in Holland, the task of a Burgomaster. Beale the Clerk of
the Council and he were joined in Commission, always to deal with the Scots;
the one the austerest, and the other the sweetest man living. When the first
frighted those rude people with Expostulations, the second got into them with
infinuations. A hard and a soft, a Hammer and a Cushion, breaks a Flint; Fear
and Love rule the world. His grand Case, as that great Historian lays it, is
briefly this: Many Protestants thought themselves in danger while the Queen of
Scots was alive; many Papists thought themselves undone while she was
imprisoned: these last press her to some dangerous undertakings; of the first,
some were for securing, others for transporting, and a third party for
poisoning her: to which purpose many Overtures were made, though yet none durst
undertake it that had either Estate or honor to loose; being so wise as not to
understand what was meant by the strange Letters that were sent, else they
might have fallen into this Gentleman's fortune; who unadvisedly venturing between
the honor and safety of his Sovereign, was ground to nothing betwixt the fear
of one party, and the shame of the other.

But this mild, but stout, because honest man, was not so weak in the
perpetration of this fault, as he was wise in his Apology for it, saying, He
would not confess a guilt, and betray his integrity; nor yet stand upon a
Justification, and forget his Duty. He would neither contest with his
Sovereign, nor disparage himself; but clear himself as an honest man, and
submit as a thankful servant, and a good subject.

Dazzled thus with height of place,
Whilst our hopes our wits beguile, F. B.

No man marks the narrow space
Twixt a prison and a smile.
Then, since Fortunes favors fade,
You, that in her arms do sleep,
Learn to swim, and not to wade;
For, the hearts of Kings are deep.
But, if Greatness be so blind
As to trust in Towers of Air,
Let it be with Goodness lined,
That at least the fall be fair.
Then though darkened, you shall say,
When friends fail, and Princes frown,
Virtue is the roughest way,
But proves at night a Bed of Down.
Observations on the Lives of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Sir Jeffrey Fenton.
SHarp and lively-spirited men, skilful in War, and prudent in Peace: of a
restless and a public Spirit, well skilled in the Trade of England, better in
the Wealth of America; in the North-part whereof, which we call Newfound Land,
whither they had sailed a little before with five Ships, having sold their
Patrimony in hope to plant a Colony there, they undid themselves: for after
they had by the voice of a common Crier proclaimed that Country to belong to
the English Jurisdiction, and had assigned Land to each of their Company, they
were distressed by Shipwracks, and want of necessary provision, and constrained
to give over their Enterprise; learning too late, and teaching others, That it
is matter of greater difficulty to transport Colonies into far Countries upon
private men's wealth, then they and others in a credulous and sanguine fit
imagine: and this, Quod s^^ esse velis, nihilque malis.

Observations on the Life of Walter Haddon.
WAlter Haddon was born of a Knightly Family in Buckinghamshire, bred at Eaton,
afterward Fellow in Kings College in Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of
Law, and was the Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen Vice Chancellor of
the University 1550. Soon after he was made President of Magdalen-Colledge in
Oxford, which place he waved in the reign of Queen Mary, and sheltered himself
in obscurity. Queen Elizabeth made him one of the Masters of her Requests, and
employed him in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her Majesty being demanded
whether she preferred him or Buchanan for Learning, wittily and warily
returned, Buchanum omnibus ^ntepono, Haddonum nemini postpono.



S. Memoriae.
Gu^ltero Haddono Equestri loco nato juris Consulto, Oratori, Poetae
celeberrimo, Graecae Latinaeque Eloquentiae sui temporis facile principi
sapientia and sanctitate vitae, in id erecto, ut Reginae Elzabethae a supplicum
libellis Magister esset, destinareturque majoribus nisi, facto immaturius
cessisset: Interim in omni gradus viro long Eminentissimo, Conjugi sui optimo
meretissimoque Anna Suttona, uxor ejus secunda flens moerens desiderii sui
signum posuit. Obiit anno Salut. hum. 1572. Aetatis 56.


This his fair Monument is extant in the Wall, at the upper end of the Chancel
of Christ-Church in London, where so many ancient Inscriptions have been
barbarously defaced. He and Dr. Wotton settled Trade between us and the
Netherlands, and removed the Mart to Embden: and both were famous for their
reservedness in the case of succession, which they kept locked in their own
breasts; so always resolved to do, (notwithstanding Leicesters Solicitations
of them to a Declaration for the Queen of Scots now his Mistress, and hereafter
in the Queen of Englands design to be his Wife) unless (as they alleged)
their Mistress commanded their Opinion; who certainly never heard any more
unwillingly then the controversy about the Title of Succession: and both as
famous for their disswasion against the making of the Netherland a Free State;
urging that of Machiavel, That People accustomed to live under a Prince, if by
any accident they become free, are like beasts let loose; and have much ado to
maintain either their Government or their Liberty.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Russel.
HIs very Name brought Tyrone upon his knees to him, and Iniskillyn to a
surrendry. He was for detaining Tyrone, notwithstanding his Letters of
Protection: the Council was for dismissing him, either out of favor to him, or
out of their reverence to their former promise; as much to the danger of
Ireland, as the displeasure of the Queen. Pretending an Hunting-match, he had
almost taken Feagh Mae Hugh, or shut him up; and under the disguize of a
progress, he shut up all the Passages and Avenues of Tyrone. Agiges the Cre^an
King would say, That he that would govern many, must fight with many: Our
Deputy found that great Honor has its great Difficulties; yet was he so
constant and resolute, that with Marcellus he would say, That as there are many
things a good Governor ought not to attempt; so ought be not to desist, or
give over an Enterprise once begun and taken in band. Therefore his Character
is One daring in his person, close to his purpose, firm to his dependencies, of
a deep and large soul; who looked upon the chargeable War in Ireland as an
equal remedy against a worse in England, to the letting of blood in one part,
against the effusion of it in another: and advised the bestowing of
Church Lands among the Nobility of both Persuasions in Ireland, as in England,
who would then hold their Religion with their Land, in Capite, and stick to the
Queen as the great support of both, against all pretenders, whom then most
would vigorously oppose, and all would fairly leave.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Roper.
SIr Thomas Roper, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, was born in Friday-street in
London; whose Grandfather was a younger son of the house of Heanour in
Derbyshire. He going over into the Low Countries, became Page to Sir John
Norrice, and was Captain of a Footcompany at sixteen years of Age. What
afterward his Martial Performances were, will appear by the following Lines
transcribed out of the Original of his Patent.

Whereas Thomas Roper Knight, one of our Privy-Councellours of the Kingdom of
Ireland, long since bath been known unto us famous, with the splendor of his
warlike Virtue; as who by the many Atchievments valiantly performed by him in
the late War of this Kingdom, has gained the eminent Repute both of a stout
Soldier, and a discreet Commander; whose Valor chiefly appeared in his
Retreat near le Boil in our Province of Connaught, where with very few horse
he undauntedly charged great troops of the horse of the Enemy, who in a hostile
manner forraged the very bowels of the Kingdom; and by his wisdom made such a
singular retreat, that he not only saved himself and his men, but also
delivered the whole Army from great danger, and slew very many of his Enemies.
Who also when our Province of Ulster was all on fire with war, being one out of
many, was for the tried Resolutios of his Mind, chosen by the Right honorable
the Earl of Essex, then General of the Army, to undertake a Duel with Makal,
and declined not to expose himself to the appointed Duel. And also when the
aforesaid Thomas Roper in the late war in the Kingdom of France at Breast, by
exposing himself to the greatest perils, and shedding of his own blood,
demonstrated his Courage to be unconquerable. Who also in the Voyage to
Portugal, behaved himself valiantly and honorably: as also at Bergen in the
Netherlands, when it was besieged by the Spaniards, approved himself a young
man of invincible Valor in the defense thereof. Who also in the day wherein
Kinsale was assaulted, was placed in the first Rank, nearest of all unto the
Town; and with no less Success then Valor, to the great safety of the whole
Army, beat back, and put to flight the Spaniards, who in the same day made
several Sallies out of the Town.

Know therefore, that We, in intuition of the Premises, have appointed the
aforesaid Thomas Roper Knight, etc.

Then follows his Patent, wherein King Charles the first, in the third of his
Reign, created him Baron of Bauntree, and Viscount B^ltinglass in Ireland.

He was a principal means to break the hearts of the Irish Rebels: for whereas
formerly the English were loaded with their own Clothes, so that their slipping
into Bogs did make them, and the clopping of their breeches did keep them
prisoners therein; he first, being then a Commander, put himself into Irish
Tro^zes, and was imitated first by all his Officers, then Soldiers; so that
thus habited, they made the more effectual execution on their enemies. He died
at Ropers Rest, anno Dom. 164. and was buried with Anne his Wife (Daughter to
Sir Henry Harrington) in St. John's Church in Dublin.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Umpton.
SIr Henry Vmpton was born at Wadley in Barkshire. He was son to Sir Edward
Vmpton, by Anne (the Relict of John Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) the eldest
Daughter of Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset. He was employed by Queen Elizabeth
Ambassador into France; where he so behaved himself right stoutly in her
behalf, as may appear by this particular. In the month of March, anno 1592,
being sensible of some injury offered by the Duke of Guise to the Queen of
England, he sent him this ensuing Challenge.

For as much as lately in the Lodging of my Lord Du Main, and in public
elsewhere, impudently, indiscreetly, and over-boldly you spoke badly of my
Sovereign, whose sacred Person here in this Country I represent: To maintain
both by word and weapon her Honor, (which never was called in question among
people of Honesty and Virtue) I say, you have wickedly lied in speaking so
basely of my Sovereign; and you shall do nothing else but lie, whenever you
shall dare to tax her Honor: Moreover, that her sacred Person (being one of
the most complete and virtuous Princess that lives in this world) ought not to
be evil spoken of the tongue of such a perfidiour Traitor to her Law and
Country as you are. And hereupon I do defy you, and challenge your person to
mine, with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it either on
horseback or on foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality of Person
between us, I being issued of as great a Race and Noble House (every way) as
your self. So assigning me an indifferent place, I will there maintain my
words, and the lie which I gave you, and which you should not endure if you
have any courage at all is you. If you consent not to meet me hereupon, I will
hold you, and cause you to be generally held one of the arrantest Cowards, and
most slanderous Slave that lives in all France. I expect your answer.

I find not what Answer was returned. This Sir Henry dying in the French Kings
Camp before Lofear, had his Corpse brought over to London, and carried in a
Coach to Wadley, thence to Farington, where he was buried in the Church on
Tuesday the eighth of July 1596. He had allowed him a Barons Hearse, because he
died Ambassador Leiger.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Essex.
IT is observed, that the Earl of Essex had his Introduction to favor by the
Lord of Leicester, who had married his Mother; a tie of Affinity. This young
Lord was a most goodly person, in whom was a kind of Urbanity, or innate
Courtesy, which both won the Queen, and too much took upon the People, to gaze
upon the newadopted Son of her favor. He was noted even of those that truly
loved and honored him, for too bold an Ingrosser both of Fame and Favor.
Having upon occasion left the Court for a while, he gave a fair opportunity for
his foes to undermine him; so that he lived a mixture between Prosperity and
Adversity: once very great in her favor, which was afterward lost, for want
of consideration and cunningness. He was raised by Leicester to prize Rawley,
as Rawley was by Sussex to check Leicester. Indeed Pity first opened the door
to him for his Fathers sake that died in Ireland, Alliance led him in for his
Father-in-laws sake Leicester. See Sir H. Wottons Observalions.
that reigned at Court. His own Royal Blood welcomed him for his Mother
Knowles, that was kin to her Majesty; his good Parts, his tall and comely
Personage, his sweet Disposition, and incomparable Nature; his noble Ancestors,
his fair, though impaired Fortune, brought him first to favor, and then to
dalliance.

He was a Masterpiece of Court and Camp; his Beauty ennamelling his Valor,
and his Valor being a foil to his Beauty; both drawing those noble respects
of love and honor; both awing, both endearing. It was his Nobleness that he
distrusted none, it was his Weakness that he trusted all; whereby he suffered
more from those that should have been his friends, then from them who were his
enemies. Good Man! his ruin was, that he measured other breasts by his own;
and that he thought Mankind was as innocent as his own person. His Merit
gained applause, and his Parasites swelled it to Popularity; and the last
enjealousied that Majesty which the first had obliged. His youthful and rash
Sallies abroad, gave too much opportunity to his Enemies whispers, and too
visible occasions for her Majesty's suspicion, that he was either weak, and so
not to be favored; or dangerous, and so to be suppressed. Absence makes
Princes forget those they love, and mistrust those they fear. Exact
Correspondence is the sinew of private and of public friendship. So great a
Master he thought himself of his Sovereigns affection, that he must needs be
Master of himself, and steal to France without leave, where, said the Queen, he
might have been knocked on the head as Sidney was. His Journey to France was
not more rash, then his Voyage to Cales was renowned; yet the one gave the
Envious arguments of his disobedience, and the other of his Disloyalty; his
enemies suggesting, that in the first he contemned his Mistress, and that in
the second he had a design upon her.

His Action at Cales was applauded; but his Triumphs were too solemn, his
Panegyricks too high, his Train too Princely, his Honors and Knighthoods too
cheap, his Popularity too much affected, and his Ear more open to hear what he
had done, then what he was. If his Manhood had been as slow as his He was one
of them whose Natures disclose but slowly.
Youth, he had been moderate: if his Life had answered his Under Dr. Whitgift.
Education, he had been patient: if his Eye had been as open upon his Enemies,
as his Ear to his friends, he had been cautious: if he had been as happy in his
constant converse, as he was obliging in his first address, he had been a
Prince: if he had had either less Fortune, or a greater Soul; either less of
the Dove, or more of the Serpent, he had bid fair for a Crown; or at least had
saved his Head. The People wished him well, but they are unconstant; the Queen
loved him, but she is jealous: his Followers are numerous, but giddy;
affectionate, but ill advice: his Enemies are few, but watchful on all
occasions: for is he pleased? they swell it to pride and vain imaginations: is
he crossed? they improve it to discontent and sedition. An Army must be sent
against Tyrone; he is not willing that any other should lead it, and unwilling
to lead it himself; yet over he goes fatally: for the service was knotty, and
his disposition smooth; his power was large, but that with as large a mind
entangled him: his Army was great, but that meeting with a great design,
precipitated him: his Title to the Crown was defended, but that lost him his
head. He had exact advices from friends, especially from Sir Francis Bacon; and
great directions from his Prince, but he followed his own: when he should have
fought the main body of his Enemy, he skirmisheth their Forlorns; when he
should have returned with a noble Conquest, he stole home after a suspicious
Treaty: the Royal Checks that should have instructed, incenseth him; and what
was designed a chastisement, he turns to a ruin. Beloved he is of the People,
but that aggravateth his rashness; flattered by Courtiers, but that swells
his humor: followed he is by the discontented of Church and State, but that
increases the jealousy: ill advised he is by heady Cuffe and Meyriche, and
that hasteneth his fall: humbled he is by the advancement of his Rivals, and
that enrageth him: easy and open was his Nature; close, active, and vigilant
his Enemies.

Valiant he was, but therefore feared; Noble and obliging to all hopeful men,
and therefore watched. A great Party he had, but they had no Head: A Minion he
was at once to Prince and People, but he had no Balance. A Man of great
Performances, but no Design: One that had too much Religion and Fidelity to be
a Traitor, too good a Nature to be safe, too much presumption on affections
when absent to be steady. He presumed too much on his own strength, or his
friends wisdom, when he came out of Ireland; he was too much wrought upon by
his enemies when he came to London, which had too much to loose to hazard a
Rebellion; and went not to Wales, where his fathers and his own goodness had
engaged 1000 Lives and Fortunes. In a word, Leicester's reservedness, Bacon's
stayedness, Sir Robert Cecil's humility, Sir Fulke Grevil's modesty, added to
his Parts and Presence, his Valor and Liberality, his good Nature and large
Heart: his favor with his Prince, and popularity with the Subjects, had raised
him to a capacity with the great Earl of Warwick, to set the English Crown on
what Head he pleased; although it was the universal opinion, he had no other
ambition then to set it on King James his head, which it belonged to, with his
own hands: his design was well principled, but not well molded; he had many
hands, but no able heads: his correspondence was universal, but not firm and
exact; his Nature was active, but impatient; his Interest was popular, not
thoroughly understood; he neither comprehending the Inclinations of the Kingdom
in gross in Parliament, nor in the retayl in its particular divisions. The
Catholics might have been his, but he was too good-natured to cajole them: the
State was well inclined, but effeminate after so long Prosperity. Hope of
Pardon sent him to his Grave with more silence then was expected from him, and
the Peoples regret; and with more sorrow then became a Queen or her Kingdoms a
safety. His Party was too needy, and their counsels too violent. Ambition and
good Nature are incompatible. Others counsels are never so faithful as our own.
When we hear others advice, let our Reason judge of it: when great, be wary;
when successful, reserved; when rising, stayed; especially in that Age when men
were poisoned with Oil, and undone with Honey: when active, modest; when
checked, yiedling; when dandled, distrustful; when flattered, fearful; when
great, not absolute, (as my Lord would have been in point of favor against my
Lord Mountjoy, and valor against my Lord Norris.) Serve not your Followers,
but employ them: Let others service administer to your design, not your power
to theirs: Let great Actions encourage greater; and let Honor be your merit,
and not your expectation. Some have been busy in the enquiry of what reason
the Virgin-Queen had for her kindness to Leicester and this man, (if there be a
reason in any, much less in Royal love, save the affection its self that bears
it) true, he had Virtue and suffering enough at his first arrival to engage the
kindness and the pity of a worse Princess: yet some then discoursed of a
Conjunction of their Stars that made way for that of their minds. Certainly
(says Cambden) the inclination of Princes to some persons, and their disfavour
toward others, may seem fatal, and guided by higher Powers.

A Parallel between the Earl of Essex and the Duke of Buckingham, by H. W.
THe beginning of the Earl of Essex I must attribute wholly, or in great part
to my Lord of Leicester; but yet as an Introducer or supporter, not as a
Teacher: for as I go along, it will easily appear, that he neither lived nor
died by his Discipline. Always certain it is, that he drew him first into the
fatal Circle from a kind of resolved privateness at his house at Lampsie, in
South Wales; where, after the Academical life, he had taken such a taste of the
Rural, (as I have heard him say) and not upon any flashes or fumes of
Melancholy, or traverses of discontent, but in a serene and quiet mood, that he
could well have bent his mind to a retired course. About which time, the said
Earl of Leicester bewrayed a meaning to plant him in the Queens favor: which
was diversely interpreted by such as thought that great Artizan of Court to do
nothing by chance, nor much by affection. Some therefore were of opinion, that
feeling more and more in himself the weight of time, and being almost tired (if
there be a satiety in power) with that assiduous attendance, and intensive
circumspection which a long-indulgent fortune did require, he was grown not
unwilling, for his own ease, to bestow handsomely upon another some part of the
pains, and perhaps of the envy.

Others conceived rather, that having before for the same ends brought in, or
let in Sir Walter Rawleigh, and having found him such an Apprentice as knew
well enough how to set up for himself, he now meant to allie him with this
young Earl, who had yet taken no strong impressions. For though the said Sir
Walter Rawleigh was a little before this, whereof I now speak by occasion, much
fallen from his former splendor in Court: yet he still continued in some
luster of a favored man, like billows that sink by degrees, even when the wind
is down that first stirred them.

Thus runs the discourse of that time at pleasure; yet I am not ignorant that
there was some good while a very stiff aversation in my Lord of Essex from
applying himself to the Earl of Leicester, for what secret conceit I know not;
but howsoever, that humor was mollified by time, and by his mother; and to the
Court he came under his Lord.

The Duke of Buckingham had another kind of Germination; and surely had he
been a plant, he would have been reckoned amongst the Sponte Nascentes: for he
sprung without any help by a kind of congenial composure (as we may term it)
to the likeness of our late Sovereign and Master of ever blessed memory; who
taking him into his regard, taught him more and more to please himself, and
molded him. (as it were) Platonically to his own Idea; delighting first in the
choice of the Materials, because he found him susceptible of good form; and
afterward by degrees, as great Architects use to do, in the workmanship of his
Regal hand: nor staying here, after he had hardened and polished him about ten
years in the School of observance, (for so a Court is) and in the furnace of
trial about himself, (for he was a King could peruse men as well as Books) he
made him the associate of his Heir apparent, together with the new Lord
Cottington (as an adjunct of singular experience and trust) in foreign
travels, and in a business of love, and of no equal hazard (if the tenderness
of our zeal did not then deceive us) enough (the world must confess) to kindle
affection even betwixt the distantest conditions; so as by the various and
inward conversation abroad, (besides that before and after at home) with the
most constant and best-natured Prince, Bona si sua norint, as ever England
enjoyed, this Duke becomes now secondly seized of favor, as it were by
descent, (though the condition of that estate be no more then a Tenancy at
Will, or at most for the life of the first Lord) and rarely transmitted: which
I have briefly set down, without looking beyond the vail of the Temple, I mean
into the secret of high inclinations; since even Satirical Poets, (who are
otherwise of so licentious fancy) are in this point modest enough to confess
their ignorance. Nescio quid certa est quod me tibi temperet Astrum.


And these were both their Springings and Imprimings, as I may call them.

In the profluence or proceedings of their fortunes, I observe likewise not
only much difference between them, but in the Earl not a little from himself.
First, all his hopes of advancement had like to be strangled almost in the very
Cradle, by throwing himself into the Portugal Voyage without the Queens
consent, or so much as her knowledge; whereby he left his Friends and
Dependents near six months in desperate suspense what would become of him. And
to speak truth, not without good reason: For first, they might well consider,
That he was himself not well plumed in favor for such a flight: besides, that
now he wanted a Lord of Leicester at home (for he was dead the year before) to
smooth his absence, and to quench the practices at Court. But above all, it lay
open to every man's discourse, that though the bare offense to his Sovereign and
Mistress was too great an adventure, yet much more when she might (as in this
case) have fairly discharged her displeasure upon her Laws. Notwithstanding, a
noble report coming home before him, at his return all was clear, and this
excursion was esteemed but a Sally of youth. Nay, he grew every day more and
more in her gracious conceit: whether such intermissions as these do sometimes
foment affection; or that having committed a fault, he became the more
obsequious and plyant to redeem it; or that she had not received into her Royal
Breast any shadows of his popularity.

There was another time long after, when Sir Fulke Grevil, (late Lord Brook) a
man in appearance intrinsecal with him, or at the least admitted to his
Melancholy hours, either belike espying some weariness in the Queen; or
perhaps, with little change of the word, though more in the dangersome marks
toward him, and working upon the present matter, (as she was dexterous and
close) had almost super-induced into favor the Earl of Southampton; which yet
being timely discovered, my Lord of Essex chose to evaporate his thoughts in a
Sonnet (being his common way) to be sung before the Queen, (as it was) by one
Hales, in whose voice she took some pleasure; whereof the complot me thinks had
as much of the Hermit as of the Poet:

And if thou should by Her be now forsaken,
She made thy Heart too strong for to be shaken.
As if he had been casting one eye back at the least to his former retiredness.
But all this likewise quickly vanished, and there was a good while after fair
weather over-head. Yet still, I know not how, like a gathering of Clouds, till
toward his latter time, when his humors grew tart, as being now in the Lees
of favor, it brake forth into certain sudden recesses; sometimes from the
Court to Wansteed, otherwhiles unto Greenwich, often to his own Chamber, Doors
shut, Visits forbidden; and which was worse, diverse contestations (between)
with the Queen her self, (all preambles of ruin) wherewith though now and then
he did wring out of her Majesty some petty contentments, (as a man would press
sour Grapes) yet in the mean time was forgotten the counsel of a wise, and
then a Prophetical Friend, who told him, that such courses as those were like
hot Waters, which help at a pang, but if they be too often used, will spoil the
stomach.

On the Dukes part, we have no such abrupt strains and precipees as these, but
a fair, fluent and uniform course under both Kings: And surely, as there was in
his natural Constitution a mavelous equality, whereof I shall speak more
afterward; so there was an image of it in his Fortune, running (if I may
borrow an ancient comparison) as smoothly as a numerous Verse, till it met with
certain Rubs in Parliament, whereof I am induced by the very subject which I
handle, to say somewhat, so far as shall concern the difference between their
times.

WHen my Lord of Essex stood in favor, the Parliaments were calm: nay, I find
it a true observation, that there was no impeachment of any Nobleman by the
Commons from the Reign of King Henry the sixth, until the eighteenth of King
James, nor any intervenient precedent of that nature; not that something or
other could be wanting to be said, while men are men: For not to go higher, we
are taught easily so much by the very Ballads and Libels of Leicestrian time.

But about the aforesaid year, many young ones being chosen into the House of
Commons more then had been usual in great Councils, (who though of the weakest
wings, are the highest Flyers) there arose a certain unfortunate and unfruitful
Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in the field,
rather then tending to the general harvest. And thus far the consideration of
the Nature of the Time has transported me, and the occasion of the subject.

Now on the other side, I must with the like liberty observe two weighty and
watchful ollicitudes, (as I may call them) which kept the Earl in extreme and
continual Caution, like a bow still bent, whereof the Dukes thoughts were
absolutely free.

First, he was to wrestle with a Queens declining, or rather with her very
setting Age, (as we may term it) which, besides other respects, is commonly
even of it self the more umbratious and apprehensive, as for the most part all
Horizons are charged with certain Vapor toward their Evening.

The other was a matter of more Circumstance, standing thus, viz.

All Princes, especially those whom God has not blessed with natural issue,
are (by wisdom of State) somewhat shie of their Successors; and to speak with
due Reverence, there may be reasonably supposed in Queens Regnant, a little
proportion of tenderness that way, more then in Kings. Now there were in Court
two names of Power, and almost of Affection, the Essexian and the Cecilian,
with their adherents, both well enough enjoying the present, and yet both
looking to the future; and therefore both holding correspondency with some of
the principal in Scotland, and had received advertisements and instructions,
either from them, or immediately from the King as induciat Heir of this
Imperial Crown.

But lest they might detect one another, this was mysteriously carried by
several instruments and conducts, and on the Essexian side, in truth, with
infinite hazard: for Sir Robert Cecil who (as Secretary of State) did dispose
the public Addresses, had prompter and safer conveyance; whereupon I cannot
but relate a memorable passage on either part, as the story following shall
declare.

The Earl of Essex had accommodated Master Anthony Bacon in partition of his
House, and had assigned him a noble entertainment. This was a Gentleman of
impotent feet, but a nimble head; and through his hand run all the
intelligences with Scotland: who being of a provident nature, (contrary to his
brother the Lord Viscount Saint Albans) and well knowing the advantage of a
dangerous Secret, would many times cunningly let fall some words, as if he
could amend his Fortunes under the Cecilians, (to whom he was near of alliance,
and in blood also) and who had made (as he was not unwilling should be
believed) some great profers to win him away: which once or twice he pressed so
far, and with such tokens and signs of apparent discontent to my Lord Henry
Howard, afterward Earl of Northampton, (who was of the party, and stood
himself in much Umbrage with the Queen) that he flees presently to my Lord of
Essex, (with whom he was commonly prima admissiones) by his bedside in the
morning, and tells him, that unless that Gentleman were presently satisfied
with some round sum, all would be vented.

This took the Earl at that time ill provided, (as indeed oftentimes his
Coffers were low) whereupon he was fain suddenly to give him Essex-house; which
the good old Lady Walsingham did afterward dis-engage out of her own store
with 2500 pound; and before, he had distilled 1500 pound at another time by the
same skill. So as we rate this one secret, as it was finely carried, at 4000
pounds in present money, besides at the least 1000 pound of annual pension to a
private and bedridden Gentleman: What would he have gotten if he could have gone
about his own business?

There was another accident of the same nature on the Cecilian side, much more
pleasant, but less chargeable, for it cost nothing but wit. The Queen having
for a good while not heard any thing from Scotland, and being thirsty of news,
it fell out that her Majesty going to take the air toward the heath, (the
Court being then at Greenwich) and Master Secretary Cecil then attending her, a
Post came crossing by, and blew his Horn: The Queen out of curiosity asked him
from whence the Dispatch came; and being answered, From Scotland; she stops her
Coach, and calls for the Packet. The Secretary, though he knew there were
some Letters in it from his Correspondents, which to discover, were as so many
Serpents; yet made more show of diligence then of doubt to obey; and asks some
that stood by (forsooth in great haste) for a Knife to cut up the Packet, (for
otherwise he might perhaps awaked a little apprehension) but in the mean time
approaching with the Packet in his hand, at a pretty distance from the Queen,
he tells her it looked and smelt ill-favouredly coming out of a filthy
Budget, and that it should be fit first to open and air it, because he knew she
was averse from ill Scents.

And so being dismissed home, he got leisure by this seasonable shift, to sever
what he would not have seen.

These two accidents precisely true, and known to few, I have reported as not
altogether extravagant from my purpose, to show how the Earl stood in certain
perplexities, wherewith the Dukes days were not distracted. And this has been
the Historical part (as it were) touching the difference between them in the
rising and flowing of their fortunes.

I will now consider their several Endowments both of Person and Mind, and
then a little of their Actions and Ends.

The Earl was a pretty deal the taller, and much the stronger, and of the abler
body: but the Duke had the neater limbs, and free delivery; he was also the
uprighter, and of the more comely motions: for the Earl did bend a little in
the neck, though rather forwards then downwards: and he was so far from being a
good Dancer, that he was no graceful Goer. If we touch particulars, the Duke
exceeded in the daintiness of his leg and foot, and the Earl in the
incomparable fairness and fine shape of his hands; which (though it be but
feminine praise) he took from his Father: for the general Air, the Earl had the
closer and more reserved Countenance, being by nature somewhat more cogitative,
and (which was strange) never more then at Meals, when others are least:
Insomuch, as he was wont to make his observation of himself, that to solve any
knotty business which cumbred his mind, his ablest hours were when he had
checked his first appetite with two or three morsels, after which he sat
usually for a good while silent: yet he would play well and willingly at some
games of greatest attention; which showed, that when he listed he could license
his thoughts.

The Duke on the other side, even in the midst of so many diversions, had
continually a very pleasant and vacant face, (as I may well call it) proceeding
no doubt from a singular assurance in his temper. And yet I must here give him
a rarer Elogie, which the malignest eye cannot deny him, That certainly never
man in his place and power, did entertain greatness more familiarly, nor whose
looks were less tainted with his felicity; wherein I insist the rather, because
this in my judgment was one of his greatest Virtues and Victories of himself.

But to proceed: in the attiring and ornament of their bodies, the Duke had a
fine and unaffected politeness, and upon occasion costly, as in his Legations.

The Earl as he grew more and more attentive to business and matter, so less
and less curious of clothing: insomuch, as I do remember, those about him had
a conceit that possibly sometimes when he went up to the Queen, he might scant
know what he had on: for this was his manner: His Chamber being commonly stived
with Friends or Suitors of one kind or other, when he gave his legs, arms, and
breast to his ordinary servants to button and dress him with little heed, his
head and face to his Harbor, his eyes to his letters, and ears to Petitioners,
and many times all at once, then the Gentleman of his Robes throwing a cloak
over his shoulders, he would make a step into his Closet, and after a short
prayer, he was gone: only in his Baths, he was somewhat delicate. For point of
diet and luxury, they were both inordinate in their appetites, especially the
Earl, who was by nature of so different a taste, that I must tell a rare thing
of him (though it be but a homely note) that he would stop in the midst of any
physical Potion, and after he had licked his lips, he would drink off the rest;
but I am weary of such slight Animadversions.

To come therefore to the inward furniture of their minds, I will thus much
declare.

The Earl was of good Erudition, having been placed at study in Cambridge very
young by the Lord Burleigh his Guardian, with affectionate and deliberate care,
under the oversight of Doctor Whitgift, then Master of Trinity College, and
after Archbishop of Canterbury: A man (by the way) surely of a most reverend
and sacred memory, and (as I may well say) even of the Primitive temper, when
the Church in lowliness of temper did flourish in high examples, which I have
inserted as a due recordation of his virtues, having been much obliged to him
for many favors in my younger time.

About sixteen years of his age (for thither he came at twelve) he took the
formality of Master of Arts, and kept his public Acts. And here I must not
smother what I have received by constant Information, that his own Father dyed
with a very cold conceit of him, some say through the affection to his second
son Walter Devereux, who was indeed a diamond of the time, and both of an hardy
and delicate temper and mixture,: But it seems, this Earl, like certain
vegetables, did bud and open slowly; Nature sometimes delighting to play an
after-game as well as Fortune, which had both their turns and tides in course.

The Duke was Illiterate, yet had learned at Court, first to sift and question
well, and to supply his own defects by the drawing or flowing unto him of the
best Instruments of experience and knowledge, from whom he had a sweet and
attractive manner, to suck what might be for the public or his own proper use;
so as the less he was favored by the Muses, he was the more by the Graces.

To consider them in their pure Naturals, I conceive the Earls Intellectual
faculties to have been his stronger part, and in the Duke his Practical.

Yet all know, that he likewise at the first was much under the expectation of
his after-proof; such a sudden influence therein had the Sovereign aspect. For
their Abilities of discourse or pen, the Earl was a very acute and sound
speaker when he would intend it; and for his Writings, they are beyond example,
especially in his familiar Letters and things of delight at Court, when he
would admit his serious habits, as may be yet seen in his Impresses and
inventions of entertainment; and above all, in his darling piece of love, and
self-love; his Style was an elegant perspicuity, rich of phrase, but seldom
any bold Metaphors, and so far from Tumor, that it rather wanted a little
Elevation.

The Dukes delivery of his mind I conceive not to be so sharp as solid and
grave, not so solid and deep as pertinent, and apposite to the times and
occasions.

The Earl I account the more liberal, and the Duke the more magnificent; for I
do not remember that my Lord of Essex in all his lifetime did build or adorn
any house, the Queen perchance spending his time, and himself his means, or
otherwise inclining to popular ways; for we know the people are apter to
applaud hous-keepers, then hous-raisers. They were both great cherishers of
Scholars and Divines; but it seems, the Earl had obtained of himself one
singular point, that he could depart his affection between two extremes: for
though he bare always a kind of filial reverence toward Dr Whitgift, both
before and after he was Archbishop; yet on the other side, he did not a little
love and tender Master Cartwright, though I think truly, with large distinction
between the persons and the Causes, howsoever he was taxed with other ends in
respecting that party.

They were both fair-spoken Gentlemem, not prone and eager to detract openly
from any man; in this the Earl has been most falsely blemished in our vulgar
Story: only against one man he had forsworn all patience, namely Henry Lord
Cobham, and would call him (per Excellentiam) the Sycophant (as if it had been
an Emblem of his name) even to the Queen her self, though of no small
insinuation with her; and one Lady likewise (that I may civilly spare to no
^inate, for her sex sake) whom he used to term the Spyder of the Court: yet
generally in the sensitive part of their Natures the Earl was the worse
Philosopher, being a great Resenter and a weak Dissembler of the least
disgrace: And herein likewise, as in the rest, no Good Pupil to my Lord of
Leicester, who was wont to put all his passions in his pocket.

In the growth of their Fortunes, the Duke was a little the swifter, and much
the greater; for from a younger brothers mean estate, he rose to the highest
degree whereof a Subject was capable either in Title or Trust. Therein I must
confess much more consortable to Charles Brandon under Henry the Eight, who
was equal to him in both.

For matter of Donative and addition of substance, I do not believe that the
Duke did much exceed him, all considered, under both Kings.

For that which the Earl of Essex had received from her Majesty, besides the
Fees of his Offices, and the disposition of great Sums of money in her
Armies, was (about the time of his Arraignment, when faults use to be
aggravated with precedent benefits) valued at three hundred thousand pounds
sterling in pure gift for his only use, to the Earl of Dorset then Lord
Treasurer; who was a wise man, and a strict Computist, and not ill affected
toward him. And yet it is worthy of note in the Margent of both Times, that
the one was prosecuted with silence, and the other with murmur; so undoing a
measure is popular judgment.

I cannot here omit between them a great difference in establishing of both
their Fortunes and Fames.

For the first, the Duke had a care to introduce into near place at the Court
diverse of his confident Servants, and into high places very sound and grave
Personages. Whereas, except a Pensioner or two, we can scant name any one man
advanced of the Earls breeding, but Sir Thomas Smith, having been his
Secretary, who yet came never further (though married into a noble House) then
to the Clerk of the Council, and Register of the Parliament: not that the Earl
meant to stand alone like a Substantive (for he was not so ill a Grammarian in
Court;) but the Truth is, in this point the Cecilians kept him back, as very
well knowing that upon every little absence or disassiduity, he should be
subject to take cold at his back.

For the Other, in managing of their Fames, I note between them a direct
contrary wisdom; For the Earl proceeded by way of Apology, which he wrote and
dispersed with his own hands at large, though till his going to Ireland they
were but aerie objections. But of the Duke this I know, that one having offered
for his ease to do him that kind of Service; He refused it with a pretty kind
of thankful scorn, saying, that he would trust his own good intentions which
God knew, and leave to him the pardoning of his Errors; and that he saw no
fruit of Apologies, but the multiplying of discourse: which surely was a
well-setled Maxim. And for my own particular (though I am not obnoxious to his
memory) in the expression of Tacitus, Neque injuria, neque beneficia, saving
that he showed me an ordinary good Countenance: And if I were, yet I would
distinguish between Gratitude and Truth. I must bear him this Testimony, that
in a Commission laid upon me by Sovereign Command to examine a Lady about a
certain filthy accusation grounded upon nothing but a few single names taken up
by a Footman in a kennel, and straight baptized, A list of such as the Duke had
appointed to be poisoned at home, himself being then in Spain: I found it to be
the most malicious and frantic surmise, and the most contrary to his nature
that I think had ever been brewed from the beginning of the World, howsoever
countenanced by a Libellous Pamphlet of a fugitive Physician even in Print; and
yet of this would not the Duke suffer any answer to be made on his behalf, so
constant he was to his own principles.

In their Military Services the Characters of the Earls employments were these,
viz.

His forwardest was that of Portugal, before mentioned.

The saddest, that of Roan, where he lost his brave Brother.

His fortunatest piece I esteem the taking of Cadiz Malez, and no less modest;
for there he wrote with his own hands a censure of his Omissions.

His jealousest employment was to the relief of Calais besieged by the
Cardinal Archduke: about which, there passed then between the Queen and the
French King much Art.

His Voyage to the Azores was the best, for the discovery of the Spanish
weakness, and otherwise almost a saving Voyage.

His blackest was that to Ireland, ordained to be the Sepulcher of his Father,
and the Gulf of his own Fortunes.

But the first in 88, at Tilbury-camp, was in my judgment the very poison of
all that followed; for there whilst the Queen stood in some doubt of a Spanish
Invasion (though it proved but a Morrice-dance upon our Waves) she made him in
Field Commander of the Cavalry (as he was before in Court) and much graced him
openly in view of the Soldiers and people, even above my Lord of Leicester:
the truth is, from thenceforth he fed too fast.

The Dukes employment abroad in this nature, was only in the Action of the
Isle of Reez, of which I must note somewhat for the honor of our Country, and
of his Majesty's times, and of them that perished and survived, and to redeem
it generally from misunderstanding. Therefore after enquiry amongst the wisest
and most indifferent men; of that Action I dare pronounce, that all
Circumstances pondered, A tumultuary banding on our part, with one thousand in
the whole on theirs ready to receive us with two hundred horse, with near two
thousand foot, and watching their best time of advantage none of their foot
discovered by us before, nor so much as suspected, and only some of their
Horse descried straggling, but not in any bulk or body: their Cavalry not a
Troop of Bascoigners mounted in haste, but the Greater part Gentlemen of
Family, and of picked Resolution, and such as charged home both in Front and on
both Flanks into the very Sea; about sixscore of their two hundred horse
strewed upon the Sand, and none of them but one killed with a great shot; and
after this their foot likewise coming on to charge, till not liking the
business they fell to flinging of stones, and so walked away:

I say, these things considered and laid together, we have great reason to
repute it a great impression upon an unknown place, and a noble argument that
upon occasion we have not lost our ancient vigor. Only I could wish that the
Duke, who then in the animating of the soldiers showed them very eminent
assurance of his valor, had afterward remembered that rule of Apelles, Manum
de Tabula. But he was greedy of honor, and hot upon the public ends, and too
confident in the prosperity of beginnings, as somewhere Polybius, that great
Critique of war, observes of young Leaders whom fortune has not before
deceived. In this their military care and dispensation of reward and punishment
there was very few remarkable occasions under the Duke, saving his continual
vigilancie and voluntary hazard of his person, and kindnesses to the Soldiers,
both from his own table and purse; for there could be few disorders within an
Island where the troops had no scope to disband, and the Inferior Commanders
were still in sight.

In the Earl we have two examples of his severity, the one in the Island
Voyage, where he threw a Soldier with his own hands out of a Ship; the other
in Ireland, where he decimated certain troops that ran away, renewing a piece
of the Roman Discipline.

On the other side, we have many of his Lenity, and one of his Facility, when
he did connive at the bold trespass of Sir Walter Raleigh, who before his
arrival at Fyall, had banded there against his precise Commandment; at which
time he let fall a Noble word, being pressed by one, (whose name I need not
remember) that at the least he would put him upon a Martial Court: That I would
do (said he) if he were not my friend.

And now I am drawing toward the last Act, which was written in the Book of
necessity.

At the Earls end I was abroad, but when I came home (though little was left
for Writers to gleane after Judges) yet, I spent some curiosity to search what
it might be that could precipitate him into such a prodigious Catastrophe; and
I must, according to my professed freedom, deliver a circumstance or two of
some weight in the truth of that story, which was neither discovered at his
arraignment, nor after in any of his private confessions.

There was amongst his nearest attendants one Henry Cuffe, a man of secret
ambitious ends of his own, and of proportionate Counsels smothered under the
habit of a Scholar, and slubbered over with 2 certain rude and clownish
fashion, that had the semblance of iutegrity.

This Person not above five or six weeks before my Lords fatal irruption into
the City, was by the Earls special Command suddenly discharged from all
further attendance, or access unto him, out of an inward displeasure then
taken against his sharp and importune infusions, and out of a glimmering
oversight, that he would prove the very instrument of his Ruin.

I must add hereunto, that about the same time my Lord had received from the
Countess of Warwick (a Lady powerful in the Court, and indeed a virtuous user
of her power) the best advice that I think was ever given from either sex; That
when he was free from restraint, he should closely take any out-lodging at
Greenwich, and sometimes when the Queen went abroad in a good humor, (whereof
she would give him notice) he should come forth, and humble himself before her
in the field.

This Counsel sunk much into him, and for some days he resolved it: but in the
mean time, through the intercession of the Earl of Southampton, whom Cuffe had
gained, he was restored to my Lords ear, and so working advantage upon his
disgraces, and upon the vain foundation of Vulgar breath, which hurts many
good men, spun out the final destruction of his Master and himself, and almost
of his restorer, if his pardon had not been won by inches.

True it is, that the Earl in West minster-ball did in general disclose the
evil persuasions of this man; but the particulars which I have related by this
dismission and restitution, he buried in his own breast for some reasons
apparent enough; Indeed (as I conjecture) not to exasperate the Case of my Lord
of Southampton, though he might therewith a little peradventure have mollified
his own. The whole and true Report I had by infallible means from the person
himself that both brought the advice from the aforesaid excellent Lady, and
carried the discharge to Cuffe, who in a private Chamber was stricken therewith
into a Sound almost dead to the Earth, as if he had fallen from some high
steeple; such Terrets of hope he had built in his own fancy.

Touching the Dukes sudden period, how others have represented it unto their
Fancies, I cannot determine: for my part, I must confess from my Soul that I
never recall it to mind without a deep and double astonishment of my discourse
and reason.

First, of the very horror and atrocity of the Fact in a Christian Court,
under so moderate a Government; but much more at the impudency of the
pretense, whereby a desperate discontented Assassinate would after the
perpetration have honested a mere private revenge (as by precedent
Circumstances is evident enough) with I know not what public respects, and
would fain have given it a Parliamentary cover howsoever. Thus these two great
Peers were dis-roabed of their Glory, the one by judgment, the other by
violence, which was the small distinction.

Now after this short contemplation of their diversities, (for much more might
have been spoken, but that I was fitter for Rhapsody then commentary) I am
lastly desirous to take a Summary view of their Conformities, which I verily
believe will be found as many, though perchance heeded by few, as are extant in
any of the ancient Parallel.

They both slept long in the arms of Fortune: They were both of ancient blood,
and of Foreign extraction: They were both of strait and goodly stature, and of
able and active bodies: They were both industrious and assiduous, and attentive
to their ends: They were both early Privy Counselors, and employed at home
in the secretest and weightiest affairs in Court and State: They were both
likewise Commanders abroad in Chief, as well by Sen as by Land: both Masters of
the Horse at home, both chosen Chancellours of the same University, namely,
Cambridge: They were both indubitable strong, and highminded men; yet of sweet
and accostable nature, almost equally delighting in the press and affluence of
Dependants and Suitors, which are always the Burres, and sometimes the Briers
of Favorites. They were both married to very virtuous Ladies, and sole Heirs,
and left issue of either Sex; and both their Wives converted to contrary
Religions. They were both in themselves rare and excellent examples of
Temperance and Sobriety, but neither of them of Continency.

Lastly, after they had been both subject (as all Greatness, and Splendour is) to
certain obloquies (...) their actions; They both concluded their earthly
felicity in unnatural ends, and with no great distance of time in the space
either of Life or Favor.

Observations on the Life of Sir Jeffery Fenton.
SIr Jeffery Fenton, born in Nottinghamshire, was for twenty seven years
Privy-Counsellour in Ireland to Queen Elizabeth and King James. He translated
the History of Francis Guicciardine out of Italian into English, and dedicated
it to Queen Elizabeth. He deceased at Dublin, October 19. 1608, and lies
buried in St. Patricks Church, under the same Tomb with his Father-in-Law
Doctor Robert Weston, sometimes Chancellor of Ireland. It is an happy age when
great men do what wise men may write; an happier, when wise men write what
great have done; the happiest of all, when the same men act and write, being
Histories, and composing them too. For these men having a nearer, and more
thorow-insight to the great subjects of Annals than men of more distant
capacities and fortunes, are the only persons that have given the world the
right notion of Transactions, when men of lower and more pedantique spirits
trouble it only with more heavy Romances. Give me the actions of a Prince
transcribed by those Historians who could be instruments. The best History in
the world is Caesar's Commentaries, written by him, and translated by Edmonds,
with the same spirit that they were acted. Xenophon and Thucydides, whose pens
copied their Narratives from their Swords. Tacitus, Malvezzi, Machiavel,
Comines, Moor, Bacon, Herbert and His Eliz. to which Cambden gave but the
language and the transcript.
Burleigh (who writ the affairs of former Ages with the same judgment that
they managed those of their own.) In a word, an History written by such a
Courtier as Guicciardine, and translated by such a Counselor as Fenton.
Diamond only can cut Diamond, the great only express the great: a person
that has a sight of the Intelligence, Negotiations, Conferences, and inward
transactions of States, is one from whom I expect a more exact Chronicle of
this age than yet this Nation has been happy in.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Fletcher.
GIles Fletcher (brother to Richard Fletcher Bishop of London) was born in
Kent, as I am credibly From the mouth of Mr. Ramsey Minister of Rougham in
Norfolk, who married the widow of Mr. Giles Fletcher, sou to this Doctor.
informed. He was bred first in Eaton, then in Kings College in Cambridge,
where he became Doctor of Law. A most excellent Poet (a quality hereditary to
his two sons, Giles and Phineas) was sent Commissioner into Scotland, Germany,
and the Low Countries, for Queen Elizabeth, and her Ambassador into Russia,
Secretary to the City of London, and Master of the Court of Requests. His
Russian Embassy to settle the English Merchandise was his Masterpiece, to
Theodor Juanowich, Duke of Muscovia. He came thither in a dangerous juncture of
time, viz. in the end of the year 1588.

First, some Forreiners (I will not say they were the Hollanders) envying the
free Trade of the English, had done them bad offices.

Secondly, a false report was generally believed that the Spanish Armado had
worsted the English Fleet, and the Duke of Muscovy, who measured his favor
unto the English, by the possibility he apprehended of their returning it) grew
very sparing of his smiles, not to say free of his frowns on our Merchants
residing there. However, our Doctor demeaned himself in his Embassy with such
cauriousnesse, that he not only escaped the Dukes fury, but also procured many
privileges for our English Merchants, exemplified in In his volume of English
Navigations, P. 473.
Mr. Hackluit. Returning home, and being safely arrived at London, he sent for
his intimate friend Mr. Wayland, Prebendary of St. Paul's, and Senior fellow of
Trinity College in Cambridge (Tutor to my Father, from whose mouth I received
this report) with whom he heartily expressed his thankfulness to God for his
safe return from so great a danger; for the Poets cannot fancy Ulysses more
glad to be come out of the Den Polyphemus, than he was to be rid out of the
power of such a barbarous Prince, who counting himself by a proud and voluntary
mistake Emperor of all Nations, cared not for the Law of all Nations; and who
was so habited in blood, that had he cut off this Embassador's head, he and his
friends might have sought their own amends; but the question is, where he would
have found it? He afterward set forth a Book called The Russian Commonwealth,
expressing the Government, or Tyranny rather thereof; wherein (says my Camb.
in his Eliz. Anno 1583. when he was Agent in Muscov. as afterward Ambassador.
Author) are many things most observable: but Queen Eliz. indulging the
reputation of the Duke of Muscovy as a confederate Prince, permitted not the
public printing of that; which such who have private Copies, know to set the
valuation thereon.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Mountjoy.
THe Lord Mountjoy was of the ancient Nobility; as he came from Oxford, he took
the Inner Temple in his way to Court, whither no sooner come, but (without
asking) had a pretty strange kind of admission. He was then much about twenty
years of age, of a brown hair, a sweet face, a most neat composure, and tall in
his person; so that he coming to see the fashion of the Court, was spied out by
the Queen, and out of the affection she bare to the very sight of his face,
received him into favor; upon the first observation whereof, she professed,
that she knew there was in him some noble blood. He was one that wanted not wit
and courage, for he had very fine attractions; and being a good Scholar, yet
were they accompanied with the retractives of bashfulnesse, and a natural
modesty. There was in him an inclination to Arms, with an humor of Traveling:
and as he was grown by reading (whereunto he was much addicted) to the Theory
of a Soldier, so was he strongly invited by his Genius to the Acquaintance of
the Practick of the War, which were the causes of his excursions; for he had a
Company in the Low Countries, from whence he came over with a noble acceptance
of the Queen, but somewhat restless: in honorable thoughts he exposed himself
again and again, and would press the Queen with the pretenses of visiting his
Company so often, that at length he had a flat denial, and yet he stole over
with Sir John Norris, into the action of Britain; but at last the Queen began
to take his Decessions for contempts, and confined his residence to the Court,
and her own presence. She was so confident in her own Princely judgment and
opinion that she had conceived of his worth and conduct, that she would have
this noble Gentleman, and none other, to finish, and bring the Irish War to a
propitious end; which (not deceiving her good conceit of him) he nobly
achieved, though with much pains and carfulness.

Among the greatest things laid to Queen Elizabeth her charge (says the
Censurer) as cast behind the door of neglect, was the conduct of the Affairs of
Ireland; a place lying all her Halcyon days under so great a contempt, that
wise Walsingham thought it no Treason to wish it buried in the Sea, considering
the charge it brought: yet she kept the Pale in good order, not suffering the
Spanish party to grow more potent in the North, than was convenient to consume
his forces, and divert him from nearer and more dangerous attempts. It being
impossible for her without being grievous to her people (a Rock she chiefly
studied to avoid) at one time to maintain so dreadful a Navy at Sea, and soment
the Dutch and French, to whose assistance she was called by a louder necessity,
than to render a Nation quite desolate: none being willing during her life to
exchange the present government of a natural Princess, for the less happy
tyranny of a Viceroy; of which the most did study more their respective
Grandeur by extending the War, than the ease of the Inhabitants, and lessening
the Queens expense, till the noble Lord Mountjoy was employed, who had no other
design than the conclusion of the Work; which he had not yet brought about, but
that the Spaniards found themselves betrayed through the covetousness and
cowardice of the Natives, that for small sums would sell not only such
Foreigners as came to help them, but their nearest Relations. Nor was it
possible to reduce them to civility, but by curing the Bogs and Fastnesses, and
building Castles and Garrisons, which he did; nor easy to subdue them without
that severity to the Priests, which he used; whom he found exercising such an
implicit power over the Peoples consciences, that they could not resolve
themselves of their Sovereigns right or Religion. -- This for his Irish
government: touching his Domestic relation; When Queen Elizabeth's favor to
Essex (like a bone by breaches made more firm) swelled him to such a degree of
confidence as frowned on them as enemies that acknowledged not his friendship,
or depended not on his favor, to balance him and my Lord Cecil, this gallant
Gentleman, and of honorable extraction, was placed in her eye; many hoping by
his application to draw from her heart the affection they thought mortal to
them and their design, the whole result concluding in a Duel that raised both
in their Mistress affections, as Champions for her beauty now, and like to be
so for her Government.

There are some Letters of this noble person's to be seen, I am told, of a
plain and equal style becoming a Statesman and business; not seldom yet
admitting of several constructions, if of any interpretation at all, where the
business related to a thing whose consequence could not easily be seen into.

Observations on the Life of Edward Earl of Rutland.
A Nobleman, eminent for those several Endowments, which single, do exact an
entire man. For a person of his quality to be an accurate Critic in the
learned Tongues, and then as a Rhetorician to make all their Graces serve his
Eloquence; to have traversed Ancient, and yet be no Stranger in Modern Writers:
to be well versed in the more crabbed Philosophy, and accurate in Politer
classick Authors; to be learned in History and Policy, and a Master in the Law
of the Land, and of Nations. For such a man to have devoured so much, and yet
digested it, is a rarity in nature, and in diligence, which has but few
examples: yet his speculative knowledge that gave light to the most dark and
difficult proposals, became eclipsed by the more dazzling luster of his more
practick and experimental prudence; which together with his alliance to my Lord
Burleigh, had voted him to Bromley's place, but that they both sickned in one
day, and died in one week; he leaving these four Advisoes behind him, 1. Be
always employed. 2. Look to the Issue. 3. Be furnished with a friend. And 4.
Reflect upon thy self -- Vita est in se Reflexio.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Smith.
HIS Relation to Edward the sixth his Cousin German, was enough to countenance
his parts, and his parts ripe and large enough to advance his person. -- His
gravity could be no where better employed than in Spain, nor his reservednesse
any where more suitable than in Italy. In Spain his carriage had a great
impression upon the King, and his spirit upon the whole Court. For Gasper
Quiroga Archbishop of Toledo, inveighing bitterly against the Queen's person,
and more against her Title (Defender of the Faith) was answered by him with
that Wisdom and Prudence, that his Majesty of Spain checked the Archbishop as
an Impertinado, as he called him, and hugged Sir John Smith, as a man who had
made himself dreadful, and his Mistress therefore much more to that Court --
(They who least consider hazard in the doing of their duty, fare best still.)
The surest way to safety, is to have one interest espoused so firmly, as never
to be changed. Nor did he this out of a vainer bottom than an observation he
made of his Mistrisses resolution, already in despair of procuring good from
any milder endeavors than those of power: A signal testimony of the commanding
worth this Gentleman had, which extorted a reverence to his person in that very
place where his business contracted an Odium. An excellent person he was, in
whom honesty of manners strived with Nobility of Birth, and merit with honor;
of a composed and stayed temper, that would say under all temptations to
disquiet, Either the thing before us is in our power, or it is not: If it be,
why do we not manage it to our content? If not, why are we discontented,
especially since every thing has two handles? If the one prove hot, and not to
be touched, we may take the other that is more temperate. Upon which
consideration, all private concernments he passed over with a perfect
indifference: the world and its Appendages hanging so loose about him, that he
never took notice when any part dropped off, or sat uneasily.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Rawleigh.
SIr Walter Rawleigh was well descended, and of good Alliance, but poor in his
beginning. He was one so tossed by fortune to and fro, that he was sometimes
high, sometimes low, sometimes in a middle condition. He was brought up in the
University and Innes of Court, but he stayed not long in a place: and being the
youngest Brother, and the House diminished in Patrimony, he foresaw his own
destiny, that he was first to roll (through want and disability) before he
could come to a repose. He first exposed himself to the Land-service of Ireland
(a Militia) which then did not yield him food and raiment; nor had he patience
to stay there, (though shortly after he came thither again) under the command
of the Lord Gray. As for his Native parts, and those of his own acquiring, he
had in the outward man a good presence, in a handsome and well-compacted person,
a strong natural wit, and a better judgment, with a bold and plausible tongue,
whereby he could set out his parts to the best advantage; and to these he had
the adjuncts of some general learning, which by diligence he enforced to a
great Augmentation, and Perfection; for he was an indefatigable Reader, whether
by Sea or Land, and none of the least observers both of Men and the Times.
Falling from that sudden grace, which he by his parts had gained of the Queen,
he went aside for a while, but at his return he came in with the greater
strength, and so continued to her last, great in her favor, and Captain of the
Guard. His prudence understood his capacity, and his industry served it;
raising his fortune as high as his parts, and his parts as high as his mind.
His Motto was, Either dye nobly, or live honorably. Never man prospered, but
the resolute, and he that has awaked an easy, soft, sleepy, or indifferent
temper, to the noble adventure of being Caesar, or being none: a disposition
meeting a large and capacious soul in this Gentleman, taught him the exact
discipline of War in Ireland and the Low Countries, the great skill of a
Seaman between Europe and America, and a patience as severe in enduring
hardship, as his necessity in requiring it. Five hours he slept, four he read,
two he discoursed; allowing the rest to his business and his necessities: no
Soldier fared or lay harder, none ventured further: what is not extraordinary
(he would say) is nothing: It being the end of all Arts and Sciences to direct
men by certain rules unto the most compendious way in their knowledge and
practice: those things of which in our selves we have only some imperfect
confused notions, being herein fully and clearly represented to our view from
the discoveries that other men have made, after much study and long experience;
and there is nothing of greater consequence for the advancement of Learning,
than to find out those particular advantages which there are for the shortest
way of knowing and teaching things in every profession. There was not an expert
Soldier or Seaman, but he consulted; not a printed or manuscript discourse of
Navigation or War but he perused; nor were there exacter rules or principles
for both services, than he drew: so contemplative he was, that you would think
he was not active; so active that you would say he was not prudent -- A great
Soldier, and yet an excellent Courtier: an accomplished Gallant, and yet a
bookish man; a man that seemed born for any thing he undertook: his wit brought
him to Court, and kept him there; for there happening a difference between him
and my Lord Gray, under whom he served in Ireland, which was heard before the
Council Table, Rawleigh stated his case with that clearness, urged his
arguments with that evidence and reason, offered his Apologies with those
pertinent and taking allegations, and his Replies with that smartnesse;
expressed himself with that fluency and eloquence, and managed his carriage and
countenance with that discretion, that he was first the States-mens
observation, next her Majesty's Favorite, and at last her Oracle; as who was
equally happy in his comprehensive discourses to her of her private interest in
every part of her government, and in his effectual Speeches to her Subjects in
Parliament touching theirs in every part of their duty.

Two things he observed in his Mistress;

1. That she was penurious in her Largesses. 2. That she was choice in her
Favorites.
Whence he concluded, that there was no good to be done unless he got an
estate first, and then a reputation.

To the first, we owe his Sea-voyages, when his whole fortune was often put up
in one ship; And to the last, his Land-services, when all his expectation
depended on one action. Two Rivals he observed, Essex for action, Cecil for
counsel: The one he went under abroad, to outvy him; the other he complied with
at home, to undermine him: but wanting strength, though not parts to be both
their Corrivals, he perished, because not thought to own humility enough to be
their servants. Cecill indeed was his friend, because Essex was his enemy: but
he taught him, That it was more safe at Court to have many enemies of equal
power, than one false and ambitious friend, that has attained to the
absoluteness of command: But this he was often heard to say, he did not
apprehend, before his Genius had dictated it to him, as he came in a Boat from
the execution of the Earl of Essex, which was done at the Tower. -- Yet two
ways I find him getting up: 1. By uncouth projects in Parliament beyond
expectation; which (though they might oblige his Mistress) together with an
opinion of his irreligion, lost him with the People. 2. By extraordinary
undertakings in War beyond his Commission; which (though performed to outdo
his Generals) had forfeited his head to their severity and justice, had not his
wit complied with their eafinesse and goodness. It Is a question among the
Curiosoes, whether his often absence from Court was his prudence, or his
weakness, it being a quodlibet, whether that distance was a greater allay to
his enemies malice, or his Sovereigns love; while his foreign actions were not
so close at her ear to his advantage, as his Adversaries applications to his
disparagement.

Two things I must needs say are wonderful in him. 1. The dispatch and industry
of the former part of his life. 2. The weakness of the latter.

Touching the first, he that shall consider his laborious way of study,
immersed in almost infinite reading and observation, to which the running over
of innumerable books, and a vast multitude of men was necessary: His
Obligations to read not only common Authors, but all Records, Schemes, and
Papers that he could come by: His correspondence with Friends and Strangers;
his review of his own Papers (which he fate close to by Sea and Land) that
never passed him without three transcriptions; his reception of visits, whether
of civility, or business, or discourse, which were numerous, and great
devourers of his time; his agency for all sorts of persons (his interest with
his thrifty Mistress being most part of his pension) in which capacity he set
up a kind of Office of Address -- his Letters, which cost him one day in the
week: The time lost upon his misfortunes, which made it necessary for him often
to break his great series and method of undertaking. He, I say, that shall
compute, and sum up this, the particulars whereof are nakedly told without any
straining of the truth, or flourish of expression, must be much to seek how a
man of so many actions should write any thing, and one of so many writings
should do any thing; and more, how one of so many fatal diversions could keep
up a steady mind for those great, but exact arguments that it has left in the
world; especially when there was one very difficult particular in all his
composures, viz. that none of his Discourses with which his History or other
Books are embellished, passed his exact hand before the most knowing and most
learned men in that faculty to which those discourses belonged, had debated
them before him; who after their departure summed up all into those excellent
pieces now abroad under his name, which I blame not King James for envying,
being the nearest his own: though I think not that learned Prince of so low a
spirit, as out of an impertinent emulation to affect Sir Walter Rawleigh the
less, for the great repute that followed him because of his pen; which being
more dangerous than his Sword, I wonder that wise Prince indulged him,
especially since that Master Hampden a little before the Wars was at the charge
of (...) 3. 52 sheets of his Manuscripts, as the (...) himself told me, who had
his close chamber, his fine and candle, with an Attendant to deliver him the
Originals, and take his Copies as fast as he could write them.

2 To the second, viz. the weakness of the last part of his life: 1. There was
not a greater reach in that advice of his to the Queen (when some were for
attacquing Spain one way, and some another) to cut off its commerce with the
Indies, than there was shortness of spirit in trusting the most hopeful part
of that expedition to Sir John Buroughs, when he sunk under the most
disastrous himself. Yet 2. That he, when Captain of the Guard, Warden of the
Cinque Ports, Governor of Virginia (a place of his own discovery) preferments
enough to satisfy a regular spirit, should stand on terms with King James
against the Law of the Land, the Genius of the Nation, the resolution of the
Nobility, and Reason it self (that knows there is no cautions that hold
Princes, but their interest and nature) was a greater infirmity. But 3. That he
upon the Kings frown for his former indiscretion upon him, and Cobham, should
engage upon so shallow a Treason ( so improbable to hurt others, or benefit
themselves, that if ever folly was capable of the title, or pity due to
innocence, theirs might claim so large a share as not possible to be too
severely condemned, or slightly enough punished) and that with such weak and
inconsiderable men, as were rather against the government, than for one another
(Gray being a Puritan, and Cobham a Protestant) were the greatest: but there is
one particular more behind; That he who could employ his restraint so well,
should lie under the justice as well as jealousy of K. James: And knowing that
Princes must not pardon any able man that either they have wronged, or that
has wronged them, be so intent upon a foolish liberty, wherein he lost himself
and his in that unhappy voyage of Guiana; a voyage, that considering King James
his inclination to the Match, his own obnoxiousnesse to that King abroad, and
Cecil here for obstructing the Peace with Spain, and Gondamor's vigilance, must
needs be as unsuccessful, as it was disgustful.

Methinks he that was of so incomparable a dexterity in his judgment, as the
Treasurer grew jealous of his excellent parts, left he should supplant him; of
so quick and ready apprehension and conduct, that he puzzled the Judges at
Winchester: of so good a Headpiece, that it was wished then on the Secretary
of State's shoulders: of so considerable an interest, that notwithstanding his
fourteen years imprisonment, Princes interceded for him, the whole Nation
pitied him, and King James would not execute him without an Apology; And to say
no more, of so much magnanimity, that he managed his death with so high and
religious a resolution, as if a Christian had acted a Roman, or rather a Roman
a Christian; might have gone off the world at a higher rate, but that there is
an higher power governs wisdom, as invisibly, yet as really as wisdom does
the world; which when I look back upon my Lord of Essex, I call fate; but when
from him I look forward to Sir Walter Rawleigh, I believe a providence.

He had a good presence in a handsome and well-compacted person, a strong
natural wit, a better judgment, with a bold and plausible tongue, which set
off his parts to the best advantage: to these he had the adjuncts of a general
Learning; which by diligence and experience (those two great Tutors) was
augmented to a great perfection, being an indefatigable Reader, and having a
very retentive memory: before his Judges at Winchester humble, but not
prostrate; dutiful, yet not dejected: to the Jury affable, but not fawning;
hoping, but not trusting in them, carefully persuading them with reason, not
distemperately importuning them with conjurations; rather showing love of life,
than fear of death: patient, but not careless; civil, but not stupid.

Observations on the Life of Thomas, Sackvil, Lord Buckhurst.
HE was bred in the University of Oxford, where he became an excellent Poet,
leaving both Latin and English Poems of his to posterity. Then studied he Law
in the Temple, and took the degree of Barrister; afterward he traveled into
Foreign parts, was detained for a time a Prisoner in Rome, which he revenged
afterward in the liberty of his speech at the Powder-Traytors Trial. Wen his
liberty was procured for his return into England, he possessed the vast
inheritance left him by his Father, whereof in short time by his magnificent
prodigality he spent the greatest part, till he seasonably began to spare,
growing near to the bottom of his Estate.

The story goes, that this young Gentleman coming to an Alderman of London, who
had gained great penny worths by his former Purchases of him, was made (being
now in the wane of his wealth) to wait the coming down of the Alderman so long,
that his generous humor being sensible of the incivility of such Attendance,
resolved to be no more beholding to Wealthy Pride; and presently turned a
thrifty improver of the remainder of his Estate. But others make him, as
abovesaid, the Convert of Queen Elizabeth, (his Cousin-German once removed) who
by her frequent Admonitions, diverted the torrent of his profusion. Indeed she
would not know him, till he began to know himself, and then heaped places of
Honor and Trust upon him, creating him

1. Baron of Buckhurst in Sussex, Anno Dom. 1566. 2. Sending him Ambassador
into France, Anno 1571. Into the Low Countries, Anno Dom. 1566. 3. Making him
Knight of the Order of the Garter, Anno 1589. 4. Appointing him Treasurer of
England, 1599.
He was Chancellor of the University of Oxford, where he entertained Qu:
Elizabeth with a most sumptuous Feast. He was called the Star-chamber-Bell, so
very flowing his invention; and therefore no wonder if his Secretaries could
not please him, being a person of so quick dispatch, (faculties which yet run
in the blood.) He took a Roll of the names of all Suitors, with the Date of
their first Addresses, and these in order had their hearing, so that a
Fresh-man could not leap over the head of his Senior, except in urgent Affairs
of State. Thus having made amends to his house for his misspent time, both in
increase of Estate and Honor, being created Earl of Dorset by King James, he
died on the 19th of April, 1608.

The Lord Buckburst was of the noble house of the Sackvils, and of the Queens
consanguinity; his Father was that provident and wise man Sir Richard Sackvil,
or as the people then called him, Fillsack, by reason of his great wealth, and
the vast Patrimony which he left to this his son, whereof he spent in his youth
the best part, until the Qu: by her frequent admonitions diverted the torrent
of his profusion; he was a very fine Gentleman of person and endowments both of
Art and Nature. His elocution is much commended, but the excellency of his Pen
more; for he was a Scholar, and a person of quick faculties, very facete and
choice in his phrase and style. He was wise and stout, nor was he any ways
ensnared in the factions of the Court, which were all his time very strong. He
stood still in grace, and was wholly intentive to the Queens service; and such
were his abilities, that she received assiduous proofs of his sufficiency. As

1. In his Embassy to France, whereas the Queen Mother complemented him, he
behaved himself very worthy of his Mistrisses Majesty, and his own Peerage:
there he had an experienced Tuscan, Calacanti by name, to deal with that
Florentine Queen; Montmorancy's brother, to undermine the Guises; and his own
great parts, to grapple with old Hospital: He began that subtle piece the
French Match, under pretense whereof we balanoed, and understood Europe; and
Walsingham finished it.

2. In his Negotiations in the Low Countries, where he watched Leicester and
the Commanders; he observed the States, and their changeable and various
Interests, accommodating the present emergencies, and suiting their occasions.

They that censure this Nobleman's death, consider not besides the black worm
and the white (day and night, as the Riddle is) that are gnawing constantly at
the root of the tree of Life, There are many insensible diseases, as
Apoplexies, whose vapors suddenly extinguish the animal spirits; and Aposthumes
both in the upper and middle Region of man, that often drown and suffocate both
the animal and vital, who are like embodied Twins, the one cannot subsist
without the other: If the animal wits fail, the vital cannot subsist; if the
vitals perish, the animals give over their operation: and he that judges ill
of such an act of Providence, may have the same hand at the same time writing
within the Palace-walls of his own body, the same period to his lives Earthly
Empire.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of Queen Eliz.
THE K. James.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King James.
Observations on the Lives of the Cliffords, Earls of Cumberland.
THE name has been for three Ages ancient and Noble, and in this last Age
Warlike and serviceable: They had the government of the North in their own
right for an hundred years, and the hereditary Sheriff-dome of Westmorland in
right of the Viponts their Relations for two. -- Henry the first Earl of
Cumberland was raised by Henry the Eighth to that Honor, 1525, for his service
at Tournay and Berwick. Henry his son was by Queen Mary honored with the
Garter for his conduct against Wyat; and by Queen Eliz. graced with peculiar
favors for his Industry, Integrity and Vigilance in the North. As Nature, so
Nobility subsists and grows by the same thing that it is made of: Virtue that
creates, supports it.

Observations on the Life of the Lord George Clifford.
GEorge Clifford, Lord Clifford, Vesoye, etc. Earl of Cumberland, was son to
Henry second Earl of that Family, by his second Lady; a person wholly composed
of true honor and valor, whereof he gave the world a large and clear
demonstration.

It was resolved by the judicious in that Age, The way to humble the Spanish
greatness, was not in pinching and pricking of him in the Low Countries, which
only emptied his veins of such blood as was quickly re-filled: But the way to
make it a Cripple for ever, was by cutting off the Spanish s(...)ews of War,
his Moneys from the West Indies [the backdoor robs the house.] In order
whereunto, this Earl set forth a small Fleet on his own cost, and adventured
his own person therein, being the best born Englishman that ever hazarded
himself in that kind. His Fleet may be said to be bound for no other Harbor
but the Port of Honor, though touching at the Port of Profit in passage
thereunto; I say, touching, whose design was not to enrich himself, but
impoverish the Enemy.

He was as merciful as valiant, (the best metal bends best) and left
impressions of both in all places where he came. Queen Eliz. Anno 1592,
honored him with the dignity of the Garter. When King James came first out of
Scotland to York, he attended him with such an equipage of Followers for
number and habit, that he seemed rather a King, than Earl of Cumberland. Here
happened a Contest between the Earl and the Lord President of the North, about
carrying the Sword before the King in York; which Office, upon due search and
enquiry was adjudged to the Earl, as belonging unto him: and whilst Clifford's
Tower is standing in York, that Family will never be therein forgotten. His
Anagram was as really as literally true: Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlandius.
Davidis regno clarus cum vi fulgebis.


He died Anno 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady Anne, married to
the Earl of Dorset.

This noble person taught the world, That the Art of making War has not a
positive form, and that it ought to be diversified according to the state of
Occurrences. They that will commit nothing to Fortune, nor undertake any
Enterprise whose event appears not infallible, escape many dangers by their
wary conduct, but fail of as many successes by their unactive fearfulness.
It Is useless to be too wise, and spend that time in a grave gaze on business,
that might serve the speedy dispatch of it. Neither was our Peer great only in
the achievements of the Field to please higher spirits, but gaudy at Court to
astonish and ravish the lowest; making noble expenses when necessary, and
appearing splendid on the important occasions, whose principal quality refided
in Magnificence. Yet was he not transported with these appearances, or to make
them the greatest ornament of his conduct: the choicest expressions of his
life, fixing neither his greatness upon a transitory Pageant, nor his glory
upon a fading Pomp.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Smith.
SIr Thomas Smith was born at Abington in Bark-shire, bred in the University of
Oxford: God and himself raised him to the Eminency he attained unto,
unbefriended with any extraction. He may seem to have had an ingenuous
emulation of Sir Thomas Smith Senior, Secretary of State, whom he imitated in
many good qualities, and had no doubt equalled in preferment, if not prevented
by death. He attained only to be Master of the Requests, and Secretary to King
James for his Latin Letters: higher places expecting him, when a period was
put at once to his life and to his hopes, November. 28. 1609. The generous piety
of the honorable Countess of Exeter having erected him one Monument at Fulham,
and his own worth another in History.

His Father died, when he was yet so young, that he knew not what a Father
meant: but his Mothers affection for her Husband died not with him; whereupon
she multiplied her cares on this Gentleman and her other children so
abundantly, that a long while he little found the want of that dear name, her
transcendent love so well supplying the place of both relations: For no sooner
was he fit to learn, than she did by friends procure the best Masters those
Times afforded, to render his education perfect in those exercises as well of
the mind as of the body, wherein they that flattered him not, would say he was
no ill Proficient: such majesty, such modesty in his carriage, that men would
admire how two such distant things could meet in one subject. His eye was quick
and piercing, his shape and motion charming; the air and lineaments of his
countenance lively arguments that his soul was not inferior to his body, --
but that the one promised no more pleasure to those that looked on it, than the
other did service to those that employed it: His mien deserving preferment from
the favor of a Sovereign, and his parts gaining it from his justice. Fortune
did him not so much wrong in his mean Birth, as he did himself right by great
merit, so worthy a Prince's service, and a Courts favor: He read and saw what
others did, but not with others apprehensions; his judgment of things being
not common, nor his observations low, flat, or vulgar, but such as became a
breast now furnishing it self for business and for government.

There was an ancient custom to celebrate the Anniversary of the King's
Coronation with all the Shows of Magnificence and joy which the Art or
Affections of the People could invent; and because we are esteemed the
Warlik'st Nation in the whole world, to continue that just regulation, we
declined all those effeminacies which are so predominant in other Courts, and
absolutely addicted our selves to such Martial exercises as are nothing less
pleasing and delightful than the other, and yet fit and prepare men more for
the real use of Arms, and acquisition of glory. Here our Knight's praise came
to my Lord of Carlisle's notice, who first designed him a Commander; but
finding his Genius more courtly than Martial, more learned than active,
recommended him to his Majesty's softer services, where none more obliging to
the People by his industry and interest Court, none more serviceable to his
Majesty by the good name he gained in the Country: So careful was he of
public content, that from five to nine his Chamber was open to all Comers;
where you would find him with the one hand making himself ready, with the
other receiving Letters; and in all this hurry of Business, giving the most
orderly, clear, and satisfactory dispatches of any Statesman at that time. From
nine to one he attended his Master, to whom he had as easy access as he gave
to his People. Two things set him up; 1. A fair respect from his Master upon
all occasions, and as fair a treatment of the People: He had his distinct
Classis of Affairs, and his distinct Officers for those Classis: The order and
method whereof incredibly advanced his dispatch, and eased his burden; which
took up his day so, that there remained but some hours he stole from night and
sleep, for his beloved and dear Studies; and King James said, he was the
hardest Student in White Hall -- and therefore he did not always trouble his
Master with business, but sometimes please him with discourse. If Fortune had
been as kind to him as Nature, greater Employments had been at once his honor
and his business: But from all his services and performances, he derived no
other advantage than the acting of them; and at his death he lest no other
wealth behind him, but that of a high reputation: never arriving at those
enjoyments that enhance our Cares, nor having time to withdraw himself from
those cares that take away the relish of our enjoyments.

Observations on the Life of Sir Fulke Grevil.
SIr Fulke Grevil, son to Sir Fulke Grevil the elder, of Becham-Court in
Warwickshire, descended from Willoughby Lord Brook, and Admiral to Hen. 7. was
bred first in the University of Cambridge: He came to the Court, backed with a
full and fair Estate; and Queen Elizabeth loved such substantial Courtiers as
could plentifully subsist of themselves: He was a good Scholar, loving much to
employ (and sometimes to advance) learned men, to whom worthy Bishop Overal
chiefly owed his Preferment; and Mr. Cambden (by his own confession) feasted
largely of his Liberality. His studies were most in Poetry and History, as his
Works do witness: His style conceived by some to be swelling, is allowed lofty
and full by others. King James created him Baron Brook of Beauchamp-Court, as
descended from the sole Daughter and Heir of Edward Willoughby, last Lord
Brook, in the Reign of King Henry the 7th. His sad death, or murder rather,
happened on this occasion: His discontented servant conceiving his deserts not
soon, or well enough rewarded, wounded him mortally, and then (to save the Law
the labor) killed himself; verifying the observation, that he may when he
pleases be master of another man's life, who contemns his own. Helyeth buried
in Warwick Church under a Monument of black and white Marble, whereon he is
styled, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counselor to King James, and Friend to
Sir Philip Sidney.

Though a Favorite, he courts Ladies rather than Honor, and pursued his study
rather than his ambition, being more contemplative than active: Others
ministered to Queen Elizabeth's government, this Gentleman to her Recreation and
Pleasures: He came to Court when all men should, young, and stayed there until
he was old; his fortune being as smooth as his spirit, and the Queens favor as
lasting as his merit. He bred up Statesmen, but was none. Sir William
Pickering was like to have gained the Queens Bed by studying, Sir Philip Sidney
had her Heart for writing, and Sir Fulke Grevil had her favor for both: one
great argument for his worth, was his respect of the worth of others; desiring
to be known to posterity under no other notions than of Shakespeare's and Ben
Johnson's Master, Chancellor Egerton's Patron, Bishop Overal's Lord, and Sir
Philip Sidney's friend. His soul had the peace of a great fortune, joined to a
greater mind: His worth commended him to Majesty; his affablenesse indeared
him to the popularity: his mornings were devoted to his Books, his afternoons
to his knowing Friends, his nights to his debonair Acquaintance: He was the
Queens Counselor for persons, as others were for matters and things: Sweet was
his disposition, winning his converse, fluent his discourse, obliging his
looks, gestures, and expressions; public his spirit, and large his soul: his
Genius prompted him to prepare himself for Domestic services by Foreign
employments, but the great Mistress of her Subjects affections and duties
forbad it, and his own prudence checked it. So dear was he to the Queen, that
when his horses were shipped at Dover for the Netherlands, her Mandate by Sir
Edward Dier stopped him: When he went over with Walsingham, he was remanded;
and when with Leicester, he was checked: He was the exact image of action and
quiet happily united in him, seldom well divided in any. He would have acted
his great principles of Government, yet he could be confined only to write
them. He could sit down In his Book called, The Declination of Monarchs.
with some Poetic and polite Characters of Virtue, when he was debarred the
real exercises of it. He had kept Essex his head on, had not that unhappy man's
Parasites made the Earl deaf to his Counsels, and his Enemies removed him from
his presence, under a pretense of guarding the Seas against his Enemies, while
his Kinsman was betrayed by his Friends.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Cecil.
SIr Robert Cecil, since Earl of Salisbury, was the heir of the Lord Burleigh's
prudence, the inheritour of his favor, and by degrees a successor to his
places, though not to his Lands, for he was a younger Brother. He was first
Secretary of State, then Master of the Wards, and in the last of her Reign came
to be Lord Treasurer; all which were the steps of his Fathers greatness, and
of the honor he left to his house. For his person, he was not much beholding
to Nature, though somewhat for his face, which was the best part of his
outside: but for his inside, it may be said he was his Father's own son, and a
pregnant Proficient in all discipline of State. He was a Courtier from his
Cradle, yet at the age of twenty and upwards, he was much short of his
after-proof; but exposed, and by change of climate he showed what he was, and
what he would be: He lived in those times, wherein the Queen had most need and
use of men of weight; and amongst able ones, this was a chief, as having his
sufficiency from his instructions that begat him the Tutorship of the Times and
Court, then the Academy of Art and Cunning, when English prudence and Counsel
was at the highest, as most exercised with Foreign dangers, and Domestic
practices. Vast was his apprehension, because so large his prospect; Sir
Francis Walsingham having opened the Conclave of Rome, and his Father the
Cabals of Spain; insomuch that he knew each design in both places, every Port,
every Ship with the Burdens, whither bound, what impediments, for diversion of
Enterprises, Counsels, and Resolutions, as appears by his private dispatches
(as his manner was) with those of the Council, one whereof to my Lord Mountjoy,
since Earl of Devonshire, with whom he seasonably closed, runs thus --

-- I must in private put you out of Sir Robert Naunton' s Fragmenta.
doubt (for of fear I know you cannot be otherwise sensible than in a way of
honor) that the Spaniard will not come to you this year: for I have it from my
own what preparations are in all Parts, and what he can do: For be confident he
bears up a reputation by seeming to embrace more than he can gripe: but the
next year be assured he will cast over unto you some Forlorn-Hopes; which how
they may be reinforced beyond his present ability, and his first intention, I
cannot as yet make any certain judgment: but I believe out of my Intelligence,
that you may expect their Landing at Munster; and the more to distract you in
several places, as at Kingsale, Beer-haven, and Baltimore, where you may be
sure (coming from Sea) they will first fortify and learn the strength of the
Rebels before they dare take the Field.

This States-man's character is engraven upon his honor, and his portraicture
drawn in his Patent for Earl of Salisbury; which to many formal words has
added these effectual expressions -- As also for his faithfulness,
circumspection, stoutnesse, wisdom, dexterity, providence and care not only
in the great and weighty Affairs of Counsel, but generally also in all other
Expeditions of the Realm.

And indeed not a man upon the Helm of this Commonwealth understood all
points of the Compass better than himself, who in a stayed and calm
setlednesse looked on the private designs that were promoted upon his Mistress
declining, and privately overthrowed them and their Masters, while in an
uninterrupted course of integrity toward his Mistress, and faithfulness to his
Country, he kept clear the succession, equally careful not to enjealous his
present Mistress, and not to obstruct his future Master, with whom he kept an
honest correspondence, although there goes this story of him, that a Post from
Scotland meeting her Majesty upon Greenwich-heath, Sir Robert Cecil in all have
would needs cut open the Packet, and pretending it stunk, had time to perfume
it [her Majesty being very curious in her smelling] and convey away his own
Letters: be this so or so, it is certain, that when assistant to the Earl of
Derby in his French Embassy, he promoted the young King of Scots interest
against his Mothers: when Sir Francis Walsingham's Colleague, he defeated her
Counsels against him; and when principal Secretary, he sounded, crossed, and
undid the little plot that was shrouded under the great name of Essex, turning
and winding, raising and ruining the Authors of it at his own pleasure. No
sooner was the Queen dead, than his Messenger was with the King at Edinburgh,
and he himself with his Favorite [Sir George Humes] at York; with whose
assistance, and honest Sir Roger Aston's mediation, King James makes him his
bosome-friend, his house [Theobalds] his residence, and his account of the
English Laws, Government, and temper his rule: Finding him but Knight and
Secretary, he created him Baron of Essenden, Viscount Cranbourn, Knight of the
Garter, and Earl of Salisbury: He promoted him Master of the Wards and Lord
Treasurer; in all which capacities how vigilant he was against the Papists, and
their Plots, their Libels (which he answered in English and Adversus perduelles.
Latin very elegantly and wisely) demonstrate -- how careful of the public
Treasure, this Narrative shows.

King James had bestowed upon Sir Robert Carr twenty thousand pound: my Lord
apprehending the sum as more correspondent with his Master's goodness, than
his greatness, with the royalty of his heart, than the poverty of his
Exchequer; and observing his Majesty more careful of what money passed his own
hands, than what passed his servants, contrives that the good King should go
through the place where this great sum lay in silver to a treatment; where
demanding whose money it was, and being answered, that it was his own before he
parted with it, He understanding the design, protested he was cheated, and
intended not above five hundred pounds; and the Favorite was glad to make use
of the Lord Treasurer's mediation for the moiety of that great sum. How
industrious in the improvement of his Masters Revenue, these particulars
conclude, viz.

1. A survey of the Crown Lands, known before by report rather than by measure;
and let by chance, rather then knowledge. 2. A Revival of the Custody-lands
Revenue by Commissioners of Asserts. 3. A tarrier of Crown-wood-lands, their
growth and value; where he numbered, marked, and valued all the Timber hitherto
unknown. 4. The Commissioners he procured to look into Copy-hold-Lands, Wastes,
and Commons. 5. The Rules to forfeited Estates and extended Lands. 6. The
improvement of the Customs from 86000 to 135000 pounds per annum. 7. The
bargain about the London River-water. 8. The encouragement of all English
Inventions, Manufactures, and Trade, whereby the Subjects might be employed,
our Commodities enhanced, and our Treasure kept among our selves. 9. The
Plantations, and Transplantations in Ireland. And 10. The Reformation of the
Court of Wards in the point of disposing of Orphans.

These services advanced him to great honor, and to as great envy, the popular
effects whereof no man could have escaped but one whose soul was immovable,
temper calm, thoughts deep, apprehensions large, and resolution great to engage
vulgar Errors rather by the greatness of his Actions, than the eminence of his
Interest -- And satisfy the world leisurely by his Virtues, and not awe it
rashly by his power; which got him even in that time St. Gregory's Encomium,
That he was the first bad, and the last good Treasurer since Queen Elizabeth's
Reign.

I shall never forget his, or his Fathers discourse with Claud Grollart primier
President of Roan, about the troubles in France, wherein he advised him to
stick fast to the King, though be saw difficulties: For it was his Maxim, That
Kings are like the Sun, and Usurpers like falling-Stars; For the Sun, though it
be offuscated and eclipsed with Mists and Clouds, at length they are dispersed;
where the others are but the figures of Stars in the eyes of view, and prove no
more but Exhalations, which suddenly dissolve, and fall to the earth, where
they are consumed: A discourse which events there and elsewhere made an Oracle.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham.
THe Lord Howard of Effingham, a man of most approved fidelity and invincible
courage, and Governor of Callice; though a Courtier betimes, yet seemed not to
be in favor before the Queen made him high Admiral of England. For his
extract, it may suffice that he was the son of a Howard, and of a Duke of
Norfolk. As for his person, he was as goodly a Gentleman as the times could
afford; he was one whom the Queen desired to honor, who at his return from
Cadiz accounts, was created Earl of Nottingham. He was a good, honest, and a
brave man, and a faithful servant to his Mistrss, and such a one as the Queen
out of her own Princely judgment knew to be a fit Instrument for the Admiral's
service, having a great opinion of his fidelity and conduct: And though his
death was not honored with much wealth, yet was it graced with the reputation
of honesty. He was raised to check Essex his ambition, and Leicester's
undermining, being equally popular, and honest, yet having those at his heels
that could lay a snare, and bring in the prize. Nature was a better friend to
him than Fortune, and his Integrity than both; which commended him to a
Mistress that understood Men as well as Books, and knew it was no less the
interest of Princes to take counsel concerning Persons, than concerning
matters: He had that goodness, without which man is a busy, mischievous, and
wretched thing; yet that wisdom whereby he was not so good (as the Italian
says) as to he good for nothing: He was gentle, but not easy; mild, but not
soft; obliging not the fancies of men, but their Interest: None more civil to
Strangers (his heart being not a narrow Island (as my Lord Bacon observes) but
a large Continent:) None more tender of Inferiors; none more humble to
Superiors; none more compassionate to the afflicted; none more loving to, or
more beloved of all. The Queen said, she trusted her Kingdom to his
faithfulness in 88. and her self to his conduct. His alliance to the Queen
brought him to Court, but his honesty kept him there (when jealousy had
overcast that great house of the Howards:) ancient Nobility was a good
recommendation to the Qu: first Favors; but modesty, submission, and integrity
were the Virtues that continued them: He had only so much Ambition as rendered
him active and serviceable, and not busy or dangerous: He knew a Nobleman
cannot be safely aspiring, nor smooth man securely popular, and a man of his
Retinue must not be busy. He lived in an age when all honor was perilous
that was not designed for service; when the State chose Ministers that were
more sensible of duty than of rising; that loved business rather upon
conscience than upon bravery, and when the Prince discerned a busy nature from
a willing mind: as the stone had need be rich that is set without foyl, so
this noble person that was only real, had need of great parts of virtue. So
valiant he was, that he made the Spanish Fleet veil to him, though it carried
the Empress of Germany; so active, that he tugged at the Cable himself in 88.
and did much by his own pains, and more by his example: so skilful, that he
contrived the Fireships that frighted and scattered the Spanish Navy. Two
eminent services he did the Protestant Religion when but twenty one years of
age: The first is, that he was so observant a witness of Archbishop Parker's
consecration, that with his bare word the tale of the Nags head came to
nothing. 2. That he was so close an Agent in the Court of France, that no
Design was brewed in Scotland, none seconded in France, but he with the
Emperor and the King of Spain's Ambassadors assistance [whom he had engaged
with the hope of a Match between the King of the Romans and his Mistriss]
discovered and defeated with that success, that the King of France courted his
Mistress to a Peace, and himself to Favor. None more careful in matter of
Business; none more splendid in business of Complement -- condoling King
Francis his death with a Majesty no less becoming the Personage he
represented, than the Prince he addressed himself to. 1. His providence in
contriving the English Ships nimble, and such as could tack about at pleasure.
2. His prudence in not hazarding his weak Navy against the Spanish Army and
Armado in an Engagement wherein a victory would be but a little glory, and a
defeat a ruin. 3. His activity in alarming the Spanish Navy day and night. 4.
His wisdom in honoring the most serviceable under him, as Hawkins, Forbisher,
Sheffield, etc. 5. His popularity that drew so many Volunteers to his service,
as the Earls of Oxford, Northumberland, Cumberland, the Cecils, etc. 6. His
wariness in dividing his fourteen Sail into four squadrons round about the
Spanish Navy. 7. His excellent contrivance of eight Ships filled with pitch,
wilde-fire, rofin, etc. which sent down the wind in the dead of night so much
to the terror of the Spaniards, that fearing the Fire, together with some more
deadly Engines, they raised a pitiful cry, weighed Anchor, cut their Cables,
and in a terrible pannick Fear, with great haste and confusion put to Sea. 8.
His admirable dexterity in disposing of the Navy, so as they met the Spanish
Navy upon their dispersion with such success, that the invincible Fleet never
saw again its own formidablenesse, ever since grown the most contemptible thing
that ever sailed upon these Seas. 9. His seasonable order to the Dutch Fleet to
watch the Duke of Parma in the Ports of Dunkirk and Newport. 10. His exact
intelligence, whereby he understood what a Controversy there was in the
Spanish Navy about this point, Whether they should stick to their Commission in
staying for Parma, which was their duty, or follow the emergent advantages,
which had been their discretion, -- and dealt with them accordingly. These
grand particulars of this Noble-man's service were so eminent and signal, that
Queen Elizabeth, who was over-lavish neither of her honor nor her preferments,
would say commonly of him and those brave Heroes under him, That they were born
to save their Country.

This noble person was of greater experience than knowledge, and more beholding
to his years than to his Education, whence K. James took great pleasure in his
discourse, that was not morose, obstinate, narrow, unactive or formal, like a
Students harangues; but free, active, and ingenuous, like a States-man's
Maxims -- Whereof one was this; That never did Commander a noble Act that was
Commission-bound; it being a question, whether the Venetians and Spaniards lost
more at Sea and in the Netherlands before they discovered that Error, or gained
more since. For whilst we address our selves to the State, occasions are
lost, things take another countenance; and so many unexpected accidents happen,
for which sudden provision must be made, that opportunities escape before we
dare lay hold of them: and sometimes we perish for want of a Commission to save
our selves.

Great content did he give by his presence in the French Court 1605. and
greater in his carriage at the Prince Elector's Where he was Bridegroom.
marriage, 1612. A prudent care did he discover in providing for posterity by
the seasonable resignation of his Admiralty; a faithful friend he showed
himself in confirming Sir Robert Mansel's place when he parted with his own; a
great argument of his own worth and service, that he was so careful to reward
others.

Observations on the Life of Sir Geo. Hume, Earl of Dunbar.
NO wonder he is so great a Favorite of King James in his riper years, who was
so faithful a servant of his in his youth: trusted with his Royal secrets in
Scotland, and therefore in his Royal bosom in England. The natural
reservednesse of all Scots-men, and the vast depth of this, are not more
necessary to all Princes, then they were pleasing to King James, who had no
secrecies that endangered his Privadoes, though many that tried them, and
particularly our Statesman, who had no hidden weakness to be overreached, nor
private Interest to be corrupted, but was a great Master of himself, owning a
reach not to be comprehended, and thoughts not to be fathomed, but by him whose
heart was as the sand of the Sea.

Exact was his correspondence with Sir Robert Cecil while in Scotland, and
intimate was their friendship in England; both extorting from each other those
observations touching their respective Countries, which they might both
communicate to His Majesty at their respective opportunities.

His Enterprises were well laid, but unsuccessful; rational, but unhappy: an
argument that Designs are only in our power, and Events in a higher. There
was not a man more noble and renowned, more comely and graceful, of more years
and experience [Versatus, Versutus] of a greater estate or revenue; more
liberal and munificent, more accostable and courteous, more resolved and
reserved (all the qualities of a complete Ambassador) than the Earl of Dunbar
when sent to Germany; yet none more ineffectual, having gained no more by a
tedious and chargeable Negotiation, than as the Earl of Nottingham with his
gallant Retinue in Spain, that the Papists who were formerly persuaded by their
Jesuits that we were Monsters, do now believe we are Men; so useless was soft
Courtship in rough tumults, and so little heed was given to smooth complements
in Arms and Uproars.

More happy was he in Scotland, where his prudence as Lord Treasurer, and his
Chaplain Doctor Abbot's gravity as Preacher, reduced that Nation to so much
sobriety as to admit a regular Religion and Government; for which service he
had the Exchequer and the Wardrobe for himself, and the Archbishopric of
Canterbury for the Doctor; when the King was in a great straight between the
known merit of the incomparable Bishop Andrews, and the last request of dying
Sir George Hume; a great instance of King James his abilities in what Machiavel
calls a Princes Masterpiece, viz. the choice of Servants.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Somerset.
HIs extraction from Scotland put him in the way, his Education in England set
him in a capacity of Advancement. He was born seasonably when his Father served
him that should be a King of England; and brought up happily, when he might
please him that was so -- His beauty and comeliness took his Majesty; his
parts and prudence obliged him, who loved the Cabinet, but valued the Jewel: He
was admitted Page of honor to King James when of Scotland, and his Favorite
when of England: His Majesty's first observation of him was at a solemn
Tilting, where his delight in his person meeting with his pity of his mischance
(I mean the breaking of his leg there) first took him to his tuition, and then
to his Council. All King James his Favorites were of his own education, and so
imbued with his principles, and engaged to his interest. It was his Majesty's
policy to retain Scots Statesmen to balance the English; It was Somerset's
prudence to entertain English Favouries to endear the Scots; therefore Sir Tho.
Overbury was as much of his Council as he was of his Majesty's: too haughty a
carriage was the miscarriage of other Minions, too good a nature was bis: His
great defect being that goodness and humanity that knows no excess, but
error, which was rather a softness than a kindness: his heart was as large
to others, as his Masters was to him, and knew as little how to mistrust, as
how to do any thing for which he should be mistrusted. This is the Lesson he
was short in, That civilities should be common, but favors choice. The Whale
is steered at Sea by a far smaller Fish, and this Statesman at Court by far
meaner men than himself. I my self (says an ingenious man) have known many so
far strangers to what was convenient, as they would scarce concede or deny any
thing out of the presence of their Secretary: and this proceeded not seldom
from a distrust there was no cause for; manifest in the Earl of Somerset, who
though himself owner of a competent sufficiency, was so enchanted with an
opinion of Sir Thomas Overbury's parts, that he preferred him from a Servant to
such an intimate friendship, as he could think nothing well educated for
employment in his Office, that had not passed his correction, nor secret laid
up but in his bosom; which swelled him (says he) to such a monstrosity in
pride, that I have heard (not being my self then near the English Court) how he
offered to rant at his servants, and did once beat his Coachman for putting his
commands under an inferior expostulation to his Master; and through this
intolerable arrogance in him, and remisness in the Earl, the sparks first flew,
that kindled the ruin of them both: Friendship being no more able to maintain
its interest against a feminine affection, than so great a pride was to confine
it self within the tedder of moderation. The greatest are not free, but led in
triumph by the affections of others, through the mediation of their own. Sir
Thomas Overbury would do what was most plausible, and the Earl must peform what
was less popular. The King trusted Carr with his Dispatches, and Carr trusts
Overbury a month together without examination, who had full Commission to
receive and answer any Letters or other Expresses that came to his hands: Great
opportunities offered themselves to Sir Robert Carr, and a great Soul he had to
observe them (Fortune being nothing else but an attentive observation of the
revolution of Affairs, and the occasions resulting therefrom:) observant he was
of his Master, who raised him not to eclipse others, but like a brave Prince to
ease himself. For Princes (to use my Lord Bacon's words) being at too great a
distance from their Subjects, to ease themselves into their bosoms, raise some
persons to be as it were participes curam, or their Companions: but this
Favorite understood as well the humor of the People, as he did the
disposition of his Prince, obliging the one no less, than he pleased the
other. Gay he was, as a Courtier, grave as a Counselor: to Scholars none more
civil, to Soldiers none more liberal; of Statesmen none more respective: He
had his extraordinary great Virtues upon occasions to show, and his ordinary
little ones always to oblige; a compleatnesse in all turns, and upon all
occasions was his nature. Familiar he was, yet not cheap; sociable upon regard,
and not upon facility: His behavior was his soul, free for any exercise or
motion; finding many, and making more opportunities to endear himself: He broke
his mind to small observations, yet he comprehended great matters: His
carriage was so exact, as if affected; and yet so graceful, as if natural. That
which overthrew the first, bewitched the wisest, and tired the most patient
man, undid this noble person: yet so regular were his affections, that he did
nothing publicly in the Countess of Essex, the Earl of Suffolk's Daughters
case, but by due course of Law, the approbation of the gravest and wisest
Divines and Counselors, and the Witness his entertainment at London.
applause of England: his failings were the faults of his years, rather than of
his person; of his sudden fortune, than of his constant temper: his counsels
were safe and moderate; his public actions honest and plain; his first years
of favor industrious and active; his mind noble and liberal. His soul
capacious and inquisitive; his temper yielding and modest. In a word, Sir
Robert Carr deserved to be a Favorite, if he had not been one. -- He fell
because he meddled too little with the Secretaries place while in it, and too
much when out of it; giving Overbury too much scope on the one hand to mate
him, and Sir Ralph Winwood too much offense to undermine him; who finding that
new Earls occasions growing with his advancements (I say his occasions, because
I think his miscarriages were not his nature, but his necessity) apt to
encroach upon his and other Court-Offices, gave ear to that Intelligence from
Flushing, that might ruin him, and set free himself.

The first Intimation of his guilt was his earnestness for a general Pardon;
and the first argument of it was my Lord Chancellor's scruples in sealing it:
whence I date his first declining, attended with as much pity as his first
advancement was with envy. We and the Troglodites curse not the Sunrising more
heartily, than we worship it when it sets. The Gentleman was as to his stature
rather well compacted than tall; as to his features and favor, comely, rather
than beautiful. -- The hair of his head was flaxen, and that of his face
yellow: His nature was gentle, his disposition affable, his affections public,
until a particular person and interest engrossed them: and the good Gentleman
being sensible of failers that might ruin him, was wholly intent upon a
treasure that might preserve him: -- His defect was, that he understood only
his own age; and that the experience of man's life cannot furnish examples and
presidents for the events of one man's life.

Observations on the Life of George Abbot.
GEorge Abbot being one of that happy Ternion of Brothers, whereof two were
eminent Prelates, the third Lord Mayor of London, was bred in Oxford, wherein
he became Mr. of University-Colledge; a pious man, and most excellent Preacher,
as his Lectures on Jonah do declare. He did first creep, then run, then fly
into Preferment, or rather Preferment did fly upon him without his
expectation. He was never Incumbent on any Living with cure of Souls, but was
mounted from a Lecturer to a Dignitary; so that he knew the Stipend and
Benevolence of the one, and the Dividend of the other, but was utterly
unacquainted with the taking of Tithes, with the many troubles attending it,
together with the causeless molestations which Parsons presented meet with in
their repective Parishes. And because it is hard for one to have a
Fellow-suffering of that, whereof he never had a suffering; this (say some) was
the cause that he was so harsh to Ministers when brought before him.

Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar, then omni-prevalent with King James, he
was unexpectedly preferred Archbishop of Canterbury, being of a more Fatherly
presence than those, who might almost have been his Fathers for age in the
Church of England. There are two things much charged upon his memory;

First, That in his house he respected his Secretary above his Chaplains; and
out of it, always honored Cloaks above Cassocks, Lay above Clergymen.

Secondly, That he connived at the spreading of Nonconformity, insomuch that a
Modern Author said, Had Bishop Laud succeeded Bancroft, and the project of
Conformity been followed without interruption, there is little question to be
made, but that our Jerusalem (by this time) might have been a City at unity
within it self.



This Archbishop was much humbled with a casual Homicide of a Keeper of the
Lord Zouch's in Bramel-Parke, though soon after he was solemnly quitted from
any irregularity thereby. In the Reign of King Charles he was sequestered from
his Jurisdictions, say some, on the old account of that Homicide, though others
say, for refusing to License a Sermon of Doctor Sirptborps. Yet there is not an
Express of either in the Instrument of Sequestration, the Commission only
saying in the general, That the Archbishop could not at that present in his
own Person attend those Services which were otherwise proper for his Cognizance
and Jurisdiction.

To say the truth, he was a man of good intentions, and knew much, but failed
in what those ordinarily do that are devoted to our modern singularities, being
extremely obstinate in his opinions, which the King was more willing to
understand than follow, because most times he looked upon things according to
the rigor of Ecclesiastic maxims, and was either too curious and irresolute
by variety of reading, or too peremptory and positive from the strictness of
his Rules; or too zealous by reason of the seriousness of his Study; or wide
from the matter, by reason of his inexperience, and aptness to require in the
times he lived, the regularity of the times he read of; heeding not the force
of Circumstances, the errors of Comparison, or the cautions of Application. I
like his Apology for his severity to the Clergy (that he was austere to prevent
others being cruel) as well as his zeal for the Protestant Religion; only his
Principles betrayed his profession, which he rendered too obnoxious, while he
supported it by those novel grounds which our Adversaries could make us
confess were Heterodox, and by those streight-laced foundations which we saw
our selves too narrow. As for instance, King James his vast capacity took him
up once for making the Scripture the only rule of Civil Affairs; owning the
piety, but observing to his face the imprudence of that assertion. Imprudence,
I say, as for many reasons, so for this, because to assert a truth upon a weak
principle, is to tempt the world to doubt of the strength of the first, when
they see the weakness of the other. Whether he went off in discontent, and
said, He would not attend at the Councel-Table, because he should not wait at
the Altar: Whether he had such malignant followers as called themselves
Nicodemites, or Night-Disciples: Whether he turned noonday into midnight, and
midnight into noonday, having a candle always burning in his Chamber; or if
so, for what reason, I would not have one of my years determine, but rather
refer the present age to his Contemporaries pen, which describes him thus;

A very learned man he was; his Erudition all of the old stamp, fitly
principled in the Doctrine of St. Augustine, pious, grave, and exemplary in his
Conversation: But some think him a better man than Archbishop, and that he was
better qualified with merit for the Dignity, than with a spirit answering the
Function; in the exercise whereof he was conceived too facile and yielding: his
extraordinary remisness in not exacting strict Conformity to the prescribed
Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to resolve those legal
Determinations to their first Principle of Indifference, and led in such an
habit of Inconformity, as the future reduction of those tender-conscienced men
to long discontinued obedience, was interpreted an innovation.

Observations on the Life of Sir George Calvert.
SIr George Calvert was bred first in Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, and then
beyond the Seas. His Abilities commended him first to be Secretary to Bobert
Cecil Earl of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterward he was made
Clerk of the Council, and at last principal Secretary of State to King James,
succeeding Sir Tho. Lake in that Office, Anno 1619.

Conceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental H. Holland, p. 39.
in his preferment, he presented him with a Jewel of great value; which the
Duke returned him again, not owning any Activity in his Advancement, whom King
James, ex mero motn, reflecting on his Abilities, designed for the Place. This
Place he discharged five years, until he willingly resigned the same, 1624. on
this occasion; He freely confessed himself to the King, that he was then become
a Roman Catholic, so that he must either be wanting to his Trust, or violate
his conscience in discharging his Office. This his Ingenuity so highly affected
King James, that he continued him Privy-Councellor all his Reign, and soon
after created him Lord Baltemore of Baltemore in Ireland.

During his being Secretary, he had a Patent to him and his Heirs to be
Absolutus Dominus and Proprietarius, with the Royalties of a Count Palatine of
the Province of Avalon in the Newfound land, a place so named by him in
imitation of old Avalon in Somersetshire, wherein Glassenbury stands, the
first fruits of Christianity in Britain, as the other was in that part of
America. Here he built a fair house in Ferry-land, and spent twenty five
thousand pounds in advancing the Plantation thereof.

Indeed his public spirit consulted not his private profit, but the
enlargement of Christianity, and the Kings Dominions, in that his ancient,
primitive, and heroic work of planting the world. After the death of King
James he went twice in person to Newfound Land. Here when Monsieur de l'Arade
with three men of War sent from the King of France, had reduced our English
Fishermen to great extremity; this Lord with two Ships manned at his own
charge, chased away the Frenchmen, relieved the English, and took sixty of the
French Prisoners. He removed afterward to Virginia to view those parts, and
thence came into England, and obtained of King Charles the first (who had as
great an esteem of, and affection for him, as King James) a Patent to him and
his heirs for Maryland on the North of Virginia, with the same Title and
Royalties conferred on him, as in Avalon aforesaid, now a hopeful Plantation,
peopled with eight thousand English Souls; which in process of time may prove
more advantageous to our Nation.

Judge Popham and Sir George Calvert agreed not more unanimously in the public
design of Planting, than they differed in the private way of it: the first was
for extirpating Heathens, the second for converting them. -- He sent away the
lewdest, this the soberest people: the one was for present profit, the other
for a reasonable expectation (it being in the case of planting Countries, as in
that of planting Woods; you must account to lose almost twenty years profit,
and expect your recompense in the end; it being necessary the Province should
first find her self, and then enrich you.) The Judge was for many Governors,
the Secretary for few, and those not concerned Merchants, but unconcerned
Gentlemen: The one granted Liberties without any restraint, the other with
great caution: The first set up a common Stock, out of which the Island should
be provided for by proportions; the second left every one to provide for
himself.

Two things are eminent in this man:

1. That though he was a Catholic, yet kept he himself sincere and disingaged
from all Interests; and though a man of great judgment, yet not obstinate in
his sentiments, but taking as great pleasure in hearing others opinions, as in
delivering his own, which he heard moderated and censured with more patience,
than applauded.

2. That he carried a digested and exact account of Affairs to his Master every
night, and took to himself the pains to examine the Letters which related to
any Interest that might be any ways considerable. He was the only Statesman,
that being engaged to a decryed party, yet managed his business with that huge
respect for all sides, that all who knew him, applauded him; and none that had
any thing to do with him, complained of him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Arthur Chichester.
SIr Arthur Chichester spent his youth, first in the University, then in the
French and Irish Wars, where by his valor he was effectually assistant, First,
to plough and break up that barbarous Nation by Conquest, and then to sow it
with seeds of civility, when by King James mad Lord Deputy of Ireland.

Indeed good Laws and Provisions had been made by his Predecessors to that
purpose: but alas, they were like good Lessons set for a Lute out of tune,
useless, until the Instrument was fitted for them. Wherefore in order to the
civilizing of the Irishry, in the first year of his government, he established
two new Circuits for Justices of Assize, the one in Connaught, the other in
Munster. And whereas the Circuits in former times only encompassed the English
Pale (as the Cynosura does the Pole) hence forwards like good Planets in their
several Spheres, they carried the influence of Justice round about the
Kingdom. Yea, in short time Ireland was so cleared of Thieves and capital
Offenders, that so many Malefactors have not been found in the 32 Shires of
Ireland, as in six English Shires in the Western Circuits. He reduced the
Mountains and Glinnes on the South of Dublin (formerly thorns in the side of
the English Pale) into the County of Wicklow; and in conformity to the English
custom, many Irish began to cut their Mantles into Cloaks. So observant was
his eye over the actions of suspected persons, that Tyrone was heard to
complain, That he could not drink a full carouse of Sack, but the State within
few hours was advertised thereof.

After he had been continued many years in his Deputyship, and deservedly made
a Lord, King James recalled him home, and (loath to leave his Abilities
unemployed) sent him Ambassador to the Emperor and other German Princes. Being
besieged in the City of Mainchine (a place much indebted to his prudence for
seasonable victualling it) by Count Tilley, he sent him word, that it was
against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassador: Tilley returned that he
took no notice that he was an Ambassador. The Lord Chichester replied to the
Messenger, Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he has sent me
on fruitless Messages, your General should have known, that I had been a
Soldier, as well as an Ambassador.

King James at his return entertained him with great commendations, for so well
discharging his Trust; and he died in as great honor as any Englishman of our
Age. Thus far the Historians. Whence I observe him stout in his nature above
any disorder upon Emergencies, Domanda assai, che non Manchera poi calare.
Proverb. Hisp. apud Insig. D. Howeilum de legatis.
resolved in his temper above any impressions from other Princes, and high in
his Proposal beyond the expectation of his own. Al vergonzoto el Diablo le
traxo al Palacio, The Devil brought the Bashful to Court, where none succeeds
but he who can ask enough to be granted, and enough to be a abated. There is a
memorable observation of Philip the second, King of Spain, called El prudente;
That when he had designed one for Ambassador, the man came faintly and coldly
to him to propose some things for the accommodation of his Embassy; and he
said, How can I expect that this man can promote and effectuate my business,
when he is so faint and fearful in the solicitation of his own?

Yet was not my Lord Chichester more resolute in Germany, than wary in Ireland,
where his opinion was, that time must open and facilitate things for
Reformation of Religion, by the Protestant Plantations; by the care of good
Bishops and Divines, the amplification of the College, the education of Wards,
an insensible seizure of Popish liberties, etc. and that the Council there was
so numerous (fifty or sixty at least) that the authority of it was debated, and
its business divulged. In a word, this brave Gentleman had an equal mind,
that kept up it self between the discourses of Reason, and the examples of
Histories, in the enjoyment of a good fortune, and a conflict with a bad.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chancellor Egerton.
THe Lord Chancellor Egerton, extracted from the ancient Family of the
Egerton's of Kidley in Cheshire, was bred in the study of the Municipal Laws of
our Land, wherein he attained to such eminency, that Queen Elizabeth made him
her Solicitor, then Master of the Rolls, and at last Keeper of the Great Seal,
May 6. in the 38 year of her Reign, 1596.

Olaus Magnus reports, that the Emperor of Moscovia at the Audience of
Ambassadors, sends for the gravest and seemliest men in Mosco and the
Vicinage, whom he apparelleth in rich Vests; and placing them in his presence,
pretends to Forraigners, that these are of his Privy Council; who cannot but
be much affected with so many reverent Aspects. But surely all Christendom
afforded not a person which carried more gravity in his countenance and
behavior than Sir Thomas Egerton, insomuch that many have gone to the Chancery
on purpose only to see his venerable Garb (happy they who had no other
business) and were highly pleased at so acceptable a spectacle. Yet was his
outward Case nothing in comparison of his inward Abilities, quick Wit, solid
Judgment, ready Utterance. I confess Master Cambden says, he entered his
Office Magna expectatione and integritatis opinione, with a great expectation
and opinion of Integrity: But no doubt, had he revised his work in a second
Edition, he would have afforded him a full-faced commendation, when this Lord
had turned his expectation to performance. In the first of King James, of Lord
Keeper he was made Lord Chancellor, which is also another name for the same
Office: and on Thursday the seventh of November, 1616. of Lord Elismer he was
created Viscount Brackley. It is given to Courts whose Jurisdictions do border,
to fall out about their bounds; and the contest betwixt them is the hotter, the
higher the spirits and parts of the respective Judges. Great was the contention
for many years together betwixt this Lord of Equity, and Sir Edward Cook the
Oracle of Justice at Westminster Hall: I know not which of them got the better;
sure I am, such another Contest would (if this did not) have undone the
Conqueror.

He was attended on with servants of most able parts, and was the sole
Chancellor since the Reformation, who had a Chaplain, which (though not
immediately) succeeded him in his place. He gave over his Office which he held
full twenty years, some few days before his death; and by his own appointment,
his body was brought down and buried at Duddleston in Cheshire, leaving a fair
estate to his Son, who was afterward created Earl of Bridgewater, as he did to
his excellent Son now living.

When he saw King James his munificence to some Courtiers, with the grave
Fidelity of a Statesman, he sticked not often to tell him, That as he held it
necessary for his Majesty amply to remunerate all those his Contrymen, so he
desired him carefully to prese ve his Crown Lands for his own support, seeing
he or his Successors might meet with Parliaments which would not supply his
occasions, but on such conditions as would not be very acceptable unto him. It
was an ordinary speech in his mouth to say, Frost and Fraud both end in Foul.

His plain, but honest advice to my Lord of Essex was,

1. Not to trust himself, because they that stand by, see more than they that
play the game.

2. To yield to Time and Fortune, and not do that for his Enemies, which they
could never do for themselves.

3. To have a careful eye upon those actions on which he knew there were many
envious ones. And for himself, his supplication to King James was, That since
his conceit and sense was grown so heavy, his Memory decayed, his Judgment
weak, his Hearing imperfect, and his Voice faltering, he might desinere potius
quam deficere, and retire from his Business to his Meditation, as he did;
while living, imparting many mysteries of the Chancery; and when dying,
bequeathing as many choice Books and Directions to his then Chaplain, and his
after-Successor Doctor Williams. -- Secretary Winwood having received the Seal,
and left this gracious Message with this good man, that his Majesty would be
his Under-keeper, and not dispose of it while he lived to bear the name of
Chancellor: nor did any receive the Seal out of the Kings fight, while he lived
to bear the name of Chancellor.

A company of Citizens got a Cause passed by keeping a Witness away in this
manner; one of them gets him to the Tavern, and there leaves him with a quart
of Sack before him, and the glass at his mouth, and swears in open Court, that
he left him in a condition, wherein if he continues but two hours, he is a
dead man. The other Party find out the cheat, and have their remedy in
Chancery: Sir Edward Cook brings the matter to the Star Chamber, and threatens
the Chancellor with a Praemunire. The business is debated, and sentence passed
for my Lord Chancellor; with the comfort whereof, and the Kings and Princes
Letter to him upon his Deathbed, he went to his Grave.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief Justice Popham.
SIr John Popham in his youthful days was a stout and skilful man at Sword and
Buckler as any in that Age, and wild enough in his Recreations. But oh! says
my Author, if Quicksilver could be really fixed, to what a treasure would it
amount? Such is wild youth seriously reduced to gravity, as by this young man
did appear, who applied himself to a more profitable Fencing, the study of the
Laws; therein attaining to such eminency, that he became the Queens Attorney,
afterward Lord Chief Justice of England. Being sent Anno 1600. by the Queen
with some others to the Earl of Essex, to know the cause of the confluence of
so many Military men unto his house, the Soldiers therein detained him for a
time, which some made tantamount to an Imprisonment. This his violent detention
Sir John deposed upon his Oath at the Earl's Trial: which I note the rather,
for the rarity thereof, that a Lord Chief Justice should be produced as Witness
in open Court.

In the beginning of the Reign of King James, his justice was exemplary on
Thieves and Robbers. The Land then swarmed with people which had been Soldiers,
who had never gotten (or else quite forgotten) any other Vocation. Hard it was
for Peace to feed all the idle mouths which a former War did breed, being too
proud to beg, too lazy to labor: Those infested the Highways with their
Fellonies; some presuming on their multitudes, as the Robber on the Northern
Rode, whose knot (otherwise not to be untied) Sir John cut asunder with the
Sword of Justice. He possessed King James, how the frequent granting of Pardons
was prejudicial to Justice, rendering the Judges to the contempt of insolent
Malefactors; which made his Majesty more sparing afterward in that kind. In a
word, the deserved death of some scores, preserved the lives and livelihoocs of
some thousands: Travelers owing their safety to this Judges severity, many
years after his death. Neither did he only punish Malefactors, but provide for
them; for observing that so many suffered and died for none other reason but
because they could not live in England, now grown too populous for it is self,
and breeding more Inhabitants toan it could keep, he first set up the discovery
of New England, to maintain and employ those that could not live honestly in
the old; being of opinion, that banishment thither would be as well a more
lawful, as a more effectual remedy against those extravagancies; the Authors
whereof judge it more eligible to hang, than to work; to end their days in a
moment, than to continue them in pains: -- only a great Judgment observes, it
is a shameful and an unblessed thing, to take the scum of people and wicked
condemned men to be the people with whom to plant: And not only so, but it
spoyleth the Plantation, for they will ever live like Rogues, and not fall to
work, and do mischief, and spend Victuals, and be quickly weary, and then
certify over to the Country, to the disgrace of the Commonwealth.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Dudley.
SIr Robert Dudley, son to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, by Dougles Shefield
(whether his Mistress or his Wife, God knows) was born at Sbene in Surrey, and
bred by his Mother (out of his Fathers reach) at Offington in Sussex, where he
became a most complete Gentleman in all suitable Accomplishments, endeavoring
in the Reign of King James to prove his Legitimacy; and meeting with much
opposition from the Court, in distaste, he left his Land, and went over into
Italy. But worth is ever at home, and carries its own welcome along with it.
Therefore he became a Favorite to the Duke of Florence, who highly reflected
on his Abilities, and used his Directions in all his Buildings. At this time
Legorn from a child, started to a Man, without ever being a youth, and of a
small Town grew a great City on a sudden, and is much beholding to this Sir
Robert for its Fairness and Firmness, as chief contriver of both. But by this
time his Adversaries in England had procured him to be called home by a special
Privy Seal; which he refused to obey, and thereupon all his Lands in England
were seized upon by the King, by the Statute of Fugitives. These losses doubled
the love of the Duke of Florence unto him. And indeed Sir Robert was a
much-meriting person on many Accounts, being an

Excellent 1 Mathematician, especially for the Practical part thereof in
Architecture. 2 Physician, his Catholicon at this day finding good Esteem
amongst those of that Faculty. 3 Navigator, especially in the Western Seas.

Indeed long before his leaving of England, whilst as yet he was Rectus in
Curia, well esteemed in Queen Elizabeth's Court, he sailed with three small
Ships to the Isle of Trinidad, in which voyage he sunk and took nine Spanish
ships; whereof one an Armada of 600 Tun.

He was so acceptable to Ferdinand the second, Emperor of Germany, that by his
Letters Patents bearing date at Vienna, March 9. 1620. he conferred on him and
his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the Sacred Empire. Understand it a Title at
large (as that of Count Arundel's) without the Assignation of any proper Place
unto him.

King James had heard so much of the Father, that he did not care for the Son,
who might have been near his Person, had not his Ancestors been so near his
Predecessors -- no other Considerations being likely to keep so extraordinary
parts at this distance from a King that valued them so highly, or a Kingdom
that needed them so much. -- That Prince being as jealous an observer of
Original sin in Policy, as he was an Orthodox Assertor of it in Religion, would
trust no tainted blood.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Bancroft.
DOctor Richard Bancroft, (whom his Adversaries character a better Statesman
than Divine, a better Divine than Preacher, though upon good occasion he showed
he was all these) was bred in Jesus College in Cambridge, where his parts in
discovering the bottom of Presbytery, and his sufficiency when his Patron
Hatton's Examiner commended him to Queen Eliz. to be Bishop of London, and to
King James to be Archbishop of Canterbury. Indeed he was in effect Archbishop
while Bishop, to whom Doctor Whitgift in his decrepit age remitted the managing
of matters, so that he was the soul of the High Commission. A great Statesman
he was, and grand Champion of Church Discipline; having well hardened the hands
of his Soul, which was no more than needed for him, who was to meddle with
Nettles and Briars, and met with much opposition.

No wonder if those who were silenced by him in the Church, were loud against
him in other places. David speaks of poison under men's lips; Psalm. 104. 3
This Bishop tasted plentifully thereof from the mouths of his Enemies, till at
last (as Mithridates) he was so habited to poisons, that they became food unto
him. Once a Gentleman coming to visit him, presented him a Libel, which he
found pasted on his door; who being nothing moved thereat, said, Cast it to an
hundred more which lie here on a heap in my Chamber. Many a Libel, (Lie)
(because false) (Bell) because loud* was made upon him. The aspersion of
covetousness, though cast, does not stick on his memory, being confuted by the
Estate which he left, small in proportion to his great preferment, being but
6000 l. after being above twelve years in London and Canterbury.

He cancelled his first Will, wherein he had bequeathed much to the Church:
suspecting an impression of popular violence on Cathedrals, and fearing an A
ienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to cancel his own, to
prevent others cancelling his Testament. This partly appears by his second
Will, wherein he gave the Library at Lambeth (the result of his own, and three
Predecessors collections) to the University of Cambridge (which now they
possess) in case the Arch-Episcopal See should be extinct.

How came such a jealousy into his mind? what fear of a storm when the Sun
shined, the Sky clear, no appearance of Clouds? Surely his skill was more than
ordinary in the complexion of the Common wealth, who did foresee what afterward
(for a time) came to pass. This clause providentially inserted, secured this
Library in Cambridge during the vacancy of the Archi-Episcopal See, and so
prevented the embezelling, at the least the dismembring thereof, in our late
civil distempers.

They that accuse this excellent Prelate of cruelty, never read this story: A
Minister privately protested to him, that it went against his conscience to
conform. Which way said the good Archbishop (observing the man's ingenuity)
will you live, if you be put out of your Benefice? The other answered, He bad
no other way but to go a begging. Not so (said the Archbishop) that you shall
not need to do, but come to me, and I will take order for your maintenance.

They that exclaimed against his unserviceablenesse, never observed this
passage: A company of young Courtiers appeared extraordinary gallant at a
Tilting, far above their Fortunes and Estates, giving for their Motto, Solvat
Ecclesia. Bishop Bancroft then of London hearing of it, finds on enquiry that
the Queen was passing a considerable parcel of Church Lands to them, and stops
the business with his own and his friends Interest, leaving these Gallants to
pay the shot of their pride and prodigality out of their own purses. -- And
this; that a prevalent Courtier had swallowed up the whole Bishopric of
Durham, had not this Archbishop seasonably interposed his power with King
James (ready enough to admit such Intercessions) and dashed the design. They
that traduce him for a Papist, forget that he fomented the difference between
the Seculars, and Regulars, to the weakening, and promoted the foundation of
Chelsey-Colledge, to the ruining of that cause.

But they that perform great actions, reserving as it is fit the reason of them
in their own bosoms, may sufficiently satisfy their Consciences toward God,
though they can hardly avoid the censures of men.

I shall add no more concerning this excellent Prelate, but that it was
observed as the Historian writes, That at Hampton-Court-Conference Archbishop
Whitgift spoke most gravely, Bishop Bilson most learnedly, but Bishop Bancroft
[when out of passion] most politickly.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Grandison.
SIr Oliver Saint-John, Lord Grandison, etc. descended of an ancient and
honorable Family, whose prime Seat was at Lediard-Tregoze in Wiltshire, though
their first settlement was in South Wales. He was bred in the Wars from his
youth, and at last by King James was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
vigorously pursued the Principles of his Predecessors for the civilizing
thereof. Indeed the Lord Mountjoy reduced that Country to obedience, the Lord
Chichester to some civility, and this Lord Grandison first advanced it to
considerable profit to his Master. T. Walsingham In the life of Richard the
second.
writes, that Ireland afforded unto Edward the third thirty thousand pounds a
year paid into his Exchequer: but it appears by the Sir John Davies in Disc. of
Ireland, page 39, etc.
Irish Records (which are rather to be believed) that it was rather a burden,
and the constant Revenue thereof beneath the third part of that proportion.

But now, the Kingdom being peaceably settled, the income thereof turned to good
Account, so that Ireland (called the Land of Ire for the constant broils
therein for four hundred years) was now become the Land of Concord.

This noble Person recalled into England, lived many years in great repute,
leaving his Honors to his Sisters son by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main of
his Estate to his Brothers son Sir John St. John Knight and Baronet. So sweet
and charming his Conversation, that he was beloved by all his Superiors, and
envied by no Inferior; being never advanced to any great Dignity, but he was
wished to a greater: So exact his vigilance, so constant his industry, so
plausible his actions, attended with no less civility to all men, than duty to
his Sovereign: So frank and ingenious his Integrity, that none feared him; so
discreet his management of Business, and so strong his judgment, that any
might confide in him. One he was that crossed the Italian Proverb, Di Dunaridi
senno, e di feed,
In e Manco che non Creed:
having more money, more faith, yea and more wisdom too than was generally
esteemed. I mean wisdom of behavior, wisdom of busidesse, and wisdom of
State; in the last whereof he aimed at a general settlement, which he observed
would bear particular errors, provided that Care, Labor, Vigilance, and
prudent Inquietude attended, that forces Difficulties, constrains Fortune,
assures good Counsels, corrects bad, supports and overthrows designs,
disposes of accidents; observes time, manageth hazards, forgets nothing;
seldom trusts others, and improveth all Occurrents: and that first maxim of
Policy he observed, That who lays out most, lays out least, that petty
frugalities undo the main Interest.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho Overbury.
SIr Thomas Overbury, son to Sir Nicholas Overbury, one of the Judges of the
Marches, was born at Burton on the Hill in Gloucestershire, bred in Oxford, and
attained to be a most accomplished Gentleman, partly at Grayes-Inn^ and partly
in France; which the happiness of his Pen both in Poetry and Prose does
declare. In the later he is observed to be the first writer of Characters of
our Nation. But if the great parts of this Gentleman were guilty of Insolence
and Petulancy, which some since have charged on his memory* reporting of him,
that he should say, Somerset owed his advancement to him, and that he should
walk with his hat on before the Queen; we may charitably presume, that his
reduced age would have corrected such Juvenile extravagancies. It is
questionable, whether Robert Carr Earl of Somerset were more in the favor of
King James, or this Sir Thomas Overbury in the favor of the Earl of Somerset,
until he lost it by dissuading that Lord from keeping company with a Lady (the
Wi^e of another person of honor) as neither for his credit here, or comfort
hereafter. Soon after Sir Thomas was by King James designed Ambassador for
Russia. His false friends persuaded him to decline the Employment, as no better
than an honorable Grave. Better lie some days in the Tower, than more months
in a worse Prison; A ship by Sea, and a barbarous cold Country by Land.
Besides, they possessed him, that within a small time, the K. should be wrought
to a good opinion of him. But he that willingly goes into a Prison, out of hope
to come easily out of it, may stay therein so long, till he be too late
convinced of another Judgment. Whilst Sir Thomas was in the Tower, his
Refusal was presented to the King as an Act of high Contempt, as if he valued
himself more than the King's service. His strict restraint gave the greater
liberty to his enemies to practice his death, 1615. which was by poison
performed: Yet was his blood legally revenged, which cost some a violent, and
others a civil death, as deprived of their Offices. The Earl was soon abated
in King James his affection (Oh! the short distance betwixt the cooling and
quenching of a Favorite) being condemned, and banished the Court.

Exact are the remarks he drew up of Foreign Countries, and therefore no less
such his transactions for his own. In this most esteemed with King James and
his Master, that he suited both their Geniuses in the easy and clear method,
wherein he expressed the most difficult and knotty Affairs; for they both being
perplexed with that variety of Affairs in general, that they could not readily
look into difficult Cases in particular, loved those that made things out easy
and clear to them, as well fitted for their apprehensions, as obvious to their
judgment -- owning a Soul so quiet, that abate its youthful extravagancies, it
knew not a motion but what was Duty and Interest; felt no agitation but what
was reason, and what Philosophy conveyed into the souls of the wisest, and
observation insinuated into the spirit of the closest: if he expected a
recompense suitable to his services, or an acknowledgement answerable to his
merit, he understood not the humor and nature of mankind, the interest of
Favorites, or his own parts, too guilty of reputation to be advanced, and of
power not to be suppressed. -- It Is Machi^vel's rule; That they who rise very
high, should descend timely, and quit the envy, lest they lose the honor of
their greatness. Although this Gentleman's skill in accommodating Factions, in
the Art of Negotiation, in the charm of Language, in the Interest of Princes,
in mastering his own Resentments as well as his Enemies that provoked him, had
preserved him, if he had known as well how to hold his Tongue, as how to speak;
if he had understood others humors as well as they did his; and if he had
skilled as well from whom to have refused kindness, as from whom he deserved
it. -- In a word, he that considered so many other Maxims, was defective in
compliance with his own, viz. That virtue is there unprofitable, where too
great; and that many had lost the favor of their Masters by overmuch meriting
it.

Observations on the Life of Sir Clem. Edmonds.
SIr Clement Edmonds, that learned and judicious Remembrancer of the City of
London, was born at Vere's Commentaries.
Shratvardine in Shropshire, and bred Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford,
being generally skilled in all Arts and Sciences; witness his faithful
Translations of, and learned Illustrations on Caesar's Commentaries. Say not
that Comment on Commentary was false Heraldry, seeing it is so worthy a work,
that the Author thereof may pass for an eminent instance to what perfection of
Theory they may attain to in matter of War, who were not acquainted with the
practick part thereof; being once employed by Queen Elizabeth, with a dispatch
to Sir Francis Vere, which occasioned his presence at the Battle at Newport:
For he does so smartly discuss, pro and con, and seriously decide many Martial
Controversies, that his judgment therein is praised by the best Military
Masters.

King James taking notice of his Abilities, made him Clerk of the Council, and
Knighted him; and he was at last preferred Secretary of State, in the vacancy
of that place; but prevented by death, he acted not therein. At this day his
goodness in his general carriage out-did his prudence and his prudence in
particular, his goodness; but his industry both in all things, and in nothing
more than in his Scotch Negotiations, where he overreached the slye French,
composed and settled the unsatisfied King, and sent those weekly Advertisements
to his Mistress, that Sir Robert Cecil confessed the Master-wheel of those
years revolutions.

When Charles the fifth presented Secretary Eraso to his Son Philip the second,
he said, He gave him somewhat greater than his Estate, and more royal than his
Empire. When Sir William Waad introduced Sir Clement Edmonds to Court, he
brought thither in that person more than he could carry away in his own: A
person much accomplished in the great precepts and rules he observed; more in
his experience and application of those he practiced; wherein he was wise, but
not presumptuous; exact, but not pedantick; allowing much to old Observations,
more to new Circumstances: He was not more beholding to his Nature, than his
Nature to his Study and Meditation; and that to time and experience, which
offered at once occasions of instruction, and matter of exercises, to his great
understanding, so well acquainted with the affairs of former Ages, that he
could not be surprised with those of his own, knowing how to command, before he
was called to obey as who trusted not to his own, short and perplexed life,
that scarce holds out five or six important Negotiations, and ordinarily
cease to be, before it begins to know: but his policy may be guessed from
his morality; and his public carriage in the ^umults of Affairs, from his
private conduct and command in the disorders of nature, these being as well
managed by his reason, as the former by his prudence: His lesser skill in
governing the little world being an earnest of that more large in ruling the
greater. -- The Government of others, says Philosophy, is not fit for him who
is a Slave to himself.

Observations on the Life of James Hay, Earl of Carlisle.
ONe Hay his Ancestor saved Scotland from an Army of Danes at Longcarty with a
Therefore the Yoke is their supporter.
Yoke in his hand. James Hay 600 years after saved the King of that Country
from the Gowries at their house with a Culter in his: the first had as much
ground assigned him by King Kenith as a Falcon could fly over at one flight,
and the other as much Land as he could ride round in two days. The whole
Family fell before Dublin-Castle in former days, save a child left in his
Mothers womb; and had decayed in ours, but that the heir of it was cut out from
his. He served his Master in Scotland by his Generosity, and in England with
his Hospitality; the decay whereof King James observed the defect of the
English Nobility; and the restoration of it, he designed the honor of the
Sc^ts Gentry. Royal was his Masters munificence toward him, noble his toward
others; His Majesty being not more intent upon his advancement for public
service, than he was upon the advancement of others to his private assistance:
His Majesty's gracious inclination being for a Reign of Peace, this servants
estate was spent upon the Arts of it, I mean upon Feasts, Masks, gay
Clothes, and such other Delicacies as might soften our harsher natures to
quietness, that Princes interest, who was first to understand, and then to
manage the strength of this Nation.

Although he failed in most of his Negotiations, because he carried his money
on his back, rather than in his purse; rather to spend, than to bestow; and
amaze Foreigners, rather than oblige them: Yet was his Embassy more suitable
to the French vanity, than either the Dutch thrift, or the Germane plainness;
and his carriage more answerable to a gaudy Treaty of Marriage, than to a close
Agency for Interest, or the intricate consultations of War. So great the report
of his Hospitality, that an Host of Delph demanded sixty pounds for providing
him a Supper, though he never came that way; yet so displeasing to the Prince
of Orange, that when his Steward asked what he should provide extraordinarily
for the great Embassador's entertainment; the Prince looks on his Bill of Fare,
and whereas there was but one Pig, he bid them write two; tartly reflecting as
well on my Lords Nation, as his magnificence. -- One of his Entertainments I
understand not the reason of, I mean his Ante-Suppers; the manner of which was,
to have the Board covered at the first entrance of Guests, with dishes as high
as a tall man could well reach, filled with the choicest and dearest Viands Sea
or Land could afford: and all this once seen, and having feasted the eyes of
the invited, was removed, and fresh set on to the same height, having only
this advantage of the other, that it was hot; at one whereof, an Attendant eat
to his single share a whole Pie reckoned to my Lord at twenty pounds, being
composed of Ambergris, Magisterial of Pearl, Musk, etc. yet was so far from
being sweet in the morning, that he almost poisoned his whole Family, flying
himself like the Satyr from his own stink: and another went away with forty
pound of Sweetmeats in his Cloakbag. Yet must I needs judge him uncharitable
that writ of this noble person, that when the most able Physicians, and his own
weakness had passed a judgment he could not live many days, he did not
forbear his Entertainments, but made diverse brave Clothes, as he said, to
outface naked and despicable Death; adding withal, That nature wanted wisdom,
power or love, in making man mortal and subject to diseases: Forgetting (as
that censorious Pen goes on) that if every Individual his own lust had been
able to have produced, should have prosecuted an equal excess with his, they
would in a far less time than an age have brought themselves or the world into
the same disease he died of, which was a Consumption.

For my part, I adhere to their Civility that represent his nature modest, his
demeanor fair and Court-like, his obligations general, his interest as great
with the Favorite as with the King; and so much the greater with the King, as
he studied him more, and understood him better than any man: though one
observes, he was rather in his favor, than in his bosom, and therefore he
took care, That as his Expedition and Civility made him the great Master of
Requests at Court, so his Marriage with the Heir-general of the Dennies should
get him an Estate in the Country -- wherewith he completed his kindness with
bounty, and adorned his bounty with courtesy. -- Courtesy not affected, but
naturally made up of humility, that secured him from Envy, and a Civility that
kept him in esteem; he being happy in an expression that was high, and not
formal; and a Language that was Courtly, and yet real.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Lake.
SIr Thomas Lake was bred a Scholar under Saravia in Hampshire, a Statesman
under Sir Francis Walsingham at Court, where such his dexterity and dispatch,
that he would indite, write, and discourse at the same time, more exactly than
most men could severally perform them, being then called the Swift-sure; such
his celerity and solidity in all Affairs! From the Secretaries Amanuensis, he
was promoted the Queens Clerk of the Signet, to whom he read French and Latin
to her dying day; for he was reading to her, when the Countess of Warwick told
him that the Queen was departed. In which Tongues she often said he surpassed
her Secretaries. Such his sufficiency (especially in keeping secrets) that King
James employed him in some French Affairs at his first arrival without Cecil,
and afterward as Secretary of State above him.

For King James (that loved what ever was facile and fluent) being taken among
other his Abilities with his Latin pen, said, that he was a Minister of State
fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe; and that the Secretaries place
needed him more than he it. Of whom I have no more to add, but that he was oue
of the three noble hands that first led Mr. George Villiers to King James his
Favor.

Observations on the Life of Lyonel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex.
SIr Lyonel was born in Basinghal street, a Citizen, bred in the Custom House,
a Merchant-Adventurer; his own Tutor, and his own University; though his Family
was ancient in Gloucestershire, and his Arms in the Heralds Office. King James
was taken with hm for his brief, clear, strong and pertinent discourses: The
Duke of Buckingham was displeased because he would stand without him, yea in
some things against him: many were as active as this stirring Lord, none more
exact; his presence was comely, his countenance cheerful and grave, his soul
witty and wise, his apprehension quick and solid, his thoughts settled and
resolved. When one asked him how a man might prevent death, he said, Get to be
Lord-Treasurer, for none died in that Office. Though no Scholar, yet was he
bountiful to Scholars; though a Courtier, yet was he hospitable in the
Country; though he suffered much, yet was he contented; and though he lost
much, yet was he charitable. Very serviceable he was to the State in the
business of Trade in general, but most in that of the Custom-house in
particular: His first preferment was the custody of the Wardrobe, his second
was the Mastership of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and his third the
Treasurer-ship of England. In the last whereof, his improvement of the Revenue,
gained him not more honor with the King, than it did him envy from the
Courtiers; While to piece out the Treasure with the expense, he husbanded the
one so thristily, and retrenched the other so rigidly, that malice it self
after many attempts to that purpose, could find no fault with his exact
account in the boundless trust of the tempting Treasury.

When the Prince was in Spain, he was the Statesman of the Council Table, and
the chief Minister of the Cabal, managing all the Dispatches, and overlooking
all the Expenses: In the last of which services he ran counter to the Duke of
Buckingham's inclination, and his own Interest; which was to keep himself up by
that noble Person's favor, as he rose by his alliance. The occasion of his
preferment might be some saving secrets of the Custome-house-men to improve the
Revenue; the reason of his decline, was some thristy suggestion touching the
Courtiers to preserve it.

This is certain, he was a man fit for government, who quickly apprehended
where any evil was, and had capacity enough to apply the remedy; only he had a
little too stiff a nature that would not easily yield, when he found on which
side there was most reason; and too much of the City in his maxims, which
pretended to attain to that in a short time, which Politicians think not proper
to arrive at but by a leasurely succession of Ages and Generations.

Observations on the Life of Henry Howard Earl of Northampton.
THis Family had endeared it self to many Kings by its services, but to none
more than King James by its obligations. Thomas Duke of Norfolk being as it
were his Mothers Martyr [executed for a design to marry her] and all his
Relations his Confessors [kept under for their inclinations to advance him:]
Reasonable therefore it was, that my Lord that Dukes brother should be made
Baron of Marnhill, Earl of Northampton, Knight of the Garter, Privy-Councellor,
Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. -- Learning in any man
had King James his affection, especially in a Nobleman, as our Statesman, who
was as serious a Student in Kings-Colledge and Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, as a
discerning observator in Rome and Florence in Italy. His Dispensative against
the supposed poison of Prophesies, dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham,
bespeaks him a great and a general Scholar: His Speeches at Cambridge and in
Star Chamber, argue him both witty and wise: His expenses showed him
publick-spirited, the unparalled port of his Family and dependants an Ancient
Nobleman: His designing of Audley-End, and building of Suffolk-house, an
Architect: His Hospital for twelve poor women, and a Governor at Rise in
Norfolk; for twelve poor men, and a Governor at Clin in Shropshire; for twenty
poor men, and a Governor at Greenwich in Kent [whereof eight to be chosen out
of Shose-Sham where he was born] a charitable man: his using of all his
interest to avoid the burden and weight of the Treasurer's place, and procure
it for the Earl of Suffolk his Nephew, his noble disposition, not to advance
himself by Court-flattery, or his fortune by State employment, being a
Batchellour and a Student; An instance of my Lord Bacon's observation; He that
has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune, for they are
Impediments to great Enterprises either to Virtue or Mischief. Certainly the
best works, and of greatest merit for the Public proceed from the unmarried
and the Childelesse, which both in affection and means have married and endowed
the Public.

But to conclude this particular; this Lord told his intimate Secretary Mr.
George Penny (who related it to my Author) that his Nativity (at his Fathers
desire) was calculated by a skilful Italian Astrologer, who told him that this
his Infant-son should taste of much trouble in the midst of his life, even to
the want of a meals meat; but his old age should make amends for all, with a
plentiful estate: which came to pass accordingly. For his Father dying in his
infancy, no plentiful provision was made for him: and when his eldest Brother
Thomas Duke of Norfolk was executed, his condition was much impaired; insomuch
that being once in London (not overstocked with money (when his noble Nephews
the Earl of Arundel and the Lord Thomas Howard were out of Town) and loath to
pin himself on any Table uninvited) he was fain to dine with the Chair of Duke
Humphrey; but other (not to say better company) viz. reading of books in
Stationers Shops in St. Paul's Churchyard; though afterward he attained to
great wealth, honor and command: However that Lord gave little credit to, and
placed less confidence in such Predictions, as appeared by a learned Work he
has written on that subject.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Ramsey, Earl of Holderness, and Sir Tho.
Ereskin Earl of Kelly.
BOth their preferments began on the same occasion; both their natures were
eminent for the same innocence and goodness; both their services tend to the
same iss^e, and therefore both their Characters come under one observation;
which it is more proper to take in the word of their Countryman and
Contemporary that knew them, than in the expression of a stranger that only
heard of them. The whole story runs thus:

The name of Ruthen in Scotland was not notorious, until Anno 1568. when Ruthen
amongst others, Confederates, in those divided times of trouble, labored much
for the imprisoning Queen Mary Mother to King James. In 1582. his son William
was created Earl Gowry, in the time of that King's minority, though the Father
bore deadly hatred to the King's prosperity. And in 1584. himself was in actual
Rebellion, in which he suffered at Dondee. His eldest son John, then in Travel
in Italy, returns home to inherit his lands and honors; but not one jot
changed in disposition from the traitorous ways of his Predecessors: For not
long after he falls into this Conspiracy; which is not so ancient, but that
many then and now living can, and my self have heard the repetition.

The house of Gowry were all of them much addicted to study Chemistry; and
these more to practice it, often publishing (as such Professors usually do)
more rare experiments then ever could be performed; wherein the King (a general
Scholar) had little faith. But to infuse more credit to the practice, Alexander
Ruthen the second brother takes this occasion, and withal conspires with Gowry
to assassinate the King; and taking opportunity in his hunting, not far from
his house St. Johnstone, invites the King to be an eyewitness of his
productions. In their way Sir Thomas Erskin (after Lord Kelly) overtakes them
and others, Demanding of the Duke of Lenox, then present, why Alexander had
engrossed the King's ear, to carry him from his Sports? Peace man, said the
Duke, Wee's all be turned into gold. Not far they rid, but that the Earl Gowry
made good by protestation his Brother's story. And thus was the King brought to
be a Guest.

Near the end of Dinner, at his Fruit, and the Lords and Waiters gone to eat,
Alexander begs of the King, at this opportunity to withdraw, and to be partaker
of his Production, to the view of that which yet he could not believe.

And up he leads the King into by-lodgings, locking each door behind them, till
they came into a Back Room; where no sooner entered, but that Alexander claps
on his Bonnet, and with stern countenance, faces the King, and says; Now Sir,
you must know, I had a Father, whose blood calls for revenge shed for your
sake. The King amazed, deals gently with his fury, excuses the guilt of his
death, by his then- Infancy. Advising him not to lay violent hands on the
sacred Person of his Anointed Sovereign, Especially in a cause of his
Innocence: Pleading the Laws of God and Man; which so much wrought upon him,
that he said, Well, I will speak with my Brother: and so put the King into a
Lobby Room next the Chamber; where no sooner entered, but that there appeared a
fellow weaponed, ready for execution, to whose custody the King is committed
till his return.

Alexander gone down, the fellow trembles with Reverence, puts down his Sword,
and craves pardon; which gave the King occasion to work upon that passion, and
to ask him whether he resolved to murder him? Being assured to the contrary,
the King gets leave to open a window, that looked into a back Court. When
presently Alexander returns, and tells the King that he must dye: But much
affrighted at the Fellow's (...), with his sword offers violence to the King;
Which the fellow seemingly opposes, and between them began a (...), which gave
advantage to the King to cry Tre^son at the Window, which looked into a
back-Court, where Sir Thomas Erskin, and o^^ Herries, were come in pursuit of
the King, who was rumoured to be gone out the back-way to his ^^nting.

At the cry of Treason, and known to be the King's voice, they both hastened up
a back-stair, called the Turn-pike, being directed by a servant of the house,
who saw Alexander ascend that way. And so forcing some doors, they found them
above, panting with the fray; and up comes also at heels of them, John Ramsey
(after Earl of Holdernesse:) by them Alexander was soon dispatched.

Not long after came the Earl Gowry (by his double key) the first way, with a
case of Rapiers, his usual weapons, and ready drawn. To whom Erskin said, as to
divert his purpose; What do you mean, my Lord? the King is killed: (for the
King was shadowed, having cast himself upon a Bed from his sight, and his Cloak
was thrown upon the Body of Alexander, bleeding upon the ground.) At which
Gowry stops, sinking the points of his weapons; when suddenly Herries strikes
at him with a hunting Falchion. And Ramsey having his Hawk on his ^ist, casts
her off, and steps in to Gowry, and stabs him to the heart; and forthwith more
Company came up.

Not long after this Conspiracy, Herries dies well rewarded. John Ramsey has
the Honor of Knighthood, with an additional bearing to his Coat of Arms, A
Hand holding forth a Dagger, reversed proper, piercing a bloody Heart, The
point crowned Emperial, with this Distick, Haec Dextra Vindex Principis and
P^triae. Afterward he was created Lord Haddington, and Earl of Holdernesse.

Sir Thomas Erskin was afterward created Earl of Kelly, Knight of the Garter,
Captain of the King's Guard, and Groom of the Stool; and the Fellow designed
for the Murderer, had a large Pension confirmed by Act of their Parliament.

And all these men (but Herries) were living, with other witnesses, at King
James his journey, when he went from hence to visit Scotland, and met together
by direction at the same house, with Ceremony; and all of them, with a number
of Courtiers, ascended into the same Room, the blood yet remaining where the
King related the Story, which was confirmed by them. And afterward kneeling
down, with tears of Contrition for his Sins to God, and thankfulness for this
Mercy, using many pious Ejaculations, embraced all these Actors in the former
Tragedy; when the poor fellow also kissed the King's hand.

These circumstances gave occasion then, that this whole story was freshly
revived, to the common Satisfaction of the whole Country, and our Engglish
Courtiers. And in especial, unto the very reverend Bishop, and nobly born,
James Mountague, then present, to whom the King addressed himself in this
Relation, and from whose Mouth I received these particulars, at his return into
England.

And thus much we have by word of mouth: somewhat I shall add out of writings,
for more satisfaction.

This Treason was attempted the fourth of August 1600. And though there
followed sundry Suspicions and Examinations of several other Persons, supposed
Abbettors and Contrivers; yet it lay undiscovered, tanquam e postliminio, until
eight years after, by the circumspection principally of the Earl of Dunbar, a
man of as great wisdom as those times and that Kingdom could boast of, upon
the person of one George Sprot, Notary-publick of Ayemouth in Scotland, from
some words which at first he sparingly or unawares expressed, and also by some
papers which were found in his house; whereof being examined, with a little ado
he confessed, and was condemned and executed at Edinburgh the 12th of Aug. 1608.

A Relation I conceive not common, but in my hands to be produced, and written
by that learned Gentleman William Heart, then Lord Justice of Scotland, and
Principal in all the Acts of Judicature herein.

Neither of these Lords professed any skill in Politics; yet neither wanted a
strong judgment, which they could make good use of in time and place
convenient, giving testimonies in those Employments they had, of a strict
secrecy, a great moderation, and a happy compliance with opportunity, Qualities
exceedingly well lodged in men of Interest and Command, especially in these
two, who neither too easily closed with others resolutions, nor too obstinately
adhered to their own.

Observations on the Fall of Sir Tho. Lake.
A Great Estate this Gentleman had honestly got, and a greater esteem, being
King James his right hand, and the Scots both hands; that with which they
begged, and that with which they bestowed; the instrument of the meaner sorts
relief, and the greaters bounty; until that Malice and Revenge, two violent
passions, overruling the Weaker Sex, concerning his Wife and daughter,
involved him in their quarrel, the chief and only cause of his ruin. He had
by his Wife sons and daughters: His eldest married unto the Lord Baron Rosse
(in right of a Grandmother) the son of Thomas Earl of Exeter by a former
venture. And upon the credit of Sir Thomas Lake, he was sent Ambassador
Extraordinary into Spain, in a very gallant Equipage, with some hopes of his
own to continue Lieger, to save charges of transmitting any other.

In his absence there fell out an extreme deadly ^ewd ('it is no matter for what)
between the Lady Lake and the Countess of Exeter. A youthful Widow she had
been, and virtuous, and so became Bedfellow to this aged, gowty, diseased, but
noble Earl. And that preferment had made her subject to Envy and Malice.

Home comes the Lord Rosse from his Embassy, when being fallen into some
neglect of his Wife and his kindred, I conceive upon refusal of an increase of
allowance to her settlement of Jointure, which was promised to be completed at
his return; not long he stays in England, but away he gets into Italy, turns a
professed Roman Catholic, being cozened into that Religion by his public
Confident Gondamore.

In this his last absence (never to return) the Mother and Daughter accuse the
Countess of former Incontinency with the Lord Rosse whilst he was here, and
that therefore upon his Wives discovery he was fled from hence, and from her
Marriage Bed; with other devised Calumnies, by several designs and
contrivements, to have poisoned the Mother and Daughter.

This quarrel was soon blazoned at Court, to the King's ^are, who as privately
as could be, singly examines each party. The Countess with tears and
imprecations professes her Innocence; which to oppose, the Mother Lake and her
Daughter counterfeit her hand to a whole sheet of Paper; wherein they make the
Countess with much contrition to acknowledge her self guilty, crave pardon for
attempting to poison them, and desire friendship with them all.

The King gets sight of this, as in favor to them, and demands the time,
place, and occasion when this should be writ. They tell him, that all the
parties met in a visit at Wimbleton (the house of the Lord of Exeter) where, in
dispute of their differences, she confesses her guilt of attempting their
poison. And being desirous of absolution and friendship (being required
thereto) consents to set down all Circumstances therein, under her own hand,
which presently she writ at the Window in the upper end of the great Chamber at
Wimbleton, in presence of the Mother and Daughter, the Lord Rosse, and one
Diego a Spaniard his confiding Servant. But now they being gone, and at Rome,
the King forthwith sends Mr. Dendy (one of his Sergeants at Arms, sometimes a
Domestic of the Earl of Exeters, an honest and worthy Gentleman) post to Rome,
who speedily returns with R^sse and Diego's hand, and other testimonials,
confirming, That all the said Accusation, and Confession, Suspicions and Papers
concerning the Countess, were notorious false and scandalous; and confirms it
by receiving the Host, in assurance of her Honor, and his Innocence. The King
well satisfied, sends to the Countesses Friends and Trustees for her Jointure
and Estate; who comparing many of her letters with this Writing, do confess it
counterfeit.

Then he tells the Mother and Daughter, That this writing being denied by her,
and their testimonies, being parties, would not prevail with any belief, but
any other Additional witness would give it sufficient credit. To which they
assure him, That one Sarah Swarton, their Chamberesse, stood behind the
Hanging, at the entrance of the Room, and heard the Countess read over what she
had writ: and her also they procure to swear unto this before the King.

To make further trial, the King in a hunting journey at New-part near
Wimbleton, gallops thither, views the Room, observing the great distance of the
Window from the lower end of the Room; and placing himself behind the Hanging,
and so other Lords in turn, they could not hear one speak loud from the window.

Then the Housekeeper was called, who protested those Hangings had constantly
furnished that Room for thirty years; which the King observed to be two foot
short of the ground, and might discover the woman, if hidden behind them. I may
present also, the King saying, Oaths cannot confound my sight.

Besides all this, the Mother and Daughter counterfeit another Writing, a
Confession of one Luke Hutton, acknowledging for 40 pound annuity, the Countess
hired him to poison them; which Man, with wonderful providence was found out
privately, and denies it to the King.

And thus prepared, the King sends for Sir Thomas Lake, whom indeed he very
much valued; tells him the danger to imbarque himself in this Quarrel, advising
him to leave them to the Law, being now ready for the Star Chamber. He humbly
thanked his Majesty, but could not refuse to be a Father and a Husband; and so
puts his Name with theirs in a cr^sse Bill, which at the hearing, took up five
several days, the King sitting in Judgment. But the former testimonies, and
some private confessions of the Lady Rosse, and Sarah Wharton, which the King
kept in private, from public proceedings, made the Cause for some of the days
of Trial, appear doubtful to the Court, until the King's discovery, which
concluded the Sentence, and was pronounced in several Censures; Sir Thomas Lake
and his Lady fined ten thousand pounds to the King, five thousand pounds to the
Countess, fifty pounds to Hutton, Sarah Wharton to be whipped at a Carts tail
about the streets, and to do penance at St. Martin's Church. The Lady Rosse,
for confessing the truth and plot in the midst of the Trial, was pardoned by
the Major Voices from penal Sentence.

The King, I remember, compared their Crimes to the first plot of the first sin
in Paradise, the Lady Lake to the Serpent, her Daughter unto Eve, and Sir
Thomas to poor Adam, whom he thought in his conscience, that his love to his
Wife had beguiled him. I am sure, he paid for all, which, as he told me, cost
him thirty thousand pounds, and the loss of his Masters favor, and Offices of
gain and honor, but truly with much pity and compassion of the Court.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Suffolk.
HIS Uncle Northampton negotiated his preferment, and his Father Norfolk
deserved it, for whose sake the eldest Son Philip Earl of Arundel was made Lord
Marshal, and this second first Chamberlain, and then Treasurer; wherein as the
Earl of Middlesex understood well the privileges of the City, so my Lord
kenned well the Revenues of the Crown. But his fair Daughter, that gained him
most favor, did him most harm; he falling with his son Somerset's
miscarriages, when he might have stood without his Relation: being as plain as
his brother Henry was subtle; as obliging, as he was insinuating; as knowing,
as he was cunning; the one conversing with Books, the other with Men. A
Gentleman from whom I requested his Character, returns me no more but this: He
was a man never endued with much patience, and one that much retarded the
progress of his fortune, by often speaking publicly with too much liberty:
Otherwise very true to the Maxims of his Age. 1. Linking himself to the Scots.
2. Buying Fee-Farm Rents to avoid envy, as my Lord of Salisbury before him in
the Scots Debenturers names. 3. Promoting Northern Suits. And 4. projecting for
money.

He was also Chancellor of Cambridge, loving and beloved of the University.
When at his first coming to Cambridge, Mr. Francis Nethersole Orator of the
University, made a Latin Speech unto him; the Lord returned, Though I
understand not Latin, I know the sense of your Oration is to tell me that I am
welcome to you; which I believe verily: I thank you for it heartily, and will
serve you faithfully in any thing within my power. Doctor Harsenet the
Vice Chancellor laying hold on the handle of so fair a Proffer, requested him
to be pleased to entertain the King at Cambridge; a favor which the University
could never compass from their former great and wealthy Chancellours; I will
do it (says the Lord) in the best manner I may, and with the speediest
convenience.

Nor was he worse than his word, giving his Majesty such a Treatment in the
University, as cost him five thousand pounds and upwards. Hence it was, that
after his death, Thomas his second son Earl of Bark shire (not suing for it,
nor knowing of it) was chosen to succeed him, losing the place (as some
suspected) not for lack of Voices, but fair counting them.

Observations on the Life of Sir Rob. Carry.
HE was born an ingenious man, of good parts and breeding; but of so uncourtly
a temper, that in all likelihood we had not heard of him, had he not had the
luck to have been the first Messenger let out of the Court by the favor of his
Father the Lord Chamberlain, to bring King James news that Queen Elizabeth was
dead; when the Scots expectation was so tired, that they thought Queen Eliz.
would never dye, as long as there was an old woman that could either wear good
clothes, or eat good meat in England. Upon which good account he is a
Bed-chamber-man to King James, and a Tutor to Prince Charles; though he had
made better use of his Talent as a Soldier, than as a Courtier, having too much
of the Candor of that Family; that as the Historian observed, spoke of things
always as they deserved: And though he had wit enough, yet he had not the
judgment or way to make those stand in awe of him, who were most obliged to
him.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Robert Naunton, and Sir Francis Nethersole.
SIr Robert Naunton is the Author of one Book of Observations upon the
Statesmen of Qu: Eliz. times, and must be the subject of another of King James
his: He noted then in his youth, what he was to practice afterward in his more
reduced years. His University-Studies at Trinity-Colledge, whereof he was
Commoner; and at Trinity-Hall, whereof he was Fellow; His Speeches both while
Proctor and Orator of Cambridge, discovered him more inclined to public
Accomplishments, than private Studies: He improved the opportunity of the
speech he was to make before K. James at Hinchinbrook so well, that as His
Majesty was highly affected with his Latin and Learning, so he exactly
observed his prudence and serviceablenesse; whereupon he came to Court as Sir
Thomas Overburies Assistant first, and then as Sir George Villiers friend, who
promoted him to be Secretary of State, Jan. 8. 1617. as his Majesty did a while
after to be Mr. of the Wards. The first place whereof he discharged with as
much ability and dexterity, as he did the second with integrity; only he was
observed close-handed, whether out of his natural inclination to Parsimony, or
some fixed design to regulate and reduce the great expenses of this Nation; or
from some hidden and refined politic consideration, that that might be done by
a wary observation of men's integrity and inclination, which was usually done
with money: and indeed, as a great man observes, to procure good information
of particulars touching persons, their natures, their desires and ends, their
customs and fashions, their helps and advantages, and whereby they chiefly
stand: So again, their weaknesses and disadvantages, and where they lie most
open and obnoxious; their friends, factions, and dependencies: and again, their
opposites, envyers, and Competitors; their moods and times, their principles,
rules, observations, etc. their actions how conducted, how favored, how
opposed, etc. is the only way of success in business, and of prevailing in
fortune, especially if attended with this Gentleman's two master-Qualities; 1.
Reservedness, the security; 2. Slowness of belief, the sinew of wisdom.
Finding his temper agreeable with the University, he allowed himself more scope
and liberty; but observing his particular constitution not suitable to the
general state of his times, the whole course of his life was more close,
retired, and reserved, opening it self but with an half-light, and a full
advantage: and what he was to others, he believed all others were to him, as
hardly trusting them, as he was understood himself, unless surprised in his
countenance by the motions of it, or in his actions by the suddenness of them,
or in his temper by his passion, but as far as can be guessed, from the Letters
that passed between them about the Palatinate. He was of the same make in the
State, as Archbishop Abbot was in the Church, zealous and sullen; if others
had a better wit than he in abusing him, he had a better memory than they to
think of it; for one Mr. Wiemark a wealthy man, a great Novilant, and constant
Paul's walker, hearing the news that day of the beheading of Sir Walter
Rawleigh; His head (said he) would do well upon the shoulders of Sir Robert
Naunton Secretary of State. These words were complained of, and Wiemark
summoned to the Privy Council, where he pleaded for himself, that he intended
no disrespect to Mr. Secretary, whose known worth was above all detraction;
only he spoke in reference to an old proverb, Two heads are better than one;
and for the present he was dismissed. Not long after, when rich men were called
on for a contribution to St. Paul's. Wiemark at Council Table subscribed a
hundred pounds; but Mr. Secretary told him, Two hundred were better than one;
which betwixt fear and charity Wiemark was fain to subscribe.

Neither was he sooner up, than he gave his Colleague and Successor in the
Orators place, Sir Francis Nethersole, his hand to advance him too; whom after
his elegant Speech on Prince Henry, we find a prudent Agent with the Princes
of the Union, and a faithful Secretary to the Queen of Bohemia, for whom he did
much, and suffered more. Yet was he lately alive, and as charitable in his
elder years, as ever he was noble in his younger.

Observations on the Life of Sir Arthur Ingram.
SIr Arthur had wit in Italy, where he was a Factor, and wealth in London,
where he was a Merchant, to be first a Customer, and then a Cofferer to that
King, who had this happiness, that he understood so much of all his affairs,
as to make a judgment of what persons might be most serviceable to him in each
of them. So pragmatical a person as this Gentleman, was necessary among the
Custome-house-men, who were about to engrosse all the wealth of the Kingdom;
and as useful among the Green-cloath-men, who shared amongst themselves vast
Concealments. The activity of his head had undone him, had not the odium of it
been allayed by the discretion of his tongue; whatever he spoke, being
naturally accompanied with such a kind of modesty and affability as gained the
affection, and attracted the respect of all that conversed with him; only some
wary men were jealous of that watchful and serene habit he had attained to in
every conference and action, as well to observe as to act: though it was more
than they needed, he having not that good stay and hold of himself, his much
observing tempting him to much meddling; though never more need of it than at
that time, when ninety and odd thousand pounds were spent upon the Palsgrave;
to reimburse which money, he set up the improvement of Coin, the Farthings, the
borrowing of money of the Customers, and as many other Projects to get money,
as others had to spend it.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Yelverton.
THis Gentleman's relation to Sir Thomas Overbury brought him to the Earl of
Somerset's service, and my Lord of Somerset's service recommended him to the
Kings favor; whereby he was at first his Counsel learned, and afterward his
Attorney General; in which last place his duty enjoined him the impeachment of
that Earl, but his gratitude forbad him: Loath he was to refuse his Masters
command, more loath to have a hand in his Patrons ruin: his civility outweighed
his prudence, and his obligations his safety: for refusing to implead his Mr.
as a great Delinquent at the Bar, he was sent by the Council as a greater to
the Tower, where he continued until (as some say) the Duke of Buckingham came
to him at midnight; and hearing from him such mysteries of State as nearly
concerned his own safety, not only relea

Observations on the Life of Bishop Mountague.
JAmes Mountague son to Sir Edward Mountague, was born at Boughton in
Northamptonshire, bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge: He was afterward
Master, or rather nursing Father to Sidney-Colledge; For he found it in bonds
to pay twenty Marks per annum to Trinity-Colledge for the ground whereon it is
built, and left it free, assigning it a rent for the discharge thereof. When
the Kings Ditch in Cambridge made to defend it by its strength, did in his time
offend it with its stench, he expended a hundred Marks to bring runningwater
into it, to the great convenience of the University. He was afterward Bishop
first of Bath and Wells, then of Winchester, being highly in favor with King
James, who did ken a man of merit, as well as any Prince in Christendom. He
translated the Works of King James into Latin, and improved his greatness to
do good Offices therewith. He dyed Anno Dom. 1618. Aetat. 49. and lies buried
within his fair Monument, within his fairer, (...) mean a goodly Tomb in the
Church of Bath, which owes its well-being and beauty to his Munificence. King
James cast his eye upon him at Hinchingbrook (where the University of Cambridge
met him as he came from Scotland) because he observed him one of those he knew
he must oblige, I mean a Gentleman: He set his heart upon him at Court, because
he found him one he intended to employ, I mean a Scholar. He was the only man
of all the Doctors he conversed with there, and the only man of all the
Bishops he consulted with at White Hall. His nature inclined him to
magnificence, and his virtue to Thrift; sparing from lesser vanities, what he
might expend upon greater enterprises; never sparing when just designs called
for great charge. Grateful he was to his followers, though not prodigal: Good
men choose rather to be loved for their benefits to the Community, than those
to private persons: His understanding was as large as his heart was honest,
comprehensive both of men and things; even those things that were either below
or besides his care, going not besides his observation.

He anticipated his age with his worth, and died at fourscore in merit, when
not fifty in years; filling his time not with days but with virtues so early,
as seemed rather innate than acquired: For which he was so popular in the
Country, as well as favored at Court; that a corpulent Officer of Bath-Church
being appointed on the day of his Burial to keep the doors, entered on his
employment in the morning, but was buried himself before night, and before the
Bishop's body was put in the ground; because being bruised to death by the
pressing in of people, his Corpse requsred speedy interment. -- In those days
the Plebs concurred with with the King in their affections to, because they
submitted to him in their choice of persons; for then wisdom was thought to
dwell in the Head, and good Folks thought their Sovereign wiser than themselves.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edm. Anderson.
SIr Edmund Anderson was born a younger brother of a Gentile Extract at
Flixborough in Lincolnshire, and bred in the inner Temple. I have been informed
that his Father left him a thousand pounds for his portion, which this our Sir
Edmund multiplied into many, by his great proficiency in the Common Law, being
made the ^4th of Queen Elizabeth Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. When
Secretary Davison was sentenced in the Star Chamber for the business of the
Queen of Scots, Judge Anderson said of him, that therein he had done Cambde^
Eliz. Anno 1587.
justum, non just; and so acquitting him of all malice, censured him with the
rest of his indiscretion. When H. Cuffe was arraigned about the rising of the
Earl of Essex, and when Sir Edward Coke the Queens Solicitor opposed him, and
the other answered Syllogistically, our Anderson (sitting there as a Judge of
Law, not Logic) checked both Pleader and Prisoner, ob stolidos syllogismos,
for their foolish Syllogismes, appointing the former to press the Statute of
Edward the third. Idem, Anno 1600.
He died in the third of King James, leaving great Estates to several sons. He
was a pure Legist, that had little skill in the affairs of the world, always
alleging a decisive Case or Statute on any matter or question, without any
regard to the decency, or respect to be had toward a State, or Government, and
without that account of a moderate interpretation some circumstances of things
require, being so much the less useful as he was incompliant, and one whom
none addressed to, because, as one observes of Cardinal Corrado; Such think
they do in some manner sacrifice themselves, when they do but in the least act
against their own opinions, to do a man a little pleasure. There are a kind of
honest men of good conscience, whose capacities being narrow, entertain private
resolutions, inconsistent with public interest; who may for me pass for good
men, but shall never be censed or registered for good Citizens; because when
straight ^aced and short apprehensions are resolved into conscience and
maxims, those men are obliged to be so obstinate as to change or remit nothing
of their first resolutions, how unreasonable soever in themselves, or dangerous
in the consequence.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bodley, by himself.
1. I Was born at Exeter in Devonshire, March 2. 1544. descended both by Father
and Mother of worshipful Parents. My Father, in the time of Queen Mary, being
noted and known to be an enemy to Popery, was so cruelly threatened, and so
narrowly observed, by those that maliced his Religion, that for the safeguard
of himself and my Mother, who was wholly affected as my Father, he knew no way
so secure as to fly into Germany.

2. My Father fixed his abode in the City of Geneva; where, as far as I
remember, the English Church consisted of some hundred persons. I was at that
time of twelve years of age, but through my Fathers cost and care, sufficiently
instructed to become an Auditor of Chevallerius in Hebrew, of Beroaldus in
Greek, of Calvin and Beza in Divinity, and of some other Professors in that
University (which was newly then erected) besides my domestic Teachers in the
house of Philibertus Saracenus, a famous Physician in that City, with whom I
was boarded, where Robertus Constantinus, that made the Greek Lexicon, read
Homer to me.

3. In the first of Queen Elizabeth, my Father returned, and settled his
dwelling in the City of London. It was not long after, that I was sent away
from thence to the University of Oxford, recommended to the teaching and
tuition of Doctor Humphrey. In the year 1563, I took the degree of Batchellor
of Arts; within which year I was chosen Probationer of Merton College, and the
next year ensuing admitted Fellow. Afterward, in the year 1565, by special
persuasion of some of my Fellows, and for my private exercise, I undertook the
public reading of a Greek Lecture in the same Colledge-Hall, without requiring
or expecting any stipend for it: Nevertheless it pleased the Fellowship of
their own accord to allow me soon after four marks by the year, and ever since
to continue the Lecture to that College.

4. In the year 1566, I proceeded Master of Arts, and read for that year in the
School-streets natural Philosophy. After which time, within less than three
years space, I was won by entreaty of my best affected friends to stand for the
Proctorship, to which I and my Colleague were quietly elected in the year 1569,
without any competition or counter-suit of any other. After this for a long
time, I supplied the Office of University-Oratour, and bestowed my time in the
study of sundry faculties, without any inclination to profess any one above
the rest; insomuch as at last I waxed desirous to travel beyond the Seas, for
attaining to the knowledge of some special modern Tongues, and for the increase
of my experience in the managing of affairs; being wholly then addicted to
employ my self and all my cares in the public service of the State.

5. After my return, in the year 1585, I was employed by the Queen to the King
of Denmark, and to the German Princes: Next, to Henry the third, King of
France: After this, in 88, for the better conduct of her Highness Affairs in
the Provinces United, I was thought a fit person to reside in those parts, and
was sent thereupon to the Hague in Holland; where, according to the Contract
that had formerly passed between her Highness and the States, I was admitted
for one of their Council of Estate, taking place in their Assemblies next to
Count Maurice, and yielding my suff^age in all that was proposed. During all
that time, what approbation was given of my painful endeavors by the Queen, by
the Lords in England, by the States of the Country there, and by all the
English Soldiery, I refer it to be notified by some others Relation.

6. I received from her Majesty many comfortable Letters of her gracious
acceptance of my diligence and care: and among the Lords of the Council had no
man more to friend, then was the Lord Treasurer Burleigh. For when occasion had
been offered of declaring his conceit as touching my service, he would always
tell the Queen (which I received from her self and some other Ear-witnesses)
that there was not any man in England so meet as my self to undergo the Office
of the Secretary. And sithence his son, the present Lord Treasurer, has
signified unto me in private conference, that when his Father first intended to
advance him to that place, his purpose was withal to make me his Colleague: But
that the daily provocations of the Earl of Essex were so bitter and sharp
against him, and his comparisons so odious when he put us in a balance, as he
thought thereupon he had very great reason to use his best means, to put any
man out of hope of raising his fortune, whom the Earl with such violence, to
his extreme prejudice, had endeavored to dignifie.

7. When I had well considered, how ill it did concur with my natural
disposition, to become or to be counted either a stickler or partaker in any
public faction; how well I was able, by Gods good blessing, to live of my
self, if I could be contented with a competent livelihood; I resolved thereupon
to possess my soul in peace all the residue of my days, to take my farewell of
State-employments, and so to retire me from the Court.

8. Now although after this, by her Majesty's direction, I was often called to
the Court, by the now Lord Treasurer, then Secretary, and required by him, and
also diverse times since, by order from the King, to serve as Ambassador in
France, and to negotiate in other very honorable employments, yet I would not
be removed from my former final resolution; but have continued at home my
retired course of life, which is now methinks to me as the greatest preferment
the State can afford.

9. This I must confess of my self, that though I did never repent me yet of
my often refusals of honorable offers, in respect of enriching my private
Estate; yet somewhat more of late I have blamed my self and my nicety that way,
for the love that I bear to my Reverend Mother the University of Oxford, and to
the advancement of her good by such kind of means as I have since undertaken.

10. Having examined what course I might take, I concluded at the last to set
up my staff at the Library door; being thoroughly persuaded, that in my
solitude and surcease from the Commonwealth affairs, I could not busy my self
to better purpose then by reducing that place (which then in every part lay
ruined and waste) to the public use of Students.

11. For the effecting whereof, I found my self furnished in a competent
proportion, of such four kinds of aids, as unless I had them all, there was no
hope of good success. For without some kind of knowledge, as well in the
learned modern Tongues, as in sundry other sorts of Scholastical literature;
without some purse-ability to go through with the charge; without very great
store of honorable friends to further the design, and without special good
leisure to follow such a work, it could but have proved a vain attempt, and
inconsiderate.

12. But how well I have sped in all my endeavors, and how full provision I
have made for the benefit and ease of all frequenters of the Library; that
which I have already performed in fight; That besides, which I have given for
the maintenance of it; and that which hereafter I purpose to add, by way of
enlargement to that place (for the project is cast, and whether I live or die,
it shall be, God willing, put in full execution) will testify so truly and
abundantly for me, as I need not to be the publisher of the dignity and worth
of mine own institution. Writtten with mine own hand, Anno 1609. December. 15.

Observations on the Life of Henry Vere Earl of Oxford.
HEnry Vere was son of Edward Vere, the seventeenth Earl of Oxford, and Anne
Trentham his Lady; whose principal habitation (the rest of his patrimony being
then wasted) was at Heningham-Castle in Essex: A vigorous Gentleman, full of
courage and resolution, and the last Lord Chamberlain of England of this
Family. His sturdy nature would not bow to Court-compliants, who would maintain
what he spoke, speak what he thought, think what he apprehended true and just,
though sometimes dangerous, and distastful. Once he came into Court with a
great milk-white Feather about his hat, which then was somewhat unusual, save
that a person of his merit might make a fashion. The Reader may ghess the Lord
who said to him in some jeer, My Lord, you wear a very fair Feather: It Is true
(said the Earl) and if you mark it, there is never a Taint in it. Indeed his
Family was ever loyal unto the Crown, deserving their Motto, Vero nil Verius.


Going over one of the four English Colonels into the Low Countries, and
endeavoring to raise the fiege of Breda, he so overheated himself with
Marching, Fighting and vexing (the Design not succeeding) that he dyed after,
Anno Dom. 16...... He married Diana, one of the Coheirs of William Earl of
Exeter, (afterward to Edward Earl of Elgin) by whom he left no Issue.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Vere.
SIr Francis Vere (Governor of Bril and Portsmouth) was of the ancient, and of
the most noble extract of the Earls of Oxford; and it may be a question,
whether the Nobility of his house, or the honor of his Achievements might most
commend him, who brought as much glory to his name, as he received honor from
it: He was amongst his Queens Swordmen inferior to none, but superior to
many: He lived oftener in the Camp, than Court: but when his pleasure drew him
thither, no man had more of the Queens favor, and none less envied. He was a
Soldier of great worth, and commanded thirty years in the service of the
States, and twenty years over the English in Chief as the Queens General; and
he that had seen the Battle of Newport, might there best have taken him and his
noble Brother the Lord of Tilbury to the life. They report that the Qu: as she
loved Martial men, would court this Gentleman as soon as he appeared in her
presence; for he seldom troubled it with the noise and alarms of supplication;
his way was another sort of undermining, as resolved in the Court as in the
Camp, as well to justify his The E^ of Essex
Patron, as to serve her Majesty, telling her the plain truth more sincerely
than any man; choosing (as he said) rather to fall by the malice of his
enemies, than be guilty of Ingratitude to his friends: Yea, and when he sued
for the government of Portsmouth, and some Grandees a objected, that that place
was always bestowed on The Lo^ Nortis.
Noblemen, he answered; There were none ennobled but by their Princes favor,
and the same way be took.

The Veres compared. Very scipiadae, Duo fulmina belli.
SIr Francis and Sir Horace Vere, sons of Jeffery Vere Esquire, who was son of
John Vere, the fifteenth Earl of Oxford; We will first consider severally, and
then compare jointly, to see how their Actions and Arms performed, what their
birth and blood promised.

SIr Fran. was of a fiery spirit and rigid nature, undaunted in all danger, not
overvaluing the price of men's lives to purchase a victory therewith. He served
on the Scene of all Christendom where War was acted. One Masterpiece of his
valor was at the Battle of Newport, when his ragged Regiment (so were the
Englishmen called from their ragged Clothes) helped to make all whole, or
else all had been lost. SIr Horace had more meekness, and as much valor as his
brother; so pious, that he first made peace with God, before he went to war
with man. One of an excellent temper; it being true of him what is said of the
Caspian Sea, that it does never ebb nor flow; observing a constant tenor;
neither elated nor depressed with success. Had one seen him returning from a
victory, he would by his silence have suspected that he had lost the day; and
had he beheld him in a retreat, he would have collected him a Conqueror, by the
cheerfulness of his spirit. He was the first Baron of K. Charles his Creation.
Some years after, coming to Court, he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so
that he died before night, A. Dom. 163... No doubt he was well prepared for
death, seeing such his vigilance, that never any enemy surprised him in his
Quarters. Another was, when for three years he defended Ostend against a strong
and numerous Army, surrendering it at last a bare Skeleton to the King of Spain,
who paid more years purchase for it, than probably the World would endure. He
dyed in the beginning of the Reign of K. James, about the year of our Lord,
16....

Now to compare them together (such their Eminency, that they would hardly be
paralleled by any but themselves:) Sir Francis was the elder Brother, Sir
Horace lived to be the elder man. Sir Francis was more feared, Sir Horace more
loved by the Soldiery: The former in Martial Discipline was oftentimes Rigidus
ad ruinam, the latter seldom exceeded ad terrorem. Sir Francis left none, Sir
Horace no Male-Issue, whose four Coheirs are since Matched into honorable
Families. Both lived in War, much honored; dyed in peace, much lamented.

What is a great question among all Martial men, was so between these Brethren;
whether to repair a reputation ruined by some infamous disgrace, and the honor
abused by some notorious loss, the General ought to oppose the fortune that
oppresses him, and hazard what remains, to recover what is lost? Sir Francis
was of opinion, That though it is not the interest of a supreme Prince, yet it
is the concern of a subordinate Commander to support his credit at the rate of
his Army. But Sir Horace was never for sacrificing the whole for the advancing
of any part, or of many, for the humouring of one; but chose rather to break
the impetuosity of his misfortunes by yielding to them, and rather recover both
himself and his success by a prudent retreat, than lose both in an obstinate
misadventure. -- It being far more eligible to suffer in the imaginary interest
of repute, than that real one of strength; though appearances are yet so
useful, that dexterously to manage the reputation of Affairs, is to imprint in
men a great opinion of virtue and fortune, to enhance successes, and raise that
respect and confidence that seldom fa(...) to the share of reservation and
fear. But apart from that too much caution that betrayeth, and overmuch
rashness that hazardeth our fortunes, both these Heroes were very choice in
the places of their Engagements; for when all the Generals before the Battle of
Newport were for quitting the upper Downs, Sir Francis Vere well knowing how
much it imported the business of the day to hold a place of such advantage,
persuaded Count Maurice rather to expect the Enemy in that ground, than attaque
him in a worse; wherein as his opinion prevailed, so all that were present,
were Eyewitnesses both of the truth of his conjecture, and the soundness of
his judgment: For the Enemy, as he said, did not long gaze upon them; but
charging up the hills, were beaten back so effectually, that our men had the
execution of them for half a mile; which was no small advantage to the fortune
of that day.

Neither were they less observant of their time, that Mother of Action, than
their place; neither hasty nor slow to manage an opportunity that is neither
often nor long the same; -- or of the order of their Army than both, whereof
each part assisted the other at Newport and elsewhere so readily, that their
shouts and charges equally amazed their Friends and Enemies.

The Reliefs of Rhingbergh were actions of great resolution, ready dispatch, a
watchful circumspection, and good pursuit: The succor of Lithenhooven was a
performance of great and mature deliberation; the surprise of Zutphen by young
Soldiers in women's apparel, was a piece of service of many particular
stratagems; and the Siege of Daventer of as much sage advice. -- All instances
of the wonders that courage can do when wise, valor when sober, a passion when
rational, and a great spirit when advised.

Observations on the Life of Richard Cousin, LL. D.
RIchard Cousin, LL. D. (one of the greatest Civilians our Nation bred, the
grand Champion of Episcopacy, was (amongst all the Countries of England) born
in the Bishopric of Durham. His Father was a person of Quality, a Captain of a
Company at Muscleborough-Field, whence his valor returned with victory and
wealth; when crossing the River Tweed [O the uncertainty of all earthly
happiness!] he was drowned therein, to the great loss of his son Richard; and
greater, because he was not sensible thereof, as left an Infant in the Cradle.
His Mother afterward married one Mr. Meadow, a Yorkshire Gentleman, who bred
this his Son-in-law at a School at Skipton upon Craven; wherein such was his
proficiency, that before he was twelve years old (little less then a wonder to
me, in that age, from so far a Country) he was admitted into Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge. Some of his friends in Queens-Colledge in that University had a
design to fetch him thence, had not Doctor Beaumont prevented the plot, in
making him Scholar and Fellow as soon as by his Age, Degree, and the Statutes
he was capable thereof.

He was a general Scholar, Geometrician, Musician, Physician, Divine, but
chiefly Civil and Can(...) Lawyer. By Archbishop Whitgift he was preferred to
be first Chancellor of Worcester, [in that (...) a place non tam gratiosus quam
negotiosus] and afterward Dean of the Arches, wherein he carri(...) himself
without giving (though many took) offenc^ at him.

Of these one wrote a Book against him called the Abstract [abstracted, says
my Author, from (...) Wit, Learning, and Charity] to whom he returned such an
answer in defense of the High-Commision, and Oath Ex Officio, that he put his
Adversary to silence.

Others lay to his charge, that he gave ma(...) blanck Licenses, the common
occasion of unlawful Marriages; and the procurer is as bad as the th(...)
robbing many a Parent of his dear Child thereby But always malice looks
through a multiplying glass. Euclio complained, Intromisisti sexcentes (...)
Plau. in Aularia.
quos, Thou have let in six hundred Cooks, wh(...) there was but two truly told
[Antrax and Cong(...) so here was but one, which a Fugitive servant sto(...)
from a Register to make his private profit thereby GOD in his sickness granted
him his desire which he made in his health; that he might be free(...) from
Torture, which his corpulency did much suspect, bestowing (...) upon him, a
sweet and quiet departure. Pious his dying expressions; I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.
Come Lord Jesus, com^ quickly, Revel. 12. And his last words were these
Farewell my surviving friends; remember your Mortality, and Eternal life.

He gave forty pounds to the building of a Chamber in Trinity-Colledge, and
fifteen pounds per annum for the maintenance of two Scholarships therein a good
gift out of his estate, who left not above fifty pounds a year clear to his
Heir: a great argument of his integrity, that he got no more in so gainful a
place. Dying at Doctors Commons, he was buried by his own appointment in
Lambeth Church, and Doctor Andrews preached his Funeral-Sermon. Amongst the
many Verses made by the University of Cambridge, this (with the allowance of
Poetical License) came from no bad Fancy.

Magna Deos inter lis est exorta: creatas
Horum qui lites dirimit, ille deest
Consinum potiere dii compone^e tantas
Lites, quod vero jure peritus erat.
A most moderate man he was in his own nature, but more earnest in the
business of the Church, in the behalf of which he writ many Books of validity,
etc.

It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Barlow (afterward Bishop of Lincoln)
was bred by Doctor Cosen at his charge in his own Family; who in expression of
his Thankfulness, wrote this Dr. Cosen's Life, out of which most of the
aforesaid Character has been taken.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief Justice Cook.
THis accomplished person was well born at Mileham in Norfolk, of Robert Cook
Esquire, and Winifred Knightly his Wise, and as well bred. 1. When ten years of
age at Norwich School. 2. At Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge. 3. After four years
University-study, first in Cliffords Inn, and then in the Inner Temple. The
first occasion of his Rise was his stating of the Cooks Case of the Temple so
exactly, that all the House who were puzzled with it admired him; and his
pleading it so, that the whole Bench took notice of him. Such his proficiency,
that at the end of six years (exceeding early in that strict age) he was called
to the Bar, and soon after for three years chosen Reader in Lions Inn. Here
his learned Lecture so spread forth his fame, that crowds of Clients sued to
him for his Counsel; and his own suit was the sooner granted, when tendering
his Affections in order to Marriage, unto Bridget daughter and Coheir of John
Paston Esquire, whose portion moderately estimated, Viis and modis, amounted
unto thirty thousand pounds, her virtues not falling under valuation, and she
enriched her Husband with ten Children.

Then began preferment to press upon him; the City of Norwich choosing him
Recorder, the County of Norfolk their Knight for Parliament, the Queen her
Speaker therein, as also her Solicitor and Attorney. King James honored him
with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice, first of the Common Pleas, then of
the King's Bench. Thus beginning on a good bottom left him by his Father,
marrying a Wife of extraordinary wealth; having at the first great and gainful
practice, afterward many and profitable Offices, being provident to choose
good pennyworths in Purchases, leading a thrifty life, living to a great age
during flourishing and peaceable times (born as much after the persecution
under Qu: Mary, as dying before our Civil Wars) no wonder if he advanced to a
fair estate, so that all his sons might seem elder brethren, by the large
possessions left unto them.

Some falsely character him a back-friend to the Church and Clergy, being a
grand Benefactor to the Church of Norwich, who gratefully under their public
Seal honored him with this ensuing Testimony. Edwardus Coke Armiger, saepius
and in multis difficillimis Negotiis Ecclesiae nostrae auxiliatus est, and
Nuper eandem contra Templorum Hell^ones, qui Dominia, Maneria and
Haereditamenta nostra devorare sub Titulo obscuro (Concelatum dicunt) sponte
sua nobis insciis, and sine mercede ulla legitime tutatus est; atque eandem
suam nostri Defensionem in perpetuam tantae rei memoriam, and posterorum
gratia, (si opus fuerit) magna cum industria and scriptis redegit, and Nostrae
Ecclesiae donaevit.



As for the many Benefices in his own Patronage, he freely gave them to worthy
men, being went to say in his Law-language, That he would have Church Livings
pass by Livery and Seisin, not Bargain and Sale.

He was our English Trebonianus, very famous for his Comments on Littleton and
our Common Law. 1628 A Parliament was called, and the Court-party was jealous
of Sir Edward's activity against them, as who had not digested his
discontentments as he had done the Law. Hereupon to prevent his Election as a
Member, he was confined to Buckingbamshire as a Sheriff.

He scrupled to take the Oath, pretending many things against it, and
particularly that the Sheriff is bound thereby to prosecute Lollards, wherein
the best Christians may be included.

It was answered; That he had often seen the Oath given to others without any
regret, and knew full (...) that Lollard in the modern sense imported the
oppos(...) of the present Religion, as established by Law in the Land.

No excuses would serve his turn, but he must undertake that Office: However
his friends beheld it as an injurious degradation of him, who had been Lord
Chief Justice, to attend on the Judges at the Assizes.

Five sorts of people he used to fore-design to misery and poverty; Chemists,
Monopolizers, Concealers, Promoters, and rhyming Poets. For three things he
would give God solemn thanks* That he never gave his body to Physic, nor his
heart to cruelty, nor his hand to corruption. In three things he did much
applaud his own success; In his fair fortune with his Wife, in his happy study
of the Laws, and in his free coming by all his Offices, nec prece, nec pretio,
neither begging nor bribing for Preferment.

His Parts were admirable: he had a deep Judgment, faithful Memory, active
Fancy, and the Jewel of his mind was put into a fair Case, a beautiful body
with a comely countenance: A case, which he did wipe and keep clean, delighting
in good Clothes, well worn; and being wont to say, That the outward neatness
of our bodies, might be a Monitor of purity to our souls.

In his Pleadings, Discourse, and Judgments, he declined all Circumlocutions,
usually saying, The matter lies in a little Room Though some observe that his
digressions marred his repute, and had broke his neck, had he lived in any
Kings reign but King James's.
. In all Places, Callings, and Jurisdictions, he commended Modesty and Sobriety
within their boundaries, saying, If a River swells beyond the banks, it
loses its own Channel.

If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another
punishes me, I will not punish my self. In the highest Term of Business he
made Vacation to himself at his Table, and would never be persuaded privately
to retract what he had publicly adjudged, professing, He was a Judge in a
Court, not in a Chamber. He was wont to say, No wise man would do that in
prosperity, whereof he should repent in adversity. His Motto was, Prudens qui
Patiens; and his practice was accordingly, especially after he fell into the
disfavour of King James, when he did Frui suo Infortunio, and improved his
loss to his advantage. He triumphed in his own Innocence, that he had done
nothing illegally; calling to mind the Motto which he gave in his Rings when
made Sergeant, Lex est (...)ssima Classis, The Law is the safest Helmet. And
now he had leisure to peruse what formerly he had written, even thirty Books
with his own hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called VADE
MECVM, from whence at one view he took a prospect of his Life past, having
noted therein most Remarkables. His most learned and laborious Works on the
Laws will last to be admired by the Judicious Posterity, whilst Fame has a
Trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein. His judgment lately passed
for an Oracle in Law; and since the credit thereof has causelessly been
questioned, the wonder is not great. If the Prophet himself, living in an
incredulous Age, found cause to complain, Who has believed our report? it need
not seem strange that our licentious Times have afforded some to shake the
Authenticalnesse of the Reports of any earthly Judge.

He constantly had Prayers said in his own house, and charitably relieved the
Poor with his constant Alms. The Foundation of Sutton's Hospital (when indeed
but a Foundation) had been ruined before it was raised, and crushed by some
Courtiers in the hatching thereof, had not his great care preserved the same.
The Free School at T^etford was supported in its being by his assistance; and
he founded a School on his cost at Godrick in Norfolk.

It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Whitgift afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, sent unto his Pupil when the Queen's Attorney, a fair new
Testament, with this Message; He had long enough studied Common Law, now let
him study the Law of God.

When he was under a cloud at Court, and outed of his Judges place, the lands
belonging to the Church of Norwich, which formerly he had so industriously
recovered and settled thereon, were again called into question, being begged by
a Peer. Sir Edward desired him to desist, telling him, that otherwise he would
put on his Gown and Cap, and come into Westminster Hall once again, and plead
there in any Court in justification of what he had done. He died at Stoke-Poges
in Buckingham-shire, on Wednesday the third of September, being the 83 of his
age, whose last words were these, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done.

The infirmities of this Judge, as my Lord BACON recited them in a Letter to
him, were these:

1. That he delighted to speak more than hear.

2. That he would run out of his Profession; and as he observed of Divines, so
it was observed of him, none erred worse out of his element.

3. That he conversed with Books rather than Men, and only with such men that
he spoke to as Scholars, rather than treated as friends.

4. That he obtruded those things as Novelties that were stale.

5. That he would jest on men in place, and insult on men in misery.

6. That he made the Law lean too much to his opinion.

7. That his Tenants in Norfolk were hardly used; and that though he had ten
thousand pounds per an. he relieved not the poor.

8. That in his last proceedings against Somerset, he was too open and
dilatory, giving too much advantage, and breaking out to some unadvised
expressions.

9. That he stood out against Power; for which, and other failures, he was
dismissed the Council Board with this expression from King James, That he was
the fittest instrument to serve a Tyrant.

Indeed he had some projects for the Revenue, and looked for the Treasury, when
he was absolutely cast off; though he made such shift, that throw him where you
would (as King James said) he fell upon his legs.

Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Winwood.
SIr Ralph Winwood was a Gentleman well seen in most Affairs, but most expert
in matters of Trade and War; for he was first a Soldier, and then an Agent in
the Netherlands, where he remonstrated against Vorstius learnedly and
resolutely, representing as well his Masters parts as his power: It was the
very guize of that time to be learned; the wits of it were so excellent, the
helps and ass(...)ants of it were so great; Printing was so common; the world
(by Navigation) so open; great experiments so disclosed; the leisure of men so
much, the age was so peaceable; and his Majesty, after whom all writ, so
knowing.

When the Earl of Somerset was made Chamberlain by his Majesty in his Fathers
place, Sir Ralph Winwood was by the Queen made Secretary in his; succeeding him
in his Office, but exceeding him in his success (Fortune may begin any man's
greatness, but Virtue must continue it) for this Favorite taking upon him to
overruled Winwood, Winwood makes it his business to overthrow him; to which
purpose his Agents discover some secrets abroad (you may understand more of
England at Amsterdam th^^ at London) and he uses his Arts at home; for Mr.
Villiers being now brought to Court, when others were for raising him by
interest, Sir Ralph was for advancing him with Compliance -- a Compliance as he
said, that must either supple or break his Adversaries, and either way ruin
them. -- Accordingly Sir George is directed to offer his service to the Earl of
Somerset; that Earl fatally tells him, He would have none of his service, but
would break his Design. -- These words coming so cross to the Kings
inclination, and the Court's plot, provoked all persons to look further into
Sir Ralph Winwood's Intelligence concerning Sir Tho. Overbury's death. Now men's
weaknesses and faults are best known by their enemies, their virtues and
abilities from their friends; their customs and times from their servants;
their conceits and opinions from their familiars, to whom they are least
masked. To all these he applies himself, until he had discovered as much of
the practices concerning Overbury, as might humble the Earl; and as much
corruption in the conveyance of public money to the buildding of Audley-End,
as might displace his Father. An Apothecaries boy give^ the first, and a
servant that carried the money the second, both whom he surprised with the
Spanish proverb; Di mentura, y sacaras verdad: Tell a lie, and find a truth.
Indeed the natures and dispositions, the conditions and necessities, the
factions and combinations, the animosities and discontents; the ends and
designs of most people were clear and transparent to this watchful man's
intelligence and observation, who could do more with King James by working on
his fear, than others by gratifying his pleasure.

When I observe how close and silent he was at the Council Table, it puts me in
mind of the man that gave this reason why he was silent in a Treaty and
Conference: Because (said he) the Enemy might know, that as there are many here
that can speak, so here is one that can hold his peace.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Bacon.
SIr Francis was born where we are made men, bred where we are made Statesmen;
being equally happy in the quickness of the City, and politeness of the Court:
He had a large mind from his Father, and great abilities from his Mother; his
parts improved more than his years: his great, fixed, and methodical memory,
his solid judgment, his quick fancy, his ready expression, gave high assurance
of that profound and universal knowledge and comprehension of things which then
rendered him the observation of great and wise men, and afterward the wonder
of all. The great Queen was as much taken with his witty discourses when a
School boy, as with his grave Oracles when her Counsel learned. He was a
Courtier from his Cradle to his Grave, sucking in experience with his milk,
being inured to policy as early as to his Grammar: Royal Maxims were his
Sententia Puerilis; and he never saw any thing that was not noble and becoming.
The Queen called him her young Lord Keeper, for his grave ingenuity at seven
years of age; and he could tell her Majesty be was two years younger for her
happy Reign. At twelve, his industry was above the capacity, and his mind
above the reach of his Contemporaries: A prodigy of parts he must be, who was
begot by wise Sir Nicholas Bacon, born of the accomplished Mrs. Anne Cook, and
bred under the wise, learned, and pious Doctor Whitgift. His strong
observations at Court, his steady course of study in the University, must be
improved by a well contrived Travel abroad: where his conversation was so
obliging, his way so inquisitive, his prudence so eminent, that he was Sir Amie
Paulet's Agent between the Juncto of France and the Queen of England: He
allayed the solidity of England with the Air of France, until his own Affairs
and the Kingdoms service called him home at his Fathers death to enjoy a
younger Brothers estate, and act his part: Policy was his business, the Law was
only his livelihood; yet he was so great a Statesman, that you would think he
only studied men: so great a Scholar, that you would say, he only studied
Books. Such insight he had in the Law, that he was at thirty her Majesty's
Advocate; such his judgment, that he was the Student of Grayes-Inn's Oracle;
so generous and affable his disposition, that he was all men's love and wonder:
He instilled wholesome precepts of Prudence and Honor to Noblemen
(particularly the Earl of Essex, to whom he was more faithful, than he to
himself:) Great principles of Arts and Sciences to the learned; noble Maxims
of Government to Princes, excellent rules of Life to the Populacy. When his
great Patron Essex sunk, he was buoyed up by his own fleadiness, and native
worth, that admitted him to the Qu: own presence, not only to deliver matter
of Law, which was his profession, but to debate matters of State, which was his
element: his judgment was so eminent, that he could satisfy the greatest; his
condescension so humble, that he instructed the meanest: his extraordinary
parts, above the model of the age, were feared in Queen Elizabeth's time, but
employed in King James his, Favor he had in her Reign, but Trust only in his:
It Is dangerous in a factious Age to have my Lord Bacon's parts, or my Lord of
Essex his favor. Exact was his correspondence abroad and at home; constant his
Letters, frequent his Visits, great his Obligations, moderate and temperate his
Inclination; peaceable, humble, and submissive his mind; complying and
yielding, his temper: In Queen Elizabeth's time, when he could not rise by the
public way of service, he did it by that more private of Marriage, and other
commendable Improvements; whereby he showed a great soul could be rich in
spite of Fortune, though it scorned it in point of Honor. In the House of
Commons none more popular, none more zealous, none so knowing a Patriot: In the
house of Lords, none more successfully serviceable to the Crown: the easy way
of Subsidies was his design in Queen Elizabeth's time; the union with Scotland
was his contrivance in King James's.

His make and port was stately, his speech flowing and grave, each word of his
falling in its place; the issue of great reason when conceived, and of great
prudence when expressed: so great skill he had in observing and contriving of
occasions and opportunities, in suiting of Humors, and hitting of Junctures
and Flexures of Affairs, that he was in his time the Master of speech and
action, carrying all before him. The Earl of Salisbury, says Sir Walter
Rawleigh, was a good Orator, but a bad Writer; the Earl of Northampeon was a
good Writer, but a bad Orator; Sir Francis Bacon excelled in both: Much he said
he owed to his Books, more to his innate Principles and Notions: When he
thought, he said, he aimed more at Connection than Variety: When he spoke, he
designed rather the life and vigor of expression, and perspicuity of words,
than the elegancy or order of phrase. His axiom was; Words should wait on
things, rather than things on words; and his resolution was, That all affected
elegance was below the gravity and majesty of a public discourse: He rather
judged Books and Men, than either read or talked with them.

His Exercises were man-like and healthful; his Meditations cohaerent; his
Table temperate and learned, where his great Discourses were the entertainment,
and he himself the treat; resolving Cases most satisfactorily, stating
Questions most exactly, relating Histories most prudently, opening great
Secrets most clearly, answering Arguments and replying most familiarly, and
speaking what he had thoroughly weighed and considered most effectually. -- All
matters and speeches came from him with advantage; so acute and ready his wit,
so faithful his memory, so penetrating his judgment, so searching his head, so
large and rational his soul.

My Lord of Salisbury said, he had the clearest prospect of things of any man
in his age; and K. James said, That he knew the method of handling Matters
after a mild and gentle manner. His Religion was rational and sober, his
spirit public, his love to Relations tender, to Friends faithful; to the
hopeful liberal, to men universal, to his very Enemies civil. He left the best
pattern of Government in his actions under one King, and the best principles of
it in the Life of the other. His Essays and History made him the admiration of
polite Italy; his Accomplishments, the wonder of France; Monsieur Fiat saying
to him, after an earnest desire to see him, That he was an Angel to him, of
whom he had heard much, but never saw him. Solid and juycy Meat was his Diet,
and Rubarb his Physic: four hours in the morning he made his own, not by any
means to be interrupted: business was his fate, retyrement his inclination.
Socrates brought Morality from Discourse to Practice; and my Lord Bacon brought
Philosophy from Speculation to Experience. Aristotle he said, taught many to
dispute, more to wrangle, few to find out Truth, none to manage it according
to his principles: -- My Lord Bacon was a man singular in every faculty, and
eminent in all: His Judgment was solid, yet his memory was a wonder; his Wit
was quick, yet his Reason staid; his Invention was happy, yet methodical: and
one fault he had, that he was above the age he lived in; above it in his
bounties to such as brought him Presents (so remembering that he had been
Lord-Chancellour, that he forgot he was but Lord Verulam: Great his
understanding, and great his mind too) above it in his kindness to servants,
to whom he had been a better Master, if he had been a worse; and more kind, if
he had been less indulgent to them. For the first of his Excesses, King James
jeered him in his progress to New Market, saying, when he heard he gave ten
pounds to one that brought him some Fruit, My Lord, my Lord, this is the way to
Beggars-bush. For the second, he reflected upon himself, when he said to his
servants as they rose to him in his Hall; Your rise has been my fall. Though
indeed he rather trusted to their honesty, than connived at their falsehood; for
he did impartial Justice commonly to both parties, when one servant was in fee
with the Plaintiff, and the other with the Defendant: -- How well he understood
his own time, his Letters, and complyances evidence; than whom none higher in
spirit, yet none humbler in his Addresses [The proudest man is most servile.]
How little he valued wealth, appears, in that when his servants would take
money from his Closet, even while he was by, he would laugh, and say, I poor
men, that is their portion. How well he kenned the art of Converse, his Essays
discover, a piece (as he observed himself) that of all his Works was most
current, for that they come home to men's business and bosoms. How far skilled
in the Art of Government, his H. 7. War with Spain, Holy War, Elements of the
Law, irrefragably demonstrate; and how well seen in all Learning, his Natural
History, and Advancement of Learning answerably argue. In a word, how
sufficient he was, may be conjectured from this instance, that he had the
contrivance of all King James his Designs, until the Match with Spain; and
that he gave those Directions to a great Statesman Vid. Duke of Buckingham's
Life.
which may be his Character, and our conclusion. Only be it observed, that
though this peerlesse Lord is much admired by Englishmen, yet is he more
valued by Strangers; distance, as the Historian has it, diminishing his faults
to Foreigners, while we behold his perfections abated with his failings; which
set him as much below pity, as his Place did once above it; Sir Julius Caesar
(they say) looking upon him as a burden in his Family, and the Lord Brook
denying him a bottle of small beer.

Observations on the Life of the Lord John Digby.
JOhn Lord Digby of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was a younger Son of an
ancient Family, long flourishing at ^^leshull. To pass by his younger years,
(all children being alike in their Coats) when he had only an Annuity of fifty
pounds per annum, only his youth gave pregnant hopes of that Eminency, which
his mature age did produce. He did ken the Embassador's craft, as well as any
in his age, employed by King James in several Services to Foreign Princes,
recited in his Patent, as the main motives of the Honors conferred upon him.
But his managing the matchless Match with Spain was his Masterpiece, wherein
a good (I mean a great) number of State-Traverses were used on both sides:
Where if he dealt in Generalities, and did not press Particulars, we may
guess the reason of it from that expression of his; I will take care to have
my Instructions perfect, and will pursue them punctually: If he held Affairs in
suspense, that it might not come to a War on our part, it may be he did so with
more regard to his Mr. King James his inclination, than his own apprehension:
If he said; That howsoever the business went, he would make his fortune
thereby, it rather argued his weakness that he said so, his sufficiency that
he could do so, than his unfaithfulness that he did so. This is certain, that
he chose rather to come home, and suffer the utmost displeasure of the King of
England, than stay in Spain, and enjoy the highest favor of the King of Spain.
He did indeed intercede for some indulgeuce to the Papists; but it was, because
otherwise he could do no good for the Protestants. -- But whatever was at the
bottom of his Actions, there was resolution and nobleness atop, especially in
these actions. 1. Being carried from Village to Village after the King of
Spain, without that regard due to his person, or place; he expressed himself so
generously, that the Spanish Courtiers trembled; and the King declared, That be
would not interrupt his Pleasures with business at Lerma, for any Ambassador
in the world but the English; nor for any English Ambassador but Don Juan. 2.
When impure Scioppius upon his Libel against K. James, and Sir Humphrey
Bennet's complaint to the Archduke against him, fled to Madrid; my Lord
observing that it was impossible to have Justice done against him from the
Catholic King because of the Jesuits, puts his Cousin George Digby upon
cutting him; which he did over his Nose and Mouth wherewith he offended, so
that he carried the mark of his Blasphemy to his Grave. 3. When he was
extraordinary Ambassador in Germany, upon his return by Heydelbergh, observing
that Count Mansfield's Army, upon whom depended the fortune of the Palsgrave,
was like to disband for want of money, he pawned all his Plate and Jewels to
buoy up that sinking Cause for that time. That his spirit was thus great
abroad, was his honor; but that it was too great at home, was his unhappiness:
for he engagaged in a fatal Contrast with the Duke of Buckingham, that hazarded
both their safeties, had not this Lord feared the Duke's power (as the Duke
this Lord's policy) and so at last it became a drawn Battle betwixt them; yet
so, that this Earl lost the love of King Charles, living many years in his
disfavour: But such as are in a Court-cloud, have commonly the Countries
Sunshine; and this Peer during his Eclipse, was very popular with most of the
Nation. It is seldom seen, if a Favorite once broken at Court, sets up again
for himself; the hap (rather than happiness) of this Lord, the King graciously
reflecting on him at the beginning of the Long Parliament, as one best able to
give him the safest Counsel in those dangerous times. But how he incensed the
Parliament so far, as to be exceped pardon, I neither do know, nor dare
enquire. Sure I am, that after the surrender of Exeter, he went over into
France, where he met with that due respect in Foreign, which he missed in his
Native Country. The worst I wish such, who causelessly suspect him of Popish
inclinations (says my Author) is, that I may hear from them but half so many
strong Arguments for the Protestant Religion, as I heard from him, who was to
his commendation a cordial Champion for the Church of England. This Family has
been much talked of this last forty years; though all that I can say of it is
this, that great spirits, large parts, high honors, penned within narrow
Estates, seldom bless their owners with moderation, or the places they live
in with peace.

Oservations on the Life of the Lord Spencer.
He was the fifth Knight of his Family, in an immediate succession, well
allied and extracted, being descended from the Spencers, Earls of Gloucester
and Winchester. In the first year of the Reign of King James, being a moneyed
man, he was created Baron of Wormeleiton in the County of Warwick. He had such
a ready and quick Wit, that once speaking in Parliament of the valor of their
English Ancestors in defending the Liberty of the Nation, returned this Answer
to the Earl of Arundel, who said unto him, Your Ancestors were then keeping of
Sheep; If they kept Sheep, yours were then plotting of Treason. But both of
them were at present confined; but to the Lord Spencer the Upper-House ordered
Reparations, who was first and causelessly provoked. This Lord was also he, who
in the first of King James was sent (with Sir William Dethick, principal King
of Arms) to Frederick Duke of Wirtenbergh, elected into the Order of the
Garter, to present and invest him with the Robes and Ornaments thereof; which
were accordingly with geat solemnity performed in the Cathedral of Studgard. --
And this was the Lord, that when the Earl of Bristol charged the Duke of
Buckingham, started up, and demanded; Is this all you have to say against the
Duke? The Earl replied, Yes my Lord, and I am sorry it is so much. Then quoth
the Lord Spencer, If this be all, Ridiculus mus; and so sat down again.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King James.
THE K. Charles.
STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King Charles I.
Observations on the Life of the Duke of Buckingham.
NAture bestowed on him an exact comeliness, his Mother a noble education (not
so much to study, as converse:) His Travels to France, carriage and experience.
About which times, he falls into intrinsecal society with Sir Job. Greham, then
one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy-Chamber; who, I know not upon what
Luminaries he espied in his Face, dissuaded him from Marriage, and gave him
rather encouragement to woo Fortune at Court, than court it in the City: Which
advice sank well into his fancy, for within some while, the King had taken by
certain glances (whereof the first was at Apthorpe in a Progress) such liking
of his Person, that he was resolved to make him a Masterpiece, and to mould
him as it were Platonically to his own Idea. Neither was his Majesty content
only to be the Architect of his Fortune, without putting his gracious hand
likewise to some part of the work it self; Insomuch that it pleased him to
descend, and to avale his goodness, even to the giving of his foresaid friend
Sir John Greham secret directions, how, by what degrees he should bring him
into favor. His own parts and observation gained him prudence and discretion;
His Family and Ancestors in Leicester-shirt, gentility and repute; so that
there wanted nothing but Interest to set him up a Courtier: Sir Thomas Compton,
who had married his Mother, supplied him with the one, and the Earls of
Bedford, Pembrook, and Hertford, who would eclipse Somerset, helped him to the
other: For those three Lords meeting one night at Baynards-Castle, and
commanding Somerset's picture should be abused in their way; next day Sir
Thomas Lake leads him into Court, buying him the Cup-bearers place: A while
after the Countess of Bedford ushereth him to the Presence Chamber, entering
him a Bed-chamber-man, -- and the Earl of Pembrook supports him, until he was
a Favorite. The Courtiers wished him well, because he was an Englishman; the
Nobility favored him, because a Gentleman; the Ladies have a kindness for
him, because the exactest Courtier in Christendom; the King observes him much,
for his complete body, more for his pregnant parts; and the Statesmen now
consulting Somerset's removal, and finding King James his good nature loath to
leave the bosom of one Minion, until he had reposed himself in another, made
it their plot to advance him. His carriage was free and debonair; his passions
even and smooth, and one says, carried in his pocket; his nature noble and
open; his temper industrious and inquisitive; his intellectuals clear and
capable; his mind tractable and docible; his spirit resolute and undaunted. --
The first month he comes to Court, he takes place above all his fellows; and
being removed with some affront by a creature of Somerset's, gives him a box on
the car; an action that gave him and his friends a seasonable occasion of a
Contest with Somerset, and him a clear conquest over him: Somerset as
Chamberlain would have cut off his hand, and he as Favorite was like to have
cut off his head. This new Favorite rises; all are weary of Somerset the
first Minion, all welcome the second. The King is first his Tutor, and then his
Patron, instructing him before he employed him. Three sorts of studies he
engaged him in; the first was for delights in private Retyrements; the second,
for ornament in Discourse; the third, for ability in Business. He had Princely
apprehensions of the principles and Maxims of Government, a distinct notion of
all his Affairs, an excellent way to make use of other men's Abilities; and
these incomparable Rules from my Lord Bacon, which were transcribed in his Life.

Sir, In the first place, I shall be bold to put you Complete Instructions for
a Statesman, given by L. B. to D. B.
in mind of the present condition you are in; You are not only a Courtier,
but a Bed-chamber-man, and so are in the eye and ear of your Master; but you
are also a Favorite; The Fourite of the time, and so are in his bosom also;
The world has so voted you, and does so esteem of you, (for Kings and great
Princes, even the wisest of them, have had their Friends, their Favorites,
their Privadoes, in all ages; for they have their affections as well as other
men) of these they make several uses: sometimes to communicate and debate their
thoughts with them, and to ripen their judgments thereby; sometimes to ease
their cares by imparting them; and sometimes to interpose them between
themselves and the envy or malice of their People (for Kings cannot err, that
must must be discharged upon the shoulders of their Ministers; and they who are
nearest unto them must be content to bear the greatest load.) Truly Sir, I do
not believe or suspect that you are chosen to this eminency, out of the last of
these considerations; for you serve such a Master, who by his wisdom and
goodness, is as free from the malice or envy of his Subjects, as, I think I
may say truly, ever any King was, who has sat upon his Throne before him: But
I am confident, his Majesty has cast his eyes upon you, as finding you to be
such as you should be, or hoping to make you to be such as he would have you to
be; for this I may say without flattery, your outside promises as much as can
be expected from a Gentleman. But be it in the one respect, or other, it
belongs to you to take care of your self, and to know well what the name of a
Favorite signifies: If you be chosen upon the former respects; you have reason
to take care of your actions and deportment, out of your gratitude, for the
King's sake; but if out of the later, you ought to take the greater care, for
your own sake.

You are as a new risen Star, and the eyes of all men are upon you; let not
your own negligence make you fall like a Meteor.

The contemplation then of your present condition must necessarily prepare you
for action; what time can be well spared from your attendance on your Master,
will be taken up by suitors, whom you cannot avoid, nor decline, without
reproach; for if you do not already, you will soon find the throng of suitors
attend you; for no man, almost, who has to do with the King, will think
himself safe, unless you be his good Angel, and guide him, or, or least, that
you be not a Malus Genius against him; so that, in respect of the King your
Master, you must be very wary, that you give him true information; and if the
matter concern him in his Government, that you do not flatter him; if you do,
you are as great a Traitor to him in the Court of Heaven, as he that draws his
sword against him: and in respect of the Suitors which shall attend you, there
is nothing will bring you more honor and more ease, then to do them what right
in justice you may, and with as much speed as you may; for believe it, Sir,
next to the obtaining of the suit, a speedy and a gentle denial (when the case
will not bear it) is the most acceptable to suitors; they will gain by their
dispatch, whereas else they shall spend their time and money in attending; and
you will gain in the ease you will find in being rid of their importunity. But
if they obtain what they reasonably desired, they will be doubly bound to you
for your favor: Bis dat qui cito dat; it multiplis the courtesy, to do it
with good words, and speedily.

That you may be able to do this with the best advantage, my humble advice is
this; when suitors come unto you, set apart a certain hour in; day to give them
audience: If the business be light and easy, it may by word only be
delivered, and in a word be answered; but if it be either of weight, or of
difficulty, direct the suitor to commit it to writing, (if it be not so
already) and then direct him to attend for his answer at a set time to be
appointed, which would constantly be observed, unless some matter of great
moment do interrupt it: when you have received the Petitions (and it will
please the Petitioners well, to have access unto you to deliver them into your
own hand) let your Secretary first read them, and draw lines under the material
parts thereof (for the matter, for the most part, lies in a narrow room.) The
Petitions being thus prepared, do you constantly set apart an hour in a day to
peruse those Petitions; and after you have ranked them into several files,
according to the subject matter, make choice of two or three friends, whose
judgments and fidelities you believe you may trust in a business of that
nature, and recommend it to one or more of them, to inform you of their
opinions, and of their reasons for, or against the granting of it; and if the
matter be of great weight indeed, then it would not be amiss to send several
Copies of the same Petition to several of your friends, the one not knowing
what the other does, and desire them to return their answers to you by a
certain time, to be prefixed in writing; so shall you receive an impartial
answer, and by comparing the one with the other, you shall both discern the
abilities and faithfulness of your friends, and be able to give a judgment
thereupon, as an Oracle. But by no means trust not to your own judgment alone,
for no man is ^^niscient; nor trust only to your servants, who may mislead
you, or mis-inform you; by which they may perhaps gain a few crowns, but the
reproach will lie upon your self, if it be not rightly carried.

For the facilitating of your dispatches, my advice is further, that you divide
all the Petitions, and the matters therein contained, under several heads;
which, I conceive, may be fitly ranked into these eight sorts.

1. Matters that concern Religion, and the Church and Churchmen. 2. Matters
concerning Justice, and the Laws, and the professors thereof. 3. Counselors,
and the Council Table, and the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom. 4.
Foreign Negotiations and Embassies. 5. Peace and War, both foreign and civil,
and in that the Navy and Forts, and what belongs to them. 6. Trade at home and
abroad. 7. Colonies, or foreign Plantations. 8. The Court, and Curiality.
And whatsoever will not fall naturally under one of these heads, believe me,
Sir, will not be worthy of your thoughts, in this capacity we now speak of. And
of these sorts, I warrant you, you will find enough to keep you in business.

I begin with the first, which concerns Religion.

1. In the first place, be you your self rightly persuaded and settled in the
true Protestant Religion, professed by the Church of England; which doubtless
is as sound and orthodox in the doctrine thereof, as any Christian Church in
the world.

2. In this you need not be a Monitor to your gracious Master the King; the
chiefest of his Imperial Titles, is to be The Defender of the Faith; and his
learning is eminent, not only above other Princes, but above other men; be but
his scholar, and you are safe in that.

3. For the Discipline of the Church of England, by Bishops, etc. I will not
positively say, as some do, that it is Jure Divino; but this I say, and think,
(...) animo, that it is the nearest to Apostolical truth; and confidently I
shall say, it is fittest for Monarchy of all others: I will use no other
authority to you, than that excellent Proclamation set out by the King himself
in the first year of his Reign, and annexed before the Book of Common Prayer;
which I desire you to read; and if at any time there shall be the least motion
made for Innovation, to put the King in mind to read it himself: It is most
dangerous in a State to give ear to the least alterations in Government.

4. Take heed, I beseech you, that you be not an instrument to countenance the
Romish Catholics: I cannot flatter; the world believes that some near in blood
to you are too much of that persuasion; you must use them with fit respects,
according to the bonds of nature; but you are of kin, and so a friend to their
persons, not to their errors.

5. The Archbishops and Bishops, next under the King, have the government of
the Church and Ecclesastical affairs; be not you the mean to prefer any to
those places, for any by-respects, but only for their learning, gravity and
worth; their lives and Doctrine ought to be exemplary.

6. For Deans, and Canons or Prebends of Cathedral Churches: In their first
institution they were of great use in the Church; they were not only to be of
Council with the Bishop for his revenue, but chiefly for his Government in
causes Ecclesiastical; use your best means to prefer such to those places who
are fit for that purpose, men eminent for their learning, piety, and
discretion, and put the King often in mind thereof; and let them be reduced
again to their first institution.

7. You will be often solicited, and perhaps importuned to prefer Scholars to
Church Livings; you may further your friends in that way, caeteris peribus;
otherwise, remember, I pray, that these are not places merely of favor, the
charge of souls lies upon them; the greatest account whereof will be required
at their own hands; but they will share deeply in their faults who are the
instruments of their preferment.

8. Besides the Romish Catholics, there is a generation of Sectaries, the
Anabaptists, Brownists, and others, of their kinds; they have been several
times very busy in this Kingdom, under the color of zeal for reformation of
Religion: The King your Mr. knows their disposition very well; a small touch
will put him in mind of them; he had experience of them in Scotland, I hope he
will beware of them in England; a little countenance or connivance sets them on
fire.

9. Order and decent ceremonies in the Church, are not only comely but
commendable; but th^^ must be great care, not to introduce Innovatio(...) they
will quickly prove scandalous: men are (...)rally over-prone to suspicion; the
true Pr(...) Religion is seated in the golden mean; the (...) unto her, are the
extremes on either ^and.

10. The persons of Churchmen are to be (...) in due respect, for their
words-sake, and protected from scorn: but if a Clergyman be loose and
(...)dalous, he must not be patronized nor wink't at; the example of a few
such, corrupt many.

11. Great care must be taken, that the patrimony of the Church be not
sacrilegiously diverted (...) lay-uses: His Majesty in his time has
religio(...) stopped a leak that did much harm, and would (...) have done more.
Be sure, as much as in you lies, stop the like upon all occasions.

12. Colleges and Schools of Learning are to be cherished and encouraged,
thereto breed up a (...) stock to furnish the Church and Commonwealth, when
the old store are transplanted. This Kingdom has in later ages been famous for
good literature; and if preferment shall attend the deservers, there will not
want supplies.

Next to Religion, let your care be to promote Justice. By justice and mercy is
the Kings thro^^ established.

1. Let the rule of Justice be the Laws of the Land, an impartial arbiter
between the King and his people, and between one Subject and another: I shall
not speak superlatively of them, left I be su^pected of partiality, in regard
of my own profession; but this I may truly say, they are second to none in the
Christian world.

2. And, as far as it may lie in you, let no Arbitrary power be intruded: the
people of this Kingdom love the Laws thereof, and nothing will oblige them
more, then a confidence of the free enjoying of them. What the Nobles, upon an
occasions once said in Parliament, Nolumus leges Anglia mutari, is imprinted in
the hearts of all the people.

3. But because the life of the Laws lies in the due execution and
administration of them, let your eye be in the first place, upon the choice of
good Judges: These properties had they need to be furnished with; To be learned
in their profession, patient in hearing, prudent in governing, powerful in
their elocution to persuade and satisfy both the parties and ^earers, just in
their judgment; and, to sum up all, they must have these three Attributes;
They must be men of courage, fearing God, and bating covet(...)e; An ignorant
man cannot, a Coward dares not be a good Judge.

4. By no means be you persuaded to interpose your self, either by word or
letter, in any cause depending, or like to be depending in any Court of
Justice, nor suffer any other great man to do it where you can hinder it; and
by all means dissuade the King himself from it, upon the importunity of (...)
for themselves or their friends: If it should prevail, it perverts Justice; but
if the Judge be so just, and of such courage (as he ought to be) as not to be
inclined thereby, yet it always leaves a (...) of suspicion behind it. Judges
must be as chaste as Caesar's Wife, neither to be, nor to be suspected to be,
unjust; and Sir, the honor of the Judges in their judicature, is the Kings
honor whom they represent.

5. There is great use of the service of the Judges in their Circuits, which
are twice in the year held throughout the Kingdom; the trial of a few causes
between party and party, or delivering of the Gaols in several Counties, are of
great use for the expedition of justice; yet they are of much more use for the
government of the Counties through which they pass, if that were well thought
upon.

6. For if they had instructions to that purpose, they might be the best
intelligencers to teh King, of the true state of his whole Kingdom, of the
disposition of the people, of their inclinations, of their intentions and
motions, which are necessary to be truly understood.

7. To this end, I could wish, that against every Circuit all the Judges
should, sometimes by the K. himself, and sometimes by the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper, in the King's name, receive a charge of those things which the
present times did much require; and at their return should deliver a faithful
account thereof, and how they found and left the Counties through which they
passed, and in which they kept their Assizes.

8. And that they might the better perform this work, which might be of great
importance, it will not be amiss that sometimes this charge be public, as it
uses to be in the Star Chamber at the end of the Terms next before the Circuit
begins, where the King's care of justice, and the good of his people, may be
published; and that sometimes also it may be private, to communicate to the
Judges some things not so fit to be publicly delivered.

9. I could wish also that the Judges were directed to make a little longer
stay in a place than usually they do; a day more in a County would be a very
good addition, (although their wages for their Circuits were increased in
proportion) it would stand better with the gravity of their employment; whereas
now they are sometimes enforced to rise over-early, and to sit over-late, for
the dispatch of their business, to the extraordinary trouble of themselves and
of the people, their times indeed not being ^orae juridic^; And, which is the
main, they would have the more leisure to inform themseves (quasi aliud
agentes) of the true estate of the Country.

10. The attendence of the Sheriffs of the Counties, accompanied with the
principal Gentlemen, in a comely, not a costly equipage, upon the Judges of
Assize at their coming to the place of their sitting, and at their going out,
is not only a civility, but of use also: It raises a reverence to the persons
and places of the Judges, who coming from the King himself on so great an
errand, should not be neglected.

11. If any sue to be made a Judge, for my own part, I should suspect him; but
if either directly or indirectly he should bargain for a place of judicature,
let him be rejected with shame: vendere jure potest, em^rat ille prius.

12. When the place of a chief Judge of a Court becomes vacant, a puisne Judge
of that Court, or of another Court, who has approved himself fit and
deserving, would be sometimes preferred; it would be a good encouragement for
him, and for others, by his example.

13. Next to the Judge, there would be care used in the choice of such as are
called to the degree of Ser jeants at Law (for such they must be first, before
they be made Judges) none should be made Ser jeants, but such as probably might
be held fit to be Judges afterward, when the experience at the Bar has
fitted them for the Bench: Therefore by all means cry down that unworthy course
of late times used, that they should pay moneys for it. It may satisfy some
Courtiers, but it is no honor to the person so preferred, nor to the King, who
thus prefers him.

14. For the Kings Counsel at the Law, especially his Attorney and Solicitor
General, I need say nothing; their continual use for the Kings service, not
only for his Revenue, but for all the parts of his Government, will put the
King, and all those who love his service, in mind to make choice of men every
way fit and able for that employment: they had need to be learned in their
prosession, and not ignorant in other things; and to be dexterous in those
affairs where of the dispatch is committed to them.

15. The Kings Attorney of the Court of Ward^ is in the true quality of the
Judges; therefore what has been observed already of Judges, which are intended
principally of the three great Courts of Law at Westminster, may be applied to
the choice of the Attorney of this Court.

16. The like for the Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, who partakes of both
qualities, partly of a Judge of that Court, and partly of an Attorney General;
for so much as concerns the proper ^evenue of the Duchy.

17. I must not forget the Judges of the four Circuits in the twelve Shires of
Wales, who although they are not of the first magnitude, nor need be of the
degree of the Coyf (only the chief Justice of Chester, who is one of the
number, is so) yet are they considerable in the choice of them, by the same
rules as the other Judges are; and they sometimes are, and fitly may be,
transplanted into the higher Courts.

18. There are many Courts (as you see) some superior, some provincial, and
some of a lower orb; It were to be wished, and is fit to be so ordered, that
every of them keep themselves within their proper spheres. The harmony of
justice is then the sweetest, when there is no jarring about the jurisdiction
of the Courts; which methinks wisdom cannot much differ upon, their true
bounds being for the most part so clearly known.

19. Having said thus much of the Judges, somewhat will be fit to put you in
mind concerning the principal Ministers of Justice: and in the first, of the
High Sheriffs of the Counties, which have been very ancient in this Kingdom, I
am sure before the Conquest; The choice of them I commend to your care, and
that at fit times you put the King in mind thereof; That as near as may be
they be such as are fit for those places, for they are of great trust and
power: The Posse Comitatus, the power of the whole County, being legally
committed unto them.

20. Therefore it is agreeable with the intention of the Law, that the choice
of them should be by the commendation of the great Officers of the Kingdom, and
by the advice of the Judges, who are presumed to be well read in the condition
of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom: And although the King may do it of himself,
yet the old way is the good way.

21. But I utterly condemn the practice of the latter times, which has lately
crept into the Court (at the back-stairs) That some who are pricked for
Sheriffs, and were fit, should get out of the Bill; and others who were neither
thought upon, nor worthy to be, should be nominated, and both for money.

22. I must not omit to put you in mind of the Lords Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants of the Counties: their proper use is for ordering the
Military affairs, in order to an invasion from abroad, or a rebellion or
sedition at home; good choice should be made of them, and prudent instructions
given to them, and as little of the Arbitrary power as may be left unto them;
and that the Muster-Masters, and their Officers under them, incroach not upon
the Subject; that will detract much from the King's service.

23. The Justices of Peace are of great use; Anciently there were Conservators
of the peace, these are the same, saving that several Acts of Parliament have
altered their denomination, and enlarged their jurisdiction in many
particulars; The fitter they are for the peace of the Kingdom, the more heed
ought to be taken in the choice of them.

24. But negatively, this I shall be bold to say, that none should be put into
either of those Commissions with an eye of favor to their persons, to give
them countenance or reputation in the places where they live, but for the
King's service sake; nor any put out for the disfavour of any great man: It
has been too often used, and has been no good service to the King.

25. A word more, if you please to give me leave, for the true rules of the
moderation of Justice on the Kings part. The execution of justice is committed
to his Judges, which seems to be the severer part: but the milder part, which
is mercy, is wholly left in the King's immediate hand: And Justice and Mercy
are the true supporters of his Royal Throne.

26. If the King shall be wholly intent upon Justice, it may appear with an
over-rigid aspect; but if he shall be over-remiss and easy, it draws upon
him contempt. Examples of Justice must be made sometimes for terror to some;
Examples of Mercy, sometimes, for comfort to others: the one procures fear, and
the other love. A King must be both feared and loved, else he is lost.

27. The ordinary Courts of Justice I have spoken of, and of their Judges and
judicature; I shall put you in mind of some things touching the High Court of
Parliament in England, which is superlative; and therefore it will behove me to
speak the more warily thereof.

28. For the institution of it, it is very ancient in this Kingdom: It
consists of the two Houses, of Peers and Commons, as the Members; and of the
King's Majesty, as the head of that great body: By the King's authority alone,
and by his Writs, they are assembled, and by him alone they are prorogued and
dissolved; but each House may adjourn it self.

29. They being thus Assembled, are more properly a Council to the King, the
Council of the Kingdom, to advise his Majesty in those things of weight and
difficulty, which concern both the King and People, then a Court.

30. No new Laws can be made, nor old Laws abrogated or altered, but by common
consent in Parliament, where Bills are prepared and presented to the two
Houses, and then delivered: but nothing is concluded but by the King's Royal
assent; They are but Embroys, it is he gives life unto them.

31. Yet the House of Peers has a power of Judicature in some cases; properly,
to examine, and then to affirm, or if there be cause, to reverse the judgments
which have been given in the Court of King's Bench, (which is the Court of
highest jurisdiction in the Kingdom, for ordinary Judicature) but in these
cases it must be done by Writ of Error in Parliamento: And thus the rule of
their proceedings is not absoluta potestas, as in making new Laws (in that
conjuncture as before) but limitata potest as, according to the known Laws of
the Land.

32. But the House of Commons have only power to censure the Members of their
own House, in point of election or misdemeauors, in or toward that House; and
have not, nor ever had power, so much as to administer an Oath to prepare a
judgment.

33. The true use of Parliaments in this Kingdom is very excellent; and they
would be often called, as the affairs of the Kingdom shall require; and
continued so long as is necessary, and no longer, for then they be but burdens
to the people, by reason of the privileges justly due to the Members of the
two Houses and their Attendants; which their just rights and privileges are
religiously to be observed and maintained; but if they should be unjustly
enlarged beyond their true bounds, they might lessen the just power of the
Crown, it borders so near upon popularity.

34. All this while I have spoken concerning the Common Laws of England,
generally, and properly so called, because it is most general and common to
almost all cases and causes, both civil and criminal: But there is also another
Law, which is called the Civil or Ecclesiastical Law, which is confined to some
few heads; and that is not to be neglected: and although I am a professor of
the Common Law, yet am I so much a lover of Truth and of Learning, and of my
native Country, that I do heartily persuade that the professors of that Law,
called Civilians (because the Civil Law is their guide) should not be
discountenanced nor discouraged; else whenever we shall have o^ght to do with
any foreign King or State, we shall be at a miserable loss, for want of
Learned men in that profession.

III. I come now to the consideration of those things which concern Counselors
of State, The Council Table, and the great Offices and Officers of the
Kingdom, which are those who for the most part furnish out that honorable
Board.

I. Of Counselors, there are two sorts: The first, Consiliarii ^ati, (as I may
term them) such are the Prince of Wales, and others of the King's Sons (when he
has more;) of these I speak no^, for they are naturally born to be Counselors
to the KING, to learn the art of Governing betimes.

2. But the ordinary sort of Counselors are such as the King, out of a due
consideration of their worth and abilities, and withal, of their fidelities to
his Person and to his Crown, calls to be of Council with him in his ordinary
Government. And the Council Table is so called, from the place where they
ordinarily assemble and sit together; and their Oath is the only ceremony
used, to make them such, which is solemnly given unto them, at their first
admission: These honorable persons are from thenceforth of that Board and
Body: They cannot come until they be thus called, and the King at his pleasure
may spare their attendance; and he may dispense with their presence there,
which at their own pleasure they may not do.

3. This being the quality of their service, you will easily judge what care
the King should use, in his choice of them; It behooves that they be persons of
great trust and fidelity, and also of wisdom and judgment, who shall thus
assist in bearing up the King's Throne; and of known experience in public
affairs.

4. Yet it may not be unfit to call some of young years, to train them up in
that Trade, and so fit them for those weighty affairs, against the time of
greater maturity; and some also for the honor of their persons: But these two
sorts not to be tied to so strict attendance, as the others from whom the
present dispatch of business is expected.

5. I could wish that their number might not be so overgreat, the persons of
the Counselors would be the more venerable. And I know that Queen Elizabeth,
in whose time I had the happiness to be born, and to live many years, was not
so much observed, for having a numerous, as a wise, Council

6. The duty of a Privy-Councellor to a King, I conceive, is, not only to
attend the Councel-board, at the times appointed, and there to consult of what
shall be propounded; But also to study those things which may advance the
King's honor and safety, and the good of the Kingdom, and to communicate the
same to the King, or to his fellow Counselors, as there shall be occasion. And
this, Sir, will concern you more then others, by how much you have a larger
share in his affections.

7. And one thing I shall be bold to desire you to recommend to his Majesty:
That when any new thing shall be propounded to be taken into consideration,
that no Counselor should suddenly deliver any positive opinion thereof; it is
not so easy with all men to retract their opinions, although there shall be
cause for it: But only to hear it, and at the most but to break it, at first,
that it may be the better understood against the next meeting.

8. When any matter of weight has been debated, and seems to be ready for a
resolution; I wish it may not be at that sitting concluded (unless the
necessity of the time press it) lest upon second cogitations there should be
cause to alter, which is not for the gravity and honor of that Board.

9. I wish also that the King would be pleased sometimes to be present at that
Board, it adds a Majesty to it: And yet not to be too frequently there, that
would render it less esteemed when it is become common; Besides, it may
sometimes make the Counselors not to be so free in their debates in his
presence, as they would be in his absence.

10. Besides the giving of Counsel, the Counselors are bound by their Duties
ex vi termini, as well as by their Oaths, to keep counsel; therefore are they
called de Privato Consilio Regis, and a seeretioribus consili^^ Regis.

11. One thing I add, in the negative, which is not fit for that Board, the
entertaining of private causes, of meum and tuum; those should be left to the
ordinary course and Courts of Justice.

12. As there is great care to be used for the Counselors themselves to be
chosen, so there is of the Clerks of the Council also, for the secreting of
their Cousultations; and methinks, it were fit that his Majesty be speedily
moved, to give a strict charge, and to bind it with a solemn order (if it be
not already so done) that no copies of the orders of that Table be delivered
out by the Clerks of the Council, but by the order of the Board; nor any not
being a Councellor, or a Clerk of the Council, or his Clerk, to have access to
the Councel-Books: and to that purpose, that the servants attending the Clerks
of the Council be bound to secrecy, as well as their Masters.

13. For the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom, I shall say little;
for the most of them are such, as cannot well be severed from the
Councellorship; and therefore the same rule is to be obseved for both, in the
choice of them: In the general, only, I advise this, let them be set in those
places for which they are probably the most fit.

14. But in the quality of the persons, I conceive it will be most convenient
to have some of every sort, (as in the time of Queen Elizabeth it was) one
Bishop at the least, in respect of questions touching Religion, or
Church Government; one or more skilled in the Laws; some for Martial affairs,
and some for Foreign affairs: By this mixture one will help another, in all
things that shall there happen to be moved: But if that would fail, it will be
a safe way, to consult with some other able persons well versed in that point
which is the subject of their Consultation, which yet may be done so warily, as
may not discover the main end therein.

IV. In the next place, I shall put you in mind of the Foreign Negotiations
and Embassies, to or with Foreign Princes or States, wherein I shall be little
able to serve you.

1. Only I will tell you what was the course in the happy days of Queen
Elizabeth, whom it will be no dis-reputation to follow: She did vary, according
to the nature of the employment, the quality of the persons she employed; which
is a good rule to go by.

2. If it were an Embassy of Gratulation or Ceremony (which must not be
neglected) choice was made of some noble person, eminent in place, and able in
purse, and he would take it as a mark offavour, and discharge it without any
great burden to the Queen's Coffers, for his own honors sake.

3. But if it were an Embassy of weight, concerning affairs of State, choice
was made of some sad person of known judgment, wisdom and experience, and not
of a young man, not wayed in Statematters; nor of a mere formal man, whatsoever
his title or outside were.

4. Yet in company of such, some young towardly Noblemen or Gentlemen were
usually sent also, as Assistants or Attendants, according to the quality of the
persons, who might be thereby prepared and fitted for the like employment, by
this means, at another turn.

5. In their company were always sent some grave and sad men, skilful in the
Civil Laws, and some in the Languages, and some who had been formerly
conversant in the Courts of those Princes, and knew their ways; these were
Assistants in private, but not trusted to manage the Affairs in public; that
would detract from the honor of the principal Ambassador.

6. If the Negotiation were about Merchants affairs, then were the persons
employed for the most part Doctors of the Civil Law, assisted with some other
discreet men; and in such the charge was ordinarily defrayed by the Company or
Society of Merchants, whom the Negotiation concerned.

7. If Legier Ambassadors or Agents were sent to remain in or near the Courts
of those Princes or States (as it was ever held fit, to observe the motions,
and to hold correspondency with them, upon all occasions) such were made choice
of, as were presumed to be vigilant, industrious, and discreet men, and had the
language of the place whither they were sent; and with these were sent such as
were hopeful to be worthy of the like employment at another time.

8. Their care was, to give true and timely Intelligence of all Occurrences,
either to the Queen her self, or the Secretaries of State, unto whom they had
their immediate relation.

9. Their charge was always born by the Queen, duly paid out of the Exchequer,
in such proportion, as, according to their qualities and places might give them
an honorable subsistence there: But for thereward of their service, they were
to expect it upon their return, by some such preferment as might be worthy of
them, and yet be little burden to the Queens Coffers or Revenues.

10. At their going forth, they had their general Instructions in writing,
which might be communicated to the Ministers of that State whither they were
sent; and they had also private Instructions, upon particular occasions; and at
their return, they did always render an account of some things to the Queen her
self, of some things to the body of the Council, and of some others to the
Secretaries of State, who made use of them, or communicated them, as there was
cause.

11. In those days there was a constant course held, that by the advice of the
Secretaries, or some principal Counselors, there were always sent forth into
several parts beyond the Seas some young men, of whom good hopes were conceived
of their towardliness, to be trained up, and made fit for such public
Employments, and to learn the Languages. This was at the charge of the Queen,
which was not much, for they traveled but as private Gentlemen; and as by
their industry their deserts did appear, so far were they further employed or
rewarded. This course I shall recommend unto you, to breed up a Nursery of such
public Plants.

V. For Peace and War, and those things which appertain to either; I in my own
disposition and profession am wholly for peace, if please God to bless the
Kingdom therewith, as for many years past he has done: and,

1. I presume I shall not need to persuade you to the advancing of it; nor
shall you need to persuade the King your Master therein, for that he has
hither to been another Solomon in this our Israel; and the Motto which he has
chosen (Beati Pacifici) shows his own judgment: But he must use the means to
preserve it, else such a jewel may be lost.

2. God is the God of Peace (it is one of his Artributes) therefore by him
alone we must pray, and hope to continue it: there is the foundation.

3. And the King must not neglect the just ways for it; Justice is the best
Protector of it at home, and providence for War is the best prevention of it
from abroad.

4. Wars are either Foreign or Civil; for the Foreign War by the King upon some
neigbour Nation, I hope we are secure; the King, in his just and pious
disposition, is not inclinable thereunto; his Empire is long enough, bounded
with the Ocean, as if the very situation thereof had taught the King and People
to set up their rests, and say, Ne plus ultra.

5. And for a war of invasion from abroad; only we must not be over-secure,
that is the way to invite it.

6. But if we be always prepared to receive an Enemy, if the ambition or malice
of any should incite him, we may be very confident we shall long live in peace
and quietness, without any attempt upon us.

7. To make the preparations hereunto the more assured: In the first place, I
will recommend unto you the care of our out-work, the Navy Royal and Shipping
of our Kingdom, which are the walls thereof; and every great Ship is as an
impregnable sort; and our many safe and commodious Ports and Havens in every of
these Kingdoms, are as the redoubts to secure them.

8. For the body of the Ships, no Nation of the world does equal England, for
the Oaken Timber where with to build them; and we need not borrow of any other,
iron for Spikes, or Nails to fasten them together: but there must be a great
deal of providence used, that our Ship-Timber be not unnecessarily wasted.

9. But for Tackling, as Sails and Cordage, we are beholden to our neighbors
for them, and do buy them for our money; that must be foreseen and laid up in
store against a time of need, and not sought for when we are to use them: But
we are much too blame, that we make them not at home, only Pitch and Tar we
have not of our own.

10. For the true Art of building of Ships, for burden and service both, no
Nation in the world exceeds us: Ship-wrights and all other Artizans belonging
to that Trade must be cherished and encouraged.

11. Powder and Ammunition of all sorts we can have at home, and in exchange
for other home commodities we may be plentifully supplied from our Neighbors,
which must not be neglected.

12. With Mariners and Seamen this Kingdom is plentifully furnished, the
constant Trade of Merchandising will furnish us at a need; and navigable Rivers
will repair the store, both to the Navy Royal, and to the Merchants, if they be
set on work, and well paid for their labor.

13. Sea-Captains and Commanders, and other Officers must be encouraged, and
rise by degrees, as their fidelity and industry deserve it.

14. Our strict League of amity and alliance with our near Neighbors the
Hollanders is a mutual strength to both; the shipping of both, in conjuncture,
being so powerful, by Gods blessing, as no Foreigners will venture upon; This
League and Friendship must inviolably be observed.

15 From Scotland we have had in former times some Alarms and Inrodes into the
Northern parts of this Kingdom; but that happy union of both Kingdoms under
one Sovereign, our gracious King, I hope, has taken away all occasions of
breach between the two Nations; let not the cause arise from England, and I
hope the Scots will not adventure it; or if they do, I hope they will find,
that although to our King they were his firstborn Subjects, yet to England
belongs the birthright: But this should not be any cause to offer any injury
to them, nor to suffer any from them.

16. There remains then no danger, by the blessing of God, but a Civil War,
from which God of his mercy defend us, as that which is most desperate of all
others. The Kings wisdom and justice must prevent it, if it may be; or if it
should happen, quod absit, he must quench that wilde-fire with all the
diligence that possible can be.

17. Competition to the Crown, there is none, nor can be; therefore it must be
a fire within the bowels, or nothing, the cures whereof are these; Remedium
praeveniens, which is the best physic either to a natural bod, or to a State,
by just and equal Government to take away the occasion; and Remedium puniens,
if the other prevail not: The service and vigilance of the Deputy Lieutenants
in every County, and of the high-^heriff, will contribute much herein to ou^
security.

18. But if that should not prevail, by a wise and timous inquisition, the
peccant humors and humorists must be discovered, and purged, or cut off; mercy
in such a case, in a King, is truly cruelty.

19. Yet if the Heads of the Tribes can be taken off, and the misled multitude
will see their error, and return to their obedience, such an extent of mercy
is both honorable and profitable.

20. A King, against a storm, must foresee, to have a convenient stock of
treasure: and neither be without money, which is the sinews of War, nor to
depend upon the courtesy of others, which may fail at a pinch.

21. He must also have a Magazine of all sorts, which must be had from Foreign
parts, or provided at home; and to commit them to several places, under the
custody of trusty and faithful Ministers and Officers, if it be possible.

22. He must make choice of expert and able Commanders to conduct and manage
the War, either against a foreign invasion, or a home-rebellion; which must not
be young and giddy, which dare, not only to fight, but to swear, and drink,
and curse; neither fit to govern others, nor able to govern themselves.

23. Let not such be discouraged, if they deserve well, by misinformation, or
for the satisfying the humors or ambition of others, perhaps out of envy,
perhaps out of treachery, or other sinister ends: A steady hand in governing of
Military Affairs, is more requisite then in times of peace, because an error
committed in war, may perhaps prove irremediable.

24. If God shall bless these endeavors, and the King return to his own house
in peace, when a Civil War shall be at an end, those who have been found
faithful in the Land must be regarded, yea, and rewarded also; the traitorous,
or treacherous, who have misled others, severely punished; and the neutrals,
and false-hearted friends and followers, who have started afide like a broken
bow, be noted, Carbone nigro; and so I shall leave them, and this part of the
work.

VI. I come now to the sixth part, which is Trade, and that is either at home,
or abroad. And I begin with that which is at home; which enableth the Subjects
of the Kingdom to live, and lays a foundation to a foreign Trade by traffic
with others, which enableth them to live plentifully and happily.

1. For the Home-trade, I first commend unto your consideration the
encouragement of Tillage, which will enable the Kingdom for Corn for the
Natives, and to spare for exportation: And I my self have known, more than
once, when in times of dearth, in Queen Elizabeth's days, it drained much coin
of the Kingdom, to furnish us with Corn from foreign parts.

2. Good Husbands will find the means by good husbandry, to improve their
lands by Lime, Chalk, Marl, or Sea-sand, where it can be had: But it will not
be amiss, that they be put in mind thereof, and encouraged in their industries.

3. Planting of Orchards in a soil and air fit for them, is very profitable, as
well as pleasureable; Sider and Perry are notable Beverage in Sea-voyages.

4. Gardens are also very profitable, if planted with Artichokes, roots, and
such other things as are fit for food; whence they are called Kitchingardens,
and that very properly.

5. The planting of Hop-yards, sowing of Woad, and Rape-seed, are found very
profitable for the Planters, in places apt for them, and consequently
profitable for the Kingdom, which for diverse years was furnished with them
from beyond the Seas.

6. The planting and preserving of Woods, especially of Timber, is not only
profitable, but commendable, therewith to furnish posterity, both for building
and shipping.

7. The Kingdom would be much improved, by draining of drowned lands, and
gaining that in from the overflowing of salt waters and the sea, and from
fresh waters also.

8. And many of those grounds would be exceeding fit for Dairies; which, being
well houswiv^d are exceeding commodious.

9. Much good land might be gained from Forests and Chases, more remote from
the King's access, and from other commonable places; so as always there be a
due care taken, that the poor Commoners have no injury by such improvement.

10. The making of navigable Rivers would be very profitable; they would be as
so many indraughts of wealth, by conveying of commodities with ease from place
to place.

11. The planting of Hemp and Flax would be an unknown advantage to the
Kingdom, many places therein being as apt for it, as any Foreign parts.

12. But add hereunto, that it be converted into Linen-cloath, or Cordage, the
commodity thereof will be multiplied.

13. So it is of the Wools and Leather of the Kingdom, if they be converted
into Manufactures.

14. Our English Dames are much given to the wearing of costly Laces; and, if
they be brought from Italy, or France, or Flanders, they are in great esteem;
whereas, if the like Laces were made by the English, so much thread as would
make a yard of Lace, being put into that Manufacture, would be five times, or
perhaps ten, or twenty times the value.

15. The breeding of Cattle is of much profit, especially the breed of Horses,
in many places, not only for travel, but for the great saddle; the English
Horse, for strength, and courage, and swiftness together, not being inferior
to the horses of any other Kingdom.

16. The Minerals of the Kingdom, of Lead, Tron, Copper, and Tynn especially,
are of great value, and set many able-bodied subjects on work; it were great
pity they should not be industriously followed.

17. But of all Minerals, there is none like to that of Fishing upon the coasts
of these Kingdoms, and the seas belonging to them: our Neighbors within half a
days sail of us, with a good wind, can show us the use and value thereof; and,
doubtless there is sea-room enough for both Nations, without offending one
another; and it would exceedingly support the Navy.

18. This Realm is much enriched, of late years, by the Trade of Merchandise
which the English drive in Foreign parts; and, if it be wisely managed, it must
of necessity very much increase the wealth thereof; care being taken, that the
exportation exceed in value the importation, for then the balance of Trade must
of necessity be returned in Coin, or Bullion.

19. This would easily be effected, if the Merchants were persuaded, or
compelled to make their returns in solid commodities, and not too much thereof
in vanity, tending to excess.

20. But especially care must be taken, that Monopolies, which are the Cankers
of all trading, be not admitted, under specious colors of public good.

21. To put all these into a regulation, if a constant Commission to men of
honesty and understanding were granted, and well pursued, to give order for the
managing of these things both at home and abroad, to the best advantage; and
that this Commission were subordinate to the Councel-board, it is conceived it
would produce notable effects.

VII. The next thing is that of Colonies and Foreign Plantations, which are
very necessary, as out-lets to a populous Nation, and may be profitable also,
if they be managed in a discreet way.

1. First, in the choice of the place; which requires many circumstances, as
the situation near the Sea, for the commodiousness of an intercourse with
England, the temper of the Air and climate, as may best agree with the bodies
of the English, rather inclining to cold, than heat; that it be stored with
Woods, Mines, and Fruits, which are naturally in the place; that the soil be
such as will probably be fruitful for Corn, and other conveniences, and for
breeding of Cattle; that it has Rivers, both for passage between place and
place, and for fishing also, if it may be; that the Natives be not so many, but
that there may be elbow-room enough for them, and for the Adventives also: All
which are likely to be found in the West Indies.

2. It would be also such as is not already planted by the Subjects of any
Christian Prince, or State, nor over-neerly neighboring to their Plantation.
And it would be more convenient, to be chosen by some of those Gentlemen or
Merchants which move first in the work, than to be designed unto them from the
King; for it must proceed from the option of the people, else it sounds like an
Exile: so the Colonies must be raised by the leave of the King, and not by his
command.

3. After the place is made choice of, the first step must be, to make choice
of a fit Governor, who although he have not the name, yet he must have the
power of a Viceroy; and if the person who principally moved in the work be not
fit for that trust, yet he must not be excluded from command; but then his
defect in the Governing part must be supplied by such Assistants as shall be
joined with him, or as he shall very well approve of.

4. As at their setting out they must have their Commission, or Letters Patents
from the King, that so they may acknowledge their dependency upon the Crown of
England, and under his protection; so they must receive some general
instructions how to dispose of themselves when they come there, which must be
in nature of Laws unto them.

5. But the general Law, by which they must be guided and governed, must be the
Common Law of England; and to that end it will be fit, that some man,
reasonably studied in the Law, and otherwise qualified for such a purpose, be
persuaded (if not thereunto inclined of himself, which were the best) to go
thither as a Chancellor amongst them, at first; and when the Plantation were
more settled, then to have Courts of Justice there, as in England.

6. At the first planting, or as soon after as they can, they must make
themselves defensible both against the Natives, and against Strangers; and to
that purpose, they must have the assistance of some able Military man, and
convenient Arms and Ammunition for their defense.

7. For the Discipline of the Church in those parts, it will be necessary, that
it agree with that which is settled in England; else it will make a Schism, and
a rent in Christ's Coat, which must be seamless: and, to that purpose, it will
be fit, that by the King's supreme power in. Causes Ecclesiastical, within all
his Dominions, they be subordinate under some Bishop and Bishopric of this
Realm.

8. For the better defense against a common Enemy, I think it would be best,
that Foreign Plantations should be placed in one Continent, and near together;
whereas, if they be too remote the one from the other, they will be dis-united,
and so the weaker.

9. They must provide themselves of houses, such as for the present, they can,
and, at more leisure, such as may be better; and they first must plant for Corn
and Cattle, etc. for food, and necessary sustenance; and after, they may
enlarge themselves for those things which may be for profit and pleasure, and
to traffic withal also.

10. Woods for shipping in the first place, may doubtless be there had, and
Minerals there found, perhaps, of the richest; howsoever, the Mines out of the
fruits of the earth, and seas, and waters adjoining, may be found in abundance.

11. In a short time they may build Vessels and Ships also for Traffic with
the parts near adjoining, and with England also, from whence they may be
furnished with such things as they may want, and in exchange, or barter, send
from thence other things, with which quickly, either by Nature, or Art, they
may abound.

12. But these things would, by all means be prevented; That no known Bankrupt,
for shelter; nor known Murderer, or other wicked person, to avoid the Law; nor
known Heretic, or Schismatic, be suffered to go into those Countries; or, if
they do creep in there, not to be harbored* or continued: else, the place
would receive them naught, and return them into England, upon all occasions,
worse.

13. That no Merchant, under color of driving a Trade thither, or from thence,
be suffered to work upon their necessities.

14. And that to regulate all these inconveniences, which will insensibly grow
upon them, that the King be pleased to erect a subordinate Council in England,
whose care and charge shall be, to advise, and put in execution, all things
which shall be found fit for the good of those new Plantations; who, upon all
occasions, shall give an account of their proceedings to the King, or to the
Councel-board, and from them receive such directions as may best agree with the
Government of that place.

15. That the King's reasonable profit be not neglected, partly, upon
reservation of moderate rents and services; and partly upon Customs; and
partly, upon importation and exportation of Merchandise; which, for a
convenient time after the Plantation begin, would be very easy, to encourage
the work; but, after it is well settled, may be raised to a considerable
proportion, worthy the acceptance.

VIII. I come to the last of those things which I propounded, which is, the
Court, and Curiality.

The other did properly concern the King, in his Royal capacity, as Pater
patriae; this more properly, as Paterfamilias: And herein,

1. I shall, in a word, and but in a word only, put you in mind, That the
King in his own person, both in respect of his Household, or Court, and in
respect of his whole Kingdom; (for a little Kingdom is but as a great Household,
and a great Household, as a little Kingdom) must be exemplary, Regis ad
exemplum, etc. But for this, God be praised, our charge is easy; for your
gracious Master, for his Learning and Piety, Justice and Bounty, may be, and
is, not only a president to his own Subjects, but to foreign Princes also; yet
he is still but a man, and seasonable Memento's may be useful; and being
discreetly used, cannot but take well with him.

2. But your greatest care must be, that the great men of his Court (for you
must give me leave to be plain with you, for so is your injunction laid upon
me) your self in the first place, who is first in the eye of all men, give no
just cause of scandal, either by light, or vain, or by oppressive carriage.

3. The great Officers of the King's Household had need be both discreet and
provident persons, both for his Honor, and for his Thrift: they must look both
ways, else they are but half-sighted: Yet in the choice of them, there is more
latitude left to affection, than in the choice of Counselors, and of the great
Officers of State, before touched, which must always be made choice of merely
out of judgment, for in them the Public has a great interest.

4. For the other Ministerial Officers in Court (as, for distinction sake, they
may be termed) there must be also an eye unto them, and upon them; they have
usually risen in the Household by degrees, and it is a noble way, to encourage
faithful service: But the King must not bind himself to a necessity herein,
for then it will be held ex debito; neither must he alter it, without an
apparent cause for it: but to displace any who are in, upon displeasure, which
for the most part happens upon the information of some great man, is, by all
means to be avoided, unless there be a manifest cause for it.

5. In these things you may sometimes interpose, to do just and good offices:
but for the general, I should rather advise, meddle little, but leave the
ordering of those Houshold-affairs to the Whitestaff, which are those
honorable persons, to whom it properly belongs, to be answerable to the King
for it; and to those other Officers of the Greencloth, who are subordinate to
them, as a kind of Council, and a Court of Justice also.

6. Yet for the Green-cloath Law, (take it in the largest sense) I have no
opinion of it, farther then it is regulated by the just Rules of the
Common-Laws of England.

7. Toward the support of his Majesty's own Table, and of the Princes, and of
his necessary Officers, his Majesty has a good help by Purveyance, which
justly is due unto him; and, if justly used, is no great burden to the
Subject; but by the Purveyors, and other Underofficers, is many times abused.
In many parts of the Kingdom, I think it is already reduced to a certainty in
money; and if it be indifferently and discreetly managed, it would be no hard
matter to settle it so throughout the whole Kingdom; yet to be renewed from
time to time, for that will be the best, and safest, both for the King, and
People.

8. The King must be put in mind, to preserve the Revenues of his Crown both
certain, and casual, without diminution, and to lay up treasure in store
against a time of extremity; empty Coffers give an ill found, and make the
people many time forget their Duty; thinking that the King must be beholden to
them for his supplies.

9. I shall by no means think it fit, that he reward any of his servants with
the benefit of forfeitures, either by Fines in the Court of Star Chamber, or
High Commission Courts, or other Courts of Justice; or that they should be
farmed out, or bestowed upon any, so much as by promise, before judgment
given; it would neither be profitable, nor honorable.

10. Besides matters of serious consideration, in the Courts of Princes, there
must be times for pastimes and disports: When there is a Queen, and Ladies of
Honor attending her, there must sometimes be Masks, and Revels, and
Enterludes; and when there is no Queen, or Princess, as now, yet at Festivals,
and for entertainment of Strangers, or upon such occasions, they may be fit
also: Yet care would be taken, that in such cases, they be set off more with
wit and activity, then with costly and wasteful expenses.

11. But for the King and Prince, and the Lords and Chivalry of the Court, I
rather commend, in their turns and seasons, the riding of the great Horse, the
Tilts, Barriers, Tennis, and Hunting, which are more for the health and
strength of those who exercise them, than in an effeminate way to lease
themselves and others.

And now the Prince grows up fast to be a man, and is of a sweet and
excellent disposition; it would he an irreparable stain and dishonor upon you,
having that access unto him, if you should misled him, or suffer him to be
mis-lead by any flattering Parasites: The whole Kingdom has a deep interest in
his virtuous education; and if you, keeping that distance which is most fit, do
humbly interpose your self, in such a case, he will one day give you thanks for
it.

12. Yet Dice and Cards may sometimes be used for recreation, when field-sports
cannot be had; but not to use it as a mean to spend the time, much less to
mis-pend the thrift of the Gamesters.

SIR, I shall trouble you no longer; I have run ^over these things as I first
propounded them; please you to make use of them, or any of them, as you shall
see occasion; or to lay them by, as you think best, and to add to them, as you
daily may, out of your experience.

I must be bold again, to put you in mind of your present condition; you are
in the quality of a Sen^^el; if you sleep, and neglect your charge, you are an
undone man, and you may fall faster than you have risen.

I have but one thing more to mind you of, which nearly concerns your self;
you serve a great and gracious Master, and there is a most hopeful young
Prince, whom you must not desert; it behooves you to carry your self wisely and
evenly between them both: adore not so the rising Son, that you forget the
Father, who raised you to the height; nor be you so obsequious to the Father,
that you give just cause to the Son, to suspect that you neglect him: But carry
your self with that judgment, as, if it be possible, may please and content
them both, which, truly, I believe, will-be no hard matter for you to do; so
may you live long beloved of both, which is the hearty prayer of

Your most obliged and devoted servant.


THese were his Rules, and this his practice: My Lord of Nottingham he bought
nobly from the Admiralty; his Assistant, Vice Admiral Maunsel, he entertained
civilly, and procured that place for life, which he had only during pleasure.
The Warden of the Cinque Ports resigned his place seasonably; the Master of the
Horse gave up his preferment and his life opportunely. -- He advanced his
Relations prudently, gratifying them, and fortifying himself: He made an
excellent choice of Servants and Confederates; entertained the ablest and most
faithful Assistants: Doctor Williams and Dr. Laud were of his Council for the
Church, Sir Francis Bacon for the State. From the first he received frequent
Schedules of Persons and Doctrines; from the other constant Transcripts of
Rules and Intelligence: Never any man more constant to his approved friend,
never any more fatal to his known Enemies: He was the instrument of all the
Subjects services to his Sovereign, and of his Sovereign's favors to his
Subjects: no place was bestowed without his knowledge; no action passed without
his approbation; not an eminent man but depended on him, and was subordinate to
him: His dispatches were many, and pregnant testimonies that he was a great
Master of his Time, and a greater of his Method and Affairs. Great he was
indeed, and humble too, not raised by his present fortune above the sense of
his former: envied he was, not haud; applauded in the same Parliament for his
services, and declaimed against for his preferments; ever studious of the
Peoples Interest, which is the care if few Favorites; never happy in their
love, which is the fate of all. He approved himself both to the declining
Monarch, and the rising, as having won himself not so much to their affections,
which were alterable, as to their judgments, which were lasting; and made his
preferment rather a matter of Interest, which is real, than of favor, which is
personal: Looking on Somerset laid at his feet, Bristol and Williams brought on
their knees, Carlisle and Pembrook beneath him, and Holland behind him; and
every man that would not owe his preferment to his favor, must owe his ruin
to his frown. He was entrusted with the greatest service and secret in Spain,
when he dived to the bottom of that Countries policy, and the Intrigues of
Europes Counsels; and could come off in the Match with Spain to the King and
Kingdoms mind dexterously, when Sir Walter Aston and my Lord of Bristol were
at a loss about it, to both their displeasures, weakly, amidst the open
entertainment, and secret working of that place. -- In his attendance on the
King in Scotland as Counselor of that Kingdom, he carried himself with
singular sweetness and temper, as it behoved him, being now in (...) your, and
succeeding one of their own. They that censure his sudden advancements and
great prefements, consider not, that

Certainly the hearts of great Princes, if they be considered as it were in
Abstract, without the necessity of States, and circumstances of time, being
besides their natural Extent, moreover once opened and dilated with Affection,
can take no full and proportionable pleasure in the exercise of any narrow
bounty. And albeit at first they give only upon choice and love of the Person
yet within a while themselves likewise begin to love their givings, and to
foment their deeds, no less than Parents do their children.

Besides that, by so long, and so private, and so various consociation with a
Prince of such excellent nature, he had now gotten as it were two lives in his
own Fortune and Greatness; whereas otherwise the Estate of a Favorite is at
the best but a Tenant at will, and rarely transmitted.

And the more notable, because it had been without any visible Eclipse or Wane
in himself, amidst diverse variations in others. How general his care, appears
in that amidst his more important Negotiations, he condescended to this noble
act of charity to a Scholar and to Learning; which I must, for my part,
celebrate above all his Expenses. There was a collection of certain rare
Manuscripts exquistely written in Arabic, and sought in the most remote parts,
by the diligence of Erpenius the most excellent Linguist. These had been left
to the Widow of the said Erpenius, and were upon sale to the Jesuits of
Antwerp, liquorish Chapmen of such Ware. Whereof the Duke getting knowledge by
his worthy and learned Secretary, Doctor Mason, interverted the bargain, and
gave the poor Widow for them five hundred pounds, a sum above their weight in
silver, and a mixed act both of bounty and charity; the more laudable, being
much out of his natural Element. These were they, which after his death were as
nobly presented as they had been bought to Cambridge by his Duchess, as soon
as she understood by the foresaid Doctor her Lords intention to furnish the
said University with other choice Collections from all parts at his own charge.

The Duke's Answers to his Appeachments, in number thirteen, I find very
diligently and civilly couched: and though his heart was big, yet they all
savor of an humble spirit one way, and an equitable consideration another,
which could not but possess every vulgar conceit, and somewhat allay the whole
matter; that in the bolting and fifting of near fourteen years of such power
and favor, all that came out could not be expected to be pure, and white, and
fine Meal, but must needs have withal among it a certain mixture of Padar and
Bran in this lower age of humane fragility. Howsoever this tempest did only
shake; and not rent his Sails.

His defense against danger was noble, but his contempt of it nobler; for when
Sir George Goring advised him only to turn out of the ordinary road, He
resolved not to wave his way upon this reason, perhaps more generous then
provident; That if, as he said, he should but once by such a diversion make his
enemy believe he were afraid of danger, he should never live without. And when
his young Nephew the Lord Viscount Fielding offered him another time to put on
his Coat and blew Ribbon, while they passed through a Town where they
apprehended some design against the Duke; He would not (as he said) accept of
such an offer in that case from a Nephew, whose life be tendered as much as
himself: But after some short direction to his company, he rode on without
perturbation of mind, though a drunken fellow laid hold of his Bridle under
pretense of begging, to begin a tumult.

Neither (for ought I can Sir Hen. Wotton's life of the Duke of Buckingh.
hear) was there any further enquiry into that practice, the Duke peradventure
thinking it wisdom not to reserve discontentments too deep.

But in the midst of these little dangers, his Grace was not unmindful of his
civil course, to cast an eye upon the ways to win unto him such as have been of
principal credit in the lower house of Parliament; applying lenitives, or
subducting from that part where he knew the Humors were sharpest; amidst which
thoughts, he was surprised by a fatal stroke, written in the black book of
Necessity. Whereof he was forewarned as well by his own as others
apprehensions, as appears by his last Addresses to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Earl of Holland, and his sacred Majesty.

And certain it is, that some good while before, Sir Clement Throckmorton, a
Gentleman then living, of grave judgment, had in a private conference advised
him to wear a privy Coat; whose counsel the Duke received very kindly, but gave
him this answer; That against any popular fury, a shirt of male would be but a
silly defense; and as for any single man's assault, he took himself to be in no
danger. -- So dark is Destiny. Since he is dead, he is charged;

1. For advancing his Relations; which yet was humanity in him, and not a fault.

2. For enriching himself; though as it is said of that French Peer, he was
rich only in Obligations, his Estate being at the mercy of Suitors.

To his familiar Servants, so open-handed he was, though many of them so
ungrateful as to deny relation unto him, either about his person in ordinary
attendance; or about his affairs of State, as his Secretaries; or of Office, as
his Steward; or of Law, as that worthy Knight whom he long used to solicit his
Causes: He lest all both in good Fortune: and, which is more, in good Fame:
Things very seldom consociated in the instruments of great Personages.

3. He had many Offices, but committed himself a most willing Pupil to the
directions of such as were generally thought fit to manage affairs of that
nature, condescending to the meanest Arts, to a^apt himself to his employments.

4. He was not bookish, it is true; his Affairs forbad him study, yet had he a
natural readiness to discourse of all subjects; which wanted nothing toward
applause, but the candor and benevolence of his hearers, whose dis-ingenuity
oft-times turned his most honest discourses to accusations; witness that
ebullition of his joy to his Majesty in behalf of is People, which Sir John
Eliot made Treason aagainst them.

5. He was great indeed, but gentle and affable; insomuch, that though his
memory were a place so taken up with high thoughts, and unlikely to have any
room for matters of so small importance, he was ever known to entertain his
younger acquaintance with much familiarity, -- and all men with that civility,
wherein was observed his peculiarity, happy bravery of deriving favors, and
conferring them with so many noble Circumstances, as the manner was as obliging
as the matter, and men's understandings oft-times as much puzzled as their
gratitude.

6. He would intercede, it is confessed, for poor Malefactors, more out of his
innate compassion, than any design to obstruct the course of Justice;
believing doubtless (says my Author) that hanging was the worst use a man
could be put to.

In fine, a Gentleman he was of that choice and curious make for exterior
shape, as if Nature had not in his whole frame drawn one line amiss; nor was
his Fabric raised by soft and limber studs, but sturdy and virile. His
intellectual gained him rather the opinion of a wise man, than of a wit. His
skill in Letters very mean; for finding Nature more indulgent to him in the
ornaments of the body, than of the mind, the tendency of his youthful Genius
was rather to improve those excellencies wherein his choice so lieity
consisted, than to addict himself to morose and sullen Bookishnesse; therefore
his chief exercises were, dancing, fencing, vaulting, and the like, as
indications of strenuous Agility; y(...) could he have foreseen where all the
Climacterie and motions of his Advance should have terminated, that from no
more than a mere Gentleman, it should be his luck to vault into the dignity of
a Duke, and trust of a Privy-Counsellor, we may presume his early studies would
not have cast so much neglect upon a thing so important to him as a Statesman,
though not very fashionable as a Courtier. The temperature of his mind was, as
to moral habits, rather disposed to good than bad; his deportment was most
affable and debonair, a rare example in one raised so high and so speedily: To
his Relations liberal, firm to his friend, formidable to his enemy. He was a
Courtier, and a young man, a profession and age prone to such desires, as when
they tend to the shedding of no man's blood, to the ruin of no Family,
Humanity sometimes connives at, though she never approves. So that take him in
his public capacity (wherein only he comes under our observation, which
meddles not with men's private converse or moralities any further then they are
subservient to their State-employments) we may say of him, as one does of his
Master; That in him the things we can wish, are fewer than those we praise.

But be it for ever remembered, That the villain, whose despair of advancement
made him careless of his own life, and Master of this Lords, talked in his
examination of a Sermon at St. Faiths, not his own Parish Church, where he
heard; That every man in a good cause might be Judge and Executioner of sin;
which he applied to himself. Whence raw discoursers in Divinity should learn
how prudently they should preach; and itching hearers, how warily they should
hear.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Noy.
SIr William Noy, born in Cornwall, was bred in Lincolns-Inne, a most sedulous
Student, constantly conversant with ancient Writing, verifying his Anagram:
WILLIAM NOY, I moyl in Law.



He was for many years the stoutest Champion for the Subjects Liberty, until
King Charles entertained him to be his Attorney. The dis-ingenuity of the
Parliament, and his impendent necessity, would have put another Sovereign on
extraordinary ways: but to King Charles it was enough, they were illegal. No
extremity, though never so fatal, could provoke him to irregularities; yet
whatever ways the Laws allowed, or Prerogative claimed, to secure a desperate
People, that would undo themselves, he was willing to hearken to; therefore for
a cunning man, the cunningest as such a project of any within his three
Dominions he sends for his Attorney General Noy, and tell him what he had in
contemplation, bids him contrive the Mode, but a statutable one, for defraying
the expense: Away goes the subtle Engineer, and at length, -- from old Records
bolts out an ancient common Precedent of raising a Tax for setting out a Navy
in case of danger.

The King glad of the discovery, as Treasure-trove, presently issued out Writs,
first to the Port-Towns within the Realm, declaring that the safety of the
Kingdom was in danger (and so it was indeed) and therefore that they should
provide against a day prefixed twenty seven Ships of so many Tun, with Guns,
Gunpowder, Tackle, and all other things necessary.

But this business is no sooner ripened, than the Author of it dies, Aug. 6.
1634. He was a man passing humorous, but very honest; clownish, but knowing; a
most indefatigable plotter, and searcher of ancient Records, whereby he became
an eminent instrument both of good and evil (and of which most, is a great
question) to the King's Prerogative: For during the times that Parliaments were
frequent, he appeared a stout Patriot for the Commonwealth; and in the last
was an active opponent in the differences concerning Tonnage and Poundage: But
when the dissolution of that was in some men's apprehensions, the end of all; No
sooner did the King show him the Lure of advancement, but quitting all his
former Inclinations, he wheeled about to the Prerogative, and made amends with
his future service for all his former dis-obligements. -- This is something
smart; more to his advantage is that character Archbishop Laud gives him; That
be was the best friend the Church ever had of a Layman, since it needed any
such (and indeed he was very vigilant over its Adversaries, witness his early
foresight of the danger, and industrious prosecution of the illegality of the
design of buying Impropriations set up by persons no^ well affected to the
present constitution) and tha^ of the Historian, that he loved to hear Dr.
Preston preach, because he spoke so solidly, as if be knew Gods will. -- To
which I add a passage from the mouth of one present thereat.

The Goldsmiths of London had (and in due time may have) a custom once a year
to weigh gold in the Star Chamber, in the presence of the Privy Council and the
King's Attorney. This solemn weighing by a word of Art they call the Pixe, and
make use of so exact scales therein, that the Master of the Company affirmed,
that they would turn with the two hundredth part of a grain. I should be loath
(said the Attorney Noy, standing by) that all my Actions should be weighed in
those Scales; with whom all men concur that know themselves: And this was the
first evidence of his parts, and the occasion of his reputation. Three Grasiers
at a Fai^ had left their money with their Hostess while they went to Market; --
one of them calls for the money, and runsaway; -- the other two come upon the
woman, and sue her for delivering that which she had received from the three,
before the three came and demanded it. -- The Cause went against the Woman, and
Judgment was ready to be pronounced; when Mr. Noy being a stranger, wishes
her to give him a Fee, because he could not plead else; and then moves in
Arrest of Judgment, that he was retained by the Defendant, and that the case
was this: The Defendant had received the money of the three together, and
confes^eth was not to deliver it until the same three demanded it; and
therefore the money is ready, Let the three men come, and it shall be paid: a
motion which altered the whole proceeding. Of which, when I hear some say it
was obvious, I remember that when Columbus had discovered America, every one
said it was easy: And he one day told a company at Table where he was, that he
could do a stranger thing than that discovery; he would make an Egg stand an
end on a plain Table: the speculatives were at a loss how it should be done;
-- he knocks the Egg upon the end, and it stands: Oh! was that all, they cried;
Yes (says he) this is all! and you see how hard a thing it is to conceive a
thing in the Idea, which it is nothing to apprehend in the performance. I need
say no more of this Gentleman, but that Sergeant Maynard will say to this hour,
he rose mainly at first by being looked upon as Mr. Noy's Favorite.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Savil.
THe methods of this Gentleman's advancement exactly parallel those of his
Countryman Sir Thomas Wentworth: Both had the same foundation of wealth and
honor to build on; both had solid and strong parts to act by; both began with
Popularity in the Country, proceeded with activity in Parliaments; --
accomplished themselves with correspondence all over the Nation: both eminent
upon the Bench; both hospitable at home; both bountiful to Lecturers; both well
skilled in, and steadfast to the great points of Prerogative and Liberty. -- For
the last whereof; they were so bold (as sure either by carrying the Cause to
oblige the People to themselves, or by suffering for it to enrage them against
the Government) that Sir R. Weston made it his business to take off the one,
and my Lord of Canterbury the other; which they did with such success, that as
my Lord Wentworth became a great Favorite, so the Lord Savile was an eminent
Counselor; only finding that his young Neighbor had got the start of him, he
kept to one of his popular Principles always, viz. a restless impetuosity
toward Papists, against whom he made himself famous; 1. For a Disputation
procured by him in Drury Lane (whither he brought Bishop Usher under the notion
of a Countrey-Parson; when the Jesuits cried, There was more Learning in that
Parson, than in all the men in England.) 2. For a project offered by him in
Parliament: -- For when they taking advantage of King Charles his wants,
proffered to maintain five thousand men to serve his Majesty in Ireland, and a
proportion of Ships to secure him in England, on condition of the free exercise
of their Religion; Sir John interposed, That if the King were pleased but to
call on the Recusants to pay Thirds (legally due to the Crown) it would prove a
way more effectual, and less offensive, to raise a mass of money: It being
but just, that they who were so rich and free to purchase new Privileges,
should first pay their old Penalties. When I read of a Lord Savile going
privately to Scotland, 16^9. subscribing to a Petition, with other moderate
Lords, as they called them, containing the very sense of the faction (insomuch
that it is observed, the City-Petition and theirs were couched in the same
words) yet going to Oxford, and after all, being so turbulent there, that his
Majesty was feign to send him beyond Sea, where his Majesty writes with his own
hand, He doubts be will rather exchange his villainy, than end it; I am almost
of that wise man's mind, that there were no less then 17 particular Designs
set on foot by the promotion of the late Troubles; whereof though most, yet not
all were carried on in Westminster: -- or to enforce something more solid; that
a King should say as the Italian does, If my Subject deceives me once, God
forgive him; If a second time, God forgive me; and the rather, because it is
fatal for Majesty to err twice.

Oservations on the Life of the Lord Bishop Williams.
A Strong constitution made his parts, a strict education improved them;
unwearied was his industry, unexpressible his capacity: He never saw the book
of worth he read not; he never forgot what he read; he never lost the use of
what he remembered: Every thing he heard or saw was his own; and what was his
own, he knew how to use to the utmost: His extraction being Gentile, his Soul
large and noble, his presence and carriage comely and stately; his learning
copious, his judgment stayed, his apprehension clear and searching, his
expression lively and effectual, his elocution flowing and majestic; his
Proctorship, 1612. discovered him a person above his place; and his Lectures to
his Pupils, above his preferment. Bishop Vaughan first admits him to his
Family, and then to his bosom; there his strong Sermons, his exact government
(under my Lord) his plentiful observation, his numerous acquaintance, made him
my Lord Chancellor Egerton's friend, rather than his servant; his familiar,
rather then his Chaplain. Never was there a more communicative Master to
instruct, than my Lord Elsemere; never a more capable Scholar to learn, than
Doctor Williams, who had instilled to him all necessary State-maximes while his
old Master lived, and had bequeathed to him four excellent 1. Of the
Prerogative Royal. 2. Privileges of Parliament. 3. The proceedings in
Chancery. 4. The power of the Star Chamber.
Books when his Master was dead: These four books he presented to King James
the very same time that he offered himself to the Duke of Buckingham. The
Excellent Prince observed him as much for the first gift, as the noble Duke did
for the second: the King and Duke made him their own, who they saw had made
that excellent Book his. Willing was King James to advance Clergymen, and glad
to meet with men capable of Advancement. His two Sermons at Court made him Dean
of Westminster; his exact state of the Earl of Somerset's Case made him capable
of, and the KING'S inclination to trust his Conscience in a Divines hand,
fetled him in the Lord Keepers place actually, only for three years to please
the people (who were offended with his years, now but 34. and his calling a
Divine:) but designedly for ever to serve his Majesty. The Lawyers despised him
at first, but the Judges admired him at last: and one of them said, That never
any man apprehended a Case so clearly, took in all the Law, Reason, and other
Circumstances more punctually, recollected the various Debates more faithfully,
summed it up more compendiously, and concluded more judiciously and discreetly.
For many of them might have read more than he, but none digested what they had
read more solidly, none disposed of their reading more methodically, none
therefore commanded it more readily. He demurred several Orders, as that of my
Lord Chancellor's pardon, the Earl Marshal's Patent, etc. to let his Majesty
see his judgment; yet passed them, to let him see his obedience: He would
question the Dukes Order sometimes discreetly, to let him know he understood
himself; yet he would yield handsomely, to let him see he understood him: and
indeed he had the admirable faculty of making every one of his actions carry
prudence in the performance. Necessary it was, for one of his years and place
to keep his distance, and avoid contempt; yet fatal was it to him to do so, and
incur envy. -- Well understood he the interest of all his places, and
resolutely he maintained them. What? says he, shall the Liberties of
Westminster be infringed, when the chief Favorite is Steward, and the Lord
Keeper Dean, and I the contemptible man that must be trampled on? When he was
in trouble, what passion, what insinuation, what condescension has he at
command? when petitioned to, how quickly he looked through men and business?
how exactly would he judge, and how resolutely conclude, without an immediate
intimation from his Majesty or the Duke! Many eyes were upon him, and as many
eyes were kept by him upon others, being very watchful on all occasions to
accommodate all Emergencies, and meet with all humors-alwayes keeping men in
dependence on the Duke, according to this intimation of his. -- Cabal 287. Let
him hold it, but by your Lordships favor, not his own power. A good way, had
he been constant to it, the neglect whereof undid him; for designing the
promotion of Doctor Price to the Archbishopric of Armagh, he moved it to the
Duke, who told him it was disposed of to Doctor Usher. Whereupon he went his
own way to advance that man, and overthrew himself: For then his Lord let him
feel what he had threatened my Lord Bacon when he advanced him; That if he did
not owe his preferment always to his favor, he should owe his fall to his
frown. The peremptorinesse of his judgment rendered him odious; his compliance
with Bristol, suspected; and his Sermon at King James his Funeral [his trial
rather than his preferment] obnoxious. His spirit was great to act, and too
great to suffer. It was prudence to execute his decrees against all opposition
while in power; it was not so, to bear up his miscarriages against all
Authority, while in disgrace. A sanguine complexion, with its resolutions, do
well in pursuit of success: Phlegm and its patience do better in a retreat
from miscarriages. This he wanted, when [it may be, thinking fear was the
passion of King Charles his Government as well as King James] he seconded his
easy fall with loud and open discontents, and those discontents with a
chargeable defense of his servants that were to justify them, and all with
that unsafe popularity, invidious pomp, and close irregularity, that laid him
open to too many active persons that watched him: Whether his standing out
against Authority, to the perplexing of the Government in the Star Chamber in
those troublesome times; his entertainment and favor for the Discontented and
Non-conformists; his motions for Reformation and alteration in twelve things;
his hasty and unlucky Protestation in behalf of the Bishops, and following
Actions in England and Wales, where it is all men's wonder to hear of his meruit
sub Parliamento, had those private grounds and reasons, that if he Bishop could
have spoke with the King but half an hour, he said, would have satisfied him,
the King of Kings only knows, to whom he has given, I hope, a better
account than any Historian of his time has given for him.

But I understand better his private inclinations, than his public actions;
the motions of his nature, than those of his power; the conduct of the one
being not more reserved and suspicious, than the effects of the other manifest,
and noble: for not to mention his Libraries erected at St. John's and
Westminster, his Chapel in Lincoln-Colledge; the repairs of his Collegiate
Church: his pensions to Scholars more numerous than all the Bishops and
Noble-mens besides; his Rent-charges on all the Benefices in his Gift as Lord
Keeper, or Bishop of Lincoln, to maintain hopeful youth, according to the
Statute in that case provided. Take this remarkable instance of his
muni^icence; that when Du Moulin came over, he calls his Chaplain, now the R.
R. Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and tells him,
he doubted the good man was low, wishing him to repair to him with some money,
and his respects, with assurance that he would wait upon him himself a^ his
first liesure. -- The excellent Doctor rejoyneth, that he could carry him no
less than twenty pounds; the noble Bishop replyeth, he named not the sum^ to
sound his Chaplains mind; -- adding, that twenty pounds was neither fit for him
to give, nor fo(...) the reverend Foreigner to receive. Carry him, said he, an
hundred pounds.

He is libelled by common same for unchaste, though those that understood the
privacies and casualties of his Infancy, report him but one degree removed from
a Misogonist, though to palliate (...) infirmities; he was most complete in
Courtly addresses: the conversablenesse of this Bishop wi^^ Women confisted
chiefly (if not only) in his treatments of great Ladies and Persons of honor,
wherein he did personate the compleatness of co^tesie to that Sex; otherwise a
woman was seldom seen in his house, which therefore had always mo(...) of
Magnificence than Neatness, sometimes defective in the Punctilio's and
Niceties of Daintiness lying lower than masculine Cognizance, and as level for
a woman's eye to espy, as easy for her hand^ to amend.

He suffers for conniving at Puritans, out of hatred to Bishop Laud; and for
favoring Papists, o(...) of love to them: -- Yet whatever he offered Ki(...)
James (when the Match went on in Spain) as (...) Counselor, or whatever he
did himself as (...) Statesman; such kindness he had for our Litu^gy, that he
translated it at his own cost into Spanish, and used it in the visitation of
Melvin when sick, to his own peril, in the Tower; and such resolution for
Episcopacy, that his late Majesty of blessed memory said once to him; My Lord,
I commend you, that you are no whit daunted with all disasters, but are zealous
in defending your Order. -- Please it your Majesty, replied the Archbishop, I
am a true Welsh-man, and they are observed never to run away till their General
first forsakes them -- No fear of my flinching, while your Majesty does
countenance our Cause.

His extraction was Gentile and Ancient, as appeared from his Ancestors Estate;
which was more than he could purchase without borrowing, when at once Lord
Keeper, Bishop of Lincoln, and Dean of Westminster. His mind great and
resolute, insomuch that he controuled all other advices to his last, to his
loss in Wales: -- and daunted Sir John Cook, as you may see in his character
to his honor in England.

His wariness has these arguments; 1. That he would not send the Seal to the
King but under lock and key. 2. That being to depute one to attend in his place
at the Coronation, he would not name his Adversary, Bishop Laud, to gratify
him; nor yet any other, to displease the King; but took a middle way, and
presented his Majesty a List of the Prebendaries, to avoid any exception,
referring the Election to his Majesty himself. 3. That he proposed a partial
Reformation of our Church to the Parliament, to prevent an utter extirpation by
it. 4. That he exposed others to the censure of the Parliament 1625. to save
himself. 5. That he answered to several Examinations without any the least
advantage taken by his Antagonist. This character of his I think very exact.
That his head was a well-fitted treasury, and his tongue the fair key to unlock
it: That he had as great a memory as could be reconciled with so good a
judgment: That so quick his parts, that others study went not beyond his
nature; and their designed and forelayd performances, went not beyond his
sudden and ready accommodations: Only he was very open, and too free in
discourse, disdaining to lie at a close guard, as confident of the length and
strength of his weapon.

Observations on the Life of Sir Isaac Wake.
THis honorable person whom I look upon at Oxford, in the same capacity and
fortune that Sir Robert Naunton and Sir Francis Nethersole were in at
Cambridge. He was born in Northamptonshire, (his Father Arthur Wake being
Parson of Billing, Master of the Hospital of St. John's in Northampton, and
Canon of Christs-Church) bred Fellow of Merton-Colledge in Oxford, Proctor and
Orator of that University, whence he was admitted Secretary to Sir Dudley
Carleton Secretary of State, and afterward advanced into the King's service,
and by his Master and the Duke of Buckingham, employed Ambassador to Venice,
where he neglected his own interest to attend his Majesty's employment; the
reason that he dyed rich only in the just conscience of his worth, and the
repute of his merit. Coming from Venice, he was appointed Lieger of France, and
designed Secretary of State, had not Death prevented him at Paris; being
accomplished with all qualifications requisite for public Employment,
Learning, Languages, Experience, Abilities, and what not?

King CHARLES hearing of his death, commanded his Corpse to be decently brought
from Paris into England, allowing the expenses of his Funeral, and enjoining
his nearest Relations to attend the performance thereof. These accordingly met
his body at Bulloign in France, and saw it solemnly conveyed into England,
where it was interred in the Chapel of the Castle of Dover. His REX
PLATONICUS, or his Latin account of King James his six days stay at Oxford,
speaks his Learning; and his Instructions for Travel, his experience. -- He
observing his Predecessors failings, retrenched his expenses, satisfying
himself with a repute of nobleness, while in his way to preferment; and others
with the expectation of his bounty. When preferred, he seemed liberal, that he
might not be despised abroad; but he was near, that he might not be odious at
home. His prodigality it may be might have satisfied the curiosity of a few
Strangers, while he incurred the displeasure of all his friends. Besides, a
close and wary man may be bountiful at his pleasure, but the munificent cannot
be so easily sparing; for if his occasions or fortunes check his profuseness,
all his gallantry is in his first action of good husbandry. Caution in
expenses, if it be a vice, is one of those, says the Italian, that never
disinherited a man. Nay, of the two, says Machiavel, It Is more discretion to
hold the style of miserable, which begets an infamy without hatred, than to
desire that of Liberal; which being maintained by necessitous courses, procures
an infamy with hatred. As never did Statesman a brave action that seemed
illiberal, so never did he any such that was not so: -- Yet four things our
Knight spared no cost in: 1. Intelligence; He could afford (he said) a golden
key for the Pope's Cabinet. 2. Books; -- his Study was his Estate. 3. In
watching the Spaniards, saying, The Indies will pay for this. And 4.
Entertaining knowing men often; applauding that Emperor's maxim, That bad
rather go fifty miles to hear a wise man, than five to see a fair City. And
this he was eminent for; that he saw nothing remarkable in Foreign parts, that
he applied not to his own Country: Sir Henry Wotton being not more curious in
picking up small Rarities to pleasure particular persons, than Sir Isaac Wake
was industrious to observe any useful invention that might improve the public
good.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Cottington.
SIr Fran. Cottington being bred, when a youth, under Sir.......... Stafford,
lived so long in Spain, till he made the garb and gravity of that Nation become
his, and become him too. He raised himself by his natural strength, without any
artificial advantage; having his parts above his learning, his Experience above
his Parts, his Industry above his Experience, and (some will say) his Success
above all: So that at last he became Chancellor of the Exchequer, Baron of
Hanworth in Middlesex, Constable of the Tower, 1640. and (upon the resignation
of Doctor juxon) Lord Treasurer of England, gaining also a very great Estate.

Very reserved he was in his temper, and very slow in his proceedings; sticking
to some private Principles in both, and aiming at certain rules in all things:
-- a temper that indeared him as much to his Master, Prince Charles his person,
as his integrity did to his service; -- Nor to his service only, but to that
of the whole Nation; in the Merchandise whereof he was well versed; to the
trade whereof he was very serviceable many ways: but eminently, in that he
negotiated, that the Spanish Treasure which was used to be sent to Flanders by
the way of Genoa, might be sent in English Bottoms, which exceedingly enriched
England for the time; and had it continued, had made her the greatest Bank and
Mart for Gold and Silver of any Commonwealth in Europe.

Indeed the advantage of his Education, the different Nations and Factions that
he had to deal with, the direct opposition of Enemies, the treachery of
Friends, the contracts of Statesmen, the variety and force of Experience from
the distinct knowledge of the natures of the people of several Countries, of
their chief Ministers of State, with their Intrigues of government, made him so
expert, that the Earl of Bristol and Sir Walter Aston could do nothing without
him; and he only could finish that Treaty, which they had for many years spun
out.

Men take several ways to the ends they propose themselves. Some, that of
confidence; others, that of respect and caution, etc. when indeed the main
business is, to suit our selves with our own times; which this Lord did, and
no man better, until looking into the depths of the late Faction, he declared
at the Council Table, 1639. that they aimed at the ruin of Church and State.
And viewing the state of the Kingdom, he advised; That Leagues might be made
abroad; and, that in this inevitable necessity, all ways to raise money should
be used that were lawful. Wherefore he was one of those few excluded the
Indemnity by the Faction, and had the honor to dye banished for the best
Cause and Master, in those foreign Countries; where he suffered as nobly for
the Crown of England in his later days, as he had acted honorably for it in
his former. When he never came off better than in satisfying the Spaniards
about toleration, reducing the whole of that affair to these two Maxims;

1. That Consciences were not to be forced, but to be won and reduced by the
evidence of Truth, with the aid of Reason, and in the use of all good means of
Instruction and persuasion.

2. That the causes of Conscience, wherein they exceed their bounds, and grow
to matter of faction, lose their nature: and that Sovereign Princes ought
distinctly to punish those foul practices, though overlaid with the fairer
pretenses of Conscience and Religion.

One of his Maxims for Treaty I think remarkable, viz. That Kingdoms are more
subject to fear than hope: And that it is safer working upon them by a power
that may awe the one, than by advantages that may excite the other. -- Since
it is another rule, that States have no affections but interest; and that all
kindness and civility in those cases are but oversights and weakness.

Another of his rules for Life I judge useful, viz. That since no man is
absolute in all points, and since men are more naturally inclined out of envy
to observe men's infirmities, than out of ingenuity to acknowledge their merit;
-- He discovers his abilities most, that least discovers himself. To which
I may add another, viz. That it is not only our known duty, but our visible
advantage, to ascribe our most eminent performances to providence, since it not
only takes off the edge of envy, but improves the reason of admiration. None
being less maliced, or more applauded than he, who is thought rather happy
than able; blessed, than active; and fortunate, than cunning.

Though yet all the caution of his life could not avoid the envy of his
advancement from so mean a beginning to so great honors, -- notwithstanding
that it is no disparagement to any to give place to fresh Nobility, who ascend
the same steps with those before them. New being only a term, says one,
only respecting us, not the world; for what is, was before us, and will be
when we are no more: And indeed this Personage considering the vanity and
inconstancy of common applause or affronts, improved the one, and checked the
other, by a constant neglect of both.

Observations on the Life of Sir Dudly Carleton.
SIr Dudley Carleton was born in Oxfordshire, bred in Christs-Church in Oxford
under Dr. King, and afterward in relation of Secretary to Sir Ralph Winwood in
the Low Countries, where he was very active, when King James resigned the
cautionary Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his former
Learning, that afterward our King employed him for twenty years together
Ambassador in Venice, Savoy, and the United Provinces; Anne Gerard his Lady
(Coheir to George Gerard Esquire) accompanying him in all his Travels, as is
expressed in her Epitaph in Westminster-Abby. He was by K. Charles the first,
to balance the Duke of Buckingbam's enemies in the House of Peers, with the
Lord Mandevil now Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Grandison, created Baron of
Imbercourt in Surrey, and afterward Viscount Dorchester, marrying for his
second Wife the Daughter of Sir Henry Glenham, the Relict of Paul, Viscount
Banning, who survived him. He succeeded the Lord Conway, (when preferred
President of the Council, in the Secretary-ship of State, being sworn at
White Hall, December 14. 1628. and dying without Issue, Anno D^m. 163... Much
ado he had to remove a State-jealousie that was upon him; That he insisted on
the restitution of some Towns in Cleves and ^uliers, to gratify the Spaniards
at that time in ^reaty with us: more to remove a Church-jealou^e, that in
negotiating an accommodation in Re^gion, he designed the undermining of the
Re^onstrants then in so much power there: In which ^atter he was at a loss,
whether his Majesty should ^terpose by Letter or Message: The former he said
was most effectual, but the later less subject to (...) constr^^^on,
considering Barnevel's interest in ^he State. But he had a Chaplain, one Mr.
Hales, that kept this Controversy even on the one hand, while he balanced the
State-interest on the other; equally careful that the United Provinces should
not be overrun by the Armies of Spain, and that they should not be swallowed
up by the protection of France.

Watchful was his eye there over the West India Company; Diligent his carriage
upon any accommodations from Spain; which he apprehended always as a design to
distract that people then in regard of their unsetlednesse, but too apt upon
any dispute to fall into faction: Great his industry in reconciling Sir Horace
Vere and Sir Edward Cecil for the honor of the English Nation, and the
advancement of the common service: Sincere his services to the Prince Elector,
and his Lady.

Exact his rules of Traffic and Commerce, and dexterous his arts of keeping
the States from new alliances, notwithstanding our likely Marriagetreaty with
Spain, especially since the Prince of Orange bluntly (after his manner) asked,
Qui at' il vestre Marriage? -- And indeed he behaved himself in all Employments
so well becoming a man that understood so many Languages, that was so well
versed in Ancient and Modern History, t(...) had composed so many choice pieces
of Politi(...) that was so well seen in the most practical Mathe(...) ticks;
and added to these a graceful and charm(...) look, a gentle and a sweet
elocution; that no^ withstanding his, and his brother Bishop Carle(...)
rigidnesse in some points, kept him to his dyin^ day in great favor and most
eminent service; a^^ sailing in nothing but his French Emb^^^^, becau^^ there
he had to do with Women. L(...)g behind him this observation; That new
Common-weal^^ are hardly drawn to a certain resolution; as (...) knowing not
how to determine, and remaining (...) in suspense, take ordinarily that course
rather whi^^ they are forced to, than what they might choose f^^ themselves. --
And this eminent service when (...) assisted the Earl of Holland in France,
viz. That (...) pa^ified the high difference there, upon which (...) revolt of
the Hugonots depended, and put a re(...) resolution in King Lewis to advance
against the Valtoline and Spain by the advantage of the Leagu^ with England:
proceeding upon this Maxim wi^^ that King; They that have respect to few
things, (...) easily misled.

I had almost forgot, how this Lord finding tha^ want of Treasure at home, was
the ground of ou^ unsuccessful and despicableness abroad; and tha^ Principe
senza quatrius e come un muro senza cr^l(...) da tulls scompisliato; That a
Prince without money is like a wall without a Cross, for every one to draw
upon; did mention the Excize in the Parliament House, and in no ill meaning
neither, and was violently cried to the Bar: and though a person of that
eminence, as being then a Privy-Councellor, and principal Secretary of State,
he hardly escaped ^eing committed to the Tower: -- So odious was ^^at
Dutch-Devil (as they called it) in the excel^^t King Charles, which was raised
by the belo^ed Parliament, with many more that were conju^ed up in three or
four years, but not likely to be said in three or fourscore.

Living in those times when weak men imagined ^o themselves some unknown bliss
from untried go^ernments; and considering that alterations coun^ervail not
their own dangers, and as they bring ^ittle good to any, so they bring least of
all to those that first promoted them; This Lord refused to be ^he mouth of the
Zealous multitude (whose rage ^ould neither be well opposed, nor joined with)
whom a pardon or compliance might bring off, leaving their Demagogues to
compound for their fol^^y with their ruin; choosing rather to be patient, than
active, and appear weak, than be troublesome; and once resolved upon an exact
survey of circumstances for power against the faults of it on the one ^^and,
and the affronts of it on the other, he gained the esteem of all parties by his
fidelity to his own. I am much taken with his plain saying, which I find of
late printed; There will be mistakes in Divinity while men preach, and errors
in Government while such govern: And more with his method of proceeding in his
affairs, whereof he laid first an Idea in his own mind, and then improved it
by debate; the result whereof was usually so complete, as showed the vast
difference between the shallow conceptions of one man, and the deep judgment
of many.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Richard, and Sir Jerome Weston, Earls of
Portland.
SIr Richard Weston in his youth impaired his estate, to improve himself with
public accomplishment, but came off both a saver and a gainer at the last,
when made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterward, (upon the remove of the
Earl of Marlborough) July 15. in the fourth of King Charles, Lord Treasurer of
England.

His activity in Parliament made him considerable at Court, none fitter to
serve a Prince than he who commands the humor of the people. Indeed where ever
he was, he discovered himself able and faithful. 1. In his Foreign Employments,
his judgment was searching, and reach admirable, he being the first that smelt
out the intentions against the Palatinate; which were then in brewing, and
mashed with much art. In his Domestic charge, his Artifice was singular, both
in a faithful improvement of the In^^mes, and a discreet moderation of the
expenses in his Masters Revenues -- In his Aspect, there was a mixture of
authority and modesty; in his apprehensions, quickness and solidity; in his
port and train, a suitable dignity and correspondence, with little noise and
outward form: An enemy to Complements, yet very courteous: no flatterer, yet of
great power: irreconcilable to frothy formality, yet maintaining a due regard
to his person and place. A great Scholar he was, and yet a great Statesman; of
various erudition, and as large observation. -- He secured himself much by
Alliances with the best Nobility, more by the love, and (what is more) the
esteem of a constant King; it being one of the wonders of that time, that my
Lord of Canterbury and he, who were at so much distance from one another,
should be so inward with their Sovereign, but that that excellent Prince
measured not his affections to his Dependants so much by a particular interest,
as by a public serviceableness. -- The necessity of the Exchequer put him upon
some ways of supply that displeased the rabble; though his three particular
cares, viz. The paying of the Navy, the satisfying of the City, and the Queen
of Bohemia's supply (three things he was very much intent upon while Treasurer)
obliged the wiser sort of men. I know nothing he was defective in, being
careful (to use his own words) to perform all duties, with obedience to his
Majesty, respect to the Duke, and justice to the particular parties concerned;
-- But that he had so much of his Master's love, and so little of his patience,
being grated (as all Statesmen are that have to do with various interests and
humors) between a strong inclination of satisfying every man, and the
impossibility of pleasing all: Considering the importunities of persons and
affairs, a little impatience must needs fall upon your Lord-ship (writes Sir
Henry Wotto^ to him) unless you had been cut out of a Rock of Diamonds,
especially having been before so conversant with liberal Studies, and with the
freedom of your own mind.

In his time was the great Question agitated; Whether a Prince should aim at
the fear, or the lov^ of his People? -- Although no Prince did more to oblige
his People, than the Excellent King Charles the I, Yet was there no Prince ever
more advised to awe them: For this Lord, and many more, who looked upon
overmuch indulgence as the greatest cruelty, considering that men love at
their own pleasure, and to serve their own turn, and that their fear depends
upon the Princes pleasure, were of opinion; That every wise Prince ought to
ground upon that which is of himself, and not upon that which is of another:
government being set up in the world, rather to trust its own power, than stand
upon others courtesy.

Besides, two things the vulgar are taken with: 1. Appearance. 2. The event of
things; which, if successful, gains both their love and reverence. Neither was
the Father more exact in his Maxims than the Son in his, of whose many
infallible principles this was one; That it was the safest way for the King's
Majesty to proceed upon a Declaration, that the Faction at Westminster was no
Parliament, upon his own and his most loyal Lords and Commons removal to
Oxford. And this another; That provided the Gentry and Clergy were well
principled, and His Majesty that now is had a constant correspondence with the
most eminent of them, it was our Interest to promote his Majesty's grandeur
abroad, and sit still at home, until the Faction might be so secure as to
divide, -- and his Majesty's Interest became so conspicuous by the Principles
that were kept up at home, and the State that was born abroad, as to command
all. And really his little saying has much in it; -- He that will see what
shall be, let him consider what has been: For there are the same desires,
humors, and interest in every age, that were before it: So that as Machiavel
observes, it is very easy for him, that with diligence examineth past
Occurrences, to serve himself of those remedies which were in use among the
Ancients; Or if they fail, to devise what is most like them.

Observations on the Life of William Earl of Pembrook.
HE was an ancient Gentleman of good repute, and therefore well esteemed; a
proper person, well set, and of graceful dep^rtment, and therefore well beloved
of King ^ames and Queen Anne: His inclination was as ge^erous as his
extraction, and manners ancient as ^is Family. One of his Ancestors is
renowned, for that he would condescend to deliver his Embassies (...) no
Language but Welsh; and he is commended for that he would comply with no
customs in his con^^^se but the old English, -- though his Contem^oraries make
that his defect, rather than his orna^ent; proceeding from his want of Travel,
rather ^^an his observance of Antiquity: He having had ^^ely (says the
Historian) the breeding of Eng^and, which gave him a conceited dislike of
Foreign men, their manners and mode; or of such English as professed much
advantage thereby: so that the Scots and he were ever separate; and therefore
he was the only old Courtier that kept close to the Commonalty, and they to
him though never suspected by either of his Sovereigns, not because he was not
over-furnished with Abilities (as that pen insinuates) to be more than Loyal,
but because he had too much integrity to be less. Being munificent and
Childlesse, the University o^ Oxford hoped to be his Executor, and
Pembrook-Colledge his Heir. Pembrook-Colledge, I say, calle^ so not only in
respect to, but also in expectation from him, then Chancellor of the
University: and probably had not our noble Lord died suddenly soon after
(according as a Fortune Tellers had informed him, whom he laughed at that very
nigh^ he departed, being his Birth-night) this College might have received
more than a bare name from him.

He was (says one of his own time) the very picture, and Vive Effigies of
Nobility; his person rather Majestic than Elegant; his presence, whether
quiet, or in motion, full of stately gravity; his mind generous, and purely
heroic often stout, but never disloyal: so vehemen an opponent of the
Spanyard, as when tha^ Match fell under consideration, he would sometimes rouse
to the trepidation of King James yet kept in favor still; for that King knew
plai^ dealing, as a Jewel in all men, so was in a Privy^ Councellor an
ornamental duty. An instance o^ his familiar converse with King James, was,
tha^ the King observing that he naturally hated Frog, threw one into his neck;
and he in requi^tal, caused a Pig (of an equal disgust with the sam^ Prince) to
be put under his Close-stool: where, though it produced no extraordinary ill
effect for the present, yet after the prank had been descanted upon, and worst
of Interpretations made by some (the title of Jews being at that time bestowed
on the Scots) the King was much affected with it; and the more, because it was
done at Wilton the Earls own house. -- Though Kings when free and sociable,
break out to sprightful and facetious extravagancies with Courtiers, yet must
they not presume, lest their words are interpreted, not by their meaning, but
others jealousy: free spirits cannot be too circumspect. And the same
true-heartednesse commended him to King Charles, with whom he kept a most
admirable correspondence, and yet stood the firm Confident of the Commonalty;
and that not by a sneaking cunning, but by an erect and generous prudence, such
as rendered him as unsuspected of ambition on the one side, as of faction on the
other; being generally beloved and regarded.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Conway.
EDward Lord Conway succeeded to his Father's Martial skill and valor, who was
under the Earl of Leicester, Governor of Ostend, and twisted therewith
peaceable Policy in State Affairs, so that the Gown and the Sword met in him in
most eminent proportion, and thereupon King James advanced him one of the
principal Secretaries of State. For these his good services, he was by him
created Lord Conway of Ragleigh in this County, and afterward by King Charles
Viscount Killultagh in the County of Antrim; And lastly, in the third of King
Charles, Viscount Conway of Conway in Carnarvan-shire; England, Ireland, and
Wales mutually embracing themselves in his Honors; and not long after,
President of the Council. Upon the breach with Spain, King James and the Duke
of Buckingham both judged it very convenient to have a Martial Secretary;
neither was there any man fitter for their turn then this Gentleman, who was as
able to direct them in the Affairs of War abroad, as he was ready to be
directed by them in those of Peace at home: Being one of those three remarkable
Servants that King James used to jest upon, viz. a Lord Treasurer [meaning the
Earl of Suffolk] that could not cast Account, a Chaplain [meaning Doctor
Preston] that could not read Being not used to the Common Prayer.
Prayers, and a Secretary [meaning this Lord] that could not write his name.
Sir Richard Weston beat the Bush in the Affair of the Palatinate, but Sir
Edward catched the Hare; his rough humor being more suitable to that business:
Or inded it having been always more successful to be bold, than wary; to be
free for all occasions, than to be obstinate to some rules. -- Fortune (says
Machiavel) is a Mistress, that is sooner won by those that ruffle and force
her, than by others that proceed coldly. Indeed he was charged with treachery
and cowardice in the action against the Scots, 1640. but he came off with his
honest animosity, saying, If he might but fight their whole Army, he would
settle Scotland in six months, or lose his head: -- being in that, of my Lord
of Canterbury's opinion, who assured his Majesty they would not hold out four:
a motion! that if as easily entertained by that gracious King as it was
effectually pursued by the bloody Usurpers, a sad experience has taught us and
them, would have prevented much mischief there, more here; especially since it
was that wise Prince his judicious observation, That they and their
Confederates were a people lost by favor, and won by punishment.

Observations on the Lives of the Digges.
MAster Leonard Digges was one of excellent Learning and deep judgment. His
mind most inclined him to the Mathematics, and he was the best Architect in
that age for all manner of Buildings, for convenience, pleasure, state,
strength, being excellent at Fortifications. Lest his Learning should dye with
him, for the public profit, he printed his Tectonicon, Prognostic General,
Stratiotick, about the ordering of an Army, and other Works. He flourished Anno
Dom. 1556. and dyed I believe about the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when as in
most growing times Arts were drowned in action.

Nothing else have I to observe of his name, save that hereditary Learning may
seem to run in the veins of his Family; witness Sir Dudly Digs of
Chilham-Castle, made Master of the Rolls, in the yaer 1636. whose abilities
will not be forgotten, whilst our age has any remembrance. This Knight had a
younger son, of a most excellent wit, and a great judgment, Fellow of
All Souls in Oxford, who in the beginning of our Civil Wars wrote so subtle
and solid a Treatise of the difference betwixt King and Parliament, that such
Royallists who have since handled that Controversy, have written plura non
plus; yea aliter rather than alia of that Subject. The Son writes down those
Rebellions that the Father countenanced: The Father, I say, who by a bold
impeachment against his Majesty's chief Minister of State, to his face, taught
a discontented People to draw a bolder against his Majesty himself: --
Wherefore it was, that (after his undutiful Prologue against his Majesty's
Prerogative in favoring his Servants; the Preface to more disloyal methods
against his right, in governing his People) he and Sir John Eliiot were
whispered out of the Lords House, when they were hottest against the Duke, to
speak with a Gentleman, and thence sent immediately by two Pursevants that
attended, to the Tower; where, and in the Country, this Gentleman lay under
just displeasure, until it was thought fit to take off so dangerous a piece of
boldness and eloquence upon the growing distempers of the age by favor and
preferment, to a Neutrality at least, if not to the just measures of his duty.
But our observation here is this; That faction is one of those sins, whereof
the Authors repent most commonly themselves, and their posterities are always
ashamed.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Ridly, Dr. LL.
THis Knight and Dr. was born at Ely in Cambridge-shire, bred first a Scholar
at Eaton in Buckingham-shire, then Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. He
was a general Scholar in all kind of Learning, especially in that which we
call Melior Literatura. He afterward was Chancellor of Winchester, and
Vicar General to the Archbishop of Canterbury. His memory will never dye,
whilst his Book called The view of the Ecclesiastical Laws is living; a book
of so much merit, that the Common Lawyers (notwithstanding the difference
betwixt the professions) will ingenuously allow a due commendation to his
learned performance in that subject: Although it startled them to hear King
James was so affected with it, insomuch that Sir Edward Coke undertook from
thence to prophecy the decay of the Common Law: though in that prophecy of his,
others foresaw nothing but his fall. Never book came out more seasonably for
the Church than this; never Comment came out more suitably, than Mr. Gregory's
Notes upon it: He writ well, and advised better: being good to give, better to
manage Counsel; which he never offered till called, and never urged longer then
it pleased; answering no question of consequence unless upon emergent
occasion, without deliberation; observing the design of people, that ask most
commonly to try his sufficiency, as well as improve their own: However, being
sure that time is likelier to increase than abate the weight of a result,
discovering as well what may be returned suitably to the general temper, as
what may be answered fitly to the particular instance.

What alterations he designed for the Churches benefit, were not sudden, but
leisurely. To force men out of one extremity into another, is an attempt as
dangerous, as it is invidious; as awakening most opposition, and obnoxious to
most hazard. Wise In Tiberio^
Tacitus observes, that men have reformed inveterate habits more by yielding
to them, than engaging against them; though a man must so yield as not to
encourage, while he does so countermine, as not to exasperate: Although he was
always able, yet was he never willing to mend the Copy his Superiors had set
him, unless owned as from former instruction, lest they grew jealous, he
valued his own experience before theirs, who measure men's sufficiency from
their caution, and not from their parts; from what they can forbear, rather
than from what they can do.

To conclude, he was one of those able men that cannot be eminent, unless they
be great; men of great merit, behave themselves so negligently in small
affairs, as that you shall never understand their abilities, unless you
advance their persons. Men's capacities and sufficiencies have certain bound^
prescribed them; within the limits of which they are able to acquit themselves
with credit and applause: But if you advance them above, or depre(...) them
below their spheres, they show nothing but debilities and miscarriages. Only
this he was alway^ commended for; That having the management of Affairs
entrusted to him, he under went all the miscarriages himself, ascribing all the
honor and sufficency to his Patron; carrying his hand in all actions so, that
his Master had the applause of what ever was either conceded or denied in
public, without any other interruption from Mr. Ridley, than what became the
bare instrument of his commands, however he ordered the matter in private.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Martin.
HE would merrily say, That if his Father had left him fourscore pounds a year,
where he left him but forty, he would never have been a Scholar, but have lived
on his Lands: whereas his Inheritance being a large encouragement, but a small
maintenance, he made up in study what he wanted in Estate; first at Winchester,
and then at New-Colledge, where his inclination led him to Divinity, but Bishop
Andrews his advice persuaded him to the Civil Law, wherein he attained that
great proficiency he was eminent for, thus: --

He had weekly transmitted to him from some Proctors at Lambeth, the brief
heads of the most important Causes which were to be tried in the
High Commission. Then with some of his familiar friends in that faculty, he
privately pleaded those Causes; acting in their Chamber what was done in the
Court: But Mr. Martin making it his work, exceeded the rest in amplifying and
aggravating any fault, to move anger and indignation against the guilt thereof;
or else in extenuating or excusing it, to procure pity, obtain pardon, or at
least prevail for a lighter punishment: -- Whence no Cause came amiss to him
in the High Commission: For, says my Author, he was not to make new Armor,
but only to put it on, and buckle it; not to invent, but apply arguments to
his Clients. -- As in decision of Controversies in his Courts, he had a
moderate and middle way: so in managing of affairs in Parliament, he had a
healing Method: Whence in most Debates with the Lords, where Mr. Noy's Law and
Reason could not convince, Sir Henry Martin's As about the Petition of Right;
in reference to which, he and Sergeant Glanvile sat^^fi^d the Lords.
Expedients could accommodate. For which services, and his other merits, he was
made Judge of the Prerogative-Court for probate of Wills, and of the Admiralty
for Foreign Trade. Whence King JAMES would say merrily, He was a mighty Monarch
by Sea and Land, over the Dead and the Living.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Bramstone.
SIr John Bramstone, Knight, was born at Maldon in Essex, bred up in the
Middle Temple in the study of the Common Law, wherein he attained to such
eminency, that he was by King Charles made Lord Chief Justice of the King's
^ench.

One of deep Learning, solid Judgment, integrity of Life, gravity of
behavior, above the envy of his own age, and the scandal of posterity. One
(...)stance of his I must not forget, writes the Historian effectually,
relating to the foundation wherein I was (...)ed: Sergeant Bruerton by Will
bequeathed to (...)idney-Colledge well-nigh three thousand pounds, ^ut (for
haste, or some other accident) it was so im^erfectly done, that (as Dr. Sam.
Ward informed (...)) the gift was invalid in the rigor of the Law. ^ow Judge
Bramstone, who married the Sergeants Widow, gave himself much trouble (gave
himself (...)deed, doing all things gratis) for the speedy pay^ent of the money
to a farthing, and the legal (...)tling thereof on the College, according to
the (...) intention of the dead. He deserved to live in ^etter times. The
delivering his judgment on the ^ing's side in the case of Ship Money, cost him
^uch trouble, and brought him much honor, (...) who understood the consequence
of that Ma(...)me, Salus populi suprema lex; and that Ship-mo^ey was thought
legal by the best Lawyers, voted ^own arbitrarily by the worst Parliament: they
^earing no Counsel for it, though the King heard (...)men willingly against it.
Yea, that Parliament (...)ought themselves not secure from it, unless the ^ing
renounced his right to it by a new Act of his (...). Men have a touchstone to
try Gold, and ^old is the touchstone to try Men. Sir William (...)'s gratuity
showed, that this Judges Inclination (...) as much above corruption as his
Fortune; and (...) he would not, as well as needed not, be base. Equally intent
was he upon the Interest of the (...) and the Maxims of Law, as which mutually
suported each other. -- He would never have a W(...) nesse interrupted, or
helped, but have the patie(...) to hear a naked, though a tedious truth: the
(...) Gold lies in the most Ore, and the clearest (...) in the most simple
discourse. When he put on (...) Robes, he put off Respects; his private
affection being swallowed up in the public service. (...) was the Judge whom
Popularity could never flatt(...) to any thing unsafe, nor favor oblige to any
thy(...) unjust. Therefore he died in peace, 1645. wh(...) all others were
engaged in a War, and shall (...) the reward of his integrity of the Judge of
Judge(...) at the great Assize of the world.

Having lived as well as read Justinian's maxi(...) Admin. Card. de Rich. p.
283.
to the Praetor of Laconia; All things which (...) pertain to the
well-government of a State, are order^^ by (...) constitutions of Kings, that
give life and (...) to the Law: Whereupon, who so would walk wis(...) shall
never fail, if he propose them both for the rule his actions, -- For a King is
the living Law of (...) Country.

Nothing troubled him so much as (shall I call it the shame, or the fear of the
consequence of the unhappy contest between his Excellent Majesty (...) his
meaner Subjects in the foresaid case of Ship-m^ney; no enemy being contemptible
enough to (...) despised, since the most despicable command gr(...)ter
strength, wisdom, and interest than their ow^ to the designs of Malice or
Mischief. -- A gr(...) man managed a quarrel with Archee the King Fool; but by
endeavoring to explode him (...) Court, rendered him at last so considerable,
(...) calling the enemies of that person (who were not a few) to his rescue, as
the fellow was not only able to continue the dispute for diverse years, but
received such encouragement from standers by (the instrument of whose malice he
was) as he often (...)oak out in such reproaches, as neither the dignity of that
excellent person's calling, nor the greatness of his parts, could in reason or
manners admit: -- But that the wise man discerned, that F. O. p. 12.
all the fool did was but a symptom of the strong and inveterate distemper
raised long since in the hearts of his Countrymen against the great man's Person
and Function.

Observations on the Life of Sir Augustine Nicols.
SIr August. Nicols, son to Tho. Nicols, Sergeant at Law, was born at Ecton in
Northamptonshire. Now though according to the rigor of our Fundamental
Premises, he be not within our cognizance under this Title, yet his merit will
justify us in presenting his Chracter. He was bred in the study of the
Common Law; wherein he attained to such knowledge, that Qu: Eliz. made him, and
K. James continued him his own Sergeant, whence he was freely preferred one of
the Judges of the Common Pleas. I say freely, King James commonly calling him
the Judge that would give no money. Not to speak of his moral qualifications,
and subordinate abilities; he was renowned for his special judiciary
Endowments; of very calm affections and moderate passions; of a grave and
affible deportment; of a great patience to hear both Parties all they could
say; a happy memory; (...) singular sagacity to search into the material
circumstances; Exemplary integrity, even to the rejection of Gratuities after
Judgment given, and a charge to his Followers, that they came to their Places
clear-handed, and that they should not meddle with any Motions to him, that he
might be secured from all appearance of corruption. His forbearing to travail
on the Lords day, wrought a Reformation on some of his own Order. Very pitiful
and tender he was in case of life, yet very exact in case of blood.

He loved plain and profitable Preaching, being wont to say, I know not what
you call Preaching, but I like them that come nearest to my Conscience. The
speech of Caesar is commonly known; Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori; which
Bishop Jewel altered and applied to himself, Decet Episcopum concionantem mori:
of this man it may be said, Judex mortuus est jura dans; dying in his Calling,
as he went the Northern Circuit, and has a fair Monument in Kendal-Church in
Westmerland. This I observe of this good man; that he was so good a man, that
in the ruffling times he could be but a bad Magistrate, Cum vel exeunda sit
natura, vel minuenda dignitas: when he must either go out of his easy nature,
or forgo his just authority.

Observations on the Life of Sir Nich. Hyde.
SIr Nicholas Hyde was born at Warder in Wiltshire, where his Father in right
of his Wife had a long Lease of that Castle from the Family of the Arundels.
His Father, I say (descended from an ancient Family in Cheshire) a fortunate
Gentleman in all his children, (and more in his Grandchildren) some of his
under-boughs outgrowing the top-branch, and younger children (amongst whom Sir
Nicholas) in wealth and honor exceeding the rest of his Family.

He was bred in the Middle Temple, and was made Sergeant at Law the first of
February, 1626. (...) on the eighth day following was sworn Lord Chief Justice
of the King's Bench, succeeding in that Office, next save one unto his
Countryman Sir James Ley (than alive, and preferred Lord Treasurer, born
within two miles one of another) and next of all under Sir Francis Crew lately
displaced. Now, though he entered on his Place with some disadvantage (Sir
Randal being generally popular) and though in those days, it was ^ard for the
same Person to please Court and Country, yet he discharged his Office with
laudable integrity, until 1631. Prudence obliges Princes to refer the
management of affairs to persons who have the reputation of extraordinary
ho^esty, especially to the transacting of such things which notwithstanding
their innate justice, may provoke any evil spirits. -- The most part of
mankind guessing only by their own senses and apprehensions, judge of the
affairs by the persons wh(...) conduct them. Opinion guides the world, and the
reputation of him that negotiateth, sets a value and price upon his words and
actions; and the opinion which is conceived of him is so absolute (...) Umpire,
that there is no appeal from his judgment. -- Opinion is the strongest thing
in the world Truth the next.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Aston.
HE was a Gentleman of so much diligence in the Spanish Negotiations, that
there were no Orders, Cabals, Consultations in th(...) intricate time, etc. he
was not acquainted with: (...) so much resolution, that there was not a
dangerous Message in that great business he would n^ deliver: Of that
excellent converse, that ther^ was not that Minister of State in that jealous
Co(...) he was not familiar with. Very observant he wa^ by Don Juan Taxardoes
means, of the Spanish pr^ceedings, and as well skilled with the Duke (...)
Buckingham's direction in the English; though y^ he confessed himself almost
lost in those Intrigue had not the Duke stood between him and the King
displeasure that suspected him, and the Prince (...) jealousy that feared him.
[He had need have steady head, that looks into such depths:] But as (...)had an
excellent faculty of excusing others mis(...)iages, so he had a peculiar way of
salving his (...); being advantaged with a great foresight, a (...)
reservedness, and a ready spirit.

Few understood better the Importance of the (...)glish Trade with Spain: None
pursued more di^gently its privileges and freedom; tracing most the secret
Counsels and resolutions so closely, at he was able with his industry and money
to (...) an account of most proceedings. -- In the ma(...)gement whereof he
resigned himself to the (...)ke's disposal, professing to own no judgment
(...)affection but what was guided by his direction. -- (...) own words are
these; Until I know by your Gra(...) favor by what compass to guide my
course, I can (...) follow his Majesty's revealed will: -- And the (...)ke's
answer this; You desire me to give you my opinion; My ancient acquaintance,
long custom of lo(...) you, with constancy of friendship, invites me to
(...)you this office of good will.

My Lord of Bristol shuffled the Cards well, but (...) Walter Aston played them
best. -- The first set a (...)ign, but the second pursued it, -- being happy an
humble and respect^u^ carriage; which open(...) the breast, and unlocked the
hearts of all men (...) him. He that looked downward saw the Stars in
(...)water: but he who looked only upward, could (...)see the waters in the
Stars.

Indeed there was in his countenance such a (...)one of sweetness, and his
words had so power(...) a charm, set off with so agreeable and taking ^^avity,
that the respect due to him was not lost in (...) love he had deserved; nor the
love he attained to, abated by the respect he commanded; being one that had and
gave infinite satisfaction in the Negotiations he engaged in: Wherein among
other things, he would urge how unpolitick, and unsuccessful it is for the
Spanyard to meditate a conque^ of Europe, where all his Neighbors oppose him
rather than Asia, where they would all join with him out of Interest and
Conscience, both to secur^ him from France, and carry him toward Turkey (...).
O. 134.
at whose doors his friend the Emperor was ready to attaque them upon any
Mutiny or Rebellion then frequent among them, whose strength (sai(...)
Machiavel) lies more in Tradition than in any real Truth: -- Considering the
contrary complexions of the people in point of Interest and Religion that can
admit of no considerable coalition upon the approach of a Foreign impression.

Observations on the Life of Sir Julius Caesar.
SIr Julius Caesar's Father being Physician to Q(...) Elizabeth, and descended
of the ancient Family of the Dalmarii in Italy, then living a Tottenham near
London; This his Son was bred (...) Oxford; and after other intermediate
preferments was advanced Chancellor of the Duchy of Lanc^ster, and sworn a
Privy-Councellor on Sunday th(...) sixth of July, 1607. and afterward was
preferre^ Master of the Rolls. A Person of prodigious bou^ty to all of worth or
want, so that he might see^ to be Almoner-general of the Nation. The story is
well known, of a Gentleman who once borrowing his Coach (which was as well
known to poor people as any Hospital in England) was so rendevouz'd about with
Beggars in London, that it cost him all the money in his purse to sati^fie
their importunity, so that he might have hired twenty Coaches on the same
terms. Sir Francis Bacon Lord Verulam was judicious in his Election, when
perceiving his Dissolution to approach, he made his last Bed in effect in the
house of Sir Julius.

He continued more then twenty years Mr. of the Rolls; and though heaved at by
some Expectants, sat still in his Place, well poysed therein, with his gravity
and integrity. Vir tantarum El^emosynarum non movebitur; a man of so great Alms
and Prayers (made by him and for him) shall not be removed. Nor was it without
a prosperous Omen, that his chief House in Hartfordshire was called Benington,
that is, Villa benigna, the bountiful Village, as one Author will have it; or
as another, Villa beneficii, the Town of good turns, from the River so named
running by it. His Arms were these, viz. Gules, three Roses Argent on a Chief
of the first, so many Roses of the second, embleming the fragrancy of the
Memory he has left behind him.

His Monument in great St. Hellens, London, being out of the road of ordinary
Fancies, was thus designed by himself in form of a Deed in ruffled Parchment,
in allusion to his Office as Master of the Rolls.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit; Sciatis me
Julium Dalmare alias Caesarem Militem, utriusque legis Doctorem; Elizabethae
Reginae Supremae Curia Admiralitatis judicem, and unum (...) Magistris
libellorum; Jacobo Regi ae Privatis Conciliis, Cancellarium Scaccarii,
Scriniorum Magistrum, hac praesenti Charta mea Confirmasse me Annuent^ Divino
Numine naturae debitum libenter solviturum quam primum Deo placuerit. In cujus
rei memoriam, Manum meam, and Sigillum apposui. Datum 27 Februarii, 1635.

Julius Caesar.



Here his Seal or Coat of Arms is affixed, and beneath them is written

Irrotulatur Caelo.

He dyed the twenty eighth day of April, Anno Domini, 1636. in the seventy
ninth year of his Age. They say of Witches, that they are unable to hurt till
they have received an Alms. It Is certain, none ever undermined this
Gentleman's insufficiency, but such as were advanced by his civility; a
civility that secured him, as well as it empowered them, making his Grants to
all persons double kindnesses by Expedition, and clothing his very Denyals in
such robes of Courtship, as that it was not obviously discernable whether the
Request or De^yal were most decent; having this peculiar to himself, That he
was very cautious of Promises, lest falling to an Incapacity of performance, he
might forfeit his Reputation, and multiply his certain Enemies, by his design
of creating uncertain Friends.

Besides, he observed a sure principle of rising, viz. That great persons
esteem better of such they have done great Courtesies to, than those they have
received greater Civilities from; looking upon this as their disparagement, the
other as their glory.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Henry, Sir Lucius, Sir Henry Carry, Lords
Viscounts Faulkland.
ARace of accomplished men, the ornaments and supports of their Country, which
they served with no less faithfulness and prudence in their Negotiations
abroad, than honor and justice in their Places at home: Of such a Stock of
reputation, as might kindle a generous emulation in Strangers, and a noble
ambition in those of their own Family. Henry Carry, Viscount Falkland in
Scotland, son to Sir Edward Cury, was born at Aldnam in Hertfordshire: being a
most accomplished Gentleman, and a complete Courtier. By King James he was
appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and well discharged his Trust therein: But an
unruly Colt will ^ume and chase (though neither switch nor spur) merely because
backed. The Rebellious Irish will complain, only because kept in subjection,
though with never so much lenity; the occasion why some hard speeches were
passed on his Government. Some beginning to counterfeit his hand, he used to
incorporate the year of his age in a knot flourished beneath h(...) name,
concealing the day of his birth to himsel(...) Thus by comparing the date of
the month, with his own Birthday (unknown to such Forgers) (...) not only
discovered many false Writings which were past, but also deterred dishonest
Cheated from attempting the like for the future. He made good use of Bishop
Usher's Interest while he was there, as appears by the excellent Speech that
the Bishop made for the King's supply.

Being recalled into England, he lived honorably in the County aforesaid,
until by a sad casualty he broke his Leg on a Stand in The^b^ld's Park, and
soon after dyed thereof. He married the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Lawrence
Tanfield, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair Estate in
Oxfordshire. His death happened Ann^ D^m. 1620. being Father to the most
accomplished Statesman,

2. Lucius Lord Falkland, the wildness of whose youth was an argument of the
quickness of his riper years: He that has a spirit to be unruly before the
use of his reason, has mettle to be active afterward. Quicksilver if fixed,
is incomparable; besides that the adventures, contrivances, secrets,
confidence, trust, compliance with opportunity, and the other sallies of young
Gallants, prepare them more serious undertakings, -- as they did this noble
Lord; great in his ^own, greater in his Buffe; able with his Sword, abler with
his Pen: a knowing Statesman, a learned Scholar, and a stout man^: One
instance of that excess in learning and other great perfections, which
portended ruin to this Nation in their opinion, who write, that all Extremes,
whether of Virtue or Vice, are ominous, especially that unquiet thing called
Learning, whose (...) signifies its own period, and that of the Empire it
flourishes in; a too universally dilated Learning, being not faithful to the
settlements either of Policy or Religion; it being no less rea^ly to discover
blemishes in the one, than Incongruities in the other: Sophisters (says my
smart Author) like the Country of the Switz, being as able upon the least
advantage proposed, to engage on the wrong side as on the sight. As to go no
further, this excellent Personage being among the Demagogues that had been for
twelve years silenced, and were now to play the prize in Parliament, and show
their little twit-twat, but tedious faculties of speaking, makes the bitterest
Invective against the Governors and government of the Church, that ever was
penned in English; which though designed by him, it'^ thought, only to allay
the fury of the Faction, by some compliance with it, carried things beyond the
moderation and decency of that Assembly, which he made too hot for himself,
retyring in cooler thoughts, as many more (that like Brutus could not lay the
storms they had raised) to Oxford, where his Pen was more honorably employed
in detecting the fundamental Error of Rome their infallibility, and
countermining the main props of Westminster their Hypoerisie; this as
Secretary, the other as a Student -- in both laying open the little
pretensions, whereby poor people were ensnared in their Civil and Religious
Liberty. -- Much was the gall always in his Ink, and very sharp his Pen; but
even, flowing, and full his Style, such as became him, whose Learning was not
an unsettled mass of reading that whirled up and down in his head, but fixed
Observations, that tempered with solid prudence and experience, were the steady
Maxims of his Soul fitted for all times and occasions; he having sat (as some
Noble-mens sons used to do formerly in the House of Lords) behind the Chair of
State from his very childhood, and owning a large heart capable of making that
universal inspection into things that much becomes a Gentleman, being a Master
in any thing he discoursed of. -- Insomuch that his general knowledge husbanded
by his wit, and set off by his Meine and Carriage, attracted many to come as
far to see him, as he prosessed he would go to see Mr. Daillee -- which rendered
him no less necessary than admirable at Court, until his Curiosity engaging
him at Newbery, he was strangely slain there, dying as he lived till then,
between his Friends and Enemies, to the King's great grief, who valued him,
because he understood his parts and services in the Treaty at Oxford, where he
was eminent for two things; the timing of Propositions, and concealing of
Inclinations; though no man so passionate for his design, as never enduring
that hope that holds resolution so long in suspense, but ever allaying it with
that fear that most commonly advises the best by supposing the worst. -- His
usual saying was, I pity unlearned Gentlemen in a rainy day.

3. He was Father first to Henry Lord Falkland, whose quick and extraordinary
parts and notable spirit performed much, and promised more, having a great
command in the Country where he was Lord Lieutenant, a general respect in the
house where he was Member, a great esteem at Court (with his Majesty and his
Royal Highness the Duke of York) where he was both wit, and wisdom. -- When
there was the first opportunity offered to honest men to act, he laid hold of
it, and got in spite of all opposition, to a thing called a Parliament: By
same token, that when some urged he had not sowed his wild Oats, he is said to
reply; If I have not, I may sow them in the House, where there are Geese
enough to pick them up. And when Sir F. N. should tell him he was a little too
wild for so grave a service, he is reported to reply; Alas! I am wild, and my
Father was so before me, and I am no Bastard, -- as, etc. In which Contention
he out-did the most active Demagogues at their own weapon, speaking. When Major
Huntington and his followers were for the long Parliament, Sir F. N. L. S, etc.
were for the secluded Members, My Lord carried all the County for an absolute
free Parliament; which he lived to see, and act in so successfully, that he was
voted generally higher in trusts and services, had he not been cut off in the
prime of his years; as much missed when dead, as beloved when living -- A great
instance of what a strict Education (for no man was harder bred) a general
Converse, and a noble Temper can arrive to; and what an Orator can do in a
Democracy, where the Affections of many is to be wrought upon, rather than the
judgment of few to be convinced. A golden tongue falling under a subtle head
under such a constitution, has great influence upon the whole Nation.

Observations on the Life of Sir James Ley, Earl of Marlborough.
SIr James Ley, son of Henry Ley Esquire (one of great Ancestry, who, says my
Author, on his own cost, with his men, valiantly served King Henry the Eighth,
at the siege of Boloin) being his Fathers sixth son, (and so in probability
barred of his inheritance) endeavored to make himself an Heir by his
Education, applying his book in Brazen Nose-Colledge, and afterward studying
the Laws of the Land in Lincolns-Inne, wherein such his proficiency, King James
made him Lord Chief Justice in Ireland. Here he practiced the charge King James
gave him at his going over, (yea, what his own tender Conscience gave himself)
namely, not to build his Estate upon the ruins of a miserable Nation, but
aiming by the unpartial execution of Justice, not to enrich himself, but
civilize the People. But the wise King would no longer loose him out of his own
Land, and therefore recalled him home about the time when his Fathers
Inheritance, by the death of his five elder brethren descended upon him. It was
not long before Offices and Honors flowed in fast upon him, being made by

King James King Charles 1. Attorney of the Court of Wards. 1. Earl of
Marlborough in Wiltshire, 2. Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, the 18 of his
Reign, Jan. 29. immediately after the King's Coronation. 3. Lord Treasurer of
England in the 22 of his Reign, Dec. 22. 2. Lord President of the Council, in
which place he died, Anno. Dom. 1629. 4. Baron Ley of Ley in Devonshire, the last
of the same month.

He was a Person of great Gravity, Ability, and Integrity: And as the Caspian
Sea is observed neither to ebb nor flow, so his mind did not rise or fall,
but continued the same constancy in all conditions; a good temper enough for a
Judge, but not for a Statesman, and for any Statesman, but a Lord Treasurer;
and for any Lord Treasurer but in King CHARLES his active time who was put to
it to find out such stirring men as might recover him from the hazard and
defection he was fallen into in Purse and Power.

Observations on the Life of Henry Vere Earl of Oxford.
THis noble person had more of the Camp in h(...) temper than the Court; whence
his roug^ Armour-constitution grated often against the our tiers Silks; for
when one of them laughed at h(...) milk-white Feather, he returned smartly upon
him with reflections on his Ancestors, That it had no (...)int in it. His
Predecessors had not been more (...)placable enemies to Spain in the
Low Countries, (...)an he was at White Hall, backing those arguments against
the Match stoutly in the Presence Chamber, that Doctor Hackwel had urged
zealously in the Pulpit; and as resolutely suffering imprisonment for the one,
as the Doctor did suspension for the other; declaring himself as freely against
the Agent Gondomar, as against his business, ^he Marriage: For chancing to meet
Gondomar at ^n Entertainment, the Don accosted him with high Complements,
vowing; That amongst all the (...)obility of England, there was none he had
tendered his service to with more sincerity than to his Lordship, though
hitherto such his unhappiness, that his affections were not accepted according
to his integrity that tendered them. It seems (replied the Earl of Oxford) that
your Lordship has good leisure, when (...)ping in your thoughts to one so
inconsiderable as my self, whose whole life has afforded but two things
memorable therein. It is your Lordships modesty (returned the Spaniard) to
undervalue your self, whilst we the spectators of your Honors deserts, make a
true and impartial estimate thereof; hundreds of memorables have met in your
Lordshipe life: But, (...)od my Lord, what are those two signal things more
(...)spicuous than all the rest? They are these two (said the Earl) I was born
in the year 88, and chri(...)ned on the fifth of November.

Neither was he a more inveterate enemy to the Church of Rome, than a cordial
friend to that of England; for presenting one Mr. Copinger to (...)neham, he
added, to try him, He would pay no tithes of his Park: Mr. Copinger desired
again to resign it to his Lordship, rather than by such sinful gratitude to
betray the rights of the Church. -- Well, if you be of that mind (said the
Earl) then take the tithes; I scorn that my Estate should swell with
Church-goods.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Cook.
SIr John Cook, younger brother to Sir Francis Cook, born at Trusley (in the
Hundred of Apple Tree) in Derby-shire, of ancient and worshipful Parentage, and
allied to the best Family in that County; was bred Fellow of Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridg, where his wit being designed his Estate, he was chosen
Rhetorick-Lecturer in the University, where he grew eminent for his ingenious
and critical reading in that School, where Rhetoric seemed to be not so much
an art, as his nature; being not only the subject, but the very frame of his
discourse: then traveled he beyond the Seas for some years (when his judgment
was fitted for Foreign observations by Domestic experience) in the company of
a person of quality, returning thence rich in Languages, Remarks, and
Experience, waving all the dangers incident to him for his Religion, by a wary
profession, that he came to learn, and not to search. Being first related to
Sir Fulke Grevil, Lord Brook, who did all men^ business but his own; He was
thence preferred to be Secretary of the Navy, then Master of the Requests, and
at last Secretary of State for twenty years together. Being a very zealous
Protestant, he did all good offices for the advancement of true Religion: His
Contemporaries character him a grave and a prudent man in gate, apparel, and
speech; one that had his Intellectuals very perfect in the dispatch of
business till he was eighty years old; when foreseeing those Intrigues that
might be too hard for his years, he with his Majesty's good leave retired as
Moses did, to dye when his eyes were not dim, etc. having kept himself strictly
to the Law of the Land: Insomuch, that being sent to command Bishop Williams
from Westminster; and being asked by the stout Bishop, by what authority he
commanded a man out of his house and his freehold, he was so tender of the
point, that he never rested till he had his pardon for it. Much ado he had to
keep the King's favor for his compliance with the Faction, witness his third
submission; and as much ado to retain the Factions good opinion for his service
to the King, witness his several Apologies in Parliament to this purpose; That
it was a hard thing, that they who should have thanks for the good offices they
did the People with the KING, had now nothing but censures for the same offices
they did the King with his People. -- Never was any man more put to it to
reconcile the two readings of that Text

(...)
(...) (...)
-- which he could never have done, but that his old rule safe-guarded him,
viz. That no man should let what is unjustifiable or dangerous appear under his
hand, to give Envy a steady aim at his place or person; no mingle Interests
with great men made desperate by debts or Court-injuries, whose falls has been
ruinons to their wisest followers; nor pry any further into secrecy, than
rather to secure, than she^ himself; nor impart that to a friend, that may
Empower him to be an enemy. Besides that his yea^ excused in him that caution
some obstinate me^ want that are broken with vicissitudes, because they
consider not that the forwardest in turmoyls a^least regarded when things
return to a calm.

He served the time out of Christian discretion, in finding out the seasons of
things commendably. He complied out of some infirmity in particular
accommodations pardonably; but neither of ignorance or design, in pursuance of
his own, or any other man's plot unfaithfully. Indeed he must have wrenched and
sprained his grave soul with the short turnings in those days, if it had been
true, that he should shuffle a Scots Paper (instead of the genuine Articles of
Pacification at York) which the Earls of Holland, Pembrook, etc. disavowed
(...) the Northern Commissioners faces (my Lord (...) Pembrook saying, That
indeed as he took Horse, and his Friends being busy about him, such a Paper
was put into his hand, but he opened it not until he came to his Majesty) and
his Majesty burned in the face of both Kingdoms; whereupon they say he was
dismissed, which I am not willing to believe: only I find him hereafter
bringing Propositions from the Parliament (as they called it) to the King, as
actively as formerly he had carried Messages from the King to the Parliament:
-- Indeed he had an^ happy mixture of Discretion and Charity, whereby he could
allow to things and persons more than men of streighter apprehensions, or
narrower affections were able to do. Indeed, though as I told you otherwise
wary, he broke an Affair to a Partizan that kept him under all his days: and he
that entertains a dangerous design, puts his head into an ^^alter, and the
halter into his hand to whom he first imparts it. -- Sir Francis Windebanke and
he fell into extremes; which balanced, might have supported the Government, if
they had directed their particular inclinations and indulgences by the measures
of the general interest and temper.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Danby.
ALl that I find of this plain Nobleman, is written on his Tombstone at
Dantsey in Wiltshire. Here lies the Body of Henry Danvers, second son to Sir
John Danvers Knight, and Dame Elizabeth, Daughter and Coheir to ^evil Lord
Latimer. He was born at Dantsey in the County of Wilts, Anno Dom. 1573. being
(...)ed up partly in the Low Country Wars, under Maurice Earl of Nassaw,
afterward Prince of Orange; and in many other Military actions of those times,
both by Sea, and by Land. He was ^ade a Captain in the Military Wars of France,
and there Knighted for his good service under Henry the fourth the then French
King. He was employed as Lieutenant of the Horse, and Serjeant-Major of his
whole Army in Ireland, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of
Mou(...) joy, in the Reign of Queen Eliz. By King Jam^^ the first, he was made
Baron of Dantsey, and Pee^ of this Realm; as also Lord President of Munster and
Governor of Guernsey. By King Charles the first, he was created Earl of Danby,
made one of his Privy-Councel, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter. In his later time, by reason of imperfect health, confiderately
declining more active Employments, full of honors, wounds and days, he died
Anno Dom. 1643.

LAVS DEO.

For many years before, St. George had not been more magnificently mounted (I
mean the solemnity of his Feast more sumptuously observed) the^ when this Earl,
with the Earl of Morton, were installed Knights of the Garter. One might have
there beheld the abridgment of England and Scotland in their Attendance. The
Scottish Earl (like Xeuxes his picture) adorned with all Art and costlinesse,
whilst our English Earl (like the plain shee^ of Apelles) by the gravity of
his Habit, got the advantage of the gallantry of his Corrival with judicious
beholders. He died without Issue in the beginning of our Civil Wars, and by his
Will made 1639. settled his large Estate on his hopeful Nephew Henry D'Anvers,
snatched away (before fully o^ age) to the great grief of all good men.

Observations on the Life of Sir Geo. Crook.
SIr George Crook, son of Sir John Crook, and Elizabeth Vnton his Wife, was
born at Chilton in Buckinghamshire, in the second year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner Temple,
Sergeant at Law, and the King's Sergeant; Justice first of the Common Bench, 22
Jac. and then of the Upper Bench, 4 Caroli. His ability in his Profession is
sufficiently attested by his own printed Reports; Eight eminent Judges of the
Law out of their knowledge of his great Wisdom, Learning, and Integrity,
approving and allowing them to be published for the common benefit. His only
defect was, that he was against the ancient Naval-aid called Ship Money, both
publicly in Westminster Hall, and privately in his judgment demanded by the
King, even at that time when our Neighbors not only incroached upon our
Trade, but disputed our right in the Narrow-seas, though concluded to subscribe
(according to the course of the Court) by plurality of Voices. The Country-mans
wit (levelled to his brain) will not for many years be forgotten; That
Ship Money may be gotten by Hook, and not by Crook; though since they have paid
Taxes (Leynes to the little finger, and Scorpions to the rod of Ship Money) but
whether by Hook or Crook, let others enquire: Hampden's share for which he went
to Law, being but eighteen shillings, though it cost the Nation since eighteen
millions.

Considering his declining and decaying age, and desiring to examine his life,
and prepare an account to the supreme Judge, he petitioned King Charles for a
Writ of Ease; which though in some sort denied, (what wise Master would
willingly part with a good Servant?) was in effect granted unto him. For the
good King (exacting from his Subjects no services beyond their years and
abilities; and taking it better at his hands, that he confessed his
infirmities, than if he had concealed them) discharged him from the pains,
though he allowed him the fees and honor of Chief Justice while he lived. --
Wherefore in gratitude as well as conscience, however he was misled in the
foresaid matter of Ship Money, he abhorred the Faction heartily, for he would
say of Hampden, He is a dangerous person, take heed of him: -- and loved the
Church as heartily; for we are told by a person of great worth and credit, That
having read over the book of Canons 1640. when it first came out, and was so
much spoken against, he lifted up his hands, and gave hearty thanks to Almighty
God, that he had lived to see such good effects of a Convocation. In a word, he
was no less in his Life, than he is in h(...) Epitaph now dead, which runs
thus;

Georgius Crook Eques Auratus, unus justiciari(...) cum de Banco Regis, Judicio
Linceato, and any(...) presenti insignis, veritatis haeres, quem nec min(...)
nec h^nos allexit: Regis authoritatem and populi (...) bertatem aequa lance
Libravit; Religione cordatu(...) vita innocuus, manu expansa, Cord humili
pauperes irrogavit: mundum vicit and deseruit, Anno Aetat. Lxxxii, Annoque R.
C. I. xv^i. Anno Domini MDCXLI.

Observations on the Life of Sir Rob. Armstroder.
HE was a great Soldier, a skilful Antiquary, and a good Fellow: In the first
capacity I find him bringing off five hundred English for three miles together
without the loss of a man, from six thousand Spaniards, along a plain
Champion, where the Enemy might have surrounded them at pleasure. -- Well he
could handle bright Armor in the Field, better he understood that more rusty
in the Tower; therefore in his second capacity we have him picking up old Coin,
traluing more a Dollar which he might study, than a pound he might spend: Yet
though his mind was taken with the Curiosities of former Times, his
^nclination was very compliant with the mode of his own; for he was excellent
company, in which capacity none more prevalent than he in Germany, where they
talk much; none more acceptable in Denmark, where they drink hard; none more
taking in Sweden, where they droll smartly. His humble proposition and
submission in behalf of the Elector, was accepted by the Emperor, 1630. He
went to Denmark; and the first night he arrived he pleased the King so well in
drinking healths, that his Majesty ordered that his business should be
dispatched that very night, and he shipped when asleep, as he was to his own
amazement when awaked, and the amazement of all England when returned; he being
here before some thought he had been there. -- Humor is the Mistress of the
world.

Neither was he more intent upon the pleasing of Foreign Princes, than careful
in the honor of his own, especially in his faith, word, and impregnable
honesty; for he knew a faithless Prince is beloved of none; but suspected by
his friends, not trusted of his enemies, -- and forsaken of all men in his
greatest necessities.

Yet he was not so taken with antique Medals abroad, but he promoted a new
invention at home: for to him and Sir H. Wotton we owe it, that F. Klein the
German, a very eminent Artist in working Tapestry, came over to serve K. Charles
the first, a Virtuoso, judicious in all Liberal mechanical Arts, and for 100
pounds per ann. pension, so improved that Manufacture, at this time very
complete at Mortlack, in a house built by Sir Francis Crane upon King James his
motion, who gave two thousand pounds toward it in that place. -- General Tilly
would say before Gustavus Adolphus came into Germany, that he was happy for
three things; That he heard Mass daily; that he had never touched a woman; and
that he had never lost a battle. -- Whatever Sir Robert could say to the
first, he was very prosperous for the last; that he never failed of success
either in fighting or treating; in the Field, or in the Chamber.

Observations on the Life of Philip Earl of Arundel.
HAd his Faith been as Orthodox as his Fathers Faithfulness was eminent, K.
James his gratitude, and his Uncle Northampton's policy had raised him as high
as his Father has been, and his son is. But since his opinion made him a
Separatist from the Church, and his temper a recluse from the Court, we have
him in a place of Honor only as Earl Marshal, while we find his Brother in a
place of Profit, as Lord Treasurer -- though both in a place of Trust as
Privy-Counsellors, -- where this Earl approved himself a confutation of his See
the Ea^^ ^f Northampton's Speech.
Uncles maxim; That a through-paced Papist could not be a true-hearted
Subject; being as good an Englishman in his heart, is he was a Catholic in
his conscience; only the greatness of his spirit would not suffer any
affronts in See Lord Spencer.
Parliament; whence he endured some discountenance from the Court, insomuch
that the House of Lords finding him a Prisoner, when they sat 1626, would not
act until after several of their Petitions he was released; when, his temper
yielding with years, he was very complying, only he ^resumed to marry his Son
to an Heiress the King and disposed of elsewhere: which yet he laid upon the
women that made the Match. Indeed the (...) Observator says; That women of all
creatures are the most dextrous in contriving their designs, their natural
sprightfulnesse of imagination, attended with their leisure, furnishing them
with a thousand Expedients, and proposing all kinds of Overtures wi(...) such
probability of happy suce^sse, that they easily desire, and as eagerly pursue
their design.

When he was sometimes barred the service of his own time, he studied those
before him, being a fond Patron of Antiquaries and Antiquity, of whose old
pieces he was the greatest Hoarder in Europe, setting aside Ferdinando de
Medicis, grand Duke of Tuscany, from whom by the mediation of Sir Henry Wotton,
he borrowed many an Antique Sculpture which furnished his Archives so well, (as
we may guess by Mr. Selden's Marmora Arundeliana) that as my Lord Burleigh's
Library was the most complete one for a Politician, my Lord Bacon's for a
Philosopher, Mr. Selden's for an Historian, Bishop Usher's for a Divine, my
Lord of Northampton's for a Poet, Mr. Oughtred's for a Mathematician, Dr.
Hammond's for a Grammarian, or an universal Critic; so the Earl of Arundel's
was the best for a^ Hearld and an Antiquary, a Nobly communicated to all
ingenious persons by the honorable H Howard of Norfolk, greater in his own
worth than in any ti^^es.
Library not for show but use.

Neither was he more in his study, where he be stowed his melancholy hours,
than in Council where he advised three things in reference to the Foreign
troubles: 1. Correspondence abroad 2. Frequent Parliaments. 3. Oftener progress
into the Countries. Neither was he less in the Field than in Council, when
General against the Scots (the more shame!) that Protestants should (...) time
rebel against their King, when Papists vent(...) red their lives for him: After
which Expedition he was ordered beyond Sea with the Queen Mother of France,
1639. when they say he looked back on England with this wish, May it never have
need of me.

It Is true, some observe, that the Scots who cried upon him as a Papist, yet
writ under hand to him their Noble Lord, as they did to Essex and Holland so
effectually, that they had no heart to that War afterward; -- and it is as
true, that thereupon a schedule was now the second time given of the parties
that combined against the Government, viz. 1. The busy medlers that had got
the plausible trick of Haranguing since King James's time, not used in
Parliament from H 6. time to his. 2. The covetous Landlords, Inclosers,
Justices of the Peace that ruled in the Country, and would do so in Parliament.
3. Needy men in debt, that durst not show their heads in time of Peace. 4.
Puritans, that were so troublesome against Hatton, etc. in Queen Eliz. days;
and under pretense of Religon, overthrew all Government. 5. Such Malcontents
as either lost the preferment they had, or had not what they were ambitious of,
with their Kindred and Dependants. 6. Lawyers, that second any attempt upon the
Prerogative, with their Cases, Records, and Antiquities. 7. London Merchants,
that had been discovered by Cranfield and Ingram, as to their cheats put upon
the King in his Customs, and Plantations. 8. Common-wealthsmen, that had
learned from Holland in Queen Eliz. days to pray for the Queen and the State.
And 9 (Because there cannot be a Treason without a P --) such Recusants as were
Hispanioliz'd, whereof this Earl was none: but though as a Church-Papist he had
most of the Catholic Peers votes devolved on him; he never bestowed them
undutifully, albeit sometimes stoutly, and resolutely. A great friend he was to
all new Inventions, save those that tended to do that by few hands, which had
been usually done by many; because, said he, While private men busy their
heads to take off the Poors employment, the public Magistrate must trouble his
to find them maintenance. Either he or the Earl of Northampton used to say
(when asked what made a complete man?) To know how to cast Accounts: an
accomplishment though ordinary, yet might save many an Estate in England.

Observations on the Life of Esme Duke of Richmond.
GReat in his Ancestors honor, greater in his own virtue, and greatest of all,
in that like the Star he wore, the higher he was, the less he desired to seem,
affecting rather the (...), than the pomp of nobleness; -- therefore his
courtesy was his nature not his craft; and his affableness not a base and
servile popularity, or an ambitious insinuation; but the native gentleness of
his disposition, and his true value of himself: He was not a stranger to any
thing worth knowing, but best acquainted with himself, and in himself, rather
with his weaknesses for Caution, than his abilities for Action. Hence he is not
so forward in the traverses of War, as in Treaties of Peace, where his honor
ennobled his cause, and his moderation advanced it: He and my Lord of
Southampton managing the several Overtures of Peace at London, Oxford, and
Oxbridge with such honorable freedom and prudence, that they were not more
deservedly regarded by their Friends, than importunately courted they their
Enemies; who seeing they were such, could not be patient till they were theirs,
though in ^ain, their honors being impregnable as well against the Factions
kindness as against their power. At Conferences his conjectures were as solid
as others judgments; his strict observation of what was passed, furnishing him
for an happy guess of what was to come: Yet his opinion was neither variably
unconstant, nor obstinately immovable, but framed to present occasions,
wherein his method was to begin a second advice from the failure of his first,
-- though he hated doubtful suspense, when he might be resolute. This one great
defect was his good nature, that he could never distrust till it was dangerous
to suspect: and he gave his Enemy so much advantage, that he durst but own him
for his friend. -- One thing he repented of, that he advised his Majesty to
trust Duke Hamilton his Adversary with the affairs of Scotland, in compliance
with the general opinion, rather than the Marquess Huntly his friend in
compliance with his own real interest; an advice wherein his
publick-spiritednesse superseded his particular concerns and his good nature
his prudence: -- So true is it, that the honest man's single uprightness works
in him that confidence, which oft-times wrongs him, and gives advantage to the
subtle, while he rather pities their faithlesness, than repents of his
credulity: so great advantage have they that look only what they may do, over
them that consider what they should do; and they that observe only what is
expedient, over them that judge only what is lawful. -- Therefore when those
that thought themselves wise, left their sinking Sovereign, he stuck to his
Person while he lived, to his body when dead, and to his cause as long as he
lived himself: -- attending the first resolutely, burying the second
honorably, and managing the third discreetly; undertaking without rashness,
and performing without fear; never seeking dangers, never avoiding them.
Although when his Friends were conquered by the Rebels, he was conquered by
himself, retyring to that privacy, where he was guessed at, not known; where he
saw the world unseen; where he made yielding a conquest; where cheerful and
unconcerned in expectation, he provided for the worst, and hoped the best, in
the constant exercise of that Religion, which he and his maintained more
effectually with their Examples, than with their Swords; doing as much good in
encouraging the Orthodox by his presence as in relieving them by his bounty. --
In a word, I may say of him, as Macarius does of Justine; There was no Vice but
he thought below him; and no Virtue which he esteemed not either his duty on
ornament. Neither was his prudence narrower than his virtue, nor his virtue
streighter than his fortune. His main service was his inspection into the
Intrigues and Reserves of the Parliamentiers at Vxbridge, and his cajoling of
the Independants and Scots at London, where the issue of his Observations was;
That the King should as far as his conscience could allow, comply with the
unreasoble desires of an illimited ambition, to make it sensible of the evils
that would flow from its own Counsels: being confident, as events have assured
us, that the people would see the inconvenience of their own wishes; and that
they would return that power which they sought for, but could not manage, to
its proper place, before it became their-ruine: -- for unbounded Liberty
overthrows its self. But alas! it was too late to grant them any thing, who
by having so much, were only encouraged more eagerly to desire what they knew
the King in honor could not give: -- For when a Prince is once rendered odious
or contemptible, his Indulgences do him no less hurt than injuries.

As his services were great, so were his Recreations useful See his late
Majesty's recomdation to him at his departure from Hamton-court.
; Hunting, that manly Exercise being both his pleasure and his accomplishment:
his accomplishment, I say, since it is in the list of Machiavel's rules to his
Prince, as not only the wholsomest and cheapest diversion, both in relation to
himself, and his People, but the best Tutor to Horse-manship, Stratagems, and
Situations, by which he may afterward place an Army; whatever Sir Philip
Sidney's apprehension was, who used to say; Next hunting, he liked hawking
worst.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief Justice Banks.
SIr John Banks his Parents perceiving him judicious and industrious, bestowed
good breeding on him in Grayes-Inne, in hope he should attain to preferment;
wherein they were not deceived. For after he was called to the Bar for some
years, he solicited Suits for others, thereby attaining great practical
experience. He afterward might laugh at them, who then did smile at him,
leaving many behind him in Learning, whom he found before him in time, until at
last he was Knighted by King Charles, made first his Attorney, then
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, dying in the midst and heat of our Civil
Dissentions. He ordered by his Will, that his Body should be buried under some
plain Monument at the discretion of his Executors; and after an Epitaph
mentioning the several Places he had held, this Motto to be added; Non nobis
Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam.



By his said Will he gave to the value of thirty pound per ann. with other
Emoluments, to be bestowed in pious Uses, and chiefly to set up a Manufacture
of course Cottons in the Town of Keswick.

He was one whom the Collar of S S. S. worn by Judges and other Magistrates
became very well, if it had its name from Sanctus, Simon, Simplicius; no man
being more seriously pious, none more singly honest. -- When Sir Henry Savile
came to Sir Edward Cook then at bowls, in Archbishop Abbot's behalf, and told
him he had a Case to propose to him: Sir Edward answered; If it be a Case in
Common Law, I am unworthy to be a Judge, if I cannot presently satisfy you:
but if it be a point of Statute Law, I am unworthy to be a Judge, if I should
undertake to satisfy you without consulting my Books. -- Sir John Banks,
though ready without his Books on the Bench, -- yet always resolved Cases out
of them in his Chamber; answerable to his saying to Dr. Sibs, A good textuary
is a good Lawyer, as well as a good Divine.

His invention was prompt and ready; his apprehension sure and solid; his
memory capacious and retentive; his knowledge in the Law, and the inward
reasons of it, profound; his experience in affairs of State universal, and well
laid: patient he was in hearing; sparing, but pertinent in speaking: very glad
always to have things represented truly and clearly; and when it was otherwise,
able to discern through all pretenses the real merit of a Cause.

He was a man of singular modesty, of the ancient freedom, plain-heartednesse,
and integrity of mind: Very grave and severe in his deportment, yet very
affable, in such sort, that, as Tacitus says of Agrippa; Illi quod est
rarissimum nec facilitas authoritatem, nec severitas amorem diminu^^: And in a
word, so even and circumspect he was in the several turnings and occasions of
his life, that though he went himself, and brought over as many as he had any
interest in, to the King, I find him under no extraordinary displeasure from
the Rebels; and I observe but one unhappiness in his whole life, and that is,
that all men speak well of him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Edmonds.
THe Trophies of Miltiades would not let Themistocles sleep, nor the
Courts-advancements of his Relations this Gentleman to sit still; having both
Livie's qualifications, for an eminent man, a great spirit, and a gallant
conduct for actions; a sharp wit, and a fluent tongue for advice. -- Whence we
meet with him Comptroller of the Kings Household at home, and his Agent for In
France, 1629.
Peace abroad, equally fit for business of courage and resolution, and for
affairs of Council and complement. -- I think it was this Gentleman, who
foreseeing a Contest likely to ensue between the English and the Spanish
Ambassadors, to the first whereof he belonged, went to Rome privately and
fetched a Certificate out of the book of Ceremonies (which according to the
Canon gives the rule in such cases) showing that the King of England was to
precede him of Castile; a good argument, because ad homines, wise men having
always thought fit to urge not what is most rational in its self, but what (all
circumstances considered) is most conrincing. Sir Thomas Edmonds used to puzzle
the Catholics about six Records. 1. The original of Constantine's grant of
Rome to the Pope. 2. St. Marke's grant of the Adriatique Guiph to Venice. 3.
The Salique Law in France. 4. The Instrument whereby King John passed away
England to the Pope. 5. The Letter of King Lucius. And 6. The Ordinal of the
Consecration at the Nagshead. -- Neither did he perplex them with these
Quaeries, more than he angered the Faction with his Principles, Tertio Car. I.
1. That the King was to be trusted. 2. That the Revenue was to be settled. 3.
That the Protestant cause was to be maintained. 4. That Jealousies were to be
removed, and things past were to be forgotten.

Observations on the Life of Sir Paul Pindar.
HE was first a Factor, then a Merchant, next a At Perro^s and Aleppo.
Consul; and at last an Ambassador in Turkey: Whence returning with a good
purse and a wary Headpiece, he cast about what he might do to gratify K. James
and the Archbishop of Canterbury most; and finding them much pleased with acts
of Charity and Piety, he repaired the Entry, Front, and Porches of St. Paul's
Cathedral to all the upper Church, Quire and Chancel, and enriched them with
Marble structures and figures of the Apostles, with carvings and guildings far
exceeding their former beauty, which cost above two thousand pounds; the act of
a good man, said K. James, who made him one of the great Farmers of the
Customs: in gratitude whereof, Sir Paul besides his former expenses, took upon
him to new build the South Isle, which cost him above 17000 l.

A Projector (such necessary Evils then countenanced) and he a Clergyman too,
informed K. James how he might speedily advance his Revenue by bringing in
Spiritual preferments (now forsooth under-rated in the Kings books) to a full
value, to the great increase of First Fruits and Tenths: the King demands the
Lord Treasurer Cranfield's judgment thereof: he said; Sir, You are esteemed a
great lover of Learning; you know Clergy-mens Education is chargeable, their
prefermeut slow, and small: Let it not be said you gain by grinding them other
ways less obnoxious to just censure will be found out to furnish your
occasions. The King commended the Treasurer (as doing it only for trial)
adding moreover, I should have accounted thee a very Knave, if encouraging me
herein. -- But he sends for Sir Paul Pindar, and tells him, he must either
raise the Customs, or take this course; who answers him nobly: That he would
lay thirty thousand pounds at his feet the morrow, rather than he should be put
upon such poor projects, as unsuitable to his honor, as to his inclination. Go
thy way (says the King) thou art a good man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Vane Senior.
THree things Henry the fourth of France said would puzzle any man. 1. Whether
Qu: Elizabeth was a Maid? 2. Whether the Prince of Orange was valiant? 3. What
Religion he himself was of? To which I may add a fourth, viz. what Sir Henry
Vane was? whom I know not what to call, but what Mr. Baxter calls his son, a
bider: the Fathers life being as mystical as the Sons faith, men as little
understanding the actions of the one, as they did the writings of the other:
But the two powers that govern the world, the best, and the worst, are both
invisible. All Northern men are reserved to others, but this was too sly for
his own Countrymen; neither Sir John Savile that brought him to Court, nor Sir
Thomas Wentworth that advanced him there, understanding either his temper, or
his design. -- He betrayed any Council he was present at, and marred all the
Actions he was employed in. As 1. When he was sent to relate the Emperor's
overture to the Queen of Bobemia, of thirty thousand pounds per ann. and a
Marriage between her eldest Son and his Daughter, he did it with those ackward
circumstances, that transported the good Lady, to such unseasonable
expressions, as at that time blasted her cause and expectations. And thence
it is thought he brought Sir Robert Dudley's Rhapsody of Projects to disparage
the King's government, under pretense of supplying his necessities: [it was the
way of the late Underminers, to relieve their Masters present need upon future
inconveniences; hiding themselves under Proposals, plausible for the present,
and fatal in the consequence] which juggles of his were so long too little to
be considered, that at last they were too great to be remedied. 2. He is said
to have shuffled other Conditions into the Pacification at York, where he was
a Commissioner, than were avowed by the Lords Commissioners, much insisted on
by the Scots, and burned by the common Hangman, as false, and contrary to the
true Articles. 3. When sent to the House, 1640. to demand 12, or 8, or six
Subsidies, he requires without abatement twelve, with design (as it is judged)
to ask so much, as might enrage the Parliament to give nothing; -- and so to
be dissolved unhappily, or continued unsuccessfully. 4. He and his son together
betray the Votes passed in the select Council, taken by him privately under his
hat, for the reducing of Scotland, to the ruin of the Earl of Strafford, and
the Archbishop of Carterbury. -- The story is, Sir Henry Vane was trusted with
the Juncto, where he took Notes of their several opinions; these Notes he puts
up in his Closet: A while after, he delivers to his son Sir H. Vane Junior, a
key to fetch some Papers out of a Cabinet, in which he finds another key to an
inward shutter; which he opened, and lighted upon this Paper, and communicates
it to Mr. Pym for the end aforesaid; and upon this very Paper (do not
tremble Reader at this Treason?) alone, the House of Commons voted that brave
Earl out o(...) his Life, the same day that twenty two years after the same Sir
Henry Vane Junior, lost his head. Absolvi numen.

Observations on the Life of Sir Richard Hutton.
SIr Richard Hutton was born at Perith, of a worshipful Family (his elder
brother was a Knight) and bred in Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge. He intended his
Studies for Divinity, till dissuaded by the importunity of his friends (amongst
whom George Earl of Cumberland was most eminent) he became Barrister of
Grayes-Inne. But in expression of his former Affection to Divinity, he seldom
(if ever) took fee of a Clergyman. Afterward being Recorder of York, he was
Knighted, and made Judge of the Common Pleas. In the case of Ship Money, though
he was against the King, or rather for the So says the Historian: but I think
as much against them as against the K. Not only because the welfare of K. and
people are inseparable: but also because there is not a more common saying
among the people, than defend me, and spend.
Commons, yet his Majesty manifested not the least distaste, continuing to call
him the honest Judge. This person so pious to God, and charitable to the Poor,
was dissolved about the beginning of our National misery. Thus God, before he
ploweth up a Land with the furrows of a Civil War, first cutteth down his old
crop, and gathers them like ripe sheaves into his Barn. He died at Sergeant's
Inn, and was buried at his earnest desire with the Common Prayer, without any
Funeral-Sermon (save what his own Virtues preached to posterity) at St.
Dunstan's in the West, on the 27 day of February, Anno Dom. 1638. Here I learn
how circumspect our counsels must be in reference to things and persons above
us; which implying an overpoyzing of our own judgment, and a debating of
others, in all cases is obnoxious to jealousy, but in these to danger, under
which there are no Qualifications to patience and moderation, The virtues of
this happy Judge (if he had cast obstinacy overboard, and let his wisdom tack
about in things capable of expedience) whereby he knew well both how to allay
the asperities of a bad fortune, and check the excesses of a good one, packing
up his fears and hopes in so narrow a compass, as made the last less tedious,
and the first more portable; to which he added an unaffected plainness, the
argument of his worth and weight, a weakness and emptiness being as safely as
usually concluded from too much affectation, -- an overmuch care of the out
side being an argument of remissness in what is within, it remaining (says
one) equally rare, to find a starched and formal man wise, as a Woman valiant;
the most serious Endeavors of both being to take only the Eyes.

Observations on the Life of the Marquess of Hertford.
HE was none of those Malcontents who make the sins of their riper years make
good the follies of their youth, and maintain oversights with Treasons: as he
was patient under his Imprisonment for the one, so he was active in his
services against the other; not more dutifully submitting to the severity of K.
James for his Marriage, then loyally assisting the necessities of King Charles
in his Wars. It Is natural to return an Injury, it is heroical to overcome it;
and be above it, when we are below our selves. It is true, he was drawn in to
subscribe the untoward Proposals at York; but it is as true, he did of his own
accord declare against the unnatural War in London, where the King advanced him
to the tuition of the Prince, and he went himself to the defense of the King:
at what time such his popularity, that he raised an Army himself such his
humility, that he yielded the command of it to another, as if he knew nothing
but others merit, and his own wants; being one of those choice men that admire
every thing in others, and see nothing in themselves. His face, his carriage,
his habit savoured of Lowliness without affectation, and yet he was J. H.
much under what he seemed. His words were few and soft, never either
peremptory or censorious, because he thought both each man more wise, and none
more obnoxious than himself; being yet neither ignorant nor careless, but
naturally meek, lying ever close within himself, armed with those two
Masterpieces, Resolution and Duty, wherewith he mated the blackest Events that
did rather exercise than dismay that spirit that was above them, and that mind
that looked beyond them: He was the easiest enemy, and the truest friend; whom
extremities obliged, while (as the Reverend Bishop speaks) he as a wellwrought
Vault lay at home the stronger, by how much the more weight he did bear. He
offered his life for his Prince's service in the Field, and his person for his
ransom at the Court; and when many wished they might dye for that excellent
King, he, the Earls of Lindsey and Southampton offered, That since his Majesty
was presumed by the Law to do no harm himself, and since he did all by them his
Ministers, as they had the honor to act under, they might have the happiness
to suffer for him.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Finch.
THis Family has had an hereditary eminence in the study of the Law. -- Sir
Henry Finch [the Author of (...)] learned Sergeant at Law in King James his
time. (...) Heneage Finch Recorder of London in K. Charles time, and this noble
person at the same time the Queen's Attorney, and Speaker of that curious,
knowing, and rich Parliament wherein some have observed, though wide, I
suppose, that the House of Commons modestly aestimated [consisting of 500]
could buy the House of Peers [consisting of 118] thrice over. -- Norimbergh in
Germany, and Florence in Italy, would not of old admit of any learned men into
their Council; because great learned men, says the Historian of those places,
are perplexed to resolve upon Affairs, making many doubts full of Respects and
Imaginations. -- Semblably this Parliament was too rich and curious to do any
good, though this noble personage, even when the Housedoors were shut, and he
violently detained in his Chair, refused to countenance their proceedings,
always abhorring Eliot's doctrine; That men should not be questioned for
offenses in Parliament: As if that reverend Assembly were called for no other
end, than that turbulent spirits might be at liberty to speak Treason once
every three years.

When he was questioned for his opinion about Ship Money, his judgment was;
That if the whole were in danger, the whole should contribute. -- When he was
urged to read the Remonstrance against Sir R. W. 4 Car. in Parliament, his
opinion was; That at any rate (though at the highest that can be) Authority
must be vindicated, and redeemed from contempt, since the Life of Government is
reputation.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Say.
WHether the first impressions of his (...) T. C.
Tutor, (Schoolmasters, though the most neglected, are not the most
inconsiderable parts of a Commonwealth:) the narrowness of his fortune
(unequal to his honor; younger brothers of noble houses had need in every
State to be observed the repulse, 1613. (other men must look to whom they are
kind, but Princes to whom they are unkind) inclined this personage to
popularity: This is certain, no man was better tempered for that humor than
himself; being in his nature severe and rigid; in his carriage close and
reserved; in his resolutions firm and immovable; in his apprehension,
provident and foreseeing; in his Sentiments nice and curious: -- in his
Discourse (full of Fears and Jealousies) dissatisfied and bold; in his
followers irregular and pretending; in the Law well seen; in the Scripture very
ready; in the occurrences of his age very exact: at Lectures most constant; to
the liberty of the Subject (then the Diana of the age) most faithful, insomuch
that he made a motion 1628, That they who stood for the Liberties, forsooth!
(then called the Lower House Lords of the Upper-House) not fifty might make
their Protestation upon record, and that the other party should with
subscription of their names enter their reason upon Record, that posterity
might not be to seek (good lack) who they were that so ignobly betrayed the
Liberty of our Nation: And this being done, they should resolve themselves to a
Committee, and proceed to vote: -- Yet so well acquainted with the King's
temper, that he would ^ake any occasion of his being pleased by the Parliament,
to (...)sinuate himself into favor with all his Malcontents, as Bishop
Williams, Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Essex, the Earl of Warwick, etc.

As he wrought upon the peoples humor in that point of Liberty, so he did upon
the Nobilities temper in another of Ambition: For in a Petition to King James
against Foreign titles of Honor, we find him first in design, though last in
subscription, teaching Essex, Warwick, St. John (for they joined with him) to
tilt against their Sovereign's Prerogative with their Pens, as they did after
with their Swords.

And when this failed (the wise King a wing the young Lords to renounce that
asunder, which they had subscribed together; none so bold as the factious in
company, none so fearful apart) the Champion of English honor and privilege,
becomes the Patron of Propriety too; for we read Ter. Hill. Anno 14. Car. 1. in
Banco Regis, the Lord Says Case. --

Action for Trover and Conversion of three Oxen taken (a great matter) for
three pounds five shillings, by the Sheriff of Lincoln, upon the Plaintiff,
toward the finding of a Ship. -- A goodly reason, for going to Law first, and
then to war with his Sovereign, as he did afterward, when he had sent his son
Nathaniel, with Hampden and Lawrence, 1639. to settle the League with their
dear Brethren in Scotland, while he formed the grand Design in England, with so
much success, that when there were some Overtures made for saving the Earl of
Strafford, and securing the Kingdom by the Party, upon condition of
preferment, as that Master Hampden should be Tutor to the Prince, the Earl of
Essex his Governor, Mr. Pym Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Earl of Warwick
Vice Admiral, he was to be Master of the Court of Wards; which he compassed,
when the rest mist of their expectation. -- No more of him, but that the King
going to Scotland, he refusing a Protestation against the Scots, had these
questions proposed to him:

1. Whether he would go with the King at his own charge. 2. Whether Rebellion
was a just cause of War. 3. Whether the taking of Castles, Crowns, Magazines,
etc. was not Rebellion.
To the first he answered; That though as a Pee^ and Subject, he could not be
forced out of his Country but upon extraordinary occasion; yet out of
affection to his Majesty, he would attend him, referring the matter of charge
to himself.

To the two last he said, he understood not the Law of Scotland, but that those
proceedings were Treason in England.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Lindsey.
HE and that whole Family (I know not whether more pious, or more valiant;
whether more renowned abroad, as Confessors for their Religion, or, as
Champions for their Country) have been in this last Age an ornament and a
defense to this Crown, equally reverenced by the Subjects of it, and honored
by the Sovereigns.

This Nobleman and the Earl of Essex did as Jugurtha and Manus, learn in one
School what they practiced in two: The one as a faithful Subject, for that
government that had obliged his Family; the other as a discontented Rebel,
against that that had disobliged his: Both Commanders for the Palatinate
against the Emperor, and for Rochel against the French.

When the Duke of Buckingham returned from the Isle of Rhee, his Majesty told
him; The neglect of his relief must lodge on his Friend and Confident, Holland.
-- To which he acknowledged; That indeed he had very affectionately entrusted
him in ordinary Affairs, but never in such an esteem, as to second him in Arms,
that place being more proper for my Lord of Lindsey, -- whose judgment of that
Expedition was; That it was friendship in earnest, and War in jest. He it was
that pursued twelve French Vessels in his own single one to their Haven, heated
at once with anger and shame. He it was, who when all men were amazed at the
Duke's fall was assigned his successor. Certainly, says one them present, He
was a person of no likely presence, but of considerable experience, by his
former Expeditions; and one that to the last of his life made good his Faith
with Gallantry and Courage, notwithstanding his ill success (the times fate
rather than his fault) 1. In scouring the narrow Sea(...) where he was Admiral,
and the Earl of Essex Vice Admiral. 2. In presiding in several great Cou(...)
on many solemn occasions, the Earl of Strafford's unparalled Trial, etc. And
3. In leading the King's Army at Edgehill with a Pike in his hand. Where what
is observed of Cataline and his followers, was true of this noble Earl and his
Countrymen, the Loyal Gentry of Lincolnshire, that they covered the same
place with their Corpse when dead, where they stood in the fight whilst living.

Observations on the Life of Judge Richardson.
JUdge Richardson was born at Mulbarton in Norf^ his Father being Minister
thereof; and he a friend to Ministers, though a foe of the Church. He was bred
in the study of our Municipal Law, and became the King's Sergeant therein.
Afterward, on the 28 of November, 1626. he was sworn Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, that Place having been void ten months before; wherein he was
humorsome, but honest, only unhappy, in that he raised the Sabbatarian
Controversy, by his orders against Wakes in Somersetshire. His Brass
Monument on the South Side of Westminster^bby, thus entertaineth the Reader;
Deo om.

Thomae Richardsoni Icaeni Equitis Aurati Humanum Depositum.

Ille Juris Municip. omnes gradus exantlavit ^enventus tertii ordinis ann.
Jacobi Regis 21, and 22.

Prolocutor extitit; Fori civilis (communium Placitorum vocant) Supremum
Magistratum quinquennium gessit; Ad summum tandem primarii per Angliam Judicis
Tribunal A Rege Carolo evectus: expiravit

Anno Aetatis 66. Salutis, MDCXXXIIII.

Tho. Richardson fill. unicus Eques A^^. Baro Scotiae designatus

Patri incomparabili posuit.



As one reason of his advancement, you must know, this Judge married for his
second Wife the Lady Eliz. Beaumont, the Sister (as I take it) of Mary Countess
of Buckingham, and the Relict of..... Ashburnham Knight. She was by K. Charles
(...)eated Baroness of Croumont in Scotland; and though Issuless by the Judge)
the Honor discented to his Grandchild. He died an enemy to Bishop Williams,
overruling all his Pleas in his Cham(...)r in a quarter of an hour; and yet,
which was strange, at that time no friend to Archbishop Laud; for he said, The
Lawn-sleeves had choked him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Coventry.
A Competent Estate he had for his education, and excellent Abilities for
advancement: his fortune was not wanting to his parts, nor his parts to his
fortune; the one being as ready to support, as the other was to raise him His
staid soul was well prepared for general learning in the Schools and
University, for his particular learning at the Innes of Court: his skill in the
study of Law called him no sooner to the Bar, than his prudence to Court: Take
we his character from his Honor. Why was he created Lord Coventry of Alisbury,
and Keeper of the great Seal? Why, says the Patent, for his eminent fidelity;
for his (...) worthy service; for his exact circumspection; for his deep
prudence; for his constant resolution; for his skill and dexterity; for his
integrity and industry for his immoveablenesse and fidelity: No man more
apprehensive of the interest of England, none more faithful to it: His kindness
to the Church and Clergy argued his piety; his safe Counsels to his Majesty
argued his moderation: his dignity rather enjoyed him, than he it: A man he was
that filled u^ his great capacities, having digested a body (...) the most
honest Law, and a scheme of the most innocent policy that ever fillled the head
of an abl^ Statesman, or the heart of an upright Judge. Wha^ belonged to him,
he knew; and what he knew, h^ practiced. He was as constant to his rule, as he
knew his rule was to him: Reserved he was, as the King's Councellor, honest as
his conscience. We measure Pyramides by their shadows, and this great Lord by
his followers: every one whereof was The most pious, learned, wise, and
Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Cant. was his Domestic.
eminent in his way, and all advanced. Each Action of his, though never so
little, yet great as himself, so gravely did he manage it, so solemnly did he
perform it: His orders were seldom reversed, because mostly including the
consent of Parties. -- Few Attorney-Generals came off with less censure, and
few Lord Keepers with less guilt; his Predecessors miscarriages being foils to
set off his exactness. -- Eminent as in most other Ca(...)s, so particularly
in that of Pryn, Bastwicke, and Burton; against whom, when after six weeks time
given them to put in an effectual Answer, they urged, that their Adversaries
the Bishops should not be their Judges: He replied smartly; That by that Plea
had they Libelled all the Magistrates in the Land; none should pass Censure
upon them, because all were made parties.

He had fifteen years enjoyed his Place; not more proper to say, that Dignity
had enjoyed him so long, this latter age affording not one every way of more
apt Qualifications for the place. His front and presence bespake a venerable
regard, not interior to any of his Antecessors. His train and suit of
Followers was disposed agreeable, to shun both Envy and Contempt: Vain and
ambitious he was ^ot; his port was state, though others ostentation. Of what
concerned his place, he knew enough, and which is the main, acted conformable
to his knowledge; For in the Administration of Justice, he was so erect, so
incorrupt, as captious malice stands mute in the blemish of his Fame. A miracle
the greater, when we consider he was also a Privy-Councellor: A trust, wherein
he served his Master the King most faithfully; and the more faithfully, because
of all those Councels which did disserve his Majesty, he was an earnest
disswader, and did much disaffect those sticklers who labored to make the
Prerogative rather tall than great; (...) knowing that such men loved the King
better the Charles Stuart. So that although he was a Courtier, and had had for
his Master a Passion most in tense, yet had he always a passion reserved for
the public welfare; an argument of a free, noble, and right-principled mind:
For what both Court and Country have always held as inconsistent, is (...)
truth erroneous: And no man can be truly loyal who is not also a good Patriot;
nor any a good Patriot, which is not truly loyal.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Strafford.
SIr Thomas Wentworth Earl of Strafford owned his birth to the best-govern'd
City London; his breeding to the best-modelled School, York, and a most exact
College, St. John in Cambridge; his accomplishments to the best Tutors,
Travail and Experience; and his prudence to the best School, a Parliament,
whither he came in the most active and knowing times, with (...) strong brain,
and a large heart: his activity wa^ eminent in his Country, and his interest
strong in Parliament, where he observed much, and pertinently; spoke little,
but home: contrived effectually, but closely; carried his Defigns successfully,
but reservedly: He apprehended the public temper as clearly, and managed it to
his purposes as orderly as any man: He spoke least, but last of all, with the
advantage of a clear view of others reasons, and the addition of his own: He
and his leading Confidents molded that in a private Conference, which was to
be managed in a public Assembly: He made himself so considerable a Patriot,
that he was bought over to be a Courtier: So great his Abilities, that he awed
a Monarchy when dis-obliged and supported it when engaged, the balance turning
thither where this Lord stood. -- The North was reduced by his prudence, and
Ireland by his interest: He did more there in two years, than was done in two
hundred before.

1. Extinguishing the very relics of the War.

2. Setting up a standing Army.

3. Modelling the Revenue.

4. Removing the very roots and occasions of new troubles.

5. Planting and building.

6. Settling Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts.

7. Recovering the hearts of the people by able Pastors and Bishops, by prudent
and sober Magistrates; by justice and protection; by obligations and rewards.

8. Recovering the Churches patrimony and discipline.

9. Employing most able and faithful Ministers and Instruments.

10. Taking an exact view of all former Precedents, Rules, and Proceedings.

11. An exact correspondence with his Majesty, and the Favorites of England.

None was more conversant in the Factions, Intrigues, and Designs, than he when
a Common-wealths-man; none abler to meet with them than he when a Statesman:
he understood their methods, kenned their wiles, observed their designs, looked
into their combinations, comprehended their interest: And as King Charles
understood best of any Monarch under heaven what he could do in point of
Conscience, so his Strafford apprehended best of any Counselor under the Sun
what he could do in point of power: He and my Lord of Canterbury having the
most particular account of the state of Great Britain and Ireland of any
persons living. Nature is often hidden, sometimes overcome, seldom
extinguished; yet Doctrine and Discourse had much allayed the severity of this
Earl's nature, and Custom more: None more austere to see to; none more
obliging to speak with: He observed pauses in his discourse to attend the
motion, and draw out the humor of other men; at once commanding his own
thoughts, and watching others: His passion was rather the vigor, than the
disorder of his well-weighed soul; which could dispense its anger with as much
prudence, as it managed any act of State. He gave his Majesty safe counsel in
the prosperity of his Affairs, and resolute advice in Extremity, as a true
servant of his interest rather than of his power.

So eminent was he and my Lord of Canterbury, that Rebellion despaired of
success as long as the first lived, and Schism of licentiousness as long as
the second stood. Take my Lord of Strafford as accused, and you will find his
Integrity and Ability, that he managed his whole Government either by the Law,
or the Interest of his Country. Take him as dying, and you will see his parts
and piety; his resolution for himself, his self-resignation for the Kingdoms
good; his devotion for the Church, whose patrimony he forbade his son upon his
blessing -- Take him as dead, you will find him glorious and renowned in these
three characters.

The first of the best King.

I looked upon my Lord of Strafford, as a Gentleman whose great Abilities might
make a Prince rather afraid, E(...) E(...). Meditat. 2.
than ashamed to employ him in the greatest Affairs of State: for those were
prone to create in him great confidence of undertakings, and this was like
enough to hetray him to great Errors, and many Enemies; whereof he could not
but contract great store, while moving in so high a sphere, and with so
vigorous a luster, he must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious exbalations;
which condensed by a popular Odium, were capable to cast a cloud upon the
brightest merit and integrity: though I cannot in my judgment approve all he
did, driven (it may be) by the necessities of Times, and the temper of that
People, more than led by his own disposition to any beighth and rigor of
Action, etc.

The second, of the best Historian.

He was a person of a generous spirit, fitted for the noblest Exercises, and
the most difficult parts of Empire: His Counsels were bold, yet just; and he
had a vigor proper for the execution of them: Of an eloquence next that of his
Masters, masculine and excellent. He was no less affectionate to the Church,
than to the State; and not contented while living, to defend the government and
patrimony of it, he commended it also to his Son when he was about to dye, and
charged his abhorrency of sacrilege: His enemies called the majesty of his
miene in his Lieutenancy, pride; and the undaunted execution of his Office on
the Contumacious, the insolency of his fortune. He was censured for that fatal
error of following the King to London, and to the Parliament, after the
Pacification at York: And it was thought, that if he bad gone ever to his
Charge in Ireland, he might have secured both himself and that Kingdom for his
Majesty's service: But some attribute this Counsel to a necessity of fate,
whose first stroke is at the Drain of those whom it designs to ruin, and
brought him to feel the effects of popular rage, which himself in former
Parliaments bad used against Government, and to find the experience of his own
devices upon the Duke of Buckingham. Providence teaches us to abhor over-fine
Councels, by the mischiefs they often bring upon their Authors.

The third, of common fame.

A Gentleman he was of rare, choice, and singular Endowments, I mean, of such
as modelled, fashioned, and accomplished him for State-concernments; of a
searching and penetrating judgment, nimble apprehension, ready and fluence in
all results of Council. Most happy in the veins of speech, which was always
round, perspicuous, and express, much to the advantage of his fense and so
full stocked with reason, that he might be rather said to demonstrate, than to
argue. As these abilities raised him to State-administration, so his
Addressing, his applying chose abilities so faithfully in promotion of the
Royal Interest, soon rendered him a Favorite of the first admission: So that
never King had a more intelligent, and withal a firmer servant than he was to
his Master. But these qualities which rendered him so amiable to his Majesty,
represented him formidable to the Scots, so that some who were not well
persuaded of the justness of his sentence, thought he suffered not so much for
what he had done already, as for what he was like to have done, had he lived,
to the disservice of that Nation: And that he was not sacrificed so much to the
Scots revenge, as to their fear. And certainly his fall was as the first, so
the most fatal wound the King's Interest ever received: His three Kingdoms
hardly affording another Strafford, that is, one man his peer in parts and
fidelity to his Majesty. He had a singular passion for the Government and
Patrimony of the Church, both which he was studious to preserve safe and sound;
either opining them to be of sacred extraction, or at least prudent
constitution, relating to holy performances. And had he wanted these positive
graces, yet in so great a Person it may be commendable, that he was emiment for
privative and negative Excellencies, being not taxable with any Vice; those
petty pleasures being beneath the satisfaction of a soul so large as his. In
short, says the ingenious Gentleman, he was a man who might have passed under
a better notion, had he lived in better times.

This last period is a question, since this great Statesman, and his good
Master's goodness was so over-shadowed with their greatness, and their
virtues so lost in their power, as the Sun (the aptest parallel of their luster
and beneficence) is hid in his own light, that they owe their great, but
glorious same to their misfortunes, and their renown to their ruin, that
levelled their worth, otherwise as much out of their reach as their place, to
vulgar apprehensions. Eclipsed luster, like a veiled beauty, as most looked on,
when most covered. -- The setting Sun is more glorious than its self in its
Meridian, because more low: and the lowest Planet seems biggest to a common eye.

So faithful he was, and the Archbishop, that in the Juncto consisting of them
two and Duke Hamilton, they voted a Parliament, though they knew themselves the
first sufferers by it: and so confident of his integrity, that when he had
treason enough discovered at the late transactions in York (touching the Scots
conspiracy) to charge his enemies with, he waved the advantage; and secure in
his own innocence, fell an instance of that Maxim; That there is no danger
small, but what is thought so. This was his great principle; Usurped Royalty
was never laid down by persuasion from Royal clemency; for in armis jus omne
regni.

Observations on the Lives of Hen-Earl of Holland, and Robert Earl of Warwick.
HEnry Earl of Holland, and Robert Earl of Warwick, both a brothers, had the
same Education at home, and the same admittance to Court -- only the elder
having an Estate, brought not thither that compliance and observance that the
younger did that wanted it. -- The one therefore is serious in his carriage,
harsh and rough in his spirit, stubborn in his constitution, steady in his
course, stern in his comportments, sly and close in his conduct; choosing
rather to improve himself in America by Trade, than in England by Courtship;
something inclined to the faction by the principles of his Education, more by
those of his Interest. The other owned not a greater smoothness in his face,
than in his soul; being very taking in his countenance, more in his Converse.
The first being not more lovely, than the last was obliging. -- While a
Courtier, so much was he in favor with King James, that one morning as he and
Mr. Ramsey waited on his Majesty, and two Porters came by with some money, he
did but smile on Ramsey, and tell his Majesty, who asked why he smiled, that it
was to think what good that money would do him: and he had it; his Royal Mr.
whose heart was as large as his Kingdom, adding, I Will warrant you, you are
glad of this; Let me tell you, I have more pleasure in bestowing this money,
than you in possessing it: so much a more blessed thing it is to give, than to
receive.

While Ambassador in France (where he represented a King in his State and port,
as well as in his place) so great was he with the Queen Mother, that he was
admitted to all treatments; that he had the honor of all Entertainments; that
he commanded the Kings ears, understood the Spanish policies, dived into the
French humor and inclination. All the while he was in Paris, his observations
were minute and particular, his Addresses wary and reserved (never opening the
Marriagetreaty until he was sure of a good reception) his working upon Madames
affection close and artificial; his counter-plots to the Spanish insinuations
nimble and effectual; his correspondence with the Duke of Bucks, weekly and
constant; his contrasts with Count Soisons, and Madam Blanvile, in behalf of
her Husband here in England, resolute and honorable (urging very nobly and
successfully, that the clamours of a turbulent Agent was not to outweigh the
favor of a mighty Monarch.) The discovery he made of the Duke of Buckingham's
enemies, their Cabals and Oaths from the said Blanviles Letters, was seasonable
and complete; but his Masterpiece was his command over all affections and
tempers, -- but his own so soft and smooth, that it endured not the roughness
of the following times, wherein he was very unsettled when Commissioner in
Scotland, while he lived, and very fearful when he died: The fate of all
delicate and too fine Constitutions.

It has been the method of Grandees to endear themselves to power for a
present interest, and to learning for their future fame; to add the renown of
the one, to the greatness of the other. Neither was this Lord more careful to
succeed his great friend the Duke of Buckingham in his favor at Court, as
Captain of the Guard, and Groom of the Stool, than in his Place at the
University as Chancellor, of which he expresses himself thus ^o his Cambridge,
That his Master had raised his fortune beyond wishing in this world, that he
could desire no more than a fair name when he was gone out of it; which the
University contributed, to whom he devoted his Iuterest.

Though they answered not his expectation in their Contributions for St. Paul's,
and other particulars, wherein he was defeated and overborn by the busy
faction, who thought it a vain thing ^o repair any Church, when they intended
to pull down all.

After all, this great man is a great instance of that observation, viz. That
when able and prudent men are brought on the Stage to manage their ^wn parts,
they are then (mostly) not of the clear^st sight, and commonly commit such
errors as ^re both discernable and avoidable, even by men of ^ean abilities.
-- Although I find him subject ^o no great error before the War, save that
when Dr. Preston was by his party judged of so great parts (...) to make a fit
Patron for them, and thereupon ^irected to appear aloof [the way of
Court-ob^ervers] in his Addresses to the Duke of Bucking^m by his Confident the
Earl of Holland, whose ^amily favored that side, though the Duke said he ^new
him, and so would use him accordingly: ^et this Earl was so far over-reached by
him, that in the Apology the Doctor writ underhand to (...) Partisans touching
his Court-compliance, he she^eth he overreached the Court-wits; as inde^ he
was a great Politician, and used (Lap-wi^^ like) to flutter most on that place
which was fa(...) thest from his Eggs:) a copy of which Lette^ with some
satirical stanzaes was found unsealed (...) the streets, and carried to the
Duke; a noble frien^ discovering to the Doctor, how witty he was (...) Rhyme,
to the breaking of his heart, he confess^^^ then he was undone, especially when
the Duke Barber could finger the Letter out of his Lord pocket, as he was
directed. -- And now I cannon but remember how this Earl at his death said,
(...) had been a friend to godly Ministers, as had (...) friends before him, by
whom he bad been instruct^^ when young. Whence I collect, that the membe^ of
those great Families, into which the godly Ministers, i. e. peevish, factious
and discontented person which usurp that precious name, insinuate the^ selves,
and their principles, seldom come to the^^ Grave in peace; they usually
instilling into the^^ such imaginations as make their lives unquiet, a^^ their
deaths dishonorable. -- Whence the goo^ old Lord Willoughby would say; Carry
the peevi^^ man this (speaking of one Chambers a Separatist but tell him he
must not come under my Roof, for will not meddle with them that are given to
chang^ whose calamity arises suddenly, and who knows t^^ ruin of them both?

To conclude, it is observed as the reason wh^ he fell off from the Parliament,
that the war^ Sirs would not trust two Brothers, him and the Earl of Warwick
with supreme commands; therefore when they voted the one Admiral, they de^yed
the other General of the Horse. Both are charactered by their Contemporaries
for natural Endowments excellent; for temper sweet and loving; for behavior,
affable and courteous; for spirit, meek and lowly; of the same inclinations
before and after their advancement: In honor sine ^^more; lifted up with
honor, but not puffed up with pride.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop LAUD.
THe pregnancy of his childhood promised the wisdom of his riper years, and
obliged his friends beyond their abilities to his support, and strangers beyond
expectation to his encouragement: Some persons offering him great sums of money
for his maintenance in his younger years, upon the bare security of his parts,
which paid them well in his more reduced age. None more observant of favor,
none more mindful of kindnesses, and none more grateful for civilities: He was
so wise as seldom to forget an injury in the consequence of it, and so noble
as ever to remember love in the return of it. His honest Parents conveyed him
an excellent temper and that temper a brave spirit; which had the advantage of
his birth, some say at Reading, some at Henley, at an equal distance from the
University, where he was to be a Scholar; and the Court, where he was to be a
Man: In the first of these, his indefatigabl^ industry, his methodical study,
his quick apprehension, his faithful memory, his solid judgment, his active
fancy, his grave and quick countenance, his sharp and piercing eye, raised him
b^ discreet and wary steps to all the perferments, an^ commended him to all the
employments of the University, when Proctor whereof he was admitted for his
prudence to the Earl of Devonshire's service, which hazarded; and when
Divinity-Reader observed by the Lords of Rochester and Lincoln for his
judgment, which advanced him. As his design was above the level of modern
Sciolists, s^ were his Studies not prepossessed with the parti^^ Systemes of
Geneva, but freely conversant with the impartial volumes of the Church
Catholic: (...) had an infallible apprehension of the Doctrine and Discipline,
and a deep insight into the interest (...) Christianity: This capacious soul
conversed with the most knowing of all Judgments, to find the bottom of all
Errors; and with the most Judicious of his own, to discern the grounds of all
truth. He had his eye on the University to reduce it, when Head of St. John's;
on the lower Functions o^ the Church in his Pastoral charges, to reform them;
and upon the higher, when Dean of Gloucester, Prebend of Westminster, and
Bishop of St. David's, to settle them. He was a man of that search and
judgment, that he found out the principles of government that were true to the
Church; of that faithfulness and resolution, that amidst all discouragements
he was true to them: The Church Government he found by many private spirited
men, accommodated to their ease and interest, he adjusted to truth and
settlement; consulting not humors which are uncertain as interest, but truth
which is certain as Eternity. Archbishop Abbot's Yield, and they will be
pleased at last, was a great miscarriage, Archbishop Laud's Resolve, for there
is no end of yielding, was great policy. His great reach in Government suitable
to that King's apprehensions, commended him to King James; his vast ability and
integrity, to K. Charles and the Duke of Buckingham; To the first whereof he
was a Privy-Councellor, to the other a Bosomfriend, before both whom he laid
the best Representations and Ideas of the English government, as to things and
persons in several abstracts, of any man under heaven. I have heard a
Statesman say, That none knew the joints, turnings, flexures, and interests of
all Parties in Church or State, that were either to be encouraged or
suppressed, with the seasons and opportunities to do it, so well as Dr. Laud.

Discerning was his foresight, complete his intelligence, exact his
correspondence, quick his dispatches; seasonable and effectual his Sermons and
Discourses, inquisitive and observing his Converse. His Instruments were able
and knowing men, that were faithful to the Church, as he was in Manwaring and
Mountagu's case to them; Knowing well (as he wrote to my Lord of Buckingham)
that discouragements would deter men of parts, whom encouragements might make
serviceable. He knew no man better how to temper a Parliament, having a
Catalogue of all the Nobility and Gentry, with their Interest and Inclination
in his eye: He understood none more exactly what was to be discoursed and
proposed to them, having a clear apprehension of the several Junctures and
Tendencies of affair^. He entertained no thought but what was public (...) his
breast; no man, but what was nobly spirit^^ in his familiarity: Ever watchful
he was of all opportunities to advance the Churches honor 1. In her Sons, as
Bishop Iuxon, etc. 2. H^^ Discipline, as in his several Visitations, Articles
Star Chamber, and High-Commission-matters 3. In her Endowments, as the buying
of Impropriations in Ireland. 4. In her Privilege, as the Canons of England.
5. In her Ornaments, as the repairing and furnishing of St. Paul's and most
other Churches in his Province. 6. In her Universities, (...) the Statutes of
Oxford, the privileges of Cambridge, and his vast gifts of Oriental Books and
Buildings, and his vaster design for both, -- and as watchful against all the
designs to undermine it. The Feoffees for Impropriations he laid aside; the
Sabbatizing and Predestinarian controversies he silenced; the Licentious Press
he reduced; Dignities and Preferments he worthily filled up; bribes at Court he
retrenched: No interest, no alliance could ever advance an unworthy person
while he lived: Breed up your children well, and I will provide for them, was
his saying to all his Relations. Many a man would be disobliged by his
sternnesse at first view, for whom if deserving, he would afterward contrive
kindnesses by after and unexpected favors. No place of experience did he ever
miss, none of employment did he ever decline: He would never see Authority
baffled, but either wave all proceedings against offenders, or go through with
them; His prosecutions, as in Leighton's Case, were close; his observation of
all circumstances, as in Lincoln's, wary; his declarations of the Cases clear
and con^^cing, as in Pryn's, Bastwick's, and Burton's; (...) sentence mild and
compassionate, as in Wal^^'s; his resolution and justice ever making way to
(...) mercy, and his mercy crowning his justice: Often did he confer with the
ablest and most Or^^odox Clergy, with the most experienced and ^owing
Civilians, with the most observing and ^^served Courtiers, with the profoundest
Lawyers, ^ith the skilfullest and discreetest Mechanics; out fall whose
opinions the result was, his most exact ^^dgement in any case that came before
him at Court, or at Lambeth.

The roughness of his nature sent most men dis^^tented from him: but so, that
he would often of ^^^self find ways and means to sweeten such as had (...)
worth again, when they least looked for it. -- any were offended at his prudent
zeal against the ^^wish Sabbatism in his government, who were ^^ry well
satisfied with the strictness of his obser^^tion of the Lords day in his
person. -- But let ^^e great man express another; Bishop Gauden, ^^rch-Bishop
Laud; whose thoughts lie so much ^^e more levelled to his brave Sentiments, as
his ^^ignity did to his high place.

As to his secret design of working up this Church by little and little to a
Romish conformity and captivity, I do not believe (says he) he had any such
purpose or approved thought; because, beside his declared judgment and
consci^^nce, I find no secular Policy or Interest which ^ecould thereby gain,
either private or public, ^ut rather lose much of the greatness and freedom
which he and other Bishops, with the whole Church had: without which
temptation, no man in charity may be suspected to act contrary to so clea^
convictions, so deliberate and declared determinations of his Conscience and
Judgment in Religion, as the Archbishop expresses in his very excellent Book.
I am indeed prone to think, that possibly he wished there could have been any
fai(...) close or accommodation between all Christian Churches, (the same which
many grave and learned men have much desired:) And it may be (...) Lordship
thought himself no unfit Instrument (...) make way to so great and good a work,
considering the eminencies of Parts, Power, and Favor which he had. Happily he
judged (as many learned and moderate men have) that in some things between
Papists and Protestants, differences are made wider, and kept more open, raw
and sore they need be, by the private pens and passions of some men, and the
Interests of some little parties whose partial policies really neglect the
public and true Interest of the Catholic Church and Christian Religion; which
consists much in peace as well as in purity, in charity, as in verity. He found
that where Papists were silenced and convinced in the more grand and pregnant
Disputes (that they are Novel, partial, and unconform to Catholic Churches in
ancient times) then he found they recovered spirits, and contested afresh
again(...) the unreasonable transports, violences and immoderations of some
professing to be Protestants who, to avoid Idolatry and Superstition, run to
Sacrilege and rudeness in Religion. denying many things that are just,
honest, safe, true and reasonable, merely out of an ((...)) excessive Antipathy
to Papists. Possibly the Archbishop and some other Bishops of his mind did
rightly judge, That the giving an Enemy fair play by just, safe, and honorable
concessions, was not to yield the conquest to him, but the most ready way to
convince him of his weakness; when no honest yieldings could help him any
more, then they did endanger the true cause or courage of his Antagonist.

For my part, I think the Archbishop of Canterbury was neither Calvinist, nor
Lutheran, nor Papist, as to any side or party; but all, so far as he saw, they
agreed with the Reformed Church of England, either in Fundamentals, or innocent
and decent Superstructures: Yet I believe he was so far a Protestant, and of
the Reformed Religion, as he saw the Church of England did protest against the
Errors, Corruptions, Usurpations, and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, or
against the novel opinions and practices of any party whatsoever. And certainly
he did with as much honor as justice so far own the Authentic Authority,
Liberty and Majesty of the Church of England (in it is reforming and settling of
it is Religion) that he did not think fit any private new Masters whatsoever,
should obtrude any Foreign or Domestic Dictates to her, or force her to take
her copy of Religion from so petty a place as Geneva was, or Frankefort, or
Amsterdam, or Wittenbergh, or Edenborough; no nor from Augsburg, or Arnheim,
nor any foreign City or Town, any more than from Trent or Rome; none of which
had any Dictatorian Authority over this great and famous Nation or Church of
England, further than they offered sober Counsels, or suggested good Reasons,
or cleared true Religion by Scripture, and confirmed it by good Antiquity, as
the best interpreter and decider of obscure places, and dubious cases.

Which high value, it is probable, as to his Mother the Church of England, and
her Constitutions, was so potent in the Archbishop of Canterbury, that, as he
thought it not fit to subject her to the insolency of the Church of Rome, so
nor to the impertinencies of any other Church or Doctor, of far less repute in
the Christian world. No doubt his Lordship thought it not handsome in Mr.
Calvin to be ((...), rather then (...)) so censorious of the Church of England,
as to brand it is Devotion or Liturgy with his tolerabiles ineptiae, who knew
not the temper of the Nation, requiring then not what was absolutely best, but
most conveniently good: and such not only the Liturgy was, but those things
which he calls tolerable toys. I having occasion to speak with him, he upon a
time was pleased to grant me access, and some freedom of speech with him; and
withal asked me the opinion of the people of him: I told him they reported his
Lordship endeavored to betray the Church of England to the Roman
correspondency and communion. He at length very calmly and gravely thus
reylyed; protesting with a serious attestation of his integrity before God's
Omniscience, that however he might mistake in the mean and method, yet he never
had other design than the glory of God, the service of his Majesty, the good
order, peace and decency of the Church of England: that he was so far from
complying with Papists, in order to confirm them in their Errors, that he
rather chose such Methods to advance the honor of the reformed Religion in
England, as he believed might soon silence the cavils of fiercer Papists,
induce the more moderate Recusants to come in to us, as having less visible
occasion given them by needless Distances and Disputes to separate from us;
which he thought arose much from that popular Variety, Inconstancy, Easiness,
Irreverence and Uncomeliness, which might easily grow among us in the outward
profession of Religion, for want of observing such uniformity and decency in
Religion, as were required by the Laws and Canons of this Church and State. He
added, that he had (further) a desire, as much as he could to relieve the poor
and depressed condition of many Ministers, which he had to his grief observed
in Wales and England, where their Discouragements were very great, by reason of
the tenuity and incompetency of their Livings; that in his Visitations he had
sometime seen it with grief, among twenty Ministers, not one man had so much as
a decent Garment to put on, nor did he believe their other treatment of Life
was better; that he found the sordid and shameful Aspect of Religion and the
Clergy, gave great Advantages to those that were Popishly inclined, who would
hardly ever think it best for them to join with that Church which did not
maintain either it is own Honor, or it is Clergy to some competency and
comeliness.

Much more discourses his Lordship was pleased to use at several times to this
purpose, which commands my charity to clear him, as far as I can judge, of any
tincture of Popery truly so called; or of any superstition, which places a
Religion in the nature and use of that thing which God has not either
particularly commanded, or in general permitted. I suppose he thought, that
where God has allowed to his Church, and to every private Christian (so far as
may consist with the Churches Order and Peace) a liberty of ceremonious and
circumstantial decency as to God's worship; there neither himself was to be
blamed, nor did he blame other men, if they kept within those discreet and
inoffensive bounds, which either the Churches public peace required, or its
indulgence to promote Christians permitted.

That Uniformity he pressed was not more advantageous to Religion, which must
of necessity have been propagated, when Controversies had been turned to
devotion, than it was necessary for the State; which cannot be secure, as long
as there is a mark of distinction, under which all Malcontents may shroud
themselves; a note of separation, whereby the Factions may reckon their
parties, and aestimate their strength, and a way open to popularity to the
ambition of any whose interest or desperateness shall adventure to make
himself head of so great a party.

He was a person of so great abilities (which are the designations of nature to
dignity and command) that they raised him from low beginnings to the highest
Office the Protestant profession acknowledges in the Church, and he was equal
to it: His learning appeared eminent in his Book against Fisher, and his piety
illustrious in his Diary: He was of so public a spirit that both the Church
and State have lasting Monuments of the virtuous use he made of his Princes
favor; at his admittance into which, he dededicated all the future Emolumeuts
of it to the glory of God, and the good of men, by a projection of many noble
Works: most of which he accomplished, and had finished the rest, had not the
fate of the Nation checked the current of his Design, and cut off the course of
his Life. He was not contented by himself only to serve his Generation, (for
so he might appear more greedy of fame, than desirous of the universal benefit)
but he endeavored to render all others as heroic, if they aimed at a capacity
for his friendship: For (I have heard it from his Enemies) no great man was
admitted to a confidence and respect with him, unless he made Address by some
act that was for the common good, or for the ornament and glory of the
Protestant Faith. Learned men had not a better Friend, nor Learning it self a
greater Advance^. He searched all the Libraries of Asia, and from several
parts of the world purchased all the Ornaments and helps of Literature he
could, that the English Church might have (if possible) by his care, as many
advantages for knowledge, as almost all Europe did contribute to the grandeur
of that of Rome. The outward splendor of the Clergy was not more his care,
than their honor, by a grave and pious conversation. He would put them into a
power of doing more good, but was sore against their Vices and Vanities. He
scorned a private Treasure, and his friends were rather relieved, than raised
to any greatness by him. In his election of friends, he was determined to the
good and wise, and such as had both parts and desires to profit. The Church had
his closest embraces; if otherwise it happened, their frauds, not his choice
deserved the blame. Both Papists and Sectaries were equally his Enemies; one
party feared, and the other hated his Virtues. Some censured his zeal for
Discipline above the patience of the Times: but his greatest unhappiness was,
that he lived in a factious Age, and corrupt State, and under such a Prince,
whose Virtues not admitting an immediate approach for Accusations, was to be
wounded with those it did caresse. But when Faction and Malice are worn out by
time, Posterity shall engrave him in the Albe of the most excellent Prelacy,
the most indulgent Fathers of the Church, and the most injured Martyrs. His
blood was accompanied with some tears that fell from those Eyes that expected a
pleasure at his death: and it had been followed with a general mourning, had
not the public Miseries, and the present Fears of Ruin exacted all the stock
of Grief for other objects.

His very enemy Sir Edward Deering would confess; That let him dye when he
would, St. Paul's would be his Monument, and his Book against Fisher his Epitaph.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Keeper Littleton.
SIr Edward Littleton, the eldest son of Sir Edward Littleton, of Mounslow in
Shrop-shire, one of the Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of
North Wales, was bred in Christs-Church in Oxford, where he proceeded
Batchellor of Arts, and afterward was one of the Justices of North Wales,
Recorder of London, and Solicitor to King Charles. From these places he was
preferred to be Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and made Privy-Councellor;
thence advanced to be Lord Keeper, and Baron of Mounslow, the place of his
Nativity. He died in Oxford, and was buried in Christs-Church where he was
bred: -- Being a Member of the Parliament 1628. he had the management of the
high presumption charged on the Duke of Buckingham about King James his death;
wherein he behaved himself so discreetly between the jealousy of the People,
and the honor of the Court, that Sir John Finch would say, He was the only
man for taking things by a Right bandle. -- And Sir Edward Cook, that He was a
well-poized and weighed man. His very name carried an Hereditary credit with
it, which plaineth out the way to all great Actions: his virtue being
authorized by his nobility, and his undertakings ennobled by his birth, gained
that esteem, which meaner men attain not without a large compass of time and
experience: worthless Nobility and ignoble worth lie under equal disadvantage.
Neither was his extract so great as his parts; his judgment being clear and
piercing; his Learning various and useful; his skill in the Maxims of our
Government, the fundamental Laws of this Monarchy with its Statutes, and
Customs, singular; his experience long and observing; his integrity
unblemished and unbyassed; his Eloquence powerful and majestic, and all
befitting a Statesman and a Lord Keeper: -- set off with a resolved Loyalty
that would perform the harshest service his Master could enjoin him while he
stayed at London, and follow the hardest fortune he could be in when at York,
whither he went with the great Seal he knew made to stamp Royal Commissions,
rather than authorize Rebellious Ordinances. At Oxford he did good service
during the Session of Parliament by Accommodations there, and as good during
their recesse by his interest in the Country.

Observations on the Life of the Marquess Hamilton.
A Preacher being at a loss what to say of a party deceased, concluded his
Sermon with these words; There is one good quality in this man, viz. that he
was born, and that God made him: And another, viz. That he is dead, and we must
speak nothing but good of the dead.

I may say of this Nobleman, that I have two reasons to speak well of him. 1.
That good King Charles honored him; and 2. That his wicked Subjects beheaded
him, otherwise I must leave these Queries as I find them.

Quaere 1. Why should Duke Hamilton post without leave into Scotland, when the
Parliament was discontented, and the Duke of Buckingham murdered in England?

Quaere 2. Why should Ramsey the Dukes Messenger to the King of Sweden, play
the Ambassador in Germany, and take place of all other persons there?

Qu. 3. What design was that which Elphyston, Borthricke, Meldrum, Vobiltry,
etc. discovered one to another?

Qu. 4. What did Ramsey with the Pedigree of Hamilton derived from James I.
King of Scots in Foreign parts?

Qu. 5. What private Instructions had Meldrum to Scottish Officers in the
Swedish Army?

Qu. 6. Why was Meldrum, Alexander Hamilton, and other his Dependants, so
preferred in the Scots Army?

Qu. 7. Why were there such Fears and Jealousies whispered in Germany of the
English Government?

Qu. 8. Why was not Ramsey able to give a positive Answer at the Trial by
combat? And why did the Marquess take him off before the Controversy was
decided?

Qu. 9. Why is Huntley put by, and Hamilton made high Commissioner? Why is
discontented Balcanquel employed to pen Declarations? And why are the King's
Papers, Letters, etc. taken out of his pocket, and betrayed to the Scots? And
why did the Archbishop of Canterbury (writing to the King) wish him not to
trust his own pockets with the Letter?

Qu. 10. Why does his Mother ride with pistols at her Saddle-bow, leading all
her Kindred and Vassals for the Covenant?

Qu. 11. Why is that time spent in posting to and fro to patch up a base
Pacification with the Rebels, that might have been employed in suppressing them?

Qu. 12. Why did the Bishops of Rosse and Breben, Sir Robert Spotswood, Sir
John Hay, the Earl of Sterling, ride post to England to entreat the King not to
trust the Marquess?

Qu. 13. Why was there so much granted to the Covenanters in Scotland -- yea
and time given them to do their business?

Qu. 14. Why did he forbear the Common Prayer at Dalkeith, and neglect to
protest the King's gracious Declaration; the justice and clemeney whereof had
without doubt allayed the commotions?

Qu. 15. Why did he not set out the King's la(...) Declaration before the
Covenanters Protestation was out against it?

Qu. 16. Why was there nothing done with the Ships sent upon the coasts of
Scotland?

Qu. 17. Why did he so caresse his covenanting Mother, that the Scots could
say; The son of son of (...)geud a Mother could do them no harm?

Qu. 18. Why had he a hand in most of the Monopolies and Projects of England?

Qu. 19. Why did he refuse to contribute as others had done to the Scots Wars?

Qu. 20. Why did he intercede for Lowdon's release, notwithstanding the
traiterous Letter to the French King was his hand?

Qu. 21. How comes Montrosse to be slighted by the gracious King at first? And
when he offered his service again, how came his Letters into the Covenanters
hands at Newcastle?

Qu. 22. Why did he and Argyle raise such Fears and Jealousies in Scotland and
England by withdrawing suddenly from the Court, under pretense forsooth of
danger to their persons?

Qu. 23. Why could not the King hear of the Scots design to invade England,
1643. before Montrosse posted first to Oxford, and then to Gloucester to tell
him of it, though the Marquess was all the while in Scotland?

Qu. 24. And yet why was that noble person mistrusted till the Kings interest
was lost in that Country?

Qu. 25. Why was he and his brother imprisoned at Oxford? And why did the King
say, Nay, if Hamilton leads them, there is no good to be done for me?

Qu. 26. Why did the King say, That he must dispose of the Master of the Horse
place to the Earl of N. That my Lord Cottington was the fittest man for the
Treasury, and that Sir Edward Hyde was the only man he could trust with the
Secretaries affairs? Being loath that D. H. should return to an opportunity of
recozening them: Questions these, that show, After-ages can scan great men's
lives with the same liberty that they live them.

Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Hopton.
GEntile was this excellent person's extraction in the West of England, and
man-like his Education in the Low Countries, that School of War, where Sir
William Waller and he learned in one Camp, what they practiced in two: The one
being no less eminent for his service under his late Majesty of blessed
memory, than the other was for his against him. The one was the best Soldier
the King had; the other the most experienced that the pretended Parliament
boasted of. None sice^ to balance Sir Ralph Hopton's success; none likelier to
understand his stratagems; none abler to undermine his designs, than his
Fellow-soldier, Sir William, who understood his method as well as he was
acquainted with his person. Both were equally active, both equally vigilant.
But what better character of this Hero, than that which his Master gave him in
his Patent for Baron, which is his history as well as his honor? Exemplified
by his Chaplain Tho. Pritter.


Carolus Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Cum and Nominis nostri and Posteritatis
interest, and ad clara Exempla propaganda utilissime compertum, palam fieri
omnibus praemia, apud nos virtuti sita, nec peri^^ fidelium subditorum officia,
sed memori and benevoli pectore fixissime insidere: His praesertim temporibus
cum plurimum (quibus antehac nimium indulsimus) temerata, aut suspecta fides,
pretium aliorum constantiae addidit. Cumque nobis certo constat Radulplium
Hopton Militem de Balneo splendidis and Antiquis Natalibus; tum in eaetera sua
vita integritatis and moris eximium, tum in hac novissima tempestate, fatalique
Regni and rebelli motu, rari animi fideique exemplum edidisse, Regiae
dignitatis in eaque publicae contra utriusque dversarios assertorem and
vindicem acerrimum.

Quippe quia non solum nascenti huie Furori (nec dum omnibus manifesto) optimis
consiliis fortis in curia Senator restiterit; sed insinuante se latius veneno,
and crescente ferocia domum ad suos reversus fortior Miles in Agro suo
Somersetensi and vicinis partibus omni open and manu iniquissimam causam
oppugnaverit, in Arce praesertim Sherborniana, sub Anspiciis Marchionis
Hertfordiae egregiam operam navaverit. Mox ulterius progressus pollenti in
Devonia factionis Tyrannide, and munitissima civitate in foedus illecta, and
jam undique bonis subditis perniciem minante, ipse pene in illa Regione Hospes,
contracto e Cornubia Milite, and primoribus statim impetum earum repressit
jacentesque and affictas nostras parts mirifica virtute recreavit. Et licet
summis necessitatibus conflictanti exigua pars Negotii hosts erant, tantum
abfuit ut vel illis, vel istis succumberet, ut contra copiis auctiores, and
bellico apparatu instructissimas, saepius signis Collaris in acie dimicans
semper superior excesserit: Testis Launcestonia, Saleash, Bradock, aliaque
obscura olim nomina and loca, nunc victoriis illius and perduellium cladibus
Nobilitata Vix etiam ab his respiraverat, cum novus belli furor Lassas jam fer^
and continuis praeliis laxatas vires Numerosissimo exercitu adortus, uberiorem
triumphandi dedit materiam. Cum ille in campis Strattoniae in difficillimas
licet Augustias redactus, inops militaris instrumenti, and consumpto jam
pulvere tormentario, armatos inermis, Vallo munito inter sola causa and virtute
animatus, ita retudit, cencidit, castris exuit, ut totum belli molem cum ipsis
Authoribus profligavit; Quic quid fugae illius residuum erat, inter urbis unius
Moenia eaque arcta obsidione astricte concluso. Qua quidem pugna memorabili,
praeter quod miserum popellum, jugo intolerabili levaverat, seeds suas
expulsis, Ecclesias Pastoribus, pacem omnibus, and Firmamentum pacis obsequium
pristiaeter restituerit. Et jam sequenti armorum nostrorum foelicitate qua
parts Regni occidentales maturius a^ officium and verum Dominum redierunt, and
viam apperuisse and momentum ingons extitisse libentissime profitemur; In hac
opera laudabili cum praefatus Radulphus perstiterit adhuc in victo animo and
industria indefessa nullo arduo quantumvis labor and periculo excusatus,
cumque mill argumentis testatum fecerit, Honorem salutemque nostram sibi omni
fortuna and capite potiorem, nos virum fortissimum optimeque affectu^ animum
benigno studio prosequi and amplius demereri volentes, hunc and praeconio
merito ornandum, and propiori ad nos gradu extollendum censuimus. Sciatis
igitur nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia mero motu, praefatum
Radulphum Hopton ad statum, gradum, stylum, Dignitatem, Titulum and Honorem
Baronis Hopton de Stratton in Comitatu nostro Cornubiae, etc. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas Nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Oxon. quarto die Septembris, Anno Regni Nostri Decimo nono.

His two great Actions, the one at Liscard, the other at Stratton, cannot be
better described than by an Eyewitness, whose are these: as he says, out of
a Manuscript corrected with Sir Ralph's own hand, communicated to him by his
Secretary Mr. Tredus.

At Liscard a little before the Fight began, the King's party took it into
seasonable consideration, that seeing by the Commission the Lord Mobun brought
from Oxford, four persons (viz. the said Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John
Berkley, and Colonel Ashhurnham) were equally empowered in the managing of all
Military matters: And seeing such equality might prove inconvenient (which
hitherto had been prevented with the extraordinary moderation of all parties)
in ordering a Battle, it was fittest to fix the power in one chief; and general
consent settled it in Sir Ralph Hopton: He first gave order that public Prayers
should be read in the head of every Squadron, and it was done accordingly; and
the Enemy observing ^t, did style it saying of Mass, as some of their
Prisoners afterward did confess. Then he caused the Foot to be drawn up in
the best order they could, and placed a Forlorn of Musketeers in the ^^ttle
Enclosures, winging them with the few Horse and Dragoons he had. This done, two
small My(...)ion Drakes speedily and secretly fetched from the Lord Mohun's
house, were planted on a little ^urrough within random-shot of the Enemy; yet
(...), that they were covered out of their sight with small parties of Horse
about them. These concealed Mynions were twice discharged with such successee,
that the Enemy quickly quitted their ground; And all their Army being put into
a rout, the King's Forces had the execution of them; which they performed very
sparingly taking 1250 prisoners, all their Cannon and Ammunition, and most of
their Colors, and Arms; and after public Thanks, taking their repose at
Liscard.

Stratton Fight succeeds on Tuesday the 16th of May, 1643.
The King's Army wants Am munition, and has a steep hill to gain, with all
disadvantage and danger; the Horse and Dragoons being not above five hundred,
and the Foot two thousand four hundred. The Parl. Forces were well furnished
and barticadoed upon the top of the hill, their Foot 3400. and their Horse not
many indeed, having dispatched 1200 to surprise the Sheriff^ and Commissioners
at Bedmin.

On the King's side, order was given to force the passage to the top of the
Hill by four several Avenues: the ascent was steep and difficult; resolutely
did his Majesty's Forces get up, and obstinately did the Enemy keep them down.
The Fight continued doubtful, with many countenances of various events (from
five in the Morning, till three in the Afternoon) amongst which most
remarkable, the smart charge made by M. G. Chudleigh, with a stand of Pikes on
Sir Bevil Greenvil, who fell nobly himself, and had lost his squadron, had not
Sir John (now Lord Berkley, who led up the Musketeers on each side of Sir
Bevil) seasonably relieved it, so resolutely reinforcing the Charge, that
Major General Chudleigh was taken Prisoner Betwixt three and four of the Clock
the Commanders of the King's Forces, who embraced those four several ways of
ascent, met to their mutual joy almost at the top of the hill, which the routed
enemy confusedly forsook. In this service, though they were Assailants, they
lost very few men, and no considerable Officer, killing of the Enemy about
three hundred, and taking seventeen hundred prisoners, all their Cannon (being
thirteen pieces of brass Ordnance) and Ammunition (seventy barrels of powder)
with a Magazine of Biscuit and other provision proportionable. For this victory
public Prayer and Thanksgiving was made on the hill; then the Army was
disposed of to improve their success to the best advantage. -- Nothing had
sunk this great spirit, but the fate of Kingdoms, with whose ruin only he
was contented to fall, and disband his brave Soldiers upon honorable terms.
Five things made my Lord Hopton so eminently serviceable. 1. His great insight
into the designs, and prudent foresight of the events of present Councels;
which when most doubted and wavered, gave him that resolution that undertook
great difficulties, and bore up against greater. 2. His experience of War in
general, and his acquaintance with that seat of it committed to him in
particular. 3. His renown all over the Kingdom for piety and moderation, and
within his own association for hospitality, civility, and charity. 4. His name
among the Enemies, as confiderable for his generousnesse and justice, as for
his valor and conduct. 5. His Estate, that set him above mercenarinesse; and
his care for money, that set his Soldiers above need, the occasion of mutinying
among themselves, or of incivilities toward others.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Carnarvan.
RObert Dormer Ar. was on the tenth of June 1615. made Baronet by K. James, and
on the 30 day of the same month was by him created Baron Dormer of Wing in
Buckinghamshire. His Grandchild Robert Dormer was by K. Charles in the 4th of
his Reign created Viscount Ascot, and Earl of Carnarvan. He lost his life
fighting for him who gave him his honor, at the first Battle of Newbury. Being
sore wounded, he was defired by a Lord, to know of him what suit he would have
to his Majesty in his behalf, the said Lord promising to discharge his trust in
presenting his request, and assuring him, that his Majesty would be willing to
gratify him to the utmost of his power. To whom the Earl replied, I will not
dye with a Suit in my mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven. By Anne
daughter to Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, he had Charles, now Earl of
Carnarvan. From his noble Extract, he received not more honor than he gave it:
For the blood that was conveyed to him through so many illustrious veins, he
derived to his Children more maturated for renow^ and by a constant practice of
goodness more habituated to virtue. His youth was prepared for action by
study, without which even the most eminent parts of Noblemen seem rough and
unpleasant sant, in despite of the splendour of their fortune: But his riper
years endured not those retirements, and therefore brake out into manlike
exercises at home, and travel abroad. None more noble, yet none more modest;
none more valiant, yet none more patient. -- A Physician at his Fatherin-Law's
Table gave him the Lie; which put the company to admire on the one hand the
man's impudence, and on the other my Lord's mildness, until he said, I Will
take the Lie from him, but I Will never take Physic of him. -- He may speak what
does not become him, I Will not do what is unworthy of me. -- A virtue this! not
usual in Noblemen, to whom the limits of Equity seem a restraint, and
therefore are more restless in Injuries. In the midst of horror and tumults
his soul was serene and calm. As humble he was as patient. Honor and nobility,
to which nothing can be added, has no better way to increase, than when
secured of its own greatness, it humbles it self, and so at once obliges
love, and avoideth envy. His carriage was as condescending as heroic, and his
speech as weighty as free. He was too great to envy any man's parts and virtues,
and too good not to encourage them. Many a time would he stoop with his own
spirit, to raise other men's. -- He neglected the minute and little
circumstances of compliance with vulgar humors, aiming at what was more solid
and more weighty: Moderate men are applauded, but the Heroic are never
understood.

Constant he was in all that was good: this was his heroic expression when
solicited by his Wives Father to desist from his engagement with the King,
Leave me to my Honor and Allegiance. No security to him worth a breach of
Trust; no interest worth being unworthy. His conduct was as eminent in War, as
his carriage in Peace; many did he oblige by the generosity of his mind, more
did he awe with the hardiness of his body; which was no more softened to sloth
by the dalliances of a Court, than the other was debauched to a carelessness by
the greatness of his Fortune. His prudence was equal to his valor, and he
could entertain dangers as well as despise them; for he not only undeceived
his enemies surmises, but exceeded his own friends opinion in the conduct of
his soldiers, of whom he had two cares: the one to discipline, the other to
preserve them. Therefore they were as completely armed without, as they were
well appointed within; that surviving their first dangers, they might attain
that experience and resolution which is in vain expected from young and raw
soldiers. To this conduct of a General, he added the industry of a Soldier,
doing much by his performances, more by his example, that went as an active
soul to enliven each part, and the whole of his brave Squadron. But there is no
doubt but personal and private sins may oft-times over-balance the justice of
public engagements. Nor does God account every Gallant a fit instrument to
assert in the way of war a righteous cause the event can never state the
justice of any cause nor the peace of men's consciences, nor the eternal fate of
their souls.

They were no doubt Martyrs who neglected their lives, and all that was dear to
them in this world, having no advantageous design by any innovation, but were
religiously sensible of those ties to God the Church, their King, their
Country; which lay upon their souls, both for obedience and just assistance.

God could, and I doubt not but he did (...)
through his mercy crown many of them with eterlife, whose lives were lost in
so good a cause: the destruction of their bodies being sanctified as a means to
save their souls.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Herbert of Cherbury.
Edward Herbert, son of Richard Herbert Esquire and Susan Newport his Wife, was
born at Montgomery-Castle, and brought to Court by the Earl of Pembrook, where
he was Knighted by K. James, who sent him over Ambassador into France.
Afterward K. Charles the first created him Baron of Castle-Island in Ireland,
and some years after Baron of Cherbury in Montgomery-shire. He was a most
excellent Artist and rare Linguist, studied both in Books and Men, and himself
the Author of two Works most remarkable, viz. A Treatise of Truth, written in
French, so highly prized beyond the Seas, and (they say) it is extant at this
day with great Honor in the Popes Vatican; and an History of King Henry the
Eighth; wherein his Collections are full and authentic; his observation
judicious; his connection strong and ^ohaerent, and the whole exact. He married
the Daughter and sole Heir of Sir William Herbert of St. Julians in
Monmouth-shire, with whom he had a large Inheritance in England and Ireland;
and died in August, Anno Dom. 1648. having designed a fair Monument of his own
invention to be set up for him in the Church of Montgomery, according to the
model following; Upon the ground a Hath-pace of fourteen foot square, on the
midst of which is placed a Dorick Column, with its right of Pedestal Basis,
and Capitols fifteen foot in height; on the Capitol of the Column is mounted an
Urn with a Heart Flamboul, supported by two Angels. The foot of this Column is
attended with four Angels, placed on Pedestals at each corner of the said
Hath-pace, two having Torches reverst, extinguishing, the Motto of Mortality;
the other two holding up Palms, the Emblemes of Victory.



When this noble person was in France, he had private Instructions from England
to mediate a Vid. crudit. J. H. de lega^s, p. 25.
Peace for them of the Religion; and in case of refusal, to use certain
menaces. -- Accordingly being referred to Luynes the Constable and Favorite of
France, he delivers him the Message, reserving his threatenings till he saw
how the matter was relished. -- Luynes had hid behind the Curtain a Gentleman
of the Religion, who being an Ear-witnesse of what passed, might relate to his
friends what little expectations they ought to entertain from the King of
England's intercession.

Luynes was very haughty, and would needs know what our KING had to do with
their affairs: Sir Edward replied; It Is not you to whom the King my Master
owes an account of his actions: and for me, it is enough that I obey him. In
the mean time I must maintain, That my Master has more reason to do what he
does, than you to ask why he does it? Nevertheless, If you desire me in a
gentle fashion, I shall acquaint you further.

Whereupon Luynes bowing a little, said, Very well. The Ambassador answered';
That it was not on this occasion only, that the King of Great Britain had
desired the Peace and prosperity of France, but upon all other occasions, when
ever any War was raised in that Country; and this he said was his first
reason. The second was, That when a Peace was settled there, his Majesty of
France might be better disposed to assist the Palatinate in the affairs of
Germany. Luynes said, We will have none of your advices. The Ambassador
replied, That he took that for an Answer, and was sorry only that the
affection and the good will of the King his Master was not sufficiently
understood; and that since it was rejected in that manner, he could do no less
then say, That the King his Master knew well enough what he had to do. Luynes
answered; We are not afraid of you. The Ambassador smiling a little, replied,
If you had said you had not loved us, I should have believed you, and made
another answer: In the mean time, all that I will tell you more is, That we
know very well what we have to do. Luynes hereupon rising from his Chair, with
a fashion and countenance a little discomposed, said, By God, if you were not
Monsieur the Ambassador, I know very well how I would use you. Sir Edw: Herbert
rising also from his Chair, said; That as he was his Majesty of Great Britain'
s Ambassador, so he was also a Gentleman, and that his Sword whereon be laid
his band, should do him reason if he had taken any offense. After which Luynes
replying nothing, the Ambassador went on his way toward the door; and Luynes
seeming to accompany him, he told him there was no occasion to use such
Ceremony after such Language; and so departed, expecting to hear further from
him: But no Message being brought him from Luynes, he had in pursuance of his
Instructions a more civil Audience of the King at Coignac, where the Marshal of
St. Geran told him he had offended the Constable, and he was not in a place of
security here: whereunto he answered; That he held himself to be in a place of
security wheresoever he had his Sword by him.

Luynes resenting the affront, got Cadenet his brother, D^: of Chaun, with a
ruffling train of Officers (whereof there was not one, as he told K. James, but
had killed his man) as an Ambassador extraordinary to mis-report their
Traverses so much to the disparagement of Sir Edw: that the Earl of Carlisle,
sent to accommodate Le Mal Entendu that might arise between the 2 Crowns, got
him called home; until the Gentleman behind the Curtains, out of his duty to
truth and honor, related all circumstances so, as that it appeared, that
though Luynes gave the first affront, yet Sir Edward kept himself within the
bounds of his Instructions and Honor, very discreetly and worthily. --
Insomuch that he fell on his knees to King James before the Duke of Buckingham,
to have a Trumpeter, if not an Herald sent to Monsieur Luynes, to tell him,
that he had made a false Relation of the passages beforementioned, and that Sir
Edward Herbert would demand reason of him with Sword in hand on that point. --
The King answered, he would take it into consideration: But Luynes a little
after died, and Sir Edward was sent Ambassador to France again, and otherwise
employed so, that if it had not been for Fears and Jealousies, the bane of
public services, he had been as great in his Actions, as in his Writings; and
as great a Statesman, as he is confessed a Scholar.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Capel.
HIS privacy before the War was passed with as much popularity in the Country,
as his more public appearance in it was with valor and fidelity in the Field:
In our too happy time of Peace none more pious, hospitable, charitable, and
munificent: In those more unhappy of our Differences, none more resolved,
Loyal, and active. The people loved him so well, that they chose him one of
their Representatives; and the King esteemed him so much, that he sent for him
as one of his Peers in that Parliament, wherein the King and People agreed in
no one thing, save a just kindness for my Lord Capel, who was one of those
excellent Gentlemen, whose gravity and discretion (the King says) he hoped
would allay and fix the Factiou to a due temperament (guiding some men's
well-meaning Zeal by such rules of moderation, as are best both to preserve and
restore the health of all States and Kingdoms) keeping to the dictates of his
conscience, rather than the importunities of the people; to what was just, than
what was safe, save only in the Earl of Strafford's case, wherein he yielded
to the public Necessity with his Royal Master, but repented with him too,
sealing his contrition for that miscarriage with his blood, when he was more
troubled for his forced consent to that brave person's death, than for losing
his own life; which he ventured throughout the first War, and lost by his
Engagement in the second. For after the surrender of Oxford, he retired to his
own house, but could not rest there, until the King was brought home to his;
which all England endeavoring as one man, my Lord adventured himself at
Colchester to extremity, yielding himself upon condition of Quarter, which he
urged by the Law of Arms, that Law that (as he said on the Scaffold) governs
the world, and against the Laws of God and Man (they are his own words) for
keeping the fifth Commandment, dying on the Scaffold at Westminster, with a
courage that became a clear conscience, and a resolution befitting a good
Christian; expressing that judicious piety in the Chamber of Meditation at his
death, that he did in his Since published.
Book of Meditation in his life: a piety that (as it appeared by his dismission
of his Chaplain, and the formalities of that time's devotion, before he came to
the Scaffold) was rather his inward frame and habit, than outward ostentation
or pomp; from the noble Sentiments whereof (as the Poet (not unhappily alluding
to his Arms; A Lion rampant in a Field Gules between three crosses) expresses
it)

Our Lyon-like Capel undaunted stood,
Beset with Crosses in a Field of blood.
as one that affrighted death, rather than was afrighted by it -- It being very
observable, that a learned Doctor of Physic present at the opening and
embalming of this noble Lord, and Duke Hamilton, delivered at a public
Lecture, that the Lord Capel's was the least heart, and the Duke's the greatest
that ever he saw; agreeable to the observation in Philosophy, that the spirits
contracted within the least compass, are the cause of the greater courage.
Three things are considerable in this incomparable person. 1. His uninterrupted
Loyalty keeping pace with his Life; for his last breath was spent in
proclaiming K. Charles the II. in the very face of his Enemies, as known to him
to be a virtuous, noble, gentle, just, and great Prince; a Perfect Englishman
in his inclination. 2. His great merits and modesty, whereof K. Charles I.
writes thus to his excellent Queen; There is one that does not yet pretend,
that does deserve as well as any, I mean Capel; Therefore I desire thy
assistance to find out something for him before he ask. 3. The blessing of
God upon his noble, but suffering Family, who was a Husband to his excellent
Widow, and a Father to his hopeful Children, whom not so much their birth,
beauty, and portion (though they were eminent for these) as their Virtues,
married to the best Bloods and Estates in the Land, even when they and the
Cause they suffered for were at the lowest. It Is the happiness of good men,
though themselves miserable, that their seed shall be mighty, and their
Generation blessed.

Observations on the Life of Bishop Andrews.
I Have much a-do to prevail with my own hand to write this excellent Prelate a
Statesman of England, though he was Privy-Councellor in both Kingdoms: For I
remember what he would say when he came to the Council Table; Is there any
thing to be done to day for the Church? If they answered Yea, then he said, I
will stay. -- If No, he said, I will be gone. -- Though yet this be an instance
of as much prudence as any within the compass of our Observation: So safe is
every man within the circle of his own place, and so great an argument of
abilities has it been always confessed, to know as well what we ought, as what
we can, especially in Clergymen, whose over-doing does abate their reverence,
and increase their envy, by laying open those defects and miscarriages, which
are otherwise hallowed, or at least concealed in the mystic sacredness of
their own function. Not but that men of that gravity and exactness, of that
knowledge and experience, of that stayedness and moderation, of that sobriety
and temperance, of that observation and diligence as Bishops are presumed to
be, were in all Governments judged as fit to manage public affairs, as men of
any other professions whatever, without any prejudice to the Church; which must
be governed as well as taught, -- and managed as well as a society dwelling in
the world, as under the notion of a peculiar people taken out of it. -- His
successful skill in dealing with the Papists under my Lord of Huntington
President of the North; and with the Puritans under Doctor Cousin, an
Ecclesiastical Officer in the South, recommended him to Sir Francis
Walsingham's notice, as a person too useful to be buried in a Country-Living;
who thereupon intended to set up his Learning in a Lecture at Cambridge, to
confute the Doctrine of Rome; until Queen Eliz. resolved to set up his
prudence in other Employments at Court, to countermine its policy: where I know
not whether the acuteness of his Sermons took most with the most Learned the
devotion of them with the most pious; or the prudence of them with the most
Wise -- (it has been one thing always to Preach learnedly, and another thing
to preach wisely) for to the Immensity of his Learning, he added excellent
Principles of politic prudence, as a governor of the Church, and a Councellor
of State, wherein he was conspicuous; not for the crafty projects and practices
of policy, or for those sinister ways of Artifice and subtlety, or the admired
depths of Hypocrisy called reason of State; nor the measures and rules of his
Politics and Prudentials were taken from the great experience he had gotten,
and many excellent observations he had made out of all Histories, as well
Humane as Divine: though he always laid the greatest weight upon the grounds
and instances of holyScripture, which gives the truest judgment of wisdom or
folly; considering the mixture of State Affairs, with those of the Church in
Christian Commonwealths, and the fitness of sober and discreet Clergymen for
those of the State in all. It Is a wonder how Clergymen come to be excluded
public Councils at any time: but observing Bishop Andrews his insight into the
Fundamental constitution of our State, as appears from his Speech in the
Countess of Shrewsbury's Case: His distinct foresight of the consequences of
Affairs, evident in his speech against Thraske: His circumspect care of the
Public, visible in his Petition to King James then sick at New Market; that
the Prince then under Scotch Tutors be educated by well-principled men, the
occasion that King James took to bring him up himself so exactly in the
Doctrine and Discipline of our Church, that it is a question whether he was more
by his Pen or Sword, his Scepter or his Style, The Defender of the Faith: --
His wonderful skill in the government of this Church, discerned by the
excellent King Charles, in that he sent so many Bishops to consult with him,
1625. what was to be done for the Church in that Parliament: His caution and
moderation, in that he never, unless upon great considerations innovated in
his Church, but left things in the same decency and order he found them
(knowing that all alterations have their dangers) I am astonished to think,
that Bishops should be forbidden secular employment in our time. -- Who has
more ampleness and compleatness (says Bishop Gauden) for a good man, a good
Bishop, a good Christan, a good Scholar, a good Preacher, and a good
Counselor, than Bishop Andrews, a man of an astonishing excellency both at
home and abroad?

Observations on the Life of Henry Earl of Manchester.
HEnry Earl of Manchester, third son to Sir Edward Mountague, Grandchild to
Sir Edward Mountague Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in King Edward the
sixth's time, was born at Boughton in Northamptonshire. One skilful in
mysterious Arts, beholding him when a Schoolboy, foretold that by the
pregnancy of his parts, he would raise himself above the rest of his Family;
which came to pass accordingly: He being bred first in Christs-Colledge in
Cambridge, then in the Middle Temple, where he attained to great Learning in
the Laws; passed through many preferments, as they are reckoned up, viz.

1. Sergeant at Law. 2. Knighted by K. James, July 22. 1603. 3. Recorder of
London. 4. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, November. 18. 1616. 5. Lord
Treasurer of England, December. 16. 1620. 6. Baron of Kimbolton. 7. Viscount
Mandevile. 8. President of the Council, Sept. 29. 1621. 9. Earl of Manchester.
10. Lord Privy Seal.


He wisely perceiving that Courtiers were but as Counters in the hands of
Princes, raised and depressed in valuation at pleasure, was contented rather to
be set for a smaller sum, than to be quite put up into the box. Thus in point
of place and preferment, being pleased to be what the King would have him
(according to his Motto, Movendo non mutando me) he became almost what he would
be himself, finally advanced to an Office of great Honor. When Lord
Privy Seal, he brought the Court of Requests into such repute, that what
formerly was called the Alms-Basket of the Chancery, had in his time well-nigh
as much meat in, and guests about it (I mean Suits and Clients) as the Chancery
it self. His Meditations of Life and Death, called Manchester Al mondo, written
in the time of his health, may be presumed to have left good impressions on his
own soul, preparatory for his dissolution, which happened 164...

The Office of Lord Treasurer was ever beheld as (...) place of great charge
and profit. My Lord being demanded what it might be worth per ann. made this
answer; That it might be some thousands of pounds to him (who after death would
go instantly to heaven) twice as much to him who would go to Purgatory, and a
Nemo scit to him who would adventure to a worse place. But indeed, he that will
be a bad husband for himself in so advantageous a place, will never be a good
one for his Sovereign.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Wotton, and his Relations.
SIr Henry Wotton first having read of his Ancestor Sir Robert Wotton, the
noble Lieutenant of Guisnes, and Comptroller of Callais, in King Edward the
fourth's days, His Grandfather Sir Edward Wotton, that refused to be
Chancellor of England in King Henry the Eighth's time. 2. Having known his
Father Sir Thomas Wotton, one of the most Ingenuous modesty, the most Ancient
freedom, plainness, single-heartednesse, and integrity in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign: His Brothers Sir Edward Wotton, the famous Comptroller of Queen Eliz.
and K. James his Court, since Lord Wotton, and Baron Morley in Kent; Sir James
Wotton (with R. Earl of Essex, Count Lodowick of Nassaw, Don Christophoro, son
of Antonio King of Portugal, etc.) Knighted as an excellent Soldier at Cadiz:
Sir John Wotton the accomplished Traveller and Scholar, for whom Queen Eliz.
designed a special favor: -- His Uncle Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury and
York, nine times Ambassador for the Crown of England (he that was one of King
Henry's Executors, King Edward's Secretary of State, Queen Mary's right hand,
and (that refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury in in Queen Eliz. days) 3.
Being bred 1. In Winchester, that eminent School for Discipline and Order. 2.
In New-Colledge and Queens, those famous Colleges for the method of Living by
rule, could promise no less than he did in his solidly sententious, and
discreetly humoured Play at Queens, called Tancredo, in his elegant Lecture of
the nobleness, manner, and use of Seeing, at the Schools (for which the learned
Albericus Gentilis called him, Henrice Mi Ocelle, and communicated to him his
Mathematics, his Law, and his Italian learning) in his more particular
converse with Doctor Done and Sir Richard Baker in the University, and his
more general conversation with Mankind in travells for one year to France and
Geneva, (where he was acquainted with Theodore Beza, and Isaac Casaubon, at
whose Fathers he lodged) for eight years in Germany, for five in Italy, whence
returning balanced with Learning and Experience, with the Arts of Rome, Venice,
and Florence (Picture, Sculpture, Chimistry, Architecture) the Secrets,
Languages, Dispositions, Customs, and Laws of most Nations, set off with his
choice shape, obliging behavior, sweet discourse, and sharp wit, he could
perform no less than he did, 1. In the unhappy relation he had to the Earl of
Essex, first of Friend, and afterward of Secretary. 2. In his more happy
Interest by his Secretary Vietta (upon his flight out of England after the
Earl's apprehension) with the Duke of Tuscany, then the greatest patron of
Learning and Arts in the world; who having discovered a design to poison King
James, as the known successor of Queen Elizabeth, sent Sir Henry Wotton with
notice of the plot, and preservatives against the poison, by the way of Norway
into Scotland, under the borrowed name of Octavio Baldi; where after some
suspicion of the Italian message, discovering himself to the King by David
Lindsey's means, he was treated with much honor, complacency, and secrecy for
three months. After which time he returned to Florence, staying there till King
James enquiring concerning him of my Lord Wotton the Comptroller; the great
Duke advised his return to congratulate his Majesty, as he did; the King
embracing him in his arms, and calling him the best, because the honestest
Dissembler that he met with: and Knighting him by his own name. Adding withal;
That since he knew he wanted neither Learning nor Experience; neither Abilities
nor Faithfulness, he would employ him to others, as he was employed to him;
which accordingly he did to Venice, the place he chose as most suitable to his
retired Genius, and narrow Estate, where, 1. Studying the dispositions of the
several Dukes and Senators. 2. Sorting of fit Presents, curious, and not costly
Entertainments, sweetened with various and pleasant discourse, particularly his
elegant application of Stories: He had such interest, that he was never denied
any request; whereby he did many services to the Protestant interest (with his
Chaplain Bishop Biddle, and Padre Pauloe's assistance) during the Controversy
between the Pope and the Venetians, especially in transmitting the History of
the Council of Trent, sheet by sheet to the King and the Archbishop of
Canterbury as it was written: And in his three Embassies thither, gained many
Privileges for the English along all those Coasts. In the second of which
Embassies, calling upon the Emperor, he had brought Affairs to a Treaty, had
not the Emperor's success interposed; whereupon he took his leave, wishing
that Prince to use his Victory soberly; an advice his carriage indeared to his
Majesty, together with his person, so far, that he gave him a Diamond worth
above a thousand pounds, which he bestowed on his Hostess, saying, He would not
be the better by a man that was an open Enemy to his Mistress, so the Queen of
Bohemia was pleased he should call her: -- Only while abroad, and writing in
the Album that friends have this sentence, Legatus est vir bonus peregre missus
ad mentiendum reipublicae causa, whereof Scioppius made a malicious use in his
Books against King James, He lost himself a while for using more freedom
abroad than became his Employment, until his ingenuous, clear, and choicely
eloquent Apologies recovered him to more respect and cautiousnesse, until he
writ Invidiae remedium over his Lodgings at Eaton-Colledge, the Provostship
whereof he obtained in exchange for the reversion of the Mastership of the
Rolls, and other places promised him; Where looking upon himself in his
Surplice, as Charles 5, or Philip 2. in Cloisters, his Study was divine
Meditations, History and Characters: His recreation Philosophical conclusions,
and Angling; which he called his idle time not idly spent, saying, he would
rather live five May-months, than sorty Decembers: His Table was exquisite,
where two youths attended, upon whom he made the observations that were to
furnish his designed discourse of Education: His Histories and Observations
remarkable, his Apophthegms sage and quick.

1. Being in a Popish Chapel, a merry Priest that knew him, sent a Paper to
him, with this question; Where was your Religion before Luther? Under which he
writ; Where yours is not, in the written word of God.

2. Being asked, whether a Papist could be saved? He replied; You may be saved
without knowing that: look to your self.

3. Hearing one rayl against Arminius and Popery, he answered, S^^, he that
understands amiss, concludes worse: -- If you had studied Popery so much as I
have, and knew Arminius so well as I did, how learned, how strict, and how rare
a man he was, you would not fall so foul on his person, nor think that the
further you go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to God.

4. One pitched upon for Ambassador, came to Eaton, and requested from his some
Experimental rule for his prudent and sase carriage in his Negotiation; to whom
he smilingly gave this for an in(...)ble Aphorism: That to be in safety
himself, and serviceable to his Country, be should always, and upon all
occasions speak the truth; For (said he) you shall never be believed; and by
this means your truth will secure your self, if you shall ever be called to
any account: and it will also put your Adversaries (who will still hunt
counter) to a loss in all their disquisitions and undertakings.

5. And when he made his Will two years before he died, out of policy to let
the King understand his Debts and Arrears (to which end he bestowed in that
Will on his Majesty, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton's Papers of Negotiation in Queen
Elizabeth's days: on the Queen, Dioscorides in Tuscany, with the Herbs
naturally colored: on the Prince, the Queen of Bohemia's picture: on my Lord
of Canterbury, the picture of Divine love: to my Lord of London, high
Treasurer, Heraclitus and Democritus; and to Secretary Windebanke old Bastano's
four Seasons) he directed that this only should be written on his plain Marble:

Hie jacet hujus sententiae primus auctor;
Disputandi Pruritus fit Ecclesiarum Scabies:
Nomen alias qu^re:
7. Going yearly to Bocton for the connaturalness of that Air, and to
Winchester or Oxford for Recreation, he would say to his friends; How useful
was that advice of a holy Monk, who persuaded his friend to perform his
customary devotion in a constant place, where his former thoughts might meet
him; for (said he) at my being at that School, seeing the place where I sat
when I was a boy, occasioned me to remember my youthful thoughts; sweet
thoughts indeed, that promised my growing years numerous pleasures, without
mixture of cares, and those to be enjoyed when time (which I thought
slow-paced) changed my youth to manhood; and now there are a succession of
Boys using the same recreation, and questionless possessed with the same
thoughts. Thus one generation succeeds another both in their Lives,
Recreations, Hopes, Fears, and Deaths.

8. There are four things that recommend Sir Henry Wotton to posterity: 1. That
King Charles took great pleasure in corresponding with him in Letters. 2. That
my Lord Racon took great pains in collecting his Apophthegme^. 3. That Sir
Richard Baker, who submitted most of his Writings to his Censure, said of him;
That the Kingdom yielded not a fitter man to match the Capriciousness of the
Italian wits. And 4. That his work of Architecture is translated into Latin,
printed with Vitruvius, and this Elogy prefixed:

Henricns Wottonus Anglo-Cantianus Tho: optimi viri Filius Natu minimus a
serenissimo Jacobo I. Magnae Britanniae, etc. Rege in Equestrem titulum
ascitus, ejusdemque ter ad Remp: Venetam Legatus Ordinarius, semel ad
Confaederatarum Provinciarum Ordines in Juliensi Negotio; bis ad Carolum
Emanuelem Subaudiae ducem: Semel ad unitos superioris Germaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbronnensi. Postremo ad Archducem Leopoldum, Ducem Wirtenbergensem,
Civitates Imperiales Argentinam, Ulmamque, and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem
Ferdinandum II. Legatus Extraordinarius Tandem hoc Dedicit. Animas sapientiores
fieri quiescendo.


Observations on the Lives of the Lord Wilmot, and Sir Tho. Roe.
THese honorable persons are united not so much in their own relation or
character, as in my unhappiness, who was promised Observations on the life of
the first, but never had them; and had some on the life of the second, but lost
them.

1. My Lord Wilmot I find acting like a Statesman, when Commissary in the
expedition against the Scots; and speaking like a Soldier, when a Member of the
Parliament that was for them: in the first capacity speaking with my Lord
Conway, he saw the King would be overcome by the English at home, if he
overcame not the Scots abroad. In the second, whispering with some
Army Officers, he said; If the Scots Army were paid in the North, the King's
Army would be paid in the South. -- A wise and brave speech, that had almost
rallied all the Army against the Parliament, as soon as that Parliament had
rallied their multitude against the King; but that treachery got easily into
the bosom of that brave Prince, that had nothing but honesty in his heart.

Yet since he could not awe the counsels of the faction in the City, he went to
suppress their Rebellion in the Field; being voted a Traitor by the Rebels,
because he endeavored they should not be so. What he performed in the Wars,
all the Kingdom knows; what he did at Oxford, the King's Letters intimate;
what he negotiated in Germany, acted in Scotland, endeavored at W^rcester, and
other places for the King's Majesty's escape and restoration, posterity shall
celebrate while he lives, as renownedly in History, as he does nobly in his son
the most hopeful Earl of Rochester.

2. Sir Thomas Roe -- understood the dispositions of men so exactly, could suit
their humors so fitly, observe opportunities and seasons of actions so
punctually, keep correspondence so warily, wade through difficulties so
handsomely, wave the pinch of a business so dexterously, contrive Interests so
suitably, that he was advised with concerning the most important Affairs of the
Kingdoms he resided in abroad, and admitted of the Privy-Councel while he lived
at home. -- Where his speech against the debasing of the Coin at the
Council Table will last as long as there is reason of State in the world; His
settlement of Trade as long as this is an Island; and his Eastern MSS. as long
as there are Books to furnish Libraries, or Libraries to preserve Books. Three
of the noblest English actions beyond Sea are these. 1. That Sir Thomas Roe
pardoned the Dutch Merchants thrice in Persia and Turkey at his mercy. 2. That
my Lord Wilmot, when Ambassador in Germany, refused the assistance of the Popes
Nuncio, or Turkish Aga; judging his great Master, when at lowest, above those
suspected Auxiliaries. 3. That my Lord Culpeper having offered him in Muscovy
all the English goods there, refused them, declaring his Royal Master a Father
of his Country, though kept out of it by Traitors; and a merciful Prince to his
People, when cast off by the Rebels.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Juxon.
WIlliam Juxon, born at Chichester in Sussex, was bred Fellow in St. John's
College in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelor of Law; very young, but very
able for that Degree: afterward becoming Doctor in the same Faculty, and
President of the College, was one in whom Nature had not omitted, but Grace
had ordered the Tetrarch of humors, being admirably Master of his Pen and
Passion. For his Abilities, he was successively preferred by King Charles the
first, Bishop of Hereford and London, and for some years Lord Treasurer of
England: wherein he had Religion to be honest, and no self-interest to be
corrupt. A troublesome place in those times, being expected he should make much
Brick (though not altogether without, yet) with very little straw allowed unto
him: Large then the Expenses, low the Revenues of the Exchequer. Yet those
Coffers he found empty, he left filling, and had left full, had Peace been
preserved in the Land, and he continued in his Place. Such the mildness of
his temper, that Petitioners for money (when it was not to be had) departed
well pleased with his Denials, they were so civilly languaged. It may justly
seem a wonder, that whereas few spoke well of Bishops at that time, and Lord
Treasurers at all Times are liable to the complaints of discontented people;
though both Offices met in this man, yet with Demetrius he was well reported of
all men, and of the truth it self. He lived to see much shame and contempt
undeservedly poured on his Function, and all the while possessed his own soul
in patience.

Nor was it the least part of this Prelat's honor, that amongst the many
worthy Bishops of our Land, King Charles the first selected him for his
Confessor at his Martyrdom, when he honored him with this testimony; That
good man. He formerly had had experience [in the case of the Earl of Strafford]
that this Bishop's Conscience was bottomed on piety, not policy, the reason
that from him he received the Sacrament, good comfort and counsel just before
he was murdered. I say, just before the Royal Martyr was murdered; a Fact so
foul, that it alone may confute the Error of the Pelagians, maintaining that
all sin comes by imitation, the Universe not formerly affording such a
Precedent, as if chose Regicides had purposely designed to disprove the
observation of Solomon, that there is no new thing under the Sun.

King Charles the second preferred him Archbishop of Canterbury 1660. He died
in the year of our Lord, 1663. and with great solemnity was buried in St.
John's College in Oxford, -- to which he was a great Benefactor, though a
greater to Paul's and Lambeth; and greatest of all to the Church which his
eminence adorned, and his temper secured in those times, wherein roughness
enraged that humor, which delay and moderation broke: a discreet yielding to
the multitude is the securest way of Conquest: They that hold together by
opposition, languish and moulder away by indulgence: In his duty, this good man
went along with Conscience. in Government, with Time and Law. He had the
happiness, that K. James admired in a Statesman of his time, to do all things
suavibus modis: He referred his Master in the Earl of Strafford's case, as he
did himself in all cases, to his own Conscience for matter of fact, and to the
Judges for matter of Law; who according to their Oath ought to carry themselves
indifferently between the King and his Subjects. -- The King was not more happy
in this faithful servant, than he was in his followers, among whom there was no
uncivil Austerity to disoblige the Subjects, nor base Corruption to incense
them. They need not keep state, they had so much real power; nor extort, they
had so much allowed advantage. His care was his servants, and their care his
business: His preferments were his burden rather than his honor; advanced by
him, rather than advancing him -- and therefore he was more ready to lay them
down, than others to take them up: Witness his Treasurers Place; which when he
parted with (like those that scatter their Jewels in the way, that they may
debar the violence of greedy pursuers) no less than four durst undertake; when
his single self sufficed for the two greatest troubles of this Nation, the
Treasurer-ship of England, and the Bishopric of London.

Religion was the inclination and composure as well as care of his soul; which
he used not as the artifice of pretense or power, but as the ornament and
comfort of a private breast, never affecting a pompous piety, nor a magnificent
virtue, but approving himself in secret to that God who would reward him
openly. His devotion was as much above other men's, as his Calling; his
meditations equal with his cares; and his thoughts even and free between his
Affairs and his Contemplations, which were his pleasures, as well as his duty,
the uniform temper and pulse of his Christian soul. Neither was his Religion
that of a man only, but that of a Bishop too, that made his Piety as universal
as his Province, by such assistances of power, as brought carnal men, if not to
an obedience, yet to such a degree of reverence, that if they did not honor,
they might not despise it. His justice was as his Religion, clear and uniform;
First, the ornament of his heart, then the honor of his action. Neither was
Justice leavened with rigor or severity, but sweetened with clemency and
goodness; that was never angry but for the public, and not then so much at
the person, as the offense: So ambitious of that great glory of Moderation,
that he kept it up in spite of the times malignity, wherein he saw all change
without himself, while he remained the self-same still within the Idea of
sobriety and temperance, virtues that he put off only with his life: Neither
was this a defect of spirit, but the temper of it; that though it never
provoked troubles, yet it never feared them: His mind was always great, though
his fortune not so: Great to suffer, though not always able to act: so good his
temper, and so admirable his humility, that none ever went discontented from
him: -- Never ^ourting, but always winning people, having a passage to their
hearts through their brain; and making them first admire, and then love him. He
was slow, not of speech, as a defect; but to speak, o^ of discretion; because
when speaking, he plentifully paid the Principal and Interest of his Audito^^
expectation.

In a word, his government as a Bishop was gentle, benign, and paternal: His
management of the Treasury was such, that he served his Prince faithfully,
satisfied all his friends, and silenced all his enemies; of which he had enough
as a Bishop, Greatness is so invidious and suspected; though none as a man,
goodness is so meek and inoffensive. The most thought the worse of Dr. Juxon
for the Bishops sake, the best thought the better of the Bishop for Dr. Juxon's
sake.

Observations on the Life of John Lord Culpeper.
I Find nothing promoting him to his first preferment of Chancellor of the
Exchequer, but his pure merit; nor any thing advancing him to his
after-honours, but his steady Loyalty; -- which when others stuck to London (in
compliance with that Maxim; In all Divisions keep your self to the Metropolis,
the chief City being for the most part preserved, who-ever prevails, in a
Civil Commotion, abounding in Money and Friends, the readiest Commodities to
purchase Quiet) carried him after a persecuted Sovereign for twenty years
together, by the strong obligation of a well-principled Conscience, and the
well-weighed observation of the natural Affection of all Englishmen to their
lawful Sovereign; from whom, though the Arts and Impulses of seditious
Demagogues may a while estrange and divorce their minds, yet their Genius will
irresistibly at last force them to their first love.

It was the resolution of a great Statesman; That if the Crown of England were
placed but on an Hedge-stake, he would be on that side the Crown was. His first
service was to discover his Sovereign to his deluded People, worthy not only
of their obedience, but their lives and fortunes. His next was, to lay open his
Enemies in all their Intrigues and Reserves, being most happy in all the
Treaties he was engaged in, in discerning the bottom of his own Parties
Interest, and their Adversaries pretensions discoveries! that prevailed on all
that was either noble or but ingenuous in the Nation, especially whither my
Lord came with his indefatigable Industry, his obliging Converse, and potent
Eloquence, excepting London it is self, whither he was sent from Nottingham,
with the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, and Sir William Wedale Knight, the
very day the King set up his Standard there. The Principle he went upon was,
That the Faction at Westminster was no Parliament; A Principle most safe on all
hands: For which and the rest of his judicious Sentiments, he has the honor
to be enrolled among those that Traitors durst not pardon; which he could not
choose but smile at, knowing (as he used to say) That Treason is always within
five years weary of its self, the People being more impatient of their own
Libertinisme, than of the strictest and most heavy government. His way of
Intelligence from L^^don by Mistress E. P. friend to J. M. puts me (...) mind
of a passage in Queen Elizabeth's Reig^ who being presented with an Overture out
(...) Spain, so secretly managed by the Council there, as the first news of its
approach came with its sel^ the Messengers (out of fear of a surprizal)
dispensing the Ceremonies commonly used in the behalf of Ambassadors (something
strange, considering the haughtiness of that Nation) did much inflame the Lord
Treasurer's desire to know the farthest extent of the Negotiation, as conducing
to a present advantage, that such an Answer might be made as should in some
proportion quadrate with the demand of the Catholic King, at that time
standing upon Terms little different from those of an Enemy. And being
informed from the ordinary Espials he kept about his Person, that the attempt
was something difficult, if not impossible; the Don out of distrust still
carrying his Instructions in his bosom: Burleigh caused such a Jesuit to be
apprehended, as by reason of former miscarriages could not expect mercy; and
imparts his desires to him under as large promises if he brought them about, as
threats to be revenged on him and his Associates, if he found himself abused.
All which, though with some reluctance he undertook, and performed, through the
mediation of a fair Lady that first took away his Commission, and then again
laid it under his pillow whilst he slept.

His early endeavors for Peace by Addresses to London, Scotland, Cornwall,
speak his integrity, and his prudence. Every inconsiderable person may be
powerful at disturbances: but to form Peace, requires much wisdom and great
virtues) and his observations upon the division of the great Faction to two
parties, Independent, and Presbyterian. His care and watchfulness; none of
their clashes escaping his reach, which was ready to accommodate as occasion
served their respective Interests, in their New models and alterations; making
as good use of Fears and Jealousies between them, as they had done between the
King and his People. These and other his services recommended him to the
attendance of his most excellent Majesty when Prince, in the perfecting of the
Western Association, when it was thought fit to put the happiness and hope of
the Kingdom in two bottomes, with whom he continued with a constant fidelity in
all difficulties, performing several Embassies during their banishment with
honor (particularly one to the Emperor, who had great respects for his
Master, and an aweful regard of his Cause) till it pleased God to bring his
Majesty by his and others counsel to his Father's Throne; which he just saw,
and dyed Master of the Rolls, June 1660. From one of whose Relations I have
these Notes and Postils, containing some of the policy of the late Times, from
1642. to 1659. -- which I set down nakedly, as I find them; not supposing they
are his, but that they were among his Papers.

1. It is against the experience of the wisest Princes of France and England,
to leave their chief City in times of tumult; -- yet it was necessary for the
King to do so, as well to break the fury of the worst people there by distance
and time, as to dis-abuse the best abroad by his presence and time: -- and
indeed it had been a shame for him to have perished in a tumult.

2. It was urged, that the King should not delay any longer the War, -- but
besides that nothing could persuade his gracious Majesty to a War, but pure
necessity; It Is usually observed, that if Boutefeus make not the feud
irreconcilable by a desperate action, Rebels cool, consider, break, suspect,
fear, and fall off to nothing.

3. The repulse of Hotham did the King excellent service, by alarming all the
Loyal in the Kingdom with their designed plot.

4. Especially when the Country saw the King so unwilling to engage, that he
discharged their guards several times.

5. It was thought unfit to send to the Faction from Nottingham, until it was
rejoyned that men of understanding and fidelity are usually employed to those
persons against whom a War is to be managed, to discover their design, humor,
forces, succors, and whatever might succor or strengthen them; which none
but they who were secured with the privilege of Agents might do; and none were
judged fitter than they that were best acquainted with the knowing Ladies, and
the talkative Lords.

6. It was offered that Intelligence should be written to satisfy the people,
and make the vulgar pretenses ridiculous: But quaere, whether it is possible
for the Areana Imperii to remain always under so exact a discipline as may
admit a thorowinspection of the multitude without danger.

7. When it was urged as the fundamental Principle the King should proceed
upon, that the Faction at Westminster was no Parliament, the King being firm
to his promise (as there was not a juster man alive) not to dissolve them
without their leave -- it was judged that self-preservation being the first
principle in nature, that concession which wisdom saw then, and experience
since, so contrary to that principle, was rather to be repented of, than
performed.

8. It is a very great advantage to the King's Cause, that his Messages of
Peace were sent always after his Victories; and his Enemies after their
defeats: And that his Declarations were natural, easy, as grounded upon
obvious principles of Scripture, Law, and Reason; and theirs harsh, forced, and
wild, as grounded only upon Pretenses and Fancies.

9. It Is a probable opinion, that it is in vain to treat with the Rebels, who
can never trust the King with their guilty heads.

10. It is in vain to yield them any thing, since all Concessions have no other
issue than either or both of these two inconveniences. 1. That they make the
Faction so insolent, that the King should not be able to deny nor grant them
any thing. 2. That they justified former proceedings, and laid the blame upon
the King for not granting that sooner, which he thinks fit to grant now.
Besides, it is more fit Propositions come to the King, than from him.

11. It may be wondered that the King does not cut off the chief of the Rebels,
as they fall into his hands, according to the usual Maxim in that case; but
that his inclination to clemency is inexpressible -- and that the principle he
goes upon is fure, though deep, viz. That so much are Mankind in general,
and the English in particular obliged by fair usages, that the generality of
this Nation returned nine times in 1300 years after long intervals of
Usurpation, out of gratitude as well as duty unto their Allegiance to the
posterity of good, pious, merciful, but unhappy Princes.

12. When it was urged against the King's going to London upon the success in
the West, that the City would pour out fresh men upon him, as at Brainford; It
was replied, that the City and Country were not under such strong delusions as
then, but were more sensible of the miseries they had been trepanned into.
Besides, there was a more miraculous power of conversion went along with the
King's presence where ever he came, convincing all he conversed with.

13. Whether the King beng so wise and able, it were not convenient to contrive
it so, that the people might see how well he acted by himself, -- provided he
had sufficient security?

14. Whether it being dangerous that the Rebels should seize (as God forbid
they should) on the whole Court at once, it were not convenient that his
Majesty and the Prince did part, that the Kingdom might know its hope as well
as its happiness; and that their interest when separated, might be more
spreading than when together?

15. It was judged prudence to let the success wherein their souls were
unequal, overthrow the Faction by mutual Jealousies and Animosities, till it
dissipated all pretenses, and the people saw none oppressed them in their
Estates, Liberties, Consciences, more than the pretended Patrons of them all.
An Indemnity without regard to any Faction, being most likely to render the
misled as jealous for the King, as they had been against him.

16. It were to be wished that the Parliament did draw into entire Propositions
their design, that his Majesty and his People might make a clearer judgment of
it in order to an accommodation.

17. His Majesty must be secured of the Militiae, and against tumults, and all
persons invested in their first right without any controversy -- As to other
matters, a full debate may settle them, with such explanations and
qualifications as may satisfy all parties.

18. It Is thought his Majesty may concur with the Parliament about the
Presbyterian Government for three years, the time allowed by themselves; and
that at the three years end the very Kingdom will throw it off as inconsistent
with the English temper, and unsuitable with the British Monarchy: -- And so
likewise in other things which look plausible in the general, but are
unpracticable in the particular.

19. Though many things are necessary to avoid jealousies, which are
inconvenient, yet they may be allowed, upon the respect of the likelihood that
all things will in time return to their proper chanel -- only a general Act of
indemnity is the best bond of Peace, whereby the numerous discontents of many
persons and families otherwise exposed to ruin, might not become Fuel to new
disorders, or Seeds to future troubles, with particular regards to the
privileges of the City, notwithstanding non-user, mis-user, abuser, and the
interest of the Army, -- an indulgence that would help the world to see clearly
the Kings intentions in matter of future government.

20. No Act to pass till the Peace be concluded, lest what his Majesty grants,
may be an argument to urge what he must deny; so that he cannot treat in
Honor, Freedom, or Safety.

21. Time is the best cure of Faction.

22. When the Treaty is broken off, so that neither side could reassume it
without a seeming yielding, it should be renewed upon the Queens motion,
provided always that her name was not used or intimated till the Rebels
willingness to compliance were preassured.

But stay, I am fallen upon mine own knowing time, wherein I am fitter to read
others Observations, than to write my own: and it becomes me rather to be
instructed, than to instruct. Industry and Curiosity bid me begin this
Collection where Sir W. F. Sir R. N. Sir J. H. Characters end: and modesty
enjoins me to finish it, where my Contemporaries own knowledge begins, -- with
whom I shall quietly pass my time, observing how far the affairs I see or hear
of agree with those I have read of. Having gained thus much (if no more) by
this Essay; That by looking into the Intrigues of former times, I have learned
a great deal of reason to bless GOD I was born in these: being assured, that
murmurs, discontents, complaints, whisperings, speaking evil of Dignities; the
common, but unreasonable faults of this Age, are kept up only because men are
ignorant of the Ages foregoing: And as my Lord Bacon says of the Schoolmen in
the Church, so I say of troublesome persons in the State; that they are so,
because they know nothing beyond their own time: whereas if the most
discontented person did but compare his own days with those before, he must
confess, that there wants nothing in the general frame of our Government
(particular persons miscarriages must be always allowed) to make us most happy,
but thankfulness, content, and the continuance of these blessings under our
dread Sovereign, for whom it is as much our interest as our duty to pray
according to St. Chrysostoms Liturgy, that God would give him strength,
victory, health, safety, length and tranquillity of days: or in Tertullian's
form; Long life, a secure government, safe Court, valiant Army, faithful
Senate, good People, quiet world, and whatever he can desire as a King, or as
a man. Or once more, in Lactantius his words, That God will keep him, who is
the keeper of all things in his Dominions, to his Felicity, and our
Tranquillity.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of K. Charles I.
Books printed for Samuel Speed at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet.
PHaramond, or the History of France, a new Romance, by the Author of Cassandra
and Cleopatra, in Folio.

The precedence of Kings, a discourse, by James Howel Esquire, in folio.

Actions on the Case for Deeds, by William Shepherd Esquire, in folio.

Declarations and Pleadings, by the Lord Cook, in folio.

The Body of Divinity, written in Latin by Bucanus, and rendered into English,
in quarto.

The Golden Coast, or a Description of Guinney, in quarto.

FINIS.

