MODERN POLICY Completed, OR, THE Public Actions and Councels both Civil and
Military of his Excellency The Lord General MONCK under the general
Revolutions since 1639, to 1660.

By David Lloyd.

(...), Dion. l. 61. p. 696. et Moschion: (...), Arist. eth. 6.7. Met. 2.2.
Rhet. 1.37. -- dolus an virtus -- virg: Men's una sapiens plurimum vicit manus:
Eurip. et Live. apud Charron. vid. Hor. 3. ode 4. (...) R. Jer. ex R. Sim. B.
Joch. ^alm. vid Maim Mor Nev. p. 1. c. 31. ^. 22.

London: Printed by I. B. for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane
near Fleet Street, 1660.

TO THE Most Illustrious JAMES DUKE of YORK.
May it please your Highness,
SPeculation is the life of a Scholar, Arist. Pol. 6. 2. Aquin. e^h 1.2.
su^rez et Burid. ibid Rev. D. Pri^p. ded. cosmogr.
and action is the life of a Prince.

It suffices the one to meditate upon the great things which former ages have
done, while the other does great things, which future ages may meditate upon:
the one Mentes ^apientiores sun^ q^i escendo. Plat. (...) vid Rev^d Reyn
Passions: ex Arist. et ^lii^, etc.
rests when he has Bacon de Augment. sci^^t. desc^rtes medit. ^. D^gby
immortality soul 7.
raised a scheme, a frame, an De Idea in D^^ vid. G^ot^ Christ. relig. 1.
Ann^^. ex An^^g etc.
Idea within himself proportionable in all things to the He has made all
things in n^^ber and m^^su^e Sir. (...) ^yne^ beautiful in his ^ime, Ec^. 3.11
order, and method of beings without him; while the other having understood
this vid D^ckens. Delph. Ph^en. d^ Pan^. (...) S^alig. exerci^. ^. c. 7. 8 Im.
Ter^ull. de Palleo. 2 Pla^ d^ 21.
all is urged by his eager virtues to perform things as great as those he
understood; and actions as great as his thoughts.

There is Norunt G^ramantes et Indj etc. I have heard Turks, Jews, speak
honorably of you
no tongue, nor language, but has heard that you are as eminent for your
action as for your birth; That you are a Prince in both, in both your self i^
as well known as your name.

I need not inform ^ou (great Sir) that all great actions in any way are
guided by a Arist eth 6. 7 (...) Me^. ^. 2. Nulla qu^ natura impedit^ sun^
confili^ expedi^n^u^: Live. see Reyn: on Hos. 14. v. 9. Ser. 7.
wisdom from above, first pure then peaceable, according to the principles and
maxims of that way, together with the conclusions, rationally, deducible from
those principles to their peculiar ends by a discreet application of proper
means; for it was your self that managed the great affairs of France and
Spain with a wisdom as Me li^ tuli^si^us ihij, the Duke of Rhoan, Interest
of Sta^es and Kingdoms.
distant from the sudden rashness of the one, as from the solemn slownesse of
the other; bare action the privilege of lower beings, valor the glory of
those more noble, or honor becoming your self sufficed you not, without a
wisdom guiding all these above your self and years; Therefore when I
entertained thoughts of drawing a rude draught of the^e great actions, and
counsels that I look upon as the best patterne^ of Modern Policy, I mean these
of this honorable Person, who discovered most of a Poli^icians virtues,
without any of its vices; that could be wise as a Serpent, and yet innocent as
a Dove; I immediately resolved to dedicate it to your self; wisdom is
justified of its children, the Diamond only can cut Diamond, the wise only
understand the wise; when I presume to make your Highness^ the Patron of this
Modern Policy, I intimate you ought to be the subject of another, which some
Dizn^^^ ^a^^c virum musae vetat morj: Horat.
soul might attempt with a Pen as Heroic as your sword; writing your life
with as much Majesty as you lived it with.

(...) Or a P^urtraict ^re of his sa^r^d Ma^^sty CHARLES the se^ond, with his
two illustrious Brothers the Duke of York and Glouc^ster. Sold by H M at the
P^inces Arms in the low^r end o^ Chancery lane.
When envy suppressed the worth and malice blasted the innocence of our dread
Sovereign with those calumnies (that were never licenced but in the age when
Men spoke whatever they thought fi^, there being no King in Israel;) I humbly
desire your Media^ion for a pardon to my inconsiderable self, who was then
past all fear of loss Amorem asseruit Plat^ (...). Cael. Rhod^g. 16. 15.
durst vindicate injured truth and Majesty advancing them above interest,
prejudice, and malice, by a course I thought most conscientious as a Christian,
and most generous as a Man; my highest design was to establish his sacred
Majesty in the hearts of his people, which was all poor I could do toward his
establishment in his Throne.

Now envy, malice, and ignorance dares abuse that renowned Person, whom the
King has desired to honor, to whom we owe even your very self, I could not
but do his Majesty, the Nation, and Himself right in justifying his
honorable actions, which I do sufficiently when I repeat them; I must
con^esse I am sorry that former powers allowed me that leisure I had to
vindicate the best Majesty; but now his Majesty is come again to his own House
in peace; I am contented to be at leisure to do justice to the best Loyalty.

Diou. Hal. a see Sue^. in Tit. Vesp. Leighes Cae^ars: Mallel: M. S S. B^b.
Bodl.
Vespasian one like your self, the darling of Mankind, as he dismissed none
sad from him; so he professed (...) that his Doors were always open for
Scholars: But to his favorite Appollonius desiring access for Dion and
Euphrates, he said (...) but to you my very breast is open, a poor Scholar
despaites not of a gracious admission to your royal presence, while he is
confident you will give his grace the Duke of Aumarle admission to your very
heart: But alas! Its high time to leave your Highness full of thoughts to
advance the honor and good, and to improve the virtue and valor of your dread
Sovereign and gracious Brothers Dominions; and to retire with my best
affections, devoutest prayers, and my honest endeavors into the crowd -- of
your Admirers, and Servants,

David Lloyd.


Modern Policy, The Second Part.
GOD (as great souls observe) has equally suffered by the too much worship
the superstition of the World that was drowned flattered him with; The occasion.
and by the too little which the Atheism of that World which shall be burned
slandered him with.

Good men (says Vossius) are equally injured with the honor the fabulous age
bestowed upon them by Legends, as with that the sullen and silent age denied
them: while the one raised their worth to that height that it cannot be
believed; the other keeps it so low that it cannot be known; The good Apostle
is abused as much when the Barbarians cry he is a God as when they say he is a
Malefactor: when he was worshipped at Lystra, as when he was stoned there; His
Excellency the Lord General Moncke suffers equally by the Courtiers smooth
Panegyricks, as by the ignorants dull silence, or the envious his malignant
calumny, while his renowned actions are made the issues of loose fancies roving
at uncertain worth, rather then the issues of his great virtues; and after ages
shall know rather how happy Poets they are, then how great or how good a Man he
was.

2 It will be therefore but a reasonable service equally due to his Excellency
and to the World; to do his public performances so much right as to express
them with the same integrity they were accomplished with; and to expose them in
their own naked Grandeur and plain state more solemn with the solid and great
then splendid with the gaudy and vain; the highest honor that can be done to
great and solid worth is faithfully to repeat it, the greatest elogy that wit
can grave upon it is it self.

3 The right honorable Sir George Monck Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, Birth and Education.
Lord General of all the Forces in his Majesty's dominions of^ England,
Scotland, and Ireland; Master of the Horse; and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable PrivyCouncell; being borne a Gentleman of the posterity of ancient
Nobility, and former Majesty, (as that happy Pe^ may easily evince, which may
hereafter in an History due to this renowned Hero's life, consecrate to
eternity Him and it self) and educated as honorably as he was borne; 1. under
such a discipline that molded his tender soul to that frame that was not
only advantageous toward the succeeding parts of his education, but toward
the Regularity of his whole Life: 2. Under that erudition that successively
instilled ingenuous and good rudiments into his tender breast, in the order
that was proper to his tender years, Age at once maturing his parts, enlarging
his capacity, and advancing his lectures, until some years education, had
accomplished his mind with that stock of active, useful, and manly knowledge,
that furnished him with those virtues that are a perfection to noble natures,
and a rest and tranquillity to great minds, 1. bridled and checked the irregular
sallies of the inferior faculties, and the impetuous passions incident to
those years, 2. fashioned his behavior to that humanity, that gentleness that
was due to Mankind, and that modesty and gravity, as was due to himself, 3.
regulated his discourse to that temper that became the product of judgment and
right reason, and raised him to thoughts of employment worthy and ingenuous,
abhorring to bufie himself vitiously, or impertinently.

4 In a word; when education had made him a complete Man, he bethought himself
that he was borne to Labor as naturally as the sparks are made to fly
upwards, being endued with that (...) as Iamblichus calls it, that ever moving
and restle^se principle his soul, and trusted with those abilities that
suggested to him that he was not so far neglected by God or Nature, as to be
placed in the World without employment.

Employment.
5 He found that if he looked up to Heaven, that was always in its course with
its several glories, rejoicing to run their race; if he ascended above
humanity, and assumed the nature of Angels, employment would pursue him
thither, and overtake him; for they stand always before God to know and do his
pleasure.

If a Man in honor would quit his Birthright whereby he is a little lower than
an Angel, and become with Nebuchadnezzar like the Beasts that perish; yet both
the Field and Forest are severe Monitors to employment, each animal being
continually engaged in an orderly exercise of those powers they are endued with.

Yea the dull Earth (besides its constant exercises in spring, after it is long
vacation) has been discovered by some of late to spend it self and to be
spent in constant (...) efluviums and emanations.

To descend to Hell, and lower he could not go, he saw the accursed Spirit
employed and busied, Satan going to and fro in the Earth, and industriously
walking about seeking whom he may devour, making diligent use of the faculties,
abilities, dexterities, which either his nature or experience have furnished
him withal, toward the end he proposes to himself.

And therefore wondered what they meant that gloried in the ignominious honor
and abasing exaltation of being above employment, which bcomes Heaven, Angels,
and Men made perfect, and of being privileged for that idleness which is
below Earth and Hell, as if it were praiseworthy to be unprofitable-burdens of
the Earth, to be born only to consume the fruit of it, to eat and drink to
day, and to morrow to die; as if they were brought to the Earth, as the
Leviathan to the Sea, to take their pasttime therein.

A Soldier.
6 He was ready to embrace any ingenuous employment opportunity offered him and
his parts deserved, not (though as a younger Brother) as a prize either to
ambition or covetousness, but as an opportunity to exercise his virtues, a
sphere wherein he might move vigorously for the service and honor of his
Country, and (as men's parts, abilities, and capacities, are their best
directions in the free choice of their calling wherein they intend to abide
with God) finding himself master of those manly and severe endowments, that
qualify great natures for the rougher engagements of Camp and War, and are
above the smoother dalliances of Court and Peace, he listed himself among the
noble train of Cavileers, and of their number that were defigned for actions
worthy and great.

7 Although his Excellency had not any right of his own lost which he was to
recover by War (which is defined to be the state of two parties contending by
public force about right and wrong) and if he had, war
yet being a private person (since the constitution of public Courts of
justice) he ought to submit his right to the fair trial of judgment, rather
then to put it to the ordeall of force and tumult, for hence it is that the
reverence of the Law was found out, that nothing might be done by force, see
Paul. L. non est de rep. 1. Cassian. l. 4. van. 1. Ep. 4. Theod. edict. 10.
124. et L. exstat. D. quod metus. Serven. 11. AEn Virg. though Ambrose de
offic. 3. 3. Ambros 1. lib. arb. 5. ep. 155. 10. 59. Eustied. Amic. de Gratian.
^. vel cause. 13. q. have been taught to speak by some as otherwise minded) see
Canon. Epist. 55. edit. novis.

Yet when lawful power and public persons for the maintenance or recovery of
their rights that are invaded or threatened by some men's ambition or
coveteousnesse, Those lusts whence come Wars and Fightings among us, have set
up a War (War being of such concernment and consequence to Commonwealths,
that its treason and that justly by most Laws to undertake a War without
highest authority; Plato de leg. l. ult. cic. de leg. l. 2. L. 3. D. ad l. Iul.
maj. et Cornel leg. Justin. cod. valent. Aug. cont faust. l. 22. c. 74. p. 206.
lin. 10. live. Dec. ult. vel. l. 29. vict. de bello numero 9.) I say when
lawful power has raised a War: Its lawful for private persons to assist
others, being not wholly for themselves; it is commendable to become champions
to afflicted right, to put forth a noble hand to rescue oppressed innocence out
of the jaws of tyranny, it is the best way a younger brother can raise himself
by raising the afflicted, and nothing ought to be moreserviceable to a man
says Cic. 2. de off. than another man; it behooves every one to take up Arms
upon injury done to himself or other^, Arles Rhet ad Ale^. c. 3. and happy are
those Commonwealths wherein every one thinks another injury to be his, and
minds not only his own things but the things of others, and no man thinks
himself unconcerned in that which is humane. Lactant. car. var l. 6.

Its usual to engage in War for fellow- Citizens, for Mercheants, says Cic.
ad Quint. and ver. 2. by the leave of the supreme power; indeed he were not a
man that had not so much of the sociable nature as to help a man, Simler rep.
Helvet. Senec. de. ira 1. c. 7. p. 51. he is not valiant that will not assist
weakness, Euripid. supplic. nor he just, that will not do right to the injured.

Praebent saxa perfugium feris, -- auraque famulis,
Vrbibque pr^ssis malo -- tutamen urbes, etc.
See Mores de ko^z. praec. 77. 80. Ben. Maim. in pec N. c. 7. And he is not
Loyal that will not serve his Prince, and there being as great a necessity
there should be Wars, as the Apostle says, that there should be divisions
among us, its not unworthy of great persons so disposed, to seek their fortunes
in a War, and having given themselves to attain abilities suitable to the
variety of exercises to be met with in that way, its reason they should follow
it, not as mercenary and hired to kill men, and thinking there is most right
where there is most pay, Plato in theat. Bellin. de re mil. 2. t. 2. p. 106. n.
4. casting their life away for that which they have only for their lives,
Plato Bacch. Diod. sic. l. 18. though yet to be encouraged with rewards and
stipends, for (says St. Paul) who ever went a warfare at his own charge? 1
Cor. 9. 7. see S. August. de verb. Dom. AEgid. de ait. super disp. 31. n. 8.

I^ish War.
8 His Excellency was ready for service when his late Majesty had a sad
occasion to employ his ablest Subjects to suppress the Rebellion in Ireland
occasioned by the Pope, 1 upon pretense of Religion, 2 a right to Ireland, and
3 the oppression of the Catholics in that Kingdom; but really upon the old
maxim, that he that would gain England, (which his holiness longs after) must
first begin with Ireland, and upon a Prophecy found in the Vatican encouraging
them at that time there-unto together with some sad divisions by Romish
Emissaries to be raised in England about that time.

9 His Excellency well knowing that War is lawful: 1 By nature Man (as Galen de
usu partium has it,) being made for war and peace, see Arist. de. part.
animal. 4. 10. Cassiod. de anima. Armaque in armatos sumere jura sinunt Ovid.
dente lupus cornu taurus petit, etc. Ho. For 2. by Scripture, which records
it approved by the Priest of the most high God, Genesis 14. 20. which provideth
Laws for it; and records the Worthies that fought the Battles of God, and
mentions Men after Gods own heart Men of War; and devout Men, Centurians, and
forbids not Soldiers their employment, but forbids them violence and falsehood,
advising them to be content with their wages.

10 And knowing likewise, that this of all wars was most lawful, being for his
Majesty against such subjects as begun without authority, It being a general
agreement of all Societies even the Aborig. to obey Superiors least otherwise
a Commonwealth become a solitude, or a confused throng where every one
commands, and none obeyes, Valor. maxim. l. 1. Salust. 2. to the Prince as
Tacitus writes, do all Men give the power, and to subjects the glory of
obedience; It being death to resist by the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Ioh. 1. 18. see
Philo. in Flacc. l. 2. c. 3. and damnation by the Gospel; he that resists
the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. Council. chalced. et Trull. can. 4. Tolet.
4. Luess. Can. 5. II. and without cause.

11 For 1. War is not to be undertaken as they pretend for Religion; the
Papists might know that Peter was bid long ago to put up his sword; It being
(as Gregory a Prophet of their own once said) an unheard of way of preaching to
beat Men into a belief; It Is the erroneous his punishment (says Plato) to be
taught rather then to be murdered: M. Anton. l. 9. valent in Am. marcel. l. 30.

None ought to be compelled to become religious says the counsel of Tolet. c.
de Iud^ and Tertull::: 2.

2 War is not lawful to fulfill prophecies; which are uncertain in themselves,
and in the time of their accomplishment; and its not our duty to do what is
foretold, but what is commanded. viz. Luncl^u. Turc. Hist. l. 18. Procop.
Persic. 2.

3. The Pope has no right over Ireland: For ^. if Christ's, (as Pet. Dam.
says) then his Vicars Kingdom is not of this world: 2. Paul would not, and
therefore why does Peter meddle with them that are without: 3. A Bishop ought
not to strike much more not to War for a Kingdom: 4. Our Kings enjoyed it as
Lords, and then as Kings, time enough to prescribe three times over; being at
first invited to it by the Irish: And then 5. if the Papists were oppressed,
which they were not unless it were with indulgencies and favors, as that
Champion in the olympic games was pressed to death with Roses; yet the Pope
did (...) meddle foolishly in other Men's business; and subjects are not to
redress greivances by Wars, bnt by petitions, they are to beseech their
Sovereign, and not to force him.

12 His Excellency might think it as reasonable and just as it was honorable
to assist his Sovereign against the mighty who upon these forementioned unjust
grounds, (which may better become the complete History of the Irish Rebellion)
assaulted his Majesty's undoubted right to be bestowed by the Pope upon the
Duke of Lorrain, and to endeavor under his Majesty's authority to reduce the
Rebellious to obedience, and punish the bloody murders, it being a primitive
constitution, that he that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,
Constantine upon this account made War against Licinius, and others made War
against the Persians, Zonar. et menand. P. et Aque 2. 2. 108.

13 And therefore as well satisfied in the lawfullnesse of his undertaking (as
every Soldier ought to do who carries his life in his hand, Command.
and may expect (as the Theban Soldiers (a pattern for all others) argued with
Julian) to die daily, and ought not to submit his precious life to the lusts
and will of others, which has too much to do to serve its own diverse lusts and
pleasures, he heads a Regiment by the Lord-Deputies's Commission, (that great
man who understood well whom he employed, who as curiously observed other men's
worth as he carelessly neglected his own: and was choice in his instruments,
because he was so in his designs and employments, well knowing his great
actions must be left to the management of great souls) and this is the first
of those public undertakings which are the subject of this discourse.

14 Wherein the first thing he was eminent for, was Discipline, Discipline.
without which Commanders lead thronged multitudes and not armies, and listed
routs rather than Regiments; he was not less careful of moral than of the
military Discipline, well knowing that that Soldiery will hardly vanquish an
enemy that is vanquished by its own debauchery, Ireland (they say) endures no
poison, his Excellency would endure no dangerous exorbitancy to envenom his
Regiment, nor any perverse Achan that would trouble his Camp, and next the care
of keeping his Soldiers Men, and restraining them (when going out of
themselves) within the compass of humanity, he added that of making them
Soldiers, that they might not be to Learn when they were to perform their duty.

Turpe est in art militarj dicert non putaram.
15 Besides that by his preparation the enemy might suspect that their plot was
discovered, and by his readiness that it was prevented, when men did but seem
to suspect an unknown plot they have often discovered it, and withal few
Soldiers brought together in a military posture, as they can vanquish many out
of order, so they can affright more; the often mustering of Soldiers among a
dangerous people, is not the least part of their policy, who know what pannick
fear armed multitudes strike into the dispersed vulgar.

16 His Excellencies solemn familiarity no Mother of contempt was observable,
Familiarity.
whereby he insinuated himself so far into his Soldiers affection that they
could have wished their lives doubled that they might have one life to spend
for his person as they had one for his cause.

His Language with Caesar was not Milites, but Commilitones, not Soldiers, but
Fellow Soldiers; nor was this out of any design so much as out of nature, and
that note of Livy took no place here, Credant haud gratuitam in tanta
majestate Comitatem fore, that so much Majesty never condescended without
design, nor was that of the Comic a good rule here; Non temerarium est ubi
dives blande appellat pauperem; altera manu fert Lapidem, panem ostentat altera
Nemini credo, qui long blandus est dives pauperis.

17 And when the sad time came that called for his actual service; the sad
condition of Ireland, (now without a Deputy, (the last being beheaded; the sad
Prologue that ushered in this Tragedy; the red morning of whose bloody death
presaged this tempest; as he prophesied rather than spoke upon the Scaffold:)
and by reason of the jealousies at the same time stirred up between his late
Majesty and his Parliament by Rome and Hell; (one not daring to trust the other
to be charitable) without supply and assistance, grapling with the power of
Rome from within, and from without from all the Kings that h^d given their
power to the Beast:) kept his Excellency and other Worthies to the defensive,
and confined their care more how to save themselves handsomely then how to
subdue the enemy; which though their cause and valor prompted them to: (for
qui molestos arcet ex ^ona, Conscientia sumit fiduciam, bonaque ei spes adest,
inde quod injuriam non inferat sed auferat, Alex. orat. ad. mil. Herod. 5.) yet
their prudence checked them from, with the prudent caution in the Gospel of
considering, whether they were able with ten thousand to hurt them that came
against them with twenty thousand, for doubtless such and much greater was the
ods, between these two adversaries.

18 Though his Excellency spent not that time he stayed there without some
offensive sallies upon the enemy; we must offend sometimes in our own defense,
and give our enemies occasion to complain that we will not patiently lie open
to their full stroke; as that Roman brought an action against a Man, because he
received not his whole dart.

19 Yet he was most eminent then upon necessity, as he was since upon design
in a prudent reservation of himself; It being as great skill to ward off
blows, as to give them; he was as wise as that Lewis of France in preventing
danger; who had foresights to prevent mischiefs when they were coming, but not
a present prudence to engage them when come, though yet he was as ready in
encountering dangers as that Henry of England, who could (as Bacon observes who
drew his life with a pencill as majestic as his Scepter) with ready advice
command present thoughts to encounter that danger with success which he could
not with foresight prevent; he gave then, great signs of an admirable
dexterity in mannaging disadvantages which he has si^ce given full proof of,
when he opposed himself against a declining age: engaging thousands with his
single self.

20 His stratagems were as considerable as any Man's in so narrow a command; for
though force and terror be most proper to wars, yet we may lawfully use guile;
Sive dolo sive vj clamve Palamve Hom: Quicquid agendo Hostica delenda vis est
Pind: dolus an virtus quis in host requiral virg. Your enemy you lawfully may
spoil,
Whether by open force or secret guile.
Bellandum est astu levior laus in duce dextra.
-- Less praise I gain,
By my strong hand I war with my strong brain.
Silius l. 5. ex Polib. l. nono. xenoph. (...): 1. Thacid. l. 5. Martis comites
irae insidiaeque virg. Elharba hudiatum says Mahomet, Wars must have some
deceit, (...) Eust ad Il. x. versu^ 120. so honorable is it to be wise as
Serpents, that Saint Chrysostom in his first Book de Sa^erdotio pronounces
that General most praiseworthy that has obtained his victory by stratagems.

21 The other private particulars (that that Hi^tory may enquire into, which is
due from after age to his blessed memory) will not bear those grave
observations which are designed in this discourse for those more public; his
performances in this lower sphere being swallowed up with those of his
superiors as the glories of lesser lights are undone at the appearance of a
greater: Wherefore,

22 I pass to the cessation made by his Majesty's order; and the alteration in
his Excellencies affairs thereupon.

For the jealousies forementioned being heightened to a War between his late
Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament by their industry who are so well read
in Machiavell, as to have learned that the best way to enjoy a Kingdom is to
divide it; One side affirming our Government by a fundamental constitution, a
(...) as Aristotle, a (...) as Sophocl^s an (...) as Plutarch, and an (...) as
Strabo says, a^ absolute and full Kingdom, wherein his Majesty was (...) by
no means obnoxious to his Subjects; being Supreme over all Causes and
Persons, accountable to none but to the blessed God, as the Hebrew Barnachman
has it, who (says Job) shall say to ^ings ye are wicked, or to Princes ye
are ungodly.

The other side asserting our constitution mixed, and our Supreme power divided
between the King, the Lords, and the Commons, as Chalchondylos formerly
asserted of England, Arragon, Navarre, vide Plin. l. 6. c. 22. and some new
Politicians of late, who though they confess, that in the beginning Kings had
all power, as Pomponius and Iustine out of him; yet afterward (as Tacitus
observes) the People established Laws which the King was to obey, Tacit. 3.
Annal. Cic. de rep. 1. ^t Fenestell, 3. 2.

And indeed we had the best constitution of a (...) as Solon, and an (...) as
Lycarg. is by some made to sp^ak.

23 But upon some disconte^t^ the several powers clashed and mistrusted each
other; and gave themselves over to such fears and jealousies as put each
rashly upon thoughts of War which cannot be just unless it be necessary; and
therefore not to be undertaken, upon every causlesse fear of uncertain
danger; But then there were some with Attila, that, Cared not how the War
begins,
If they could bring it to their ends.
This civil War was managed a while with variety of success, that neither side
should either presume or despair.

24 It pleased God his Majesty suffered some disadvantage at last, success
being not commanded to attend the best cause here, nor miscarrage the worst,
greatness and goodness, justice and victory being not yet married; there is
so much security of the happiness of another life; that Christ's Kingdom was
not, and our hapiness is not of this World; though many have been perplexed
with that question, Cur bonis male sit, why it fares so ill with the good, yet
a Bible well understood has taught them, that there is neither love nor hatred
to be known by any thing under the Sun; when we go into the Sanctuary we are
taught that its unwarrantable to appeal to heaven for the decision of this or
that controversy by the success bestowed upon this party or that cause,
according to its righteousness and due merit.

Pluto in Aristophanes is commanded to be as favorable to the wicked as the
good; because if virtue were rich, she should be courted more for her dowry
then for her beauty; so if Justice or Religion had the advantage of prosperity
(we should be apt to follow it as the common Soldiers, more for the prey then
for the canse; Christ would be followed again for loaves.

25 His Majesty's unhappy affairs in England, made some alterations in his
Councels; together with no less unseasonable then unlawful interposition of
those of Scotland in our affairs; for since civil society was instituted; its
certain the Rulers of every one have attained a special right (in which
others have no share) over their own Subject, so that in them only resides the
supreme power of Judgment, whence there is no appeal says Thacydides.

Nos quotquot hujus Colimus urbis maenia,
Sufficimus ipsi nostra judicia exequi: Heraclides:
Spartam tibi quae contigit orna -- nobis fuerit Cura mysaenae: Pro^. vandal 2.
c. b. n. b. (although when Subjects suffer what is intolerable humane Society
has allowed, and prompted one Nation to assist another, so the Romans assisted
the Persians; so the English succored the oppressed Dutch and French.)

26 These advantages prevailed with his Majesty to order the honorable
Marquess of Ormond to bring the Rebels to a cessation upon the most
advantageous terms: and to spare so many of his best Regiments for English
service; among whom his Excellencies is brought over as one every way
accomplished for the exigence of those times affairs; Neither needed his
Majesty make use of a Quintili Varo read legiones; So complete are his
Companies, that he might reply to his Majesty with reverence to our Saviors
words, and of those which you have given me, I have hardly lost one.

27 No sooner was he and others landed on English ground, but they were
entertained with a Surprise, by some Parliament Forces, before they had time to
know which was their foe, which was their friend; For the Scene was altered and
their noble hands were to be imbr^ed now in Protestant, and not in Popish
blood; their swords were to be sheathed no longer in Irish, but in English
bowels; It had been some comfort had it been strangers that they engaged with,
but alas! it was with those of their own and their Fathers house; It was with
their famili^rs, those with whom they had taken sweet council together, they of
their own faith, one Baptism, and one hope, were their aid called against
aliens, it were easy to resolve, says Aristides Luctrica 5. but a sudden
disaster prevented these debates, they being set upon by that Person whose
undertakings were more sudden then others thoughts, and sometimes then his
own.

28 The Parliament were too well informed of these Regiments to give them the
strengthening advantage of uniting with the Kings main body, and better
instructed in that maxim, dum singulj pagnant vincuntur universi, then to let
them pass without attempts upon them singly.

29 His Excellency and others were taken Prisoners, and had now nothing left
them but the glory of suffering for his Majesty, he is deprived of all those
things that make a Soldier, and now what remains but those prayers and tears
that may make a Martyr; And in this capacity of a Prisoner did he remain in
the Tower so long as to see his Majesty utterly defeated, imprisoned as
himself, (the a^ointed of the Lord was taken in their Nets, under whose shadow
we said we should live in peace) yea and murdered too; to see Monarchy laid
aside, Parliaments forced, Laws, Privileges and Properties invaded by their
own Patrons; and the veyle that the uncertain War kept on the Rebels face,
now by a certain success drawn off: At their first entrance to England the
Irish Forces were puzzled; Against whom to direct their loyal Swords while each
side was for the King, for Laws, for Liberty, Property, and Religion; But now
they were satisfied in what they meant, that fought for his Majesty against the
King.

Now the whole World saw that they least intended what they most pretended;
(...) Homer they that sit at our helm looked one way but rowed another, when
they should make his Majesty glorious, they summon all the wit and malice of
their side to make him infamous; when they should bring him to his Throne they
bring him to the Scaffold, the Liberty they with much blood and treasure
obtained for the Parliament is it seems an unparalleld force; the Religion to
be established are all the antiquated and condemned errors and heresies with
the exploded Schisms that attended them, so many Religions that sober and
unconcerned Spectators thought we had none, so easy is it in a throng of
Religions to loose Religion.

30 His Excellency saw how prosperity opened those Persons whom another
condition kept close as mid day discloseth those shells whom night keeps shut,
advancement discovers a Man; when Appius had his wish, finem fecit gerendae
alienae personae; he left wearing another man's Person: maxim^ pars morem hun^
homines habent, quid sibi volunt dum id impetrant boni sunt, sed id ubi jam
penes sese habent, ex bonis pessimi, et fraudulentissimi sunt.

Before the man
Had got his end
He was all Puritan
What he would have
He thus obtai^ed
And then resumed knave
31 And now he was in love with his imprisonment, seeing clearly by this time
that good cause that consecrated his misery, advanced his Prison to a
sanctuary, and his close retirement to a religious life, in the good company of
his many honorable and reverend fellow sufferers; his withering and tedious
durance being deceived away by the happy alleviation of Society; wherein it was
doubtful whether he took or gave more content.

32 There were no mean Persons then that buzzed in his Excellencies ear his
Majesty's neglect of him, in that upon the several exchanges of Prisoners on
both sides he was not thought off; It seems there broke out through his
concealment and obscure restraint that worth that was not by our grandees
thought below their temptations.

But his Excellency was so well appointed with naked honesty, that he was
proof against all suggestions to disloyalty.

He that looked upon his service to his Majesty as its own encouragement, and
upon his loyalty as his own reward, valued not a neglect, or contempt, his care
was not so much what he was in others thoughts, as what he was in his own; he
is great that is just, good and great in his conscience.

And moreover his Majesty was so beset with malignant Courtiers that he could
hardly see any Person in his own worth, without a malicious tincture from those
mediums they passed through; otherwise he knew the Sun beheld not a more
gracious Master to condescend humbly to take notice of his subjects service, to
acknowledge it gratefully, and to reward it liberally.

His Excellency was not ignorant how coldly the renowned Montrosse was
entertained for those services that were then (without disparagement to any)
unparallelled; and have not been since seconded by any but those of his own.

But now he and three Nations have reason to think it was not his Majesty but
God that delayed his releasement; reserving him for better seasons, wherein it
might please him to make use of his Excellency; when rebellion had run to the
end of the line, and the iniquities of the Amorites became full: And it was
time to check successful villainies that blustered in the World, casting
terror round about, and threatening Heaven and Earth; and to vindicate oppressed
right and afflicted innocence.

Perijssem (might he say) nisi perijssem: I had been undone had I not been
undone, for had he been released probably he might have partaked in some of the
straggling undertakings of those times which proved as unhappy to his Majesty's
cause as to the undertakers; for these slight endeavors kept together their
divided adversaries with the common danger, and hardened them with their
miscarriage; for they now thought that success hallowed their villainies;
Honesta scelera successus facit, Sen: Whereas if Men had stood still, the fury
of the Rebels had been spent upon themselves, for as they say wine must be fed
with flesh, otherwise it will devour its own strength, so usurpation must have
an adversary up for a fomes to its power, otherwise (as we have since seen) its
like to feed upon its self; wherefore who knows not that his Excellency was
reserved for such a time as this.

33 And although he had been slighted by his Majesty, (which was not
impossible, considering the evil council about his Majesty (that betrayed him
to his friends and foes) against whom he himself had as great cause to raise a
War as his Parliament:) yet that his enemies who durst not put him to death (it
being against equity says Sen. ep. 1. and Alexander in Plutarch, against the
Law of War says Salust. in his Iugurt History, and great cruelty says
Diodorus Siculus l. 17. against the custom of War says Caesar l. 2. de belle
Gallico: Taul. Anali. 12. to murder Prisoners quos mars reliquit praelio
superstites Eurip.) entrust him with liberty is the eternal Monument for his
worth and faithfulness; this was a Man (as his late Majesty said of that
honorable Strafford) that even Principalities and Powers that would not trust
might fear.

34 Upon the Parliaments unhappy success, Men of dangerous design and loose
Principles, usurping Supreme power: 1. From the Sword, when most that fought
in this unhappy War protest they fought not for power but for Liberty: 2 From
the people when though they are not Servants by nature, as A^ist. would have
it, yet neither are they all Masters, for who then would obey? or if they had
the power, all the World knows that they would otherwise dispose of it then to
these Persons) Proceed (as its usual after civil Wars) against the Kings
party as Traitors for their loyalty; whose carriage in the War could not be
treason against their Government, which they acknowledge is the issue of the
War: and now searching Prisons they chose out the chief for exemplary justice
(as the fattest commonly falls a Sacrifice) and shed the blood of War in the
time of peace; and revenged themselves, (1. Inhumanely says Sen. 2. Unjustly
as they were injured, says Tyrius, yea beastly says Plut. for says he,
Beasts bite him that bites, see Grotius, de bello et pace part. 2. p. 80:) Upon
his sacred Majesty (though they were checked with a Touch not mine anointed:
and though no Man 1 Samuel 26. 9. could lay hands upon the Lords anointed and be
guiltless;) and upon the flower of the Nobility and Gentry that had escaped
their fury in the Field.

35 His Excellency being a younger Brother had not estate enough to make his
offenses capital; yet had too much worth to be at liberty, and to be an enemy;
there appeared it seems in his single Person what whole Nations might be
afraid of.

Therefore Cromwell that had So^ldier enough in him to understand a Soldier
takes the advantage of his Excellencies solitude for a temptation, and assaults
him with an all this will we give you; withal adding (as most commonly his
speeches had a sting in the tail) that there was no less could purchase his
Liberty of the Parliament then his service.

36 His Excellencies thoughts are now divided between two equal
inconveniences, uncertain how to guide a discreet choice; to continue
himself in Prison (now he might be enlarged upon the inauguration of these new
powers) were sullenly to put himself beyond all hope of being serviceable to
himself, his cause, his Country; to go and serve his successful
adversaries, and to abet prosperous villainy with the same hands he once
withstood it were to betray his former actions, and condemn himself: not
without some suspicion of time-serving, as if with that Marquess of Winchester
he had been made rather of the complying willow, then of the royal and solid
oak; ready always for the prevailing side.

37 Upon a sober debate with himself (for War must be once well thought on,
wherein they say a Man cannot err twice) though morals by reason of the
variety of unexpected circumstances are so uncertain that its (...) Arist. 1.
eth^ Cic. 1^ et 3. et. Rhodius l. ^. c. 3. and quod dubitas ne feceris says
Pliny l. 1. ep. 19. covar. de mal. c. 7. p. 2. n. 9^ what is not of faith is
sin says the holy^ Ghost Romans 14. 23. if a Man does any thing and doubts he is
damned:) yet partly by the strength of his own great reason; partly by the
advice of his Oracles whom he had ready to consult with in all emergencies;
(Its most excellent to be able to direct ones self, says Minutius out of
Hesiod, next to follow the good directions of^ others, vasquedisp. 62. c. 3. n.
10. victor: de Judic. relat. 1. n. 12. (...) the company of wise men brings
learning and wisdom unto Kings; The Rom^n Emperors u^dertook no War without
the advice of Faeciales, nor the Christian without their Bishops says Grotius
bell^ et pac. p. 1^ 117.) he left it to posterity, that betwixt two evils his
Excellency could do well.

38 For with the consent of his best friends; with the blessing of his reverend
Confessor the L.B. of E. with the approbation of his own heart ( and if our
hearts condemn us not we have confidence toward God) He lifted himself under
the Par. for the Ks. service, professing (as I am credibly informed) to the B.
of E. that as he expected Heavens blessing with his Lordships, he now served
his enemies only for his friends advantage; And methinkes the reverend Father,
with other his noble and reverend fellow prisoners bespeak him as David does
Hushai the Archite, 2 Samuel 15. 32, 33, 16, 17, 18, 17, 14. If you continue with
us, you will be a burden to us as we are to you, but if you return, and say
unto these younger powers, I will be your servant, as I have been a servant to
the powers before you so will I also be yours; then may you defeat the council
of their Achitophels; Have you not with you also Zadock and Abiathan the
Priests (two reverend Persons, whom had I time to go and ask their leaves, I
would mention to the World not without due prefaces of honor,) and me thinks
when some enemies were ready to say is this your kindness to your friend? why
would you not go with your friend? he might reply as well as Hushai and no
better, whom the Lord, and this people, and all the Men of Israel chose, his
will I be, and with him will I abide.

And we have seen how by the council of our Hushai, the Lord had appointed to
defeat the good council of eminent Achitophels to the intent that the Lord
might bring evil upon these Absal^ms; The incomparable Grotius out of L. sec.
1. de dolo m^lo, says it was too crudely spoken by Cicero that our whole
conversation ought to be altogether f^ee from simulation or dissimulation;
without which we cannot live among those that are wise in their own generation;
so lawful is it (as Thom. 2. 229. 40. or 3. 9. 7. artic. silv: in verbo bell.
p. 1. n. 9. decides the question out of St. Augustine upon the fifth Psalm) to
cast the veil of dissimulation, not that (...) but (...), that compliance and
dispensation as Saint Chrysostom. calls it over the face of truth, that God
himself seems sometimes to go along with successful wretches in the
pursuit of their lower designs while he mannageth the eternal council of his
own will, thus Paul harmlesly becomes all things to all Men that he might gain
some; although (...), as well as (...), ought to be (...)^ a Man in whom there
is no guile, and if it were possible to deal openly with all Men.

39 But his Excellency besides was not to learn that useful Men must not
withdraw their service from their Country to spite Usurpers: we must go on
each in our place to keep up Law, peace, and order according to an Usurpers
will; though not for his Authority, but for public good, which is the only
Sovereignty we are under in the absence of the L^wfull M^gistrate ordained of
God; provided we contribute as little as we can for the establishing of the
Usurpers; Cyllas Laws were of power says Quint. l. 2. c. 1. so far as the
state of the C^tty was contained in them; that it could not stand (as Florus
upon those Laws) if they were dissolved, see S^urez. de legib. l. 3. c. 10. n.
9.

40 And now not only Ireland, but England called like the Macedoni^n, come and
help us; for they that turned the World upside down were alm^st come hither
also: Campanella Cotzen, and Richle^ in their politics having long since made
Ireland a passage into England; so its not so much an order of Parliament, as a
law of nature dictated by common safety and public good that seems to command
him over into Ireland; which must not be neglected for any private quarrel;
Themistocles and his Antagonist left their private grudges at home; when they
were employed abroad for public service; if the intelligences were removed,
their own (they say) and the Worlds interests would turn the Spheres.

41 Its true the Rebels pretended a League with his Majesty, and therefore they
should be rather succored then opposed by his friends: But the wise knew that
had his Majesty's subjects helped these Rebels to a conquest over the
Parliament, they had helped them to a conquest over themselves, for they were
as impatient of a Protestant Monarchy, as of a Free state or rather more, for
this was thought to be of their own design and contrivance; and the other the
object of their malice and ancient hatred. His Majesty himself though much
persuaded by his Mother, could not be prevailed with to join with those in
Ireland; for though Thucydides say the Athenians did well in a case of
necessity to seek aid not only of the Grecians but of the Barbarians; Yet
methinks I hear Fulco of Remes in Fred. l. 4. Hist. Rhemensi c. 6. admonishing
our Charles as he did another; who may not be afraid seeing you covet amity
with the enemies of God; and to the overthrow of the Protestant name take unto
you Popish arms, and enter into Leagues detestable; they are great offenders
says Alexauder in Arrianus, who serve the Barbarians against the Greeks,
contrary to the Laws of Graecia; should thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. O King let not the arm of Israel go
with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel, nor with any of the Children of
Ephraim, ^ Chron. 25. 7. Be ye not une^ually yoked with misbelievers; for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, what communion has light
with darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 1. 15.

42 His Excellency resolves (upon the terms proposed by the Parliament) for
the Irish service in the capacity of a Colonel of Foot; but first he must take
the engagement; when usurpation has ravished just power, it usually supports
it self with the two Pillars of Arms and Oathe^; a good Man fears an oath,
and therefore his Excellency, upon mature deliberation made a promise equal to
an oath: (for a noble soul of (...) as the Persians, such bonae fidei as
Augustus, that (...) Isoc. de evag. Gunther. Leg. etc. Its word is as strong as
its oath:) that he would be true and faithful to the Commonwealth without a
King or House of Lords; and he is not a Man that would not be faithful to the
interest, Commonwealth, and good of his own Nation as well without as with a
King; which was the primary, favorable, proper and significant import of that
engagement to the best judgments of that time.

43 He is no sooner made sure, but he is sent by that Man of dispatch, O. ^.
(into whom the old Emperor of Germany thought Gustavus Adolphus his hasty soul
was got by a metempsuchosis) with Reynolds and others to Chester, and thence
wafted over by a favorable gale immediately to Dublin, and made his way
resolutely through the thickest of his enemies to relieve the distressed City;
where they staid not long but impatient both of restraint and delay; they sally
out for more elbow-room with that success that they had the pursuit of the
enemy for many miles, until they came upon my Lord of Ormond's whole Army
ready for an overthrow, such was their confusion and disorder.

The honorable Lord of Orm^nd unhappily thus associated, being betrayed to
that security that he is playing at Tables, and his Army and cause lies at
stake.

After this Victory these lower Commanders are carried about with the rapid
motions of O. C. that violent first mover, who upon his first arrival
Iehu-like drove furiously toward Trogedah with all his Forces; took the
place by storm, and spared neither Man, Woman, nor Child, Indeed throughout he
was resolved to use the highest right and law of War; which after ages may
dare to call an injury; strangers were not spared, for by the Law of War
strangers upon an enemies ground is an enemy, Philo. de judice ex vetere
Oraculo. Malcho excerp. legis: nor sacred Persons, my Lord Broghil hanged a
Bishop (notwithstanding the common clamor for their Father in God) with an
haec sunt vestim^nta patris: no native e^caped the several parts justly
suffering for the guilt of the whole: Its lawful to continue the punishment of
a guilty Nation; for one generation after its fault, Arist. Pol. 7. c. 13.
Liban. orat. de sedit. Ant. Yet its the general Law of War (if yet it have any
law, and it be not true what that rash head blurted that martial Law was as
absurd as martial peace) Hostis sit ille et qui extra praesidia, etc. Live. 37.
Baldus 1. de just. Bembus Hist. 7. mercy, sanctuary, etc. are say the Soldier,
for the miserable rather then for the guilty, venet. de Asylis Thu. 1585.
Cambd. Eliz. 1593. and we took all his Cities at that time, and utterly
destroyed the Men, and the Women, and the little ones, and we left none to
remain, Deuteronomy. 2. 34. Ps. 137. ult. But with this flux of blood, they said they
stopped a greater; Sanguinis fluxu^ diffusi venula revocamus Tert.

The very report of this siege reduced all Ireland: for immediately the two
next Garrisons Trim and Dundalk are quitted; such a pannick fear seizing upon
the Soldiers, that they were not able to endure a summons: this success is
seconded with the taking of Werford, Rosse, Kingsale, Cork, Youghal,
Bandon-bridge, Barrow, and Duncannon, Enistroge, Carricke, Waterford: and now
Cromwell no sooner sees a City or an Army, but he conquers it; In the mean
time his Excellencies particular honor was involved in that great renown of
the General; whatever glory he acquired it was as the Civilians say for his
Master.

44 Ireland now acknowledging a conquest in ten months, (for they were there
but from the middle of August, 1649. to the next May, 1650.) which ten Ages
formerly durst not boast of; They return by order of Parliament to England to
assist them in those dangers that threatened them on every side; especially from
Scotland that had engaged it self by a late Treaty at Breda to assist his
sacred Majesty. 1. In bringing the Murderers of his late Father of blessed
memory to condig^ne punishment. 2. In recovering his royal right.

45 Cromwell being to go for Scotland, (the House having now concluded that
the War should be offensive; and my Lord Fairfax laying down his Commission)
makes choice of his Excellency for one of his Commanders in that desperate
expedition; which he willingly undergoeth when he heard the quarrel stated by
Lashley upon the account of the Old Cause, and not upon the account of the King
whom they disowned, as one sticking too close to his Fathers sins forsooth, his
House and Friends: Judging souls thought that War was for his Majesty rather
then against him, that Cromwell there was loyal; and that it was a great
courtesy for our Sovereign to be conquered, least a sad success had gained him
a Kingdom with the loss of Religion, Law, and Liberty, however his Excellency
thought it unresonable to see his Native Country submit its Law and Religion
to the saucy imposition of a neighbor Nation that had been indeed often taught
to take Laws from us; but never to give us any.

46 When his Excellency was in Scotland, jealous Oliver joins with him Lambert
and Okey to watch his thoughts, words and actions, and to check him from any
design of loyalty; which he discreetly observed, and therefore managed each
action committed to his trust, as that against the Highlanders, Dundee, etc.
with such resolution as made him believed cordial to the cause, and able for
service, and therefore advanced him to the command of Lieutenant General in
Scotland; It was his honest ambition to be eminent in every thing he undertook,
so he hoped at last to arrive at that power that might sway Kingdoms to a
compliance with his Majesty's interest, as successfully as he saw them now
swayed against it.

47 And therefore when his Majesty marched for England by the way of Carlisle,
he refused to follow him, and chose rather to complete former victories in
Scotland as Commander in chief, then to gain new ones in England under
Oliver: Therefore waiting anxiously between hope and fear upon his Majesty's
success in England, he took care to reduce Scotland into a subjection to the
Parliament until an opportunity offered it self of restoring it to the King,
who had utterly lost it had not he lost it.

48 But no sooner were the Scots Wars finished, but Holland threatens us. 1
Partly upon his Majesty's account being engaged to his assistance: 1 By the
Prince of Orange: 2 By Admiral Vantrump who had not forgot the high honors
bestowed upon him in England in the year 1641. 3 By an overture made between
his late Majesty of blessed memory, and their Ambassador the night before his
death; Partly upon their own account claiming a right in our Seas which we for
times out of mind were taught to See Grat^um in mare lib. Seld. mare Clou^
S^^in^. Mar. Com. Greg. Thol. jur. reg. Franc. prop. L. L. quae propria ulpian
l. o. L. L. quae comuniae: vid servium in 12 AEn. virg. Eust^ch. in il. x. n.
22^. --
deny them. --

See Fleta and Seldom notes upon it; see Draytors Polyalbyon, Grotius de jure
belli et pacis of propriety; see Saxon Laws in Spelm and Seldom: Just. and
Theod. Codes: the Danish Laws in the exact Collect of Beccius: W^itlock^s
observat. etc.

49 His Excellency is called upon from Scotland to Sea in joint commission with
Blake, and Deane, he willingly submits knowing he was to engage for the right
of his native Country, I mean the dominion of the narrow Sea, which belonged
to England as a hedge (so the Sea is called in Eurip. and most Poets since out
of him) belongs to the enclosure, and indeed is the best of its enjoyments.

50 He being at some loss in Sea affairs discovers as much wisdom in making
use of other Men's skill, as others did in acting by their own; others direct
he encourages, and spirits the dull Seamen to action; to pass by the meaner
passages his most solemn performance was the last engagement with the Dutch for
which the Parliam. honor him with a gold chain, and oblige him by a command
over the Army in Scotland; which he underwent willingly, so securing to
himself and his Master one Kingdom while now an Usurper swallows up two.

51 Being come to Scotland he takes care that the council who were in joint
power with him, should be Men of solid Principles and good Interest, and if he
must be troubled with some fa^aticks, they were some soft, easy and quiet Men
that stood for ciphers, and were only to fill up a number, and not to maintain
a party.

52 He takes care to restrain that Scottish spirit that is never quiet
Conqueror nor conquered; and remembering what sad use they had made of former
indulgencies, proceeds with force and rigor, resolving that they should really
fear him, who he knew would never really love him.

53 He disarmed, imprisoned, and innocently trappanned them, (though none of
them sussered the least upon his account in state or life) and so amused the
cunning Scot, with active policy, that he had scarce time to think of plots, or
to contrive villainy.

54 And when some Loyal persons under the honorable Middleton, attempted
something 1654. he easily subdued them, first dividing and then conquering
them; he was as ready to suppress those men that attempted any thing
Inconsiderately for his Majesty, as he has been since to encourage them when
they attempted any thing soberly: It was about that time Oliver would have had
him out of Scotland, and therefore had not he opposed his Majesty then,
probably he had not been in a capacity to restore him now.

55. In Scotland he impartially executed all Laws enacted by the Supreme
power in England tending to the peace and welfare of that Nation: so that his
severities had not formerly enraged them more than his justice obliges them,
and therefore Oliver omitted no opportunity to tempt him out of Scotland, by
calling him to the other house, etc. which temptations he dexterously put off
(choosing (with Caesar) rather to be first in Scotland than 3d. or 4th. in
England) so that the Usurper was heard often to say "that he could do many
things were G. M. out of Scotland: And if I am not deceived by knowing and good
men, the Usurper upon his deathbed (when he was urged to name his successor)
professed, It was in vain to set up a Protector in England for George Monck
would bring a King out of Scotland.

MODERN POLICY. The Second Part.
ALthough upon Cromwell's death, Sect.

His Excellencies behavior upon Cromwell's death.


it was thought, the awe (whereby he checked the private designs of each party
to an homage to his own) was so happily removed; that the several Grandees
would now publicly pursue their aim at that Supremacy, to which each of them
was willing to advance Cromwell first (one daring enough to break the ice to an
usurpation) that they themselves might be his Seconds: and because (as Seneca
says) seelera dissident, their villainous Enterprises would interfer and
clash, each of them resolving to admit neither equal nor superior; it was
thought honest men might have opportunities to join together in vindication of
lawful Sovereignty and public Right, while the Thieves and the ( Magna
Latrocinia.
) p^blick Robbers (as the Pirates told Alexander) fell out about oppression and
wrong; Take off the common Principles in which Rebels agree, and the common
persons that keep them together with those Principles, their variety of humors
and interests bring them immediately to a division, and then to a ruin,
Machiavel. Kings l. 2. c. 3. on Livy l. 6. c. 2. sect. 3. These Rods that have
lain so long upon our backs might be singly broken, when they could not be
broken united, and in a bundle.

But Cromwell taking as much care to keep usurped power as he took to gain it:
-- Nec minor est virtus quaerere quum pertatueri: and being a man of (...), as
Arist. de A^. l. 2. c. 1. Eth. 4. c. 3. of desires as vast as his thoughts, and
as boundless as his soul: (...) as Iamblichus Carm. 6. And therefore its pity
(as Socrates says) that great and good have been separated) he secured not the
Government with more policy to himself then he does to his Heirs after him for
ever! for (naming his Son Richard Successor, according to a power cunningly
gained by him from the Parliament in a Petition and Advice 1656.) he contrived
him an impregnable in^erest; first in Ireland, by his B^other Henry made there
Lord Deputy: secondly in Scotland, by a Council and an Army, made up, for the
most part, either of Relations, or of Fanatiques, or of New-purchasers of the
Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands, all equally engaged to the Usurper: thirdly
in England, 1. by a Council made up of his Fathers own Creatures: 2. An Army
under his Brother in Law Flee^wood Commander in chief; his (...) le Desborough
as Major General, and seve^all other Relations of his in great command; so
that his Army was like that of Abrams, of his own house: 3. The City awed by a
pack of Sectaries, under one Io. Ireton a Creature of his, since the marriage
of his Brother Henry with Oliver's Daughter. 4. The Country people generally
so much pleased with the obliging carriage, to which Oliver politickly brought
him up, that they generally said, If we must needs have an Usurper, we will be
content to have him.

Sect.
His Excellency saw Richard so well settled, that to attempt any thing against
so well laid a Government, in the behalf of his most Sacred Majesty, had been
but to hazard the best Cause, with his own and his Friends persons and
fortunes, against a tide, which swelling higher by the opposition, would
quickly have overwhelmed them: And therefore he submitted himself to a
compliance with the Power then in being; acting by its authority; knowing (as
Grotius says, jure belli and pacis p. 1. c. 73.) That the acts of empire which
an Usurper exercises may have power to oblige, not out of his right, which is
none, but because its better his Commands should prevail and be of force, then
utter confusion be brought in; the Laws and Judgments being taken away; See
Suarez leg. l. 3. c. 10. n. 7. vid. de potest. civ. n. 23. And so his
Excellency went on with the Usurper, ^trengthening the hands of the evil doer
for public good, while he was weakening him in private interest: We may
observe in Nature, that the several parts of it, though they are ordinarily
true and faithful ^o their standing rule, law, and duty, (the light going
upwards and the heavy downwards, etc.) yet they are allowed to comply with a
violence, that brings them out of their place and order, against their
inclination and law, to fill up such chasmes, and supply such vacuities as may
endanger the dissolution of the whole.

Besides, I think really his Excellency, together with our Gracious Sovereign,
had rather the Invader should be left in possession, then occasion given to
such dangerous and bloody commotions, as they both trembled at the thoughts of,
which yet must necessarily follow upon any violence against those men, who have
strong Factions on their side at home, and as strong Con^ederacies abroad. It
was their opinion, (...), Plutarch: Or as Favonius has it, Civil War is worse
then unlawful Government-Mihi pax omni cum civibus bell^ civilii utilior
videtur, Cic. Titus Quintus thought it better the Tyrant Nubis had been let
alone at Lacedemon, when he could not otherwise be thrown down, but with the
ruin of the Commonwealth, likely to perish in vindication of her Liberty: For
(as Aristophanes h^th it) A Lion is not to be bred in a City; but if he be
brought up he must be kept: For indeed we nec morbum far possumus nec
remedium, Live. Yea, we were so unfortunately sick, that we feared, plus
pericul^ a medico quam a morbo: For though Usurpation falls heavy upon many
particulars, yet the bloody consequences of an intestine War are worse
spreading and permanent.

Sect.
His Excellency was as careful to keep others within an useful moderation and
prudence, as he was to act according to it himself; and therefore upon Oliver's
death He and the Council make an Order:

That there be none brought from beyond the Seas to Scotland, and that none be
carried from Scotland beyond the Seas, without special leave, and a Pass.
That there be no unusual meetings of Persons dangerously affected to the Peace
of that Nation, etc.

And seized upon several persons dangerously busy about his Majesty's Affairs
in that Kingdom; whereby he at once seemed to be very cordial against his
Majesty's interest, and for that of the Usurpers; and really did his Majesty
the best service imaginable, and his Friends the greatest ^^rtesie: 1.
Restraining them from those attempts which had been their ruin: AEquum non est
(says Stallius) ut sapiens disipienti^m causu in pericula and turbas se
con^ic^a^^: See N^hem. 9. 27.

2. And withdrawing from the Usurper that advantage which he made of such vain
and empty oppositions, toward his own establishment and settlement^ who knows
no^ that Oliver was advanced to that height we ere while admired and feared, by
those plots which he subtlely contrived, and others were foolishly trapanned
to? by whose discovery and defeat he rendered himself formidable, and by sly
insinuations, of what danger the Government, and the three Nations were in, by
reason of them, prevailed with his Conventions to secure the Commonwealth, by
promoting his power daily, upon the occasion of one pretended Plot after
another, until he scrued himself up to the power of the most absolute Monarch
in Europe.

His Excellency thought that monstrous Power would fall away of it self, which
might be held up and strengthened by opposition; A Lacedemonian in Plutarch
when he read, Hos dum Mart parant dominatum extinguere, saevus ante saliuntis
Maenia mors rap^it; added, Merito viri illi periere; expectare enim deb^erunt,
ut ipse per se dominatus conflugraret.

Sect.

His acquiescing in Richards free Parliament.


In the meantime he resolved to acquiesce discreetly in the determination of the
free and full Parliament, which Richard and his Council were happily
necessitated to call; toward the right constitution of which, he contributed
much in the choice of such Parliament men for Scotland, as the Malignant party
in England would not have willingly admitted to the House; who when they
entered, assisted the Honest party in such counsels as would have brought down
the power which Oliver set up with so much blo^d and treasure, in the twinkling
of an eye, without any noise or stir: wherefore they were suddenly after
dissolved by the Army, with a consent that Richard gave to it: (...)

Although his Excellency was sorry to see such unwarrantable violence offered
to a free Parliament, made up of the ho^ourable Representatives of three
Nations; yet he was pleased to see that vast Power taken from Cromwell's Family,
by the same Authority that gave it them, even before a third Heir en^oyed it:
He so well foresaw the future establishment of these Nations, through these
several revolutions (as the establishment of a fair World out of a Chaos) that
he stuck not in an Address to the Parliament (whom the Army had invited to
reassume their power, which they had once forced them from, and now looked upon
as the only Authority that could serve their turn and interest) to say, that
the Nation was then born in a day.

Sect.

His carriage toward the long Parliament when recalled.


When those Members that the Army had called in, refused the admission of the
secluded Members, those worthy Patriots, that were resolved to do their King
and their Country right; when they resolved to ^surp the Government, denying
the Nation their privilege of being governed by a free and full Parliament,
and siding with a company of Secta^ies and desperate persons, that were engaged
to ruin our Church and State, neglected our honorable Nobility, our
worshipful Gentry, our reverend Clergy, and in a word slighted three
Kingdoms, and with their assistance awe us with Militia's, and oppress us with
Assesments so far, to the discontent of the whole Nation, that they agree
upon a general Insurrection upon the first of August; but upon some
discoveries made by the unhappiness of the Honorable the Lady Howard (whose
Sex was not capable of that secrecy whic^^her Loyalty might be entrusted with)
and others, they were prevented in most places, save only in Cheshire,
Lancashire, and Wales, where Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir George Booth, Sir Philip
Egerton, etc. by reason of their distance from the Parliament and Army, got
together such a considerable party that alar^med the whole Army under Lambert,
and an Irish B^igade besides, to march toward them; whom his Excellency beheld
favorably, and had they brought their design to any iss^e, he would have
assisted to bring those refractory Members at Westminster to some reasonable
terms: Although he would not have engaged against those Members, (being
obliged unto them, and thinking not with Cicero, T. Fregis ^idem.

A. quam nequ^ dedi, neque do Infid^li cui periam. Accuis.


that a man may break his oath with thieves; or with Brutus in Appion, That
(...), That the Romans esteem no faith, yea^ nor oath to be kept with Tyrants,)
yet would he have used his interest with them to reduce them to a Moderation.

But upon Sir George Booth's overthrow, Sect.

His design upon Sir G. Booth's rising.


Lambert, blown up with the success, sores high, and contrives, that the Army
now highly caressed by him, with the thousand pound sent by the Parliament to
buy him a Jewel, etc. should stickle for his Honor to be Commander in chief
of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, the next step to the
Protectorship of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that the Parliament, in
case they denied it, should be dissolved; which he saw done accordingly.

Sect.

His resolution against the Armies Arbitrary power.


Whereupon Lambert calling together his Counsel of Officers, makes sure of a
correspondence with the Army in Ireland, and Scotland, and therefore
dispatcheth Colonel Barrow for Ireland, and Colonel Cobbet to General Monck;
who though he was a Member of the Army, yet was he likewise a Servant to the
Parliament; and of two Confederates he is to be preferred that has a just
cause of war. The Athenians were to assist their fellows the Messenians
against their other fellows the Lacedaemonians, Them. Orat. de Megalop. Methinks
I hear his Excellency replying to Colonel Cobbet's Message, as the A^onans did
to the Spartans, A^icis auxilia ferenda contra hosts non contra A^icos; vid.
fidel. Tubal. l. 4. c. 31. l. 7. Ptolom. apud Appianum in leg. exceptis: Or
with him in Alexandrides. Ego esse vester non queam Commilito,
Quando nec leges nec mores Consentiunt
Sed multis inter se Convallis discrepant.
Vid. Orat. Partazae ad Laz^s apud Agath. l. 3. c. 2. n. 6.

The noble General, Sect.
according to his instructions from London, secures Cobbet; at once preserving
his Army from such dangerous in^inuations as that person brought along with him
thither; and to cut off all the advantages the Army in England might have of
the information he might carry home with him.

Its true an Ambassador is per saecula populis sanctum no^en Papin. and
Pompon. l. si quis D. de legal. yea, He imprisons Cobbet the Armies Messenger.
Sancta sunt carpora legatorum var. l. 3. del. Tutius regressus legat^ Radevi^.
append. de Polon. morian. l. 12. de mauris; so that they were not to be
violated in life, limb, estate, or liberty; for it is contra jus legatorum,
legatos in vinculis habere Menand. de Just. 2. Imp.

But Collonell Cobbet is rather a Messenger of a Faction of Subjects, then a
proper Ambassador of the Supreme power, and therefore he must not claim the
right of an Ambassador: It Is the pe^^liar prerogative of Majesty, and Supreme
Authority (^aith Dion. Hulicarn.) to create Magistrates, to make Laws, to make
War and Peace, and to send Ambassadors.

Legates must not be received from Antony, for says Cicero, In that Case we
have not to do with Hanniball, an enemy of the Commonwealth, but with ^ne of
our own Country. Nobly does the General imprison him, who brought along with
him the face of a Faction, and the authority of Rebels; who would have honored
him, Si senatus faciem secum attulerat, auctoritatem reip. Cic. Philip. 7.

Sect.

He models his Army.


And then his Excellency feeling the temper of his Army, upon Collonell Cobbets
Message (according to the power given him, when he was made Commissioner for
governing of the Army, with Sir Arthur Haslerig, Collonell Walton, Collonell
Morley, Collonell Okey, and^. by the Parliament, just before their dissolution)
he models it, and secures such Officers (as he found, either too loosely
principled, or already too dangerously engaged, to be entrusted in so
honorable an expedition as he resolved upon;) in Tantillon Castle first, and
since in the Basle I^lands, so confining their principles and persons within
those walls, which otherwise might have too sad an influence upon that whole
Army and Nation.

And then thinks fit to declare his resolution, Sect.

He declares.


to assert the a^thority of Parliaments against all violence whatsoever, in two
Remonstrances, one to the whole Nation, and the other to the Churches.

Whereupon the English Officers bethink themselves of a De^laration too;
wherein supposing the end of Government to be the public good, they must
persuade the world that they are the only promoters of that in the world: In
melle sunt linguae sita vestrae^ atque orationes lacte; cord^ fell sunt ^ita,
atque acerbo aceto e linguis dicta dulcia datis, ut cord amara facitis.
Pretense white as milk,
And as soft as silk,
Will do ^he feat;
Your hearts as sour as gall
Purpose our thrall,
And thus ye cheat.
They ravish us with apprehensions of liberty, while they enthrall us with
oppression; and as their usual manner is, they bespatter the Parliament with
their foulest ink, making (according to an ordinary figure in Policy) every
infirmity a fault, and every fault a crime: yea, they were almost ready to
swallow that gross abuse; (...), Isocrates, of making^ the Office guilty of
the Officers abuse.

And withal they declare the necessity of their proceedings; they thus make a
virtue of necessity, seeing no other virtue will be so easily induced to serve
their proceedi^gs; and she may well be the patron of all licentiousness, who
her self has no law.

They declare the necessity of continuing the cashiered Officers in power,
which is a necessity only of their own creating, and ^ignifies no more, but
that they are compelled to cover wrong with wrong; as if it were not enough to
have done mi^chief with an Army, but we must continue that Army to defend and
justify it: Their (...) is, That his Majesty must be kept out of his just
rights, and that the Nation be deprived of their Laws, Liberties, Religion,
and^. And thence it follows, as a Conclusion becoming that Premise, that it is
^ecessary our Army be commanded by Persons, that are the worst Rebels against
the one, and the greatest Violators of the other: (...).

But his Excellencies rational Declaration (which he published to give the
world the same satisfaction, Sect.

The e^ficacy of his Declaration.


for his undertakings, that he had already in his own breast, scorning the
(...) of (...) Joseph. An. 15. Crantz. Saxon. 11. Nicet. l. 3. and 4. and
willing to provide honest things, ^ven in the sight of men) out-weighed their
Pamphlet with the Judicious; because they saw in his few words; (for he, with
Stenelaidos the Ephor, would not stand deb^ting with words, being injured above
words) that he asserted Authority, the ligament of humane society, against
Violence and Rebellion; he asserted the true public, instead of a private
good; he stood for liberty against licentiousness and oppression: In a word,
because they saw him expressing himself throughout like a Person of worth and
honor.

Messengers sent to him.
After this (...) of the Armies Declaration, they send two more Messengers to
his Excellency, his dear Brother in Law, Doctor Clerges, and another, to
satisfy him more fully of their proceedings; for his Excellency, as if he
wanted nothing else all this while but good intelligence, writes them an
ambiguous Letter, intimating, that he might comply with them better if he had
but the happiness to understand them. Indeed it was but prudence, to suspend
all expressions that might make them despair of his compliance with them,
until he were ready to appear against them.

Sect^
And these are followed by Whaley and Goffe, Caryl and Barker, as Messengers
from the Churches, who had a Bird for every Conqueror: Its the boast of a
Dutchman, that he can sail with all winds; the Compass breaths not more
varieties then these dexterous souls have changes, and garbs, and suitable
compli^nces. Its the perfection of an Orator, to make happy applications to
the several humors and geniusses of all sorts of men: That Is the character of
these Churchmen; these Independent Willows are pliant to the poor power of a
contemptible Committee of Safty; as Alcibiades shifted disposition as ^e
altered place, so they proportion themselves to time, place, person, religion,
with such a plausibleness, as if they had been born only to serve that
Opinion, which they harbored but as a guess, while it continued in sway.

In the mean time his Excellency (being by a call (as he expressed himself to
the Convention) from God and man, He calls an Honorable convention of Nobility
and Gentry a^ Edenborough.
engaged for England, to restore the Parliament to their due freedom and
honor) assembles the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland at Edinburgh; to whom he
proposed: Sect.

His propositions to them, with there Answer and his Reply.


1. That they would secure the peace of that Nation during his absence, which
would not be long. 2. That they would supply him with some men for this
undertaking, which he engaged upon his Honor should be to their satisfaction.
3. That they would advance what money they could beforehand.


And hearing by the Earl of Glencarne, the Chairman o^ that Assembly, that 1.
The Scots were, since their being disarmed, incapable of keeping the peace. 2.
That they were so unconcerned in the issue of his undertakings, that they saw
no reason they should engage with him. 3. That they would advance a years tax
beforehand. 1. He gives the Lords and Gentry power to arm themselves. 2. He
sati^fieth them privately in the design of his expedition. 3. And accepts of
their years tax (O rare) be^ore-hand; that being what he first intended,
though what he last proposed.



And thereupon he dismisseth the Assembly, which he would not have called
together but in a case of necessity, which makes any thing lawful; it being
one of the Regalia (as G. Tholos has it) to call Assemblies.

And then he resolves to stay no longer then his supplies of men and money come
in: In the mean time he encourages Sir Charles Coote, the Lord Brohill, etc.
to take this opportunity to reduce Ireland, with it is sectarian Governors (the
first poisenous Creatures that ever came over thither) according to their
design laid before any thoughts of the dissolution of this Long Parliament;
but he advised them to proceed leisurely, and by piecemeal, for that, which at
one view would be a m^rmo to fright them, give it them but in part, and it
would please them: All great mutations (says the noble Falkland) are
dangerous, even where what is introduced by that mutation is such, as would
have been very profitable upon a primary foundation,

Yet hearing that Lambert was coming against him with thirteen thousand men,
Sect.

His prudent management of a Treaty.


(resolved pro regno patriam penates, conjugem flammis dare) indeed Imperia
pretio quolibet constat been, according to the advice of an high-spirited Fury)
he (with that King in the Parable) sits down and considers with himself,
whether with his seven thousand men (which was all he could bring to the field
from his Garrisons, the Highlands, and the new supplies) was able to enter
battle with his enemy, that leads thirteen thousand; and finding himself too
weak, before the enemy enters his Territories, he sends Messengers of peace, he
thinking of the unexpected Accidents before he did engage, Thucydides advises,
was loath to hazard the jus^ice of his Cause upon the chances of a battle; we,
may quit something of our own right to avoid pursuing it, with so much hurt to
other men as War carries along with it; Vict. de jure bell. n. 14. and 33.
Arist. Polit. 4. Rhet. ad Alex. 3. Pausan. l. 5. Philost. l. 23. Sen. suas 5.
Yet withal he provides for War; being (as Joseph. 2. Cont. Appian) To
preserve the Laws; other losses he could bear patiently, but when he is forced
to depart from the Laws, then he will fight even beyond his strength, and
endure all extremity of War.

He sends three to treat with those at Wallingford, viz. Collonell Wylkes,
Lieutenant Collonell Clobery, and Major Knight, with letters to Genesis Fleetwood,
intimating his readiness to comply upon reasonable terms with his old friends
and fellow soldiers; and his sorrow for the advantages which were given the
common enemy, by this unseasonable distance of friends.

But withal he sends letters to the City, Sect.

His Letters to the City.


to encourage them to stand fast in their Liberty, for their Laws, Privileges,
Properties, and lawful Government; for which he there expressed himself ready
to live and die: which letters were delivered by Collonell Alured, and
Collonell Markham; but by reason of the conclusion the forementioned Treaters
came to, so contrary to the contents of those letters, they were a while under
Cassandraes fate, of not being believed, though they brought in them the
highest truths imaginable, as time the father of truth has since made manifest.

Sect.
The Treaty is concluded in an agreement upon these terms: 1. That his
Majesty's Title be renounced. 2. That England, Scotland, and Ireland, be
governed as a free State, without any single Person, or House of Peers. 3. That
an able and a godly Ministry be encouraged, and the Universities regulated. 4.
That the Army be not disbanded without its own consent. 5. That there be a
meeting of three from Scotland, three from Ireland, and three from England, not
Officers of the Army, and five from Scotland, and five from Ireland, and five
from England, Officers of the Army, to consult about a further settlement.


Sect.
But his Excellency had discreetly reserved to himself the ratification of the
Treaty, so that nothing should be of force until he confirmed it with his own
Seal; and therefore upon the return of his Commissioners by his own order, he
(imprisoning Collonell Wylkes for going beyond his Commission) declares the
Treaty void, and marches ^owards the Borders, intending to make B^rwick, which
he had secured at first, his Headquarters; holding correspondence with his
friends all over England, esp^ciall in the West, as the information Collonell
Cobbet gave his friends at Wallingford House intimated.

At B^rwick he gave the Messengers of the Army, Sect^
and of the Churches, very plausible answers, which yet signified nothing,
receiving and dismissing them with great respect; but yiedling to them nothing
prejudi^iall to his cause; so that one of the Ministers, upon his return home,
must needs tell his Congregation, That the seed of the Serpent is
irreconcilable with the seed of the woman.

Fabius saved Rome by a delay; Sect.

Overtures toward a second treaty^ with the grounds of it.


his Excellency being advised from England, That if he could keep at distance
with his Adversary until the first of January, the work would be done without
bloodshed; make some overtures of peace with Lambert, but always insisting
upon the readmission of the Parliament to the exercise of their trust, to be
granted before they enter upon any Treaty.

Sect.
Now some Commissioners for the Parliament, viz. Haslerig, Walton, and Morley,
having gained Portsmouth with the consent of Collonell Whe^ham, formerly of the
Counsel of Scotland, whereof his Excellency was Pre^^dent; and Lawson
(notwithstanding all endeavors by that Siren Vane, to persuade him to the
contrary) declaring with the Navy for the Parliament; and the Land forces for
want of p^y revolting; the Army in the North mouldereth away, and yields to
time and delay.

Sect.

He moves to England with his whole Army.


Thus all force being removed from the Parliament, and they sitting, thought
themselves not safe until he by his authority and presence came to awe the
So^ldiery and the tumults, that want nothing but an Head to lead them to
another Rebellion.

Sect.

His prudent management


His Excellency (whom former Powers could not draw from Scotland with either
fear or favor) takes this opportunity to of affairs throughout his progress to
a subserviency to his design. do his Country and King a public right: And so
(though ordered to bring with him only three hundred men, and dispose the rest
for quarters) he marches with his whole Army, modelling such Garrisons and
Forces as he met with to a posture subservient to his design, intrusting them
with men faithful to his and the Nations Interest, which were now no more two
but one: and commending the care of Scotland to Major General Morgan, a Person
very industrious in assisting his Excellency, going to him in his greatest
extremity from London, to encourage him and his Army to a resolution in those
designs, that were as great as they were good, he marches with his own Army,
which he knew was tried and faithful: whereas the other Forces (an air dato
conduct a cohors bellica, miles dona sequens pretioque suum n^utar^ favorem
suetus, and accept^ pariter cum munere bello, hunc habuisse dator pretii quem
jusserit, hostem, Bell. de re mil. 2. p. t. 2. n. 4.) would upon the least
temptation (as he told the Parliament) betray both himself and them too.

And in his way finds the Honorable Lord Fairfax, His conference with ^e Lord
Fairfax in his way to Yorkshire.
with Sir H. Cholmely, etc. in Arms against free Quarter, and for a free
Parliament, with whom he had private conference, to each parties satisfaction.

Setct
Here he receives a Message from the City by the Sword Bearer; to which he
returns this Answer.

1. That he was resolved for the Parliament as it was on the 11. of October.
last. 2. And yet when he came to the City (which he said would be shortly) he
assures them he would satisfy their expectation.
Thus at once he keeps himself to his own Commission, owns the only face of
Authority then in being, under whose Authority he might act safely, and yet
privately manageth things according to his own principles and thoughts: So
inferior Orbs suffer themselves to be swayed by the motion of the superior,
while yet they steal a motion of their own: The Parliament serve the Public
for themselves; His Excellency will serve them for the Public; Being
inviolably constant to his Principles of Virtue and religious Prudence; his
Ends are noble, and the means he uses innocent: His Worth had led him to the
Helm of our State: The Rudder he uses is an honest and vigorous Wisdom: The
Star he looks on, for direction is in Heaven; and the Port he aims at, is
the joint welfare of Prince and People.

And then he proceeds toward London, Sect.

He is caressed by the whole Country but not understood.


being courted by the Countries as he passed, as the Patron of Authority, Law,
Liberty, and Property, (his Expedition looking like a Kings Progress rather
then a Soldiers March) and addressed ^o by the most considerable Gentry, to
use his interest in restoring them to their Birthrights, their Laws, their
Privileges, and a full and a free Parliament; whose desires if he had
satisfied, he had utterly disappointed; for to have discovered himself, had
been to defeat the hope of the whole Nation: Veritatem voluit celari non
mendacium dici, Aug. q 20. in Genesis And therefore he usually answered them, that
he would see 1. All force removed from the Parliament. 2. The House filled. 3.
See that there be good provision made for future Parliaments: And so he kept
himself dark to his Adversaries and his common Friends, though he was light to
himself, his Prince, and his discreeter Friends, Quibus pro sermon nutus
motusque membrorum est; uti, Plin. de AEthiopum Gente l. 6. 30. (...) Arist.
Nu. 4. c. 8. Incerta disseruit, tracturus interpretationem, pro ut conduxisset,
Tacit. Hist. 3. He gave answers doubtful and inclining whither they were
drawn: Manass. Ben. Iser. Council. q. 39. Notwithstanding there were two sent of
purpose to watch him Scot and Robinson, who returned as wise as they came: His
Excellency dropped never a syllable that Suspicion it self could be afraid of,
all the while they were with him; every word he let fall was ^he well-weighed
issue of Judgment and Reason, that did signify, but not betray his mind: His
expressions were Oracles, as well for their clear worth to his discerning
Friends, as for their dark doubtfulness to his preying Enemies, So Christ
himself spoke to his Enemies in Parables.

Sect.

He conceales his


About this time his Excellency saw how dangerous it had been for him to
deresentment of the Part hard usage to those that made address to him clare for
the Nations right, when it was high misdemeanour but humbly to wish for it;
when gro^ns for grievances, as once at Rome, were dangerous, and complaints
were treason; when men are imprisoned for what Nature, Reason and Law has
declared to be the right of man, and our Parliament declared to be the right of
English men; I mean, An humble Petition for Right. He saw Sir Coppleston
Bampfield for Exeter, and Sir Robert Pie for Berk-shire, without any respect at
all to the Countries whence they came, the Message they carried, or the
Honorable Person to whom they were employed, confined to the Tower; and yet he
having, with that Earl of Leicester, his passions in his pocket, looks upon
them with an unconcerned eye, and takes no care for the liberty of few
imprisoned persons, least he should lose the opportunity of redeeming an
enslaved Nation.

His Excellencies march to England was slow and orderly: Sect.

How he controls his Soldiers.


So first taking time to observe the posture, genius, and inclination of the
Kingdom. Secondly, and keeping his Soldiers close to himself, ready for any
occasion, and in order; fobidding all private meeting of Officers for
consultations about State Affairs; assuring them, that he and they were rather
to obey Powers, then to control them: and that every person should be so long
in Command under him, as they were in obedience under Authority.

Sect.

A Letter to Mr. Roll in his name.


In his March he takes occasion to answer a Declaration of the Western
Gentlemen, that run too high at that time to be complied with, and yet was too
just and equal to be neglected: Wherein he published expressions, that like a
well-framed picture, looked smilingly upon all sides; especially let the honest
part of the Nation see a Grant of their whole wishes through a denial: For
(said he) the Nation could not be settled without a Civil War, unless the
several interests 1. Of such new Sects (as Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists) never known here before the Wars. 2. Of such new Factions^ as
the purchasers of Kings, Queens, and Bishops Lands, were provided for by such a
comprehe^sive settlement as might include all sides: ((...) (...), Aristot.
Eth. 6. Quod commune est, connectit civitates, quod singuloru^ dissipat, quare
and public and privatim utilius est ut publica magis quam privata curentur.
Plato 4. legum; a Law is to be profitable (says Cato L. (...) D. de leg^l. 3.
in fine D. D. petit haered) to the greater part and the main: Semper non quod
privatim interest, uni ex sociis servari debet, sed quod communi societati
expedit L. actiones sect. Labeo D. Soc. That is good for the Be that is good
for the Hive ( Antoninus) and therefore Monarchy in the State which a free
Parliament would introduce being so inconsistent with the later sort of men's
interest, and Monarchy in the Church which is the necessary attendant of State
Monarchy (for no Bishop no King) they being so inconsistent with the interest
of the former sort of men was not the best way of establishing these Nations:
Whereby he gave us to understand rather what he thought expedient, then what he
thought lawful; intimating withal to the discreet and wise, that those things
were his as well as the Nations design, but it was not yet time to accomplish
them.

As soon as time and prudence had conquered all remaining difficulties, he
could be as much for a free Parliament, and the happy issues of it as
themselves. In the mean time, though his Loyalty prompted him to serve his
Majesty, and his Country; yet his Prudence taught him not to engage against
Impossibilities: In a word, he lets not fall one word in that Letter, that
seemed to deny that any of those things therein mentioned were lawful, though
he dropped some that signified that all those things were not Then expedient.

Sect.

His honorable Ladies arrival at London.


When a long and tedious March, with the P^ayers and Wishes of the whole Nation,
had brought his Excellency to Saint Albanes, his honorable Lady borne to
succor affl^cted Loyalty and Majesty was arrived at Whitehall: Our Venus being
b^ought by Water to meet her Mars by Land, how seasonably is she arrived to
give heat and life to his cooler thoughts, and to spirit his grave and slow
designs into accomplishment^ he said the King should Come, but she said Now:
Her eager Passions, those Whet-stones of virtue ( Cic. Acad. 9. l. 4. Tusc. 9.
l. 4.) Set him on to a performance, when his cautious Wisdom checked him to a
Retreat, A furiis agitatus amor, A sacred fury of Love: (...), Cael. Rhodig^ l.
16 c. 15. Raising her wishes above all thoughts of difficulties, suggested to
her expedition: but ^e remembering that (...) Arist. Poli. 3. c. 16. That
Passions are not fit to conclude of Enterprise, Methinks answers her
Importunate Loyalty: As Latinia does Turnus, -- Quantum ipsa feroci
Virtute exupero, tanto me impensius aequum est
Consulere, atque omnes metuentem expendere casus
The more undaunted Courage does you move
Its fit my serious fears show the more Love
In mature Counsels, and in weighing all
The various dangers, and Event may fall.


The impatient Lady was so intensively fixed on resto^ed Majesty, that she
seemed to decay with a lingering Expectation to enjoy it, (...), Theocrit. Idyl.
2.) she hardly rested night or day from some eminent service for her Sovereign,
he took up her thoughts, her discourse, insomuch that her hopeful Son, when
checked by some Gentlemen for an often mention of the King, replied pretily, I
am sure my Father and Mother talk of him every night: When the honorable City
drooped under a fear of the Issue of the late do^btfull expedition of his
Excellency, she speaks them to a Life and Resolution with these words: Did you
(Gentlemen) understand General Monck as well as I do, you might trust him.

He lodges at White Hall.
When he had stayed there some days to refresh his Army to consult with his
Officers, and to look about him for the setlement of every thing in its place,
in a subserviency to his design, He marches to London, and refuses not the
accommodations offered him at Whitehall, as some thought he would; being too
wary to open himself, when he had the opportunity to hide himself by an
acceptance of a courtesy.

At Westminster (when he had indulged himself some time ^or the embraces of
his dearest Consort, Sect.

He gives account of his expedition to the House.


that deserved his first and dearest Affections) he attends the House solemnly
according to their Order, conducted by Scot and Robinson on each side of him,
who was a virtue to each extreme, and modestly refused the Chair that was
offered him, now as above himself in Humility, as he was above others in
worth: They with most Regret and Tenderness receive Honors that most deserve
them.

Leaning on the back of the Chair, provided for him, Sect.

His depo^tment and speech.


he delivered himself in a choice, pure, breife, clear, vigorous Expression of
the great Notions in his mind to this purpose. 1. That he deserved no Thanks,
having done no more then his Duty: He is less willing to hear Commendations^
that has done most worthy of them: though he had attempted great things
resol^tely and valiantly, he heared Applauses and Elogies for them, by so much
the more tenderly, by how much they were more justly due.

2. He turned their Thanks^ Applauses, and Commendations from himself the
Instrument in their Resta^ration to God the Author: Accipio, agnosc^que, Deos,
Virg. AEn. 12. -- (...). (...).
-- If God will fight Soph. Aj. Ezekiel. 3.
He can make the weak men put the strong to flight,
(...) Anton. By God, and therefore to God are all things, Romans 11. Ult. But
knowing that it is, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. Sen. Ep. 95. Chrysostom. Hom.
25. Its not the mentioning so much as the improving of mercies, which
expresses our thankfulness to God, Ovid. AEshyr. Apud Plut. de audit. P^et. A.
Gel. l. 1. c. 15. Tertul. de Patria, c. 1. Therefore he humbly desired the
Parliament to satisfy the Expectation of the Nation, in the establishment of
their Laws Liberties, etc. Upon this their wonderful Restoration; God had
been at the charges (as I may so speak) of so many wonders from above, nor his
Excellency of so much care and pains below to restore them, not so much that
they should seek Their own, as the public good.

3. He desired them particularly to take off the Suspicion men had of their
perpetuity, by determining their own Sessions, and providing for future
Parliaments (A constitution si vetustatem spectes vetustissima, si dignitatem
honoratissima, si jurisdictionem Copiosissima) Where the Nation by its several
Representatives might gravely, deliberately, and safely consult its own peace
and setlement. The Major part as Grotius says in his Hyl. Gothi...) prevailing
over the minor " Otherwise there is no hope of Peace: Where there are multitudes
of Counselors there is safety.

4. Then he commended to them a moderation in their qualification, intimating,
That it would be their Prudence not to narrow but widen their Interest: Withal,
telling them, the noble Gentry were so ingenuous, That fair means would bring
to that compliance, when hard usage would deter them: English spirits must
not be forced but won by an acquiescence, they are not to be subdued but with
kindness.

5. He wishes them to be tender in impo^ing Oaths (though yet he thought none
were to be admitted to any trust in England, as none ever was without an
Engagement to be faithful to the Power in Being.) In all Governments
Fundamentalls are secured by standing Laws, obliging all to a faithfulness
and constancy to them, when the supestructures are capable of alterations by
the growing Wisdom of succeeding Ages, and Powers) He was sensible of the
abuse of Gods Name in our frequent Oaths: En toutes manieres sa este un fort
belle Ordinance and institution, de en^ user point du nom des deieux legerement
de peur de les Contaminer, Car la Majeste des dieux ne se doit Imployer^ qu' en
un saint, and Venerable purete. Its wisely ordained that the Names of the Gods
should not be used upon trifling occasions: for the Majesty of the Gods should
not be employed but in holy and venerable purity. Malvezzi on Philostratus.
Casaub. Exercit. 203. 2, Of the abuse of force whence, (...) (...). Scholl. in
Aristoph. Until men have used them so commonly, that they can shake off their
Cords with as much ease as Sampson did his Withs, and break over these Hedges
of Faithfulness when they please: Though Vt Masora sepes, legi decimae
divitiis, vota sanctimonie, silentium sapientiae, sacramen^a ^idelitatis, Pirke
Aboth As the Masora Hedges in the Law, Tithes Hedge in Ri^hes, so Oaths keep
in faithfullness, so restraining and bounding our hearts that are as unstable
as Water, whose propriety is to be (...) Arist. Genesis 5. Corrupt. l. 2. c. 2. to
be apt to shed abroad when left to it self: but alas! His Excellency, s^n^e
men make too much use of that piece of Lysander (...), that Children are to be
cosened with Rattles and men with oaths: with whom pactum non pactum est, non
pactum pactum est cum illis Lubet, Paul. Aul. An oath shall no oath be, if they
no advantage see: but an oath, an oath shall be if it with their designs agree
they were so good at that of Euripides, Iurata lingua est, mente juravi nihil,
that his Excellency thought fit to put the Parliament in mind that they had
more need to repent of their former oaths then to take new.

6. He warnes them to take heed of admitting Cavaleers and Phanatiques into
pl^^es of any employment or trust: doing the Cavaleers no injury, for they
could not have wors thoughts of them then they had, but secretly weakening the
Parliament, by rendering their friends the Phanatiques odious to them, and so
useless and unservicable: when he seemed to discharge Cavaleers from
employment, he meant those whose actions had been more serviceable to their
enemies then their friends, whose rash and unadvised zeal had done more harm
than their Loyalty was ever like to do good; for those sober persons that were
in a mean between madness and AEnthusiasme, were such as we have seen manage
their moderate Councils in two Months, with more success on his Majesty's
behalf then others have managed their valor in twenty years.

7. He commends to them Scotland, as a Nation that indeed had of late deserved
to be encouraged, and assures them of Ireland, with the persons in whose hands
that Nation was.

8. He commends to them a Free State, for he would gladly lay down his life;
but he knew well that Nunquam libertas gratior extat quam sub rege pio, That it
is the highest freedom a State ^an hope for, to serve a good Prince.

And then he withdraws to his place in the Council of State where the first
thing under consideration was the reducing of the City, Sect.

The Parliament employ him to the City.


now stiffly resolved to own no power save that of a Free and full Parliament,
where he saw that that Parliament and Council of State were near a period: by
those strong attempts they made to keep themselves alive, ( Morientium morsus
acerrimus, the last endeavor of the dying is most vigorous) for they order,

1. That he should march into the City with so many Horse and Foot, to force
them to an obedience to the Act of Assesment: Its the guise of men in power to
act themselves in the plausible part of their Government, leaving the more
offensive passages to their instruments. His Excellency coming up to the City,
at Guild Hall peremptorily demands the Assessement, by an order from the
Parliament and the Council of State, to which demand proceeding from him beyond
expectation, the City after a little respit for ecstasy and amazement, return
this answer, In Magna Charta confirmed by the Petition of Right, and renewed by
this present Parliament, a day before their forcible dissolution upon the 11.
of October. they were to pay no Taxes, etc. but by their consent i^ Parliament,
which now they had not: Yet to give no offense to the Parliament, the Council
of State, or his Excellency, desire time to consider of it: and indeed those
debates upon which depended the welfare of the Nation, with its Liberties,
priveledges, and properties called for time and leisure.

His Excellency in the mean time writes to the House to know their pleasure, to
which they answer that 1. He should imprison the Honorable Col. Bromfield,
Alder. Bludworth, L. C. Jackson, Ma^or Cox, etc. 2. That he should remove their
Chains, dig up their posts and break their Gates.


Which strange orders were sent not only to try his Excellencys patience and
obedience, but to make that emnity open which was but suspected between him and
the City; so did Achitophel advise Absalom to ravish his Fathers Concubines
before all Israel, that Israel might be assured that he and his Father were
enemies.

And his Excellency obeys them readily, thereby gaining an opportunity to
discover the genius of the City, which he had not otherwise there known
certainly to be ^o resolute for, and so true to Liberty and right.

But the Parliament as they intended, that by that employment so offensive to
the City, Sect.

They afterwa^ds degrade him.


he should weaken his Int^rest; so they contrive that while he is busy in it he
should be weakened in his power: His Commission for Generalship expiring, they
renew it not according to his desert, but empower six more of themselves to be
equal with him in command that never came near him in me^its, according to
their interest, viz. Hazslerig. Walton, Morley. etc. which when his Army heared
as they were not satisfied with their late employment, so much less were they
satisfied with this reward; the lessening of their Generals power when they
might justly expect his advancement, and therefore being assured of the City,
by a conference at the three Tunns at Guild Hall, his Excellencies Head
quarters, They humbly remonstrate, His Officers Remonstrance thereupon.
First, their sense of that violence they were commanded to offer the renowned
City, a violence unparraleld in our worst of days, which though they made
havoc of most part of the Nations, yet spared the ancient City, for its late
performances too honorable, and for its antiquity too reverend to be so abused.

Secondly, their fear of several persons eminent in this late disturbance, who
had their freedom within and without the City, to consult, plot, and design
what might reduce us to our former misery.

Thirdly, their abhorrency of a late Petition delivered in the House by
Praise-God Barebone, so subversive of all order and power, so dangerous to all
Religion, worship, and discipline, so destructive to all Laws, Statutes and
Customs that to repeat it was to confute and condemn it, and all sober eyes
have as soon abhorred it as seen it.

Fourthly, Their wish that the Parliament would quickly determine their
session, and provide for succeeding Parliaments.

Sect.

He adheres to the City for a Free Parliament.


Which as soon as his Excellency had communicated to the Speaker by a Letter he
marched to London for quarters declaring for a Free Parliament, and casting
himself upon the love, and faithfulness of the City, and Country, that they
might stand by him in the prosecution of public good.

In which resolution he persisted, (notwithstanding, 1. The flatteries of the
House, cajoling him with the Honor of Hamp^on Court, and his Brother the
Honorable Sir Th. Clergis, with the Hamper Office which was worth a 1000 l. a
year.2. Their snares, into which (had it not been for his incomparable Lady, he
might have been trappanned by a dinner, to which he was to be invited by the
Council of State. 3. their threatenings expressed in Haslerigs Speeches, (that
breathed nothing but fire and sword.) In the mean time taking his quarters
among the Citizens, he expects patiently the issue of the Parliaments debates,
in answer to his last Letters to them, and finding they thought of nothing but
the settling of their own interest and continuing of their power; he desired the
messengers they sent to treat with him, to delay time, to procure a conference
between some Members of the House, and some honorable patriots that were
excluded from it, He heardt the controversy between the Secluded and the other
Members.
which was granted and had before him ^or m^tual information, in which he
judi^iously weighed each sides reasons and arguments being all the while silent
himself, and concluding with himself upon the result of the whole, that the
settlement intended by the horse was upon ^oundations too narrow to bear up a
public good: he resolved to withdraw all force from the house, and admit men
of more sober, moderate, and therefore of a more p^blick spirit, who would
establish us upon ^ermes comp^ehen^ive of every considerable interest among us,
He admits Seclu^ed Members to the House.
making each part happy in the welf^re of the whole; which he did upon the one
and twentieth of February, Cressane careat pulchra dies nota. 5. Meeting the
Secluded Members at White Hall, Sect.

His speech to them at White-Hal.


and expressing himself to them in a speech not delivered by himself to avoid
offense, but by his Secretary; wherein he commended to their care.

1. Religion that (...), as Ari. stol. 7. that first care of Magistrates, it
being in Plat^ and Plutarch, Coagulum omnis societatis and fundamentum, and
efficacissimum vinculum benevolae amicitiae unius dei Cultis Philo: so great an
awe has Religion had always upon the spirits of men, prevailed with by the
thoughts of eternal weal and woe, that to settle it (...). Just. Mart. Apol.
would be a royal work, which his Excellency p^oposed in the most sober and
moderate way, imaginable between some men's too close and severe rigor, which
hi^ Excellency had di^countenanced in Scotland, and others too loose indulgen^e
which he checked by a public ^islike of a Sermon preached before him at St.
Paul's for that abomination that makes desolate, I mean a toleration for every
one to do what is good in his own eyes.

2. He commends to them the State: desiring them to provide for a Free and full
Parliament, in whose resolves he himself and the whole Nation might acquiess.

As soon as they sit, Sect.

He is Voted General.


they vote his Excellency according to agreement, Lord General of all the
Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; which trust he managed with much
discretion and faithfulness, modelling his Army to a temper suitable with the
designs he had in hand, disarming the Phanatiques in City and Country, in the
mean time taking care to arm Loyalty, while he ^ayd the Factions naked.

Sect.

He rejects all temptations to b^senes^.


Now to let the world see his Excellency had the best Soldiery, virtues,
valor, and wisdom; without any of their vices, ambition, etc. He slights all
temptations of Command, Power, and Authority, which were offered him, and
resolves rather to be a Loyal Subject, then an usu^ping Sovereign: he had
rather have obsequii gloriam (as Tacitus calls it) the Glory of Obedience, then
the Majesty of command.

Sect.
The Parliament having settled the City in its just power, by Mayor, Aldermen,
and an honorable Common Council, and an incomparable Militia, under as worthy
Commanders as ever lead English men to the field: and vacated the Phanatique
power in the Country, and settled the Militia of the three Countries in
honorable and great hands, of men of worth, and interest, and p^ovided for the
future Parliament, they dissolve upon the 16. of March, leaving the care of the
Nation to an incomparable Council of State, and the care of the Army to his
Excellency, as Commander in chief, and Major General of the City, and the care
of the Navy to his Excellency, and the Honorable Lord Mountagne.

His Excellency in this interval condescends to the divertisements of several
entertainments by most Companies in London. Sect.

His Excellency entertained in London.


The Honorable society of the Mercers beginning; but in the midst of
pastimes and pleasures, his great and solid mind (as invincible by these soft,
as formerly by his harder services), ^orgets not the greater affairs of State.

And he keeps good correspondence with his Army b^ frequent confe^ences: Sect.

His prudence in the interval of power.


at last he brought them to declare their acquiescence in the resolves of the
approaching Parliament, to the confusion of such whose hope lay wholly in their
reluctance against lawful power.

When Lamberts escape had s^irred up the drooping spirits of the factio^s to
designs threatening and formidable; Sect.
his Excellency first discreetly orders the Forces in the Country, so as to
prevent their uniting in any considerable posture, and then Honorably offers
his own person for the service of his King and Country: In the mean time
taking care to settle the Militia of London, and Westminster, so as they might
be able to guard themselves if he should be called abroad to engage against the
Enemy.

Sect.
He takes care likewise of Intelligence, well knowing of what concernment it is
for a Nation to have an impartial relation of the actions of the supreme power.

Sect.
The Parliament being sare, whereof he was a Member both for Devonshire and
Cambridge, he carries himself there with that modesty that might become the
meanest Member, hardly so confident as to own the honor that honorable House
conferred upon him by their solemn thanks to him.

And would hardly accept the 20000. l. bestowed upon him, Sect. His modesty.
until the Kingdoms account and stated, his Majesty's occasion supplied, his
public debts paid: so little did this public minded Worthy care for his own
things, and so much for the things of others.

Sect.

He sends his brother in Law to his Majesty.


When his Majesty's gracious Declaration and Letters came over, to give occasion
to modest Loyalty to discover himself, his Excellency having received the
Declaration with a Letter to himself, (by the leave of the House which he
humbly asked) he sends his Brother the Honorable Sir Tho. Clergies to attend
his Majesty, with his humble answer, wherein was inclo^ed a loyal address from
the Army, to let the world see how well a Generals command became him, who had
modelled his Army to that temper, that there seemed to be but one soul
controuling that whole great body, that expressed its allegiance to his Majesty
unanimously as one man.

When the Honorable Parliament, Sect.
(each Member whereof deserves an everlasting monument) had upon that blessed
1. of May voted the Governmen^ by Kings, Lords, and Commons) a constitution to
be admired and envied, but not imitated) and were preparing Commissioners to
attend his Majesty, to de^^re him to come to his Parliament and People with all
speed possible.

His Excellency takes care for Palaces to entertain him, His care to make all
things ready against his Majesty's coming.
his own incomparable Lady condescending to the drugery of a common maid for
the service of her Sovereign and then gives order for so many Regiments of
Horse to attend his Majesty, taking great care, and giving many discree^ orders
for his Majesty's security, providing with v^lour against open foes, and
prudence against base friends, knowing his Majesty had good reason to pray with
the Italian God deliver me from my friends.

(...)
(...)
Hom. Il. 313. Who have taken Theogenis wicked Counsel to his Cyrnus.

(...)
(...)
Vid. dom. vit. Agric. Tacit. Annal. l. 1. Sect.
His Excellency according to his Majesty's order, waits upon his Majesty at
Dover (being unwilling to Land before he came) with so much humility, as if he
had not known any worth and merit in himself; and was received by his majesty
as if he had known nothing in him but worth and desert: how Honorably do the
best of subjects and the best of Kings greet each other? how modestly does the
Subject kneel? how humbly does the Sovereign kiss and embrace: its one property
of love to condescend with a (...). Eurip. Hal. So Parents out of love to their
Children lisp, and play, and fit their speech and dalliances ^o the age and
infirmities of their children.

In that renouned progress of his Majesty to London, Sect.

He meets his Majesty.


his Excellency had the honor to ride nex^ before his Majesty, with the
Illustrious Duke of Buckingham all the way to London, and with the Honorable
Mayor through London: where the whole Nation saw him more Honorable in that he
restored a sovereign, then if he had been one more glorious in his Loyal
Subjection then in an usurped majesty: his bare head was more honorable then
others Crowns.

When some careful of the Subjects liberty would have bounded his Majesty's
prerogative His tenderness of his Maj^sties prerogative.
within the compass of the Laws (it being a power not to be entrusted to frail
flesh and blood to be above Law) and what was more have capitulated with his
for his own right, and brought him to him Throne upon terms: his Excellency
withstood the motion, scorning to fetch home a ^ettered Majesty, and to restore
a captive Sovereignty: if he brought in a King, he would also bring in
prerogative; and a plenam potestatem, 2. Ed. 4. 17.21. H. 7 2. H. 7.7. as it
was in principio rerum, where Gentium nationumque imperium penes reges erat,
Just. l. 1. See R. B. Ios. in Mishput Aammelech: and indeed pre^ogative cannot
be in^rusted to a mortal more capable of it than our Sovereign, who thinks it
his highest power not to be ab^e to do an injury; and his highest prerogative
to take nothing from his Subjects but a libe^ty to offend, Principi summum
rerum arbitrium dijdederunt, subdi^is obsequi^ gloria relicta est, and may it
suffice us when we admit his Majesty to a Sovereignty over us, that we know,
Regem in ipsum imperium est Iovis, God is Sovereign over him.

Sect.

His care for justice.


It was thought his Excellency would intercede with his Majesty for a general
pardon to all parties and persons, but his Excellency perceiving his Majesty's
extraordinary inclination to mercies, thought fit rather to encourage him to do
Justice.

1. That innocent blood may not be upon our heads or upon our posterities, such
blood as may ov^rthrow a world: Its a fearful thing to let a Nation fall into
the hand of the living, by a neglect to satisfy that justice which divine
mercy will not defraud, and therefore humane mercy dares not.

Secondly that posterity may look upon their late villainies with horror when
they see them punished with severity.

(...), Plato apud A. Gel. l. 6. c. 14. Famosos publica furca figendos pluribus
placuit ut conspectu deturreantur alii ab iisdem facinoribus F. de. paenis L.
28 P. fumosos Pet. Erod. decret. l. 2. Til. 14. Zeppa. de leg. l. 1. c. 11.
Plin. l. 29. c. 4.

3. That complete justice be done to all sufferers of the Clergy and Layty,
righteousness establishes a Nation, and the guilty must be as contented for
the good of the Nation to suffer Justice, as the innocent may be to enjoy right.

But his Majesty and his Excellency has taught the Nation to sing of mercy and
judgment Ps. 101. 1. by their (...), Arist. Rhet. Iudex (...) medicus syropos
habet and aloen. R. maim. transl. p. 63.

Sect.
When his Majesty had leisure for any thoughts of settling his Officers of state
he began in his own family, (for as a Bishop so a King must rule well in his
own family) for how says St. Paul, can he rule the Church that cannot rule his
house, and how says Aristotle, Can he govern Kingdoms that governs not his
own Court: Indeed Kingship (says Seldom, in his titles of honor, Weems
exercitations 3. Arist. Polit. 7. Rev. Bp. Will. in his jura Majestatis) was
first exercised in the narrow comp^ss of an household, and those increasing to
Cities, Kings a while contentedly possessed those Cities, and Cities swelling
into Nations, we had our Kings of Nations. Whence his Excellency had the honor
himself of being Master of the Horse, and to commend the incomparable Sir.
Will. Morris (eminent in his Country for piety, prudence, publikemindedness,
and valor for rejected truths, eminent in his worthy book called Caena quasi
(...) for depth of judgment, solid and accute reason, sharp, quick, yet clear
apprehension, for comprehensive reading, for a copious fancy, for a choice,
grave, brief, perspicuous, pleasant, vigorous, and moderately vehement
expression, with a gracious frame of spirit running through each part, and the
whole of it) for the first Secretary of state.

His Majesty well weighing That in the multitude of Counselors there is
safety, Sect.
called his Excellency with his own high-borne Brothers in suffering as well as
nature, the Honorable Marquesses of Hartford, of Ormond, the Lord Chancellor
Hide, and^. to the Council Table, where there is no person that need go beyond
him who first has been present at all the subtle debates whereby the (...).
The Rulers of the darkness of this age promoted their mysteries of iniquity.

2. Who has managed the troublesome affairs of Scotland so succesfully for so
many years.

3. Who had manifested so much prudence in his late expedition, that the King
solemnly desired his sage advice for the settlement of his Kingdom.

But his Excellency conscious enough of the worth and ability of the most
honorable Council is not so intent upon the affairs of state, Sect.
as upon those of the field his own peculiar charge, where his chief care is to
model the Army to a frame subservient to his Majesty's and the whole Nations
interest; and well knowing that the whole Army is at the beck of superior
Officers as much as the lower O^bs and at the command of the first mover, he
disposed of most commands to persons of honor, worth, and sound interest. His
Majesty himself with his two Royal Brothers, honoring their respective
Regiments with their command.

And now it may be expected that from this confluence of the highest worth,
Sect.
the most eminent virtues, the most renouned performances, the result must be
the highest honor (...) Arist. de mor. l. 4. ^. 7. Charron wisd. c. 7. Haell
government l. 1. c. 5. and therefore his Majesty was pleased to call his
Excellency to the House of Peers as Duke of Aumarle See Heylin Surv. France
Seele blane French. Nob.
, Earl of Torrington, Lord M^nk of Potheridge, Beauchamp, etc. Knight of the
most Honorable order of the Garter, etc. honors that others indeed have
enjoyed, but his Excellency made it his chief business to deserve: and I hope
as he has attained this honor with great actions, he will maintain it with
greater until he is gathered to his Fathers full of honor and of days, until
having seen 1. That Sacred Majesty which he was an instrument to restore,
established above malice, envy, ambition, rebellion, faction, and ^reason, by a
sage Council, well constituted Parliaments, a well disciplined Army, and Navy,
well chosen Officers and Ministers of State.

Secondly the s^bject secured against all encroachments (by a Prince who^e
prerogative it is that he cannot do wrong) in their persons, estates, lives or
liberties, through wholesome, just, and good laws, the Church established 1.
Against all He^esy in the faith on^e delive^ed to the Saints against all
schism by the Primitive order, discipline and government.

3. Against all profaneness, See 39. Art. Rogers. Dr. Overal. Dr. Ellis. Bp.
Andr. ibid.
1. By a worship in spirit and in truth, 2. decent, 3. in order, 4. to
edification, 2. by the power of godliness) his days be swallowed up of
eternity, and his honor be exchanged for An eternal weight of Glory.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane
near Fleetstreet.
Folio.
THe Sovereigns prerogative, and the Subjects Priveledge comprised in several
Speeches, Cases and Ar^uments of LAW discussed between the Kings sacred Majesty
and the most eminent persons of both Houses of Parliament^ together with the
grand Mysteri^s of State then in agitation faithfully collected by Thomas
Fuller, B. D.

A Complete History of the Wars of the Greeks written by the Learned Polibius,
and translated by Edward Grimstone Esquire Sei^geant at Arms to his late
Majesty.

Quarto.
The Faithful Lapidary, or the nature and qualities of all pre^ious stones,
very useful for Merchants and others to avoid deceit by Thomas Nicols.

Richard Hannums exployts.

The Rump's Looking glass, or a collection of such pieces of Wit or Drollery as
were prepared by several Wits to purge the Rump.

The Div^ls Cabinet bro^ open, or a new discovery of High way Th^eves, being a
serious and seasonable advice of a Gentleman lately converted, to Gentlemen,
etc. others to avoid their villainies, to which is added a notable discovery of
Hectoring and Trappanning, acted in and ^^out this City of London, M. H. Esquire.
Large Octa.

Royal History completed, in the life of his sacred Majesty Charles the II.
and his two illustrious Brother, James Duke of Yo^k, and Henry Duke of
Glocest^r, with their restoration happily concluded by the Lord Genesis Monck.
Now D. of Aumarle being a complete History of all the Remarkable passages since
1630. to this present year 1660.

Mounsi^ur de B^lzac's Letters translated by Sir Ric. Baker Knight, and others.

That useful book for G^ntleme^ and Travelers, entitled England described,
being an exact description of the several Counties and Shires in England, by
Ed. Leigh Esquire. M. A. of both Universities.

A Treple reconciler s^ating the controversies, first whether Ministers have an
exclusive power of communicants from the Sac^ament. 2. If any person unordained
may lawfully preach. 3. If the Lords Prayer ought not to be used by all
Christians, to which is added a Sermon preached at his late Majesty's
Inauguration by The. Fuller, B. D. Modern Policy completed or the actions and
councils Civil and Military of his Excellency the Lord General Monck under all
revolutions since 164^. to 1660. with the Principles moral and Political, upon
which they were grounded, illustrated out of the best Masters of Policy ancient
and modern.

Montelion or the Prophetical Almanac being an exact account of all the
Revolutions that are to happen in the world till this time twelve month, by
Montelion Knight of the Oracle a well wisher to the Mathematics.

That excellent piece Scutum R^gale the Royal ^uckler or, Vox legis a Lecture
to Traitors, who most wickedly murth^red Charles ^he first, and contrary to all
Law and Religion banished Charles the II. third Monarch of Great Britain, by
Giles Dun^omb of the Inner Temple, Gent.

The complete Attorney, fifth and last edition.

The Baptized Turk, showing his happy conversion from the delusion of that
great impostor Mahomet unto the Christian Religion by Mr. Gunning at Exeter
Honse Chapel the fifth of Nove. published by Tho Warmstrey D. D. in Octavo.

John Quarles his last Poems.

The Crafty Wh^re or the mystery and Iniquity of ^audy houses, laid open with
dehortations from lust, drawn from the sad and lamentable consequences it
produces, published for the good of young men by R. H. Esquire.


