A LITTLE True Foreign News: Better Than a great deal of Domestic spurious
false News, published daily without fear or wit, to the shame of the Nation,
and beyond the liberty of Paris Pasquils. Unto which is added A LETTER Written
by the Lieutenant of the Tower, to the PARLIAMENT, in defense of himself, and
may give satisfaction to all men.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Butter, 1641.

An Extract out of diverse Letters written in Brazeil, concerning the glorious
Victory of the taking of the great and populous City of Loando de S. Paulo in
Angola: By the Fleet of the General West India Company, under the command of
the Admiral Houte-beene or Wooden leg, which was done the 26 of August, 1641.
Imprinted at Middelburgh, by the widow and Heirs of Simon Mowlers, Ordinary
Printer to the High and Mighty LORDS, STATES of Zealand, dwelling upon the
Damme near the old Exchange 1642.
News From Brazeil,
SIR,
I Cannot but communicate unto you the great blessing, which it has pleased
our good God to bestow upon the Company in the taking of the City of Loando de
S. Paulo the 26 of August last past; for after that we had sent out from hence
the 20.30th. of May, under the command of the Admiral Iol Lieutenant Colonel
Hinderson, and as Politic Counselors, Morthamer, and Newlant with 21. Ships
and Pinnasses, with about 3000. men, both Soldiers and Mariners; which came
the 25. of August, upon the road before the said City, and presently landed
their Forces, where they found the enemy in order to defend the City; yet
after a small skirmish, wherein we lost three or four men, and as many more
were wounded, the enimes retired. At the rising of the Moon, our men marched
toward the City, which they found wholly forsaken, finding in it no more but
some few men, that were drunk, without any opposition; insomuch, that this is a
great Victory, because the King of Castile can get no Negros or Black-Moors to
labor in the Mines in the West Indies, whether-wards they have yearly sent
from that place about 15000. which they buy there for a small price, and are
sold here in Brazeil, for 400 or 500. gilders one Negro; and in the West Indies
they are sold yet for a higher price: out of which trade the King of Castile
has yearly had a great treasure, which he must miss now, because he had for
every Negro, ten Crusa custom, besides other great Revenews. This Victory is
both here and in Angola counted higher than any other, that the Company
obtained here before, in regard of the great traffic, that falls there, and
the great profits it will afford, and I do not doubt, but the Company shall
be furnished from thence with all sorts of Commodities.

Upon a good hope of this design, we had sent after the Fleet already in
August, two Ships more with two hundred foot with firelocks, which came
thither in very good and due time. We are now busy to send thither-wards two
lusty Ships with Victuals and Merchandise to begin the trade; it comes us well
to pass, that we have taken two prizes, which were bound for that place with
goods, that are much desired there, which gives a double advantage unto us. The
Admiral Iol is departed from thence, or was upon his departure, with a good
number of Soldiers and Ships, and going out upon another exploit; unto which I
pray God to give his blessing. The Vice Admiral Lichtart toward with Colonel
Coin, if God pleases, are to go to Sea within these eight or ten days,
with sixteen Sail of Ships and Pinnasses, well manned, upon another exploit, I
hope that by Gods assistance, they will have good success; yet the place which
they aim at, for diverse reasons I must conceal: here underneath I have set to
it that same, what we have obtained, so sarre as is yet known.

The City of Loando de S. Paulo is of a very great circumference, situated
upon a fair Hill, having obtained thereby six Forts, seven Ravelins, two
Batteries, fifty nine brass Pieces of Ordnance, sixty nine Iron Pieces,
thirteen thousand weight of gunne powder, three hundred weight of matches, two
thousand two hundred Bullets: A certain number of Negros. A certain quantity
of Merchants goods. A certain quantity of Victuals. A certain quantity of
Wine.
Whereof we have as yet no particular List, what quantity there is of.

In the City have been under the command of the Governor Pedro Sect de Meneses
eight hundred white, both soldiers and Townes-men, with about thirty thousand
Negros without wifes and children, but they were all fled, but must needs come
to a composition, because they will not be able to get sufficient provision in
the field. The profit of the Trade from thence is esteemed to amount yearly to
sixty Tons of gold, which is a great matter for the Company, etc.

Laus Deo Adieu, the 30 of October 1641. In the Recyf de Pernambouqe.
Worshipful and worthy Sir, after my kind salutation, I hope that you are
safely arrived, being the occasion falls out now for Rochel, I cannot pass by
this present occasion, but advertise you, how that our Admiral Houtebeene with
his Fleet has taken the 25 of August, the City of Loando de S. Paulo,
together with five Castles, the manner as follows. Our Forces coming upon
the height of the said City of Loando in sight of the Country Kassoone, the
Inhabitants perceived our Fleet; they gathered together about twenty five
thousand Negros or Black-Moores and some thousand white, to resist our Forces;
notwithstanding our Forces would lose no time and occasion, but came up with
the whole Fleet, and landed betwixt the Castles and the City: those within the
City seeing the stout and valourous coming on of our men, grew faint-hearted,
and betook themselves to flight, excepting three Companies, which seemed to
stand to it and to make some opposition, against which was commanded the young
Gyselinck with some Troops with firelocks, who after some charges given, put
them likewise to flight; whereupon our Forces marched on, and found the City
and Castles wholly forsaken, and thereupon our men took presently possession of
a great and fair City, containing about five thousand great and fair
Stone-houses less or more, in the bigness of the City of Olinda, together
with five Castles, and seven Batteries; whereupon stood planted about one
hundred and thrity Pieces of Ordnance, amongst which are sixty Brass Pieces.
Before the City lay about twenty, both great and small Ships, of which our men
took possession in like manner. The Inhabitants have taken along with them all
their moneys and best goods, leaving only behind them some household stuff,
which they could not take along with them; In the taking of the said City, we
lost no more but seven men in all. Lieutenant Colonel Hinderson received again
some hurt in his broken leg; and commands now in the said City with twelve
Companies. This is truly a great Victory for the Company in regard that so
little blood was shed, for which we cannot give sufficient thanks unto God
Almighty. The Admiral Houtebeen with twelve or fourteen Ships is gone toward
N. N. what success he will have there, time will show. Yesterday the
Vice Admiral Lichtart together with Colonel Coin, and twelve Sail of Ships
is likewise gone to Sea upon an exploit, but whether, time will show: to morrow
or next day after are to go for Holland three Ships, and then I shall write
unto you at large, etc.


The letter was subscribed and signed by Gilles Crol and Lucas de Keyser.

News from Brazeil sent over with the Ships called the Burning of Troy, which
set out the Recyf de Fernambouck the 6. of Novem. and arrived in the Texell the
2. of Jan. new style, 1642.
THe 2.12. of October, arrived in the Recyf of Fernambouck, the Ships called
the Orpheus, coming from Angola with Avisoes, that the 15.25. of August, our
Fleet arrived in Angola, and in the afternoon all the soldiers under the
command of Lieutenant Colonel Hinderson were brought a shore upon the firm
land within a league of the City of Loando de S. Paulo, which the 16.26 of
August before break of the day, together with all the Castles, Batteries and
Forts, was taken by our men without any resistance almost, because all the
Inhabitants, Governor and soldiers were fled up into the Country: The
Ambassadors of the said Fugitives, were sent already to our Commanders to come
to a composition, that they might return into the City, and to take possession
again of their houses, which are found in number above seventeen thousand. It
is to be admired that they have so slightly delivered up and forsaken so brave
a City with invincible Forts, which has been of great importance to their
King, because he brought from thence all the Negros and Black-Mores, which they
had need of, and employed in all quarters; and being we have the said place now
in our own hands, Spain and Portugal it self will have great want of Negros*
It is a place of great Traffic and Negotiation, which has been of highest
importance to the King of Spain. Our Admiral Iol was departed from thence
with some Ships, and gone upon another exploit: Our Vice Admiral Lichtart with
eighteen Sail of Ships, wherein are twelve hundred soldiers under the command
of Hanscoine, went the 20.30. of October, to Sea upon another exploit.

A Copy of John Coulombels letter sent from Fernambuck, to Philip Bishop,
bearing date the 14. of October, 1641.
As for news, I must let you know, that our Fleet, which under our Admiral
Houtebeen went from hence the 19. of May last past, arrived safely the 15. of
Aug. near the City of Loundo de S. Paulo in Angola, where they obtained a
glorious victory, taking the said City with 2000. men, and in the City were
above 3000. armed men together with 30000. Negros. The City is fortified with
five Castles, and diverse Batteries; but as soon as they saw our forces ashore,
they betook themselves to flight, and are retired about 9-leagues off from the
said City upwards into the Country; but now they begin to desire a pass, that
they may return into the City, which is granted them with condition, that they
should deliver over the half part of their goods. It is an exceeding great
victory, which was obtained without any shedding of blood, and is of great
importance, for the Company; for it is certain, that within the space of 6.
years, the King of Spain has had from that Country about 76000. Negros, and
every Negro is sold here for 5. or 600. Gilders, you may now reckon up the
profit. There is made ready again another Here, which is to go to Sea, under
the Vice Admiral Liehthart, there design is not known.

An extract of an other Letter sent from N. N. in Brazeil hearing date the 1.
of November. 1641. to his friend dwelling in Rochel, in the Ship called the
Burning of Troy, which by reason of the great wind was forced to run into the
Texel, and arrived there the 2. of January, 1642.
COncerning the affairs of Brazeil, they go on very successefully: the 16. and
26. of August our Admiral Iol with 21. Ships and Pinnaces, and 3000. men has
taken the great and populous City of Loundo de S. Paulo in Angola, together
with six Forts, seven Ravelins, two Batteries, fifty nine Brass, and sixty
nine Iron pieces of Ordnance, 13000. weight of Gunpowder, 300. weight of
Match, 2200. Bullets, and obtained a good number of Negros, a good quantity of
Merchant goods and victuals, the List whereof is expected, 30. Ships, amongst
which are four great ones, and 20. small vessels, some whereof were laden, from
the said place, are yearly sent away, and sold about 16000. Negros, by Gods
assistance it will yearly bring to the Company 60. or 70 Tuns of Gold, so that
the Spaniards will be now wholly destitute of Negros in the West Indies, etc.

Sir,
MY words have already been so misreported, that I am forced to return my
answer in writing, and think my condition at this time very unfortunate, that
according to the warrant of Summons, I received this morning from the
honorable House of Commons, I cannot personally attend there without both the
breach of His Majesty's express command, not to stir out of the Tower
without His leave, and likewise of the oath I took at my coming into this
place, to observe His Majesty's commands. This I hope well considered, will
exempt me from the censure of contumacy, or disobedience to the commands of
that honorable House, whose just Liberties and Privileges, I shall ever be
ready to maintain with my life and fortune^. And I most humbly desire the
honorable House to rest assured, that it is far from my thought (what false
reports soever have been raised to the contrary) to divide my self betwixt the
King and the Parliament, and that my affections are u^ited equal^y to serve
both, though in the condition I am in (different from other men) I can perform
only a si^gle personal obedience here (unless His Majesty ple^se to a^so^ve
me from this command.) In the mean time, if b^ the house, it shall be thought
fit to demand any particulars, I am ready with all clearness, and ingenuity to
give satisfaction, and with the like candor and fidelity, to behave my self in
all other actions, as becomes a person entrusted, and one more willing to
deposi^e his life for the true Protestant Religion, the peace and tranquillity
of this City and Commonwealth, then ambitious to continue Lieutenant of the
Tower. In which resolution, I rest*

Your humble Servant, J. Byron.
Tower of London, 12. January, 1641. For the Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.



FINIS.

