THE LEGEND OF Captain Jones: CONTINUED From his first part to his end:
Wherein is delivered His incredible adventures and achievements by sea and
land.

Particularly;

His miraculous deliverance from a wrack at Sea by the support of a Dolphin.

His several desperate duels.

His combat with Bahader Cham a giant of the race of Og.

His loves.

His deep employments and happy success in business of State.

All which, and more is but the tithe of his own relation, which he continued
until he grew speechless, and died.

LONDON, Printed by M F. for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop
under the King's Head Tavern in Fleet Street, near Chancery lane end. 1648.

To the READER.
REader, read on: here you may happ'ly meet
News, pleasing more, then what is cried in your street.
Jones is revived; nere start: the danger's past;
What he has done long since, now makes him last.
His last brave actions never sung before
We offer to your view, nor write we more
Then he made good on oath: then (pray) believe
What here you will find: thus by your faith he will live.
Next, spare your censure on his Poets style;
Had it gone high, his ghost had kept a quoile
To be surmounted: downright were his blows;
Downright his speech; downright to's grave he goes.
Only his fame by your opinion may
Make him still live, though now he is dust or clay.
THE LEGEND OF CAPTAIN JONES, Continued from his first part to his end.
WIll nothing please the taste of these rough times
But rue and wormwood stuf't in prose or rimes?
No verse to make our poets Laureate
But smart Iambicks lashing King or State?
Must all turn Mercuries, these times to fit
By poisoning fame with their quicksilver wit?
That name that is got by some notorious ill,
And merits Gives, is hateful to our quill.
But if the last brave acts of Captain Jones
Which can move mirth and fear, and break no bones,
May be admitted in this ruffling age,
Behold him here remounted on our stage.
Yet know we still are tied to our low streine,
We must not once transcend his downright vein.
And if you meet ought favoring of a lie,
(Reader beleeve't) it is Jones that speaks, not I.
We left him prized on change, too dear 'twas thought,
Twenty four Donnes, 24 Spanish commanders given in exchange for him.
and all not worth a groat
Compared to him, though each had had command
Over great armies pressed for sea and land.
Here see him shipped for his dear native coast;
Where ere he comes you will find he will rule the roast
With new found foes, who attempt his force to shake;
But sleeping Lions it is not wise to wake.
Now once more Neptune does his waves enlarge
Swollen big with pride, that Fate had given him charge
And weighty convoy of this mighty man
To whence he came; but ere the ship had ran
Ten glasses out, comes Boreas with a cloud
As black as ink; the steers-man cries aloud
Down with the topsaile, keep the spritsaile tight,
Hail the maine bowling. Whilst this mask of light
Usherd with lightening plowes the angry deep
High as her self in ridges, and as steep
As Cair's tall Pyramids: the laboring ship
Like a chaf't Bear with Mastives, strives to keep
Her beak aloft; some billows she breaks throw,
Others mount over her at poop and prow.
Jones heard this stur unmoved: from Neptune still
He hoped no good, nor ever feared his ill.
Thus whilst the careful seamen work and pray,
He careless, to his cabin calls his boy,
And makes him read to him the ancient stories
Of our old English Worthies, and their glories;
How our S. George did the fell Dragon gore:
The like achievement of Sr. Eglemore:
Sr. Topas rhyme in Chaucer.
Topas hard quest after th'Elfe Queen to Barwick:
Sr. Bevis cow, and Guy's fierce boar of Warwick,
These stories read, exalt his haughty mind
Above the servil fear of sea or wind,
The ships hard state grew now from ill to worse:
Between too hideous seas acrosse her course,
Her whole bulk groans: her beak and maine mast break.
Shook with this shock, she springs a dangerous leak,
Which her slye foe soon finds, and to begin
Like a dire dropsy, drenches all within.
Thus whilst a treacherous in-mate fills her womb,
She Is forced to be her own destructions tomb.
And over burthend with what bore her before,
She Is downright foundred, and can work no more.
Here might be seen the sad effects of fear
Which several ways in several men appear:
Some cried, some prayed, whilst others swear or rave,
To leave the land to make the sea their grave.
Jones swollen with the brave actions of his Knights,
Big as the sea, ascends and Neptune cites
To single combat: when a boistrous wave
Which Neptune sent to make him Neptunes slave,
Whurles him a cables length to sea, the ship
Sinks with the rest, who give this world the slip.
Well now Sr. Jones it is time to show your skill;
You must swim stoutly for it, or drink your fill.
No danger frights thee, thou brave man of merit,
Thy body is boyd up by thy blow'n spirit.
As a grim Always portending storms when they are seen to play.
sea-calfe still presaging storms
Wallowes and wantons in cold Thetis arms:
Just such is Jones: as if he had been bred
With her finn'd fry within her watrie bed.
No ship for help, no land for hope appears;
Horror of billows roaring in his ears.
Nothing supports but confidence alone, as
If some pressed Whale must take up Jones like Jonas?
At last (alas!) he finds he is no fish,
His spirit 'gins to leave his treacherous flesh^
Continual laboring makes his limbs wax stark
And stiff with cold, his optic sense grows dark,
Neptune insults, and brandishing his mace
Makes his rude billows dash him ore the face.
Now see the fate of noble resolution,
When Jones thought nothing but of dissolution,
Man's constant friend a gentle Dolphin glides The Dolphin is always observed
to be a lover of man.

Between his thighs, on whom he mounts and rides
In post with mighty speed, through wind and weather;
So his kind fish holds out, he cares not whither;
Like a bold Centaur bravely he curvets
From ridge to ridge; 'twas strange, how fast he sits
In this rough road; but Jones learned from his cradle
To ride without a stirrup or a sadle
When on the mountains tops wild mares he spide,
He sucked them dry, and then straight up and ride.
At last at this high speed he gets the sight
Of land, so near, he is ready to alight,
When his kind fish much grieved to leave the burden
She loved so well, to sea again does turn
With mighty speed, still Jones does her bestride
Believing now he should toth' India's ride.
Feign would he turn her, but he knew not how,
He never knew a bridles want till now:
At last the faithful fish preferring higher
Her riders safety then her own desire;
She turns her course about with happy have,
And so our errant Knight on land she cast.
Some Spanish writers flatly do deny
He sufferd wrack, and plainly term't a lie:
They say the ship that led this dangerous dance
Was built by Lewis King Henry's son of France,
And took that name from him, who bears that name
The eldest son of the King of France always styled the Dolphin.
As eldest son, who still is styled the same:
They write Jones got this ground t'augment his glory
And cheat the world with this stupendous story;
But let the reader judge if this be true,
And know pale envy still does worth pursue.
Well now to Jones again, we may conceave
He was not ill apaid to take his leave
Of this rough element: nor did account it
Much worse to go on foot, then ride so mounted.
It Is true, he road this lofty fish in state,
But 'twas too near the boisterous fit of fate,
He feared not Fortune nor her wheel, though fickle,
Yet loath he was to be laid up in pickle;
Or that his manly limbs should be a feast
For sharks, or crabs, or congers to digest.
His next work is to find some habitation,
Though he came safely there 'twas in mean fashion,
The selfsame clothes which when Alonso braved him,
He made him wear, and to the gally slav'd him.
And though this last foul storm had little harmed him,
It seemed to some strange thing to have transformed him
Rigid and rough, long wet and feltred locks,
Nebuchaduezzar.
Like Babels King when turned into an ox:
For a fresh water soldier none could doubt him,
The seas salt tears ran trickling round about him.
In this cold plight he leaves the beachy strand,
And coasts the maine with many a weary stand.
At last he spies a house, not great, but good:
For here he finds a brother of his brood,
Who had adventured in those ways before,
And raised some fortune by it, and gave it ore.
He quicly finds that Jones had skap'd some wrack;
Experience, charity and pity spoke
On his behalf; the good man bids him in,
And with You Are kindly welcome does begin.
He spak't in Dutch, which gladded Jones, for he
Could speak't as well as The same in Welsh.
GRACE dw worth awhee.
Which language a Dutch Pilot well had taught him
When Greenfield to America had brought him.
By this, the Stove's made ready, in goes Jones:
Dryes his wet garments, comforts nerves and bones.
The table's set with homely wholesome cheer,
And to make all complete, strong Lubeck beer.
A Dutch froe was his mate, more fat then fair,
But wondrous free, and thereto debonaire.
Which made Jones ask what Country 'twas that gave
This noble welcome to her humble slave?
He Is answered, it is the Netherlands; the States
Brave seat of war, where many broken pates
Are got and given, and for his wants supply
The good strong town of Flushing stood fast by,
Where Sr John Norrice did command in chief
For England's glory and the States relief.
This tickled Jones with joy; for Horace Vere,
Norrice, and he had been (I know not where)
Comrades in arms, ere Jones did entertain
That cross design with Cumberland for Spain.
But now a bed does well, to take some rest
Where this good host directs his weary guest.
And having slept his fill, he timely rose,
Takes a most thankful leave, and on he goes.
His purpose is to take his passage over
At the next Port he finds: from thence to Dover.
But first at Flushing he resolves to touch,
Where his old friend, the Bulwark of the Dutch,
Brave Norrice holds his troop; Here Jones arrives,
Just as he came from Jaile, except his Gives,
Clad in his slavish robe of Friars gray,
His cap true blew; no company, but they
Lousy.
That will not leave him whilst he has a ragge,
Such as possess the Beggar with his bag.
Winds, storms, nor seas, nor ought that could undo him,
Could make the^ flinch, like friends they stick close to him.
And thus accompanied he does approach
To the Generall's house, neither with steed nor coach;
But in his manly foot-march: 'twas the time
When Norrice with his Chiefes were set to dine.
Jones presses to the Parler from the Hall,
And there accoasts the noble General.
Who eyed him quickly, and cries out (o fate!)
Live I to see the strength of England's State?
Breathe thou brave man at arms? Jones art thou he?
Or is it Mars himselse disguised like thee?
Quoth Jones, The scourge of Spaniards and of Spain,
Whom they have felt and foiled, but to their pain,
Stands here; and yet would breath some few years longer,
To prove King Philip or my self the stronger.
The rest was dear embraces, and his place
By Norrice side; and then a hasty grace.
Now might I dwell upon the luscious cheer,
Which here grew cold, whilst each man's eye and ear
Fed on the person and discourse of Jones,
And quite forgot their toasts and marrow bones.
And whilst his strange adventures past, hetels;
The Captains, Serjant majors, Colonels
Fast to admire him, and are filled with wonder,
And feel no hunger though their bellies thunder.
Here mark his constancy, beyond these men,
He eats and talks, and eats and talks again.
Their mawes are cloyed to hear those deeds of his,
His stories are his meals Parenthesis.
But when he spoke of Spain, it is past belief,
What fearful wounds he gave the chine of beef.
A capon garnished with sliced lemmons stood
Before him, which he tore as he were wood;
And made it leglesse ere he made a pause,
Merely in malice to the Spanish sauce.
He wrecks his wrath on every dish that is nigh him,
And spoiled a custard that stood trembling by him;
Grow'n pikes and carps, and many a dainty dish,
That far excelled his tame Crotonian fish.
At last his fury 'gan to be asswag'd,
And then the General all his friends engaged,
To give him Soldiers welcome in a rowse
Of lusty Rhenish, till both men and house
Turn round. Once two great deities conjoined
To work his fall, with hideous seas and wind:
Now only Bacchus takes the man to task;
And lays sore to him with his potent caske.
And whilst with lusty grape ore-born Jones reeles,
H'assaults his head, and so trips up his heels.
But up he rose again with vigor stout,
And swears though foiled, he will try an other bout.
They all were now high flow'n, when Collonell Skink
Fills a huge bowl of sherry Sack, to drink
A health to Englands Queen, and Jones is he
Must take it in pledge; and so he did: but see
The strange antipathy between this man
And Spanish grape as well as Spanish Don.
Against them both his stomach fierce does rise,
No sooner drunk but up again it flies.
This odd distemper made him half ashamed,
But there is no help, he was with wrath inflamed.
Nor was he pleased with Skink for this affront,
(For so he took't) he knew Skink could not want
The wine of Rhene for healths: why then in Sack,
Unless it were to lay him on his back?
Fired with this thought, he caught at his buffe coat,
Then grapples close; and had plucked out his throat,
But that the wary General interposes
His hands and friends between their bloody noses:
And with strong reasons, smiles, and smooth allayes,
He dampes the fury of these fiery boys:
And left them (as he thought) well reconciled,
But by the effect he ^ound he was beguiled.
The night dispersed them now to several ways,
As they were quartered. Jones with Norrice stays,
Who sent him the next morn a brave rich suit
Intended for himself, with all things to it.
Scant was he dressed, when Skink unto him sends
A Captain, boldly to demand amends
For last nights work, and Jones to do him right,
A bullet must exchange in single fight.
For which himself and Second would not miss,
Where Jones designed to meet with him and his.
This Jones accepts; and swears before that night
He shall hear from him, how and where he will fight.
He thus dispatched; Sr Roger Williams enters,
To whom much kind discourse past ore; he venters
To tell his difference with Skink; which told,
Sr Roger like a Britain true and bold,
Protests himself his Second, hasts to Skink,
Tells him, he had need fight well, as well as drink:
That Jones and he at the South-posterne gate
Early next morn would meet him and his mate,
With sword and pistol horsed, and there agree
To fight it two to two, or Jones and he.
Then comes to Jones, supplied him with a horse
Well rid and fierce; Bucquoy had felt his force
Before Breda; then gives that sword and belt
Which Prince Llwellin wore when slain near Bealt. The Prince of South Wales,
who was slain near Bealt a town in Brecknock-Shire.

The hour come, these champions soon appear,
They spend no time in words; in full careere,
Jones charges bravely close up to his breast,
And fires, but fortune turned it to the best:
Makes him through have forget to prime his pan,
So mist his shot, and so preserved the man.
Vexed with this fail, he flings with all his might,
Worse then the bullet, had his hand gone right,
His pistol at his face; 'twas aimed so near,
It razed his cheek, and took quite off his ear.
Skink's bullet pierced the bow of Jones his saddle,
And slightly circumcised his foremans noddle.
The Seconds stood attending the event
Of this first charge, both resolutely bent,
If either in th'incounter had been sped,
To run the same adventure they both did.
But when they saw the bravery of their fight,
Both having lost their blood, the quarrel slight:
They both detest such men should be destroyed
By which their country should be fore annoyed:
With joint consent their power they unite
To ride up to them, and break off the fight:
Thus got between them, all best means they use
To take it up: which both enraged refuse.
They urge the equal terms on which they stood,
In point of honor: both had lost their blood,
Both fought it well; how light their quarrels ground,
Not worth one drop of blood, much less a wound.
Then bid them look on their dear countries woe,
Whose breasts must suffer for the ill they do.
Reason takes place of wrath, they both accord,
And mischiefs engine rests: they sheath the sword.
And thus (in few) this dangerous duel ends,
Fierce foes they met, and now return good friends:
Their Surgions stanch their blood, for yet they bled,
And clap a cap on Jones his nether head.
This news comes quickly to the Generals ear
Who when he heard their lives were out of fear,
He gently chides them that they would expose
Their limbs unto the various chance of blows
In single duel, when the common good
No longer stands then such good members stood.
Ten days are spent ere Jones could stand upright
Through his slight hurt: which come, the noble Knight
Brave Norrice he takes leave of, with the rest
Of that brave martial crew, and then adrest
Himself for England: Joy thou happy Isle,
Thy Son returns, that has kept all this quoile;
Ye blustering boys of Britain feast and quaffe all:
The man's at hand whose presence makes you laugh all.
Welcome to Dover thou great son of Mavors,
So spoke the Mayor of Dover on his grave horse,
Mounted to meet him with his reverent train,
All gownd, who cry him welcome home from Spain.
After some short repast, on post he rides
To Non-such where her Majesty resides,
Where he was soon brought up, to kiss her hand,
By his dear friend George Earl of Cumberland.
But then when took to private conference,
What news of moment, what intelligence,
What Spanish plots, what mysteries of State,
Unto her Majesty he did relate,
'Twas wrapped in clouds too high for me to know it;
Then pardon Reader that I do not show it.
But 'twas observed he gave a written book
Unto her hand: on which she daign'd to look,
And seemed to slight it in the public face
Of Court; yet made some use often in a place
That Is privy, so dismissed him to his rest
Or her Courts welcome; as to him seemed best.
'Twas now the time when Robert Earl of Essex.
Essex was engaged
In Ireland against Tyrone, with whom he waged
A bloody war: which to the Queen and State
Seemed long and costly: after much debate
It is resolved to pick out such a man,
Whose active force and spirit dares and can
Put a full period to this war at once,
Without delay, and this was Captain Jones,
On whom they pitch, who fed on hopes in vain
To get some small command to conquer Spain.
It Is first resolved, he must reduce Tyrone,
Till that be done he must let Spain alone.
Thus his Commission's sealed to raise his force,
A complete regiment of British horse:
He Is thence to waft them ore the Irish brine;
And then his force with noble Essex join.
Jones lost no time, goes in five days to Wales:
Shows his commission, tel's them glorious tales;
He need not beat a drum or sound his trumpet,
His name's enough to make these Brittons jump at
This brave employment under such a Chief,
Whose fame's reserve enough for their relief.
Perplexed he was in choosing his commanders,
For he still fancied best his old Highlanders;
But many worthies of the lower parts
Offer to him their fortunes and their hearts.
But all respects put by, h'inlisteth ten
Of his old gang, all hard bred mountain men,
For his Lifeguard, Thomas Da Price a Pew,
Jenkin Da Prichard, Evan David Hugh,
John ap John Jenkin, Richard John dap Reese,
And Tom Dee Bacgh, a fierce Rat at green cheese,
Llewelling Reese ap David, Watkin Jenkin,
With Howell Reese ap Robert, and young Philkin;
These for his guard, his Officers in chief
Lieutenant Collonell Craddock, a stout theif,
With Major Howell ap Howell of Pen Crag,
Well known for plundring many a cow and nag,
Captain Pen Vaure, a branch of Tom John Catty
Whose word in's coulors was, YE ROGVES have at ye;
Griffith ap Reese ap Howel ap Coh ap Gwillin,
Reese David Shone ap Ruthero ap William,
With many more whose names 'twere long to writ,
The rest their acts will get them names in fight,
We must conceive they all were men of fame
For here we see them all men of great name.
Jones with these blades advances to the A little village by Milford.
Dale,
There lines himself and them with noble Ale
Of such antiquity as has not been there
The like since An old Wel^h prophet who ^or^told the landing of Henry the
seventh there.
Robert of the Vale was seen there
Who used to sink those kinterkins of merit,
To raise the heat of his prophetic spirit.
His forces shipped, at last a board he goes,
A lusty South-east gale so fairly blows,
That forty hours easily brought him in
To Dubline Harber where he lands his men,
There getting knowledge where the Army lay
To the Lord General he takes his way
From whom a noble welcome he receives,
And good fresh quarter to his troops he gives.
Jones first informs himself in what condition
Tyron's made up for war, what ammunition,
How fortified in camp, what force, what watch,
How victualled, all occasion he does catch
To take him tripping; when at length he found,
He would not give nor take an equal ground,
To hazard battle, he resolves to try him
In such a way as he should not deny him,
Unless with loss of honor; he indites
This fearful challenge which his squire writes:
False traitor to thy country and thy Queen,
I he who yet my peer have never seen
In feats of arms, whose martial hand has slain
Kings with their armies, half unpeopl'd Spain:
Done more then I can write; I say, I he
Urge thee to single duel: and to thee
Give the free choice of weapon, time, and place,
On foot or hors-back: think it no disgrace,
That I a private captain, thou a Chief,
(My deeds make me admired, thee thine a thief)
Call thee to question, 'twere ambition
In thee, to hope to fall by such a one,
T'augment my praise I wish thee five times stronger.
Live till I meet thee: and but little longer.
This done, a Herald is straight charged with it,
In public to Tyron's own hand to give it,
Who to him hast's, and in the public view
Of all his Army says, (Tyrone) to you
I have command to bring from captain Jones
This challenge; read it, and resolve at once.
He takes it, reads it, and admires the man,
That sends him this high Brave, who if he can
But half he writes, he counts himself but lost,
To meet him; yet in sight of all his host
This brave was given him: thus his honor lies
At stake, and therefore desperately replies.
Tell your brave man I am not conquered yet,
Nor can by words but blows, he shall be met,
Before to morrow noon, on yon green plot,
Surrounded with the bog, neither with shot,
Nor head steeled dart: this sword I wear shall do it,
Armed cap-a-pe, no horse but foot to foot.
He thus dispatched, Tyrone does straight seek out,
Brian Mac-kilkow, a strong sturdy lout,
Made up with nerves, and brawn and bone so mighty.
He felt no burden were it nere so weighty.
The strongest man in all his camp by half,
Milo's great Bull to him was but a calse,
Bred in the Irish wilds amongst bogs and woods,
And like an outlaw lived on others goods.
And this is he on whom Tyrone now fixed,
To personate himself in fight betwixt
Him and our Jones, true arms of largest size,
He donns on him, then to his loins he ties
Morglay his trusty sword, then swears devoutly,
If in this combat he behave him stoutly
He Will raise his means above two English Barons
In lands and sheep and cowes and lusty garrons:
Bryan's all confidence and hastens thither
Where Jones and he must try their force together,
The place designed was hardly twelve yards square,
No traversing of ground, no boys play there,
The rest was bog, ore which some plankes were laid
To pass them ore: and then to stop all aid,
Were took from thence: here Jones our valiant fighter
Advances first: Bryan with his fell smiter
Is hard at hand, they spare no time for words,
Their mettle is the whet-stone of their swords.
They clap togeher like two sons of thunder,
Their blads struck lightening, whilst the earth quak't under
The burden she boar; no stroke that is given, but death
Seems to attend it, till both out of breath
Consent to make a stand, but this short rest
Was like a sallet with a muttens breast
To their sharp stomachs, to it they go again,
And lay on load like devils, not like men.
Their well tried arms do blush with their own blood
To find their flesh in whose defense they stood,
Stand, whilst it fell: for that their keen swords whipped off
As if they would each other make a chipt loaf.
At last as I have seen a Man of war
Assault a carrick which exceeds him far,
In bulk and strength: so Jones deals now with Bryan,
With shunn's and shifts, more like a Fox then Lion.
For (to speak truly) this fell Pagan lout
Does so belabour Jones from head to foot,
That both his ears do often with sorrow sing
And's eyes see Stars at noon: (a wondrous thing)
We must conceive those furious blows he dealt
Were well repaid with use, which Bryan felt.
But Jones esteeming it an equal thing
To be self conquered and long conquering,
Resolves to put the business out of doubt
With one Pass more, which was the fatal bout.
On this Resolve, with both his hands he pressed,
The pummell of his sword against his breast
Then like a thunderbolt tilts swiftly at him:
With th'feare of this, Bryan had quite forgot him.
That 'twas a bog behind, so backward springs,
And his whole body up to th'arm pits flings,
Amid'st the bog. Jones driven with his own force
Missing his thrust falls headlong in the gorse
But pitched upon his foe, by happy fate
With which ore boren, our Jones so mawles his pate,
That th'helmet flies, and leaves his head to th'danger,
Of being the anvill of our Jones his anger:
And now the day is his, his strength he strains
With hand and hilt to beat out Bryan's brains:
Who cries out quarter, Man of Mars I yield
My self and sword, the honor of the field.
And where the power rests, it is much better far
To give then take a life in chance of war.
This and the bog does cool the wrath of Jones,
He spares his life and draws him forth at once.
Besides he scorned posterity should tell,
That by his hand Tyrone so nobly fell.
And thus O neale his captive (as he thought,)
In this foul plight unto the camp he brought.:
Presents him to the General, and then spoke,
Sir if you have ten more Tyrones to take,
Command, I Will do it; here see him hither led
By me, who all this charge and stir has bred.
The joy was great, but short; 'twas quicly known,
This was but some impostor for Tyrone:
And this an Irish Captive at first view
Made known, who him and his condition knew.
This bred a qualme in some, whilst others smiled
To see their British Champions so beguiled,
And that Tyrone had bobb'd him with this jeer,
To match his Cow-herd with our Mountaneer.
Jones vexed with this, retires unto his tent,
An angry, dirty, desperate, malecontent.
Three days thus spent, his wrath no longer bears
This base affront; (like Scaevola) he swears Scaevola against Porsenna in
Livie.

He Will kill Tyrone in midst of all his force,
Though in the act himself be made a coarce:
In this wild mood by night he does convey
Himself where he supposed the Rebel lay:
Who wisely raised his camp the day before,
Marched far through desert woods, and would no more
Of these affronts; which to put off again
Might breed contempt of him with his own men.
Two days Jones spends in quest to find him out;
At last he was incountred with a rout
Of ravening wolves, who fiercely all at once
Assailed the back and face of manly Jones.
'Twas time to draw, else these wild Irish dogs
Had been so bold to shake him by the logges:
But when his sword was out he makes them feel,
Their teeth are not so sharp as his true steel.
The first good blow he dealt took off a head,
The second made one two; the next he sped
With a sore thrust at mouth and out at tail:
A fourth which his posteriors does assail,
With his strong heel he hurles against a tree
Twelve paces from his kick, and there lies he:
His sword rips out another empty paunch;
The next limps off from him with half a haunch.
We must conceive 'twas time to lay about him,
For here were those that fought to eat, not rout him.
Nor skap'd he free, the rich sword-skarfe he wore
About his loins, they all to fitters tore.
His boots plucked off by bits, some flesh to boot,
No quarter free from skars from head to foot.
Lupanthropos. Witches that take shapes of wolves upon them in Ireland.
And (to conclude) from these wild Irish witches
He scapes scant with a hands breadth of his breeches.
Wearied with blows and kicks, at last they fly him,
And take a snarling leave as they go by him.
Thus Jones half worried, hasts unto the camp;
There Is none could say the clothes he wore were damp
With night perdues, unless they meant to flout him;
For (to speak truth) he had no clothes about him.
Thus come; he swears by the immortal Powers,
He had maintained a battle full five hours,
With forty duels, five and twenty killed,
Routed the rest; who all had took the field
Against him alone; all raised with him to fight,
To his destruction, or t'eclipse his might,
By that old timorous treacherous kerne Tyrone,
Who durst as well meet Death as him alone.
The plight our Jones appeared in, made none doubt
But he had had at lest a divelish bout,
If not with Devils; on him each man sees
The fearful characters of nails and teeth.
We may not stand to show what Essex's sense
Was on these actions, nor the consequence
They did import: the progress of this story,
Hastens our Muse to Jones his further glory.
Fame these achievements brings to Englands State;
Which held the Queen and Council in debate
About this man; and all at last supposed,
In policy he is not to be expos^d
To the close dangerous plots of such a foe
Who neither values faith nor honor, so
His mischiefs take success: and thus the State
Lose this dear Limme, and then repent too late.
Some looking deeper into Jones his spirit,
Knowing he knew too much of his own merit,
Hold it not safe he should be open to
The windy baits of that so subtle foe,
To gain him to his part; whose haughty mind
Would soon take fire; then could not be confined.
And if by such a plot they should be crossed,
They all conclude that Kingdom were but lost.
These grounds invite them wholly to decline
His warfare there; so on some grand design
Pretended, they invite his quick repair
To Englands Court to act this great affair.
He comes, but leaves his British troops to fight
Tyrone to death; whose acts who please to write,
May meet with subjects brave to rant upon,
But for my self I am quite tired with one.
And thus transported from the Irish strands,
A Town and Port in the County of Cardigan.
At Aberustwith a Welsh Port he lands;
Where ere two days he fully spent for rest,
A goodly vessel with cross winds oppressed,
Comes boiling in; Jones by her colors knows
She is of Spain: his color comes and goes
At sight of hers; that such a goodly prey,
Should come (as 'twere) to meet him in his way.
He musters straight a troop of British lads,
Who on their mountain-geldings clap their pads;
With rusty bills in steed of Staves in rest;
Such were their horse, such were their arms at best.
Then with a fowling piece the ship they hail,
With confidence that she would straight strike sail:
But she makes answer, that she was too hot,
From her broad side with twenty culverin shot.
This struck a stand, till Jones cried out, what doubt ye?
The day is ours, masters lay about ye,
Lead the forlorn up bravely, and be bold,
I Will bring the rear, for they know me of old,
If once my name or person they descry,
My life for yours they will either yield or fly.
Made bold with this, in full careere they ride
Up to the ridges of the flowing tide.
But when they came brest-high amongst the waves,
Their horse more wise by half then these mad knaves,
Snort at the foaming billows, turn their tails,
And make a fair retreat from sea and sails;
Which lest it should seem done on terms of fear,
Jones to the front now hastens from the rear,
And leads them back again in good array,
Neither with hasty flight nor much delay.
At his return he searches all that coast,
To find a herring boat or two at most;
With which he doubts not but he will sink or take
This lusty ship; whose bravest men will quake
To hear his name. But Fate that had decreed
To save her, caused her hoyse her sails with speed:
So with a strong fore wind away she flies,
And leaves our Jones to seek some other prize.
Thus crossed in this design to Court he went,
Where he is met with noble complement;
And from the Queen such grace he does receive,
As he deserved and stood with her to give.
Now for the great affair that called him back,
The Lords must pump for it in a cup of Sack
To help invention: Jones must be preferred
To some employment, be it nere so hard.
In deep consult and long discourse they sat on it,
And studied for it; at last they lighted pat on it.
It is resolved, that he must be the man
To go in ambassy to Prester John.
The business carried with it a glorious face;
Employed ambassador unto his Grace.
The dangerous voyage to a place remote,
Affects him most to get his name more note
In forain Lands; he will not refuse the work,
Were It to the Great Magul or the Great Turk.
A lusty Ship's prepared, again he goes;
But what this great employment was, who knows?
Reader I know thy thoughts are strongly bent
To know this great design, on which he went.
But know this first, that Princes secret ways,
Are such as Ships cut through deepest Seas,
Which shut still as they open, and him that sounds
And enters too far in, their deepnesse drownes.
If bare conjectures may give light to thee,
Here take them freely; harmless thoughts are free.
Perhaps this high blown spirit now is sent
To forain air, where it may purge and vent,
And so return more fit the State to serve,
In their commands, who yet must him observe.
Perhaps he went this Priestly Prince to gain
Unto our Church, who gave good proof in Spain
Of's power in this; or to negotiate
Commerce between the AEthiop and our State,
For tuskes of Elephants to haft our knives,
Apes and Baboones and Pugges to please our wives;
Which things satiety makes common there,
And curiosity orepriseth here.
Be It what it will, our Jones is gone upon it,
And we may know he will make something on it.
His treacherous friend the Sea his charge receives,
And with some flattering gales his hopes deceives,
Making the Land his firmer friend appear
Still less; until at last it brought him where
He lost her sight: for three months time he makes
Good way; at last the wind his wings forsakes,
The Ship's becalmed, and to the Port she seeks,
She gains not half a league for thirteen weeks.
Jones finds this lazy war offends him more,
Then all those hideous storms out-rid before.
These sad effects this sleepy calm attend;
Victual and beverage spent; less hope of end.
Then fear of further miseries ensues,
The Sea with calmes his patience does abuse,
Turns divelish Statesman, puts on a smooth face,
Salutes and kills them with a soft embrace.
'Twas now far worse with Jones then erst with Skink;
For three weeks his own urine is his drink,
Which his hot body had so often sublimed,
It Is grow'n a cordial, like gold thrice calcined.
Breeses of wind at last his sails display,
And waft him into the Barbarick bay,
Then to the Arabic, next the Pilot laves
His boisterous charge in Mare rubrum's waves.
And lastly he attaines beyond all hope,
Errocco the sole Port of AEthiope:
And here he lands, and empties many a bowl
To allay the fury of his thirsty soul.
After some rest he gets intelligence,
Where 'twas the Prince then kept his residence;
Where he repaires, and's told when he comes thither,
The Prince and town are both removed together
Some ten miles off. The Prince and town? (quoth Jones)
I have met my match: here is people make no bones
Of things beyond belief. And yet 'twas true;
This town was tents which fifty thousand drew,
And raised in the instant wheresoere the Prince
Sat down to sport, or show magnificence.
By Mount Amara now his Court he reares;
Read Purchase in his relations of AEthi^pia, touching this Mount.
A Mount far differing from the name it bears:
If Paradise had ere a second birth
Below the seat of Saints, it is there on earth.
An humble valley is the Garden where
This Mount is raised; a vale so rich, so rare;
Nature grew banrkupt drawing this rich plot;
And striving to be quaint, she quite forgot
To keep reserves: for by this work we know,
She made it such she could make no more so.
Amidst this vale is raised this lofty structure,
Five leagues upright. It Is outsides architecture
Unpolished Marble; but so rich, so fair,
You Would think it a pillar of one stone in the air,
By some high power unto Atlas given,
To ease his shoulders whilst it proppeth Heaven.
This goodly Mount a specious plain does crown,
Imbost with Natures gemmes, a velvet down
That Is always green; no frost, no winter here,
Continual Spring: here Phoebus all the year
From rise to set, does always fire his eye,
As loath to put so fair an object by.
Here grow those happy trees from whence there springs
That precious oil, which erst anointed Kings,
And sacred Priests. Nor crowd they here to take
One sense alone; the sent and sight partake.
So are they ranked, as well to give a grace,
As sweet perfumes, for tribute to the place.
No orchard here, nor garden but the plain;
The choicest fruit all Europe does contain,
Grow here unplanted, here is the luscious Grape,
That makes Joves Nectar: 'twas not Helens rape
That ruined Troy: the The Apple which three goddesses Juno, Pallas and Venus,
contended for, which was given by Paris to Venus whereupon followed the
destruction of Troy.
Apple got from hence,
Had worth enough to do it. Here every sense
Would surfeit, but each objects rarity
Gives appetite without satiety:
Roses and Tulips Flora gathers here
When we have none, to crown her golden hair,
And here Medea picked (if Jones speak truth)
Those herbs which turned antiquity to youth:
The only Phoenix deignes to wether here,
The only place like her without a peer:
Lest all these sweets should want sweet harmony,
A numerous quire of nightingales, comply
To warble forth the sweet Amara's praise,
Who turns their mourning notes to merry lays.
Amidst this plain there glides a silver brook,
So gently, that the suttlest eye may look,
And find no motion; on his violet banks
Thick Cipres trees marshall themselves in ranks,
To keep out Phoebus: whose enamored beams,
Peep through each little crink to view his streams:
His pavement azure gravel intermixed
With orient pearls and diamonds betwixt,
Which as the aires soft breath his surface purles,
Vary their gloss, and twinkle through his curles:
Like a steeled glass presenting to the eye,
The spangled beauty of the starry sky.
Here Dolphins leave the sea to wanton; here
Carps since the deluge their grown bodies cheer:
Umbrana's too; such had A great epicure and Emperor of Rome.
Vitellius known,
A province should have gone to purchase one:
Such is Amara, such is Tempe field,
Elysium on earth unparaleld.
'Twas here this royal Priest now kept his Court,
A place well suting with his fame and port.
And here comes Jones, where having made's address,
Letters of credence given at his access
In Latin writ: in the same tongue he gives
Jones gracious words, which language Jones conceives
To be Arabic, for the Latin tongue
He nere endured to learn nor old nor young,
But that is all one, there is no reply expected.
Unto a rich pavilion he is directed
By men of State, where he is well attended,
With all that is rich, and to his rest commended.
Some few days spent and time for audience got,
When Prester John in royal State was set;
Jones studying how to express his eloquence
In some strange language which might pose the Prince,
Now trouls him forth a full mouthed Welsh oration,
Boldly delivered as became his nation.
The plot proved right, for not one word of sense
Could be picked from't, which vexed the learned Prince.
His learned Linguists are called in to hear,
Who might as well have stopped each others ear
For ought they understood, and all protest
It was the very language of the Beast.
Jones has his end, and then to make it known
He had more tongues to express himself then one;
In a new tone he speaks, not half so rich,
But better known, 'twas English; unto which
An English Factor is interpreter
Between our Captain and John Presbyter;
His business takes effect (what ere it was)
And great expresses of respect do pass
To Jones from him, as one he thought most rich
In unknown tongues expressed in his first speech,
And so admires him for he knows not what:
But Jones may thank his mother tongue for that.
His business done he is led for recreation,
To take the pleasures of that pleasant nation,
To mount Amara's top, the chiefest grace,
And perfect beauty of that kingdoms face;
And finding his great heart was most inclined
To martial feats, all in one motion joined
T'invite him to their deserts, where he might
Make trial of his force in manly fight,
With their wild beasts, and promised him consorts
All truly tried t'assist him in those sports.
The motion takes, a brave accoutred horse,
And his own arms, he and's associate force
Advance to hunt; me thinks I see them all
Drawn to the life in canvasse painted cloths in Inns and victualling houses.
against the wall,
In some mean house made for good-fellowship,
How fierce they look, how brave they prance and skip;
With hounds and horns, and bills and pikes and glaves,
And spears and clubs, and many light-foot knaves:
In this brave equipage they march away
To the known haunts where these wild creatures pray.
'Twas Jones his trick of old to ride alone:
In hard adventures he will admit of none
To share with him, from them he steals aside,
And in the desert by himself does ride.
Nor rode he long till just against him stalks
A ramping Lion new come from his walks,
Jones draws, the furious beast with fiery eyes
And bristled mane, against his bosom flies,
But his keen sword met full with his fore paws,
And whipped them off; and so he escaped his claws.
Nor stayed it there, but gave a cruel wound
To his left jaw, and fel'd him to the ground.
Then nimbly wheels abont, and stepped aside,
Leaps from his horse which to a tree he tide:
Then turns again and with his sword falls to it,
To end this combat with him foot to foot.
The wounded beast with all his power does hasten,
His fearful fangs in Jones his throat to fasten.
Whilst on's hin feet he assaults him bolt upright,
With left hand armed, Jones stunnes him, with the right,
Strikes both his hin legs off: yet on his stumps
The noble beast unconquered fiercely jumps
Full at his face with open mouth, and there,
(For his grim face could raise in Jones no fear)
In shoots the deadly blade, and out behind,
Where't makes a second vent for life's short wind;
This thrust with right hand armed so home was lent
That hand and hilt quite throw together went,
Where taking hold of his strong stern (for truth
He swares) he drew't quite through his trunck to his mouth
Then with fine force (the like was never seen)
He strips his inside out, and 's outside in.
Thus tergiverst upon his steed he flings him,
Then mounts himself, and to the Court he brings him.
Never was royal beast so grossly jaded,
But 'twas his fate which could not be evaded,
Unto the gallants of the Court he shows,
How hard th'adventure was, what thrusts, what blows;
On every circumstance he does dilate;
Nor adds he much to truth, nor much does 'bate:
For much he spoke, the Lion made it good
With loss of his four legs, and his best blood.
This strange achievement strikes them all with wonder;
'Twas never seen since Greeces Alexander.
Lysimachus, Lisander, nor Perdicas, Read Curtius, touching these.

Nor any of his Chiefs, ere did the like as
Our Jones in this: It Is true, they write they killed,
In single fight some few of these in field;
But here is a force born with a higher sail,
Transtorting tail to head, and head to tail.
The Prince in words this high achievement praised:
But inward fear and jealousy it raised
Of our brave Queen, whose scepter does command
Such men whose power no Nation can withstand.
Jones might so far on his own strength presume, as
To seize his throne, as A private Spanish Commander, that took this great King
of Mexico with a handful of men.
Cortez Montezeuma's
Had done before. These thoughts he often revolves
With troubled mind, and so in fine resolves
To shift him thence: makes for his fair pretense,
Matter of high and hasty consequence,
To be with speed conveyed unto our Queen;
Except her self it must by none be seen.
This past on Jones, who parts with high content,
Nobly presented with fair complement.
Amongst the rest, a Parrot that could speak
All tongues but Jones his own; that had a beak
Of perfect coral, plumed as white as snow:
This he accepts, and so to Sea does go.
Where under sail such welcome he receives,
As one dire foe unto another gives.
With calmes, and storms, and winds, all cross, that bear
The ship quite off the course that she would steer.
Long time thus spent, into a Bay he drives,
And at a Port unknown at last arrives:
Where he beholds a glorious Castle built
High on a cliffe, whose walls pure gold, or guilt
To him appeared. Which object caused him land,
To know who did this Princely seat command.
He Is told it is the Queen of No-lands place,
The only relict of her royal race,
A Maiden Queen that here does keep her Court,
Where many Kings and Princes of high port
Make their address, and lose themselves in love,
To purchase hers, for not a man can move
Her heart to wed, though nere so great his state,
Or form exact, such was the will of Fate.
Here as he lands, a large Cannow was sent
To know from whence he was, and whither bent.
In this a Dutchman came by happy Fate,
Who could his Language to the Queen translate.
This man he tells as briefly as he can,
His voyage from his Queen to Prester John:
How by cross winds in his return he is blow'n,
And forced into this Port to him unknown.
Jones is resolved to see and to be seen
Of this great Princess, that our virgin-Queen
Might know when he returns what form, what port
This royal Virgin carried in her Court.
Thus like an errant Knight all armed complete,
He marches boldly to her Palace gate,
All massy polished brass; at this first ward,
Six milk-white Panthers fierce were chained for guard.
Thence through a large great specious Court he past,
And so ascends twelve ivory steps at last,
With ebon columns, unto which were tide
Twelve sharp kept Lions, who all yawned wide
When strangers do approach Jones through them all
Is safely guarded to a goodly Hall.
From thence ascends to rooms of greater state,
And comes at last where this Princess royal sat
Upon a strange rich bed, not stuffed with down,
But closely wrought, and like a bladder blow'n;
Three AEthiops on each side, to fan the air
With Ostridge plumes perfumed as rich as fair.
Her beauty could not boast of white and red,
But jet-like black; about her crisp curled head
And cheeks, there hang rich flaming stones and pearls,
That past Mark Anthony's Egyptian girls.
In brief; if Tuscan lived to limne the night
Sparkling with stars, this were her picture right.
No sooner to her sight does Jones appear,
Then to her heart his piercing eyes shot fire;
Which Cupid blows and raised into a flame,
That warmes her zeal to invocate his name.
No part of Jones but in her eye exceeds
All humane shape; some god he must be needs.
But when at her request he does relate
The chances of his past and present state;
Never was ear with Orpheus harp possessed
As hers with Jones, whilst he his life expressed.
Those that have warmed themselves by these strong fires,
May easily guess what fruits her wild desires
Produced to Jones; The observance of the Court,
With feasts and banquets, and all Princely sport,
Are at his foot: he cannot name nor wish
That meat he likes, but straight it is in his dish.
In this high state some months he takes his ease,
Whilst this sick Princess feeds on her disease:
At last a sharp alarm damps these desires,
Which threatened death, but could not quench her fires.
A Prince there was mighty in bulk and mind,
Whose Kingdoms confines unto No-land joined:
Descended in his race from Og of Basan;
You Would think his very name might well amaze one,
Bahader Cham Mombaza's King; he had been
A long hot suter to this mighty Queen,
But still repulsed: now this unruly fire
Suppressed with scorn, breaks forth from love to ire.
A mighty host he raised, and marches through
The heart of No-land, to command, not woo:
Approaching near her Court, he sends her word
She must be his own Queen at bed and board,
Or see her Kingdom burn in higher flames,
Then his for her: yet (for his spirit shames
To war with women) if she can find out
One man in all her Realm, that is so stout
In her defense with him his sword to try,
He Will bravely win her, or he will bravely dye.
Her Courtiers quail'd at this, who knew his force
Could not be paralleled by man nor horse.
Nor could it choose but make the Queen look black,
Not pale. Th'interpreter at Jones his back
Rounds in his ear this proud imperious speech;
Had she been thence, he had bid him kiss his breech
For this proud message: up howere he starts,
And this loud answer with his mouth he farts;
Go tell Bahader Cham Mombaza's King,
One Mars begot in's wrath will have a fling
With him ere night, that one who at one breath
Don Dego and Gonzago did to death,
Will look him dead; nor will I only be
This Princess champion, but (thy Cham to see)
I Will walk through beds of Scorpions: for I hear
He dares enough, and I can brook no peer.
This high reply nere moved the haughty Cham,
Let Jones be what he will he is still the same.
The day's his own before the fight's begun:
Were Mars himself in steed of Mars his son.
A back and breast and helmet strong he dond,
Well wrought and varnished by some Indian hand,
A whale-bone bow he takes of special strength,
With arrows barb'd, at least two yards in length:
A crooked Scimiter whose edge was flint,
Queintly conjoined and some tough spell was in it,
To make it proof against the strength of steel.
Often had this sword made headstrong Giants reel.
By his right side a massy Mace he hangs,
With which his sturdy foes to death he bangs.
A buckler like a Spanish ruff he wore
About his neck, full half yard deep, or more:
He wore not this for his defense, or grace,
But to keep off his urine from his face.
For you must know that member was still mounted:
The bravest woman's man on earth accounted.
And thus prepared, this lusty Termagant,
Ascends his castle on his Elephant.
And then advances to a spacious Green,
Before the castle of this maiden Queen.
A brave Arabian courser is prepared
For Jones, his own true arms he dons for guard,
Llwellins sword to do; and so descends
Down to the Green, where the fierce Cham attends.
Jones was to seek what kind of fight were best,
To make against this Giant and his beast.
Both far exceed in strength himself and horse,
And therefore art must now be joined with force:
No breast to breast, a nimble charge, and gone.
His ready steed as soon comes off as on.
Had not the well tried arms he wore proved true,
The Chams smart whale bone bow had made him rue
This bold attempt: but what can whales weak bones,
When whales themselves came short to swallow Jones?
Thus thrice he charged, and thrice he came off clear,
At last he came close up in full career,
And turning short, the horses hind feet slipped:
Through which mischance the Carry-castle ripped
His bowels forth, with his tusk; down falls the horse:
The furious beast claspt Jones with his probosce;
And mounts him high, but in his rise he found
The means to give Bahaders face a wound,
And cuts in the instant off, the trunck that claspt him:
So down the Elephant was forced to cast him.
This hard exploit none ere performed before,
But one of Caesar's Read the Commentar^es de bello Africano.
Soldiers, and no more.
The wounded beast enraged with pain cries out
With hideous voice, and plunged and pranc'd about
The Green, till from his seat the prince he throw'th,
And then (for by the Cham from his first growth,
This feat he had been taught,) though mad with pain,
He strives to mount him on his back again.
But Jones had lopt off his strong trunck before,
Whereby he could perform this feat no more.
Here Jones denies he bred this docill beast,
Taught to his hand he got him from the East;
And his report must have belief before us,
Who swears it was the same that carried Read Curtius touching that El^phant
of Porus, who often remounted his master with his trunck in tha battle between
him and Alexander.
Porus
Against the Macedon. I cannot see
How by wise natures rules this thing should be,
Unless in Plinies Volumes it appears,
That Elephants may live two thousand years.
Now Jones leaps up in have, and swiftly flies,
With sword in hand, where bruised Bahader lies;
And ere he could get up, one washing stroke
His head and buckler from his shoulders took;
Which when it was off, they may compare't that will,
To the grim S John's head on Ludgate hill.
His numerous Army struck with grief and sright
At his sad fate betook it self to flight,
And thus was No-lands Queen redeemed by Jones
From bondage, rape, and No-lands loss at once.
Now if she loved our Captain well before,
In reason she must love him ten times more,
Which she expressed by laying at his foot
Her people, No-land, and her felfe to boot:
But whether 'twas the god of loves deep curse,
That she refused for better or for worse,
Those mighty Princes which to her he sent,
To make her do^e on a non-resident;
Flings snow-balles at his heart, and flames at hers,
To keep conjunction from these errant Stars;
Or whether Jones his genitals had got
Some lame defect by Skinks late desperate shot;
And so his noble heart made him refuse,
What having got he could not rightly use.
It Is not in me to Judge, but this I know,
Her violent fires scorcht her, and him his snow,
So cold that to avoid her amorous sight,
He leaves her court, and steals to sea by night:
So Jason used Medea erst, but he is
So wise to take with him the golden fleece,
Which Jones contemned to do, and thought himself
When safe returned, his countries Mine of wealth.
No certain ground I have here to relate,
This great deserted Queens unhappy fate,
But Sr. John Mandivils, who does deliver,
As Jones reports, he came soon after thither,
And found the peoples outside all in black;
A sad expression for their Princess wrack.
Who told him lately there arrived a man,
All white, who for them wondrous things had done,
Redeemed their Queen and kingdom from the shame
Of rape and rapine, which Bahader Cham
Came there to act, and was in open field,
By this white man in single combat killed.
Their Queen enamored with this matchless man,
Refused and left by him: when nothing can
Quench her wild fires but Carthage Queens hard fate;
Whilst on the Cliffe with pensive thoughts she sat,
A sudden spring she gave, and so commends
Her self to sea, where life and love she ends.
No more of this sad stuff: let us all at once
Join in a joyful welcome home to Jones.
In six months sail he steers by Goodwin sands,
Casts anchor at the Downs: the next day lands,
Hasts to the Queen at London, there expresses
Every particular of his addresses
To Prester John; the great affairs success
As she desired: Lastly, in his progress,
He might have married the great Queen of No-land,
But this the Queen gave credit to at no hand,
'Till 'twas confirmed by Sr John Mandevill,
Whose strange reports they may believe that will.
Now let us well observe the happy Fate,
Which still provided for the Queen and State.
Jones had not rested fully three days here,
But out there breaks a great and fearful fire
Of strong rebellion; and to quench it, none's
So fit in common sense, as Captain Jones.
Brave Essex through affronts turned malcontent,
Hatches in's breast a desperate intent,
To seize the Person of the Queen, and those
He found most near about her his strong foes.
Her Grace and Council call for Jones, to know
What in his judgment now were best to do.
Who first her gracious pardon does beseech,
And then delivers this short pithy speech.
First guard the Court with Westminsters strong bands;
Call in the neighboring Counties by commands.
Out with your household men, shut up your gates;
We Will make your foes turn tail with broken pates.
Then call to you the richest of your Citt's,
But seek no cash; for in their bags their wits
Are close knit up: but only thus much make
Them know, their wives and fortunes lie at stake;
That they shall want no succor, whilst your hand
Can grasp the sword, and scepter of this Land.
Thus arm their hearts, and rouse them from their beds,
And then let us alone to arm their heads.
She now requires, that Jones in person go
To Essex, his intents to sound and know;
To use all fairest means that may reduce him,
From those lewd ways, to which lost men seduce him.
He undertakes it; hastens to the Lord,
And is admitted in as soon as heard.
And here he finds Sr Walter Rawleigh with him;
Some ill was in it, his fancy straight does give him.
He knew he came not to the Earl for good,
But to provoke him to some madder mood.
Therefore from thence our Jones does Rawleigh rate,
Shaking his martial truncheon ore his pate:
Bids him pack thence to th'knaves of his Grand Jury,
He Will make him else the example of his fury.
Rawleigh was wise, and ruled by his best sense,
Gives place to time, and so withdrawes from thence.
Then Jones these Counsels to the Earl began,
How full of dangers were the ways he ran:
How weak his power; much less unto the force
Of Englands, then his Raine-deer's to a horse.
Thus his brave Family must be destroyed,
His honors lost, his ancient house made void:
Beside, his cause was naught; for though himself
Nere read the laws of this great Commonwelth,
Yet he had heard some Lawyer say long since,
There was no law to captivate our Prince.
Thus all the harmless blood that shall be spilt
In this bad cause, must lie on Essex guilt.
Lay hand on heart most noble Peer, (quoth Jones)
The Queen can pardon, and enrich at once.
Be you but good, she can be gracious,
Your own experience can inform you thus.
Thus Jones possessed his noble heart so far,
He is resolved to wave the chance of war;
Himself and house he yields unto the Queen,
And her cold mercy, which too soon was seen.
This is the last great act I can relate,
Of his good service for the Queen and State.
Rewards fit for his worth there were prepared,
Which his high spirit past by without regard:
And his great Queen was seriously bent,
To put him in some place of government;
But Nature only taught the man to fight,
And his rude Mother not to read and write.
Which was the chiefest cause that made him hate
To be employed in mysteries of State.
Besides, he was not pleased that her Grace
Cut off this Noble man before his face,
Whom he brought in; it may be his own lot,
With axe or cord for naught to go to pot.
Thus ignorance, a discontented mind,
And worth ill weighed, do make him fall behind
Occasions lock; which lost, he never more,
Though bred and breathed on hills, shall get before.
Now time and bruises, and much loss of blood,
Had made Jones feel cold age was not so good
As fiery youth; he needs must find a fail
Of what he was: declined from top to tail.
Which made him wish he might put up his rest,
And breath his last in his own Countries breast.
And for this cause he went unto her Grace,
And begged of her a Muster-masters place,
In Wales, nere his first home: where he may spend
His later days in peace, and in it end:
And yet to leave behind his martial art,
To Wale's posterity, before he part.
This suit with speed and readiness is granted,
And so to Wales our Muster-master's janted.
Here many years he spent in telling more,
Or less of those strange things he did before:
At last in his old age he grows so wild,
He needs must marry, to beget a child:
Which though he mist, the mastery he must have
Ore every sex, Jones sent her to her grave.
Devotion now with his old age increast,
He meditates thrice every day at least.
His only prayer was the Absolution
In our old Liturgy, with some confusion
Of short ejaculations in his bed,
For some old slips, and for the blood he shed;
Especially for those six Kings he killed
Without remorce at the Juzippian field:
At last death comes, whose power he defied
From first to last, and thus he lived and di'd.
Now you wild blades that make loose Innes your stage.
To vapor forth the acts of this sad age,
Your Edghil fight, the Newberies, and the West,
And Northern clashes; where you still fought best:
Your strange escapes, your dangers void of fear,
When bullets flew between the head and ear:
Your pia matters rent, perished your guts,
Yet live, as then ye had been but earthen buts:
Whether you fought by Damme, or the Spirit,
To you I speak, still waving men of merit,
Be modest in your tales, if you exceed
My Captain's hard achievements, I Will proceed
Once more to imp my rural muses wings,
And tune my lyre so high, I Will break her strings,
But I will reach ye, and thence raise such laughter,
As shall continue for five ages after.
The Captains Elegy.
ANd art thou gone brave man? has conquering death
Put a full period to thy blustering breath?
Thus has she played her masterpiece? and here
Fixed her nil supra on thy sable beer?
Scap'st thou those hideous storms, those horrid fights,
With many Giants; cruel beasts, fierce Knights?
Such dangerous stratagems, such foes intrapping,
And now has death don't? sure she took thee napping.
For had thou been awake to use thy sword,
She would have shunned thee, and have taken thy word
For thy appearance, till the last return
Of her long term. Or did thy metle burn
Through thy chapt clay unto Elysiums shades
T'in counter with the ghosts of those old blades,
Great Caesar, Scipio, Annibal; 'cause here
Thy fiery spirit could not find its peer?
How could thou else find time to fold thy arms
In thy still grave, now Mars raines bloody storms,
On Christian earth? great Austria would be ours
Without pitched field, without beleaguering towers:
Were thou but here, thy sword would strike the stroke
To break or bring their necks to Britains yoke.
Perhaps it was the providence of Fate,
To snatch thee up, lest thou should come too late,
Now soldiers drop pel-mel, whose souls might thrust
Thine from the chiefest place, which thou from first
Have gained on earth; now what shall England do?
Limp like some grandame that has lost her shoe.
Put case a new Tyrone again should spring
From his old urne, or some such furious thing
As fierce Mac-kil-cow, where were then our Jones,
To bring these Rebels on their marrow bones?
Or say against Spain our pikes we readvance,
For their old Sack, as such a thing may chance,
Where shall we then find out that Martial man,
That killed six thousand with nine-score? he is gone.
And we that lick the dish that Homer lapt in,
What fury now shall our dull brains be rapt in?
We must go sing Sr. Lancelot and rehearse
Old Huan's villainous prose in wilder verse;
Or else put up our pipes, and all at once,
Cry farewell wit: all is gone with Captain Jones.
Well go thy ways (old blade) thou have done thy share
For things beyond belief time (never fear)
Will give thee being here: thou have left us stuff,
To build thy Pyramid, more then enough,
To equal Cayre's, and happily it will out last it,
So with thy glorious deeds we may rough-cast it.
Fare well great soul, and take this praise with many;
Fxcept thy foes, thou nere did harm to any:
And thus far let our Muse thy loss deplore,
Well she may sigh, but she shall nere sing more.
His EPITAPH.
TRead softly (mortals) ore the bones
Of the worlds wonder Captain Jones:
Who told his glorious deeds to many,
But never was believed of any:
Posterity let this suffice,
He swore all is true, yet here he lies.
FINIS.

