A PROJECT OF A DESCENT UPON FRANCE.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON. Printed; and are to be sold by Rich. Baldwin. MDCXCI.

PREFACE.
THIS Paper was written last Winter: and should then have been published, had
it not been for some Impediments. And the Business of Valona happening since,
the mention of it is now added in the transcribing. I crave leave to say
further, that the whole Form of this Project was communicated diverse Months
ago, to some Persons proper. and if they were not pleased to make use or take
notice of it, the Author is not to be blamed. The time seems not yet past, for
pursuing the Design here recommended. But if it should be past, so that it were
now too late to show what may be done; yet it will be a Satisfaction to the
curious, to know what might have been. Moreover there are some things here
offered, that may perhaps rouse up the Spirits of our English Nation, and put
them likewise in Mind to do some Good for themselves. Of which there is now
such an Opportunity, as is hardly to be again expected. But if it be decreed
that We must get nothing, we must be content.

A PROJECT OF A DESCENT INTO FRANCE.
I That erewhile have sounded a Trumpet for a Voyage Royal into France, must
now aim at lower and lesser things, and content my self with a Descent: if even
that may be obtained. Had we a Peace in Ireland, we might continue our Thoughts
of a Voyage Royal. Our King might then be in the Head of a mighty Army,
composed entirely of his own Subjects: who would delight to follow him and
serve him in so glorious an Expedition. He might have them to any number under
a hundred Thousand. We might then act separately, and with Honor; and we might
make a great Figure in the World. And moreover we might hereby give to our
Confederates a most effectual Assistance; making their Work easy by so strong
a Diversion. Such an Invasion as this, would in all Probability turn the
Fortune of the War at once: Such a Voyage as this, would make us emulate the
great Actions of our Ancestors in France: and we might reasonably hope for as
good Success. For tho the French are much stronger now, than they were in those
days; yet by reason of their many other Enemies, assailing them on all sides,
we should find them much weaker.

These would be the Effects of a Peace in Ireland. But this Peace has not been
had: there have been too little Inclinations to it. Though all Europe (I mean,
all those that would pull down the French King) be as much concerned to have
it, as to have a Peace in Hungary. For there is the same Consequence and
Advantage of both: and that is, That thereby we may be enabled to bring all our
Forces against the French.

This being the Condition of Affairs, and the main of our Force being still
detained in Ireland, so that only Part of it can act against France; it is to
be considered, how this Part may be employed to most Advantage. Suppose then
that of our seventy Thousand Men (which is the present Establishment wanting a
few Hundreds, and for which the Parliament has provided full Pay) we should
turn twenty Thousand against France. And I hope we may suppose likewise, that
we shall have a Fleet out this Summer, that will make us Masters at Sea. Here I
presume to affirm, that this twenty Thousand Men being put on board our Fleet,
will do more Service, and be a greater Terror to the French, than any other way
whatsoever.

But what must these Men do when they are on board the Fleet? What will be
their Business? I answer; their Business will be, to run straight upon the
French Coast, and there to Land: or in other Words, to make a vigorous Descent
into France.

There are several things that recommend this Design to us.

First, The French cannot hinder us from Landing. tho they had no other Enemy,
and though all their Forces were drawn down to the Seaside, yet it could not
be done. But when all their regular Troops are engaged elsewhere, it were a
great Mistake, if Arrier Bans and Country Militias should so much as endeavor
it. Sir Walter Rawleigh knew these Matters as well as any Man in the World. And
his bare Opinion might seem sufficient in the Case. But he not only affirms,
but also gives plain and clear Demonstration, that it is impossible to keep an
Enemy from Landing, if he be Master at Sea. And the thing is confirmed by
universal Experience. For never any Army that came against a Country by Sea,
did fail to Land upon it.

Secondly, When we are Landed, nothing can hinder us from fortifying. If twenty
Thousand Men, having the Sea and a Fleet behind them, cannot entrench, (either
in a Town or upon the open Shore) so as to defend themselves against any Force
that can be brought against them; they deserve to be cut in pieces. But they
must labor hard: and they must have good store of Spades, and Mattocks, and
Baskets, and Barrows: and they should carry Palisadoes ready with them.

In the third Place, Nothing can hinder, but that the Place we thus fortify
may be some weak Port. There are many such on that side of France which lies
upon our English Channel: and which is, from Calice to Breast, near five hundred
Miles in Length. But in all this Coast between Breast and Calice, there are but
three Ports of any Strength considerable; and those are Havre de Grace,
Honfleur and S. Maloes. All the rest are in a manner open Towns, and may be
easily seized by any strong hand that approaches them. As for Graveling and
Dunkirk, they are in the French Flanders, and out of these Bounds.

Fourthly, Any Port that we thus fortify, may be made as good as Calice:
provided it be relievable by Sea, and not commanded by Land. And by the Labor
of twenty Thousand Men, it may in two Months time be put in such a Condition;
that a Garrison of eight or ten Thousand, being backed by the whole Power of
England, will defend it against the whole Power of France. It is not necessary,
that it should be a good Port: it cannot well be worse than Calice. and the
French have no good Port upon these narrow Seas, save only Breast, and S.
Malo's, and Dunkirk. It will be sufficient, if the Place can receive and secure
small Vessels. Also this Place should be upon these Seas, that it may be
reinforced and supplied from England with every Snatch of Wind: lying also in
the way of our grand Fleet.

Fifthly, This rampant Garrison, having a thousand or fifteen hundred Horse
lodged in it, will command the Country far and wide. The French in Mastricht,
with the like number of Horse, exacted so great a Contribution, that they sent
at one time (over and above the maintenance of the Garrison) eight hundred
Thousand Crowns in Money to their Flanders Army. Dunkirk had but five hundred
Horse while the English held it: and they commanded Contribution forty Miles
round. as I have been told by Sir Tobias Bridges, who had the Command of those
Horse.

Sixthly, I grant that the French will do their utmost to curb and bridle this
Garrison. But it will be to little purpose. While the Dutch held Ostend, all
the Power of Spain (which was then very great) could not hinder that Garrison
from making Incursions into Flanders. But if the French should beset us with
extraordinary Vigor, we must take them off by giving them more Work elsewhere.
that is, by seizing and fortifying some other Ports. For my meaning is, that
our moving Force be still kept up to the full number of twenty Thousand; to
make farther Progresses, and to harrass and torment the French. When these
Fires are thus kindled in several Places, they will find it very hard to quench
them. and tho possibly they might be able to oppose the Insults of one
Garrison, yet they can never bear up against three or four, or perhaps a
greater number. These Garrisons being scattered upon their whole Coast of five
hundred Miles; and every one of them having behind it the whole Power of
England, to support and enforce it. Admitting therefore, that the Power of
France were double or treble to that of England, and that their whole Power
were turned against us; yet having them at this Lock, we should be too hard for
them.

Seventhly, There needs no mighty number of Transport Ships for this Service.
For our Grand Fleet, which will be always in these Seas, will with great ease
carry over the forementioned twenty thousand Men. I mean the Foot; of which
this Force will almost wholly consist. For the Horse must be carried in Vessels
proper, which may also be done at leisure; they being not useful either in the
Landing or the Fortifying, which are the Things first to be done. It is not
here intended, that our great Ships of War should run close in to the French
Shore: for generally the Seas are there shallow and dangerous. But they may go
as near as they can safely; and there lying off, they may send the Men ashore
in their Boats and Tenders, or in other small Vessels. which for a Miles
Passage, or two or three Miles, may be stuffed as full as they can hold.

Eighthly, If we can fix Garrisons in this French Coast, we may well presume
they will be strongly supported from England. The greatest part of our standing
Forces may without much inconvenience lie in the Counties adjoining to that
Sea, and be ready to embark upon all Occasions. And I may venture to say, That
even our Trained Bands (and particularly those of the said adjoining Counties)
would march with all cheerfulness, to make good our Footing in France. the
London Auxiliaries I dare engage will do it. Nor can Ships be wanting to
transport them. for beside the Ships that must be kept for that purpose, those
Seas are always full both of our Men of War and Merchants. But since standing
Armies must not always be in England; and since the Militia's of some Counties
must not be pressed with greater Duty than others, unless in cases
extraordinary; we must think of some way beside, to support and enforce our
French Garrisons. It is therefore proposed, that fifteen or twenty thousand
Foot, and three or four thousand Horse be listed and armed in the said
adjoining Counties; that is, in the Counties to the South of Thames, with the
addition of London and Middlesex. These Troops to be ready to march and embark
upon every sudden Command. Every Footman to have forty or fifty Shillings a
Year, and a Horseman eight or ten Pound, and their Officers in proportion: with
full Pay while they are in Service. Such an Establishment will not be of any
great Charge. but what ever it be, France will be made to pay it. For our
Garrisons in France, being backed by such a Body of Horse and Foot, will
command much farther into the Country: each of them will command as far, as if
this Body of Men were constantly lodged in it. And surely England will then be
glorious, when we have a Range of Garrisons the whole length of the Channel,
upon French Ground, and maintained by French Contributions. It will be such a
Frontier, such a Barrier, as never any Kingdom has had the like.

Ninthly, There are upon this French Coast, as before has been noted, diverse
Ports and Creeks (such as they are) that are capable of being well fortified.
but some of them are more inviting than the rest: of which I shall name a few.
In Picardy there is Bologne, or (as we call it) Bullen: a place of great Fame
amongst us English Men, since Henry the Eighth took it. But all its
Fortifications are now demolisht, save only the old Walls of the upper Town. I
confess this Place is not for our turn: because even the lower Town lies some
distance from the Sea. But we may remember, that while we held it, the French
begun a Fort (and they called it Fort Chastillon, from the Famous Admiral of
that Name) between the Sea and the lower Town. If we should now make a large
Intrenchment in this Place, (for little ones are good for nothing,) and should
fill it with a Garrison of ten thousand Men, it would dismember all the French
Conquests in Flanders: for it would command them quite thorough. It would do
the French five times more hurt, than the taking of Mons has done them good.
In vain would Humieres guard his Line, to hinder the Incursions of the
Brabanders, if such a Fire were kindled behind him. Then if we go on to
Normandy, we shall there find Harflew and Quillebeuf at the Mouth of the Seine.
which Places, though they lie open at present, have been strong formerly. The
former endured a Siege from our Henry the fifth when he conquered Normandy:
being the First Fruits of that glorious Expedition. And the later, in the Civil
Wars of France, was the only place for a time, that Henry the fourth had upon
that River. during which time, it shrewdly annoyed Roan and the other Places
which the Leaguers held. If it be objected that Havre de Grace and Honfleur lie
lower upon the same River, and therefore stop the Passage to the other two
Places; I deny the Consequence: for the River is here so wide, that there is no
stopping of the Passage. Moreover in the same Normandy there is the Town of
Cherburg, just over against our Spit-head. It was always a Garrison till this
dangerous War broke out. At which time the French King resolved to keep no
Garrisons, save very strong ones. And he found that this Place could not be
made very strong, unless some high Grounds were taken in that command it. which
new Line would require so much Labor to make it, and so many Men to defend it,
that he chose rather to slight the whole, an old Castle excepted; which Castle
is of no Strength toward the Land, against an Enemy that has made a Descent.
If we go further on to Bretagne, the Haven of Conquest does there lie fair for
us. I confess it is no deep Harbor, it lying dry at every low Water: But a
great and strong Fortification in this place, with a great and strong Garrison
in it, would be very useful to us, were the Harbor never so mean. Also this
Place is so much the better, because it is so near the Port of Breast, and would
be a means to bring us better acquainted with it.

Lastly, The attacquing the Port of Breast it self, is a principal end and use
of these Land Forces on Shipboard. Not to get it for our Selves, for that
requires a much greater Force: but to spoil it to the French. which would
destroy at once their Power at Sea, they having no other Harbor for great
Ships upon all this Coast. Let us therefore consider how this Port lies. It
opens to the Westward: being at the very Lands end of France (which is much
broader than that of England,) just where the Bay of Biscay comes up to the
Mouth of the English Channel. Without this Port there is a Commodious Bay,
almost in form of a Semicircle, and about two Leagues over: the Seamen call it
Brest-Water. The depth of it in most places is from ten to fifteen Fathom, and
no where under seven. The entrance of the Port is about a League in length, and
about half a League broad. And close under the Southern Shore of it there is a
deep and narrow Channel; the rest being rocky, and shoat water. As for the Port
it self, it is much greater within than the Bay is without; being deep for the
most part, and running into the main Land by diverse Creeks or Spurs. and upon a
Northerly Creek of it the Town of Breast is situate: being exceeding strong, and
very well manned and furnished. Here now it is plain, that there is no
attempting the Town, with the Force that can now be brought against it. Nor
indeed would it do us any Service to have it, as long as the French command the
Entrance of the Port, which we must presume they have strongly fortified. We
must therefore apply our Thoughts to this Entrance of the Port, and to the Bay
without. As for the Bay, (to speak of that first,) there is no doubt, but that
if we had a great Fort on each side, and in them two or three hundred good
reaching Guns, the French would find it very uneasy riding or lying in this
Bay, and not very safe passing. I have been present, where Men of great Skill
have had a large Draught of this Bay before them, and have pointed to the very
places where these Forts should be. And surely if we are Masters at Sea,
nothing can hinder us from making these Forts. Then for the Entrance of the
Harbor, there are diverse things that may be done there. One thing is, (and they
that well know the place do think it very feasible,) to choke the narrow
Channel or Passage by sinking of Ships. which being laden with Stone-work and
Tarras, will not easily be removed. Another thing is, to make a good Fort on
the Northern side of this Entrance: where I think the French have no Fort, the
deep Channel being on the other side. But if they have a Fort there, and it
cannot speedily be taken, we must make another not too near it. which, though
half a League from the deep Channel, would shrewdly annoy both single Ships,
and much more grand Fleets, in their passage. A third thing is, to make a good
Fort on the Southern side, just upon the deep Channel. where, though the French
may have more than one already, yet they cannot have so many, but that another
Fort may live by them; this Shore (as has been said) being three Miles in
length. It Is much if we cannot find a place without their outermost Fort, which
though it be not so very near the deep Channel, may yet command it
sufficiently. But if there be no such place without, we must fix upon one
within. and our Forces being landed from the Bay, may by Land come down to it.
You will say that such a place cannot be relieved and supplied by Sea, the
French having a Fort without it. But I answer, That this cannot hinder small
Vessels from coming to it by Night, and at high Water. for even the shallow
parts of the Entrance will be then deep to such Vessels. There is yet another
thing to be done at this Entrance into the Port of Breast: and that is, That
since by the deepness of the Channel, our great Ships may come close to the
Forts lying upon it, they may (with their mighty force of Cannon) beat these
Forts about the Frenchmens Ears. which will be the easier done, if they are
attacqued by Land at the same time. They that are acquainted with these
Matters, know that a Fort in such cases is a mere idle Bugbeare: and that any
Fort, approachable by great Ships, may be thus beaten to pieces. unless it be
large, and have a mighty number of Guns. for then it may be too hard for the
Ships at their own Weapon. I confess this thing requires great skill and
courage: nor is it to be done by every Fool. but I know the Men, that can and
dare do it.

I must now answer some Objections against this Project of a Descent.

It may be objected, that having proposed twenty thousand Men to be employed
against France, I do afterward design further to have several great Garrisons:
which may take up above forty thousand Men more. so that I have outrun my own
Proposal. To this I answer, That it is true, here will be required an increase
of Men; which we may safely presume we cannot want, if they are well paid, and
have good English Officers. but here will be no increase of Charge, which is
the main thing to be feared. For these Garrisons will maintain themselves. and
by how much greater they are, by so much better they will do it.

It may also be objected, that the way here proposed, is a very laborious and
chargeable way of Conquering. it would probably cost us less to take Towns
ready fortified and furnished, than to raise these Fortifications from the
Ground. But I answer, That we must not think of taking strong Towns, unless we
had an Army that would make us clearly Masters of the Field. Such an Army, I
confess, might find every thing easy. but such an Army we cannot have in
France, unless we had a Peace in Ireland. which Peace it concerned us to have
upon any Terms, that so we might apply all our Force to pull down this French
King. for except we do it, we are in great danger to be destroyed by him. Since
therefore, by reason of the Irish War continuing, we cannot do as we would, we
must do as we may. Moreover the Method here proposed, though it may seem flow
and heavy, yet it is sure, and void of all hazard; there being hardly a
possibility of miscarriage. and it would put the French, whom we must allow to
be shrewd Gamesters, quite beside their Play. And what would the Charge of
these Fortifications be? It would chiefly consist in the Labor of Men; and
here are twenty thousand ready to perform it. And a small matter given to those
that labor, over and above their ordinary Pay, would make them labor
cheerfully. which was the way of the old Princes of Orange. Suppose then, that
one time with another, there be twelve thousand Men at Work: at a Groat a day
extraordinary. this comes in the whole to two hundred pound a day: which for
every hundred days is twenty thousand pound, and seventy three thousand for the
whole year. which is no such affrighting Sum.

It may be objected likewise, that having fortified these Places as it has
been here projected, we shall lofe them when we have done. And the fresh
Example of Valona, and of Calice of old, and afterward of Ostend, Candia and
Dunkirk, seem to strengthen this Apprehension. But all this notwithstanding, it
will be very hard and very strange, if the whole Power of England should not be
able to defend a great and strong Intrenchment, against any Power whatsoever.
that is, If the place be near us, and lie open to Sea, of which Sea we are
Masters. for such a place has the whole Power of England to support it. What
do you talk of Valona? If we cannot do better than the Venetians, we deserve to
have our Legs cut off. These are they, that when their Enemy could make no
resistance considerable, being so terribly over-laid elsewhere; have been
trifling away their time, for diverse years, in making a Conquest that is not
worth one Farthing. for it will never bear the charge of maintaining it. But
had the gallant Cornaro who took Valona been alive, (the only Man of the
Venetians that deserves that Name;) he would not have lost it in that manner,
while a Fleet with Land Forces on board it lay in the Harbor. He would have
put himself into the Town, taking both his Landmen and Seamen with him; and
have made good the Breach (for it seems a Breach was made) by repairing, and
retrenching, and strength of Men. As for Calice, it was lost by the Sottishness
of Queen Mary's Council; and their shameful neglect to send it Supplies,
notwithstanding the repeated Instances of the Lord Wentworth then Governor.
Ostend was too little, and was lost for want of ground. however it held out a
violent Siege of three years and upwards. But Candia is an encouragement to
this fortifying Project. for if we can raise Fortifications in two or three
months, that can stand a Siege of above twenty years, as Candia did; we need
not repent the Bargain. I could wish that Dunkirk might be past over in
silence: for the selling of it, especially to the French, is a shame to our
Nation. I do well remember a Discourse, not long after the thing was done,
between a Knight and an Squire upon this Subject. The Knight was the
beforementioned Sir Tobias Bridges, who commanded the Horse there: the Squire
shall be nameless: But he desired to know of the Knight, what were the true
Reasons of our parting with Dunkirk. and the Knight asked him again, what He
(the Squire) thought to be the true Reasons of it. I had rather (said the
Squire) learn from You, who know better. But I (said the Knight) desire to hear
Your Reasons. Then said the Squire, I have heard several Reasons alleged. One
is, That the keeping it would be a continual Charge to us. Not so, says the
Knight, for the Parliament that established the Kings Revenue, had the Article
of Dunkirk laid before them among the other Expenses of the Crown; and they
allowed it, and provided fully for it. so that it could not be accounted a
Charge to the King. but however it would be a Charge to the Kingdom, said the
Squire. If the Kingdom, said the Knight, were willing to bear it, as they were
most willing; where was the harm? And how could they bestow Money better, then
toward the keeping of a brave Nursery of Soldiers, in a Post of mighty
importance and advantage both to Sea and Land, and in exact and complete
Military Discipline? But moreover the Charge, when the Works were finished,
would have been inconsiderable. For we commanded such a Contribution in the
Countries, forty Miles every way, as would maintain the Garrison: at least
within a small matter. And therefore, the Knight added, what you have said
about the Charge, is no Reason. Then the Squire proceeding; Another Reason,
says he, is this: That the Place is not relievable by Sea, it lying some
distance from it. I confess, said the Knight, that it lies near half a Mile
from the Sea. But the Ground between the Sea and the Town is so low and so wet,
that no Enemy can work through it to block up the Passage. And therefore this
is no Reason neither: have you any more Reasons? Yes, says the Squire, I have
one Reason more; They say the Place was not strong, nor could it ever be made
strong. Here the Knight granted, that the Town was not completely strong while
We English held it. But, said he, whoever had seen the New Works, begun and a
good deal advanced by My Lord Tiviott, must have allowed that it might be made
very strong. What could you do with the Sand-hills, said the Squire, which when
a strong Wind came that way, did use to blow into the Town Ditches, and to fill
them quite up? We took a course with those Hills, answered the Knight: for we
carried them clear away, and threw them into wet Ditches and Marshes, whence
they will never rise more. And to speak at once, the Place is now in fact one
of the strongest of Europe. Then said the Squire, I have given you my Reasons,
and I can think of no more at present: pray let me now hear Your Reasons. I
shall give but one Reason, said the Knight: which I think the true one. The
French had then an Army on foot, and not far from us. And if this Army had
marched straight to Dunkirk, and had attacqued it in the Condition it was in,
and before the New Works were finished, in all probability they had carried it.
It seemed therefore advisable rather to sell it for Money, then to have it
taken from us by Force. But what if the Garrison had been doubled, said the
Squire, till these New Works could have been finished? Nay that, said the
Knight, would have made it hot work. Why then I will undertake, said the
Squire, that to relieve Dunkirk, the Auxiliaries of London would have marched
at two days warning. and all other parts of England accordingly. And therefore
the Reason you have given, proves also no Reason. You must take it as it is,
said the Knight; for I can give no better. And so this Discourse ended. Which I
have inserted here, to give some light into that ugly Business of Dunkirk. She
that lost Calice did use to say; that when she was dead, they should find
Calice at her Heart. But He that sold Dunkirk, deserved to have it written upon
his Forehead. it is surely a Brand upon his Memory. Had the Interest or Honor
of our Nation been minded, or any thing but Baseness and Vice, and the French
Greatness; We might have kept Dunkirk to this day. And there is nothing, either
in that or in the other Instances, that should discourage us from embracing the
Project here offered. But enough of this: let us now proceed in the Objections.

It may be objected further, that here is a Design for employing twenty
Thousand Men; and nothing has been said, where or how we shall have them. To
this I answer; that if nothing has been said hitherto, it is now time to say
something. But it has been already intimated, that all the Forces we can spare
from the Irish War, and turn against France, which were supposed about twenty
Thousand, might be put into our Fleet. But you will say, they are already in
Flanders: I answer, they are then so much out of their way. but they may be
easily taken on board, (I mean chiefly the Foot) from Ostend and Newport. You
will say further, that they cannot be spared from those Parts and I answer
further, that they may well be spared, if they draw after them twice as many
French: which they will certainly do. For the French must defend their maritime
Provinces, and Country Militias cannot do it: so that of necessity they must
draw back great Numbers of their regular Troops, tho even these also will be
too little, if the Methods be followed that have been here proposed. But were
it not for the Irish War, we might leave our Forces in Flanders, and fill our
Fleet with those now in Ireland. And therefore some that wish well to England,
and to their Majesty's happy Government; wish the Irish Lands we fight for,
were all in the bottom of the great Ocean. in regard they take us off from our
Main Business, which is the hewing down of the French King. While we are
rooting out the Irish, and in pursuit of their Lands, God only knows to what
Distresses we may be brought. The Losses we have received already, and the
Difficulties and Hazards that may befall us hereafter, must all be imputed to
these Irish Lands. Could we have turned our whole Force against the French,
these things had not been: it had, in all likelihood, given a new face to the
War upon the Continent. But you will say; as the War of Ireland continues, so
that Men cannot be had from thence for the Project here offered: So out of
Flanders they cannot be had, because we are obliged to have them there, (that
is, eight or ten Thousand of them to assist the Dutch, by virtue of a Treaty
with King Charles. To this I answer, that it is much doubted, whether this
Treaty do thus oblige us. It obliges both Parties to assist each other with
that Number, in case either be attacqued. But if both be attacqued, the
Obligation stems to cease, and we must take new Measures: both being concerned
to do their utmost against eth Common Enemy. Moreover the Dutch might be more
effectually assisted, by our having these Men in Normandy or Bretagne, then by
our having them in Flanders. So likewile if the Duke of Savoy have twenty
Thousand Pounds a Month, it might do him more Service to have this Money (which
would maintain 10000 Men more) employed upon the Project here offered, than to
have it remitted in specie: For the good Effects of a Descent upon Normandy or
Bretagne, would be felt in Piemont. Thus we have found Money as well as Men,
toward the carrying on our Project. There is a further means to get Men, which
is this. I have said before, that if a good Part of our standing Forces were
drawn down to the Seaside toward- France, they might there ly ready to
embark, for relieving and renforcing our French Garrisons. And they may in like
manner be employed in our first Descents or Invasions. Nor would they be taken
off thereby from their Business, that is, their Guard of England. For that Sea
being narrow, and our Fleet commanding it; they would in effect have one Foot
in England, while the other is in France. But there is an Expedient yet
remaining, both for Men and Money, which will be sure to do the Work: and which
we must make use of, if the rest should fail. and that is, that we now raise
this twenty Thousand Men, and likewise raise Money to maintain them. And this
is the thing I have now to say in this matter, if nothing had been said before.

I hope I have fully satisfied all the Objections. But this last Expedient may
perhaps be a little startling. What? More Money at this time of day? Yes, more
Money, when all lies at Stake; and to preserve us from utter Destruction. there
being (I fear) no means to prevent it, but by a Descent upon France; which must
be carried on with this Money. We must therefore resolve, in this great
Exigence, to strain our selves to the utmost. We must do any thing, rather than
be Slaves to the French.

But whereas I have spoken of raising Men and Money, these Matters deserve to
be further considered. As for the Men, we may rely upon it, that they will come
in most readily and cheerfully for a Descent upon France. Provided there be two
things observed, which I have slightly mentioned before. The first thing is,
that they be all English. For England had always Men enough for a French Voyage:
and it would be very displeasing to have Foreiners put upon us, as if our
Nation were either despised or distrusted. England also will afford good
Officers, if Care be taken to have the best: but if all the Care be to have the
worst, I confess they will be very ordinary. and so it would be with the
bravest Nation upon Earth. But all this while it is not intended, that the poor
French Protestants should be excluded from joining with us. They have been
driven from their Country, by the Jesuitical bigoted Rage of their inhumane
Tyrant; who has exceeded all the Barbarities of the Heathen Persecutors. And
the restoring of these poor People, next to our own Preservation, is the great
End we aim at. So that there is no Doubt, but that we should gladly receive
them amongst us, under their own Officers. The second thing to be observed, to
facilitate the raising of the Men, is this: that there be a good Fund for their
Payment, and appropriated to it; and that their Money, to prevent all Fear of
Disappointments, be managed by such hands as they like. A Committee of Lords
and Commons, some think, would be the most acceptable. And if his Majesty would
be graciously pleased (in this extraordinary Occasion) to give leave to the
same Committee to recommend the Officers, it would be very much for his
Service. These are the two things, which being duly observed, there will enough
good Men (both Officers and Soldiers) come in cheerfully to this Expedition.
And so I have done with one Branch of the Expedient, which is the raiing of Men.

I now come to the other Branch, which is the raising of Money. And I am still
of opinion (for my opinion has been made known already) that an Excise upon a
great many Commodities of general Use, is without comparison the best way of
raising it. Two pence a pair upon Shoos, would raise a hundred thousand pounds
yearly. and it might be four pence or six pence. If this seem hard to the Poor,
they may wear Cloggs, or Shoos with wooden Soles, which are supposed
Duty-free. And this may save a great deal of Sole-leather: which is as good as
Plate, and might be exported to the great Advantage of the Kingdom. But if they
think scorn to wear this sort of Shoos, they must pay the Duty of the other.
The Duty, I confess, will lie a little hard upon the Shoomakers: as all Taxes
lie harder upon some than upon others. But to make them some amends, and
likewise to raise more Money, a high Duty might be laid upon all unwrought
Leather exported. It is a great doubt, whether the Exportation of Leather be
convenient or not. Some think that it ought to be wholly prohibited, as it was
by the old Laws; upon the same Reasons with that of Wool. and some think it
should be freely permitted, as by our new Laws it is. But the middle way is
certainly the best; that is, to permit it under a high Duty. And surely if all
our Prohibitions were turned into Duties, it would be a happy thing. I name no
other Commodities, fit for an Excise. though there be many such, that are
obious to any Man's Thoughts. and a few of them would raise a greater Sum, than
is required for this Service.

But if nothing else will do the Business, a Land Tax will. And we need not
question, but that, to carry on a Descent into France, the Parliament will
cheerfully grant it, and the People will cheerfully pay it. Such a Tax as we
pay this year, being granted forthwith for the year following, will give a
present Credit for more than is needful for this Affair. And to bring the Tax
to some Equality, and to ease a great many People; No Man to pay above two
Shillings in the pound. The Abatements to be allowed by Commissioners in the
Counties, upon good Proofs made before them; and to be confirmed by a Committee
of Lord and Commons, the Proofs being to them transmitted in writing. By which
means the whole Amount of the Tax will be about a Million. The Pay of the
twenty thousand Men for a whole year, reckoning also two thousand of them to be
Horse, will take up little more then half this Money: and the residue will
defray all other Charges and spare.

Thus I have laid open my whole Project. Which if it be pursued, I make no
doubt but it will bring great Advantages to England, or at least great Terror
and Confusion to the French. For tho we should fail in our main Design, though
we should not be able to seize any Ports, or having done it should not be able
to defend them; yet the very attempting these things in several places, (in one
place to day, and a hundred Miles off the day following,) would harass our
Enemies to that degree, that they would never be able to stand under it. We may
remember, that in the beginning of the late Confederate War, the Dutch sent out
a great Fleet, with some thousands of Landmen on board it, under De Ruyter and
Van Trompe. These past through the English Channel together: but with such
haste, as if they had been running the Gantlope. They never so much as once
stood over to the French Coast, or hardly looked upon it, thereby to amuse and
alarm the Enemy. When they were come to the Channels Mouth, the Fleet divided.
De Ruiter with the greatest part sailed away to the West Indies, where he did
nothing: Trompe with the rest falling down to the River of Nantes. near which
he seized a small Island, separated by a narrow Channel from the Main. And here
he lay quiet and still for about two Months: not offering to do any thing at
Land; nor moving with his Fleet, as he might and should have done, sometimes
toward Bourdeaux and Bayonne, and sometimes toward the South Coast of
Bretagne. As if he made it his business to give the French as little
disturbance as he could. But however, disturbed they were at a strange rate.
All that part of France was in Arms, under four or five Country Dukes, with as
much distraction as can be imagined. And by the continual Marching to and fro
of so many thousands (for they were in mighty Numbers,) Provisions for Horse
and Man upon all that Sea Coast were almost wholly consumed and devoured. In
which condition they were like to continue all Summer; when on the sudden, (and
for some cunning Reasons I am yet to learn,) Trompe takes his Men on board, and
sets sail for Cales. and from thence round to Catalonia. where he landed his
Men again, who were now reduced to twelve hundred, to join the Spanish Army.
And the Spaniards wondered, when they beheld such a contemptible Party, that
those should be the Men that had made so great a Noise in the World, and had so
alarmed and turmoyl'd the Kingdom of France. But by this we may see, what might
reasonably be expected, from a vigorous and powerful Descent. Moreover we may
know by our selves, how these things would work with France. What a condition
had England been in last year, if Tourville (being Master at Sea) had had Land
Forces on board him, and had used them to his most advantage; while so many
Ports, and so many Countries on that Coast lay open to him? And if he had
mastered and fortified any of our Ports, what Thorns had they been in our
sides? Also we may remember, how easily he landed at Torbay.

Having seen what Good may come, by pursuing this Project of a Descent upon
France; let us now consider what Evils may come, in case it be not pursued. And
truly unless something of this nature be done, there is reason to fear we shall
be hard put to it. The posture of of our Affairs will not be very good at Sea,
and will be very bad at Land. At Sea we shall in likelihood be Masters for the
present: but if we have no Land Forces on board, we shall make no Use
considerable of that great Advantage. For the French will not come out; and We
shall ly still and do nothing, at least not to any great purpose. It Is true, we
may land our Seamen upon the Coast; and make some little havoc, by burning or
otherwise. but what will this signify? And when our Ships are foul, and our Men
sickly; the French may have Opportunities to revenge our foul War, in greater
measure. Our Shores being bolder, and our Countries lying more open, and the
things exposed being more valuable. But at Land there seems to be less ground
of Hope: at least there appear extreme difficulties and dangers. In the late
War of the Confederates against these French, we know with what vigor they
pressed upon them, year after year, and could never do any good. And the Frontier
of Flanders is so fortified, and that of Germany so wasted; the French also
have now so great a Force in the Field, and they manage their Affairs with so
much Skill and Conduct; that it will be very hard to make any great Impression
upon them, admitting our Forces to be something superior. And as for Piemont,
it will be happy if we can keep what is left. But why may not the Confederates,
notwithstanding all these things, march straight into France: which they have
been so highly blamed, for not doing two years ago? I answer, Because our
Circumstances are much altered since that time. Our Marching Forces were then
treble to the French: whereas now they are little more (if any more) than
equal. So that what had then been safe and easy, and almost impossible to
miscarry; may now prove a desperate Undertaking.

Since therefore the Confederates then would not, and now cannot, find the way
into France by Land, We must do it by Sea. For into France we must get: or else
this War will never have a good End; which is, the pulling down the French
King. If France still continue entire and untoucht; at the best we can hope
for, he will hold us play, till he has wearied us quite out. as it happened in
the former War of the Confederates.

It is not probable that we should ever enter France by the way of Flanders,
except our Kings Presence alter the Method of that War. For the usual Method is
this. The French, if they are like to be hard matched, make a shift however to
encamp (little or much) within the Spanish Quarters: and then the Confederates
encamp by them, to observe them. as if they were chained to the French, or were
drawn to them by some Magnetic Force. Whereas it is the Part of a skilful
General, Trahere Hostem, non trahi: not to dance after the Enemy, but to make
the Enemy dance after Him. Which was said by that great Soldier, King Heury IV.
(our Kings great Grandfather), in an Advice he sent to the States of Holland;
as we find it set down by Grotius, in his most excellent History of the Belgic
Wars.

[The doing the contrary last year, seems a Mistake in the highborn Duke of
Bazaria: who spent too much time in following the Dauphin, thereby putting his
own Army to miserable Hardships. Since he could not conveniently go round by
Mentz, he might have passed the Rhine at Manheim; which would have drawn back
the Dauphin most effectually. And though the Duke could have gone no further,
yet Manheim had been worth his Pains and Care. For had it been well fortified
on both sides the River, it would have been as good as Mentz. It would have
commanded far and wide into the French Quarters, and given maintenance to
several Thousands of Men: which should be a principal Aim of the Germans, since
they abound with Men, but not with Means to maintain them. But the fortifying
of Places is not to be done without Labor: which the Germans will not undergo.
though that be the true way to work the French out of their Conquests.]

But to leave this Digression; some think that our King, with his Flanders
Army, might march into France by the way of Calice, and so along the Sea-Goast
of Picardie and Normandy, having the Sea open to supply him. And so he might
do, if his Army were clearly Master of the Field, so that the Enemy durst not
abide within distance But for him to engage so deep in France, and be closely
waited on by a French Army near as good as his own; would be a thing extremely
dangerous. and the having the Sea open would not cure the matter, nor prevent
many Discommodities and Distresses that might befall him even to his ruin.
Such an Invasion therefore is by no means advisable, in the high Condition the
French are now in. But when by our Descents (in which there will be no such
Hazards) they are distracted, and confounded, and every where weakened; the
Confederate Armies may then from all Parts safely bear in upon France, and in
all Probability come to a good Market. And then may the poor French
Protestants, together with that whole Nation, expect deliverance from the
horrid Oppressions they ly under: and the rest of Europe be freed from their
Apprehensions of Slavery and Destruction.

FINIS.

