A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT NORTHAMPTON, August 13. 1677. At the
Request of JOHN NORTON, Esquire; High Sheriff of that County.

By DAVID LLEWELIN.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the King's-Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

Imprimatur,

T. Turner, R.P.D.no Episc. Land, a sacris Domest.

Page 3. line 4. for em in read examine. P. 4. l. 5. blot out the. P. 7. l. 4.
blot out of. P. 8. l. 21. for of read for. P. 20. l. 8. for or read of, leaving
out the Comma before it. P. 25. l. 1. make a full Point instead of the
Interrogation. P. 29. l. 4. after Case make a Comma instead of the full Point.
P. 30. l. 25. blot out Christians, and read Christian before Church.

To the Honorable Sir Hugh Windham, AND Sir Robert Atkins, Knights, Justices
of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Judges of Assize for the Mid-land
Circuit.
MY LORDS,
IT was delivered to me as a Message from your Lordships, that it was your
desire I should print the Sermon, which I had the honor to speak in the
hearing of your Lordships last Assizes at Northampton. All I gathered from it
then was, that I was obliged to have a grateful Sense of the Encouragement I
thought your Lordships intended to give me, by expressing so favorable an
opinion of my weak, though well-meant Performance. But afterward, when I
received a second Message of the same import, I concluded it was a Command your
Lordships expected should be observed. In all dutiful submission therefore I
send it abroad, but humbly beg that it may pass under the Protection of your
Lordships Names. For I so well know my own Inability to write any thing that
will bear a deliberate reading in this critical Age, that I should never have
had the confidence to expose this to it, if I could any other way have made it
appear, that I am,

My Lords, Your Lordships obedient, humble Servant, DAVID LLEWELIN,

ROMANS 3.31. latter part, We establish the Law. The whole Verse runs thus:

Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea, we establish the
Law.


THE Apostle, in this Chapter, has been reasoning with some Judaizing
Christians, who were willing to receive Christ as the promised Messiah; but
yet thought they could not attain to be just in the sight of God, without
observing the letter of the whole Law of Moses; but with that they thought
they might. To confute this Error, St. Paul proves, that they could never
obtain the grace of Justification by being the Disciples of Moses; and that the
only means whereby they could obtain it, was, to become Christ's faithful
Disciples, and give themselves entirely up to be governed by his Doctrine. And
this, in few words, seems to be the main scope of all the Apostle's discourse
here about Justification. But then he foresaw, that the persons with whom he
had to do, might object, that by this kind of Argumentation, he made the Law of
Moses (which was delivered by the Eternal GOD Himself to their Forefathers)
to be utterly void, and of no use. To which he answers, (...), no such matter;
far be it from us; yea, we establish the Law. We establish the Law. These are
the words of my Text. And with your patience and favor, I shall discourse of
them in this method; I shall make three Enquiries: 1. What the Apostle would
have us understand by Law here. And this will take up the most time, because
there is the most difficulty in it. But that I may clear it, 1. I shall
consider, what Law is in general. 2. I shall make a distribution of the Laws
of Moses, into those that were designed to govern the inward Affections with
respect to God and Man, as their Objects; and those that were made to regulate
the outward Actions, as they have relation to God and Man too.
Then I shall distinguish between the Righteousness, and the Letter of all
these Laws. And by that means (I hope) the first Query will be satisfied. 2. I
shall examine what the Apostle means by Establishing. And, 3. Who the We are in
my Text, that can have authority to establish the Law.


Having done this, I shall endeavor to show how the Righteousness of all the
Laws of Moses is established by the Gospel; and so I shall conclude with an
Inference or two, exhorting all Christians to pay obedience to Laws, and honor
to Magistrates, as they are commanded by the Precepts of that Religion which
they profess. I begin with the

I. Mentioned Particular, which is to em in, In what sense the Apostle uses the
Word Law in my Text. And for the clearing of this, I shall not make any
Discourse about the Origination of the word (...), concerning which there is
some doubt among Grammarians. I shall think it sufficient, if I can show what
the thing is which the Apostle means by the Word. And in order to that, I think
it may be useful to give some account, what Law is in general. But by the way,
I hope no body will think me so vain in my Imaginations, as to believe that my
business in this place, at this time, is to tell my Lords, the learned Judges,
what Law is; no, that is far from my thoughts. But if by difcoursing of Law,
which I am led to by my Text, I can convince others, that they are obliged by
the Christian Religion to observe the Laws which they come to dispense, and to
be affected with reverence and gratitude to Persons, that are employed in an
Office so weighty in it self, and so beneficial to our Country; I humbly
conceive I shall do the proper work of a Divine upon the present occasion; and
I shall abundantly have all I aim at. In pursuance of which I thus proceed:

A Law is a Precept of a Superior, by which his Subjects are obliged to do or
omit something, the doing or omission of which (respectively) does tend to the
Glory of God, and the Good of Men. This I take to be a true definition of the
Law. But that it may appear so, I shall give a brief account of the Terms. In
the

First Place, I call the Law a Precept rather than a Rule, because a Law
extends to the Soul; and in that respect the word Precept is agreeable and
proper; but Rule is a Metaphorical word, and therefore not so fit to be used in
a Definition of this nature, because genuinely it signifies a material
Instrument, which Artificers make use of.

2. By Superior, I mean one that has Authority to make a Law, whether that
Superior be God, or any Magistrate that derives Authority from him. But

3. Because no Superior Power, but that of God and Christ, does extend to all
Men, and this Definition is intended to take in Human Laws, as well as Divine;
I put in the word Subjects, which in respect of Divine Laws are all Mankind,
with relation to Human Laws, they are only such as are under the Authority of
the Magistrate who makes the Law.

4. I say, Subjects are obliged. And the Obligation by which they are tied to
observe Laws, consists in the Sanction of some Reward, or Punishment, or both;
and that either expressed, or left to the discretion of the Judge. But Rewards
are not ordinarily annexed to Human Laws; for they account a Man sufficiently
rewarded for his obedience, if he can live quietly and safely in the civil
Society whereof he is a Member; and this is a very valuable Reward, and very
inviting to those that consider it. However Human Laws seldom express any thing
but the Punishment, knowing that the frail Nature of Man is more apt to be
driven by Fear, than led by Love. But God obliges us to obey his Laws by
Promises, as well as Threatenings, and those as expressly and amply propounded,
being very desirous that we should obey him of choice, rather than by
compulsion.

5. In the last place. I add, as necessary to explain the Nature of Law, the
true End of all Laws, which is expressed in two parts, the Glory of God, and
the Good of Men. But these two are so closely linked together, that they are
inseparable, and so become in effect as one; for there is nothing done among
Men which tends to the Glory of God, but it does at the same time make for the
Benefit of Men, in rendering him favorable and propitious to them; and God is
so great a Lover of Men, that whatsoever is beneficial to them, is looked upon
by him as redounding to his own Glory, which he thinks to be advanced by
nothing, more than the happiness of his Creatures.

Now what I have said of a Law in general, might be truly affirmed of any
particular Law in the whole body of Moses's Writings, That it was a Precept of
a Superior, by which his Subjects were obliged to do or omit something, the
doing or omitting of which did tend to the glory of God and the good of Men.
But all those Laws which were delivered by Moses are not alike, either in the
Matter or in the Obligation; and therefore there must be a Division made,
whereby we may distinguish one from another; and such Divisions as are useful
in order to a clear and distinct Notion of the Mosaic Law, would equally serve
for a right apprehension of Law in general. For Moses delivered an entire Body
of all sorts of Laws, that were necessary to promote the glory of God, and the
good of Men, in that State and those Circumstances in which he and his People
then were. And Laws of the same kind always were since the World grew populous,
and while it is so, ever will be necessary in order to the same End, though not
in the same Form. But the Apostle in my Text speaks of Law with manifest
reference to the Institutions of Moses; for my Text is a part of his
Disputation against such as wrangled with great zeal, though with little
discretion, for the perpetual and entire observation of the Letter of Moses's
Law; and therefore aiming at an explanation of the Apostle's sense, I must
speak of Law too, as he does, with respect to that which was delivered by Moses.

Now the whole Body of that Law has been divided into Moral, Judicial, and
Ceremonial Laws; but this Division is not so exactly agreeable with the Laws
of a true Division, which are chiefly two. 1. That the Parts of the Division
ought to comprehend the whole of of that which is divided into them; but they
do not so in this Distribution: For those Laws, which require obedience from
the inward Man, by enjoining Men to love God above all things, and their
Neighbor as themselves, were delivered as Laws by Moses; and yet they cannot
be included in any of those Terms, because in true speaking they can none of
them reach further than the outward Actions. 2. The second Rule of a good
Division requires that the Members should be opposite, so that they cannot be
affirmed of one another: But it is otherwise in this Partition; for the Moral
Laws were most or all of them Judicial, in respect of the administration of
them; and consequently many of the Judicial Laws were Moral as to the matter
of them; and most or all the Ceremonial Laws were Judicial, as falling under
the cognizance of Magistrates, and some of them Moral in relation to the
Matter; and this, if we take Moral, as it is usually understood, to signify
something that is unalterably and indispensably good; but if we take it in its
genuine sense, for something that pertains to Manners, the Judicial and
Ceremonial Laws too in the whole and every part were both Moral.
So that the Terms of that Division are ambiguous, and a Man cannot speak of
one Member, but he may be thought to mean something of another; and therefore
the Distribution of the Laws into Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial, is not so
fit a Ground to build upon by one that would set up a clear and distinct
Explication of that which the Apostle calls Law in my Text: the Terms may be
useful in other respects, but to signify the three distinct integral Parts of
the Mosaic Law, they cannot so well be used. I leave them therefore here, and
proceed to distinguish thus.

There are in the Body of Moses's Laws, some laid down for the government of
the inward Affections, of the Heart or Mind; and some were made to regulate the
outward Actions. Those that were intended to rule the Inner-man, as the
Scripture terms it, were of two sorts; the

1. Required, that the Heart should be rightly affected toward God, with a
Love that prized him above all things. The 2. Demanded of every Man such a Love
to his Neighbor, as was to take its measure from that kindness which he had
of himself.
Those Laws that concern the outward Actions of Men were likewise twofold. The

1. Was to determine their outward Actions in those things that concerned their
behavior in the external Worship of God. And here the Law descended to many
Particulars, concerning holy Persons, Times, and Places, Sacraments,
Sacrifices, Purities, and Purifications. But some things in this Ritual part of
their Religion were left to the determination of those that did preside in it.
Among other things Prayers, and the Forms of them, which were to be presented
in Confessions, Supplications, and Thanksgivings, respectively, with the
several sorts of their Sacrifices. But, 2. There were Laws to determine the
Actions of Men in respect of one another, to determine the Natural, or Moral
Law, of doing by others, as they would be done by themselves, in many
particular cases, concerning several Relations, in which they stood to one
another, as Members of a Society. And in cases concerning their Lives and
Limbs, their Beds, their Goods, their Reputations, and the Law in these kind of
cases between Man and Man, whether pecuniary or criminal, was very particular
in assigning such Punishments for Transgressors, as God savv were most useful,
and like to have the best effects among that sort of People to whom the Law
was given, in the Circumstances they then stood. But after all this
particularity, many things of this kind too were left to the discretion of the
Judge, which could not be determined expressly by the Law, in all the most minute
particulars. And though the Magistrates were bound not to determine any thing
in any case contrary to what God had expressed in the Law; yet where God had
not expressed his Mind in any particular there the determination of the
Magistrate was to be received as the Mind of God, who in other Cases was
Himself their immediate Lavv-giver.
Now I suppose St. Paul in my Text has a respect to all these Species of the
Mosaic Law, as well those that concern the outward Carriage of Men toward
God, and one another, as those that directed their inward Affections toward
their Creator, and their Neighbor. I say, I conceive, the Apostle by the word
Law has an aim at all these Laws, though not at the precise Form, and at every
Part of them, as they descend to Particulars. But therefore that we may come
nearer to a right apprehension of his Sense, it is necessary we should have
recourse to a Distinction which he makes use of, (i. e.) the Letter of the Law,
and the Spirit or Righteousness of the Law. The first of these is as the Laws
Body, which is subject to various Changes and Alterations. The second is as its
Soul, which is the same for ever. We find this Distinction, Romans 3.25, 26, 27.
Curcumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker
of the Law, thy Circumcision is made Uncircumcision; i. e. Circumcision is of
beneficial use to thee, if upon the consideration of that thou keep the
Righteousness of the Law, to which thou were obliged by that Ceremony; but
otherwise thou art in no better Condition upon the account of that outward
literal Ceremony, than if thou had never been circumcised at all. Then v, 26.
Therefore if the Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of the Law; (there is
one of the Terms of the Distinction, the Righteousness of the Law) shall not
his Uncircumcision be counted for Circumsion? i. e. If an uncircumcised Person
do observe that eternal Righteousness of the Law, which consists in true
Charity to God and his Neighbor, and those material Duties that are naturally
and easily deducible from thence, which is the end of all the Ceremonial and
Forensic Laws that God prescribed to your Nation; if he thus fulfill the Mind
and Will of God, shall not he, think you, be looked upon as favorably as if he
had engaged himself to the same thing, by submitting to the outward Ceremony of
a carnal Commandment, which God never gave for its own sake, nor ever gave at
all to him, nor to any but the Jews only? Then, v. 27. Shall not
Uncircumcision, which is by Nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by
the Letter and Circumcision do transgress the Law? Here in this Verse the
Apostle does manifestly express the same thing by the word Law only, without
any addition, which in the former Verse he calls the Righteousness of the Law.
Before he says, If the Uncircumcision keep the Righteousness of the Law; and
here, If Uncircumcision, which is by nature, fulfill the Law, (i. e the
Righteousness of the Law) shall it not judge thee, who by the Letter and
Circumcision do transgress the Law? (i. e.) Shall it not judge thee, who
observing something of the Letter of the Law, do notwithstanding transgress
the Righteousness of the Law. Here we have the other Member of the Apostle's
Distinction, viz. the Letter of the Law, and that placed in opposition to the
Righteousness of the Law. Now I suppose it may be evident, without using any
more words about it, to any one that does but consider the design of the
Apostle's Discourse, that by the single word Law in my Text, to which and
beyond it the same Discourse is carried on, he does mean the same thing that he
does in the 26 and 27 Verses, i.e. the Righteousness of the Law. But here by
the way we must take notice for the prevention of Mistakes, that by the Letter
of the Law, as it stands in opposition to the Righteousness of the Law, we are
not to understand all the Law that is written; for that which the Apostle
means by the Righteousness of the Law is written too in the Institutes of
Moses, but yet the Obligation to observe that does not depend merely upon the
Letter, as the other does: for if that had not been written, we had been
obliged to practice it, and might have seen our obligation by the natural light
of that Reason which God has given us, if we would have made an unbiased use
of it: But in the other Case it is not so, for such positive Laws, as are meant
by the letter of the Law, concern particular People for whom they are made, the
goodness of the things enjoined by them depending upon Circumstances, which
when they alter, as they often do, it is necessary the Laws should alter too.
But the Eternal Law of Right and Wrong concerns all the World, it ever did, and
ever will do. And this (I conceive) is that which the Ancients mean by Law,
when they speak such high things of it; As Plutarch says from Pindar, in his
little Tract directed to an unlearned Prince for his Instruction; (...). Law is
the Ruler of all the immortal Gods, as well as mortal Men. And in Euripides's
Tragedy of Hecuba, when that unhappy and desolate Queen made her Address to
Agamemnon, for relief against Polymnestor, King of Thrace, that had basely
betrayed his Trust in destroying her Son Polydore, who had been committed to
his Protection, with a great Treasure, in the declining estate of Troy. She
seems to conjure him to take her Cause in hand by this Sacred Name of Law, I am
a weak Woman, and now become a Captive, says she,

(...)
(...) --
But the Gods are strong, and the Law which governs them, and they will be
assistant to you in so just a Cause, that is impli'd. Here the grave Poet tells
us, the Gods are governed by Law; and we say something of the same nature, when
we say, God cannot do an ill or an unjust thing; for we do not mean by it,
only that God cannot do such a thing, because whatsoever he does is good and
just, for that reason, but whatsoever is in it self evil is so inconsistent
with his Nature, that he cannot do it, and so in some sense he may be said to
be governed by the Eternal Law of Good and Evil: Yet perhaps it may be more
agreeable to the Modesty of a Christian to say, the Omnipotent and only Wise
God will not, than to say he cannot do any thing.

But having found (I think) the right Notion of the Word Law, that it signifies
the Righteousness of the Law, as the Apostle uses it in my Text: I am now,
according to my propounded Method, to Enquire,

II. What he means by Establishing: And fevv Words will dispatch this. By
Establishing, he means a Propping or Strengthening, a making that to stand which
was ready to fall; that I take to be the sense of (...). And there was need
enough thus to establish the Righteousness of the Law; for it was just hidden,
and ready to fall to the ground, through the various misinterpretations, and
many idle Traditions, that were set up against it by the Scribes and Pharisees.
What in Nature can be more natural than Gratitude to Parents? this was ever
accounted a Fundamental Law of Nature: And yet they rendered this great
Commandment of God and Nature void of Effect, through a foolish Invention and
Tradition of their own. Thus we read, Mark 7. 10, 11, 12, 13. Moses said,
Honor thy Father and Mother, and whosoever curses Father or Mother, let him
die the death. But ye say, if a Man shall say to his Father or Mother, It is
Corban, that is to say, a Gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me,
he shall be free; and ye suffer him no more to do ought for his Father or his
Mother; making the Word of God of none effect through your Tradition, which ye
have delivered, and many such like things do ye. We have our Saviors Word
here, that they were guilty of this foul abuse of the Law, who were great
disputers for it in pretense and show; and that they were guilty in many other
Instances like this, of making void such fundamental Laws of God and Nature by
their Traditions: And then sure 'twas high time to rescue the Righteousness of
the Law from such abuses, and to set it fast and firm upon better Ground, than
it stood amongst the Jewish People. But who was sufficient to do this? why the
Apostle tells us in my Text, We establish the Law, we keep it from falling, and
set it firm and fast. But then,

3. Whom does the Apostle mean by this We? himself only, or others besides
himself? And in what respect could he understand it of himself, or others? To
this I answer, that the Apostle might mean only himself by the We in my Text,
as he does in many places of his Writings, speaking of himself alone in the
plural number, as other Authors also do; but in some places by we he means
himself, and all other true Apostles and Teachers of the true Doctrine of the
Gospel, in opposition to those false Apostles and corrupt Teachers, who
preached things disagreeing with Evangelical Law; and such were they he
disputes against in the Chapter from whence I take my Text, who urged the
obligation of the letter of Moses's Law beyond what was consistent with the
Authority and Religion of Christ. And so it is likely the Apostle by we in my
Text might mean all that taught the true Doctrine of the Gospel, reckoning
himself in that Number; and then his Sense is this, All that assert the
Doctrine of Christ's Gospel in Truth do establish the Law. But in what respect
can this be said of them? how can they establish the Law? by their own
Authority? No, but by the Authority of Christ, and those Lessons which he
taught, and which he gave them Commission to declare to others. This then is
the Conclusion of this Matter, the Christian Religion and all that preach the
true Doctrine of it, do establish the Righteousness of the Law. But now for
further Illustration of this we must enquire, How it is that they establish the
Righteousness of the Law, with respect to those several Parts into which I
divided it. And,

1. For those that were made to govern the inward Affections, and were
expressed in those two great comprehensive Precepts, of loving God above all
things, and their Neighbor as themselves. We may be assured this is entirely
established by the Gospel, and all the true Preachers of it, if they establish
the Righteousness of the Law, for this is all Righteousness; there is nothing
of the Letter in this. For if there had never been letter written of Moses's
Law, we had been obliged to this: As soon as ever any Person comes to the use
of his Reason, and knows by natural Discourse, who God is, that he is his
Creator, and the Author of all the good he does at present possess, or can ever
hope to enjoy; it is most evidently necessary to conclude, that such a Being,
to whom he is so highly beholden, ought to have the chief Place in his Heart,
which is expressed by that predominant Affection of his Love. And as soon as
ever he can apprehend how great efficiency there is in every Man's loving his
Neighbor as himself, to work the happiness of Mankind, and how impotent
every thing else is to secure it without this; he must needs be overcome by the
reasonableness of the thing to acknowledge, that himself and all other Persons
are obliged so to love one another. And now we are more strongly obliged to
these Duties than ever, not because Moses vvrote them, but because it is the
Eternal Law of God, and established by Christ; and yet the Obligation does not
lie all in this, that in reason and duty we ought to obey whatsoever God, our
Creator and greatest Benefactor does command us by his Son, whom he sent from
Heaven to confirm us, that this is his Will; but we are infinitely obliged by
our own Interest to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves,
because Christ has settled the Law, which commands us to do this by a Sanction
of greater weight and strength, than ever had been clearly understood before
he appeared in the World himself to acquaint us with it; i. e. a Promise of
Eternal Felicity in a World durable and glorious, which must succeed this we
now inhabit, to all those that are careful to observe these Duties; and a
Threatening of endless Misery after this Life, to all such as disobey that
Eternal Law, which enjoins them. And thus that Law which was delivered by
Moses, for the right disposing of our inward Affections both toward God and
Man, is established by the Gospel, and all that preach the Doctrine of it in
Sincerity and Truth. Let us now consider, How the Righteousness of those Laws,
which Moses laid down for the Direction of Men's outward Actions toward God,
and their Neighbor, is established by it. These I shall speak of apart, as
requiring a more distinct Consideration. And I shall speak

1. Of those Laws that were to regulate Men's outward Carriage in the Worship of
God. And here that God should be worshipped by some outward service, is a thing
so palpably righteous, that natural Reason cannot but assent to it, as soon as
propounded. Again, it being easy to collect, that God is a God of Order, and
not of Confusion; it seems to be of the Righteousness of this Ceremonial Law,
that all the Members of every Society should agree in some decent Rites, and
worship God in an uniform way, as the Jews did; and because this cannot be
without Laws to direct and oblige, it seems no less agreeable to common Sense,
that there should be such Laws as may direct and oblige in this Case, as the
Jews had. And because Laws signify nothing but to make disorderly Persons
despise and laugh at their Lawmakers, unless they be put in execution; and
because they cannot be executed without Power, therefore it is necessary that
there should be Magistrates invested with sufficient Power for that Work, as
there were among the Jews. And all these things are so righteous, so reasonable
in themselves, and so agreeable to the universal Sense of Mankind, that all
Nations have consented to them, and reduced them to Practice. Thus Isocrates,
that wise and learned Athenian Lawyer, in his Precepts to Demonicus, among
other important Advices, gives him this, That he should worship God always, but
especially in public, with the Congregation; and he gives this reason of the
latter, (...); For by paying your attendance at the public Worship, you will
at once (says he) both pay your duty to the Gods, and show your self obsequious
to the Laws of your Country. And this shows, that among the Athenians, the
Ceremonial Law of their Religious Worship, was a part of the Civil Law of the
Commonwealth; and so 'twas with the Romans. And I conceive it were no
difficult Task, to make the same appear to have been the Practice of most or
all other Nations, concerning whom we have any Records; and surely there is
much of concluding in the Argument of universal Consent. But it may seem more
material to the present Case, as it concerns us, that when the Empire became
Christian, the Ceremonial Law, or the Church, became a Part of the Law
Imperial, till the Popes of Rome, by their Artifice and Usurpation, made the
Imperial truckle under the Pontificial Law. But in this Kingdom of England,
things are put into the ancient Course again, and our Ceremonial Law is a Part
of the Civil or Common Law of our Nation. And this seems to me much more
agreeable to the Christian Doctrine, than what the Disciples of Rome on the one
hand, and those of Geneva, on the other, do aim at, and contend for in their
Writings, and have done some of them with their Arms: For both these Parties,
upon the account of their Authority in spiritual things, or in Order to
spiritual things, as some of them cunningly express it, would engross all
earthly Power; and this is a Charge, which I am sure might without much
difficulty be made good against both these Parties, if it had not by diverse
learned Pens been sufficiently done already. But this could never be objected
against the Clergy of the Church of England, truly so called. But to return, I
think it does appear, that what is enjoined by Moses concerning the Worship of
God, in general Terms, namely, That God should be worshipped with an external
Service, and that this should be performed in an uniform Way; that there should
be Laws to direct and oblige in this Matter; and that there should be Power to
execute such Laws: I think, I say, it does appear, that all this in general is
of the Righteousness of that Law, which is established by the Gospel. But then,
whatsoever in the particular Matter and Form of the Mosaic Worship was
righteous, in opposition to the Letter; whatsoever was substantial, in
opposition to little accidental Circumstances; whatsoever was useful for all
Mankind, and not proper to the present State and Condition of the Jews only, is
established by Christ in specie. Thus Prayer in all its Parts of Confession,
Petition, and Thanksgiving, was a Part of their external Worship; and the
Tongue is so apt and ready an Instrument to be used in the Worship of God, that
all Nations, by the Direction of their own Reason, have used it as well as the
Jews. And this Duty being always useful, fit and good for all People, of all
Ages, and all Nations; our Savior has made it of as large Extent as his
Religion, which was designed to be the Religion of the whole World, and which
we hope will one day be so. But the Sacrifices of the Mosaic Law fell into
disuse of themselves, for they were only intended to be used for a time, as
Types and Shadows of that great Sacrifice which Christ was to offer for the
whole World; and when that was offered, they had their End and Accomplishment,
and were therefore no longer of any use. To conclude this Point then, I say,
our Savior has established the Righteousness and Substance of the Ritual Law
of Moses, 1. By enjoining some things that were commanded by that. 2. By
instituting some others, as Baptism and the Euch^ist, which were derived from
that too. 3. By putting it into the Power of his Apostles, and their
Successors, to direct such other Forms and Ceremonies of outward Worship, as
they should see most conducing to the great Ends of all Religion, i. e. the
Glory of God, and the Good of Men, at the Times and in the Places where they
should be concerned. And, 4. By investing the Secular Christian Magistrates
with Power to confirm such Directions, by the Sanction of such temporal
Penalties, as they should see fit in order to the same Ends.
And if we consider that in the Time of King David, and Solomon, (when
certainly the Public Worship of God was in its highest Glory among the Jews)
as well as in after Ages, we find many things practiced in their Divine
Worship, which seem to have no Warrant at all from any express Command in the
Law of Moses, which yet appear to have been very acceptable to God: I say, if
we consider this, and the Consequent of it, which is, that even in the Jewish
Economy, many things pertaining to the outward Worship of God, were left to be
disposed and ordered by the Discretion of those that were to govern; we shall
have no reason to wonder that Christ has left it in the Power of Christian
Governors to appoint what they shall see expedient, decent, and orderly in the
external Worship, who have so much greater Light from his Revelations, to guide
them in it. And so I come to show,

2. How the Christian Religion, and the Apostle in my Text, and all other
Preachers of the true Doctrine of the Gospel, do, by the Authority of that and
its Author, establish the Righteousness of the Mosaic Law, which was designed
to govern the outward Carriage of Men toward one another. Now it is of the
Righteousness of this Law, that we should do by all Men in all things, and all
Circumstances, as honestly, as faithfully, and as fairly, as we would be done
by our selves. It is of the Righteousness of it, that they who do any thing
contrary to that Royal Law, as St. James calls it, should be punished according
to the nature of their Fault; agreeable to that old Rhadamanthean Law, as it is
called by Philosophers, Qui male fecit, malum ferat. Let him that does Evil,
suffer Evil. Yet by the way, it is not the ultimate End of the Law, De Offic.
l. 3.
that any Man should suffer. The great Roman Lawyer, Cicero, tells us of a
further and a better Aim that Laws have, Leges hoc spectant, hoc volunt, civium
conjunctionem esse incolumen; This is the thing which the Laws look at, and
would have, the Safety of the main Body of the Society for which they were
made. And this they would have, though with the Punishment, or even the Cutting
off of any corrupt disorderly Member, if it cannot be had otherwise. And this
was spoken like a Man that was wise and good according to the Light he had.
But St. Paul, who besides that he was bred up to the Law too at the Feet of
the great Gamaliel, had likewise his Understanding cleared by a more
resplendent Light from Heaven; he expresses it in better and more comprehensive
Terms, The End of the Commandment is Charity; i. e. It is the final Design of
Law, that Men may honor God with one Consent, and embrace one another with a
pure and peaceable Love; and it aims at the Punishment of Evildoers no
farther, than as they stand between the Law and this excellent Purpose of it;
but so far it does, because the Experience of all the World does prove, that
many Men will be impious, injurious, and unruly, unless there be Laws and
Magistrates to restrain them by force, when there is Occasion; therefore it is a
thing most evidently righteous in its own Nature, and absolutely necessary for
the Good of Mankind, that there should be Government in all Nations of the
Earth; that there should be resident somewhere in every Society, an
uncontrollable Power of Determining concerning Right and Wrong? for without
this, i. e. Law and Government, neither any House, nor City, nor Nation, nor
universal Mankind, nor all the Nature of things, nor the whole World it self,
could consist. As Tully, after his wonted manner, most elegantly expresses
himself; Lib. 3. de Leg. Princ.
And from thence he rationally exhorts, that since the Office of Magistrates is
so useful, and indeed necessary, Men would not only observe and obey them, but
reverence and love them too. And here that great Man speaks like a Christian:
For upon the main, whatsoever there is of substantial Righteousness and Equity
in the Political Institutes of Moses, the Gospel confirms it by establishing
Government and Governors, and enjoining Submission, Love, and Reverence to be
paid to them, in all Nations, under the Penalties of this Life, and that which
is to come. Thus St. Paul, by the Light he received from Christ, instructs and
exhorts, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power
but of God, Romans 13.1. Again, ( v. 4.) the Ruler, or Magistrate, is the
Minister of God to thee for good: but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid:
for he bears not the Sword in vain. For he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger, to execute Wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for Wrath, (or Fear of Punishment) but also for Conscience
sake. And St. Peter agrees to a tittle with St. Paul, in this weighty Point
of Christian Doctrine; 1 Pet 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King, as Supreme; or
unto Governors, (or Judges, the word will well bear it) as unto them that
are sent by him for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them
that do well; for so is the Will of God. And here, I think, we have the
concurrent Determinations of both these great Apostles; that all Christians are
bound in Conscience, and for the Lords sake, to honor Governors, and obey
their Laws, because it is the Will of God. And thus the Gospel establishes the
Righteousness of Moses's Judicial Law, concerning the outward Behavior of Men,
one toward another, by giving Power to Magistrates, to punish all Faults, that
by Word or Deed are committed against it. But the Gospel leaves the Letter or
Form of that Law to the Magistrates disposing, as a thing that is alterable,
and as a thing that, according as Circumstances shall alter in every Nation,
ought to be altered, for the better securing of the great Ends of the Natural
Law. For Illustration I shall use an Instance or two. And first, The Law of
Stealing in the Mosaic Institutions was ratified only by this Punishment, That
whosoever was guilty of it, should make in some Cases a twofold, and in some a
fourfold Restitution; and that was all. The Punishment fell heavier upon some
indeed, because in case a Man were not able to make such Restitution as the Law
required, he was to be sold into Bondage, and Restitution to be made out of
the Money for which he was sold. But this was an accidental thing,
Restitution was all that was aimed at by the Law. And the most ancient Laws
of some other Nations inflicted no greater a Punishment for Theft, than a
double Restitution. But afterward, when that was found ineffectual to give
Men any tolerable Security, that they might enjoy their just Possessions
without the disturbance of Thieves; then Theft was punished in some Nations
with Banishment, others punished it by severe Scourgings: But when all other
Punishments proved insufficient to satisfy the End of the Law, it became a
Capital Crime, as it is at this day amongst us. But then we must consider, That
it was the Design of God in framing those Laws which were delivered by Moses,
(as it is of all other Lawgivers, who desire to imitate the great and good
God,) to establish them by the Sanction of no greater Penalties, than what were
necessary to secure the Ends which the Laws did aim at. Now it may be
presumed, that God foresaw that the Punishment of a double, or at most a
quadruple Restitution would be a sufficient Restraint upon Men, at that Time,
and in that Nation, (to our Shame be i^ spoken) to withold them from putting
their Hands to their Neighbor's Goods; and in ordinary, and for the most part,
Men might have a quiet Possession of what was their own, without danger of
having their Rights invaded by Theft or Robbery, which was the End of the
Law. But when it evidently appeared, that Thieves increased extremely, and
that no Man was like to enjoy his Propriety in any thing he had, without
continual apprehension of being disturbed by the Fraud or Violence of such
lawless Persons; certainly it was a most reasonable, and most righteous thing,
to appoint a greater Punishment for that Crime. I will instance in one Case
more, which may show how righteous and fit a thing it is in some Circumstances,
to alter the Forms and Penalties of Laws in the same Nation. The Decem-viral
Law of the Romans, or the Law of the twelve Tables, decreed, That if any Man
injured his Neighbor in his Body, by Assault and Battery, (this is our Phrase,
but it is the Sense of that Law) he should pay five and twenty Asses, that is
(some say) twenty Pence of our Money, perhaps it is more, but that is all one to
my present business. It was not so great a Sum, but that one Lucius Veratius,
a Person loose and rich, who was so mischievous as to take delight in
striking Men over the Face with his Hand, would go about the Streets, and
when the Humor took him, would give any Man he met a good Flap of the Face,
and then command a Servant, that followed him for that purpose with a Bag of
Era, to pay five and twenty to the injured Person; and so the Law was
satisfied. But when the Magistrates saw that Penalty began to have so little
Power over Men's Manners, they put it into the Judges Power to increase the Fine
according to Discretion, and that the Penalty should be made greater in such a
Case. And so the Form of the Law altered, that Men might walk the Streets
about their honest Occasions, secure from Violence, which was the Design of
the Law, was the most reasonable thing in the World. It may be objected, that
the Mosaic Law was more perfect than the Roman Law of the twelve Tables,
though they had their Original from the old Attic Laws, Grot. de Jure Bell.
lib. 2. c. 1.
and they theirs (as some say) from the Law of Moses; and no doubt this is
true, that we can find no Improvement of the Mosaic Law in the Law of the
twelve Tables. But notwithstanding, the Law of Moses is not so perfect it self,
but that there has been very good reason to alter the Form of that; as it
appears from the Instance of Theft, and might do from the Lex Talionis, and
several others, if there were any need to insist longer upon it. And that
Example out of the old Roman Law does sufficiently prove all I produced it for,
which is only this, that Circumstances in one kind or other may so alter in
any Nation, as to make it necessary to change the Form of Laws, by increasing
the Penalties, when it is found that the present Penalties do not satisfy the
Ends for which the Laws were made; and so the contrary, by lessening the
Penalties, when it is believed upon good Grounds, that lesser Penalties will
secure the Ends for which the Laws were enacted. And so I conclude from what
has been said in this Particular, that the Apostle, by the Authority of Christ
and his Doctrine, does establish the Righteousness of those Political Laws,
which Moses published for the regulating the outward Behavior of Men toward
one another in the Jewish Nation, so that it ought to be observed by all
Christian Nations. And has left the Letter, as a Pattern for all Christian
Magistrates to make use of, so far as they shall see it useful for their
People, and agreeable to the Ends of Government; but has laid no Obligation
upon them to use the precise Form, any further than so. In like manner, that I
may now join both together, and come to an end, the Apostle, as his great
Master did, left the letter of the Ceremonial Law, which was laid down to
govern the outward Behavior of Man in the Worship of God, as a Pattern for
Christian Governors to imitate in their forming Laws of that nature, (...) far
as they should see it conducible to the Glory of God, and agreeable to the
Design of the Christian Religion, which was intended to be the Religion of the
whole World, and not of the Jews only. And accordingly the Apostles, ancient
Fathers, and Doctors of the Primitive Church, Christians did imitate them in
that outward part of Religion, which was left to their Ordering, and that in
diverse particulars. We are not therefore to think, as some have seemed vainly
to do, that as soon as ever Christ's Religion took place, the Civil and
Ceremonial Laws of Moses became an Abomination, and were to be quite banished
the World, as things altogether incapable of any good use; For both those sorts
of Laws were nothing but Determinations of the natural Law, in particular
Instances, after a particular Form. And that the natural Laws should be
particularly determined in all Christian Societies, after some Form, so as to
direct our outward Duty both toward God and Man, and oblige us to it by the
Sanction of temporal Penalties, is a thing highly reasonable, because it seems
absolutely necessary, and that for these two Reasons.

1. Because the natural Law it self is communicated to us in so few and general
Terms, and the Sentences of particular Men are so different, and so biased in
particular Cases, where their own Interests or Humors are concerned, as is
known by the Experience of all Men, that if there were not particular Laws and
Magistrates in every Human Society, to determine the natural Law, and to
determine Men in all Matters and Cases, whether of spiritual or temporal
Concern, and to be more impartial in it than Men can be imagined to be, if
every one was left to be his own Director and Judge, it were morally impossible
that the Inhabitants of any Nation should live one day without Tumult and
Confusion. 2. It is necessary that there should be some Form of Laws in all
Christian Communities, to determine the natural Laws in particular Instances,
under present Penalties, because Christ himself in his Advancement and
Confirmation of the natural Law, did ratify that in general, only by the
Rewards and Punishments of a future World. And though that be the strongest Tie
imaginable upon such as have Faith in it; yet there is so little Faith upon
Earth, as our Savior affirmed of his own, and prophesi'd of future Ages, i. e.
there are so few in this World, who do steadfastly believe the Rewards and
Punishments of that which is to succeed, that when Christ had taken away the
Obligation of those Jewish Forms of Ceremonial and Forensic Laws, which were
fitted to the Genius of that Time and People, and confirmed under present
temporal Penalties by God himself; if he had not established the Righteousness
of those Laws, by giving Power to the Governors of Christian People, to set up
other Forms, more agreeable to the Religion which he came to plant in the
World, and such as they should see most conducing to the common Peace and
Welfare of their several Nations and Societies; and if withal he had not
invested them with Authority, to settle those Laws with a Sanction of Rewards
and Punishments to be bestowed or inflicted in this present Life; he had left
no possible means, as the World stands, of restraining the rude Passions and
inordinate Desires of faithless carnal Men. But those few that had any fear of
future Punishments, or any hope of eternal Rewards, had been left to be
swallowed up first by such as had none; and then those wicked Ones themselves
should have stood exposed to the Rapine and beastly Lusts of one another. Now
because these Absurdities are consequent to an utter Abolition of all
Ceremonial and Forensic Laws: and because Christ, by himself and by his
Apostles, whom he left with Commission to declare his Sense of things, has
given some general Rules to direct Christian Governors in the forming of such
Laws; and because he has consigned us over to the Jurisdiction of such as
should have lawful Power to rule us, both in spiritual and temporal things; I
conclude, that such have Power to determine the Natural Law, by making
particular Laws, both concerning the outward Expressions of our Religion in the
Worship of God, and our outward Expressions of that Charity, which we owe to
one another, i. e. concerning all things that belong to the common Good, of
which they whose Business it is are the proper Judges. And thus the
Righteousness of the whole Law, which God gave by Moses, is established. And
it is in this Sense, as I apprehend with all humble submission, that the Apostle
affirms in my Text, We establish the Law.
And now I could make many applicatory Deductions from the Doctrine I have
delivered, that might be of concern to us. But that I may not presume to make
too much use of your Patience, I shall only beg the favor to mention two
briefly, which may be perhaps most suitable to the present occasion. And they
are these:

1. If the Apostle in my Text do by the Authority of Christ's Doctrine,
establish the Righteousness of the whole Mosaic Law, in that sense which I have
said; then he does by the same means ratify our Laws. From whence it follows,
that we cannot behave our selves like true Christians in this matter, unless we
make a Conscience of paying obedience to them. Indeed there is nothing urged
upon us in the Gospel more expressly, or more earnestly, than to be meek and
submissive, tractable and obedient to Laws and Government. If any Person then
do pretend to Religion and Conscience, and act some outward parts of Piety,
with all the show and demureness imaginable. and yet endeavors to undermine
Government, and invalidate Laws, either by public Discourses, or secret
Murmurs, we may certainly conclude that such a Person is no true Follower of
Christ, and that whatsoever he acts of the outside of Religion, it is but the
feigned show of a pretending Pharisee. If therefore we are unwilling to be
abused and cheated by their Arts, and Tricks of Hypocrisy; if we desire to
avoid the Imputation of being wilful and heinous Offenders against that pure
and peaceable Religion, which Christ taught; and as we would avoid the bitter
Consequents of this; let us be exhorted to keep the greatest distance we can
from that Pride carnal and spiritual, and those other worldly Lusts which tempt
Men to be such Murmurers and Complainers, as St. Jude speaks of, which draw the
Children of Disobedience, in contempt of Laws, to desire and endeavor
turbulent Changes and Alterations, that so in a confused hurry they may mend
their worldly Condition, tho with the shipwreck of their Consciences. If we
understand the value of Peace within our own Breasts, and if we have any aim at
that Eternal Peace in the Kingdom of God, which can be the Reward of none but
those who follow the things that belong unto Peace among Men; let us carefully
shun the Wickedness and Folly of those filthy Dreamers, as the Apostle calls
them, who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, who are always
censuring the Manage of Affairs in Government, which they do not understand;
but in the Case of Obedience to Laws, which the Gospel lays down so plainly
that they cannot but understand it, like brute Beasts corrupt themselves And as
we desire a true Title to the sacred Name of Christians, let us receive with
Thankfulness the great Benefits we enjoy by the good Laws of our Country, and
let us with all lowliness of Mind express our Thanks by paying a Conscientious
Obedience to them. 2. If the Gospel do establish our Laws by commanding us to
pay Honor to our Magistrates, from whom we receive the Benefit of them, as
has been said, and I think proved; Then let us be exhorted to bear that Love,
Reverence and Gratitude toward them, which God requires we should when he bids
us honor them. And that first to the King as Supreme, under whose Government
we have now for above these seventeen Years enjoyed such Happiness, as has
seldom continued so long together, with so little disturbance, either in our
own or any other Nation; as they know very well who turn over the Histories of
other Ages and Nations, besides our own. I say, Let the King, as Supreme, have
the first place in our dutiful Respect. But then, as we are by the same
Christian Doctrine bound, let us be exhorted in the next place, to pay it to
Governors, that are sent by him for the Punishment of Evildoers, and the Praise
of them that do well. Let us pay the just respect we ow to all our Magistrates,
from whose Administration of the Law we receive so many and great Advantages.
Let us pay an humbl^ and grateful Observance to the Right Honorable, the
Judges, who come into our Country, to pronounce impartially the Sentences of
the Law; and to those worthy Justices, by whatsoever other Titles they are
dignified, who living in our Country, make it their Care to preserve our Peace,
and to assist my Lords, the Judges, in securing our Lives and Limbs from
Violence, our Goods from Fraud and Rapine, and our Names from Slander and
Defamation. This we are bound to do by the natural Equity and Reason of the
Thing, and by the Eternal Obligations of the Gospel; which that we may all obey
in this and all other Instances of Duty, and at last receive the great Rewards
of it, God of his infinite Mercy grant, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake, to
whom with the Father, etc.
FINIS.

