Patronus redux: OR, OUR PROTECTOR Is returned safe again.

An Historical POEM; CONTAINING The EARL of CALANDER'S Departure, his stay in
England, and the Effects thereof upon the Town of FALKIRK: Congratulating his
Return; and Describing his Virtues, with their Profits Communicated unto the
said Town.

Composed by M. L.

-- Non si male nunc, and olim
Sic erit, etc.
Hor. lib. 2. od. 10. Paraphrased thus by S. W.

Though it is bad now, 'twill soon be spent,
Apollo's Bow's not always bent;
But sometimes he will the Muse bid sing,
And touch a better string.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1682.

To the Right Honorable, THE EARL OF CALANDER.
My Lord,
WHEN I reflected upon the propitious Aspects of your honorable Countenance,
levelled perpendicularly at your Religious Observer, and upon the growing
Profits, daily accruing, from the enjoyment of your Favor, unto me, allowed,
through the Impulse of your Piety, to have ready access thereto; your Lordship
thus adding Honors to a Wit, of purpose it might be improven, and bestowing
Favors, that the Receiver might be made capable to deserve them; I thought it
the least part of my Duty to confess the Receipt; and humbly to offer to your
Lordship, this homely POEM, not as a competent Retribution, but as an ingenuous
acknowledgement of the Debt Iow you, and speaking Emblem of my duteous
Gratitude, since as Cicero says, Mullum officium referenda gratia magis
necessarium. But your Lordship, as Protector and Favourer of the Muses, may
challenge a just Propriety in the Oblation; it is but equitable the Nine, often
Watered with the Refreshing Showers of your Bounty, and taken care of, that
they might Fructify, should refound something answerable to that Industry, and
by a dutiful acknowledgement of their Patron, let you taste of the Fruit of
your pains; so the well manured and fattened Ground, as't were by a thankful
Requital, yields a Fertile and Hope-answering Crop, to the industrious
Labourer: Yet, tho the returns of the Muses are far disproportionable to the
Provisions, it is like, they will scarcely be welcome to your ordinary Modesty,
being unwilling to be Illuminated with the reflected Beams of your own Virtues,
and displeased to have their Curtain drawn, that others may have Admittance to
behold you Act; so that I have nothing to make the Fruit of the Muses
acceptable unto you, but this, that they come undesired, hence Livius Writes,
dec. 1. lib. 4. Gratia atque honos interdum non cupientibus opporiuniora sunt.
But if your Lordship be chafed to be praised openly, who is to be blamed? Or
how was I admitted a Spectatour, when some of your Virtues were Acted privily?
Verior famae domesticis emanat. Moreover it is granted, that open Praises,
besides the Influence they have on others, in prompting them to Emulation, and
to Transcribe the Copy, redound seasonably to the advantage of the Patient,
while they Cultivate and make the Ground, thus Prepared and Seasoned, more
Pliant and Fertile, inflaming the Mind with a desire to appropriate the
Accessions, and deserve (if it were not otherwise due to the praised) the
ascribed Character.

Hence Silius, Arripuit traxitque virum fax mentis honestae Gloria -- Others of
your Virtues presented unto the view of the world, in behalf of the Republic
and your own People clame not unjustly a public Register; only I do them this
injury, that if I had not too ambitiously intruded upon the Office of Recorder,
it might have been performed by a better hand, and they had received a more
glorious, and authentic Signature.

'Twas, My Lord, your placable Disposition, and my officious Zeal, which were
insinuating Sollicitors, for the Undertaking; 'twas the inestimable Talent of
your Favor, given to, and deposited with me, which cherisht and hatched this
POEM; and nothing will raise the Value thereof further, so that your Lordship's
Favors may seem to be improven, nor will any thing Gratify the Author more,
then to receive it with your wonted Aspect, whereby the Cruicks will attempt in
vain to undermine the Work, while stayed upon the solid Rock of your Heroic
Veriues, and seek in vain to disseize the Author of your Favor, while secured
within the Precinct of your Benevolent Thoughts, and indulgent Oversight. And
that your Dominions may be enlarged, and your Graces increased and Crowned with
immortal Glory, shall be the Breath which extinguisheth the small Taper of my
obsequious Poesy, and continues the course of my serious Oratory, both
flowing from

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most devoted Servant and Vassal, M. L.

An Account of the ensuing Poem, to his Honored, and most ingenious Friend,
Mr. Alexander Cuninghame, Professor of Humanity, in the College of EDINBVRGH.
SIR,
IT is not the first time I have disturbed you with the Correction of my Poems;
your willingness to assist others, and accurate Judgment upon such
Undertakings, seem to prevent the Apology for this Address. I know you use not
to be refractory to Illuminate another's Understanding, when it may be done
without detriment to your own, and as Ennius consults, Nihilominus ut Ipsi
luceat. I ingeniously confess, that this Poem owes much of its Perfection to
your controlling hand; and, as much of its Luster was borrowed from your
qualifying Converse, so asuitable proportion of the praise (if there be any
thing landable therein) ought to be sequestered unto you, and so much the
rather, because the Errors that have escaped me in the Composition, are only to
be appropriated to my self. In this kind of Verse, viz. Stanzas or Quatrains,
of four in alternate rythme I have imitated Dryden's Annus Mirabills, where, in
the account of his Poem, he shows us both the Dignity, of this kind above all
other Verse in fashion amongst them, and the difficulty thereof beyond the
couplet Verse; for, in Quatrains, the troublesome meaning of four Lines
together, fall under the care and recognition of the Poet, in the last of
which, he is not Licensed to make digression from the quality of the first;
Whereas in coupiet Verse, two Lines soon terminate the Work, and facilitat the
Labor of the Poet, who may assume the liberty of supplying a part of the
Verse, only for the sake of Rythme. I have called my Poem Historical not Epick;
for the same reason Dryden gives for his, viz. the abruptness and dissimilitude
of the Action, and the brevity of the Poem, being little longer then the half
of his. Although 'the principal Actours and Actions in mine be Heroic enough,
yet, these which belong to Dryden's sphere, have the advantage by militating
under the Standard of Mars, from whom Virtue it self (as (...) from (...))
seems to be derived, and consequently Military preferable to Moral Virtue,
which requires not to be imaged with such bright colors of Speech, and
elevated Thoughts, as are necessary for the raising of Martial Actions to their
due proportion and altitude. I have therefore endeavored to Portraict this
Hero with such colors as are most consonant to Moral Virtues, rendering the
Poem as much Ethical as poetical, being composed of the sublimity and
mastership of Maro, and Gravity of Seneca; Of the Delicacy of Ovid, and
Divinity of Plutarch, etc. All concurring to make it -- Exemplum imitabile
morum. What cat be more persuasive then Morality, or amiable then Virtue, to
the imitation whereof, if the love of the thing, (according to that of Horace,
Od^runt peceare boni virtutis amore) be not a saffitient incentive; yet the
praise of the Action (which Fabius made the discoverey of his hopeful youth)
may probably entice. It Is true, though neither the habit of Virtue with the
Stoics, nor its Action with the Peripateticks, be available to entitle their
Possessour to Beatitude; yet the exercise of good Actions, acknowledging their
original from the Fountain of true Virtue, God Almighty, and levelling at the
right Scope, His Glory, is, no doubt, profitable as the Antecedent and Way, the
not as the Cause and Merit of Salvation. Besides the estimate of this Hero's
Virtues is raised, by his not being too much affected with popular applause,
nor transported with Fame and Commendation conferred upon ^im by othe^s, as
Claudian aptly expresses it, to the praise of his Theodorus thus -- Nec
fa^cibus ullis (...) Erigltur, pla^suve petit clarescere vuigl; Choosing
Socrates compendious way to Glory, by being such indeed as be would seem and
be accounted to be; so that, he needs not regard what prejudice, Fame can d^
h^s Ve^^ue, which, ^^^ough the obscure Clouds of Envy ( Virtue's waiting
shadow) wherewith it has been overcast, has appeared, the more radiant, and
his Spirit, by the outward violence, and various assaults it has encountered,
become the more Herolek; of whose Virtue, that of Furnius is Verified --
Virescit vulnere virtus.

It will also accresce to the extent of his Praise, that his Virtues are
Illustrated by the splendor of a noble Parentage, from whom, albeit N^bil^^^
shadowed with Virtue, might seem to have been derived, and propagated to the
several branches, properly sprung from the same, as Horace alludes unto lib. 4
od. 4 thu's Fortes c eantur, fortibus, and bonis:
Est in juvencls, est in equis patrum
Virtus, nec lmbellem feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.


Nevertheless he has always esteemed his claim unto his Birthright,
Nobility, to be frivolous and slight, unless it had been founded upon the merit
of his own purchase, Virtue; as if he had concluded to have forefeited his
interest in the celebrity of his Progenitors, if he had been unable to
acquire, and challenge the same, as the due reward of his own, which gives him
a just Title (without having recourse to the Sanctuary of his Ancestors merits)
unto thereverse of true honor; albeit it may be Problematical, whether it be
more commendable, to have Virtue and Honor entailed upon him, as the effect
and quality of the Original, or to become himself the active and free Cause of
the progress and continuation of the same. From all which, every Christian may
copy, what Virgil prescriv'd to young Saloninus, Ecl. 4.

At simul Hero^m lauds, and facta p^rentis
Jam lege^e, and quae sit poteris cognoscere Virtus.
But to give you a further account of my Poem from which the warm Celebration
of my Hero's Virtues made me a little digress, know that I auspicate (as a sure
and noble Foundation to the succeeding Work) with the pious erogation of an
illustrious Fountain, flowing from my Hero's native Generosity, toward his
observant Town Falkirk. In this manner of Exordium Scallger does Patronize me,
teaching in an Heroic Encomium, at first view to introduce the Hero (the
subject of the Poem) adorned with the Trophies of some of his most laudable
Actions; Next I inveich against Diseases, the cause of his departure, whereby
Falkirk was not only deprived of the b^^^fit of several Virtues, viz.
Temperance, Justice, Friendship, Charity etc altemanently exemplifi'd in his
Presence, but also sustained numerous and great losses in their ^riviledges,
Estates and Credits; and the damnage, which, through the death of some of their
(...) Friends and Benefactors, accru'd unto them, seemed even to be extenuated
and compens'd by his Presence, of which being deprived, they were extremely
^ffl^cted, till (now sensible of their low estate) they become Supplicants to
the Throne of Grace; which Affliction (as Gregory well Observes) aims to
conduct men unto; And lo their Address (a motive to excite others to Devotion
in the like condition) seems not to have been unseasonable, for their Petitions
are returned indorsed with a fiat ut petitur; and the glad return of their Lord
and Patron, proven now to be their best Tutelar in Adversity, and fittest
Superscription of my Poem does soon constitute the wished effect of their
prayers, which compleats the first part of my Poem.

The second part of my Poem contains Calander's Return, which the Town and
others solemnly congratulate; and the Rendevouze of all these Virtues again,
which, at his departure, forsook their Residence in the Town; making up a part
of the Retinue which attended him home. In this Collection, I do not muster up
any new Virtue, di^^ering from these mentioned as Concomitants of his
departure; but only condescend upon the several Streams and numerous Issue,
that may be drained from these prefixed Heads, and appositly referred unto the
same. It were improper to conceive that these Virtues, accompanying him, should
be reduced unimprov'd, seeing Activitie is supposed to be essential to Virtue,
which, unoccup^'d, must forgo its property, and degenerate into an ignoble
habit: For example, under Temperance, that general Head, are comprised
Frugality, Liberality, and Sobriety, all tending to moderate the passions of
the mind, and subjected to temperance, not improperly termed the modus in
Rebus, which Horace speaks of, Sat. 1. lib. 1. From Loyalty (the duty which
all Subjects ow to their Sovereign) I took occasion to speak of the gallantry
and dignity if the Family he descended from, much celebrated for their
obedience to their Prince; As also, to reflect upon public and private
Business, praevious to the consideration of Court and Country; his own private
Dwelling laying before him all the Charms imaginable, to engage his suffrage
for the latter. From Trade, it followed not impertinently to Treat of his Care
and Oversight of the Inhabitants; of the several Virtues employed by him, in
Ruling over them, having influence upon their manners; And, lastly, of his good
Turns done to, and Favors bestowed upon the Town, contributing much to the
advancement of Trade, to the conciliating the Affections of the Inhabitants,
signified by their zealous Prayers, for the promoting of their Patron's present
and future Felicity. Thus I have given you an Account of my Poem, and method
thereof I doubt not but you will approve the Argument, which, I confess, is but
ill managed; The advantage of the easiness, and pleasantness of the Subject
(insinuated before in the comparison of Military and Moral Virtue) will
certainly prove matter of Indictment against the Author, culpable in not
performing what the Fertility of the Argument might have ministered unto me; But
I am so zealous of your Reputation, that I should not have written any thing
unworthy of my Master, if it could not securely pass under the venerable notion
of your Scholar. Albeit your Modesty has hitherto restrained your own
appearance in public; yet you have not failed, to lend me as much Light, as
might give me confidence to appear for you; but whether out of too much
indulgence to my Muse, and forbearance to check my rash forwardness, (for
nothing can relish worse with a Poet though never so bad, then to debase his
Works) or out of the just sense of your own sufficiency to defend my failings,
you have emboldened me to face the Light, I shall not determine: But whatever
way I am enfranchised. I have learned so much discretion, as not to question
the Authority of my Patron, and acquired so ^uch courage, as not to be scarr'd,
by all the Sophisms of our snarling Critics, from asserting the equity of my
Cause, and soundness of my Positions, if once passed the Test of your
Judgment. Its like the growth of my years may give you ground to expect from
me now a Valedictory to Poesy; and indeed, upon the same account, I have but
small encouragement to frustrate your Expectation; For, though Poesy be no
improper study and divertisement to Youth, pregnant with Humor and Luxuriant
Fancy, the Soil in which Verse thrives best, yet it becomes unluckie and
barren, when the Imagination is sensibly drained, and empaired of these
copious provisions, by supervenient Manhood, shooting forth the nobler Blooms
of Reason and Memory; which, as 'twere by the natural course, succeed to be
Occupi'd. Considering the contumelit and harsh censures Poets are obnoxious
unto, for, as the E. of Rosecommon on Horace's Art of Poetry, sings, Now
lunacie that is past the cure of Art,
With a long Beard and ten long dirty Nails,
Pass current for Apollo's Livery.
And considering the difficulty, now, to reconcile the opinion of Wise men to
the person of a Poet, for though some stand well affected to Poesy, they will
hardly allow a grain weight of favor to the Poet; I need not be sollicitous to
preserve the Title; Nor stick for any preferable Claim to the Possession, or
seen advantage in the enclosure, to renounce my Infestment in Parnassus.
Wherefore I freely surrender my Poetical Priesthood, only I desire that, when I
have resigned the Badge of that whin^ing profession, none would be so injurious
as to detain from me the pledge of my Reputation, nor object to me the Style,
when I have abandoned the Benefice And now seeing I must give you the trouble
of Correcting my Poem, I shall also give you encouragement to dispense with it,
by acquainting you, it is the last: And as the Patron of a posthumous Work,
might expect a thankful acknowledgement from the Author, if it should happen he
were revived again, so, methinks, you ought not to be disappointed of the like
measure of gratitude from the surviving Author of this Poem, who is thus
engaged unto you, and shall ever study to acquit himself, as

Sir, Your most humble and obliged Servant. M. L.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
WHen on this Poem, Kind Sirs, ye reflect
Both of a frowning, and benign aspect,
Ye need not seek in its cross form, to Dig
For the new Stamps of To^ie, and of Whig.
Nor from their nice Distinctions, Rich, and North,
Conclude, absurdly, such men to be worth.
For I bewitched to Harmony by Rhimes
Dare not indulge the Discords of the Times.
Nor, simply, vaunt to either hand t'ave played,
When in the mean time Virtue is betrayed.
When Star-Divines, agreed in Notes, presage
The Ills, which are, next year, to fill the Stage:
When seeret Fate may that to Life recall,
On which time had bestowed a Funeral.
The Fable of the Lion and the Fox
May now be applied, since on the Gallick Pox
Men are as apt to splite, as Ships on Rocks.
He who desires to shun the Sirens Charms,
And to hug Laboring Virtue in his arms;
Let him Ulysses trace, that Man of Fame,
Or Read this Hero, our well-chosen Theme,
And if he grow not wise, he cannot the Poet blame.
Patronus redux: OR, OUR PROTECTOR Is returned safe again.
1.
WEre ever people happier then were we?
Plenty and Peace bound long unto our Shore;
From the The drouth which happened in June and July, 1681.
hot Plague of Summer's Fever free,
When fresh The Well brought in to the Town by the E. May 29. was then
serviceable unto the Inhabitants.
Springs were conveyed unto our Door.
2.
These, under Calander, we did enhanse,
Of the K. C. 2.
first mover's Reign the blessed Effect,
Though the near Stars seem t'ave great radiance,
And with strong influence on us to reflect.
3.
We Would tasted scarce the Fruits of his abode,
The Summer of his Presence scarce enjoyed,
When Critic Health him quickly called abroad,
And his Departure our Delights destroyed.
4.
Even so from These dwelling in Greenland, and Island, situate between the
Polar Artick Circle and the North Pole.
those placed in the frigid ^one,
The Sun withdrawes his all-refreshing Light,
And the fresh Pleasures of their Day anon,
End in the sable weed of a long Night.
5.
Did we not fully prize your influence?
That you, so soon, t'eclipse your splendor chus'd,
Thus to displace your Virtue, and drive hence
The happiness, which we, it seems, abused.
6.
So men, when sound and strong, never reckon more
Health's value, then did Aesop's Cock the Gemm;
Homines non prius intelligunt sua bona, quam cum ea amiserunt, quae habuerune
in potestate. Plaut. and Soph.
Till once thereof deprived, then they adore,
What they before, possessed of, did contemn.
7.
What cursed Diseases are the effect of sin. Jo. 5.14.
Diseases still this Clime infest?
And drive men in pursuit of health abroad;
These The Serpent the first enticer to sin. Genesis chapter 3.
Serpents sure are brooding in the West,
While undevour'd by great Mon^rose his Rod.
8.
Sin was the thing which Mankind did defile,
And, since, Rebellion has the Earth o'rrun;
Sure the Black The Box sent from Jupiter, with Pandora to Epimetheus, out of
which, being opened all kind of evils flow, and filled the Earth with Diseases.
Box was opened in this Isle,
If where the sin increast these Ills begun.
9.
In his aspect, enough t'ave made us proud,
More then the Indian wealth we did engross,
While under it the Virtues all did shroud,
And nothing could our thriving Labors cross.
10.
Lo' it no sooner in black Clouds was wrapped,
But, sensibly, we felt our state decline,
Each Virtue shrunk away, as Thunder-clapt,
And every thing our ruin did design.
11.
Justice It Is taken from Theognis. (...). (1) Justitia i^ se^e virtutes
continet omnes.
which all the rest does represent,
With an offended eye asquint did look;
The one to us, his Creatures, was but lent,
The other fixed on him, her The three Precepts of the Civil Law, viz. Honest
vivere, Alterum non laedere, Jus suum cuique dare.
three-footed Book.
12.
Grave Temperance, when we her Bridle held,
Was, from the Temperance is called from the Hebrew, Dober. (1) the mean of a
thing Hence Cic. Temperantia est moderatio cupiditatum rationi obediens.
mean, turned into loose excess,
The Reins, like Phaeton, we could not wield,
And, without Guide, the way but only guess.
13.
Sweet Friendship Aurum igne, amicitia rebus adversis probatur. Embl. N. Chytr.
which adversity does prove,
As if grown peevish, straight forsook our road;
She, without him, could not find mutual Love,
Nor we trace her, but where he made abode.
14.
Lo! Christian Charity, as wounded, bled,
Its Objects seemed by meagre Cheeks to mourn,
The poor by no religious Marie fed,
And all the Land, Unchristian, seemed to turn. The Christian Name of the
Countess of Calander: These are recorded in Scripture for their Piety and
Charity.

15.
(1) These on whom he used to conferr favors.
The instances of his indulgent Heart,
And sumptuous Well grief, diverslie, did show;
While these dissolved in tears, unforced by Art,
And this, grown feav'rish, did The Pipe sometimes was stopped, sometimes the
water fled through the secret little bo^es in the Pipe.
forbear to flow.
16.
True Loyalty, the A. B. C. of our Youth,
Departed not, but lay as't were asleep;
Occasion called us not to assert the truth,
Loath, without Shepherd, to disturb the Sheep.
17.
The Muses, since Mecaenas he retired,
To whom, though absent, they paid due respect;
They wanted a Bowl of the French Nectars; wherewith, at a set hour in the
afternoon, he used to exhilarate them.
Were no more with the generous grapes inspired,
Nor got a A Mistress in the Intellect: (1) Ens rationis; for so the E.
designed the Authors Mistress.
Mistress in the Intellect.
18.
Religion, which was wont to lead the Van,
Came up, like tired Soldiers, in the Rear,
All then, b' Scilicet in vulgus manant exempla regentum. Claud.
example drawn, to Service ran,
Such is the advantage of an In the Greek it is (...), Episcopus. Hector was so
designed by Homer. because he had a care of, and defended Troy.
Overseer.
19.
Trade, which before here constantly did flow,
And made the Town of foreign Wealth to boast,
Robbed of its Noble Patron, fell as low;
The Town its Traffic, Trade its Freedom lost.
20.
Our foes occasion caught us to distress,
And every petty foe appeared too strong;
To him, our Guardian, we could not address,
Our selves unable to repair a wrong.
21.
To every stroke our Body open lay,
And what was aimed against us did not miss:
But, like his absence, none did so dismay,
From Virgil, Quisque suos patimur Manes. Aeneid. 6.
Each suff' red a peculiar blow by this.
22.
Normand Livingstoun of Milnhills, who had been Sheriff-depute and Baille of
the Regalitie of Falkirk, dies.
Normand, our temper who exactlie knew,
And could a Salve apply to every sore;
Soon from our Helm the awful Powers withdrew,
When our affairs required a double Oar.
23.
The Powers were angry still, there yet remained
John Livingstoun of Kirkland, Tacks-man of the Excise of the Parish, and My
Lord Calander's Trustee, is burnt in his own House, within the Wood (while a
cutting) by an accidental Fire, fireing and destroying the House; his death and
loss being much regrated by the Earl, Town, and others.
A pious Hostie, to appease their ire;
So massy Gold, for better use ordained,
Must thus be tried, and purified by Fire.
24.
The blood of Beasts, it seems, the Gods deride,
Man, harmless man, both Priest and Victime is;
He, able only the fiery Test to abide,
Must expiate our guilt, procure our Bliss.
25.
Humano autem sanguine placari defanctorum animas credebant. See Farnabius his
Notes on the Tragedy of Seneca, called Troas. chor. 115.
Or are the Defunct's Souls, by humane Blood,
As the Heathens fancied, now to be appeased?
Nay rather he, who courted shades and woods,
A living Tree in Elysium, it signifies, in the Hebrew, Dei nemus.
Paradise is placed.
26.
Our trial was not o'r, until the John Brown of Seabegs, Town Clerk dies.
Clerk
Had a surcease unto our Worthies signed;
Fate knew that if the writing bore his mark,
'T would pass What he wrote and signd was still counted Authentic; his
honesty being notour in the place.
unquestioned by the rest behind.
27.
Columen patriae, mora fatorum, they were ascribed to Hector; See the Chorus of
the first Act of Seneca's Tragedy, called Troas.
These were the Pillars of our Loyal Town,
And chiefest remora of the Fates below;
Whom Secret Fate no sooner had o'rthrown,
But we received the impendent Fatal Blow.
28.
In this our Triple loss, he also shared,
But, by his care and bounty, 'twas supplied,
His chearing Presence then our grief empair'd,
Now when the cause is given, the cure's denied.
29.
So when the The great Fire in London, Anno 1666.
Flames proud London's Beauty stained,
And made her Lovers to dissolve in grief;
The Royal Arm on it his Bounty rained,
And from his succ'ring looks each fetched relief.
30.
To crouching thoughts at home we were enslaved,
And the assaults of future fear did kill;
Lo! distant comfort there our hopes deceived,
When here were present Many evil; and calamities, such as happened at the
Siege of Illum or Troy, which lasted ten years.
Iliads of ill.
31.
Ut nulla dies moerore caret, sed nova fletus causa ministrat ite ad plan^^us.
Sen. in Troade. chor. lin. 76.
A mass of sorrow each day is ingrost,
For fresh Tears yielding matter, time, and place:
As if the curses of that Tantalus.
bloody Ghost,
Had fallen on us, and missed Atreus and Threstes. See the first Act of
Seneca's Thyestes.
his own
Son's race.
32.
What Love, dear Patron, has us dispossessed,
Your promised return, what fates retard?
Though Love should cool, while we are sore distressed;
Yet Honor bids you your own words regard.
33.
Make have t'expel our foes, and bear the shock,
Quam longa Danais semper in portu mora. Sen. in Tro. act. 2.
O linger not, like the
Graecians, in the port;
Return as Victour to his vanquished Flock,
Or, to your unfenc'd people, a strong Fort.
34.
It seems the Gods did in this Kingdom fix
Their plagues, and nothing could our sin atone;
Thus The Poet Laureat in England, who wrote a Poem, entitled, Annus Mirabilis
or, Year of Wonders, 1666. etc.
Dryden's year of wonders, sixty six,
Was but accomplished in eighty one.
35.
O thou whose pleasure ord'reth every thing,
And nothing done escapes thy piercing Eye;
A speedy period to my sufferings bring,
And let me next the Fortiter malum qul patitur idem post potitur bonum, Plaut.
good impli'd
espy. Falkirk's Prayer.

36.
Grant, while I hope my troubles to escape,
And of ill Men and Dev'ls the subtle Plot;
That I may the surviving profit reap,
Quae fuit durum pati, meminisse dulce est. Sen. in Herc. fur.
The sweet remembrance of my former
lot.
37
Make me thus by affliction grow more wise,
And like the oppressed Palm, ascend more high,
Out of their mournful Ashes make me rise
The more Renowned, by a new progeny.
38.
Renew my Patron's health, too long bereft,
But the dear purchase safe at home transplant,
Wherein, to's Welcome, during life infeft
He may never it, nor we the Owner want.
39.
Grant us Remorse, and this thy Doom restrain,
Thy Judgments, Lord, on us do not entail;
And if our Pastor can no respite gain,
Lord let the Bishop of our Souls prevail.
40.
To thaw our Frosts make our warm Sun appear,
And our eclipsed Horizon repossess;
Grant the Land-Frigate homeward 'gain may steer,
That we may yet retrieve our happiness.
41.
Our prayers were heard, thus the easy Gods soon are,
By pious Airs of the afflicted, pleased;
As soon as Jonah made his mournful Prayer
He from the scaly Prison was released.
42.
As Marcus Tullius Cicero, v. Epist. Fam. lib. 2. Ep. 11. and lib. 7. Ep. 3.
Tullie to
the City 'gain to hie
His covetous desire could not withstand;
Even so our Patriot cast a longing eye,
Far back reflected on his native Land.
43.
Yet here always, though distant far from this,
B' ubiquitie of care, he present was;
So Ovid his dumb Sine me liber ibis in urbem, etc. Trist. lib. 1. Eleg. 1.
Legate did
dismiss
To Rome, when there the Master could not pass.
44.
As soon's he had surveyed it in his mind,
He was transported hither by desire;
His winged fancy could sweet footing find,
Where he from cares of Court wont to retire.
45.
No wonder he preferred this Plot of ground
To the English Dales, which tempted but his Eyes;
Here all these Pleasures, without price, abound,
Planting at home his Earthly Paradise.
46.
He pays, afar, a Visit to the Town,
On which he ample Ben'fits did bestow;
Obscure and low, bereft of Patron, grown,
Whose rise again to him alone must ow.
47.
Nor Law, nor Order did amongst them thrive,
As if they had been under Pupillage;
But whose free course his presence will revive,
-- ac cuncto surget gens aurea civi; Virg. Ecl: 4.
And bring on them again the Golden
age.
48.
As when Aurora draws away the Skreen
From Earth, and with Vermilion paints the Sky,
The Sun in our Horizon straight is seen,
Impatient till her Beauties he espy. His Lady first returns.

49.
So our Lord's way was with chaste Beauty strow'd,
His Lady's Graces, of magnetic force;
Which, when first viewed by our expecting Crowd,
Gave notice, he would soon begin his Course.
50.
Lo! how her Glorious Presence cheered the Fields,
And made the Journey seem exceeding sweet;
The Pleasures which she brought, the way but yields,
And every thing kind welcome seemed to Greet.
51.
The Birds, the feathered Muses of each place,
To welcome her by sweetest Stanza is a staff or number of Verses, (nore or
less, according to the diversity of Stanzas) whose Lines or Rhimes still return
in the same order.
Stanza's strove,
And weari'd not her moving Court to trace,
As if with some bright object fallen in love.
52.
VVind only failed, to set him off from shore,
His restless thoughts already home confined,
Which, as his Harbingers dispatched before,
Foretold himself would not stay long behind.
53.
It took effect, the weather straight grew fair,
A gentle Gale sprung from its Earthly womb,
The Sun both guilt the Sky and warmed the Air,
And all did club for to dispatch him home.
54.
The Sea-leagues seemed to be abridg'd in walks,
And all the Seasons to be changed to May;
While his -- varioque viam sermon levabat. Virg. Aeneld. 8.
enriched and time-
beguiling talk,
Then the swift pinnace, did discuss more way.
55.
First, at the It Is said to be flitting; because the privilege of a
Staple-port is sometimes removed thence to Blackness; this Port is like the
unfixed Isles in the Aegaean Sea: hence Virgil. -- credas innare revulsas
Cycladas.
flitting Port, the Land he pressed,
Where he his Votive Table satisfied;
Thus to do good his purposes were blessed,
And did forestal a thankful VVind and Tide.
56.
A The Lord of Dechmond.
Friend near by, such such in absence found,
To's welcome did the compliment first pay;
And while the sundry christened Healths went round,
He, but with The E. his Health and Welcome home was only remembered by him,
through the whole day of his Arrival.
one, would terminate the Day.
57.
The parted twain, in their Embraces sweet,
Here match again, and distance reconcile;
So Rivers seem with closer Huggs to meet,
After Divorce made by some justling Isle. My Lord and My Lady meet again in
Dechmond's House.

58.
And their Reunion quite expells the fear,
Their parting bred, and better hopes succeed;
So ill, apart when Castor and Pollux.
Leda's Twins appear,
Good luck, when joined, to Sailers is decreed.
59.
From thence, like Lovers, longing to improve
The mutual Pleasures, home they quickly drive,
Where they unlock not former knots of Love,
But the holy flame, and nuptial sweets revive.
60.
At home? but yet he scarcely home has win;
When him, unrested, business calls away;
Thus he must use his dwelling as an Inn,
Only to bait in, but not long to stay:
61.
For at the Maiden-City he arrived,
Often refreshed by his Golden Showers;
Nor yet, by absence, of these Drops deprived,
Such Influence she has on her Paramours.
62.
The Lawyers, for their Clients interest,
Their As the Chrmists extract Gold out of other Metals, so their Counsel
draws the Silver and Gold out of their Clients Pockets.
Chymick Counsel lavishly disburse,
The Merchants woo him too to take their Test,
And both agree to milk and share his Purse.
63.
A Welcome Home each pay, a gainful Debt,
Knowing on whom to work, and how to move,
His generous Soul will not let him forget,
Each to requite with Pledges of his Love.
64.
Thus, nobly their allegiance he repaid;
Him none for kindness, nor for Debt can crave:
And while we long for's coming hither stayed,
Of the unwilling City he took Leave.
65.
The distance, 'twixt his Palace and the Town,
Was swallowed in the compend of a thought;
He, by warm puffs of speedy triumph blown,
Hither, without Geometry, was brought.
66.
The ten-years-wandring Ulysses, who, after the Siege of Troy, lasting ten
years, strayed other ten on the Sea, before be came home to his Wife, Penelope.
Greek, upon the main,
Arrived, was not more welcome to his Spouse,
Then was our hon'red Master come again,
Untoh is people, and his lonelie House.
67.
His Palace seemed, the A glade and honorable way of Reception, for when the
Roman Emperors went in Triumph, as the Procession advanced, the doors were all
opened.
Doors and Windows open,
With By a metaphor, allading to humane Laughter; hence Ovid. -- risu laxare
labella.

laughing front, its Landlord to receive;
Thus to the Builder's praises they gave scope,
And seemed his stay, and oversight to crave.
68.
The people proud of their restored Lord,
Soon by diffusive joy were overcome;
And at his Entry powered out of their hoard,
A shower of blessings to his. Welcome home.
69.
The Mothers frame the Children understand,
And show such joy as with their age can suite,
And while the elder run to Kiss his Hand,
With silent Eyes the younger him salute.
70.
Lo as he passed each Heart new vigor took,
And straight forgot that they erstvvhile did mourn:
Even so the Flovvr's, fred from their Prison, look,
When the new Sun to Aries does return.
71.
All while the Flagg of Duty is displayed,
Their Persons, Povv'r, and Wishes under't bring,
And while the Tribute of their Lips is paid,
From Virgil. -- studiisque faventum consonat omne nemus. -- colles clamore
resultant Aeneld. 5.
The adjacent Hills with his loud Praises ring.
72.
So to a new Play, by the Dryden Esquire. The Poet Laureate in England.
Laureat spun,
Acted on a new Theater, or Stage;
Many, led by an amorous humor run.
And with their Plaudits, the whole Club engage.
73.
To his return, etc. (1) Falkirk promising themselves the victory over Fate,
and an issue from their troubles, through his return, will gladly commemorate
the same, as the Thebans did their Victory, obtained at Leuctra by Epominondas.
To his return, Falkirk will take delight
To found an Holy day, and feast in State;
So the brave Thebans from their signal fight
Their yearlie Ceremonies used to date.
74.
The Graces now on the ascendent are,
The From Virgil. Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna.
Virgin, and old
Saturn come again;
Wars Gates are shut, and they such Fortune share,
As Rome did under its first Founders Reign.
75.
From Virgil. -- imperioque iterum paremus ovantes. Aeneid. 4.
Again they gladly to his
Reign submit,
The Powr's obeying from the Sacred got;
Whom, if, by right, he had not wedded it,
They would call hither to preside, by Vote.
76.
And now their Well with a full Pipe abounds,
And does its Way by Tides of Joy extend;
The measured falls of whose glad Streams will sound
The Donour's Welcome home, world without end.
77.
The Fabric of this Monument of Fame,
At stately height arrives, by fair degrees;
And each, by higher Notes, as't were Proclaim
The Founder's praise, and hold spectatours eyes.
78.
The Shire with circling mirth receives its In the Saxon language it is the
Governor of a Manor, or Lordship; hence Sheriff, is the Reev of a Shire the
Guardian of a County.
Reeve
Sheriff, on just and hon'rarie account:
Whose Chief and Loyal Town its grief reprieves,
Turning the Dol'rous, to a Joyful Mount. Sterling was formerly called in the
Latin, Mons Dolorosus.

79.
Their former state, his Presence does reduce,
And raise their Pleasures from the fatal Urn;
His looks do Soul in every thing infuse,
From Horace -- Et neglecta redire virtus Audet -- Epod. ult.
And Virtue scorned
dares, with its Lord, return.
80.
Religion, which of Faith and Life's composed,
Grew fresh again, and a new courage took,
Within the Kirk the Parish is enclosed,
And his Devotion is the Laics Book.
81.
His Zeal unto the Church is well diffused,
Flowing through all its Pastors, Levi's race;
By him his own is 1 Thessal, 5.12, 13.
honorably used,
Striving to found his Patronage on Grace.
82.
The luster of whose Grace the It Is called in Latin, Varlum facellum. (1) The
party-colored Chappeed or Church: though now called Fall-kirk.
Chapel Paints,
And the exercise of others Grace excites.
So the English Church is Beautified by Saints,
And to the Heavens rapps its Proselites.
83.
His Conscience, laid unto the sacred Line,
Is found exact, and worthy to get trust;
His Honesty his Honor does Define,
And the exactness of the ruled adjust.
84.
As Theseus did the Labyrinth deride,
By the help and train of Ariadne's Thread;
So he, the Sacred Rule being still his guide,
From the dark Mazes of the times is freed. See Ovid Metamorph. lib. 8.

85.
Justice, observing him, on us did throvv
At once both Eyes, dispensing looks by Rules;
Thus she, who looked before Regardant, now
Is with our Lion, etc. (1) As the red Lion sitting upon the top of the well,
which the E. erected in Falkirk, supporting his Arms, in that posture seems to
look straight; So Justice now does not incline to one side nor other with her
Eyes.
Is, with our Lion, Sejant, full-fac'd gules.
86.
As his true Honesty, meant by the It Is Sable; which Heralds make to denote
honesty and prudence.
Shield,
Is firmly propt by the proud Lyon's Pavv:
So may etc. Thus Rome and Lacedaemon flourished most under Numa Pompilius, and
Lycurgus, famous Lawgivers.
So may our Town be safe, while it is upheld
By this great Atlas of the Civil Law.
87.
When doubtful Cases in the Law occur,
The practicks of his Life we need but scan;
Scarce one foul Act that Volume seems to blur,
But each Page (1) Universal justice; when we give to God the things that are
Gods; to Caesar the things that are Caesar's.
But each page gives the due to God and Man.
88.
Nor Rich nor Poor, through preference, are heard,
Nor the first speaker, can bribe his applause;
Like Alexander, the other Ear unbarr'd,
Is always free reserved unto the Cause. Alexander Magnus in judiclis and
causis litigantium alteram aurem rel integram servat. Plut.

89.
As a good Poet, etc. it is the Apophthegme of Themistocles to Slmonides. Plut.
As a good
Poet does not against measures sing,
But has to Laws of Art a due respect;
Even so his Acts in equal balance hing,
And of strict Justice make him Justitiae Architectus. from Pindar.
Architect.
90.
Who would obedience to his Laws refuse?
When the extremes are so well interlac'd,
Which would be, if Rogation of the Laws among the Romans was thus; The
Magistrates having made and published a Law, conveened the people in the field
of Mars, and asked them whether or not they would have that Law Established,
and according to their Suffrages, 'twas either abrogated, or approven and
confirmed. v. Antiq. Romans leg. Rog.
Rogation were in use,
By all the people's suffrages embraced.
91.
His Debtors to indulge he is eas'lie bribed,
Yet most precisely purges his own Debt,
His life in See Olympius Nemesianus Ecl. 1. His description of just Melibaeus.

Melibaeus is described,
To calm the Country, and Landmarks to set.
92.
The man, by him to sit in Judgment called,
Must Justice weigh with an impartial hand,
Plut: in his Apophthegms of Kings, etc.
So those, by the Egyptian Kings installed,
Were ti'd to Law, though the King should countermand.
93.
The worthy etc. Romanorum imperium ad viros bonos, vel exteros saepe delatum,
nam ubi fores, etc. Natal Com. lib. 7.
The worthy still commence his substitute,
And such, though strangers, here give only price;
Whereas that Citie's Gates against Virtue shut,
Are necessarly open unto Vice.
94.
Friendship, which, with the (...); As between the Head and the Members, so
there is a near conjunction, and Sacred Tie betwixt Friends; Hence Horace,
Animae dimidium meae: Englished, my better half.
Head, our
bounds had fled,
Now by a closer Union is begun,
Thus She does his uniting Presence wed,
And woo him as the Marigold the Sun.
95.
His Friendship knows no treach'rie, nor by path,
Nor can the knot be easily untwin'd,
The pious relicts of the Attica fides, it is a proverb, from the City of
Athens, famous for their unfeigned affection to their Friends; Hence it is said,
that at Athens there was a Temple built to the Goddess of Faith, Plut.
Attick Faith,
Are on the Table of his Heart enshrined.
96.
His Friendship, the Virtue, pleasure, profit.
three requisits unloades,
Which he, deep-fraughted, does to's Friends import,
From Lucan-dignare tuos aperire penates. ad Pisonem; That is, he bountifully
opens his store, or storehouse to his Friends, hence Cic, says, rem
famillarem aperit beignitas 2. Offic.
To whom he daigns to shows familiar Gods,
And give sufficient share of every sort.
97.
He chooses Friends by worth, and not by weight,
The honest, though but poor, enhance his Voice,
And those who fit his humor, are upright;
Such sympathy is 'twixt his Friends and choice.
98.
Although his Genius Homo natura est appetens socij. Cic. in Lael.
sociable is,
Yet likes not Leagues with many to contract;
For scatt'red Love becomes too soon remiss,
And many Friends too many cares exact.
99.
The fewer Branches that the stock foments,
The Body's sap is not so soon decayed;
And a great River deeper water vents,
Where Streams through fewer Channels are conveyed.
100.
Ne cuivis Dexteram injeceris. Adag. Pythag.
To all the Right Hand it is unsafe to reach,
Or any, rashly, our near Friend to make:
In Philosophy it is called materia prima. defined, an incomplete substance
variously determinated by the different forms.
So the first matter, as the Physics teach,
Is any form made capable to take.
101.
Their Room all blanch, yet without Charter hold,
Novos parans amicos ne obliviscere veterum. Adag. Hermol. Barb.
Nor by the new, the old are justled
out;
And these, in the In the Register of Friendship there were certain Classes,
and these of the first Table and admission, were preferred to these of the
second Table and admission. vid. Sen. de benef. lib. 6. cap. 33.
first Table once enrolled,
Stand fast, though Fortune's wheel should turn about.
102.
His Friendship with their Fortune will not expire,
From Ovid. Turpe laborantem deseruisse ratem. lib. 2. de Ponto,
The laboring Ship abhorring to
forsake:
-- Dum medicinam vulnera poscunt, is Iocus officio. Sil.
And when their wounds due medicine
require,
Duty and Pity place together take.
103.
These timely and discreetly he reproves,
Not fearing, for reproof, his Friends to loose;
Morbi interdum amarulentis potionibus potius sanantur, quam si dulciora
adhibeas. Pythag.
So
sometimes to the Patient, whom he loves,
The expert Physician gives a tarter Dose.
104.
His favors, secretly, he makes them taste,
Which are more welcome, when they thus surprise;
So that Arcesilaus.
Philosopher's conveying cast,
Seemed more enam'ring in the Painter's Eyes. Apelles. See Plat. Mor.

105.
He will not cement with these who palliat Truth,
And Ut monere and moneri est verae amicitiae, sic etc. Cic. in Lael. From
Homer. Iliad. 1. (...).
mutual admonition do repel;
* He, whose mind is belied by's fawning mouth,
Is unto him as odious as is Hell.
106.
From Terence. Postremo imperavi egomit mihi omnia assentari.
These, who to what he speaks,
strain their assent,
And to his humor can their own adapt,
The subtle Fowler fitly represent,
When by his mimick voice the Bird's entrapt.
107
By honi'd words he will not be preyed upon,
When under such the lurking Habet enim suum venenum blanda oration. Sen.
venom stays;
Bonum enim est laudari, sed praestantius est esse laudabilem. idem.
And though smooth-tongu'd
applause has Honor won
Yet better it is to claim deserved Praise.
108.
Temperantia cernitur in praetermittendis voluptatibus. Cic. 5. de Fin. 67.
Now Temperance
began their Hearts to wean
From tickling pleasures which they had pursued;
A metaphor taken from the Sun, who not only rules the day, and keeps a
measure himself, but likewise moderates the course of the Planets. Hence Cic.
5. Tuscul. 42. Temperantia est mo deratrix omnium commotionum.
As soon's he ruled the day, the Golden mean
Was in the motions of their minds renewed.
109.
His Temperance has influence upon us,
Persuasive by its modest Dialect:
When he superfluous cost abandons thus,
We, needless excess, must, for shame, correct.
110.
Frugality, his humor thus does fit,
Being thereto from his budding youth inured;
From Horace od 2. lib, 3. Angustam, amici, pauperiem pati, Robustus acri
militia puer Condiscat.
So by the youth, in wars taught well to acquit
His age, Want will be patiently endured.
111.
Good Education is a kind of spell,
Whereby the Child, in's spring, is lulled asleep,
Until his pliant mind be seasoned well,
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Hor. Epist. 2. lib. 1.
Which will
the scent, through all its seasons, keep.
112.
Liberalis dabit propter honestatem, and recte, quibus oportet and quando
oportet. Arist. lib. 4. Eth.
Yet, when his Honor at the stake is laid,
He can in liberal offerings even transgress;
Deserving works, by him are doubly paid,
His Bounty rather tending to excess.
113.
Si deos imitaris, da etiam ingratis, nam and sceleratis Sol oritur, etc. Sen.
de benef.
And while he strives to imitate the Gods,
The man ingrate of his Benev'lence shares;
So, with ill men the Sun lives not at odds,
But to their roofes indiff'rently repaires.
114.
He might, by Fortune, be to riot moved,
Yet huggs Sobriety the Friend of Health,
So Life may be prolonged, Estate improved,
From Ausonius. Et misceret opes pauperitmque simul lib. Epigram.
Mingling together Poverty and
Wealth.
115.
From Claud. l. 1. Vivitur exiguo melius; -- si quis cognoverit uti.
Little suffices
Nature best, if such
We knew aright to use, and not to waste,
He thinks it meet, Minimum decet lubere, cui multum licet. Sen.
whose power can compass much,
To be contented quietly with least.
116.
Our Loyalty, the Subject's natural Test,
His happy advent from its Virtue is apt to slumber, if it be not stirred up by
exercise, Hence Virg. Aen. l. 10. Nunc prece, nunc dictis virtutem accendit.
See number. 16.
slumber roused,
By his obedient mouth we are confessed,
Although before, through want of tongue excused.
117.
This seems t'ave been an an Heritage entailed
Upon the Buchanan and Burnets unjust Characters of this Family are to be
imputed to their serving a Party.
Fam'lie, still to be improved;
Nay through this breath, long from the stock exhaled,
The (1) Branches of the Family; whereof Calander is the first.
arms will still be
honored, and beloved,
118.
A Race so stamped with Loyalty and Wit, Digression.

That it should ever tend to the ascent,
Not only in the Several of the Lords of Linlithgow were Privy Counselors.
Senate, raised, to sit,
But to enhanse the Reins of Sir Alexander Livingstoun, thereafter Lord
Livingstoun, was made Governor of Scotland in King James the Second 's
minority.
Government.
119.
What See the Edinburgh Edition ( A. 1582.) of Buchanans History, fol. 119.

Tongue, the Index of the abounding Heart,
Has greater Love to their great Lord expressed?
I pray, whose James late Earl of Calander was portrayed with a Batton in his
right hand, above which was this Superscription, Haec dextera vindex, Principis
and patriae.
hand was abler to assert
His Prince and Countrey's mutual interest?
120.
With what a courage did James Livingstoun Son to the Governor, See Leslies
History, l. 8. page 289.
he brave his fate,
Who fell by too too powerful fees oreborn.
And with his dying breath pronounced it great,
Court grandeur and all earthly pomp to scorn.
121.
What Courtier, 'midst vicissitudes of State,
Has longer stood unhinged, or tumbled down?
As if true merit aimed to consecrate
Brave George present Earl of Linlithgow, has continued to be Colonel to the
Kings Guard of Foot, since His Majestle's Restoration, and his last breath is
likely (if desert avail) to date his Exauctoration.
George, the surest Atlas of the Crown.
122.
George present Lord Livingstoun, is inclined to encourage the Name; whereof he
is the noble Chief.
He who succeeds to lead the Fam'lie's van,
Is like to'inherit too their lasting Fame;
If they the Nation of that Tribe began,
He Will prove the chief promoter of the same.
123.
And lo a Alexander second Son to the Earl of Linlithgow, looked upon, by all
men, as the most hopeful Gentleman in the Name.
graffsprung from that verdant stemm,
Early begins fair Blossoms to send forth,
Making the luster of that sparkling Gemm
To be best seen, through his own living worth.
124.
None can him, for Disloy'ltie to his Prince,
Without injuring innocence, impeach,
The Legends of his Faith and Life evince
The practice, of what Law and Gospel teach.
125.
For he, in the old stock of See Act 1. and 11. Sess. 1. Parl. 1. Car. 2.
Allegiance 'graft,
The right of the Supreme can never explode,
By Faith, on whatso'er pretext, he is taught
Not to resist the Ordinance of God.
126.
In state affairs his hands were not embrew'd,
And yet his Loy'ltie is no whit the less;
This in his private station has been showed
Not yet being called to public business.
127.
And he, whose temper jumps not with the time,
A more retired course of Life should drive;
Thus Tiberius. Hence Tac. Annal. 1. Alla Tiberio morum via.
he, who with the public could not
chime,
Did not in men's eyes, like Augustus, live
128.
If we the Court and Country would compare,
Reckoning with that, the Stet, quicunque volet, potens Aulae culmine lubrico
etc. Sen. in Thyeste.
changes, cares, and strife:
One, but half-witted, sure would this prefer,
And damn the greatness of a Courtly life.
129.
The Country life effectually promotes
True -- Exeat aula, qui volet esse pius. Luc. lib. 8.
piety, and innocence abetts;
Unto sublimer thoughts it us devotes,
And frees us from the Art of counterfeits. And frees us, etc. For the Country
simplicity requires not that policy which is studied in Courts. Hence. Sen.
Fraus sublimi regnat in aula. in Hippol.

130.
Here he enjoyes what wish can e're pursue,
Hugging comentment under's shadie grove;
The powers, as'twere, allow him here to See Deuter. chapter 34. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.
view,
And to foretaste the sweet that are above.
131.
Here is the shade of a well peopled wood,
Where Nature's choristers have pleasant shroud,
A Garden where the Hieradiant flores, Claud;
glittering flowers do bud,
Aspice labentes jucundo murmr rivos. Ovid.
And a Spring talking, musically, loud.
132.
Lo here are Quem florea vallis paverit, Petrar:
flowrie Walks, and Aspice curvatos pomorum pondere ramos. Ovid.
laughing meads,
These feed the body, and the eyes their Feast;
With ponderous Fruit, here each Tree hangs its head,
Able to tempt the eye, and please the taste.
133.
His Palace, bord'ring with the common Rode,
Seems, hospitably, for its guests to call;
And, by his pains, repaired alamode,
Outbraves the Shadow of the The Rampire built by the Emperor Severus, betwixt
Abercorn and Dumbarton or Alcluich, to keep back the Scots and Picts from
invading their new Province there: it is called otherwise Grahame's Dyke, either
because it was razed to the ground by one of that name; or because Graems, in
our old Language, and Severus in the Latin signify the same thing. The Earl
made this Dyke level with the ground, upon which his Palace is built; about
200. and odd pates distant upon the south side of the Wall.
Roman wall.
134.
The ancient Tower, which was by the English stormed,
And by them suff'red an This fell out on the 15th. of July 1651. Sixty two
persons were killed in the Garrison nobly resisting.
unbribed death;
Behooved, by levelling, to be reformed,
And to be purged from the Usurper's It is reported in his life and death that
he stunk horribly after he expired.
breath.
135.
He means his Dwelling publicly to show,
Removing lets, which might obstruct the eye;
So Julius Drusus a Senator of Rome, See Plut. Moral.
Drusus House was built in open view,
That all the City might his life survey.
136.
Yet, Hermit-lik, he courts not Solitude,
Tho never less'alone, but when he is so;
A civil life he leads for Non solum nobis natisumus, ortusque nostri partem
patria vendicat, partem parents, partem amici. Plato.
for others good,
Which is the best and noblest of the two.
137.
Lo Charity of its wounds freely cured,
Retrives the Revenues it had before,
Others are by his Charity allured,
Cor viduae consolatus sum, pater etiam pauperum. Job 29.31. See Number: 14:
While he the widow cheares, and feeds the poor.
138.
Within his breast the naked Graces meet,
And, christianly, their Offices exerce;
The Graces Temple was built in the midst of the Streets, that all passers by
might be put in mind of Benevolence.
There is their Temple reer'd, as in the street, Never meaning to cut off the
poor, their Terces, as to wives, are taken away, by Act 10: Par: 3: K: Ch: 2:
terce.
139.
If Charity its traffic can enrich,
Then he might soon a wealthy Merchant grow,
From Claud: Nil negat, and sese vel non poscentibus offert.
For he refuses not an Alms, and which,
Often unasked, he largely does bestow.
140.
The needy, daily entering at his Gates,
Return supplied with a most willing loan;
And lest the (1) such as are fit objects of Charity
wingless be meet with hard fate,
He often, with honey, feeds the (i.e.) these who seem to claim our pity, but
deserve not. See Quarl. Enchir. cent: 2: ch: 2: and cent: 3: chap: 71:
yawning drone.
141.
His wealth thus is for ends, by God designed,
And not for worldly bias ends employed;
And though the payment here should be declined,
Yet 'twill; with * interest, after be enjoyed. See Prove: 19: 17: and Mat: 19;
21:

142.
The Muses, in their Patron's presence safe,
Recover their See notes upon Number: 17: Collation is a little Banquet, or
Contribution.
collation, cashiered long;
Glad to have made their first Love's Epitaph,
And kindly tuned the Reals nuptial song. Ens reale, in opposition to Ens
ratlonis, their first Mistress.

143.
He still refreshes with the early dew,
Of his free favor, the ingenious Bards:
Nihil ille Deos, nil carmina curat: Virgil: Eclog: 8: de Daphnide.
Maro's reproach to him will never accrue,
While he the Gods, and Sacred Verse regards.
144.
To pay them honor he is no whit a shamed;
Nor thinks't 'disparagement to nourish Art:
Moecenas was the proper name of a noble Roman, the favorite of Augustus, to
whom he recommended Virgil and Horace; he was a special friend to all Poets,
hence it is said. De Poet. sort Solns Mecaenas verus amicus erat. Virgil wrote
his Georgicks in his honor, and dedicated them unto him, hence in the
beginning of the last Book of the Georgicks, he says -- Hanc etlam Moecenas
adspice partem.

Several Odes, Epodes and Epistles of Horace bear the inscription Ad
Moecenatem. From him all friends and Patrons to the Muses are called
Moecenases: though the name and occasion thereof be grown much out of fashion.


Mecaenas by Posterity is famed,
Who did much favor to the Tribe impart.
145.
The Nine, from It Is clear from Homer (...). in Hymno.
Jove, their pedigree derive,
But their well-being much to this Hero owes;
It Is just his Dignum laud virum, Musa vetat mori. Hor. lib. 4. od: 8:
praises should his fate survive,
If such advantage from the Muses flows.
146.
To count his Virtues o'r, and trace their tracks,
They Will take delight, enam'red with his Name;
Nay they, From Virgil: Et dubitamus adhuc virtut^m extendere factis Aeneid: 6:
if Glory can but match his Acts.
Will write them in the Calendar of fame.
147.
Why should a drop of his Renown be spilt,
While by the Muses, 't may be intercept,
Or, on such Chapel as the Marcellus. who caused a Chapel be builded, bearing
the name Virtutis and Honorls Plut.
Roman built,
'T may be engraven, and from falling kept.
148.
Through his departure, Trade, shipwrack'd almost,
Discov'reth nigh a long expected Port;
Now Riches will be driven on our Coast,
And Commerce will choose hither to resort.
149.
The Town's dear purchased freedom he will defend,
Which some had taken occasion to invade;
Thus from the Duke, the Merchants noble friend,
Our Peers may be moved to encourage Trade.
150.
The old unjust That the Bairns of Falkirk die before they thrive.
reproach is now defaced,
While all the fruit of their Industry taste,
His frugal steps, now by his people traced,
Make It seem a paradox to loose, or waste.
151.
But might the Scandal bear a new Record,
That, of Renown, 't might a new income bring,
If so we prove more duteous to our Lord
And, with our Lord, more Loyal to our King. The foresaid Scandal, That the
Bairas etc. it is here set down in Latin Verse, as it was elsewhere described
by the Author thus. Scillcet hic genitum, vetus est injurla, prolem
Quamve facit rem, vel profidt, ante morl:
Nempe quod urbs Regl cives tulit usque fideles,
Qui male-fidorum ne vel in ore vigent.


Englished. Fame, feigning Children, here begotten, died,
E're they began to thrive, too long belied;
'Cause this Ground still a Loyal Crop did yield,
Which thrives not, sown in a disloyal Field.




152.
Over them his Power, gently exercised,
With their consent, has him obedience won;
Tohim the People's hearts are sacrificed,
While he is pleased to make their case his own.
153.
The Sun when near to make the brightest hour,
And reach the highest point, appears most slow;
So, he exalted both in Place, and Power,
Becomes more moderate, and nobly low.
154.
To purchase Reverence, he does not affect
By coy and swelling looks, and seem too high,
When he, who meets with such squint eyed neglect,
Into his life, too curiously, will pry.
155.
Nor yet remarked, on suppliants to have frowned,
His Nihil est laudabilius, nihil magno and praeclaro viro dignius
placabilitate and clementia. Cic. lib: 1. Offic.
Clemency being by such Voice alarmed,
So Plut.
Caesar's ears were by the zealous sound
Of Prayers and Supplications strangly charmed.
156.
Strange! how a kind Superiour's look or word
Charms the warm heart, and makes the affection spring;
So Cleomenes King of Sparta. Plut.
he, who easy access did afford,
Was only worthy thought, to be a King.
157.
Here Virtue's Tree appears to grow and spread,
And stand, unshaken, fixed by a deep root;
And though the Tree is hid, as was * Nile's head,
Yet it is known to his People by the Fruit. 'Twas said of old that Nile
concealed its spring, for the Ancients were ignorant of its original; but it is
now said to arise from the mountains, called Lunae montes, in Ethiopla: the
lenth of this River is about 900 German miles.

158.
As that cold Mandragoras, or Mandrake. Plut.
herb, when growing near the Vine,
Transmits its healing Virtue to the Grape;
Even so his active Virtues theirs refine,
And by his Ipsise homines in reges, velut unici exemplimores formant. Live.
de^^ 1. lik. 1.
Courtly Manners theirs they shape.
159.
By him that subtle Machiavels precept.
Precept's not transcribed
For the appearance, not the thing to care;
He, only by Moralities, is bribed,
Not by Politics, which vain Titles bear.
160.
Could Sacred Virtue humane shape invest,
Sure it would his assume, as most Divine;
Lest the Inns should be mistaken by her Guest,
Here are hung up all Plutarch mustreth up ten signs, which he makes to be the
discoverers and touchstone of Virtue. See his Morals, of proccieding in Virtue.
Plutarch's speaking signs.
161.
Thus he the toils of Virtue first o'r come,
May Honor est virtutis praemium. Hence Virgil. Ipsis praecipue ductoribus
addit honores. l. 5. Aeneid.
Honor's Trophies, not unjustly claim;
So all through Virtue's Temple, at old Rome,
Were wont to pass, e're they to Honor's came.
162.
As Caesar did his waiting Friends engage,
To seal his last breath with a joyful cry,
So he, his part once acted on the Stage,
Will sure deserve a solemn Plaudite.
163.
His former benefits, among them sown,
(Tho yet the later he upon them heaps)
Twice blaefied, etc. from Virgil Bis quae solemn, bis frigora sensit.
Twice blasted, now by's By his second heat, etc. (1) their Gratitude, blasted
twice before, through his departure, seems now by his second Presence to be
revived, and warmed again; and they become thankful for his benifit.
second heat are grown
Mature, and he a From Virgil: Illa seges demum votis responder.
thankful Harvest reaps.
164.
Beatius est dare quam accipere, Act. 20.
The better part he chooses, to Bestow,
To take with thankful hearts, they make it their work,
Never to be changed into the Cuculus matrem vorat: ingratus Benefactorem. Adag:
ex Cosmoscopia Christiana. N. Chytrael.
male Cuckoo,
But hatched, as't were, under the Ciconia pietatis erga parents magistra est.
Idem.
grateful Stork.
165.
They pray he may, at home, sound Health enjoy,
Where the The air is here more cold, whereby the natural heat is more united
and kept in the body, which renders the people more strong, and longer lived.
air less then the English The soil is there more fat; which, as Cyrus said,
makes men more soft and effeminate, then the sharp and hilly Countries; hence
Cic. Ad juvenilem libidinem copia voluptatum gliscit illa, nt ignis oleo.
Besides the marish ground does exhale many vapors, which renders the air more
thick, and unwholesome.
soil offends;
Where he can better his (le) Honesty. Hence the similltude of Thalasius. Sicut
anima corpus secundum naturam vivisicat; ita and animam virtus.
Soul's Health employ,
And sway the Body's, if it on that depends.
166.
May these hot Baths thus prove medicinal,
To purge away all pain, and pamper Health;
So Aeson's youth the Medes: who restored youth to old Aeson, the father of
Jason, who, by Medea's art, stole the Golden Fleece from Colchos. See Ovid.
Metamorph. lib. 7.
Sorc'ress did recall,
And made him Grat'late in the stolen wealth.
167.
May his sweet mate, thus wat'red, pregnant grow,
And, landed safe, her masculine fraught unlade;
So while Nile does the Pharian Lands o'rflow,
Fruits are produced, and Plurima cultores versis animalia glebis Inveniunt,
etc. Ovid. Metam. 1.
living creatures made.
168.
After the fall of calm and balmie showers,
Which to be welcomed, by the Fields are seen;
The smiling spring sends forth her plants and flowers,
And paints the teeming earth with white and green.
169.
O may this Treasure not long here be couched,
But drained, as streams, from this delicious source,
Fama est in Delo nasci olivam and palmam, quibus tactis Latonam subito partum
edidisse cum ante id facere non potuisset. Aelian: in varia historia.
The Palm and Olive, by Latona touched,
Did the strait passage, long obstructed, force.
170.
The fruitful Womb is now to Scotland sent,
To make the number up in CHARLES his waine;
Could Nature then be so improvident,
As to introduce a Prince, without a Train.
171.
This doubtful Guest, Health, at dear rate repaired,
To treat aright, the men of skill advise,
Not to be tossed by cares, nor passions snared,
But the (...), mensura in omnibus optima. Pyth.
mean to keep in food, and exercise. See Plutarch's precepts of health.

172.
And to recruited Health may Of old they attributed much unto Fortune, making
it the Governess of their, lives and estates; hence Juven: sat: 10: -- sed te
Nos faclmus, Fortuna, Deam coeloque locamus.

And tho Poetlcallie, the word Fortune be made use of now; Yet the success and
event of every thing is to be ascribed to God only; hence Homer, (though he
assigns the power to the wrong god,' out of mere ignorance) sings well --
(...). (1) Jovi suerint haec omuia curae.


Fortune add
Increase of Lordship, equal to her own;
On whose retail may no coheir be glad;
But, without Rival, that you Reign alone.
173.
From Homer: Iliad: 1. (...). (i e) Haud expedit unquam Multorum imperium,
nobis Rex unicus esto.
As it is more safe one bear supreme Command,
Then it' among many differing heads should fall;
So, under Charles, we would have our spot of Land
(Unlike the Echo) know but one man's Call.
174.
This this shall be the scope of all our Vows
That Both, in honor, long together live;
While to Subjection's yoke each calmly bows,
And under them, be Chronicled to Thrive.
175.
Serus in Coelum redeas: Hor: lib: 1: od: 2: Alexander and Marie the Christian
Names of the E. and Countess of Calander, both famous in Sacred, and profane
History, to whom that verse of Strozius pater, may be fitly applied. Omnibus
his celebrem virtus dedit inclvta famam.
Till Heaven, first of their Virtues the Earth possessed,
And filled with fame, late to receive them daigne,
Where Marie, with the worthies, shall be blessed,
And Alexander, more then Monarch, reign.
176. The EPILOGUE.
His luckie aspect, when from us estranged,
With lofty buskins did the stage befriend;
The unluckie Scene its Restitution changed,
And made the Play with Comic show to end.
FINIS.
Illustrissimo HEROI, ALEXANDRO Calanderiae Comiti, Almondiae Regulo, etc. Cum
ditissima Munificentia Monumentum exstruxisset fontale Varij Sacelli 4o Call.
Jun. 1675.
Gesta sua Carmine pro Urbanis Gratulabundo consecrat M. L.
OVID. Nunquam pigra fuit nostris tua gratia rebus.
Sit piger ad poenas Princeps, ad praemia velox.
Lo thine Indulgence unconstrained came,
When e're our drooping State required the same.
Peers should be swift to give and to reward,
Whom Clemency to punish should retard.

SPlendet amor donis; Lymphas ubi cogis in urbem,
Debita muneribus Gratia quanta tuis!
Instar aquae saliet tua fama e font perenni,
Nommis insculptas rupe tenente notas.
Cedite j^m Vario, Mundi Miracla, Sacello?
Cedite Pyramides, clarius extat opus.
Font Calanderio mergat, versetur Apollo,
Usque sit Aonio lympha sacrata choro.
Ut Leo vestra ruber palmis Insignia tollit,
Sic populus lauds sustinet ore tuas.
Gloria te decorat, ceuaurata Corona Leonem,
Nectare quae meritum Carminis usque vehet.
Hebdomadem Versus erexi haud laudibus aequam,
Pleias in vestro, quae sit honor micans.
ENGLISHED.
1.
YOur pious love beheld in Beauties glass
Does Love surpass,
Viewed in the Fount
Reared in your ancient Town; it does amount
To sumptuous charges, which with cheerful heart
You did impart.
Each trickling drop shall sound your Fame,
Each Stone engraven bear your lasting name.
II.
Thesev'n rare Monuments of humane pride
Are here descri'd;
Nay straight give place
To this exalted Pyramide of Grace;
For lo our noble Patriots frame
His Gifts proclaim.
Let Phoebus n'ere from it retire
But still be hallowed to Apollo's Quire.
III.
As the Lion Sejant Gules his paws advance
Your cognizance,
So, as in fort,
The peoples dutious tongues your praise support.
And as the generous Lions temples round
With Gold are crowned:
So yours with Fame, which shall rehearse
Your merit in a never dying Verse.
IV.
In lien of a proud fabric to make even
The Wonders (sev'n)
My Muse appears,
And to your Shrine a Week of Distichs rears;
Not on this sev'nfold Theater to raise
Nor reach your praise;
But to b' as sev'n Stars in your Honor,
Set up to acquaint Spectatours with the Donour.
Ad Cives Festivos, Aqua fontana in urbem 4o Call. Jun. primum introducta.
Exhortatio.
DUm CAROLI reducis memor, Auctorisque salutis
Pocula verte; locus, lympha, Diesque vocant.
Laetitiam testare; novo neu parce Liquori
Usque est, insignis bis, celebranda dies.
ENGLISHED.
SInce Fountain, Day and Place to drink invite
Our Sovereign and free Patrons health; come, pray
Fill up to th brim; and in a merry fit
Let Us solemnize this twice auspicious Day.
Alexander Livingstonius.
Anagr.
Si ingratus, inde lex nova.
Carmen
Nil, reor, ingratis, nisi lexnova, plaudere possit;
Quam tua, rite, minas men's generosa probat.
Englished

Nothing, me thinks, can handsomely allow
Of base ingratitude, condemned by you,
Unless it be some glozing piece of frand,
Which thou, most generous soul, will never appland.
Alexander Calanderii Comes.
Annagr.
Ex animi calore (h) ercle dona das.
Carmen
Cum doni pretium frigus persaepe remittat,
Auxerat usque animi munera vestra Calor.
Englished.

While a faint heart, in open hand reclus'd,
Another's largess has ofitimes abused,
The value of your liberal gifts are still
Raised by the heat of your concurring Will.
In Mariam, Comitissam De Calander, EPIGRAMMA.
Juno, Minerva, Venus, Charites, Cybeleque Camoena,
Optima, contendunt, quae tibi dona daret:
En Majestatem vultus Regina recludit,
Front perillustrem significante domum.
Imbuit ingenio doctissima Pallas acuto,
Indole vel sexum condecorante suum.
Cum splendore modum formae Venus indidit aequum,
Rore pudicitiae perpoliente genas.
At Virtutis apem Charites fecere, sonante
Praeter Virtutem voce manuve nihil.
Te Cybele, turrita caput, Pietate coronat,
Unde Rosam verae Relligionis oles.
Dona Deum repetens te Laud Camoena notavit,
Iusuper at dona haec usque vigere dabit.
ENGLISHED.
Madam, the Goddesses litigious grow,
Which should confer the noblest gift on you;
The Juno
Queen discl seth a majestic front,
Which of your high extraction gives account.
The Minerva
laureate Dame a pregnant Wit does vent,
And a choice genius, the She Is ornament.
Love's Queen shows as much beauty as is fit,
And with the chastest colors brightens it.
The Graces make your good works to abound,
While Voice and Hand can naught, but Virtue sound:
The Cybele.
Turban'd Dame your pious orgies Crowns,
Hence your Devotion is so savoury grown.
And while the Muses all these gifis recount,
Their own Donations all the rest surmount.
For these, which, with their owner, might decline,
To all Posterity they will enshrine.
Maria Hamiltona.
Anagr. 1.
Amor animi halat.
(1) Hearty affection breath's out.

Car.
Quod tibi dilecti sint proximus and Deus, insto,
Vestri quando Animi suaviter halat amor.
(1) Love, as the two Decalogue-objects due,
God, and our neighbor, will to both accrue;
For It scents so sweetly, thus exhaled from you.
Anagr. 2.
O Ara miti in mala.
(1) O sanctuary to the meek against troubles.

Car.
Improbus hic nullo, durusve potitur asylo,
In mala quum solum mitibus ara pates.
(1) The lewd, and rude need not expect to share
In your Protection, when, against galling care,
A rampire to the meek you only are.
Anagr. 3.
At arma animi alo.
(1) But I maintain the armor of the mind.

Car.
Exultent arts talem reperisse Patronam,
Quae ferat, arma animi convenienter alo.
(1) Let Arts exult, that they have found, in need,
Such noble Patroness, by name decreed
The working mind, in season, thus to feed.
FINIS.
On the preceding POEM, Patronus Redux.
Here Maro's loafty, and immortal strains,
Here Seneca's Diviner raptures flow;
Here Ovid's fancy in this Mirror shines,
Plutarch's Moral'ty here it self does show.
Here Learning burnisht with Pegasian fire,
And Love with Wit these mighty Lines Inspire:
Which Lines, to give my judgment of the whole,
Will Burnet and Buchanan both control.
To the Learned and ingenious Gentleman, M. L. the Author.
Sir (though unto my grief) I must confess,
I know you not so much as by the Face,
Yet by your other Writtings which I saw,
And by the Portraicture which here you draw,
Both of your Self and Patron, not to smother
My thoughts, you both are happy, each in other.
So let the Patron's love and Poet's be
Bounded with nothing but eternity.
N. P.

TO Michael Livingstone OF Pantasken, Upon his Panegyric on the Earl of
Calander.
Though Poets now, in this malicious age,
Infactions join, and indamn'd Clubs engage;
Plotting to bite in mercenarie Rhimes,
And with vile Satyrs to lampoon the times:
Yet here such paths our Author seeks to shun,
And cannot, with pleasure, in these footsteps run,
Scorning to build the Trophies of his Fame,
Upon the ruins of some nobler Name:
Neither will he the sensual Creature please,
Our huffing Gallants, or such Fops as these,
By Writing bawdie; or, with placquet Rhimes,
Nick all the itching Wenches of the Times.
These easier Ways, he, with contempt, does view,
And not the Many, but the Virtuous, few,
He strives to please, and set that goddess forth
Virtue, adorned with all her native worth
Such as she was, e're common made by Fame,
Who christened Vice with her usurped Name.
Will. Scot.

ADDENDA.
SEe page 18. number. 23. to which Notes upon the said number, add, that John
Livingstoun of Kirkland, died June 11. 1681. about 2. a cloak in the morning;
what way the House, wherein he was burnt, was fired, is yet unrevealed.

See p. 27. n. 61. Now at the Maiden City, etc. This name of the Town is
derived from the Castle, called in Latin; Castra Puellarum; it is conveniently
Situated upon a Rock, overlooking the whole Town, His Majesty keeps a strong
Garrison therein, under whom the right Honorable, the Marquess of Queensberry
is Governor, as also, Lord high Thesaurer; For, In one man's hand the Castle
and the Purse,
Will best each other Fortify and Nurse.


See page 42. n. 124. where, for Without injuring innocence, etc. understand,
Without It Is a Law in England, called, Scandalum magnatum, whereby any,
injuring the reputation, or Person of a Nobleman, are punished.
Peer's scandal, legally impeach.

ERRATA.
TO answer to this mark, page 44. numb. 132. there is omitted in the Notes,
this Latin phrase, prata rident.

As also, p. 45. n. 136. to answer to the mark, there is omitted in the Notes,
Noinquam minus solus quam cum solus, the saying of Scipio maj. Asri.

There are several literal errors which have escaped the Printer, to be amended
thus: For ingeniously p. 7. l. 5. read engenuously. For be, p. 11. l. 16. read
b'. For given, p. 20. l. 4. read given. For que, p. 21. l. last, read, quod.
For cast, p. 23. l. 3. read casts. For, from earth, p. 24. l. 6. read from the
earth. For show, p. 55. l. last, read, shoot.

Any like faults that occur, the Reader may help them accordingly.


