PNEYAT-APOLOGIA.

OR, AN APOLOGY FOR THE POWER and LIBERTY OF THE SPIRIT; As at first To give a
Being to, so still to give a Blessing by his Ordinances. IN THREE SERMONS
PREACHED AT Great BVDWORTH, TO Some Persons of Honor, and several of the Clergy
then present to communicate in reference to the late ACT.

By James Livesey, A.M. and Vicar of Budworth.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Robert Clavel, in Little-Britain, 1674.

To the Honorable Sir George Warburton, Baronet. Lord of Budworth Magna,
Aston, Apleton, Sutton, Warburton, Winnington, Marthal, Pulford, etc. And his
Incomparably Accomplished and most Noble Lady, Madam Diana Warburton. And Right
Worshipful, William Tutchett, Of Whitley, Esquire His Majesty's High Sheriff for
the County Palatine of Chester. And his Virtuous and worthily Honored Consort,
Madam Martha Tutchett.
With the rest of the Gentry, and others of the Congregation of Great Budworth.
Honorable, Worshipful, and Worthy Sirs,
WHat was then (though not affectionately enough) presented to your attentive
and judicious ears, is now most humbly offered to your discerning eyes; the
good Spirit of the Lord hand it down into your Hearts, the best receptacle of
Divine Truths. 'Twas my work to suit the Text to that Occasion, and the Sermons
to the Text; yours to suit your Attentions to the Sermons, and His to do us all
good, we doing so. If any shall demand why these were then Preached, or are now
published? your Honor can satisfy the former, your Worship the latter. That I
have mounted the Dedication so high, to so many, (when to every individual a
just volume had been an incompetent Oblation) this presumption I must answer
for.

As Artaxerxes that great Persian Monarch accepted a present of Water from a
poor Labourer (with a smiling countenance) not having need thereof; for may
(perhaps) your Generosity these plain, unpolished Sermons from one under so
many Obligations to serve you. The censures of the ignorant I have no reason to
regard, nor need I fear those of the Learned (who can do much better with their
Pens, yet do nothing) for de Straminibus non curat invidia. -- The carelessness
of many who woefully and wilfully squander away Sacrament-days without due
observation, has awakened my Pen to remind them of the preciousness and
us^fulness of this Ordinance, and of their duties to their never-dying Souls.
Who sees not some so sick that they complain they cannot live, and yet so
sinful that they dare not die? before another day any of us (the most young or
strong) may be in another world; though we shall live out, yet surely we cannot
outlive the determined time. These serious thoughts of Death cannot bring us
sooner to our graves, but they should bring us nearer to our duties, to a more
constant and conscientious attendance on this holy Ordinance amongst the rest,
which is the grand design of these ensuing Pages.

In short, the Truths in them contained are Gods, as such embrace them; the
weaknesses mine, how many soever. I have borrowed help from others to erect
this feeble Fabric, but most from the Spirit of the Lord, to whose gracious
conduct in your passage to Glory, I shall never cease to commend you,
beseeching that my service be not accounted my crime.

The good Lord make you shining Lights in that public Orb in which God and the
King have fixed you, and more illustrious Patterns of all Graces and Virtues
(wherein you now excel) to those you converse with. This shall be the
breathing of his Soul, who is, Sirs,

Your ever obliged Servant, J.L.
Aug. 26. 1673.
Besides some mistakes in pointing, and a few literal; the material Errata
correct thus I pray.

ERRATA.

IN the Margent, page 125. read Revel. 5.8. and p. 141. after (...) add (...):
p. 146. read (...).

In the Book,
page 10. l. 18. r. despises. page 11. l. 7. r. him for hmi. page 15. l. 23.
r. pulls for puts. page 80. l. 9. r. scan for can. page 102. l. 17. r. might
for would. page 104. l. 4. r. Act the latter. page 110. l. antap. r. Him for
them. page 163. lin. antep. neglected. penult. observation. ult. in things.
page 165. l. 16. r. wills for wits.
THE SPIRIT of the LORD IN Power and at Liberty* The first Sermon, July the 13.
1673.
to bless his own Institutions, with the efficacy and usefulness of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, asserted in THREE SERMONS, Preached On Three
Sacrament-days,
On Micah 2.7. O thou that art named the House of Jacob, is the Spirit of the
Lord straightened? are these his Doings? Do not my words do good to him that
walks uprightly?
Legi potest (...) Drus.
MIcah was one of them we call the small or lesser Prophets; not because their
Prophesies are of less authority and majesty, or excellency; (for they were all
the dictates of the Spirit of the Lord) but because they are more concise and
of greater brevity than the first four. Ruffin. in Praefat. in Hos.


These Prophesies ( Calvin conceives) as now extant are but the marrow and
quintessence of those Sermons by them preached to the people of Israel and
Judah: Collected and reduced (says Zanchy) into one volum, Proleg. in Hos.
by the care of those pious Princes inspired of the Lord, left by reason of
their littleness they should be lost; and this was done for the Churches
benefit in those and succeeding Ages.

This Prophecy contains two solemn Sermons.

The former compriseth the five first, and the latter the three last Chapters.

In the former are three things observable.

1. The Sins this people stood guilty of before God, and they are ingentia
vitia, mighty ones. 2. The Judgments of God denounced against this people for
those sins; and they are ingentia supplicia, doleful, dreadful, but most just
and righteous: For he is too good to do his people hurt, and too just to do any
people wrong: remunerat ultra condignum, sed punit infra, Ezra 9.13. 3. The
Comforts interspersed on purpose to solace and support their hearts who were
found faithful in these Kingdoms. He foretells (as is obvious to the meanest
capacity) both the temporal deliverance of Judah out of the Babylonish
Captivity; and the eternal deliverance of the Church to be gathered out of all
Nations through the promised Messiah.
Their Sins are many, so were their Judgments; we shall mention three or four,
for no more stand in our way unto the Text.

Cultum Idolorum institutum in Bethel, and Dan. Drus.
1. Their Idolatry, Chap. 1.5. this they are branded with; this is the
procuring cause of the Lords appearing against them in this glorious severity.

The Judgments threatened for this Sin, you see in verse. 6, 7. their capital
Sinners were in their capital Cities, Samaria and Jerusalem; but they were not
too great for the great God to bring to condign punishment. (...) Diffluere
faciam.
I will make Samaria as an heap of the field; all the graven Images shall be
beaten or broken to pieces.

The next this people are stigmatized with are Covetousness and Oppression,
Quid non Auri sacra fames.
chap. 2.4. They covet fields and take them by violence, and houses, and take
them away, etc. regarding neither right nor wrong; provided they got it they
cared not Quo jure* quave injuria.

How graphically does the Poet describe this monster sin? Phoc.
even in Saint Paul's own terms, (...). The Judgment denounced for this
complicate sin, you see 3, 4 5. Their calamity shall be extraordinary ^ their
desolation is irrevocably determined, and positively and peremptorily declared,
Behold, against this Family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove
your necks, etc.

The third sin is contempt of and opposition against his Word, his Ordinances
and Officers, Verse. 6. and which did accent and aggravate the crime, their
delight in and approbation of such false Prophets as would speak Placentia, and
flatter them in their vicious and pernicious practices, verse. the 11th.

The Text under consideration is the Lords expostulation with this degenerated
people for their forementioned irreverence and contempt. O thou that art named
the House of Jacob, is the spirit of the Lord straightened? Are these his doings?
Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly.

In this last clause two general parts.

1. The Specification of a choice and precious privilege, viz. To have the Word
and Ordinances to do one good, this is a mercy of the first Magnitude; I know
you pray for it as such; you prize it as such; you praise him for it as such;
you wait this day for it as such: your non-proficiency under the dews and
droppings of the Sanctuary you lament as an heavy judgment, Isa. 6.10, 11.
Ergo. 2. The qualification of the persons to whom it appertains, Privilegia non
sunt amplianda.
them who walk uprightly; rare ones indeed, the (...), do not so; they say,
Privilegia sunt stricti juris.
Consider the form, it is Interrogative; the matter or sense of this sentence,
it is positive.

It Is a Categorical proposition; in which, 1. The Subject, or that which is
spoken of, viz. my words. 2. The Predicat; or that which is spoken of his
words, they do good.


Do not my words do good? yea out all ifs or ands they do, to such as are thus
qualified (i.e.) walk uprightly.

In both are four things.

1. The Author or Proprietor of them, -- my words. 2. The signal energy and
singular efficacy of them, -- do good. 3. The grand duty required of such who
shall receive good by them, -- walking. 4. The Modification of the duty here
expressed, -- uprightly.
A short explanatory must serve at present, and then the observations resulting
hence will be methodically proposed.

O Dicte, (...) prius erat, (...) in foem. Qui diceris sed non es. Drus. Vos
estis Israelite nomine non re, Vat. and Para us.
O thou that art named the House of Jacob; i.e. who art called, but really art
not so; you are an hypocritical generation; Jacob that good old Patriarch was a
man of godly simplicity, Genesis 25.27. a man full of the fire of holy zeal; O the
care he had, and the conscience he made of reforming his Family, Genesis 35.2, 3.
a man of Prayer, a great Wrestler with God, Genesis 32.28. Hos. 12.4. A great
lover of my Word and Ordinances. Were you (as is said of Nathanael) Israelites
indeed, in whom there is no guile; Were you good indeed, my words would do you
good. But you snarle at and quarrel with my Prophets, Domino per laesos servos
fit injuria.
because of those Judgments they have denounced against you; the fault is not
in them, nor yet in me; no, it is in your selves; you complain of them unjustly,
and so doing you deal with me injuriously, Luke 10.16. Hos. 13.9.

Spiritus (...) Latin in Mascul. Hebr. in Foem. Graece in Neut. Commode servit
personae Divinae cui nulla sexus generisve diversitas tribuitur.
Is the spirit of the Lord straightened? By the Spirit of the Lord Grotius and
Friedlibius understand the patience, longanimity, mercy and goodness of the
Lord; others (as Drusius, Paraeus; etc.) understand the Holy Ghost; -- What? is
he so contracted? is he reduced to such an exigence, that he cannot inspire his
Prophets? and appoint them how and what to speak unto you? how audacious is
your pride and wickedness? Is it for you to dictate to them what, when and how
to prophecy? Dare you attempt to limit the holy Spirit of God? Quae haec
superbia and impietas? Paraeus and Piscator.
it is not for want of fullness in him to publish or perform good things, that my
Prophets have commission thus to thunder against your impieties.

An ista sunt opera. Vatab. Cogitationes ejus. Grot. Number exitio vestro
delectetur? non ita intelligendae sunt comminationes Prophetarum.
Are these his doings? That is, the way and method of the Almighty in his
dealings; and those in which he delights are ways of love and mercy; he draws
with the cords of men; is full of candor and ingenuity; if now he speak harshly
and deal severely with you, know this is not his usual course; but only your
present case calls for it. Consult Isa. 28.21. Hos. 11.8.

Do not my words do good, etc. q.d. Yea, they do: And if you break off your
sins by true unfeigned repentance, and believe my Prophets; if you will but
take care to walk regularly, you shall surely find the influences of this my
Spirit upon your Hearts, causing my Word and Ordinances to work for your good.

I now proceed to the Observations: From the Context take two.

Doct. 1. It Is a doleful case and matter of saddest lamentation when a people
(by profession Gods) stand in opposition against his Word, Ordinances and
Officers: These Expostulations and pressing Interrogatories import no less.

Doct. 2. God will own and plead the cause of his Ordinances and Officers,
whoever dares to oppose or contemn them. Thus he did against this people, and
thus he will; Tua causa erit mea causa, Luke 10.16. He that despises them,
despiseshim: They who do so shall hear from him.

O thou that art named.

Doct. 3. However men be called or accounted of by themselves or others, yet the
Lord can easily discern and will opportunely discover what they are indeed: He
knows us intus and in cute, intus and in cord; Though the heart of man be
(grande profundum) a great Deep, Psalm. 90.8.
yet he can fathom it, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart: He is a God of
Knowledges, 1 Samuel 2.3. Totus oculus, All things are open, naked, anatomized
before him.

Art named.

Doct. 4. The note is this; It Is not enough for a people to have a name or to
be called good; they must be really so: It was a cutting question which St.
Austin put to one, Quid tibi prodest vocari quod non es? What will it advantage
one to have a name to live if he be dead? See H^insius in Joh. 1.47.
To pass for a Saint here, and to be found amongst Sinners hereafter; to be
reputed an Israelite indeed, and to be a Gibeonite; to be named of the House of
Jacob ( i.e. of the Church of God) and to be of the House of Sodom? How shall
Men and Angels stand amazed at the great day, when the secrets of all Hearts
shall be disclosed, to see some taken up to Heaven who were named the vilest of
sinners, and others turned into Hell who were reputed choicest Saints: A form
will do nothing without the power of Godliness. There are two things which
every man is mainly concerned to mind.

(1) To be Good. (2) To appear so.
He that is not so is lost with God, and he that appears not so is lost with
men.

Ones goodness if unknown to himself will afford him little comfort; and if
unknown to others, it will procure him little credit.

Abbreviatus contractus. Drus.
Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened?

Doct. 5. The Spirit of the Lord is not so straightened but he knows how to
inspire and instruct his Prophets.

Doct. 6. The Spirit of the Lord is then straightened, when proud people presume
to prescribe ^ to dictate unto his servants the Prophets, what and when and to
whom they shall speak, and when and what not. Are these his doings? Hence note,
that

Doct. 7. The ordinary way of the Lords dealing with men is in love and mercy;
acts of judgment are his; but they are his strange, not his genuine acts; how
full and sweet is that in Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How
shall I deliver thee Israel, etc. In this sacred volum where is the parallel?
What pathetick Interrogations puts he there unto himself? q.d. Thou art upon
the brink of destruction; it is but a giving thee up and thou art ruined. Oh --
but how: how shall I do it?

Do not my words, etc.

Doct. 8. Note, that the Word delivered and Ordinances dispensed by faithful
Ministers are his. -- Attend them then with due care and conscience, with fear
and reverence, with faith and patience.

Doct. 9. From the connection of the principal efficient and instrumental
causes, viz. the Spirit and the Word: Such as sincerely desire to receive good
from God, must attend to and depend on the Spirit of the Lord in the use of
Ordinances. Ubi enim Ecclesia ibi and spiritus, ubi spiritus Dei illic est
Ecclesia and omnis gratia. Iren. lib. 3. udvers. Haereses.
For the Word can do nothing without the Spirit, and the Spirit will do nothing
(ordinarily) without the Word: Let people talk as their deluded fancies prompt
them; One day they will see and say, that they who are enemies to the Word, are
no true friends to the Spirit; despising the one they do quench the other: Quae
Deus conjunxit, etc. How sweet, Oh, what a reviving Cordial is that precious
promise to a pious Soul, in Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my Name
(my word and Ordinances, by which I am known, as a man is by his name) I will
come unto thee (by my Spirit) and I will bless thee; there shall be a
comfortable meeting and a Cordial closing of my Spirit with your Spirits: See
one for all, Isa. 30.20, 21. Thine eyes shall see thy Teachers -- mark that,
and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, etc.

Do not my words do good? There is a twofold word, the one is verbum audibile,
that is the Holy Scripture, Ephesians. 6.17. and there is verbum visibile, viz. the
Sacraments; they are called visible Sermons: as Christ in that conveys himself
by the ear, so in these he conveys himself by the eye into the Heart. Hence
observe,

Doct. 10. That the Word and Ordinances of God are very operative and powerful.
The Spirit of the Lord concurring, they are not only preceptive and directive,
but affective and effective; they are the rod of his strength, Psalm. 110.2.

In a word there is a sevenfold force or power in the Word:

There is a Sin-subduing power, it puts down strong holds, casts down carnal
reasonings; Oh it is mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

A Soul-humbling power, it lays a proud sinner as low as Hell; makes him cry
out, Lord I am vile: what will thou have me to do, and I will do it: To be, and
I will endeavor to be it, Act. 2.37. and 9.6. and 16.31.

A Soul-cleansing power, Joh. 15.3. Now are ye clean through the Word which I
have spoken to you. And chap. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word
is truth.

A Soul-solacing power: This (word of promise) is my comfort in my affliction,
Psalm. 119.50. it keeps the Soul from fainting; a promise like pearl in broth is
cordial.

A Soul-quickening power: No such Incentives to holy duties in the World as in
the Word: Psalm. 119.50.

A Soul-searching power: It ransacks and rifles the Conscience, and looks into
the most secret transactions of the Heart: When the Sun shines into the House
the Atoms are easily discerned; when the Word shines into the Heart our secret
lusts are easily discovered, Romans 7.7. Heb. 4.12.

A Soul-healing power; Psalm. 107.20. He sent his Word and healed them: How long
might a Soul sit at the foot of a Philosopher and hear his Lectures of
Morality, ere it should experimentally feel and find such an Heart-transforming
power going along with them; such a mighty change wrought by them; Est quaedam
verbi omnipotentia; as Luther said of Prayer.

To him that walks.

D. 11. Christianity is a walk; a Christians life is not a standing or sitting
still: every day must we do a days work, and go a days journey toward our
Heavenly Country.

Up then and be doing, here is not your rest, Quo brevior opportunitas, co
major sedulitas; lose your season and you may lose your Souls; opportunities
are for Eternity but they are not to Eternity: The Spirit will not always
strive with man; now Christ stands and knocks, Genesis 6.3. Cant. 5.3.
but he that stands stays not; give him no childish, no churlish answers; work
and walk now; now if ever, now for ever; you may want an (1) opportunity, if
you slip this; Esto in diebus aestatis Formica. Prove. Arab.
who knows what a day may bring forth? if you be not present in duty, God may
be present in judgment; may come quickly, Rev. 2.5. His Judgments are often
sudden and prevent men's expectations, but never their deserts: Lam. 4.12. Hos.
10.15. Ere you can get out of bed he may let out your blood. Or (2) you may
want ability and not be in a capacity; a sickness may come that may take away
your senses, your friends perhaps may be forced to bind you in your beds; and
is that a season for the greatest work of all, which is not fit for any work at
all? Shall the best Master be the last, the least, the worst served?


Why should our vain hopes of living long, remit or abate our cares of living
well, and working hard? Most never think of going faster till they are forced
to think they shall not go much longer. Let us mind our way and mend our pace.

Uprightly.

Doctr. 12. It Is an important duty which concerns us all to walk uprightly,
Genesis 17.1.

And it is the privilege of such to have the word of the Lord to work for their
good: They shall not hear in vain: Their souls shall live, Isa. 55.3.

But the proposition on which I purpose now to fix (waving all the rest) is
this, and it takes most of them in.

Doct. The spirit of the Lord is not so straightened but that he can cause his
Word and Ordinances to do them good who walk uprightly.

St. Ambrose writing three Books to Gratian the Emperor concerning the Spirit
of the Lord, fronts his first with this passage, Sp. S. non aut alienae
potestati est subjectus, aut juri; sed suae libertatis arbiter, omnia pro
authoritate propriae voluntatis, etc.

There are three great Ordinances of God.

(1) The Ministry of the Word. (2) Baptism.
And the Lords Supper is the third.

The first we have dispatched, and in our last discourse the second was finished
too; to refresh your Memories, give me favor to hint the heads thereof, or
some few only, and them briefly.

Ad templu^ Dei pertinent parvuli sanctificati Sacramento Christi, regenerati
spiritu sancto, qui certe per aetatem nondum possunt cognoscere Deum. Aug.
Epist. 57. Darda. circa Med.
(1) It was proved by Scripture, that the Infants of Christian Parents (visible
Professors) are true Denizons of the visible Church and Kingdom of God; and
have a just right to and interest in Gods Magna Charta, or Covenant of Grace.

That the truth of Grace in the Parents is not the rule we are to act by in
admitting Infants to this Ordinance. Surely he would never make that the
condition upon which his Ministers must apply this his Ordinance, which none
but God himself can infallibly know; let Parents be what they will (vicious and
scandalous) if the Church cast not them out, we must not cast theirs out. A
visible profession of Faith and Holiness in the Parents, (though there be not a
conversation congruous to that profession) intitles the Child to Baptism.

That Infants are capable of the Spirit of the Lord, of saving Grace, of Union
with Christ, of Regeneration, of pardon of Sin, all which are sealed in
Baptism; if any deny this, they must then say, either, That these are not
necessary unto Salvation; or, That no Child dying in his Infancy can be saved:
Both which are absurd enough.

That if Infants have no right to this Seal of the Covenant, their condition
under the Gospel is much worse, and their privileges less than were those of
Jewish Infants under the Law; theirs had one, viz. Circumcision; ours none.

That the Commandment for Circumcision being so express, plain and legible in
the Old Testament, there is no more need of a new Commandment for
Infant Baptism in the New, than for a new Commandment for the holy Observation
of the Lord's Day.

That the Covenant (and not only the Commandment) was then the principal ground
and reason of Circumcision (and is now of Baptism.) Circumcision was called the
Covenant, and not the Commandment; and the contempt or violation of it was
called the transgression of the Covenant, not of the Commandment; Vide
Whitakerum contra Duraeum fusius hac de re page 681. 682.
and the despisers were threatened to be cut off for the violation of the
Covenant, not of the Commandment, Genesis 17.10, 13.

That Esau and Ishmael were regularly circumcised, as well as Isaac. No
Scripture rule was transgressed when Judas and Simon Magus, when Ananias and
Sapphira were baptized; yet what they were, you know, the whole multitude of
the Israelites were baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Yet were not all true Believers,
verse. the 5.

That we cannot infallibly know, but only charitably judge who are true
Believers; and that, Though Infants cannot lay hold on Christ by the hand of
Faith, yet he can and will embrace them in the arms of his love, and bless them.

That he whose child was uncircumcised (by his neglect) was in Gods account
uncircumsised himself, Exodus 12.48. it is so in this case of Baptism; and if
uncircumcised, he was not admitted to the Passover; no nor into the Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 44.9.

That the enemies of Infant Baptism deal not ingenuously in requiring from us
an express Commandment for our practice, whilst mandment for our practice,
whilst they cannot produce one for theirs. Where is your command to keep the
Infants of visible professors from this ordinance till they be six, ten, or
twenty years of age, or till they can make profession of their Faith?

Or where is your command to baptize Children when grown up? if you insist upon
example, then where is your example for your admitting of Women to the Lords
Supper? But of this more the last time.

Secondly, the Antiquity of this Ordinance was vindicated from the imputation
of Novelty; Nullus est Scriptor tam vetustus, qui ejus originem ad Apostolorum
seculum pro certo non refert. Calvin.
and that assertion of Judicious Calvin in his Instit. lib. 4. cap. 16. sect.
8. and of learned Zanchy in Ephesians. 226 page, was considered and confirmed by
the concurrent Testimonies of the Ancients in the several Centuries; as of
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origin, Cyprian, Ambrose, Austin, Nazianzen, etc.

Thirdly, The high and noble ends for which it was instituted. The great
usefulness and advantagiousness of it was showed; not only to those who are of
maturer age, but even to Infants (Elect ones, I mean) ordinarily, when they are
baptized: As the Spirit moving upon the waters produced a world, Genesis 1.2. and
brought forth living Creatures; so the Spirit moving upon the Soul can produce
the seeds of Grace in it: Consult at better leisure the 27th. Article of
Religion, and you will find it corresponding with the judgment of the Fathers,
with the most eminent Divines of these latter ages, with the Holy Scriptures,
which is instar omnium. All which assert the present Infants, ordinarily in the
act of Administration; to clear this (perhaps a more important truth than many
in this Age are apprehensive of) I refer you to what an eminent Doctor of our
Church has left up record, D.C.B's Baptismal Regeneration: It shall suffice
now to mention only four or five. Chrysostom calls Baptism our initiation
Christ, 1 Homil. in Act. (...): In Baptism the chief part is the spirit, (...)
by which the water becomes effectual.

Basil in answer to that question, How are Christians saved? makes this return,
(...): by being regenerated by the grace received in Baptism: de sp. s. cap.
10. (...): Baptism is unto me the beginning of life.

St. Ambrose is for it, Ep. 23.
and Austin too; see his Epistle to Bomface (a noble Earl) on this Argument,
and to Daranus, Ep. 57. -- Sacramenta in solis electis, etc. The Sacraments do
work that which they signify only in the Elect; Zanchy lib. Confess. cap. de
Bapt. P. Martyr loc. com. class. 4. cap. 8. sect. 2.
that is quoted by P. Lombard in Sent.

Calvin and Chamier those two great Lights of France are full for this too;
though in their Circumcision Infants could not apprehend what that sign meant,
yet they were truly circumcised unto the mortification of their depraved and
defiled nature, which when at maturity they meditated on. Instit. lib. 4. cap.
16. sect. 20. Vbi plura ad propositum. See also cap. 15. s. 12. And Chamier, de
sacr. lib. 2. cap. 6. p 4. Tantum abest, etc. It Is so far from us that we
should teach that Baptism effects nothing upon Infants till they come to age;
that on the contrary we know that the effect of Baptism which is performed
immediately by the Spirit himself, sometimes goes before the very celebration
of Baptism; therefore we say, that either then there is some effect in truth
and indeed when the Sacrament is administered, aut nullum unquam futurum; or
else there will never be any at all; that is, then our sins are truly remitted,
and our Adoption made sure to us, but all this morally; with them concur our
own Chieftains, Jewel, Ward, Davenant, Bucer, Ames, and Ainsworth, the last in
his censure of a Dialogue of the Anabaptists urges this argument amongst
others, page 40. to 46.

They to whom God gives the sign and seal of Righteousness by Faith and of
Regeneration, they have Faith and Regeneration, for God gives no lying sign,
he seals no vain or false Covenants.

But God gave to Infants Circumcision which was the sign and seal of the
Righteousness of Faith and Regeneration, Genesis 17.12. Romans 4.11. Coloss. 2.11.

Therefore Infants had (and consequently now have) Faith and Regeneration,
though not in the crop or harvest, yet in the bud and beginning of all
Christian Graces.

A little after: They that deny this reason must either make God the Author of
a lying sign and seal of the Covenant to Abraham and his Infants; or they must
hold that Infants had those graces then, but not now; both which are wicked and
absurd; or they must say, Circumcision was not the sign and seal of
righteousness which is by faith, contrary to Romans 4.11.

Fourthly, And in order thereunto some rules were hinted'; I shall only
superadd one more now; mark it well pray. If you would have the blessing of the
Lord upon this initiating, matriculating Ordinance, act regularly, I mean
according to the rule of the Word: What Is that you will say? I answer let them be
baptized 1. Early. 2. Publicly.


(1) Early: Abraham the Father of the Faithful delayed not the Circumcision of
his dear Isaac beyond the eighth day; and that was a painful ordinance. St.
Austin well observes that the Sacraments of the New Testament are 1. Fewer in
Number. 2. Clearer in Signification. 3. Easier in Observation.


Who dare say of this or that particular infant, it is not regenerate? and Mr.
Tombs confesses such are to be baptized early. Joh. 7.22, 23.
John was circumcised the eighth day, Luke 1.59. So was Christ himself, Luke
2.21. That he was not baptized till about thirty years old, was because till
about that time John baptized none.

The Jews did circumcise the Children which they bought with their moneys, the
same day they bought them; though it was the very day they were born; yea, i^
the eighth day fell to be the Sabbath, yet the Jews circumcised the Child
therein, Joh. 7.22. According to the Hebrew Canon: Circumcision in the time
thereof drives away the Sabbath: See Mr. Ainsw. on Genesis 17.12. Maimonid. his
Treatise of Circumcision. chapter 1. sect. 9.
(i e.) A man must omit the Sabbath (the keeping of it) for to circumcise in
due time. Was the Lord so angry with Moses for the not circumcising of his
child in due time, that he sought to kill him in the Inn* Exodus 4.24. and is he
well pleased with your delays? St. Austin. judgment is well known in thi^ case,
Tanto magis pro parvulis loqui debemus, quanto ipsi pro se loqui non possunt.
Aug. Ep. 89. juxla med.
Non est justum (speaking of Baptism) ut res quae tam magna, tam praeclara
creditur, negligenter aut tardius quam expedit, requiratur. It is not just that
a matter of such moment and importance should be negligently and slowly gone
about; can you devote and dedicate your Children to God too soon? Can you seal
them too early? The sooner the better they are solemnly consecrated to the
Lord, and have his name put upon them: Is it not a great and choice privilege,
that our Children have a visible standing in the Church? can they be too early
initiated into the Church or too soon engaged to serve the Lord? Gal. 5.3.

(2) Publicly: This is according to the ordinary common rule of the Gospel,
Zepper de Pol. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 12.
and the Liturgy of the Church. Baptism is a public seal of the Covenant of
Grace, and therefore should be done publicly. You honor God most when you
solemnly and publicly devote and dedicate your little one^ to God.

You honor this ordinance mos^ by a public owning and using o^ it; and we
should preserve the honor of his Institutions all we can; never more need.

Your little ones are most advantaged this way, they have the prayers of the
whole Assembly; and by the solemnity of this Ordinance your selves are more
quickened in remembering and renewing your Covenant with God on this occasion: So
much is said (and so rationally) by a learned Pen, Mr. Samuel Langley's
Suspension reviewed, etc.
that I cannot presume to add thereto. O^ that for the future what is amiss
amongst us may be redressed; let the honor of God be more consulted, and not
the humors of men.

When Christ was baptized he sent not for John to come to him, but himself went
to John, and was baptized publicly, Mat. 3.13, 16. He has left us his own
example, let none think himself too good or too great to follow his steps.

But because of this present occasion the rest of this discourse shall be
confined to the third Ordinance, viz. The Lords Supper: The Doctrine's this;

Doct. The Spirit of the Lord is not so straightened, but he can cause this.
Ordinance to work for their good who walk uprightly.

In prosecution of this Proposition I shall resolve but only eight Queries,
very succinctly. For brevity is good,

Whether it be or be not understood.

1 Q. What does this term or expression [Walk] import and intimate? 2 Q. What
is it to walk uprightly? -- How is it to be understood? 3 Q. Of what importance
and concernment is it, that we walk thus? 4 Q. When does this Ordinance work
for their good who thus walk? 5 Q. How does it appear that the Spirit of the
Lord can do them good by it, who thus walk? 6 Q. What course must a Christian
take that the Spirit of the Lord may do him good by this Ordinance? 7 Q. What
must one do who has found good at and by this ordinance, from the powerful
workings of the Spirit of the Lord? 8 Q. What Soul-reviving comforts does the
consideration of this important. Truth afford to such as conscientiously
endeavor to walk uprightly?
Of these in order:

1 Q. What does this expression import or intimate?

To clear the notion, know, that walking,

1. It Is motus vitalis, the result of a living principle in the Soul: Actio
sequitur vitam.
Angels do not animate those Bodies which they assume, and their operations
therefore are not vital: to speak properly, those Bodies are rather moved than
move.

Indeed we read in Genesis 18.8. of their eating with Abraham; and this is a vital
act: but you are not to understand it properly but metaphorically, they seemed
to eat: At non comederunt action vitali (says Mercer) sed cibo in corpus
assumptum transmisso, and in aerem tenuissimum resoluto.

There must be a vital principle of grace in the Heart, or we cannot walk in
Heavens way: Dum deest aliquid intus; we are becalmed and cannot move at all.

2. It Is Motus progressivus; a going forward: No man ever did or shall go to
Heaven backward, or get thither by standing still. Circular motion is the
motion of the Heavens, but it is not the most Heavenly motion, -- We must go
from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.

3. It Is Actus repetitus; walking implys frequent acts, or a course of life; as
every act of Godliness is a step, so the whole of our Actions is our Walk. --
And,

4. It Is Motus spontaneus; a free voluntary motion, not of force but of choice,
Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way of Truth; a way that never deceived any,
nor will me, (...) I have carefully sought out and chosen 'em.

5. It Is Motus arduus; this walking is all up the hill, against winds and
waves, and many oppositions: -- Hic labor, hoc opus est, (the way to Hell is
all down-hill.) Walking is painful yet the most gainful motion. An Heathen Poet
could say,

(...) -- 6. It Is Motus ordinatus; a regular and well-ordered motion, not a
running at random, or confusedly, but an acting by rule; i.e. by the Word, 2 Samuel 23.5.
Psalm. 119.9. Gal. 6.16. As many ^s walk according to this Rule. -- Psalm.
50.23. A Covenant ordered in all things calls for a Conversation suitable.

7. It Is Motus aequabilis; an even uniform motion; not now and then, or (as we
say) by fits and starts.

8. It Is Motus aeternus; this walking (I mean) must be even to the end, Psalm.
119.12. It Is not enough to set out, we must also hold out, or all our labor is
lost, and our walking is to no purpose. 2 Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them (says Peter) not to have known the way of
Righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the Holy Commandment.

To^ turn our feet into his Testimonies, this is a blessed turn indeed; Psalm.
119.59. Psalm. 9.17.
this will serve our turn to bring us to Heaven. First God turns us, and then
takes us to himself: But to fall off and to turn from God and his way will undo
us for ever.

2 Q. What is it to walk uprightly? what does this import? how is it to be
understood?

In short thus:

There is a threefold Uprightness; Legal, Moral, and Evangelical.

1. Legal; Adam in this sense was so whilst he continued in that state of
Innocence; his Knowledge of God was clear; his Engagements to God were great;
his Enjoyment of God was full; his Communion with God was sweet; no stain at
all upon his Nature; his Obedience to the Divine Will was exactly quadrate and
perfect for a time: his Heart and Life did agree with the Law of God exactly,
as a well-made Dial goes with the Sun. Thus the Text is not to be understood,
for thus can no man walk: He that says, he has no sin does sin even in saying
so. There are but a few men against whom Christ has but a few things; and
there is none on Earth against whom he has nothing, Rev. 2.19, 20. As in the
worst there is something good, so in the best there is something bad. Paul
speaking of the Saints, says, That in them the flesh lusts against the
spirit, Gal. 5.17. Whilst the Flesh lusts, and Satan tempts, and the World
allureth, think it not strange if the precious Sons of Zion be now and then
found halting, sometimes taken tripping.

To have nothing of Flesh is the glorious privilege of the Saints in Heaven; to
have nothing but flesh is the doleful state of the Damned in Hell, To have
something of Flesh and something of Spirit is the case of the Saints on Earth.
It Is the pleasure of the All-wise God it shall be thus with us; were it not for
sin Christ would not be so sweet unto us as now he is; were it not for Christ
sin would not be so bitter to us as now it is. -- To be freed from all sin
would conduce more to our peace, but less to Gods honor; less to the honor of
his wisdom, power, patience, etc.

2ly. There is a Moral uprightness; thus are they said to be upright who are
adorned with Moral virtues, and who walk justly, temperately, prudently; such
was Aristides and other of the Heathens; this is a fine flower, but you may
find it in the wild and waste of Nature. God becomes Compurgator for Abimelech,
That what he did in taking Sarah, was in the uprightness of his heart, Genesis
20.6. I know (says God) that thou did this in the sincerity of thy heart;
Simplici ac sincero animo. Joab, though a man of bloods, yet dealt very
uprightly with the King concerning the rendition of Rabah. Some advance this
Moral uprightness, and set it too high, others set it too low; it is very good,
but it does others more good in this World than our selves in the other. Of
this I do not understand the Text neither.

3ly. Evangelical; This is a Jewel that none wears but Christ's Spouse; a Grace
(if I may so call it) that none is graced with but Gods Child; a plant that
only grows in Gods Garden; it is called godly sincerity, because it is of God,
it aims at God, and ends in God; thus holy David resolved to walk, Psalm. 101.2.
I will walk within my house with a perfect heart thus Abraham is commanded to
walk, Genesis 17.1. And Saint Paul triumphs in this, that he had (through Grace)
thus walked; 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation
in the world. -- In an Evangelical sense one may walk perfectly, and thus
Zachary and Elizabeth did: See Luke 1.6. They walked in all the Commandments of
the Lord blameless; (...), not sinless, but blameless, Sine^querela, non sine
peccato, as St. Austin glosseth it in the end of his 95. Epist. and since him
Osiander and others.

It Is a true saying of one:

They err egregiously who look for that in the Law which is only to be found in
the Gospel; for that in themselves which is only to be found in Christ; and for
that on Earth which is only to be had in Heaven: i.e. A sinless perfection.

To dispatch this enquiry, know that to this upright walking three things are
necessary.

1. A Rule is requisite; a certain, infallible, and inflexible Rule by which we
act, that is the Word; it is not only a rule of Knowledge but also a rule of Duty.
2. A knowledge of this Rule, and then there must be, 3. An acting conformably,
suitably to our knowledge.
We must have an eye as well to the manner of our Obedience as to the matter of
our Obedience: For (as Luther well) Adverbia apud Deum praevalent verbis.

We must obey him as well in the spirit of the command as in the letter of it:
In those things which seem to make against us as in those that make for us,
Genesis 22.1, to the 12. v.

We must not only not do that which is evil, but we must do that which is good:
-- We must have respect to all his Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. As good to none
at all as not to all; David fulfilled all Gods wills, Act. 13.22. Gal. 3.10.

3 Q. We shall now enquire after the Quae ratio, of what importance and
concernment is it that we thus walk? --

It were easy to be voluminous; but take hints:

That there is an absolute and indispensable necessity of walking sincerely,
uprightly; that it is of great concernment we do so; Appears,

1. If we appeal to God under the Law, there we see the Lord requires it, Genesis
17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect or upright. 2.
If we appeal to Christ under the Gospel, all his commands breathe Holiness and
Uprightness; and his promises are to the pure and sincere in Heart, Mat. 5.8.
He came to save us, not in our sin, nor with our sin, but from our sin. He
requires us to be holy as he is holy; and we must follow the example of his
life if we hope to be saved by the Merits of his Death. 3. If we appeal to the
practice of the Saints under both Dispensations, they ever made it their
business to walk uprightly; Enoch, and Noah, and David, and Josiah, and
Hezekiah. Hear one for all, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, says good Hezekiah, Isa.
38.3. For the New Testament, consult 2 Cor. 1.12. and 1 These. 2.10. Ye are
witnesses, and God also, how holily and justly, and unblameably we behaved our
selves among you that believe: -- Phil. 1.27. 4. If we appeal to Conscience,
our own or others; Conscience is a faculty or habit of the practical
understanding, whereby the mind of man by the discourse of Reason, applys the
light it has to every particular moral act.
There is a Conscience convinced and awakened, but not converted nor renewed:
Consult this and it will tell you that it is a matter of importance to walk
uprightly; a Conscience upon the rack will confess it freely.

There is a good renewed Conscience, and this will tell you there is a
necessity of walking uprightly. In every man God has placed a Conscience, it is
his bosom-preacher, it is a petty God, (...), it reproves, accuses, checks and
smites when we do evil. Ask your Consciences when you are under some sore
affliction, or when upon your Death beds, and they will bear witness to this
truth; that it is your part and prudence, your duty and discretion to be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long; To walk humbly and uprightly before God.
Excellent is that passage of Justin Martyr in his Defense for the Christians to
Antoninus Pius: (...), etc. If any be found who lives not as Christ has
taught, it is a certain Argument he is not a Christian, (...).
though with the Tongue he confess the Doctrine of Christ; for not those which
only profess, but those who make good their profession, does Christ assure of
Salvation.

But to ground the Point.

We are thus obliged to walk upon a sevenfold account.

1. He is an upright God whom we walk before; he is so in his Nature, in his
Attributes, in his Mercy, Love and Justice, in his Precepts, in his Promises,
in Threats; he is so in his offers and tenders of Christ and Grace, and of
Pardon, and eternal Salvation; in Him is no iniquity, no hypocrisy at all: He
is a God of Truth, his eye is fixed upon it, his heart is in love with it. He
disgusts and abhors all leaven of hypocrisy, and vizors of piety, all
falseness: It Is not all you can say, or do, or suffer or lose, that can make
you precious in his eyes without this sincerity. In that Psalm of Thanksgiving
there is an excellent passage, 2 Samuel 22.22, to the 28. I have kept the ways of
the Lord. -- All his judgments are before me, I was also upright before him. --
For with the upright man thou will show thy self upright. David walked before an
upright God, and it concerned him the more to walk uprightly.

2. We have an upright Pattern, and upright Presidents to walk after. -- The
Lord Jesus is our pattern; he has left us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21.
and we must follow his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his
mouth^ We must look at Jesus, Heb. 12.2. He was (...), a pattern; not only for
patience in death, but for holiness and uprightness of life too; for this end
and purpose is his life recorded in this sacred Volume, Bonos tibi adjunge,
quia si socius fueris conversationis eris and virtutis. Ambr.
that all his Members might lay it as a golden Samplar before them, according
to which they should work.

Upright Presidents; the godly Patriarchs, the holy Prophets and Apostles,
pious Princes, and other religious persons of whom we read in Holy Story: These
are (...), Examples propounded for all our imitation: In every Profession there
are Chieftains.

The Roman Warriors had their Camilli, Fabricii, and Scipio's. The Philosophers
had their Plato, Aristotle, and Pythagoras: We have the Prophets and Apostles.
Man is a ductile creature, led as well by the eye as by the ear; we must follow
them so far as they follow Christ. Non cadendi exemplu^ propositum est; sed si
ceciderie resurgendi; non sit delectatio minorum lapsus majoru^. Aug. in Psalm.
51.
Their failings indeed are recorded, but for our caution, not for our
imitation; their errors are set up not as Stars to guide us, but as Rocks to
warn us; not as Landmarks to go by, but as Sea-marks to shun by. Sit casus
majorum timor minorum. Aliorum perditio tua sit cautio. Excellent is that of
Saint Ambrose, Lib. 4. Ep. page 127. In omnibus actibus tuis imitare bonos,
aemulare sanctos; habeto ante oculos eorum exempla, etc.

3. We have an upright Rule to walk by, the Word of God; it is that should guide
us here; by that we shall be judged hereafter. -- This is a perfect Rule, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. an upright and holy Rule; so is not the Light within; and as for
the Spirit, he is our guide, Romans 8.14. not our Rule. -- Again,

4. We have an upright way to walk in, the way of his Commandments; this is an
underfiled and an undefiling way; a pure, and holy, and perfect, and pleasant
way; paths of life, and peace, and righteousness, all which call for
Uprightness. Si vis esse beatus, esto in via immaculatus, Aug. in Psalm. 119.1.

5. We have upright Companions to walk with; indeed the (...) are not so; the
most do walk in crooked paths, but in all ages there are some who are undefiled
in the way, whose Hearts are sound in Gods statutes, and follow the Lord fully,
and keep themselves from their iniquities; see St. Ambrose his Epistle to
Florianus, ubi supra.

6. We have an upright, a perfect account to give of our walkings and workings:
Though now we live as if we had no God to serve, no Souls to save, no accounts
at all to give; yet surely we shall be called upon anon to give account of all,
Luke 16.2. We read of the Counsel which Alcibiades gave unto Pericles, whom
going to visit he found busied about his accounts, Why do thou trouble thy
self (says he) in seeking to make thy accounts, rather think of some course to
free thee from making any account at all. Doubtless there are who do thus; but
the greater sorrow and shame shall they have at the last day. Does not the due
consideration hereof lay a mighty obligation on us to walk uprightly? Nothing
had so great an influence on St. Austin, to recall him from, and to recover him
out of his sinful ways, and to engage him to live an holy and upright life as
(Metus mortis and extremi judicii), the fear of Death, and the day of Judgment.
O that we were wise, then would we remember our latter end.

7. The Reward we shall receive will be an upright, just and perfect reward:
Verily there is a reward for the Righteous: A sure reward, Prove. 11.18. A full
reward. 2 John 8. An everlasting reward. 2 Cor. 4.17. It shall be well with the
righteous; their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. He is not behind with
them now, nor will he then. They shall have Pleasures without pain; Treasures
without trash; Riches without rust; Honors without envy; Crowns without cares;
and Life without death. If the consideration of these things prevail not with
us thus to walk, what shall? If they have no influence upon us, what will?

Having premised these things, the fourth Query comes next in order to be
discussed; go along with me and it shall be fully resolved.

4 Q. When does this Ordinance of the Supper work for their good who thus walk?

An account hereof take in the Twelve following particulars.

Then it does such good and much good:

(1) When it makes them more zealous for God, for his Way and Truth, and in his
Worship; Zeal is Amor intensus, the flame of Love, as Aquinas describes it.
It Is ignis quidam flagrantissimi amoris, Usque ad O^^^vum gra^am.
as St. Austin long before him. Or if you will, it is a compound of Love and
Anger, a mixed affection; it carries forth ones love to God and his anger
against sin in the most intense degree. -- It consists in an earnest
prosecution of what is good, and in a vehement detestation of what is evil. O
the excellency of this frame of spirit! You know it is the spirit of wine that
commends it; the sparkle that gives worth to the Diamond; as life gives an
excellency to being, so vivacity in operating gives an excellency to life; this
is that the Lord calls for in Romans 12.11. this he owns and crowns, Numb.
^.25.11. This is most prevalent with God for good, Jam. 5.16. Elijah's prayer
fetched fire from Heaven, because it carried fire to Heaven. Grace turns a
Sinner into a Saint; Zeal turns a Saint into a Seraphim. Much more of this you
heard the other day from Revel. 3.19. Be zealous therefore.

If when you come to this Ordinance with chill, and dull, and frozen
affections, and dead hearts, and there find them wrought upon; and you go
thence more brisk and lively, more full of love to God, and hatred of sin; if
now you can plead the cause of God, and defend the Faith with more courage and
resolution; if now you can suffer for God more cheerfully, whose dearly beloved
Son you here see suffered so much for you, if now you can perform every holy
duty with more vigor and activity; if you who were so remiss and cold and
slothful in the business of Religion, in the great concerns of God and your
Souls, are now more rouzed, quickened, excited and enlarged: -- When thus it
works then it does you good indeed.

(2) When their Hearts are thawed and melted, so that they can sorrow after a
godly manner in the sight and sense of sin: Tears are precious things; one
calls 'em the Wine of Angels; another, the fat Sacrifice. Such Sacrifices were
most acceptable, Levit. 3.3, 4, 5.

The Prayers of the Saints move, their Tears compel the Lord to show mercy,
says Jerome. Were they not very precious, he would not keep a bottle for them.

They never run in the right channel but when they are shed for sin, then only
they do us good; as St. Chrysostom well observes, (...): For this end were they
made. Philosophers tell us, That only reasonable and sinful Creatures can
(gaudere and maerere) rejoice and weep. To speak properly, no other upon earth
can. -- If now when you come to this Ordinance, your Eyes affect your Hearts,
so that you can inwardly grieve, and outwardly weep bitterly for your sin, as
one that is in heaviness for his only Son, or firstborn. If when you behold a
bleeding Christ, you have bleeding Hearts; a broken Christ you have broken
Spirits, then does this Ordinance work for your good.

In the time of the Law, the Passover was to be eaten with bitter Herbs, Exodus
12.8. those Herbs were five, say the Jewish Doctors: The Passover was a lively
Type of Christ, who is our Passover; that Rite was instituted to intimate, that
the Lamb of God is only savingly taken and eaten by those who are in bitterness
of spirit and sorrow of soul for Sin; and thus is this Holy Sacrament to be
received. Does not a broken, bleeding Savior call for a broken and bleeding
Sinner? How can we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured forth (and so
should you place your selves as you may see them) both which do represent and
show his bloody Death and bitter Passions, and yet have no remorse, no
contrition, no compunction, no godly sorrow in our Hearts for sin? shall the
Lord of Life thus suffer Death, and shed his precious innocent blood for thy,
for my sins, and shall not our Hearts be so affected with 'em as to weep and
drop one tear for 'em?

What sad lamentation do we make for the death of our Relations, especially
when taken away by the hand of violence, (nay they are not interred without
tears who die in their beds), such, so, such was the death of our dearest Lord

Vellosillus disputes the question, Whether the Death of Christ might or ought
to be lamented? He cites Ambrose and Theophilact, Vide Vellosill. Advertentias
in B. Amb. Quest. 19. page 33.
Beda and Erasmus holding the Negative, from Luke 23.28. but concludes for the
Affirmative, which most of the Fathers are for. But out of dispute it is, That
he was wounded for our iniquities, died for our sins; and that it concerns us
all to weep for our sins which had so deep an hand in his Death; and
Sacrament-days are proper times and seasons for godly sorrow. When your Eyes
and Hearts are wrought and brought into this melting, mourning frame; when your
sorrows for 'em is quadrate, adequate and proportionable to that delight and
complacency you have taken in them; when thus you find it at such a time as
this, then does this Ordinance work for your good. O that Rivers of waters did
this day run down our Eyes, at the remembrance of that River of blood which ran
down from his sides! --

(3) When it makes their Hearts to die to Sin; when they do not only discard,
but disgust it, not only leave but loath it; when there is not only a breaking
of the Heart for Sin, but also a breaking of it from Sin. When their unbelief
is blasted, their pride and other lusts are mortified; when they come with
strong and impetuous lusts to the Lords-Table, and there get (though no more
peace yet) more power over them.

The death of Sin is the Souls life; its ruin is our rise, its falling is our
advancing; it is sad to come and see Sin living in us, and Christ bleeding for
us; to see a crucified Christ, and yet to find in our hearts uncrucified lusts.
When you come to this sacred and solemn Ordinance, and there can cry, Lord,
Here is a proud unbelieving heart, an heart that does not love thee; I cannot,
I will not therefore love it, it does not fear thee, but I fear it: O Lord
help, help thy poor servant with a better heart, that I may lead a better life.
As it is I cannot serve thee, and thou wilst not save me; Oh let my Sin die,
but let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee for ever. Let not that which
thou did not make, destroy what thine own hand has made. O kill my pride, my
passion. As thy Son died unto Sin for satisfaction, so enable me to die unto
Sin by Mortification. Let me see that Christ died for me, even for me, by the
death of Sin in me. Lord help me to revenge the Blood of my dearest Lord upon
my dearest lusts. When thus it works, then it does you good indeed.

(4) When their Hearts and Affections are more firmly cemented and united,
animosities are removed, breaches healed, differences composed; when their
Heart-burnings are turned into Heart-breakings, and more Hearty-breathings
after love, peace, and unity.

St. Austin tells us of a Street in Rome called Via Sacra, De Civit. Dei lib.
18. cap. 12.
the Holy Street; Ludovicus Vives gives the Reason, viz. because Romulus and
Tatius (King of the Sabins) made their League of Union there. Well may this be
called the Holy Sacrament, (as on other, so) on this account; because of that
Holy League the Saints renew with God, and make one with another here.

This is the great Love-Feast; one great end and design of God in this
Ordinance is, by it to increase and strengthen Love and Unity amongst his
Servants; by their Communion in this Ordinance they are made to drink into one
Spirit, or into oneness of Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

But alas, Nullum suit indoctius and insaelicius saeculum, in eo quippe nulli
Scriplores illustres. De Romans Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 12.
what Bellarmine observed of the Tenth Century, No Age was so unluckie and
unlearned as that; the like may I say of this Seventeenth, No Age since our
Saviors Passion, no, nor since the Worlds Creation was ever so divided and
disunited as ours; we live as if we had been born upon the Mountains of Bether,
(i.e.) the Mountains of Division, and Baptized in the Waters of Meribah, (i.e.)
the Waters of Strife. --

They who once did weep and pray together, and did suffer together, cannot now
sit together at the Lords-Table; this is a Lamentation, etc.

Excellent is that passage of Paulinus in his Epistle to St. Austin, Inter
Augustini Epistolas. Ep. 33. in Med. Paulinus and T^erasia Augustino.
It is no marvel though we both that are absent, be yet present, and being
unacquainted, yet know one another, seeing as we have one Head, so we live by
one Bread, walk in one Way, etc.

When you who break Bread together, are bound up together; when such
silver-showers of Love are rained down upon your hearts as cement them more
firmly, as heal your Schisms and repair your Breaches, and make you like the
Cherubims, with your Faces looking one upon another; when you go from this
Ordinance with stronger resolutions to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace; when by it you are more enabled (as well as more engaged) to love
more purely, to live more Christianly, to forgive more cordially; to forget
injuries, to pity and pray, and live and love as Brethren, as did those
Primitive Christians, Act. 2.46, 47. When you that are one in so much, will not
be two in or for a trifle; for vestures or gestures, or such little matters.
When thus you find it at or after a Sacrament, then indeed does it work for
your good.

(5) When their Holiness is thereby more promoted and advanced, it is the end
and design of God in all his Ordinances, especially in and by this to make them
who are holy more holy; them who are heavenly more heavenly. When Moses had
been with God in the Mount, he came thence with his Face shining: -- When you
go from this Ordinance with your Graces shining, then it does work for your
good indeed. --

Nothing does grace a man as Grace; (...): Chrysostom.
it is a Christians great Ornament: What a pearl of price must holiness be when
it is the scope of Almighty God in all his Acts, Ordinances and Providence; in
all his Mercies and Judgments; in our Election, Ephesians. 1.4. in our Redemption,
Tit. 2.14. in our Afflictions, Heb. 12.10. Some Ordinances are for Conversion,
some are for Confirmation, all are for our Sanctification. This Golden Oil
comes from the two Olive Trees, through the Golden pipes of his holy
Institutions.

They say, that Corn never ripens more than when the Sun is in Conjunction with
the Dog Star; sure am I, Holiness never ripens more than when the Spirit of the
Lord is in Conjunction with the Word and Sacraments.

When you go from this sacred Ordinance, and find you are not only more for the
doing of holy things, but for the more holy doing of things, more thankful for
mercies; more watchful over your hearts, words and ways, more spiritual in your
Conversations, more savory and fruitful in your Converses, more conformable in
every thing to the Image of your dear Redeemer: When the power of this
Ordinance runs through every vein of your Conversations; when you trade, buy
and fell, when you pray, hear, sanctify his Day, and do all in the strength of
this Ordinance; when you can stand at a greater distance from Sin and from the
World; when you can look upon all the beauty of the World as blackness, and on
all the fullness of it as emptiness; when you can feast your selves in God
whilst you are starving in the Creature; when you can say in the sincerity of
your Souls, were all the Universe on a flame, the fire does not touch my
portion; when you can stand upon its ruins, and say triumphingly, I have lost
nothing; or as that good man, Lord, Te pro omnibus and prae omnibus the sauris
aestimo. Moller in Psalm. 73.25.
thou know where all my good things are, even in thee and above with thee.
Lord, whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I desire
in comparison of thee. You have there the desire of David's Soul, and the Soul
of his desire; when thus you find it working, it does you much good indeed.

(6) When their hearts are more humbled, more deeply and thoroughly humbled; when
they meet with such tastes of the Lords graciousness, such manifestations of his
rich mercy, and discoveries of his free love, as lays them as low as the very
dust; when they can say as David did 2 Samuel 7.18, 19. Who am I, O Lord God,
that thou have brought me hitherto? What shall such a poor pitiful piece of
polluted clay, such a map of misery be admitted to thy Table, feasted at thy
Board, fed with the Body and Blood of the Son of God; who am I that I should be
embraced in his arms, that he should ravish my heart with the sweet sound of
his precious promises, and rejoice my drooping Soul with a well-grounded hope
of his gracious pardons, and of the acceptance of my person and performances. I
am not worthy the least crumb of bread which grows upon the earth, or comes
thence, much less of that bread of life which came down from Heaven. The
condition of my Soul had been as doleful as any man's on earth, had not free
grace renewed me; as dreadful as any damned souls in hell, had not he in mercy
to my Soul reprieved me; O what a poor starven Soul had mine been, had not the
Lord of Life refreshed me?

The most genuine and natural effect, which divine discoveries have upon a
devout Soul is Humiliation, nothing does it more kindly; and that which humbles
us does not hurt us; when you can go from this Ordinance lothing and abhorring
your selves, and see more of your own nothingness as Creatures, and vileness as
Sinners; when you can cry with Job, Behold I am vile, Chap. 40.4. With the poor
Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner: I dare not lift mine eyes toward
Heaven, Luke 18.13. When it makes and keeps us more humble, then it does us
good indeed.

(7) When their peace and joy in the Lord is increased, their Spiritual
comforts are enlarged, and their Souls are more assured of their interest in
Christ, and in the everlasting Covenant. When they can go to Christ and say,
Thou art mine; to the Promises and say, all these are mine; when they can lay
hold on the blessings of the Covenant, and say, all these are sealed to me in
this blessed Sacrament. This, lo, this is the sweet fruit the Saints find at
this holy Sacrament; when their trembling Faith, is turned into a triumphing
Faith; their Faith of adherence into a Faith of evidence and assurance. There
is a threefold fullness of Assurance, a full allurance of Understanding, Col.
2.2. of Hope, Heb. 6.11. and of Faith, Heb. 10.22. O what a sweet and precious,
what a rich and rare Jewel is this! Grace purifies; Assurance pacifies; Grace
brings the Soul to Heaven; Assurance brings Heaven into the Soul: Grace is
better than Peace, but Peace is sweeter than Grace; Assurance is a flower of
Paradise, a sparkle of Glory, Heaven on this side Heaven, an Anchor at Sea, a
Shield at Land, a Staff to support, a Sword to defend, Bread to strengthen,
Wine to cheer, and Balm to cure the Soul of man. --

When at and by this precious Ordinance your Souls are filled with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory; when those black clouds of fears and jealousies
are dispersed, and those bitter storms of Soul-troubles are blown over; when
brighter beams, and clearer calms, and sweeter comforts flow in upon your
Souls; when thus you find it, then has the Sacrament been working for your good.

It Is one great end of this Ordinance to seal his peoples Graces; many a child
of God can tell you, that by this Ordinance they have arrived at a great
measure of assurance, they have come empty and gone hence full; they have come
with fears and doubts upon them, and have gone away with abundance of joy and
peace; the Lord has met them at his Table, has spoken peace unto their
Consciences, has cleared up their Evidences for Heaven, and now they can speak
of the great things he has done in it, and by it too, for their precious Souls.

This Ordinance was instituted for his peoples growth in Grace, and for their
sense of Grace; for the augmentation of it, and for the manifestation of it.

By it Grace grows up to its full stature, and just proportion; It Is for
sealing too; the Sacrament is a good friend to the Spirit, (be it spoken with
reverence) and the Spirit is a greater friend to the Sacrament, and both are
great friends to the Soul, sealing it up unto the day of redemption, Romans 4.11.
Ephesians. 4.30. As a Seal does confirm and settle the mind of the Buyer, so does
the Sacrament satisfy and assure the heart of a Believer; O how willing is the
Almighty the Soul be out of doubt of its Sanctification here and Salvation
hereafter. -- To which God of his infinite mercy, for the merits of his Son, by
the conduct of his holy Spirit, at last bring us. Amen.

The End of the First Sermon.
The Second SERMON
On Micah 2.7. Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? July the 20th. 1673
Do not my words do good to him that walks upright, or uprightly?
(...)
A Word spoken upon his Wheels is like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. I
may say of this, It Is verbum super rotas, a word in season; then will the
Sermon be most profitable, when the subject is most seasonable. The Text is
like a well-drawn picture, it has an eye on every man; as you will see anon. I
shall draw aside the curtain, that so you may view it, and it may view you. --
I will waste no time in the beginning, that I may want no time in the end. I am
showing when this Ordinance of the Supper does work for the Saints benefit and
advantage. I have hinted seven, and shall now proceed methodically unto the
eighth in order; of which succinctly: For enough is better than all.

(8) Then does this Ordinance work for your good, when your Souls are more
corroborated and strengthened, and your power is more increased: Observe it,
pray.

The Ministry of the Word begets spiritual life; The Sacrament preserves and
increases spiritual life.

The Word lays the Basis or Foundation of Grace; the Sacrament carries on the
Building.

The Word is instituted to implant Grace, to work the truth of Grace, where it
is not: The Sacrament is to promote the growth of it, where it is. The Ministry
of the Word is a converting Ordinance; the Sacrament is a confirming Ordinance:
That Is the breeding, and this the feeding Ordinance. If now you come to the
Lords. Table very weak, your Graces very feeble, your Faith and Love, and other
Graces very little. If it may be said of you as it was of the Church of
Philadelphia, Rev. 3.8. Thou have but ((...),) a little strength; and then you
go away stronger, your Faith more increased, your hope more quickened, your
obediential and penitential resolutions more strengthened, your corruptions more
easily subdued, temptations more easily repulsed, your assections more raised
and enlarged, your hearts more established, duties more spiritually performed,
the world more easily conquered and vanquished. If now you find your selves
more able to do, to suffer for God, or from God; if now you are more fitted for
active and passive obedience, if you can go through all Christian duties with
more alacrity and cheerfulness, if you can apply the promises, and live by
Faith upon the Fatherly providence and faithful promises of God. When thus you
find it, then has this Ordinance been doing you good.

(9) When at and by the Sacrament your love to Jesus Christ is more enflamed;
when this little drop swells into an Ocean, and this spark becomes a flame;
when it may be said of your love to God, to Christ, to his way, day, people,
Ordinances, as is said of the Waters of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5. that
it is still higher and higher, from the ankles to the knees, thence to the
loins, and then unpassable; so in the present case.

Is it possible we should be such constant Guests at the Lords-Table, and daily
see before our eyes a crucified Christ, and yet go thence with so little love
to him, and longings after him? Can we fee so much love in his heart to us, and
shall we be contented with so little love in our hearts to him? -- Per vulnera
videmus viscera. It Is an heart of Adamant that will neither impendere, nor
rependere; which will neither begin in love nor love him then who has thus
begun, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, in bestowing
his Son upon us; We call not upon people to behold things common and ordinary;
Paul calls it (...), great love, Ephesians. 2.4. (...) a love passing knowledge;
Heart-warming words indeed; See Ephesians. 3.19. He laid down his precious life and
dearest blood for us, he died Nostro loco, in our place and stead; Nostro
commodo, for our benefit and good; for our sin as the meritorious cause, and
for our good as the final cause, Dan. 9.26. 1 Pet. 3.18. Greater love than this
can no man show. Did ever Mother love her own Child so as to wash it in her own
blood? thus loved he us, Rev. 1.5. God so loved the world, -- so; How Is that?
so wonderfully, so infinitely; so -- but I cannot tell you how, and therefore
must leave it so; admiring and not once attempting to express it, but the Son
of God can, Even as the Father loved me, so have I loved you. Joh. 15.9.
Here was the highest, purest, freest, sweetest and choicest love that ever was
in the world.

We conclude they love us who will speak kindly and courteously to us, or a
word in season for us; much more if they will hazard their lives and fortunes
by espousing our cause and quarrel; did not our dear Redeemer all this and
more? Lord, (now says the poor Christian) thou have laid down thy life, and
thereby have manifested thy love to me; Now will I part with my dearest lusts,
I will be their death, and so show my love to thee; shall a damning lust live,
and a saving Christ die? Shall the man die that kills my Son or Father, and
shall my Sin live which slays my Savior? Well, if I can do no more, I will do
no less than love thee my dearest Lord with all my heart and might, and
strength. The more vile thou wast made for me, the dearer to my dying day shall
thou be unto me. When thus it works, then it does you good indeed.

(10) When your hearts which were before at a distance from him are by it drawn
nearer to him; and your desires are more drawn out after him.

There is a twofold distance between God and Man.

The one is natural; as he is the Creator, Man a creature; He infinite, Man
finite; this is an infinite distance.

The other is Moral, as he is Holy, and Man impure; this is a greater distance
than the former, if we may suppose an infinito infinitius.

By nature we are all afar off from God n="*" Non intervallo locorum sed
pravitate morum.
, by Grace through Christ we are made nigh, Ephesians. 2.13. yet nigher we may be
by much than yet we are; and it is our great business in every Ordinance to get
nearer to him, if you scan that famous place, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with
a true heart. If now we find our confidence drawn more out after him; and that
we can rest more upon him, and trust more in him; if for what our Souls want we
can with an humble boldness go to him, and say, Lord, Here is my treasure, my
fullness, my All; I am dead, but to thee I come for life and quickening grace; I
have a proud heart, but unto thee do I address my self; I know thou who give
more (and better) grace to the humble; can give me grace to be more humble. I
am impotent, but to thee I come for strength against my corruptions, and for
holy duties; Lord, I am nothing, I have nothing, I can do nothing, I am good
for nothing; I cannot plead my merits but thy mercy; unworthy I am to live,
unfit I am to die. When thus we find it with us at or after a Sacrament, then
has it been working for our good.

(11) When you have the Covenant of Grace sealed, and the Characters thereof
impressed upon your hearts; when Sacrament-days are healing and sealing days;
the Saints are sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise; such sacred stamps he
sets upon their Souls as shall never be obliterated. Many a child of God has
here had monumentum aere perennius; when by this Ordinance you gain such full
evidences of his love, such influences of his Grace, such experiences of his
Truth, such assistances from his Spirit, such ratifications and confirmations
of the Gospel-promises, as you never had before. When thus you find it with
you, you may safely and solidly conclude, it has been working for your good.

(12) Once more, and in a word. -- When more glorious conquests over your
spiritual enemies are obtained, when prevailing lusts are vanquished, and fiery
temptations are quenched, (and all these wonders one drop of his precious blood
(when taken down by Faith) can do) when you can go from this Ordinance
triumphing over and trampling upon the neck of your unbelief, and pride, etc.
and this some have done; when you can come from the Sacrament as Israel did out
of the Red Sea, and see your spiritual enemies bleeding, gasping, dying, dead;
your lusts destroyed, but your Souls preserved. When thus you feel and find it,
surely the Sacrament has done you good and much good.

Q. 5. How does it appear that the Spirit of the Lord is not so straightened, but
that he can cause this Ordinance to work for your good?

Answ. It Is a truth written with a Sunbeam; it is tanquam ex tripode dictum;
None of those Oracles may vye with this, The Spirit of the Lord has owned and
blessed it to others, and therefore can to you.

The Spirit of the Lord is God, and what cannot a Great, Almighty God do? What
will not a good and gracious God do by his Ordinances for his people? His arm
is not shortened, nor love lessened or impaired.

Of all the Fathers (were I confined to one alone) I should fix on Ambrose,
Vide S. Ambrosii de sp. s. lib. 1. cap. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, 11, 14, 20. Lib. 2. cap.
4, 9. and 12. Lib. 3. cap. 5, 12, 14, 17, 23, Tom. 4.
for he has writ enough to evince the Deity and divine operations of the Holy
Ghost; from him I might extract what would abundantly confirm the Proposition
under our present consideration; but I forbear.

As St. Paul reasoned concerning the Resurrection of the dead, saying in his
Apology for himself before King Agrippa, Act. 20.8. Why should it be thought a
thing unreasonable with you that God should raise the dead? So may I say to you
in this Apology for the power of the Spirit, Why should it be thought a thing
unreasonable for the Spirit of the Lord to do all these things in, at, and by
this sacred and solemn Ordinance?

The Doctrine under debate neither exceeds the bounds of Faith, nor is it
contrary to the experience of the Saints. Doubtless some within these walls
have had sweet experience of the powerful influences and mighty workings of the
Spirit of the Lord in their Hearts, and upon their Spirits at this Ordinance.
-- But we will review and succinctly reflect upon some of the forementioned
particulars; we shall fix on four or five, the rest you may clear up to your
selves in your private Meditations.

I remember that Athenagoras an Athenian (but a Christian) Philosopher
disputing for the Resurrection of the Dead, has a passage which is pertinent
to what I have in hand. The impotency of an Agent arises either from his
ignorance, something he would do, but knows not what nor how; or from his
insufficiency or weakness, though he knows what and how to effect, yet a power
is wanting to accomplish and bring it to pass; neither of which (says he truly)
can be affirmed of God, who is infinitely wise and powerful. The same say I of
the Spirit of the Lord; He is a Spirit of Wisdom and Power, and both infinite,
they are really the same with his Essence.

1. He knows how to break the Heart for Sin, and he can as easily bring it into
a melting mourning frame; alas, we may pray and hear, and wait in the use of
means, and yet our Hearts remain as hard as Adamant; Fortiter yet Suaviter.
but when the Spirit of the Lord once takes them in hand, he works irresistibly
and effectually, a nullo duro cord respuitur; when he breaks in and breaths
upon the Soul, then it begins to thaw and melt, and mourn.

We read of Peter's sins, exceeding great and very many were they, sadly
circumstantiated, highly aggravated. Mat. 26.75
Peter even now (and but just now) had a forewarning from Christ; Peter was
dearly beloved of Christ, none of the Twelve more, John ever excepted: He was
the first whom Christ called to be an Apostle; Peter was often admitted when
others were excluded. He yielded easily to the Temptation, and that of a poor
silly Damsel: He sinned not in a corner; once and again, and a third time
denies Christ with cursing and swearing, etc. yet when our Blessed Savior
began to look, and the Spirit of the Lord set in to work, then Peter went out
and wept bitterly, Mat. 26. ult. A strange look and a strong look it was that
thus quickly broke his heart in pieces; he looked ((...), as Theophylact
observes) with a look of love, with a benign aspect. Christ looks, the Spirit
works, the Conscience stirs, and out he goes and weeps exceedingly.

2. He knows how to break the Heart from Sin; and can easily do it, be it a
darling lust, a Delilah, never so near or dear, a peccatum in deliciis. He can
make a full, a final, a total and an eternal Divorce between you and them,
though your lusts were mighty Hosts, he can lay them dead at your feet. I
appeal from Gods Book to your own Breasts for the proof hereof.

3. He can increase your Graces: are they weak? he can strengthen them; if
little he can increase them. There is no Corruption so strong but he can make
it weak; no Grace so weak, but he can make it strong. This Men cannot, Means
cannot, Angels cannot, but He can.

4. He can make you Holy as he is Holy; that is, for Quality, not for Equality;
Holy in way of resemblance; Holy in all manner of Conversation; all that
Holiness in Saints or Angels is of his implanting.

5. He can fill your Hearts with assurance of his Grace in you, and of Gods
Grace and Favor toward you. The influences of the Spirit work Grace, and the
Evidences of the Spirit discover Grace: 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received not
the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God. He bears witness with our spirits
that we are the Sons of God. Et quando Spiritus testatur, quaenam relinquitur
ambiguitas? The Spirit brings the Heart to the command, that is holiness; he
brings the promise to the heart, that is assurance. In a word, Sp. S. irradiat
Intellectum, inclinat voluntatem, sigillat Animum, etc.
he can turn your Water into Wine, your night into day; he can remove your
fears, resolve your doubts, revive your Souls, recruit your Comforts. Others
only walk in the light of Gods Providence, he can make you to walk in the light
of his Countenance.

6. He also who reconciled Man to God can reconcile Man to Man. He can cement
your hearts. The stones of the Temple were so closely cemented, as if they all
had been but one; He can unite you thus too. When the Sons of Brutus and the
Vitellii conspired with Tarquinius his Ambassadors against the Consul, they
drank the blood of a man to confirm their Amity and Unity; You are now a going
to drink the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, what hinders but the Spirit of the
Lord may shed abroad his love in your hearts, and make you live in love? what
are all the motions of the Spirit but tenders of Love? or what is the zeal of
the Spirit, but the print of love? or the Graces of the Spirit but engagements
to love? He can give you such hearts, as will be,

Afraid of every little Sin:

Amended with every little Cross:

Affected with every little mercy.

The Spirit of the Lord has power enough to give a being to us, and has he
not power enough to do any thing in and about us? Can he give a being to his
Ordinances, and cannot he give a blessing to them? He can do every thing, and
therefore This -- But that shall serve for the fifth Query. -- The improvement
of. the point is not the least considerable part of my work, and indeed it is
all that now remains. Here is a word of Counsel, and a word of Comfort;
something which concerns Sinners, and something too which concerns the Saints.
I would not discourage the weak, yet must I awaken the secure.

I begin with the Counsels, such first as concern you that are Saints; and I
have something to say in General, something in particular.

Two things would I say in general, -- Is not the Spirit of the Lord so
straightened, but that he can cause this Ordinance to do you good? Then see that,

1. You believe this Truth, and believe it firmly and undoubtedly. The Spirit
is God, as Almighty as the Father, or as the Son. To an Almighty power nothing
is impossible, nay nothing difficult. When God promised Abraham a Son in his
old age, what a hard task was here for God? Sarah could not believe it, she
laughed; but what says the Lord, Is any thing too hard for me? He can do it
because he is omnipotent, and he will do it because he has promised to do it;
it is a truth as full of comfort to the Saints, as is the Sea of water, or the
Sun of light; therefore believe it steadfastly. And see that you

2. Look for good; for great workings in and by this Ordinance from the Spirit
of the Lord. And look well to this Ordinance that it do you good; for if it do
you no good* it will do you hurt; if it be not bread, it will be poison; it
will set you either a step nearer to Heaven, or nearer to Hell. Who can say
when he has been at a Sermon, or at a Sacrament (as some Tradesmen may when
their accounts are cast up) I have neither got, nor lost. Be you well assured
that if it do not strengthen your graces, it will strengthen your corruptions.
This is a sad saying, but not more sad than true; others have found it so, and
so may you; it will further you either in the way to glory, or in the way to
misery. O that whilst the sound of these words is in your ears, the savor of
them were upon your hearts.

But to come yet more close to the business; in order hereunto perhaps some of
you may enquire. And it brings me to the Sixth Query.

Q. 6. What course must a serious Christian take or hold, that the Spirit of
the Lord may cause this blessed Ordinance to work for his good?

In this numerous Auditory I am in hopes there are not many, if any, but they
seriously desire the Ordinances may do their Souls good. They would not pray,
nor hear, nor receive in vain. Well, I will confine my discourse to this
Ordinance before you, take these ten Directions.

1. Carefully prepare your hearts for it if you would profit by it. Till the
Earth be prepared you cast not in the seed; till the Instrument be tuned, you
do not begin to play. Till your Hearts be prepared you cannot receive worthly;
Gods Dispensations are generally suited to our Dispositions. Those Beasts which
came in to Noah's Ark unclean, went out again unclean. -- You know the Jews had
their preparation for the Passover, Job. 19.14. And is not this an Ordinance
every way as holy and venerable? When our Blessed Savior was about to
institute this Ordinance, it was his pleasure the House should first be fitted
and prepared in which he was to do it, Mark 14.15. Is there not as much, nay
much more need our hearts be fitted and prepared? Well then say I to you as
Samuel did to the Elders of Bethlehem, 1 Samuel 16.5. Sanctify your selves and
come with me unto the Sacrifice; put your hearts in order.

These two things have a special eye unto:

(1) To get an Understanding. (2) An humble Heart.
(1) Get an Understanding Heart; when the Lord appeared to Solomon in Gibeon,
and said unto him, Ask what I shall give thee? 1 King. 3.5. Give unto thy
Servant an understanding Heart, says Solomon, in verse. the 9th. Some render the
words, Cor dicile; Sapientiam circa agenda; Cor capax divinarum legum.
Cor audiens, an hearing Heart; others, Cor intelligens aut sapiens, an
understanding, wise heart. He asked Wisdom; with a great deal of Wisdom; had
not he been wise before, he had not known the worth of wisdom. When you* are
about these Sacramental duties, pray for an Understanding heart. Amongst the
Graces requisite to qualify a Communicant, Knowledge is neither the last nor
the least considerable. Knowledge of what? may some say.

I answer (I) the Knowledge of our selves, Est Dis^iplinarum omniu^ pulcherrima
and maxima seipsum nosse. Cle. Alex. Paeda. l. 3. in initio.
of our misery and of our malady, of our want of Christ, and of the worth of
Christ, of our interest in Christ* in the Covenant, and consequently of our
right to this Ordinance, which is one seal of that Covenant.

(2) The Knowledge of this Sacrament, what it is and whose it is, and for what
ends it is; a Physical potion may do the Patient good, though he know not the
ingredients of which it is compounded, nor the Apothecary by whom it is
prepared, nor yet the Doctor by whom it is prescribed; because it works
physically, naturally; but in this case it is not so, because the Sacrament
works morally. In short, if you be found guilty of much ignorance, I fear me
you will find little good by this Ordinance; for it works not ex opere operato
but ex opere operantis.

Secondly, above all, let it be your care to bring with you an humble Heart. At
the Marriage of Peleus and Thetis, Lud. Vives on Aug. lib. 3. c. 5.
a Golden Ball was sent in amongst the Feasters, having this Inscription on it,
(...), Let the fairest have it.

Here are choicest comforts, sweet, sanctifying, satisfying comforts to be had
at the Lords Table, such as will rejoice and transport the Soul infinitely, on
them the Motto is, (...), let the humblest have 'em; of all the Graces which
Christ commands our imitation of him in, humility is one of the first and
choicest, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. q.d. Your care
should be to be holy as I am holy, and merciful as I am merciful: But above
all, be sure to learn from me to be humble.

In the Lords eye no heart like the humble heart, it is the grand Sacrifice,
Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 66.2. A proud man will presume to come to the Table of the
Lord, no man sooner, but the Lord will not come nigh to him at his Table; No,
he beholds him afar off.

How can he expect a gift in love from Gods hand, who must not have a look in
love from Gods eye?

A proud heart is not fit for this Ordinance, nor was ever this Ordinance
intended for a proud heart. But the poor humble, hungry Soul the Spirit of the
Lord will enrich and fill with good things. What Tully said of Pronuntiation in
an Orator, that says St. Austin is humility in a Christian; it is the first,
second and third Grace.

The humble heart is a spiritual vacuum, Cor Humile est vacuum spirituale.
Guliel. Paris. Sicut natura non. --
as the God of Nature will not permit a natural; so the God of all Grace cannot
permit a spiritual; filled it shall be with Grace here and Glory hereafter. I
have often thought of that passage of St. Austin in his Enarrations on the 93.
Pfalm, Magis Deo placet humilitas in malis factis, quam superbia in Bonis.
The great God is better pleased with humility in a bad, than with pride in a
good action.

He that comes to this or that, or any holy Ordinance, without Faith and
Humility, whatever good is dispensed, he goes without. For he has nothing to
take a mercy with, wanting the hand of Faith; and nothing to put a mercy in;
not having an humble heart. The Spirit rested on the Virgin Mary, not for her
Virginity, Bernard.
but for her humility.

Secondly, Would you have the Spirit of the Lord to do you good at and by this
Ordinance, then be serious in self-examination. It Is a necessary duty; on this
the stress is laid; let a man examine himself and so let him come and take and
eat, etc. This is a trying time, and this is the trying Ordinance; it trys how
your pulse beats; how you can pronounce Transubstantiation; what propensions
you have toward the Romish Faith; As in the Marian times, how men's
inclinations stood toward the Reformed, -- well -- as you are tried by it, so
must you try your selves for it; the knowledge of your selves is necessary as
you heard even now. Now the most expeditious way to know our selves is to try
our selves: Search,

(1) Then till you have found out the evil that is in you; the pride,
Hypocrisy, self-love, unbelief, etc. and mortify them; enquire what error is
in the head, what blood is in the hand, what lusts are in the heart; what it is
that hinders your growth in Grace, that interrupts your peace, that interposeth
between you and the light of Gods Countenance. Something there is at the
bottom, some Jonah that disturbs the Ship, some Achan that troubles the Camp;
you would have more joy and peace: Know, the Spirit first sets the Soul a
searching, and then he comes a sealing; God may hide his face in point of
Sovereignty, but he does it commonly in case of sin, Lam. 3.40. Let us search,
etc. (2) Search till you have found out the good that is in you; for you must
acknowledge the Graces that you have, before you can receive the comforts which
you want.
Thirdly, Be careful to excite and to blow up those graces which the Spirit of
the Lord has implanted in you. It Is not enough that you have grace, no, no, a
man that has grace may receive unworthily (not acting his graces) though he
cannot be an unworthy receiver. Now Is a proper season for the exerting and
exercising of your Graces: What Graces may some enquire?

I answer, chiefly four, Faith and Love, Humility and Repentance; all noble
Graces; they are Theologiae Quadriga. Faith gets all; Love spends all; Humility
keeps all; the grace of Faith lays up for Christ; the grace of Love lays out
for Christ; and the grace of Humility keeps all for Christ. Of this last grace
I have spoken in the first Direction; of the other three a word or two now.

1. Act Faith now; the acting of Faith is the way to increase your Faith, and
to obtain peace and assurance; all the Devils in Hell cannot do you that hurt
at this Ordinance as your own unbelieving hearts can and will. I dare and do
assure you, That if the Spirit do not weaken your unbelief, your unbelief will
straiten the Spirit, Mat. 13. ult.

Fides non est necessaria accessuro ad Eucharistiam:
Cajetan at a Conference with Luther, positively asserted, That Faith is not
necessary for an Evangelical Communicant. Could I but pro tempore abjure Sense
and Reason, and so much unman my self as to admit that scandalous Doctrine, and
devilish figment of Transubstantiation, I would concur with him in that
ignorant and impudent assertion; but no such trash will pass here; you have not
so learned Christ. Well then, act Faith, and this will sanctify you for this
Ordinance, Act. 15.9. and it will sanctify this Ordinance to you, Tit. 1.15.
God the Father conveys all good to us through Christ, and Christ conveys all
good to us through Faith. Dormit Fides and dormit Christus. Christ is the
Fountain, the Sacrament is the Conduit, Faith is the Cock, the heart is the
Vessel. Turn but this Cock, and the oil of joy and peace will flow in
abundantly into your Souls from the fountain of living waters.

There are two special seasons for a Christian to act faith in; the former when
under sore afflictions; then he must live by Faith. Faith is an inquisitive
grace, it will not be quiet till it have found out the Sin that has provokt
God, and procured the rod; Faith then eyes the Sin to humble the Soul, and the
promise to comfort the Soul. Faith eyes the hand inflicting, and works
patience; and it eyes the sin procuring, and works repentance. When God is
striking for sin, Faith will be striking at sin; Faith will make great
afflictions little, bitter potions sweet; unbelief makes short afflictions
long, and easy burdens heavy. Faith will enable the Soul to pray; Prayer i^
the very breath of Faith. Faith is all for Prayer, and Prayer is all for Faith;
the latter, when about divine Institutions and holy Ordinances: what Christ
said to his Disciples, Joh. 15.5. that faith Faith to us, Without me ye can do
nothing. Nothing acceptable to God, nothing profitable to your selves.

2. Act Love and Charity; now is the time to have your Hearts fired, inflamed
with love to God, and filled with love to Man. As the Sacrament received
without Faith is received without fruit; so, if received without love, it is
received without life.

Love puts life into a Communicant, and Love puts life into a Sacrament. When
the Lord Jesus was a dying on the Cross, he stretched out his Arms to both
Malefactors; to teach us (surely) when we come unto this Ordinance to be in
charity with all men. All men love their Friends, but Communicants should love
their enemies; Amare est bonum alicui velle, non nostra sed ejus causa. Aqu*
Amicos in te, inimicos propter te. Aug.
else what do they more than others, Mat. 5.47.

The Spirit of the Lord is a Spirit of Love, and loves to do good to such as
live in love.

But we cannot live in love may some say.

No? It may so happen you cannot live in peace; I am for peace, (says David)
but when I speak, they are for war. Well, but you may live in love; you may
love them though they hate you: If so you do, your duty is done, and you may
come in hope and assurance to receive good by this Ordinance; carry these two
things along with you.

1. It Is connatural to a Sinner to hate a Saint; if he chance to love him, it is
because he is of a sweet nature, or for some external Considerations; not
because he is of a sanctified nature; Holiness is the thing he disgusts and
hates. 2. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, think it not strange if he hate
you; never court his favor, for his love is not worth the having, who thinks
not Christ worth loving.
See Tertullian's Book to Scapula, who was a great enemy to Christians, the
beginning of it.

3. Renew your Repentance, and the Spirit of the Lord will do you good by this
Ordinance. The Jews before the Passover cleansed all their Vessels which they
suspected might have any leaven in them* they burned all they could find, and
what they could not find, they cursed. Thus should we do by our sins, we should
search every corner of our hearts, and every passage of our lives, (if
possible); We should go with a Melius inquirendum; What have I done since the
last time I was at the Lords-Table? What sin have I lapst into, what dishonor
have I done to God, what disservice to Religion? and now repent of all. Do as
the Royal Prophet did, (...) Calculavi. Consultavi.
Psalm. 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned my feet into thy Testimonies. I
considered; i.e. I set my head and heart and mind on work; I turned them over
and over; upside down; I weighed them in the balance: I thought on them; i.e.
what they were, whither they did tend, in what they would end; I saw they were
not good, holy, right; I durst not own them at the great day; and I turned, I
saw 'twas high time to turn. I busied not my self about other men's ways and
works, my own found me work enough.

A serious Consideration of our ways helps us to a sight of the evil of them; a
sight of the evil of our ways, helps us to godly sorrow for them, 2 Cor. 7.10.
and godly sorrow works repentance. The Dunghill is never so lothsom and
offensive as when you stir in it; you never so fully discern the Bran as when
you sift the Corn; you will never discern sin, mourn for sin, or turn from sin
till you consider your ways. O pray remember, only the true penitent is the
right qualified Communicant. Say, Lord, here is the sin, (by search I have
found it out) that has so highly dishonored thee, so greatly troubled me,
it is this that soiled my Evidences; cankered my Assurance; I loath my self now
and repent in dust and ashes.

Apposite to what I have in hand is that passage of St. Ambrose, Ita and nos
quando ad altar Domini communicaturi accedimus, venemum pessimum: viz.
Iracundia^, invidiam, suberbiam, avaritiam, haec sunt animarum venena, ista
prius repellamus, etc.
Feria 2. post Dom. 1. Quadrag. the subject or argument of his Sermon is, The
universal or general day of Judgment, Serpens cum venerit ad bibendum, aquam
priusquam bibit, extra fontem evomit venenum suum? Even as a Serpent coming to
drink; first it vomits up its poison, and then drinks; so when we come to the
Lords Table, we must first (by humble confession, which is vomitus sordium
animae) cast up and vomit out our poison, the worst of poysos; viz. Anger and
Hatred, Envy, Pride, and Covetousness, Sacriledg, Theft and Luxury; these are
the poisons, the bane of the Soul; away with these, and then we shall be
satisfied with those Spiritual dainties, and Heavenly viands, viz. the body*
and blood of the Lord Jesus.

Athenagoras the Athenian Philosopher has a parallel passage in the very
beginning of his Book de Resur. Mortuorum. Nec Medicus infundere salutare
pharmacum aegroto corpori apt potest, nisi vitiosa prius expurgarit, aut
affluentem purulentilentiam cohibuerit, etc.

Fourthly, Constantly and conscientiously wait, diligently and duly attend upon
the Lord in every Ordinance, if you would have the Spirit of the Lord to do you
good in and by This; let this be your practice and it shall be your praise; if
it be somewhat painful, yet you shall find it very gainful; it is your duty,
and your glory too. The Merchants Ship takes not in all its Lading at one Port;
nor does the Christian enrich himself with treasures of grace and peace at one
Ordinance only. He has instituted none to be kicked at or neglected; slight him
in that, and he may you in This. Vide sis Aug. Epist. 29. Hieronymo, de illo
loco Jacobi.
His Ordinances are Channels of Grace, and Channels of Comfort; if you neglect
him in one, he may suspend his influences at another. As every command of God
must be obeyed and observed; a wilful violation of one amounts to a total
neglect, Jam. 2.10. so every Ordinance of God must be used and improved; a
partial observance is an argument of insincerity; it is a vain deceit to excuse
defects of one duty, neglects of one Ordinance, by care of another.

As all the commands, so all the Ordinances of the Lord are equal in regard of
him; Psa. 119.6.
all being ratified by the same authority, which you contemn when your own will
is, made the measure of your obedience. I urge this Rule the rather, because
some of you I see for the prayers of the Church more vehement, but for the
Sacrament more remiss and indifferent; others, all for this, not at all for
that. But if you would find acceptance, if you would profit by any Ordinance,
improve all; thus doing, doubtless the good Spirit of the Lord will do you good.

Q. But what are those other Ordinances, may some say?

Resp. Meditation and Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word. Meditatio est
mentis ditatio; it is the enriching of the mind. The Royal Prophet was real for
it and frequent in it; who ever more? O how sweet was his Meditation of God,
his laws and ways to him, Psalm. 104.34.

Luther was used to say, Three things make a good Divine, Prayer, Meditation
and Temptation; the first makes him holy; the second makes him rich and full,
the third makes him an experienced Divine. And will not that which makes a good
Preacher make a good Christian? Surely it will.

2. Prayer; he makes his people fruitful and joyful; but where? why in his
house of Prayer; Prayer is a mighty friend to the Sacrament, and the Sacrament
is a mighty friend to Prayer; and both are great friends to a gracious Soul?

3. The Ministry of the Word; as the Word is a Word of Grace, so it is a Word of
Peace; by this the Spirit of the Lord begins the work, and by it he carries on
the work.

Two things take along with you.

1. He will be waited on in a right manner, and in a due order in all his
Ordinances, or he takes himself as not waited on at all; though the
Institutions or Ordinances be different, yet the command and authority and
ultimate end in all is the same. 2. He will be waited on continually; as we
cannot set the Sun a time when it shall rise, nor the Wind when it shall blow,
so nor the Spirit of the Lord a time when he shall work.
We know not (as the wise man said of sowing seed, Eccless. 11.6.) whether our
waiting on this or that, whether now or then, or when this or that shall be
successful to us; it is enough to quiet and comfort us in our attentive waiting,
that we have his sic volo, sic jubeo for it; and that we are at the right door.
Man is for the shortest time, and God is for the fittest time; if we wait long
and have not so quick an answer, yet we shall have a fuller answer; and when
the mercy comes it will be sweeter.

You know that food be it never so good, must have a time allowed for its
concoction; it may be so in this present case, the Ordinances must have time
allowed for their operation. You find not peradventure, that power over your
corruptions and impetuous passions, not that increase of Grace, not that joy in
the Holy Ghost, not that full assurance of his Love which is dearer and sweeter
to you than your very life; as was expected. Well, but work with diligence, and
wait with patience; work I say, and be not slothful, wait and be not wilful;
these (or some of them) are but one step short of Heaven; when you are gone
thence you may have some smiles, after the Sacrament you may meet with more.

There are some special seasons in which he gives in assurances of his loves
unto his servants.

1. Sometimes immediately after their Conversion; Babes must be fed with sweet
things; Lambs must be carried in the arms. The Soul at first is not able to
bear harshness; Parents are more fond of Children at two than at twenty, it was
thus with the Prodigal.

2. Sometimes when they are under some great afflictions; when Ezekiel was
among the Captives by the River of Chebar, then the Heavens were opened, and he
saw Visions of God, Chap. 1.1. When the way is foul below, he will have the
Heavens serene and clear above; when his people have wormwood from the World,
they shall have wine from God; no Nectar nor Ambrosia comparable. Under the
greatest Crosses the sweetest and greatest Comforts. I appeal to your own
observation and experience.

3. Sometimes before some eminent trial, some great temptation and
extraordinary conflict. -- Stephen saw the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing on the right hand of God, Act. 7.56. But what followed, you see v. 59.
They ran upon him* cast him out of the City and stoned him till he died.

Paul was first wrapped up into the third Heaven, and heard ((...),) words that
neither might nor could be uttered. But then comes the messenger (Satan) to
buffet him, (...) I^ casu recto, ut D. A. in Tact. Sacr. Doctique passim.
2 Cor. 12.4, 7. A more eminent instance (because of a more eminent person) is
yet behind. No sooner was our Lord baptized, at which time was heard that voice
from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; but the
Spirit leads him up into the Wilderness, and there the Devil tempts him, Mat.
3. ult. Chapter 4.1, 2.

4. Sometimes after some great crosses; without the least impeachment to his
Love or Wisdom (on purpose to evacuate some peccant humor) he may, nay, does
suffer his dearest Children to lie under the black rod; none suffer

1. Sorer, Lam. 4.6. Dan. 9.12. 2. Sooner, 1 Pet. 4.17. Romans 2.9. 3. Surer,
Amos 3.2. than they here.
The Sons of God are known by their Affections and Afflictions.

Now the sensible manifestations of his love and favor he reserves in great
wisdom (as Physicians do their choicest Cordials) and gives them after the
Physic is over: After a sharp and bitter Winter, the best and sweetest Spring.
But once more.

5. Sometimes when they are waiting upon him in his Ordinances, when they are
in Prayer, the Spirit of the Lord comes in and whispers, Thou art mine. At the
Sacrament, O what heart-enlargements have they in that! what beams of light and
love have been darted in at his Table! what Divine comforts have they been
filled with there?

That it is often thus I need not prove, your own experience will contribute to
the evidence of this Assertion. -- But that it is ever thus, I may in no wise
maintain: He is a great King, and Sovereignty would and should be waited on. It
is good for a man to attend and wait on God in all his appointments. Increase
of grace, strength and power against sin, assurance of his love come too soon
to that man, who thinks Gods time of sending them is too long or late.

I will shut up this Discourse with that memorable passage of the Prophet
Isaiah, chapter 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto
you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; for the
Lord is a God of Judgment. Blessed are all they that wait for him.

And that of Habakkuk. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end
it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely came, it will not tarry: So say I, the Sacrament is for an appointed
time; but in due time the Spirit of the Lord will speak peace, though he tarry
wait for him, because he will surely come, and give in more life and light, and
grace and peace, yea joy without measure and joy without mixture. -- Now to God
the Father, etc.

The End of the second Sermon.
The Third SERMON
On Micah 2.7. Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? July the 27th. 1673
Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?
It Was excellent Counsel which an eminent German Divine once hinted to a young
Preacher, Luther:
Cum vides populum attentissime andientem, conclude, eo alacriores redibunt.
When you observe the people hearing most attentively, conclude your discourse
quickly, and they will return with more alacrity. This numerous Assembly gives
in evidence enough thereof.

The Logical resolution of these words you heard before, and the observations
thence deduced. The Propositions under debate cleared; and several Queries
resolved; we are now upon the Sixth. It Is this.

Q. 6. What course shall a Christian take that he may have the Spirit of the
Lord to do him good by this Ordinance of the Supper?

The Directions are many; we have dispatched four, and now proceed to the fifth
in order; which is this.

Fifthly, Be thankful to God for what good you have any time got by this
precious Ordinance: For, Gratiarum actio est ad plus dandum invitatio. He who
can cordially praise him for a little life and strength, and grace, and peace,
shall soon have more than a little to thank him for; the most expeditious way
to get what at any time we want, is to be grateful for that we already have;
others have only the shell, you have had the kernel, they nothing but bones,
and you the marrow. Have you had any quicknings, any refreshings from the
Spirit of the Lord at this Table, then say, (...) Bless the Lord O my Soul.

A Sacrament in its full extent compriseth two things.

A visible and an invisible part; the Schools call that, Sacramentum; this, rem
Sacramenti.

Excuse this short digression, pray, upon this occasion: If they of the Romish
Church will stand their ground, and be true to their own Principles, it will
appear to every vulgar capacity that they have none of this Sacrament amongst
'em. For, before they take and eat, the visible part is gone, both being
converted into the Body and Blood of Christ; for thus their Council (or rather
their Conspiracy at Trent, or if you will, that transcendent thing called Pope)
defines Transubstantiation; It Is a change of the whole substance of the Bread
into the whole substance of the Body of Christ, and of the Wine into his Blood,
Sess. 13. Can. 2: and this change is wrought, ere any take or eat. This is a
novel opinion, a new Article of the Romish Creed; of the same date with Pius
the fourth, without any basis or foundation in the Holy Scripture, Vide Alanum
de Euch. lib. 1 cap. 34. page 419. See that unanswerable piece of Bishop Morton
in 8. Books against the Romish Mass.
as their own Scotus and Cameracensis, and Cajetan confess. Nay, Bellarmine
himself says, Non tam ex Evangelio, quam ex Ecclesiae authoritate constat.

But to return: When this change is made, where is that outward and visible
part, which their School-Divines call Sacramentum? --

But have (my Beloved) by a lively faith fed on, and been strengthened by this
Heavenly Manna? then take heed of unthankfulness: 2. Chron. 32.25.
O remember that [But] But Hezekiah remembered not to render unto the Lord
according to the benefit done unto him. O what a blot was that [But] in that
good Kings scutcheon. When you come next to the Lords Table, bring Harps in
your hands, (they are emblems of praise. Heb. 5.8.
) The Spirit of the Lord will not, I had almost said, he cannot, but do you
good, if humble and thankful for what good he has done you already.

Sixthly, Grieve not the Spirit of the Lord, if you would have him to do you
good by this Ordinance. He is a delicate person, if you grieve him, he may, nay
will grieve you. Has he begun in love to melt and mollify your flinty hearts,
to increase your graces, to speak peace unto your Souls? if you now distaste
him, he may withdraw and leave the work at a sad and long stand; you may hear
no more of him of many days, nay, months or years. Grieve not the holy Spirit
of God; why? Paul gives his Ephesian Converts a cogent reason why they should
not, Ephesians. 4.30. thereby ye are sea;led to the day of redemption; if you do,
you may be the first will rue it; you shall be without the witnessings and
sealings of the Spirit for a longer time than you are aware of.

But how or when is the Spirit of the Lord grieved?

I answer briefly.

When his Ordinances are not attended, his commands are not obeyed, his
comforts are not prized, his graces are not acted and improved; his assistance
in duties is not desired; his motions are not regarded. -- In a word, if you
will not have the Spirit for your Counselor, you cannot expect him long to be
your Comforter; lay not a bar in his way, and he still will do you good by this
holy Ordinance.

Seventhly, Heighten your hopes and expectations when you are about this
Ordinance, if you would have the Spirit of the Lord to do you good by it.

There is much good laid up for you, come on then, Sirs, and quicken your
hopes; great expectations from God greatly honor the greatness of God, and
wonderfully advantage you. It Is as displeasing to him, and as prejudicial to
you, when you believe little as when you do little. Open your mouths and hearts
wide; you have not only Gods power for it, but his promise too, to fill you.

One reason why you receive so little good at it, is because you look for so
little good by it; when your faith is very weak, and your expectations are very
low, you do what in you is to hinder the Spirit of the Lord from doing you
good. But surely when you have a Spirit of Prayer, and your hopes are high,
these are pledges to you, that he has a purpose to do you good.

Alexander the Great was wonderfully well pleased with Anaxarchus the
Philosopher, Plut.
when he desired an hundred Talents of his Treasurer. Apoph.
He does well (says he) in asking it, and understands his friend aright, who
has one both willing and able to give him so great a gift. The same Author
relates the like of that Kings munificence and bounty to his Favorite
Perillus, who asked but ten, Plut.
but the King gave him fifty Talents. The great God allows his people to ask
great things, nay commands them to believe and hope for mighty things; to covet
earnestly the best; if thus you do, the Spirit of the Lord will surely do you
good; you shall not seek nor hope in vain.

Well then, when you address your selves to this Ordinance, remember what great
things Christ has purchased for you; what great things are there proposed, and
God has promised to you; and then regulate your prayers by, and raise your
hopes to the riches of his merits and greatness of his mercies.

Some look for good by this Ordinance; but what good, or for what it is good
they know not; or they look for that good in it which God never intended to
convey by it. Others have their hopes fixed on the right object, their ends are
right too, but they have not a lively Hope. In short, if the Spirit of the Lord
be not present, the Sacrament is but a gaudy pageant; it is the spirit in the
Word that causes efficacy; in Prayer that causes prevalency; in this
Ordinance that causes proficiency: But then must we have an active Faith, a
strong and lively Hope.

Eighthly, Lament over the chilness, dullness, the deadness and unpreparedness
of your Hearts for this blessed Ordinance: When one has taken Physic and it
does not operate, something is prescribed and used to quicken it: A sincere
sorrow for your former carelessness and deadness may much conduce to your future
proficiency.

They shall come with weeping, says the Prophet Jer. 31.9. Tears dropping from
a mournful eye and grieving Heart, are like Water dropping from the Roses, very
sweet, fragrant and sovereign. Mary stood at Christ's feet weeping, Luc. 7.38.
Could we kneel at the Lords Table weeping (and is not the humblest posture
fittest for miserable sinners?) could we weep tears of blood for our scarlet,
crimson, bloody sins, acting her part, we might hope for her portion, a
gracious pardon, and that sealed in this Ordinance.

We pity weeping persons, and do them good; Tears melt our Hearts, Psalm 6.8.
and though silent, yet they are prevalent Orators; when you are in such a
melting frame, occasioned by serious meditation on your sins and Christ's
sufferings; on his bitter passions for you, and most tender affections to you;
then, lo, then is a season for the Spirit of the Lord to do you good by this
Ordinance: (...), says Chrysostom: Weep out your eyes for the loss of lands or
friends, all your tears will nothing avail you; but in this case they may, nay
will much.

Ninthly, Go out in the power and might of the Spirit of the Lord to this
Ordinance; you cannot rely on men or means too little, or on him too much; you
should depend on him though you had never tried him, but having tried him, you
are now under greater obligations to depend on him. Royal and religious is that
resolution of the Prophet David, Psalm. 71.16. I will go in the strength of the
Lord God. (...). Inpo^^^tus. q.d. Tu^ unius vir^^^^ situs.
Let us write after his Copy: -- remember; ejus est benedicere, cujus est
instituere. -- Alas all our light is darkness, our strength weakness, and our
wisdom foolishness. Frustra nititur qui non innititur; that man labors in
vain, who labors and yet relies not upon the Spirit of the Lord; if the Spirit
help you to pray, he will also help you to speed; and if he help you to prepare
for, and to go out in his might unto this Ordinance, surely he will do you good
by it; I will close up this with that excellent passage of Saint Cyprian, de
Bapt. Solus spiritus rem sacramenti nobis confert. Or that famous speech of the
School-Doctors,

Sacramenta ex similitudine repraesentant. ex institutione significant.

Sed, ex virtute Christi sanctificant. Or with that of Prosper in his Epistle
to Demetrius, speaking of the holy Sacraments; Forma adhibetur per humani
ministerii obsequium, virtus autem per Divini spiritus praestatur effectum.

Tenthly, Once more. Walk uprightly, and the Spirit of the Lord will do you
good by this Ordinance; you have his promise for it, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord will
give grace and glory. Grace, that is the best thing that you can have on Earth.
-- Glory, that is the long and the short of what you shall have in Heaven. No
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Let a thread of
uprightness run thorough the whole web of your life's; and then you are sure (1)
of being safe in this world, Prove. 10.9. Men may kill you but they cannot hurt
you. (2) of being saved in the other world: But of this anon.


Follow these few Directions, and I dare be the Prophet to foretell you good by
this holy Institution.

I proceed now unto the seventh Query.

Q. 7. What shall a Christian do who has sound some good at, in, and by, or
after this precious Ordinance, from the powerful workings of the spirit of the
Lord?

I will hint a few Directions to you in answer to this Query; the amplification
of 'em I leave to your private Meditations. They are Ten or Eleven.

1. Walk Thankefully.

Has it been the day of his power, let it be a day for his praise; you have
had news from Heaven, let the Heavens hear good from you.

Though you have not got all the good you desired, yet bless God for this, that
you have got more than you have deserved. And bless God for this too, that you
have a desire still to get more. O despise not the day of small things. Say,
Lord, who or what am I that the Spirit of the Lord should condescend or stoop
so low as to breathe upon my Soul, to blow upon my Garden, and cause the Spices
therein to flow forth; who am I that he should cause this Ordinance to work for
my spiritual and eternal good, when others eat and drink Damnation to
themselves? I will write my self an eternal debtor to free Grace, for it is
that, that fitted me for, admitted me to and benefited me by this sacred
Ordinance. I will ever remember that golden sentence of Saint Austin, Hoc totum
hominis est, curare ut anima non sit ingrata Deo: This is the whole business of
a Christian man, To take care that his Soul be not unthankful to his God.

Have I received any light or life, or increase of grace and peace, I will
remember to my dying day, though it is wrought in me, yet 'twas not wrought by
me. Non nobis Domine, non nobis; Not unto us, Lord, not unto us; Because not by
us, Lord, not by us, but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts. Though I cannot
praise thee so much as I should, yet will I praise thee as much as I can.

Sacramenta Judaeorum umbra Christianorum. Aug: Enar: in Psalm: 37: nobis 38:
At the Jewish Passover was sung the 113. and some following Psalms; and this
they called the Great Hallelujah; And the Sacraments of the Jews were but
shadows unto ours. In every thing we must give thanks, but for this especially;
others stand without, you are admitted into the Presence Chamber of the great
King. They feed on husks and trash, you on the hidden Manna. My flesh (says
Christ) is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. All other food compared
with this is cibi tantummodo umbra and vana imago; as Cameron speaks; all
shadow, no substance. To a worthy Receiver the choicest of mercies and
blessings are here exhibited: one calls it (...), Food made up all of
Thanksgiving. And having tasted so much, nay drunk so deep of the cup of
blessing, does it not concern you now to sing, Glory be to the Holy Ghost? That
praise is due to God from every Creature in the World, and from every corner of
the world, I need not prove; but it is not comely for any but such as you, Psalm.
33.1. It Is a garment that suites none but Saints, Isa. 61.3. You read there of
the garment of praise. -- The Jewish Doctors have a saying, That the World
subsists by three Pillars, the Law, the Worship of God, and Thankfulness. O let
the high Praises of God be now and for ever in your lips and lives.

Has the good Spirit of the Lord gone out before you in love and mercy? Do you
follow him now in praise and duty. It Is the happiness of the Saints in Heaven
to enjoy God; and it is their only business in Heaven to bless God; and is it
not your wisdom as well as duty, to be daily doing that on Earth, besides which
you shall have nothing to do to all Eternity in Heaven? Hosanna's here and
Hallelujahs hereafter.

(2) Walk charitably.

Do all the good you possibly can for the Spirit of the Lord, and for the
people of the Lord. I know your goodness extends not to God, but let it the
more to the Saints. Yet you may plead for and vindicate his honor; which is by
many now laid in the dust; many father their errors and blasphemies on the
Spirit, laying them at his door, as if he were not the Spirit of Truth.

There are four sorts of men amongst us,

(1) Some who are all for Ordinances, not eying at all the Spirit of the Lord
for his teachings. (2) Some are all for the Spirit, Sans-ordinance men; casting
of Baptism, the Ministry of the Word, and this blessed Sacrament. Beza in 1
Cor. 1.12
As Beza said, so shall I, Hoc Pestilentissimo morbo utinam nulli hodie
laborarent. Oh that none had this Plague Sore now. (3) Others (and not a few)
neither regard the Spirit, nor men nor means; nothing but mundum and fundum.
(4) Only the sincere Christian is for all; and he is the man to whom I address
this counsel; -- if you espouse not his cause who shall? if in your stations as
Magistrates, as Ministers, as Christians you plead not for it who will? But --
walk charitably toward men; that is the duty I would press on you.
Has the Spirit of the Lord done you good? do you now all the good you can to
others; show your love to God by your love to your needy Brethren, and your
love to them by works of mercy. Acts of charity do not impoverish but enrich.
Perhaps the Purse may be lighter, but your Crown will be heavier. Who ever
heard or read of a man that lived charitably that died miserably. Non memini me
legisse mala morte mor^^^, qui libenter opera charitatis exercuit: Hieron:
Morison in his Itinirary:
Hierom in his Epistle to Nepotian tells us he never did; nor did the royal
Prophet, Psalm. 37.25, 26.

One tells us of a fountain of Salt in Germany, of which all the poor about it
had Salt Water freely for their use, but when once it was denied them, it lost
its virtue. If once you harden your Hearts against, or hide your faces from
those pale faces, and withered cheeks, and maimed arms; from those who have no
bread to eat, nor where to lay their heads; well may the Spirit of the Lord
suspend his influences at the next Communion, and then it cannot heal nor seal,
nor do you good. What greater incentive to show mercy to others than a due
sense of mercies received from God? Do good to all as you are of ability, and
have opportunity, but especially to the household of Faith.

(3) Walk contentedly.

Have you received good and much good at the Lords Table, then be not so full
of complaints if you have little of the worlds goods: Is your grace increased,
have you got more assurance of your Lords love? do not murmur though your Corn
and Wine and other matters increase not: Whilst those put gladness into your
Hearts let not the want of these cause sadness to appear in your faces. It is
enough (says Jacob) Joseph is alive. So say you, It is enough, the Spirit of
the Lord is alive, and has enlivened and sealed, 1 Timothy 6.8. (...).
and comforted me at and by this precious Ordinance. Show us the Father (says
Philip) and it suffices us. The sight of God without riches or honors, or
lands, or friends should satisfy your Souls. Having food and raiment you
should be content; well, Having food, not fine fare: Raiments not Ornaments:
and you have both; nay much more; viz. the Mediatory Righteousness of Christ
to deck and adorn you, and his precious Body and Blood to nourish you. And
whatever afflictions you meet with in or from the World, still be contented.
They say, whatever betides a Spaniard, he will not change his pace; whatever
troubles betide you, let no change appear in your Face. Whether God give or
take; whether he stroke or strike; Nimis delicatus es frater, si and hic vis
gaudere cum mundo and posthac regnare cum Christo* Hierom.
whether men hum or hiss, fret not your selves; shall you receive good from the
hand of God: What, all good and no evil? you are too delicate, if you would
have two Heavens, one here, and another yonder above the Clouds.

(4) Walk Compassionately.

Have you tasted there of the Lords graciousness, can you tell of the great
things the Spirit of the Lord has by that Ordinance done for your Souls; then
be not supercilious and censorious, but candid and ingenuous toward others who
come thence without any sense of increased grace, or evidences of his love and
favor, Job 6.14. To him that is afflicted (melted in the furnace of
Affliction) pity should be showed. Is it not enough that God does grieve them
by the suspension of his influences, but must you add unto their sorrows? and
why should you insult over them? Are you Saints, so are they* Though they walk
in darkness yet they are children of Light. Know and do your duty; pray for
them and pray with them. Can you go from promise to promise, and say, These are
mine. Or from Ordinance to Ordinance, and say, By all these the Spirit of the
Lord has done, and still is doing me good. Well, be you thankful, but be not
proud nor supercilious; be not high-minded but fear: At the next Communion he
may vail his Face from you, and reveal his love to them, whom now you
brow-beat, Psalm. 30.6, 7. He may turn your Wine into water, and their water
into wine, he may do them much more, and you much less good at the next address
you make unto the Lords Table. Let not such as are high and rich in grace and
peace censure them that are poor and low, and do not you that are low envy them
that are high; but bear ye one another burdens, rejoice in one another
Graces, mutually promote the work of Holiness, be less in censuring and more in
praying; Oret Apostolus pro plebe, oret plebs pro Apostolo, pro se omnia membra
orent, caput pro omnibus interpellat: Aug. in Psalm. 38.
the Pastor for the People, the People for their Pastor; one member for
another; ever remembering that Jesus Christ our merciful high Priest is pleading
and interceding for us all.

Egregia laus non modo non satiscere, sed indies proficere in melius: Grot: in
Rev: 2: 19:
(5) Walk fruitfully.

Make it your business to do all the good you can: Wherefore does the Spirit of
the Lord at any time, or by any means do you good, but only to make you better,
and to enable you to do better? Go then and abound in the work of the Lord; let
your last be more than your first; more for quantity, better for quality. Be
filled with the fruits of righteousness, This Ordinance concerns the Soul; may
be the last, is the purchase of Christ, and is a good gale for Heaven: Study
then to be fruitful:
which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Be more vigorous
in every holy duty; more zealous for the advancement of Gods Glory. Follow the
Lord fully, faithfully and cheerfully. Study how you may answer his
expectations from you, his dispensations to you, and the many obligations that
are upon you. Has he done more for you, do you the more for him; or your
answer and account at the last day will be sad indeed. You love to see every
thing you have fruitful; much more does the Spirit of the Lord love to see you
so. O how happy were we, yea, Foelices ter and amplius, might it but as truly
be said of us, as it was of Joseph, Joseph is a fruitful Bough. Genesis 49.22.
Naturalists say of the Pomecitron, that it bears fruit at all times of the
year; this is the Emblem of an Evangelical Communicant. -- As a plant differs
from a stone by vegetation, and a Beast differs from a plant by sense; and a
Man differs from a Beast by speech and reason; so should a Communicant differ
from other men by fruitfulness. Come then and spread your branches, send forth
your spices as Aromatic Trees in Lebanon.

Christ chides a little Faith, Mat. 14.31. but admires and applauds a great
Faith, Jer. 11.16 Joh. 15.8. Mat. 25: 30: Non tantu^ de non servato, sed de non
aucto munere damnabuntur homines: Profp:
O woman great is thy Faith.

Scholars are not at ease till they have taken all their Degrees, though it
cost them dear; and why should Christians till they come to a Non ultra? Our
blessed Savior did only two terrible wonders; the one was the drowning of the
Swine, Mat. 8. and yet that was only done by his permission. The other was his
cursing and blasting of the barren Fig Tree, and that was symbolical; not done
in spleen to the Tree, but only to manifest his indignation against an
unfruitful profession. Let us view that Text, Mar. 11.13 (...) subaudi (...)
ubi enim erat tempus erat ficuum; vel tempestivae ac maturae trant ficus.
Accentus enim spiritusque and distinctiones negligebant veteres.
Mark 11.13. Seeing a Fig Tree afar off, having leaves he came; if happily he
might find any thing thereon, but when he came to it he found nothing but
leaves. For the time of Figs was not yet. You will say, was not this a cruel
act? or unreasonable? had it been a time for Figs, the blasting of it had been
reasonable and just. I answer, the words in the original are not rightly
comma'd and accented; if they were, they would run thus, For where he was, it
was a time of Figs, as one well observes; viz. Learned Heinsius on Mark 11.13.

You have been (some of you at least) three or four days together at the Lords
Table upon this signal and special occasion; besides your Communions in course,
every first Lord's Day in the Month. You are planted in a fruitful Hill, Isa.
15.1. The Sunbeams of mercies, Zions silver-drops have fallen on you; you hear
more of God and from God in one day, than some thousands in the world have done
in all their lives. These are your enjoyments, what now are your improvements?
your receipts are high, let not your returns be low; if he find you without
fruit, he will leave you without excuse: Nay, he may deal with you as with that
barren Fig Tree, blast and not bless you. But my hopes are and my prayers shall
be for you, as St. Paul's were for the Philippians, that your Faith and Love,
and all your Graces may abound, Phil. 1.9.
(...), yet more and more.

(6) Walk closely.

Keep close (that is my meaning) to this precious Ordinance where you have so
happily met with all this good from the Spirit of the Lord; those sweet
experiences you have had of his quickening and strengthening influences should
engage you (if it will not others) to a more constant and diligent attendance
upon him in this solemn Ordinance.

The Question once was, Mat. 22.12.
How came thou in hither not having on the Wedding garment? The Question I
must invert, and put it thus to you. Having on the Wedding Garment, how comes
it now to pass that you go out? Do vestures or gestures, or the prayers of the
Church deter or drive you hence? would you not complain of us, should we
excommunicate or cast you out? and is it well done in you, thus to cast out
your selves? Have you no need of this Ordinance? if so, why do you turn your
backs, and by your examples discourage others; you should rather come and cry
to others, Come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and feed us with the
bread of life; and do us good by his holy Spirit. Excellent is that passage of
St. Austin in his first Book de vera Relig. cap. 6. where he shows the
constancy of the Godly for public Assemblies, against Conventicles; a word it
is you may observe of above 1200 years standing upon record; sine ulla
conventiculorum segregatione usque ad mortem defendentes and Testimonio
juvantes eam fidem, quam in Ecclesia Catholica praedicari sciunt.

There is an Observation which some have concerning the simpathy of Plants,
that some plants will bear better near other Trees, than when they grow alone;
they instance in the myrtle and the Olive: Sure I am it is true in Divinity;
when the Saints associate in these public Assemblies, and sit together at the
Lords Table, they thrive most. Therefore having had such experiences of the
Spirits influences in this sacred and solemn Ordinance, forsake not the
Assembling of your selves together; but exhort one another to a more constant
and conscientious attendance, Heb. 10.24, 26.

(7) Walk cheerfully.

Let your Hearts be wonderfully enlarged now in rejoicing in God. Rejoice in
the Lord always, (...)
and again, I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4.

The Ingemination of the charge intimates three things, The Necessity, The
Difficulty, The Excellency,
of the Duty.

Joy suits no person so well as a Saint; no day so well as the Sabbath; no duty
so well as a Sacrament; no Ordinance better I am sure.

Has he made you fruitful, then be it your care to be joyful.

The Rabbis have a saying, Spiritus sanctus non quiescit nisi super Hilarem.
Heins. in N. T.


Has the Spirit of the Lord been doing you good this day or at any time by this
Ordinance, has he been as a refiners fire, Non (...) Dux gementem militem.
burning up the dross, and making your Graces sparkle like gold in the furnace?
are his signatures and engraving upon your Souls: Then say, This is the day
which the Lord has made, a good day, a day of mirth and gladness, we will be
glad and rejoice therein. Now sing the Magnificat, My Soul does magnify the
Lord, and, etc. None have that call, none have that cause to rejoice as you.
It Is a saying too trite, unless it were more true, Spiritus Calvinisticus est
Spiritus Melancholicus. Most think they shall never have merry day, if once
they devote themselves to Gods service, and engage, though but in the duties
which concern this Ordinance. But your cheerfulness will confute their ignorant
and malicious censures; you may assure them from your own experience, that
there is more true and solid joy and comfort to be had in and by this precious
Ordinance; more peace in having Communion with God, and Communications from the
Spirit of the Lord at his Table, than in the most luscious acts of sin, or
those brutish pleasures the World affords. Tell them the fruits of the Spirit
are joy and peace, Gal. 5.22. His comforts are the golden Pot and the Manna,
the Nectar and Ambrosia of a Saint: But their pleasures are mixed with
mortiferous ingredients; at the best like Wine that runs dregs, and whilst they
have a cheerful countenance, they cannot deny (if they will speak all the
truth) but they have a corroding and chiding Conscience.

(8) Walk perseveringly. (...) Psalm. 119.112.


Walk on in the strength of this food (as Elias did of his) till you come to
the Mount of God; be not weary of, nor weary in well-doing. Blood ennobles, and
Learning adorns, but it is perseverance in the way and worship, and favor of
God that crowns all. Rev. 2.10. Only the through-Christian is in Gods account
the true Christian. The fixed Stars are few; in our age many are falling Stars;
they are not (...); steadfast in Godliness; they are like Reuben, unstable as
water; an Element hardly kept within bounds. But hold fast that which you have;
good things are not easily got, therefore it concerns you to hold 'em fast; and
many good things are easily lost, and therefore it is your wisdom to hold 'em
fast. Remember that in Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back, etc.

Surely the good you say you have got at this Ordinance is such as you highly
estimate, and perhaps it cost you many tears and prayers, then be the more
choice of it; it will sweeten your passage to the Heavenly Canaan. Some notions
concerning the Perseverance of the Saints were lately hinted. I shall now say
no more of this, but leave you in the meditation of two famous Scriptures, Job
17.9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall
be stronger and stronger. Prove. 4.18. The path of the just is as the shining
light that shines more and more unto the perfect day.

(9) Walk Heavenly: (...).

An Heavenly employment calls for an Heavenly deportment.
An earthly Saint is a Solecism or contradiction; therefore has the Spirit of
the Lord done you good by it that he might engage you to live more to him, and
to live more with him; more for Heaven, and more in Heaven. Every manifestation
of his love unto the Soul should raise it above the World. And if you do not
live much above the World, you live much beneath your Principles, and
privileges, and beneath your selves. O let your dispositions and affections,
your operations and communications, and conversations, and expectations be more
Heavenly! The good which God sends you in by his Spirit is to fetch your hearts
up to him. Grace in the heart (like fire on the hearth) tends (sursum) upwards;
it makes the Soul to mount or sparkle upwards in divine breathings and
ejaculations. The man whose heart is not in Heaven before himself comes there
is never like to come there. O let your thoughts and delights, your hopes and
comforts be above the world. Be content with the worst of it, but be not
satisfied with the best of it; for every crumb you should be thankful, but with
Crowns and Diadems you must not take up.

The more sweet you have met with at this Supper, the more bitter should the
world be unto you for ever after. Ludov. Vives on Aug. l. 18: cap: 54.
Cui dulcescit Christus amarescit mundus. When our blessed Savior was a dying,
the whole World was in obscurity, 'twas midnight dark at Noonday, and the
Stars were visible. This Sacrament is a lively representation and solemn
Commemoration of his Death; when you are about it and gone from it, let the
world be darkness to you. I will leave St. Ambrose his Counsel with you, Toto
animo odi and damna quod diligit mundus: Tanquam mortuus a labe and affectu
illius te separa; Epistolaru^ lib. 4. Floriano.
sicut sepultus nil habeas carum de saeculo, tanquam defunct us omni terreno te
abdica negotio; contemn vivens, quae post mortem habere non poteris.

(10) Walk watchfully, (...)
uprightly. As it is not enough that you be and do good for a day or two before
you come to the Sacrament, but your care must be to walk uprightly; so it must
be your care when you are gone thence to walk thus. Go then and sin no more,
Joh. 5.14. no more so wilfully, so prefumptuously. To sin after a Sacrament is
to sin with a witness. To sin against clearest light and dearest love provokes
exceedingly, and yours will be found of this nature.

To provoke God in a Wilderness is not so bad or sad as to provoke God in a
Paradise. 'Twas an aggravation of Eves sin to listen to the whisperings of the
Serpent when placed there; it is so for you who have been sealed with the holy
Spirit of promise, now to listen to the delusions of that lying Spirit. Enar.
in Psalm. 29
Adam in stercore (says St. Austin) est cautior, quam Adam in Paradiso.

Sacramentum est juramentum, every wilful iniquity now comes little short of
perjury.

There are some sins which the fallen Angels were never guilty of; they sinned
not against the Patience of God; non expectavit Angelos; they suffered
immediately as they had sinned. Nor against the tenders and offers of Grace;
the golden Scepter was never held out, nor pardon offered to them. Nor against
the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ; he died not for them; if now we sin, not
out of weakness, but out of wilfulness; our sins will be found such as the
Devils themselves are not guilty of. What higher privilege is or can mortal man
be capable of on this side Heaven, than to be feasted at the Lords Table with
these Heavenly viands. Now the greatness of the Privilege adds to the greatness
of the crime; Ubi sublimior praerogativa, ibi major culpa. Salv. de Gub. Dei
lib. 4, page, 128.
your sins after a Sacrament cannot take Christ from you, but they may take
rest from you, Psalm. 38.3. They cannot take Grace from you, but they may take
peace from you; God may break your bones and leave you long in the dark; you
may never recover that comfort and assurance which you had before. Wicked men
have their Heaven here, and their Hell hereafter; and some good men have their
Hell here, and their Heaven hereafter.

Now, Sirs, you have been at the Lords Table, you have seen what Sin cost
Christ; what buffetings, what bruisings, what woundings, what bleedings; and
shall not this engage us to greater circumspection to our dying day? having
received so much good from the Spirit of the Lord shall not we watch our ways,
and keep our Hearts and Eyes, and Tongues, Obstrue quinque Fenestras (i.e.
quinque sensus) ut luceat Domus. Prove. Arab.
and All with more care and diligence? If Israel play the Harlot, yet Judah
must not transgress. Having now been at such an Ordinance as this, shall we
again return to break his Commandments? Every mercy is a motive to duty; and to
walk circumspectly, watchfully, wisely, uprightly is one without dispute, Ephesians.
5.15. Mark. 13.37. Col. 4.5. Let not the increase of our mercies be the
decrease of our duties. Though we walk in, yet let us not walk after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit of the Lord, who by this Institution has done us all this
good.

Once more: Walk Penitently.

You must renew your repentance as well after, as before this Ordinance. Call
to remembrance the deadness of your Hearts, the coldness of your Love, the
unactiveness of your Faith, the many wanderings and distractions of your minds
and spirits when about this duty. There are some special seasons for the
renewing of repentance. -- As,

1. When you are a dying* though we must not defer it till death, yet we must
be sure to renew it at death. We should take our fill of repentance before we
take our leave of repentance: thus St. Austin did, he caused the Penitential
Psalms to be fixed before him on the wall, and as he lay in bed he wept and
read, and read and wept abundantly; Intuebatur and legebat, and jugitr ac
ubertim flebat; as Possidonius relates it, De vita Aug. cap. 31. 2. And when
you are suffering for God or from God, under some great afflictions; though
repentance must not be limited to a time of affliction, yet it must be renewed
in a time of affliction; for Gods end and design in and by them is not to break
our backs, but to break our hearts. Once more, 3. When you are a doing, or have
done any great and more solemn duty. What, is there nothing now you have been
at this Ordinance to renew your repentance for? was all so well done? did
corruption act so weakly, and Grace so vigorously and strongly? was the evil
spirit so chained and restrained? and did the good Spirit of the Lord so
enlarge, enliven and strengthen? is there no need of praying over your prayers
again; of repenting that your repentance was no more Evangelical? -- Did you
thoroughly consider (as you ought) your Saviors Passion in the matter and quality
of it; in its bitter ingredients and heightning circumstances of it? or your
own sins, the meritorious cause of it? You had some light about this in your
heads; but was it attended with power and efficacy upon your hearts? for the
clearest notions without suitable impressions will not advantage you.
And thus have we dispatched the counsels which concern you Saints, and also
resolved the seventh Query. If thus you walk, you will much honor the Spirit
of the Lord; who is the great Agent in your Regeneration, Illumination,
Conversion; and in your proficiency by this sacred institution. And as you are
concerned to honor the Son for what he has done without, so are you concerned
to honor the Spirit for what he has done within. -- You will honor this
Ordinance too, and advantage your selves, and you will be instrumental to bring
in others, whose hearts are too full of disgusts and prejudices against this
high and holy Institution.

I told you of something I had to say to sinners; I could be well contented to
say nothing at all; had I none at all to speak to. But there are two ranks or
sorts of them.

1. Such as peremptorily (but most perniciously and erroneously) assert, that
they are above Ordinances, this or that; Sans-or supra-ordinance men; in what
predicament to place them, how to call them, or how to cure them I well know
not: Is not the Spirit of the Lord straitened? can he do his people good by
this Ordinance? why then is there no breaking of Bread, no Sacrament of the
Lords Supper amongst you? why is this cast off, and cast out? -- As the Center
of the Earth has an attractive power and virtue to draw all heavy substances
to it; so has the Sacrament such an enlivening, strengthening, nourishing power
and virtue, as may, nay will draw all real Saints to it; and you amongst the
rest, if you be such. What is said of Socrates is true of the Sacrament, all
that know it (its power, preciousness, and usefulness) love it, if any do not
love it, it is because they do not know it. The whole management of Soul work
in order to Salvation now lies upon the hands of the Spirit, but in the use of
means. He that made us without us, will not save us without us. True it is,
means are but means, and therefore not to be relied upon; and as true it is,
means are means, and therefore not to be neglected or despised; it is an
excellent observation of an eminent Divine: In things of this nature men are
very prone to run themselves on one of these two rocks; Dr. Jacomb on Romans 8.
page 246.
(says he) Either they rest upon the means, not looking up to the Spirit: Or
they cast off the means, casting all upon the Spirit. Either they are proud and
can do all without God; or idle and slothful so as that God must do all without
them. But you should remember that the spirits sole-efficiency (as to the
formal production of the act) is well enough consistent with men's endeavors in
the use of means; he does all in us and for us, yet he will do nothing without
us, nor without means; if he will, you may do well to show where he has
promised it, till then we cannot believe it. Our Savior once though this
Ordinance very necessary, and he is the Wisdom of God; 1 Cor. 1.24.
are you wiser than he? speaking of this Ordinance, St. Paul (moved by the
Spirit) says, As often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords Death till he come. But he is not yet come, yet you have laid it by as
vain, needless and fruitless.

Shall his Ordinance have his or your date? He set it up, how dare you take it
down? You talk much of the Spirit, but see and say if it be not a spirit of
pride, or ignorance, or a Popish spirit that prompts you thus to speak and act.
They of the Romish Church have taken away the Cup, but you have outdone them,
in taking away the Bread too. Is the command and example of Jesus Christ of no
force with; shall his Institutions be of no longer use to, you than your wits
and wisdoms think fit? This Sacrament is (q.d.) the picture of our dying
Savior; an injury done to the Kings coin or picture, is taken as done to the
Kings person; so in this case, (...). Basil. de Sp. S. cap. 28. Genesis 45.3.
Men love not to see the faces of those they have injured, if armed with power
to punish them.

How were Joseph's Brethren amazed when he said, I am Joseph; what horror and
confusion will one day possess your hearts, when you shall hear Christ say, I
am Jesus; I am Jesus who instituted and appointed this Ordinance, to continue
in full force till the end of the world; I am Jesus who can and will do you
good by my Spirit in the use of this Ordinance, if you walk uprightly. But as
sure as I am Jesus, my enraged justice shall avenge the quarrel of my abused
mercy; and they shall meet with wrath and vengeance who are contemners of my
Ordinance.

How discursive is foolish pride when it would prescribe unto God? vain man
do thou censure his benefits when thou should enjoy them? art thou so
stupid and sottish as to judge of the things conveyed, by the quality and value
of the instrument that conveys them? Does not the weakness of these Elements
add much to the wonder of the Sacrament? It was an argument of Christ's power to
feed five thousand with a few Loaves; this miracle of his Sacrament is equal
thereunto which feeds the whole Church with such slender Elements. -- But I
will expostulate no farther with 'em; I convert my speech to others. For,

2. As there are some who look upon themselves as above this Ordinance, so
there are others who look upon this Ordinance as above them; and why? but
because they are not qualified; nor can any arguments prevail with them to
capacitate themselves for it. Others will say, they know no good got by it, no
fruit that grows on it. The poor have no leisure for it, and the rich take no
pleasure in it; and few there are who come to it in most Assemblies. -- I have
a word for you, Et valeat, quantum valere potest.

1. Suppose this were (but it is not) a prerogative-command, given only for the
probation and trial of your obedience, and no benefit at all should redound to
the observer of it; are you not (yet) obliged to consider your ways to turn
your feet unto his Testimonies; to break off your sins by repentance, to
prepare your selves and then to come and take and eat? The observance of such
commands has been well rewarded, Genesis 22. and the disobedience thereof most
severely punished; as in Adam, Genesis 2.17. in Lots wife, Genesis 19.17. and in the
young Prophet. 2. Gods standing Laws and Ordinances (and such is this) oblige
not to observance only, but they intend a real benefit withal; which should be
an incentive to our obedience, Deuteronomy. 10.13. Psalm. 19.11. And 119.165. Great
peace have they which love and keep thy Law. 3. Though you never got good by
this Ordinance, will you say, no good is to be got by it; or that never any
did? it will in no wise follow. 4. You speak expressly against the Word of God,
this very Text; and for every blasphemous word you shall account another day.
5. Do not your speeches reflect upon the glorious Trinity? 1. On God the
Father, as if he had made or instituted an Ordinance in vain; you call in
question his wisdom. 2. On God the Son; as if his Body and Blood were good for
nothing. And, 3. On this holy Spirit; as if he were straitened so, that he
could not do them good by it who walk uprightly; or as if he would not.
6. Do not you speak against the sweet experience of the Saints in all ages?
they have found good by it. 7. Do not you speak against right reason? for as
the guilt and danger is great in case one receive unworthily, so must there in
reason be some proportion of fruit and benefit to such as come preparedly. 8.
Once more: Is it not your pride, carnality, and hypocrisy? is it not your
earthliness, unbelief and impenitency that hinders your addresses to it, and
proficiency by it? Water there is enough in this well, had you but buckets to
draw it forth; the Spirit is present to heal, but you are insensible of your
Maladies. You may complain of us if so you will; of God if so you dare; of his
Decrees, Ordinances, this or that; but assure your selves, he can as soon cease
to be God, as cease to be good or just; he will lay the fault where you will
not like it; whence you shall never be able to remove it, even at your own
doors. Therefore be advised, 1. Cherish not any longer such undervaluing
thoughts of this mysterious, holy and precious Ordinance: Judge not rashly nor
falsely of the things of God; I am speaking for God, and for his Institutions;
and though it be an easy matter to slight me your Minister, yet I fear, it
will be no easy province to answer your Maker for the contempt you do to his
sacred Ordinances. 2. Break off your Sins by repentance, and that speedily;
though a late repentance may be a true repentance, yet you will find that a
late repentance will prove an hard repentance; a disease, the longer it grows
upon a man the harder it is to be cured. Be quick in this duty, lest God be
quick in judgment, Rev. 2.3. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly. --
Mark that quickly.

Lament and weep over your Souls for the loss of all that good you might ere
this day have got by this Ordinance. Now get your persons clothed with his
Righteousness; your natures cleansed by his Spirit, your sins pardoned in his
blood, and doubt not (if then you come) but the Spirit of the Lord will do you
good by this Ordinance. The good Lord follow this work of Conviction with a
work of Conversion. And make this word effectual to confirm the doubtful; to
quicken the slotful; to encourage the fearful. Go to God, though you cannot go
in Faith, yet go for Faith; though you cannot, yet he can reform your life's,
and put you into a right frame for communion with him in this Ordinance.

We are now arrived at the last Enquiry.

Q. 8. What soul-reviving comforts does this truth afford to the people of God,
who care take and conscience make of walking uprightly?

Resp. I will not presume too far upon your patience, and therefore shall not
launch out into this vast Ocean; take an account of them in these ten
particulars, and these ten rather in Figures, than in words at length. Is the
spirit of the Lord at liberty, and has he a sufficiency of power to enlighten
and strengthen, and comfort, and to do you good by this Sacrament? Here is
comfort for you in ten cases or respects.

1. As to the weakness of these Sacramental Elements; alas! what is a little
morsel of bread, or a sip of Wine, and a few words spoken over them; (no
Transubstantiating words, we abhor all thoughts of that Doctrine which is so
contrary to our Senses, to Reason, to the Scriptures, to the comfort of the
Saints, to the honor of Christ's glorious Body; all which is abundantly evinced
by our Divines.) True it is indeed, they are poor and weak things in
themselves; but you must remember they are of divine Institution; this is an
Ordinance of the great God, who has owned it and can and will bless it. Though
these outward Elements be weak, yet the Spirit of the Lord is strong; he
delights to do great things by weak means. What is the word, if abstractly
considered, but a dead letter, yet it is the power of God unto Salvation to them
that believe; it is mighty through God, it transforms the heart, reforms the
life; by it the dead in sin are quickened; sinners are turned from darkness
unto light; and this is a greater work to turn the Soul from a state of Sin to
Grace, than from Grace to Glory. By it Lepers are cleansed, afflicted
Consciences comforted, etc. What is a little water in Baptism to a tender
Infant? it is in it self but a mean thing; but water baptism is of divine
sanction and institution, Joh. 1.33. He that sent me to Baptize with water; and
Infant Baptism is so too, Mat. 28.19. Go disciple ye all Nations: Posito toto
generali, pars ejus negari non debet.
How? Baptizing them, etc. and the Spirit of the Lord can do us good by it; yea
our tender Infants too, even in their Minority; much more when they arrive at
years of Discretion. He can and has made his Elect, who were baptized at ten
days, as careful to repent, to believe and obey the Gospel, as those ever were,
who were twenty years of age, ere they were dipped. Say men what they will of
it or against it, that it is a sign or shadow, this or that; if God set us a
shadow, a brazen Serpent, it shall not be in vain to look up unto it. Do not
less prize or use the institution, being well assured of the Lords Benediction.
I told you but even now, That the meanness of the Element adds more to the
honor and wonder of the Sacrament. And that it derives its being and value
from its Author. I refer you for more of this to St. Ambrose his fourth Book de
Sacr. chap. 4. Tom. 4. page 173. And to Bishop Reynolds, his Meditations on the
Holy Sacraments, chap. 4.

2ly. Here is comfort for you in case of bitter taunts and Satirical or
Sarcastical speeches which you may meet with from ignorant, sensual and secure
Sinners, because of your constant and conscientious attendance upon God in this
Sacred Ordinance. Nazianzen said long since, (...). In all Ages the most
serious holy men are represented as the most vicious; wicked men have no favor
from God, and good men shall have no favor from them, whilst they have
virulent Tongues, or violent hands: If the Son of God was crowned with thorns,
let not the Saints of God expect a crown of Roses: As the Lilly amongst the
Thorns, as the lamb amongst the Wolves, so is the Spouse amongst the Daughters.
They will do by you as Stunica did by Erasmus, observe and review all your
works, and pick and cull out only what they conceive is worst; but those
perhaps (as did his) may prove your greatest truths and virtues: However,
solace your selves in this; The Spirit of the Lord is doing you good, and never
the less for their saying or doing you evil; what though you hear ill, whilst
you fare well; their reproaches shall hurt you no more, than the Dog does the
Moon, which he cannot bite, though he bark all night at it. Apol. pro
Christianis. Antonin.
Virtus nihil est imminuta propter existimationem vulgi. Nobis temerariae
quorundam calumniae sanctioris vitae institutum non obscurant, nec per eas
gloriae nostrae coram Deo aliquid decedit; as Athenagoras told Antoninus and
Commodus in his Apology for the Christians; a Diamond sparkles never the less,
nor is it any whit the less precious, because an ignorant or a blind man
disparageth it; it is so in this case; their reproachings tend to your greater
glory; they will wish (but perhaps, when it is too late) they had been fitted
for, admitted to, and shared with you in this Sacred Ordinance.

3ly. Here is matter of comfort for you in respect of the meanness of the men,
or weakness of the persons by whom it is dispensed. We are not Prophets, we
pretend to no such inspirations or immediate calls as they had; we are not
Apostles, we have no immediate call from Christ to preach the Gospel to all
Nations; we cannot, do not, dare not pretend to an infallible conduct of the
Spirit, as they had, and some ignorantly and impudently now challenge to
themselves; No, we are men, men subject to like passions and perturbations,
temptations and infirmities as they were, and perhaps to more than you are; you
know it, we confess and lament it. Guilty were we of sin before we could do any
thing, and ever since we could do any thing we have done nothing without sin.
But in this may you and we not little solace our selves; Though we can do you
little good, very little good, yet the Spirit of the Lord can do you very much.
All we can do is to endeavor it, but the conversion of Souls is (not ours but)
Gods work; we may ((...)) speak what is in it self persuasive, but it is the
Spirit of the Lord alone that can and must ((...)) actually persuade you. The
efficacy of the Word and Sacraments depends not upon the arts, or parts, or
gifts, or graces, or greatness, or goodness of men, but upon the power,
institution and blessing of God. Is a golden treasure ever the worse because
it is laid up in an earthen vessel? or is water the less sweet because conveyed
to your cisterns in leaden pipes? Mark well the Text in hand, and you will find
the great stress laid upon your own upright walking, if you expect a blessing;
a parallel you have in Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with faith in them that heard it. It is not said, Not being mixed
with faith in them that preach it, -- but in them that heard it. In short, the
spirit of the Lord can do great and mighty things, as by poor and weak means,
so he can do great and mighty things by poor and weak men. He employed not at
the first publication of the Gospel, any mighty Monarchs, or noble Lords, or
profound Philosophers for the Conversion of the Nations, whose Majesty,
Authority and Wisdom might have had a powerful and prevailing influence on
their inferiors; No, a few poor Fishermen are the men; 2 Cor. 4.
that the excellency of the power might be and appear to be of God alone, and
not in or of man at all: Men and means are productive of nothing if they
operate only from an inherent or natural virtue, but when they have a divine
stamp upon them the Spirit of the Lord can do great and mighty things by them.

4ly. Here is comfort for you in case of temptations to disbelieve the Godhead
or Deity of the Holy Ghost; other mediums are urged to evince his Divinity, but
the Ancients make much use of this, viz. the glorious operations and most
mighty and powerful works done by him; as Cyril and Ch^^^ostom and Ambrose, de
Sp. sancto. He that can quicken dead Souls, subdue such strong lusts, implant
and increase Grace, and bless the Ordinances, and all this by an immediate
primary underived power (as the Spirit does) certainly he is more than a mere
creature, he is truly God; for these are works for a God, and for a God only. O
the boundless, incomprehensible, and infinite power of the Spirit! What all the
Creatures yonder above the Clouds with these on Earth cannot, that he can do
omnipoteutissima facilitate, Aug. Epist. 107. ad vitalem non procul a fine.
as an Ancient elegantly expresses it; when he will work, who shall let him?
Isa. 43.13. He acts omnipotenter, insuperabiliter, this speaks him to be God
indeed; He is not strained, he can do his people good by his institutions.

5ly. Here is comfort for you too in case of mighty oppositions from the flesh
when you are about any holy and religious exercises; there is no one duty in
the whole course of Christianity, but it is sure to meet with one impediment or
other. The Flesh (if nothing else do) will belusting against the Spirit,
corruption will be opposing grace; so that you cannot do the things that you
would and should: The agency and enmity of the flesh appears both in the matter
and manner of our performances. Sometimes it hinders from duty, from praying,
hearing, and receiving, sometimes in duty; nay it ever hinders us in the
manner; abating the vigor and fervor, or lessening the alacrity of our Souls
in duty, your own experience is proof sufficient; but here is comfort for you
in this present case, the Spirit of the Lord is not shortened, nor straightened, he
can help your infirmities, subdue corruptions quicken graces, and in spite of
all oppositions he can bless his own Institutions: He can make mountains to
become plains, and cut a way through the hard rock, Zach 4.9. Behold I am the
Lord, the God of all flesh, is there any thing too hard for me? Jer. 32.27. It
may, poor Soul, be too hard for thee, but not for me; this is applicable to the
Spirit in the personal consideration of God, and it is no less comfortable than
applicable.

A Child of God fain would do more but cannot; a wicked man may do more but
will not; the godly man's heart is larger than the duties; a wicked man's duties
are larger than his heart; it is the complaint of a gracious Soul, O how do my
corruptions hinder in these holy duties! But O, says the other, how do these
duties hinder me in the pursuit of my lusts!

A godly man is grieved because he cannot do all the good that he would; and
the other, because he cannot do all the evil that he would. It Is the burden of
a Saint, the greatest trouble upon his Spirit, that he can pray no more
fervently, hear no more profitably, receive no more worthily; so to bungle and
baffle, and trifle, is his great trouble; but he has this to comfort him, The
good Spirit of the Lord to assist and help him in every duty; and he knows,
that his arm is not shortened.

6ly. Here is comfort for you as in case of the activeness of the flesh, so in
case of the weakness of the Spirit; i.e. of Grace; you find that you are
woefully and wonderfully straightened in your selves; you complain of the
narrowness of your Hearts, the unactiveness of Grace, you are not so humble and
holy, not so tenderhearted and enlarged; your lives are nothing so blameless
and harmless as you could wish, and this to you is matter of saddest
Lamentation and deepest Humiliation. But remember (pray) the Spirit of the Lord
is not straightened, though you be, he is not; and this is matter of consolation;
though you be impotent, chill and dull; yet if you be sensible of it, and
sorrowful for it, you will find his Grace sufficient for you, and himself
alsufficient in you: A weak Christian assisted by the Spirit of the Lord can do
all things, Phil. 4.13.

7ly. Here is comfort for you against those oppositions and temptations you may
meet with from the Devil when you are at the Lords Table: O that we were as
careful to prepare our selves for that Ordinance as he is to prepare for us; he
is ever fixed, and very diligent on holy days, in holy places, at holy duties,
Job 1.6. not because he loves them, but because he hates us. I have read of one
who said, he saw but one Devil in the Market, for most of the buyers and
sellers were his already; but a Legion in the Church; A Legion (according to
Varro) is 7622; but what employ had so many evil spirits there? why, to lay
snares for them; to hinder the operation of the Word and Sacraments, and
consequently the salvation of Souls. Doubtless you are not without
discouragements by reason of your own corruptions, and his oppositions. Well
but your Redeemer has not left you comfortless; the Spirit of the Lord is not
straightened; He is a most glorious and victorious Spirit; your way in this case
is, to set the power of this Spirit against the power of Satan; when the gates
of Hell, and powers of Darkness press hard upon you, it is your wisdom (in order
to your comfort and conquest) to improve this power of the Spirit of the Lord.
The more you are assaulted by that evil spirit, the more shall you be assisted
by this good spirit. He will be with you in the floods and in the flames; Who
and what art thou O great Mountain before this Zerubbabel.

8ly. Here is comfort for you as to the greatness of those mercies and
blessings now by you desired and expected. O says a child of God, how shall I
get my heart humble, more quick and lively; what shall I do for a broken,
bleeding. Heart, for more full assurance of the pardon of my sin, and the
salvation of my Soul. Ah what shall, poor I do for a little more light in my
Understanding; O that my Will were healed, etc. These indeed are great things,
they are not (...), no, they are (...), such as accompany Salvation. Yet
although these be very great things as to you, they are not so to the Spirit of
the Lord, if it be marvelous in your eyes, is it therefore marvelous in Gods?
Zach. 8.6. All things are alike easy to an Almighty Agent, and this Spirit is
such; Exodus 14.24.
a look from him in anger can lay your strongest lusts dead; he can irradiate
your minds with beams of Divine light; and efficaciously incline, overpower,
determine and heal your* Wills. He can (in one word) do every thing; therefore
be confident of this very thing; viz. that as he easily can, so he assuredly
will. He, I say, who has begun a good work in you, will own it and crown it
and perform it until the day of Christ, Job 42.2. with Phil. 1.6.

9ly. Here is also comfort for you in case of barrenness under former
administrations; perhaps you find not that power as yet over your impetuous
lusts as you then and there expected; no more peace of conscience; Nec mibi
dant s^^llae lucem, etc. You have often been at the Lords Table, and yet no
assurance, or no more assurance of his love, and of eternal life, than you had
before. If it be thus your present case is sad; yet thus it may be, and your
internal and eternal state be good. For though you have not peace, yet you want
not grace, in the best of Saints there is a want in grace, but in the worst or
weakest Saint there is not a want of grace. Though you are cast down, yet you
are not cast off; you have not so much as will comfort you, but you have enough
to save you. It Is Heaven that is the proper place of comfort, and Earth of
grace: It Is the pleasure of our all-wise God to make some to weep and wait long
for a smile from Heaven; and thus he acts in a way of wisdom, not ever in a way
of punishment. Know and do your own work, let the most High alone with his;
hear what he will speak for he will speak peace unto his people; the day that is
clouded now may be clear anon; it is darkest a little before the dawning of the
day. Remember for your comfort, (...) Lux fidei, veritatis, and ^^materia
perpetuae laetitiae: Orta Sparsa; justi multa patiuntur, antequam laetitia
fruantur.
that light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Ps.
97.11. The Interval of time may be considerable between the sowing and the
reaping. But act you faith on the Promises, acquiesce in and submit to the Will
and Wisdom of the Lord; for unto the Upright (and they are the persons I am now
addressing this discourse to) I say, unto the upright there arises light in
darkness; i.e. comfort in troubles; remember that the Spirit of the Lord is not
straightened. Concerning him take three notions along with you: He is

1. A free Agent; as the wind blows when and where it lifts, so the Spirit
works, witnesses, seals and assures when and whom himself pleases. 2. A
wise Agent; and therefore will act most seasonably and opportunely, when it
will most conduce to his own honor and your comfort. 3. A strong and mighty
Agent; when he begins it is not sin, nor Satan, nor the World shall let him:
Therefore though now you mourn, yet you may not murmur; Groan you may, but must
not grumble, be it never so little life and light, and power and peace you have
arrived at. I say to you as did Elibis to Job, chapter 34.32. should it be
according to your mind? is it fit you have just what you will, and when you
will; if you will be your own carvers, take heed of cutting your own fingers.
Withdraw not from this Ordinance; but (as before) wait with patience and work
with diligence; for the Spirit of the Lord is not straightened; this is a reviving
Cordial in this case.
Antisthenes an Heathen Philosopher desired nothing of the Heathen gods so much
as the Spirit of Socrates. You have a more glorious Spirit, this Spirit of the
Lord, who will in due time make you more fruitful and cheerful; and give you
more increase of grace, more settled peace of Conscience; yea an absolute
mastery and victory over all your spiritual enemies. Once more, and I dismiss
you.

10ly. This speaks comfort to you who persevere in prayer; the seed of Jacob,
not in name only (as were these in the Text) but in deed and truth.

To hold on in Duty is not the practice of the most, Job 27.10
but of the best; it is no easy work which is both above nature and against it:
This affords comfort to you; it is like the rod of myrtle in the travelers
hand, Pliny.
which makes him fresh and lively, and keeps him from being weary; O nourish no
jealous thoughts of God; if you distrust him, you will desert him.

Remember for your encouragement and comfort, that the good Spirit of the Lord
is in full power, and at liberty still to give a blessing by, as at the first
to give a being to his holy Institutions. To which ever-blessed Spirit,
together with the Father and the Son, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, World
without end..

FINIS.

