FAmes windy trump blew up this haughty mind
To do or wish, to do what here you find:
'Twas were held error yet in errant Knights
(Which privilege he claims) to dress their fights
In high hyperbolies: for youths example
To make their minds as they grow men, grow ample.
Thus such achievements are assaid and done
As pass the common power and sense of man.
Then let high spirits strive to imitate,
Not what he did, but what he does relate.
The LEGEND of CAPTAIN JONES: the first and 2d part.


Printed for R. Marriott and are sold at his shop under ye Kings head Tavern
in Fleet street near Chancery Lane en^


THE LEGEND OF Captain JONES.

RELATING His adventure to Sea: His first landing, and strange combat with a
mighty Bear.

His furious battle with his six and thirty men, against the Army of eleven
Kings, with their overthrow and deaths.

His relieving of Kemper Castle.

His strange and admirable Sea Fight with six huge Galleys of Spain, and nine
thousand Soldiers.

His taking Prisoner, and hard usage.

Lastly, His setting at liberty by the Kings command, and return for England.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Dunstans Church yard Fleet Street, 1656.

To the READER.
REader, you have here the Mirror of the times,
Old Jones wrapped in his colors, and my rimes.
Receive him fairly (pray;) nor censure how,
Or what he tells: the matter he will avow.
And for the form he speaks in, I Will maintain it,
It comes as near his vain as I could strain it.
For 'twere improper to set forth an Ass
Capparison'd, and pannell a great horse.
My part claims no inventions praise: for (know it)
Where ere there is fiction in it, there he is the Poet.
His last deeds here epitomized, entreat
Some thundering pen to set them forth complete.
Let him whose lofty Muse will deigne to do it,
Drink Sack and Gunpowder, and so fall to it.
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...)
(...).
(...):
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...):
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
P. E.

After Captain Jones his great Conquest in the Indies, these Verses were
engraven on a Pillar of Gold, in the famous City of Chiapa.
HAvacun! atsiquinta, rucar, ruchaquit, a holom,
Rutsi uutsiquin Jonos, quintacque Britanno;
In rutisba Dios, chiru narapata tiquita,
Xalocohta naloc quinquimi, nava tinuloc,
Chaquil Ruchaquil, Don Spanos, Cacaracarta
Inra Ixnulocosh Europon quincol amoloh,
Chinaloconta nucam quiti Chicata Chiapa,
Mecoacana mani quinraphi tilcona rutat,
Inrurapa cochor vilcat Cacunta, Chalocoh
Havocohta ruvac, Rixim car nucar avixim;
Ixlocon-hita quimac, avix inreca corochi,
Pan Nutsi nuchac, quinrochi nutisba China;
Chipam Rumoloh^mac, numac taxa veronquil
Chyrvo capat quiro vinac navecata maniquir,
Chilocontho Navos nutacqui Coave-caca,
Quinvani vilquin Xinvi nucamca tivito.
By the assistance of Mr. Gage his rules to learn that Indian Tongue called
Poconchi, thus faithfully and verbatim translated into English.
HO Passenger! Behold, read, understand,
Great Jones a Britain conquered all this Land;
In thirteen days twelve Kings he overthrew,
And millions of Salvages he slew:
At last the Spanish Dons with all their force
Of Indian foot, and Europaean Horse
Surpised him near Chiap^, where he stood
Five hours in fight covered with fire and blood;
And in that furious conflict, all his men
Who were once thirty six reduced to ten,
With those few blades, and his own mighty Arm,
He did repulse them without spell or charm:
Then to his Ship retreated; and to show
'Twas Glory and not Gold he did pursue,
Of all the spoils he took but one rich Cup,
And as much Gold as made this Pillar up.
This Monument stood Undefac'd 1588. But Immediately after was demolisht by the
Envy of the Spaniards, and the Gold converted to other uses.

E. LL.

On the REVIVALL of Captain JONES.
WHy shak'st thou Coward Hand, do drop the Pen
Honored to limne the Prodigy of Men?
What means this strange Surprizall that unknitts
Thy joints, possessing them with Palzied Fits?
Who dares (dread Hero) offer to thy Fame,
(Without Apollo's Call) must feel the same.
Moved by pure zeal to Honor, thus I run
A young Enthusiast the Priests among,
Trembling to pay my Mite. Welcome once more
To us, Great Britains Mars; our joys run ore
To see the truth of a Platonique year
Confirmed in thee; so bright do thou appear
Decked with thy valors Rays: Poets (who can
Make Gods) have raised thee up thou God-like Man.
What brave Revenge had they had on thy old Foe,
Had thou but breathed our Air some months ago?
Thou, and thy six and thirty set on shore
In Hispaniola, would have acted more
Than was (I blushing write it) done by --
And -- with their ten thousand men.
I acquiesce, and leave to higher Forms
Thy stern deportment in all Fights and storms,
Who draw at large, and well; my single Hint
Is a Pertentous Act in a small Print.
Reward those who again have made thee breath,
With Laurel taken from thy victorious wreath;
I have enough t'entitle me to Fame,
Who both a Britain, am, and of thy Name.
H. I.

A Supplement to the famous History of the truly valiant and Magnanimous
Captain Jones.
Look to your selves. I see his marble frown,
His threatening ashes challenge their renown,
Expostulating thus. Durst your narration
Omit those noble acts of admiration,
Which I performed, when Aeolus denied
Me his assistance'gainst the struggling tide?
Never was Martial man affronted worse,
Tyrone had bribed him to retort my course.
Some wished me send to Lapland for a wind,
Nay that I scorned, I had enough behind;
Turning my posterne, I sent forth a blast
That tore the sails, and cracked the Sturdy mast,
Hurrying my friggot with such force, that it
Ran on a shelve, and so was like to Split.
'Gramercy policy, this I foresaw,
For such mischances I had help at Maw;
I Would drank an Ocean up of English Beer
Which (wanting water) I made use of here;
I turned my Conduit pipe ote deck and Spouted,
And filled the shore, so that Saint Patricke shouted,
And cried, my friends this, is no time for mirth,
Oh hone! a deluge comes to drown the earth!
Obstructions being removed in this sort,
At length I landed in an Irish port,
And thought it wisdom, before they came to treat,
To stay my stomach with a bit of meat.
Seeing a cook hang up a stall-fed ox,
I bade him roaste him quickly with a pox;
Twa's quickly done: as soon as off the Spit
My Valiant grinders Snapt it at a bitt,
Sooner than one could turn his hand about,
As when a Pickrell swallows up a Trout.
The Cook's amazed: what quoth I, thou thief,
I do not eat but barrel up my beef;
I can lay up a whole one and a half,
The ox that Milo Carried was a calfe:
Sirrah make haste, get me some more meat dressed
To fortify the castle of my breast.
I mean to feed as Dromedaries do,
Both for the present and the future too.
Thus terrified, my foes ran to the bogs,
And there were Metamorphos'd into frogs;
I speedily destroyed that croaking faction,
Then could no longer live for want of action.
Death natures beadle took me by the hand,
And said, Grand Captain I thee now disband,
Abstract of valor, let thy name be blessed,
Lie down within this tomb, and take thy rest.
R. LL.

On Valiant Jones.
COme see the Man, whom Mountains bred,
Who talked high, as he was fed.
No Court like Milk sap trained tot'h fidle,
But yeand in the Region called the middle.
There Captain Jones his cradle chooses,
More dangerous then that of Moses;
For that was watched by Pharaos daughter,
The Deabe a Nurse did him look after,
Or he for them: Come Wolf, or goat
Who took the Nibb, and filled his throat
Thence was allied to Brute; near Cuz
By the nurses side to Romulus:
And for his nimblenesse and skipping,
Remus (himself) could nere out leap him;
This, and the warbles of his throat
Came from the Rennet of the goat
Curdling his gutturalls: His haire's
All flaggy too, and rank as theirs.
Which was resented, as was Mars
Or Hercules for his black A --
These were strange signs, and did betoken
What ere was after by him spoken.
'Twas well the wars were done before
Lost in Lluellin and Glendore.
Had Jones lived then, in vain the Assales
Of Saxons; Wales had still bin Wales.
Nay had the fates (but they denied,
For Jones had neither barn nor bride)
Saved but his Praepuce in Skincks fight,
That spoyld his skirmishes by night.
No doubt an Issue, not of's legs
But of his Loins, for he loved eggs
Extremely to the very bowels,
Would have out Vavasord the Powells:
Content us therefore with those duells
Which no man did, or very few else,
Related from his mouth: This Brit;
As Caesar did, could he have writ,
What Comments had he made? what storys
Of Irish wolves which now are Torys?
This Frontispice alas! nay twenty.
As big as this had bin too scantie
The Elephant and's Pego-man
And Hobb's on his Leviathan,
Nay what so ere old Inigo
(His namesake) could have drawn for show
Had been too small a Seen: why then
No more, it shrivells up my Pen.
On the Legend of Captain Jones.
REader, be stout and credulous, for he
Must have both Courage and credulity
That reads this Poem; and to have enough,
His soul should be half Cheverell and half Buffe:
For Jones such things does talk, and such things do
As far transcend all Faith and Reason too.
That ancient Poets that in former times,
Extolled their Heroes with undying Rythimes;
Must go to school to learn of Jones, for he
At once both made and writ all Chivalrie.
There Homer and Achilles both must clubb
To make one story, this must fight, that dubb.
Which asks Time, Charge and danger; whilst bold Jones
Does without either, raise, and kill at once;
Tam Marti quam Mercurio, if he list,
He could dispute, as well as fight with fist.
With on Cuff-syllogisme confute more men
Then Wit or Reason could convince with ten.
Among all the Giants whom he robbd of breath,
He has three signal Battles fought with Death,
While Fame, that still hates living men, gave out,
That Jones was conquered; and to clear the doubt,
Employed the Wits with a lamenting pen
In Epitaphs to kill him over again.
At which enraged he rose, and swore They lie;
Jones is not dead; I swear Jones shall not dye.
A. B.

Upon Captain Jones Relating his own Exploits.
Lo here great Captain Jones! in whom do dwell
Both Mars and Mercury, Gods stout and fell;
Thou, thine own Trump, do with a valiant voice
Both beat thy Foes, and thy great Conquests noise;
Thus thy Minerva lends thee speech and shield,
Wherewith thou all things make unto thee yield;
Ajax, U^sses, both in Thee agree,
Thy valor and thy Tongue alike are free;
Great Alexander's Envy would have ceast,
Nor would Achilles fate have Spoiled his rest,
Had but Jones Poetry inspired his Soul,
To whom, the blind man Homer's but a fool;
Homer could only his borrowed phansy write,
Jones could do more, both strangely saine and fight;
Caesar of all the Worthy's most like Thee,
He did both fight and tell's own History,
Which yet compared with thy Relation
Seems but an old threadbare narration;
So between both how vast's the Difference,
Jones does all Caesar's baffle, and all Sense.
I. U. (...)

On the same.
AWay with Fictions, short of our stout man,
The Poet must now turn Historian;
His fights, his fights, his fights, his victories
His conquests, his trophyes, and yet no lies!
What Wars were they when all each battle fell
But Jones, and he survived, his services to tell?
When he relates the story, an Enemy
Truth fears to be, lest in contending she
Too late learn due subjection; thus the tide
Forces the waters that would gently slide:
When our great Jones, had quite subdued the land
He boldly puts to Sea; but here is a stand,
The Sea of such an adversary proud
To try'm, its waves into a storm does crowd.
Jones leaves his ship, he scorned such a flood,
For he had often swam in streams of blood;
He then such Tempests raised with arms and back,
That the very Ocean did fear a wrack.
^et he would dye, that the shades might of him fear,
And learn by Mortals woe, great Jones to fear.
N. H.

Upon the incomparably valiant, Captain JONES.
WHen I do read thy Legend, Jones, and see
Thy Fights, thy Victories, thy All, and Thee,
I stand engaged 'twixt Wonder and Delight,
That I can neither think, nor speak, nor write.
My Faith thou puzzl'st, and Invention too,
It Is monstrous strange! but these things thou di'st do,
Alcides, Hector, are outdone by Thee,
Thy History has foiled all Poetry.
Poor Hector! he by his own Valor's lost,
But Thou surviv'st, and do thy Triumphs boast.
Herc'les, we know, has his Non ultra found,
But to Thee, Jones, nor Earth, nor Sea's a Bound;
The World from East to West, from North to South,
To echo forth thy Fame's but one wide Mouth.
The Earth, Great Jones, grows fruitful in thy praise,
And all her care's to crown thy head with Bays.
The Sea pays Homage to thee, and roars out
Brave Jones's name, who is greater far then Cnute.
Neptune to Thee his Trident does resign,
The Whales cry out with trembling, We are thine;
And proud of thy Command, they swell the Maine,
For thy great sake thronging into a Train;
^hen Spain does yield to thy fierce heat; thy might
^ostrates their doughty Don, Diego hight;
^hy arms so tossed that vap'ring Admiral,
^s if ha'd naught been but a Tennis-ball.
Thou did Bears, Lions, and such Monsters quell;
^y thy strong hand the sturdy El'phant fell.
^e the bright Sun peeped from his Eastern bed,
^even Kings before thy feet, brave Jones, lay dead.
That work would thou have made in one whole day,
Had thou but found for thy Killzadog play?
^ow such exploits, so strange, thou could atchieve,
^one ever yet could tell Brave Jones, and live.
^ore Mortals we! the Fates have thought it fit
^e should in wonder spend our days and wit.
P. D. Ox.

HAve you not heard of Jones that man of wonder
That brought Don Dego and Mac- kill Con under
And when he had um there agreed being wise,
To run away before that they should rise?
For'tis a Maxim; If youl'd be secure,
Still make the Relics of a Conquest sure:
Jones still killed those that fled, and only those;
For such tuffe Fellows as withstood his blows
He scorned and spared; thinking it base to beat
A stubborn Enemy that will not retreat.
Amongst all those Blustering sirs that I have read
(Whose greatest wonder is that they are dead)
There Is not any Knights, nor bold Atchivers Name,
So much as Jones's in the Book of Fame:
They much of Greeces Alexander bragg,
He Would put ten Alexanders in a Bag:
Eleven fierce Kings, backed with two thousand Louts,
Jones with a Ragged Troop beats all to Clouts.
But sure it was a Conquest by Compact,
For he could never be accused of fact:
And yet no story a Romancer sings,
That ere exploited more stupendous things;
Quixot a winged Giant once did kill,
That Is but a flying tale, beleiv't who will:
This were but petty hardship, Jones was one
Would Skin a Flint, and eat him when he had done.
Had Jones but bin a live and seen the pudder
Betwixt Briganza's Legate and Anstrudder;
When the fierce Portugal in high Bravado,
(Storming The Exchange with Pistols and Granado)
Put the poor Pego mongers to a Rout,
And their beloved Bables flung about:
He Would not have fawned upon like a Spaniell,
Jones would have kicked the Dog into the Kennell;
And spite of Darkness made his head ring Noone,
For daring to pluck Honor from the Moon:
He Had dyed no other Death, for furious Jones
Once fleshed, would kill ten such and make no bonos:
He once had an Encounter with a Lion,
(Though most believe he never durst come nigh one)
But as the Author says and I believe,
Both bravely fought and many wounds did give
Each other, 'till the Beast in wof^li dumps
Worn out, (for Jones had fought him to his stumps)
In honor of his Fall and Jones's Glory,
Died with mere Age, and there is an end oth'story.
Many a tough adventure he has had,
And like a true Knight Errand, never a bad:
He foiled great Asdriasdust in the twinck*
Ling of an eye, as easy as to drink:
And yet as tough, and dry a sir, as ere was y knight
Unto a sword (Jones often wished him chok't)
But yet of all the Giants that came nigh him
There Is Nerapenny stuck the longer by him;
For though his slender wounds made many doub: him,
That threadbare Tearcoates he had still about him;
And if they say he had not, he is bell* ed
For he had never a penny when he died.
Jones had a valiant stomach, and would eat
As well as fight, provided he had meat,
Else patience upon force took place, for Jones
Kept many fasting days, and made no bones.
But I Would not have you think it was for want;
For when he had no Money, nor Provant,
The Foul flew to his Table, and the Fish
Left the cold stream, and swam into his dish.
It Is an old Proverb, (Like to like they say)
Jones was a Cods-head too as well as they.
But Jones, like a Disease, both Sexes smites;
For he wounds Ladies too as well as Knights:
He was so trim a youth the Queen of No-land,
Thought him some Princely Shaver come from Poland;
And so he proved indeed, for by Guds duds
He most unkindly left her in the Sudds;
Jones like a Wiseacres begged to be spared,
For he had No-Land, nor for No-land cared:
If any ask you wherein lay his Grace?
Venus loved Mars his Truncheon not his face.
To wind up all, Fame's Trump his Deeds does tell,
Although a sow-gelders would do it as well.
W. T.

THE LEGEND OF Captain JONES.
ISing thy Arms (Bellona,) and the Man's
Whose mighty deeds out-did great Tamberlans:
Thy Trump (dire goddess) send, that I may thunder The Invocation.

Some wondrous strain, to speak this man of wonder.
When Fates decreed that Captain Jones should be
The life and death of men, they could not see
A place more suiting to bring forth this mirror
Of martial spirits, this thunder crack of terror,
Then some vast mountains womb, whose rigid rocks His birth place.

Might form him, and foreshew the hardy knocks
Which he should give and take: Nor were they nice
To think it base, that mountains bring forth mice,
Since from a British mount and Mars his stones,
They sent this Man of men, stern Captain Jones.
Wild Mares milk nursed him on the mountains gorse,
Which gave him strength and stomach like a horse;
Goats flesh matur'd him, killed on craggy tops,
Which taught him to mount Rampires like those rocks.
Ere eighteen winters fully waxen were,
This imp of Mars began to do and dare.
With Reymond a stout brother of the sword
He first attempted Sea, and went abroad,
Two hundred strong, for the East Indies bound,
Fame was the only prize he sought or found.
Twice twenty days auspicious waves and winds
Lulled them: then Aeolus and Neptune joins
To work Great Jones his fall. Envy and ire
To see him more then Man, made them conspire:
Rough Boreas whistled to the dancing ship,
The boisterous billows strove to over-skip
The bounding vessel. In this great disaster
Reymond, the soldiers, Mariners and Master His stout behavior in a storm at
sea.

Lost heart and heed to rule; then up starts Jones,
Calls for six Gispins, drinks them off at once.
Thus armed at all points, yet as light as feather,
He ascends, and drew, and pist against the weather;
And are we borne (my hearts, quoth he) to die?
Shall we descend? Thy immortality
Neptune thou must resign, if I come thither:
One Sea may not contaie us both together.
Nor waves nor winds could fright him with the motion
Who thought he could contain and piss an Ocean.
His fatal Smiter thrice aloft he shakes,
And frowns; the Sea and ship and canvasse quakes:
Then from the hatches he descends, and stepped
Into his Cabin, drank again, and stepped.
When these rough gods beheld him thus secure,
And armed against them like a man pot-sure,
They stint vain storms; and so Monstrifera The name of his ship.

(So hight the Ship) touched about Florida,
Upon a desert Island called Crotona,
Where savage beasts and serpents live alone:
Here Jones would needs no land, though Reymond swore
Danger was in it: he laughed and leapt a shore His landing.

Danger (quoth he) to the^ who^ danger fright,
My heart was framed to dare, my hands to fight.
Some six and thirty more put forth to ground,
These for fresh food, he for adventure bound;
They limit their return when three hours ends,
Which Reymond with the ship at Sea attends.
These Sea sick soldiers, rang hills, woods, and valleys.
Seeking provant to fill their empty bellies;
Jones goes alone, where Fate prepared to meet him
With such a prey as did unfriendly greet him;
His encounter with a Bear.
A Bear as black as darkness, and as fell
As Tiger, vast as the black dog of hell,
Runs at him open jaw'd, so fierce, so fast,
That he no leisure had to draw for have
The name of his sword.
Kilza dog his good sword; with fist he aimed,
Al armed, a blow, which sure the bear had brained,
But that between her yawning teeth it dings,
The gauntlet there stuck fast, his hands he wrings
Unarmed, unharm'd from thence; her foremost paws
The Bear on Jones his shoulder claps, and gnawes
The gauntlet wedged between her teeth: Jones claspt her
With both his arms, and strove by force to cast her.
And here they try a pluck, and grasp, and tug,
And foame; but Jones who knew the Cornish hug,
Heaves her a foot from footing, swings her round,
And with a short turn hurles her on the ground;
Then came his good sword forth to act his part,
Which pierced skin, ribs, and riffe, and rove her heart.
The head (his trophee) from the trunk he cuts,
And with it back unto the shore he struts,
Where Reymond was appointed to attend
His and the rests return: but he (false friend)
When they were once on shore and out of sight,
Hoist sails to sea, and took himself to flight.
Here Jones found fraud in man, and deeply swears
Revenge on Reymonds head, the rest he cheares;
All safe returned, but all in desperation He joins himself to the 36.
soldiers.

To see themselves left there to desolation:
Nor grain nor ground, but wild; nor man, nor beast,
But savage; yet (O strange) here Jones does feast
His six and thirty daily, 'twas with fishes
Tossed from his halberts point into their dishes; His taking of fish with his
halberts point.

Wherewith he took them standing on the shore
Out of the Ocean: whether 'twas the store
Frequenting this unpeopled coast, or whether
To see this wondrous man they shoald together
And so astonished, yield themselves a prey
To him from whom they durst not swim away.
Be It so, or so, I Will not decide, but I
Know Jones tells this for truth, who knows no lie.
Thus from his weapons point, nine months they fed
Till fate Sir Richard Greenfield thither led,
Who to America transports with Jones
His six and thirty fish-fed Mermydons,
To Insip were they brought and left; oh then
'Twas time, had they had meat, to play the men.
Their first encounter there with famine was,
A dry and desert soil, nor grain nor grass,
Nor drink, but water had they here, nor bread Captain Jones encounters with
the great Giant Asdriasdust.

For thrice twelve months, but caves for house and bed.
Such living as that Country could afford
Bold Jones was forced to win by dint of sword
Eleven fierce Kings possess the fertile tract
Of this great Coast, who all their powers compact
To vanquish Jones: A brave attempt it is true,
Yet more then twice eleven fierce Kings could do.
Two thousand choice and doughty men they chose,
To bid him battle, armed with darts and bows,
And arrows fadome long, well barb'd with bone
Of some strange fish, which pierced through steel and stone
And thus they came prepared. When they drew near him,
He brought his soldiers forth, and thus did cheer them;
My five and twenty friends (for only those His cration to his 25. soldiers
before their fight with the 2000. sent against him by the 11 American Kings.

Had fate and famine left) these darts and bows
Are fit to deal with fearful Crows and Daws,
But us whose hearts of oak and empty maws,
Hungers sharp dart has pierced (and yet we stand
To fright and foil our foes with sword in hand)
These weapons cannot conquer, nor the number
were they two thousand such as John a Cu^ber.
Does hunger bite you? bite your foes as fast,
Eat these men-eaters (soldiers) kill and taste.
Would you gain glory? Kill by six and seven,
If Crowns of Kings, then here behold eleven.
And this he spoke and drew. With stomach fierce
They give the first assault, Now for a verse
To speak great Jones his deeds, who headlong goes
Amongst the thickest ranks, cuts, kills, and throws, His courage in fight.

Some by the legs, some by the wast he makes
Shorter; another by the lock he takes,
Reaps off his head, wherewith he brains another,
Then at one stroke kills father, son, and brother;
Few escaped with life, but strangely; happy those
Which escaped with loss of half a face or nose.
Nor may I pass his men, who cut and slash
Like those that fought for life, not Crowns or Cash.
Want made them seem (which sure their foes dismayed)
The very sons of death, whose parts they played;
The Insips now no aim can take aright,
They think each foe they meet, a mighty Sprite;
And so they fly. Six Kings he took, and killed,
Five, with eight hundred soldiers left the field; 5. Kings and 120^ soldiers
slain.

Twelve hundred fell: for those that went off safe
Their heels and not their hearts the praise he gave.
Unto their fullest towns, when he had killed them,
He brought his ragged regiment and filled them.
Here on the river of Mengog they find
A Wear with fish of wondrous growth and kind,
Where with a thousand herrings they were sed, Strange herrings.

All two foot long besides the tail and head.
Here some may ask what came of all the wealth,
(For Jones brought nothing home besides himself)
This conquest gained; sure many precious things
Must needs attend the death of six such Kings. What became of the rich prizes.

I answer briefly; His heroic desire
Ascends above earth excrements as fire:
Nor can descend to Crowns. The soldiers found
Much wealth, which in their home-return was drowned
Still fortune favors Jones. Amidst this river
He spies a sail directly bearing thither;
He calls, and finds them English, homeward bound,
Who for fresh water thrust into the sound.
With these his men and he for England comes,
Had England known it, all her guns and drums He and his men come for England.

Had been too little to express her joy,
As when victorious Hector entered Troy;
Yet ere he can attain his native coast,
Aeneas like he must be tired and tossed
With storms, till meat and water waxed so scant,
That Jones drank naught but piss one week for want.
At last when they had cast out all their goods,
(To save themselves) into the furious floods,
The ship all bruised with sands, and storms, and stones
At Ipswich does disburthen the sea of Jones.
England salutes him with the general joys
Of Court and Country, Knights, Squires, fools, and boys
In every town rejoice at his arrival,
The townsmen where he comes their wives do swive all
And bid them think on Jones amidst this glee,
In hope to get such roaring boys as he:
Others this joy, into a fury rapt
To sing his praise, though elegant and apt;
Yet mixed with fixions, which he scorns. It Is known
Jones fancies no additions but his own;
Nor need we stir our brains for glorious stuff
To paint his praise, himself has done enough,
And has prescribed that I should write no more
Then his good memory has kept in store
Of what he did. Perhaps he has or can
Do more, but hides it like a modest man.
His British expedition makes me hie
From his vagary to his Chivalry.
This Dukedomes confines pointing on the South,
Great Ke^per Castle guards on Morligs mouth; His raising of the ^^^ege of
Kemper Castle.

Which key of Britain (like great Britains Dover)
Was well nigh lost by siege til Jones went over,
To dye or raise it; 'Twas begirt by land
With fifteen thousand. Four tall ships withstand
All succors from the sea: Against this force
He goes as boldly as an eyelesse horse,
With one small Bark (the Shit-fire 'twas) a hot one,
And save a hundred men was with him not one:
But these were Welsh blades, born for hacks and hewing,
And cared not what they did so they were doing.
Thus like some tempests these four ships he frightens,
His guns roar thunder whilst his powder lightens,
And from his broad side poures a shower of hail,
Which rakes them through and through, ribs, masts, and sail.
Their shot replies, but they were rankt too high
To touch the Pinnace, which bears up so nigh
And plays so hot, that her opponents think
Some Devil is grand Captain of the Pinke.
One English Pirat with them, whilst he watches
His time to shoot, spies Jones upon the hatches
And cries out, Ho, hoise Canvas all at once,
And fly, or yield; Zounds it is Captain Jones:
The man swore reason, and 'twas quickly heard,
For, not a Bullet like that name was feared;
They fly, he follows, but a partial wind
And wings of fear saved them, left him behind.
To Kemper he returns him, and supplies it
With fifty men, and victuals to suffice it
Six months: The foes by land lose hope and heart
To oppose this new supply, and so depart:
Then on the Gate this title was ingraved,
Jones rescued Kemper, and the Dukedom saved.
Thus plumed with Laurel, Jones for England came,
Where George of Cumberland, rapt with his fame,
Wooes him to be Vicegenerall of his fleet; He is made Vice Genesis under G. of
Cu^berland and fought against the Spanish Fleet.

Which Jones vouchsaft, because he was to meet
Men like himself, the doughty Dons of Spain,
Whose honor (or lose all) he vowed to gain.
And better fate in this design he wished not,
The^ to cope single with their great Don Quixot.
Stay Muse and blush, and sigh and sing no more,
Here Jones his Mistress Fortune played the whore.
Yet, whilst thou loathed her lightness to rehearse,
Let indignation make thee chide in verse;
Ah deity! and blindly to go on so
From thy dear minion Jones, to John D' Alonso,
Whose out and inside is no better mettle
Then an old Drum, or a base Tinkers Kettle.
And take thou him for Jones? that glorious boy,
Whom Venus self would kiss (were Mars away.)
Well fickle goddess, if thou be divine,
I Will swear, heaven has like earth, light feminine.
It Was thus, This fleet cut through the Western maine,
And so lay hovering on the coast of Spain:
Jones led the front (as it was his custom still)
The first in fight, last to be killed or kill:
His ship went swiftest too, as did his mind
On honors wings: But (oh) an envious wind
Filled all his sail, and wrapped him in a mist
From being seen, or seeing, ere he wist.
And thus he lost his train, and cast about,
And beat these Seas five days to find them out,
Till in his quest it was his fate to meet
Don John D. Alonso with the Spanish fleet.
This General bid amain, and Jones defied
From Canons mouth. The Don again replied
With four for one. Ah Jones, had I my wish,
Some Godhead should have turned thee to a fish,
To escape this dire assault; thou should not then
Be taken like a tame beast in thy den.
Nine thousand soldiers was the force that fought
This day with Jones, whom six huge galleys brought,
The stoutest boats to make a bold Bravado
That were in Spaines invincible Armado:
Jones first commands his men to take their victual,
He souldier-like drank much, and prayed a little;
Then tells them briefly, here is no place to fly,
Come friends, let us bravely live or bravely die.
By this the gallyes had enclosed him round,
And sought to board him; but they quickly found
The ship too hot to grapple with sosoon,
And so bore off again, and paid her room.
Then each by turn present her the broad side,
Which she repaid with intrest, and so plied,
That where her bullets pierce, whole streams of blood
Spout through the gallyes ribs, and dye the flood;
The foes disdain thus long to stand in fight
Against one, and so press on with all their might,
And now the storm grew hot, and deep in blood,
"Mad rage had got the place where reason stood:
Guns, drums, and trumpets stop the soldiers cares,
From hearing cries and groans; and fury reares
This fatal combat to so strange a height,
Th^^ higher powers express the effects of fright.
Great Neptune quakt and roared, clouds ran and pi^
The winds fell down, and Titan lurkt in mist.
Then belch huge bullets forth, smoke, fire, and thunder
Their fury strikes the gods with fear and wonder.
One gally which two hundred slaves did row,
Affront the ship in hope to buldge her prow.
Jones gave her leave; but when she once came nigh,
One burst his murdering shot; here doomed to dye
Down dropped the brave Viceroy of Saint Iago,
Don Diego de Cordona and Gonzago.
Stones, chains, and bullets tare their passage out
Through men and galley, which soon tackt about
In hope to get aloof; but Jones sent after
Two lucky shots, which light twixt wind and water.
"In crept the quaking billow, where he spide
"Those holes, in hope its fearful head to hide;
"The galley like afeard, worse hurt, does creep
"Into the trembling bowels of the deep;
"And so she sanke. Thus Diego whilst he tried
His force with Jones, with fifteen hundred died.
Now Jones all breathless sat to take his breath
Upon a But of sack, and drank the death
Of Don John de Alonso, which his men
Pledge in a rowse, and so they fight again.
Ninescore there were, but threescore now remain
To do or suffer, for the rest were slain.
The Spanish force distract twixt hope and fear,
Yet by their fellows fall forewarnd, forbear
This hot assault, keep distance, and at Jones
Let fly their shot at random all at once,
Some half a Cable short and some flew ore
The top sail, some the stern and rudder tore:
One, all the rest in fatal fury past,
And all to shivers rove the master mast,
Down fell the tackle, and the vessel lay
An English prison and a Spanish prey.
Starboard and Larboard side, from poope to prow
They all let drive and raked her through and through.
All now but Jones and one man more were killed,
Who cried, Now fight and die or live and yield.
Jones killed the first, the latter he besought him
Upon his knees, whilst by the knees he caught him
Begging for life, a bullet took away
His head, which when 'twas off still seemed to pray;
Out flew the head and bullet both at once
Between the manly thighs of Captain Jones;
Who looked behind him, art thou gone (quoth he)
Still may they die so, that cry yield to me.
Now naught to him but blood and death appeared,
Death was his wish, captivity he feared;
Which to prevent This sword he won from the great and fearful G(...)
Nereapeny.
Kil-za-dog forth he drew,
And thus he spoke, Brave Cato, Cato slew.
And when victorious Brutus could not stand,
He fell, but by his own victorious hand.
Brutus, I am a Brute, and have thy spirit,
Thy fortune and selfe-death I will inherit.
Thus said, his sword unto his side he plyes,
Which his good Genius stays and thus replies; His g(...) de(...) him from
selfmurder.

Hold Jones, reserved for the Countries good,
Born to shed hostil, not thy homebred blood,
And know that self death is the Cowards curse,
For, he that dies so, dies for fear of worse;
The time will come when Irish bogs shall quake
Under thy feet, whilst great Oneale does shake.
I may not on thy future deeds dilate,
Thy sword must right what is involved in fate;
This know, in thy old age thou shall impart
Unto thy Countries youth thy martial art,
Teach them to manage arms, and how they must
Make bright their swords, which peace has wrapped it rust
Now Jones vouchsafed to live, not for himself
But for his Countries good and Common wealth,
His scarlet cap he dons, with crimson plume,
And he ascends the hatches all in sum.
The Musketeers ambitiously desire
To his this mark, and all at once give fire:
Some Bullets raze his plume, his hair, his nose,
His velvet Jerkin, and his satin hose,
(The scars may yet be seen) yet draws he breath
Fearelesse and harmless in the jaws of death.
The Spaniard now conjectured his intent,
By seeking death to avoid imprisonment,
And so forbore to shoot, drew near and sought
To take the prey, which they so dear had bought.
Then Jones all raging throws into the maine
That sword which men and wolves and bears had slain,
That sword which erst had drunk the blood of King;
Into the bowels of the deep he dings.
The Ocean thirld for fear, and gave it place,
And greedy Neptune snatched it for his mace.
Then from the ship he leaps amongst his foes,
And so undaunted to Don John he goes,
Who bid him Live, Don-like, but gave him breath,
Only to breath in greater pains then death.
This shock had sent to Styx six thousand men,
Whose souls Don John to satisfy again How be was used being taken captive.

Inflicts more servile punishments on Jones,
Then countervails six thousand deaths at once.
He beds on boards, is fed with bits and knocks
Ape-like, barefoot with neither shoos nor socks.
Hair shirt, blew bonnet, made a servile knave,
A lousy, dusty, nasty galley slave.
At last he brings Jones to the Spanish King,
And says: Great Monarch, see this precious thing;
Six thousand of your bravest men he cost, He is presented to the Spanish King:

Who to gain him alive, their lives have lost,
Nor think the bargain dear, for here is a man
Can do and say more then your Viceroyes can.
This praise was given him by the crafty Don,
For fear his loss seemed more then what he won;
And so it did indeed, for Phillip thought
Jones inside by his outside dearly bought.
To try he asks him, whither bound, and whence
He was, and Jones replies with little sense,
Whether through fear or faining, he affords
To all the King demands, not three wise words.
To try him further, in a Jaile they cast him, He is cast in prison.

Which served for nothing but to stink and fast in.
And here it was his destiny to light
Upon a learned Priest, a Jesuit:
With him falls Jones to work. The sacred word
His weapon was, for he had drowned his sword. He disputed there with a Jesuit
about Purgatory

Their question was of purgatory, where,
And whether it is at all, if so, it is here
(Quoth Jones.) For he half tired with pains would needs
Go straight to heaven: And thus the question breed;
Jones was no Schoolman, yet he bore a brain
Which nere forgot what ere it could contain.
Yet this old Priest so wrests the letters sense,
Equivocates, denies plain consequence,
Starts to and fro, and raises such confusions,
That Jones chief ward was to deny conclusions:
But, do this subtle Schoolman what he can,
Such was the vigor of this martial man,
Though he was no good disputant or Text-man
Nor knew to spell Amen, to serve a Sexton;
Yet truth, with confidence and his strong fist
Does first convince, and then convert the Priest.
Some talk of Garnets straw and Lipsius lasses.
Whose miracles made many Artists asses;
But here is a miracle transcends them all,
An Artist made wise by a Natural.
Now Englands Court rings all of Jones his fetters, Order ^ken in Eng land for
(...) ransom.

And men of rank were soon sent ore with letters,
To ransom him for gold, or man for man,
On any terms. The King with many a Don
Consults upon this point: One thought it fit
To deal upon exchange; some better wit
Thought it more fit to keep this second Drak, The point of his ransom debated
in ^p.

For so he termed him wisely, and thus spoke;
Armies are Englands arm, Captains the hand
Of this strong arm that rules by sea and land:
And of this arm and hand I think in sum,
This captive Captain is the very thumb.
This speech was short and sound, but could not go so
Without th'opposing of old Don Mendozo;
Who loved and favored Jones, but knew not why,
(Nature it seems had wrought some sympathy)
Pardon (quoth he) (dread Sovereign) are we come
To talk of arms and hands and Captain Thumb?
From East to West our Arms and armies reign,
And fear we now for one to re-obtaine
So many Viceroyes in the Isle captived,
For us, of light and almost life deprived;
Were Drake's and Candish spirit in this dragon,
Let not their future times have this to brag on,
That Englands Queen did prize one Captain more
Than Spaines great Monarch did his twenty four.
His speech prevailed, and so they all atone,
And twenty four were asked and given for one;
All which had led great armies to the field,
And never knew but once, what it was to yield.
And thus was Jones dismissed; yet ere he go
The King, to grace him, made him kiss his toe.
Long may thou live old man, and may thy tongue
And memory, as thou grow'st old, wax young:
Then will thou live in spite of time, and be
Times subject, and time thine t'imblazon thee.
Pardon my forward Muse, striving to soar
A pitch with thee at midday tired, gives ore;
For, who can speak thee all (thou mighty man?)
Not Greece's Homer, nor Rome's Mantuan.
Thy Irish wars, thy taking great Tyrone, A touch of some other deeds of
chivalry by him performed.

Whole herds of Wolves killed there by thee alone,
Thy several single duels with fiece men
And Bears, all slain; and that dry journey when
Thou drank'st but what thou pist for thrice seven days,
Which made thee dry ere since; then the amorous ways
The Queen of No-land used to make thee King
Of her and hers (Oh) many a precious thing.
Thy London widow next in love half drowned,
Which thou refus'dst with forty thousand pound:
Thy daunting Essex in his rash bravado,
Raleigh's hard scaping of thy bastinado:
Lastly, thy grace with thy great Queen Eliza,
Who, had thou had the learning to suffice a
Man, but to write and read, had made thee able
To sit in Council at her highness Stable.
These trophies of thy Fame, and myriads more
Kept by thy fertile brain for time in store,
I leave unsung, and wish they may be writ
In golden lines by some more happy wit,
Whose Genius, till some fury does inspire,
Let me sit down in silence, and admire.
THE END.
A copious commendation of a Red Nose.
LEt him that undertook to praise
The French Pox, and so many ways
Did prove that it is now a days
Commodious:
I say, let him a while give place,
For I will prove, a fiery face
Is to the owner no disgrace,
Nor odious.
Who has a fiery face, that man
Is said to have a rich face, an
Rubies about his nose, none can
Deny it.
And all men know as well as I,
That what is rich, most eagerly
We covet, and no cost deny
To buy it.
Some have their clothes sold from their back,
And some their lands, and some will lack
Meat, rather than good sherry Sack
And Claret:
And they swear (and swear truth) that those
Which drink small beer, and wear good clothes
Do offer wrong unto their nose,
And mar it.
If in Romes Senate long-nos'd men
Were chose for wisest, tell me then
Why these should not be praised, when
All men know
A fiery face nere is without
A rich nose: and how far a snowt
That's rich exceeds a long to doubt
Or call men to
Dispute or to capitulate,
This matter's not so intricate
But any may expostulate
And judge it:
And if judge truly he will confess,
Fire-rich, exceeds long wise; I guess.
No man that has true worthiness
Will grutch it.
Besides, the world knows this that we
Affirm those gracious that we see
But blush, and call it modesty.
In people.
A rich face always blushes, so
It does all faces else out go
As far as S. Faiths is below
Paul's steeple.
He that reads this, and does not say,
A fiery face has won the day,
In judgment shows himself a boy,
And heedlesse.
Nor will I spend more words to show
What commendation men do ow
To Captain Jones his face you know
It Is needless.
FINIS.
THE LEGEND OF Captain JONES: CONTINUED From his first part to his end:
WHEREIN IS DELIVERED His incredible adventures and achievements by sea and
land.

Particularly, His miraculous deliverance from a wrack at Sea by the support of
a Dolphin.

His several desperate duels.

His combat with Bahader Cham a giant of the race of Og.

His loves.

His deep employments and happy success in business of State.

All which, and more, is but the tithe of his own relation, which he continued
until he grew speechless, and died.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Dunstans Churchyard Fleet Street 1656.

To the READER.
REader, read on: here you may happ'ly meet
News, pleasing more, than what is cried in your street.
Jones is revived; nere start: the danger's past;
What he has done long since, now makes him last.
His last brave actions never sung before
We offer to your view, nor write we more
Than he made good on oath: then (pray) believe
What here you will find: thus by your faith he will live.
Next, spare your censure on his Poets style;
Had it gone high, his ghost had kept a quoile
To be surmounted: downright were his blows;
Downright his speech; downright to's grave he goes.
Only his fame by your opinion may
Make him still live, though now he is dust or clay.
THE LEGEND OF Captain JONES. Continued from his first Part to his end.
Will nothing please the taste of these rough times
But Rue and Wormwood stuffed in Prose or Rimes?
No Verse to make our Poets Laureate
But smart Iambicks lashing King or State?
Must all turn Mercuries, these times to fit
By poisoning Fame with their quicksilver wit?
That name that is got by some notorious ill,
And merits Gives, is hateful to our quill.
But if the last brave acts of Captain Jones
Which can move mirth and fear, and break no bones,
May be admitted in this ruffling age,
Behold him here re-mounted on our stage.
Yet know we still are tied to our low strein,
We must not once transcend his downright vein.
And if you meet ought savouring of a lie,
(Reader believe't) it is Jones that speaks, not I.
We left him prized on change, too dear 'twas thought,
Twenty four Donns, and all not worth a groat, 24. Spanish commanders given in
ex change for him.

Co^par'd to him, though each had had command
Over great Armies, pressed for sea and land.
Here see him shipped for his dear native coast;
Where ere he comes you will find he will rule the roast
With new found foes, who attempt his force to shake;
But sleeping Lions it is not wise to wake.
Now once more Neptune does his waves enlarge,
Swollen big with pride, that Fate had given him charge
And weighty convoy of this mighty man
To whence he came; but ere the ship had ran
Ten glasses out, comes Boreas with a cloud
As black as ink; the steeres-man cries aloud
Down with the top-saile, keep the sprit-saile tight,
Hail the main bowling. Whilst this mask of light
Ushered with lightning plowes the angry deep
High as her self in ridges, and as steep
As Cair's tall Pyramids: the laboring ship
Like a chafed Bear with Mastives, strives to keep
Her beak aloft; some billows she breaks throw,
Others mount over her at poop and prow.
Jones heard this stir unmoved: from Neptune still
He hoped no good, nor ever feared his ill.
Thus whilst the careful seamen work and pray,
He careless, to his cabin calls his boy,
And makes him read to him the ancient stories
Of our old English Worthies, and their glories;
How our S. George did the fell Dragon gore:
The like achievement of Sir Eglemore:
Topas hard quest after th'elf-queen to Barwick: Sir Topas rhyme in Chaucer.

S. Bevis cow, and Guy's fierce boar of Warwick,
These stories read, exalt his haughty mind
Above the servile fear of sea or wind,
The ships hard state grew now from ill to worse:
Between two hideous seas acrosse her course,
Her whole bulk groans: her beak and main mast break.
Shook with this shock, she springs a dangerous leak:
Which her slye foe soon finds, and to begin
Like a dire dropsy, drenches all within.
Thus whilst a treacherous in-mate fills her womb,
She Is forced to be her own destructions tomb.
And overburthen'd with what bore her before,
She Is downright foundred, and can work no more.
Here might be seen the sad effects of fear
Which several ways in several men appear:
Some cried, some prayed, whilst others swear or rave,
To leave the land to make the sea their grave.
Jones swollen with the brave actions of his Knights,
Big as the sea, ascends and Neptune cites
To single combat: when a boisterous wave
Which Neptune sent to make him Neptunes slave,
Whurles him a cables length to sea, the ship
Sinks with the rest, who give this world the slip.
Well now Sir Jones it is time to show your skill;
You must swim stoutly for it, or drink your fill.
No danger frights thee, thou brave man of merit,
Thy body is boy'd up by thy blow'n spirit.
As a grim Always portending storms when they are seen to play.
sea-calfe still presaging storms
Wallows and wantons in cold Thetis arms:
Just such is Jones: as if he had been bred
With her finn'd fry within her watrie bed.
No ship for help, no land for hope appears;
Horror of billows roaring in his ears.
Nothing supports but confidence alone, as
^f some pressed Whale must take up Jones like Jonas.
At last (alas!) he finds he is no fish,
His spirit'gins to leave his treacherous flesh.
Continual laboring makes his limbs wax stark
And stiff with cold, his optic sense grows dark,
Neptune insults, and brandishing his mace
Makes his rude billows dash him ore the face.
Now see the fate of noble resolution,
When Jones thought nothing but of dissolution,
Man's constant friend a gentle Dolphin glides The Dolphin is always observed
to be a lover of man.

Between his thighs, on whom he mounts and rides
In post with mighty speed, through wind and weather;
So his kind fish holds out he cares not whither;
Like a bold Centaur bravely he curvets
From ridge to ridge; 'twas strange, how fast he sits
In this rough road; but Jones learned from his cradle
To ride without a stirrup or a sadle
When on the mountains tops wild mares he spide,
He sucked them dry, and then straight up and ride.
At last at this high speed he gets the sight
Of land, so near, he is ready to alight,
When his kind fish much grieved to leave the burden
She loved so well, to sea again does turn
With mighty speed, still Jones does her bestride
Believing now he should toth' India's ride.
Feign would he turn her, but he knew not how,
He never knew a bridles want till now:
At last the faithful fish preferring higher
Her riders safety then her own desire,
She turns her course about with happy have,
And so our errant Knight on land she cast.
Some Spanish writers flatly do deny
He suffered wrack, and plainly term't a lie:
They say the ship that led this dangerous dance
Was built by Lewis King Henty's son of France,
And took that name from him, who bears that name The eldest son of the King
of France always styled the Dolphin.

As eldest son, who still is styled the same:
They write Jones got this ground t'augment his glory
And cheat the world with this stupendous story;
But let the reader judge if this be true,
And know pale envy still does worth pursue.
Well now to Jones again, we may conceave
He was not ill apaid to take his leave
Of this rough element: nor did account it
Much worse to go on foot, then ride so mounted.
It Is true, he road this lofty fish in state,
But 'twas too near the boisterous fit of fate,
He feared not Fortune nor her wheel, though fickle,
Yet loath he was to be laid up in pickle;
Or that his manly limbs should be a feast
For sharks, or crabs, or congers to digest.
His next work is to find some habitation,
Though he came safely there, 'twas in mean fashion,
The self-same clothes which when Alonso braved him,
He made him wear, and to the gally slav'd him.
And though this last foul storm had little harmed him,
It seemed to some strange thing to have transformed him
Rigid and rough, long wet and feltred locks, Nebuch^nizzar.

Like Babels King, when turned into an Ox:
For a fresh water soldier none could doubt him,
The seas salt tears ran trickling round about him.
In this cold plight he leaves the beachy strand,
And coasts the maine with many a weary stand.
At last he spies a house, not great, but good:
For here he finds a brother of his brood,
Who had adventured in those ways before,
And raised some fortune by it, and gave it ore.
He quickly finds that Jones had escaped some wrack;
Experience, charity, and pity spoke
On this behalf; the good man bids him in,
And with You Are kindly welcome does begin.
He spak't in Dutch, which gladded Jones, for he
Could speak't as well as The saw in W(...)
Grace dw worth awhee.
Which language a Dutch Pilot well had taught him
When Greenfield to America had brought him.
By this, the Stove's made ready, in goes Jones:
Dryes his wet garments, comforts nerves and bones.
The table's set with homely wholesome cheer,
And to make all complete, strong Lubeck beer.
A Dutch froe was his mate, more fat then fair,
But wondrous free, and there to debonaire.
Which mades Jones ask what Country 'twas that gave
This noble welcome to her humble slave?
He Is answered, it is the Netherlands; the States
Brave seat of war, where many broken pates
Are got and given, and for his wants supply
The good strong town of Flushing stood fast by,
Where Sir John Norrice did command in chief
For England's glory and the States relief.
This tickled Jones with joy; for Horace Vere,
Norrice, and he had been (I know not where)
Comrades in arms, ere Jones did entertain
That cross design with Cumberland for Spain.
But now a bed does well, to take some rest
Where this good host directs his weary guest!
And having slept his fill, he timely rose,
Takes a most thankful leave, and on he goes.
His purpose is to take his passage over
At the next Port he finds: from thence to Dover.
But first at Flushing he resolves to touch,
Where his old friend, the Bulwark of the Dutch,
Brave Norrice holds his troop; Here Jones arrives,
Just as he came from Jaile, except his Gives,
Clad in his slavish robe of Friars gray,
His cap true blew; no company, but they
That will not leave him whilst he has a ragge. Lousy.

Such as possess the Beggar with his bag.
Winds, storms, nor seas, nor ought that could undo him,
Could make them flinch, like friends they stick close to him.
And thus accompanied he does approach
Toth' Generals house, neither with steed nor coach;
But in his manly foot-march: 'twas the time
When Norrice with his Chiefes were set to dine.
Jones presses to the Parler from the Hall,
And there accoasts the noble General.
Who eyed him quickly, and cries out (o fate!
Live I to see the strength of England's State?
Breathe thou brave man at arms? Jones art thou he?
Or is it Mars himself disguised like thee?
Quoth Jones, The scourge of Spaniards and of Spain,
Whom they have felt and foiled, but to their pain,
Stands here; and yet would breath some few year longer
To prove King Philip or my self the stronger.
The rest was dear embraces, and his place
By Norrice side; and then a hasty grace.
Now might I dwell upon the luscious cheer,
Which here grew cold, whilst each man's eye and ear
Fed on the person and discourse of Jones,
And quite forgot their toasts and marrow bones.
And whilst his strange adventures past, he tells;
The Captains, Serjant Majors, Colonels
Fast to admire him, and are filled with wonder,
And feel no hunger though their bellies thunder.
Here mark his constancy, beyond these men,
He eats and talks, and eats and talks again.
Their mawes are cloyed to hear those deeds of his,
His stories are his meals Parenthesis.
But when he spoke of Spain, it is past belief,
What fearful wounds he gave the chine of beef,
A capon garnished which sliced lemmons stood
Before him, which he tore as he were wood;
And made it leglesse ere he made a pause,
Merely in malice to the Spanish sauce.
He wrecks his wrath on every dish that is nigh him,
And spoiled a custard that stood trembling by him;
Grow'n pikes and carps, and many a dainty dish,
That far excelled his tame Crotonian fish.
At last his fury 'gan to be asswag'd,
And then the General all his friends engaged,
To give him Soldiers welcome in a rowse
Of lusty Rhenish, till both men and house
Turn round. Once two great deities conjoined
To work his fall, with hideous seas and wind:
Now only Bacchus takes the man to task;
And lays sore to him with his potent caske.
And whilst with lusty grape ore born Jones reeles,
H'assaults his head, and so trips up his heels.
But up he rose again with vigor stout,
And swears though foiled, he will try an other bout.
They all were now high flow'n, when Collonell Skink
Fills a huge bowl of sherry Sack, to drink
A health to Englands Queen, and Jones is he
Must take it in pledge; and so he did: but see
The strange antipathy between this man
And Spanish grape as well as Spanish Don.
Against them both his stomach fierce does rise,
No sooner drunk but up again it flies.
This odd distemper made him half ashamed,
But there is no help, he was with wrath inflamed,
Nor was he pleased with Skink of this affront,
(For so he took't) he knew Skink could not want
The wine of Rhene for healths: why then in Sack,
Unless it were to lay him on his back?
Fired with this thought, he caught at his buff-coat,
Then grapples close; and had plucked out his throat,
But that the wary General interposes
His hands and friends between their bloody noses:
And with strong reasons, smiles, and smooth aallyes,
He damps the fury of these fiery boys,
And left them (as he thought) well reconciled,
But by the effect he found he was beguiled.
The night dispersed them now to several ways,
As they were quartered. Jones with Norrice stays,
Who sent him the next morn a brave rich suit,
Intended for himself, with all things to it.
Scant was he dressed, when Skink unto him sends
A Captain, boldly to demand amends
For last nights work, and Jones to do him right,
A bullet must exchange in single fight.
For which himself and Second would not miss,
Where Jones designed to meet with him and his.
This Jones accepts, and swears before that night
He shall hear from him, how and where he will fight.
He thus dispatched, Sir Roger Williams enters,
To whom much kind discourse past ore; he venters
To tell his difference with Skink i which told,
Sir Roger like a Britain true and bold,
Protests himself his Second, hasts to Skink,
Tells him, h' had need fight well, as well as drink:
That Jones and he at the South-postern gate
Early next morn would meet him and his mate,
With sword and pistol horsed, and there agree
To fight it two to two, or Jones and he.
Then comes to Jones, supplied him with a horse
Well rid and fierce; Bucquoy had felt his force
Before Breda; then gives that sword and belt
Which Prince Llwellin wore, when slain near Bealt. The Prince of Sonth-Wales,
Who was slain near Bealt, a town in Brecknockshire.

The hour come, these champions soon appear,
They spend no time in words; in full career,
Jones charges bravely close up to his breast,
And fires, but fortune turned it to the best:
Makes him through have forget to prime his pan,
So mist his shot, and so preserved the man.
Vexed with this fail, he flings with all his might,
Worse than the bullet, had his hand gone right,
His pistol at his face; 'twas aimed so near,
It razed his cheek, and took quite off his ear.
Skink's bullet pierced the blow of Jones his saddle,
And slightly circumcised his foremans noddle,
The Seconds stood attending the event
Of this first charge, both resoluetly bent,
If either in th'incounter had been sped,
To run the same adventure they both did.
But when they saw the bravery of their fight,
Both having lost their blood, the quarrel slight:
They both detest such men should be destroyed,
By which their country should be sore annoyed:
With joint consent their power they unite
To ride up to them, and break off the fight:
Thus got between them, all best means they use
To take it up: which both enraged refuse.
They urge the equal terms on which they stood,
In point of honor: both had lost their blood,
Both fought it well; how light their quarrels ground,
Not worth one drop of blood, much less a wound.
Then bid them look on their dear countries woe,
Whose breasts must suffer for the ill they do.
Reason takes place of wrath, they both accord,
And mischeifs engine rests: they sheath the sword.
And thus (in few this dangerous duel ends,
Fierce foes they met, and now return good friends:
Their Surgeons stanch their blood, for yet they bled,
And clap a cap on Jones his nether head.
This news comes quickly to the Generals ear,
Who when he heard their lives were out of fear,
He gently chides them that they would expose
Their limbs unto the various chance of blows
In single duel, when the common good
No longer stands then such good members stood.
Ten days are spent ere Jones could stand upright,
Through his slight hurt: which come, the noble Knight
Brave Norrice he takes leave of, with the rest
Of that brave martial crew, and then addressed
Himself for England: Joy thou happy Isle,
Thy Son returns that has kept all this quoile;
Ye blustering boys of Britain feast and quaff all:
The man's at hand whose presence makes you laugh all.
Welcome to Dover thou great son of Mavors,
So spoke the Mayor of Dover on his grave horse,
Mounted to meet him with his reverent train,
All gown, who cry him welcome home from Spain:
After some short repast, on post he rides
To Non-such, where her Majesty resides,
Where he was soon brought up to kiss her hand,
By his dear friend George Earl of Cumberland.
But then when took to private conference,
What news of moment, what intelligence,
What Spanish plots, what mysteries of state,
Unto her Majesty he did relate,
'Twas wrapped in clouds too high for me to know it;
Then pardon, Reader, that I do not show it.
But 'twas observed he gave a written book
Unto her hand: on which she daign'd to look,
And seemed to slight it in the public face
Of Court; yet made some use of 't in a place
That Is privy, so dismissed him to his rest,
Or her Courts welcome; as to him seemed best.
'Twas now the time when Robert Earl of Essex.
Essex was in-gag'd
In Ireland against Tyrone, with whom he waged
A bloody war: which to the Queen and state;
Seemed long and costly: after much debate
It is resolved to pick out such a man,
Whose active force and spirit dares and can
Put a full period to this war at once,
Without delay, and this was Captain Jones,
On whom they pitch, who fed on hopes in vain
To get some small command to conquer Spain.
It Is first resolved he must reduce Tyrone,
Till that be done he must let Spain alone.
Thus his Commission's sealed to raise his force,
A complete regiment of British horse:
He Is thence to waft them ore the Irish brine;
And then his force with noble Essex join.
Jones lost no time, goes in five days to Wales:
Shows his commission, tells them glorious tales;
He need not beat a drum, nor sound his trumpet,
His name's enough to make these Britons jump at
This brave employment under such a Chief,
Whose fame's reserve enough for their relief.
Perplexed he was in choosing his commanders,
For he still fancied best his old Highlanders;
But many worthies of the lower parts,
Offer to him their fortunes and their hearts.
But all respects put by, h' inlifleth ten
Of his old gang, all hard bred mountain-men
For his Lifeguard, Thomas Da Price a Pew,
Jenkin Da Prichard, Evan David Hugh,
John ap John Jenkin, Richard John dap Reese,
And Tom Dee Ba^gh, a fierce Rat at green cheese,
Llewelling Reese ap David, Watkin Jenkin,
With Howell Reese ap Robert, and young Philkin;
These for his guard, his Officers in chief,
Lieutenant Colonel Craddock, a stout thief,
With Major Howell ap Howell of Pen Crag,
Well known for plundering many cow and nag,
Captain Pen Vaure, a branch of Tom John Catty,
Whose word in's colors was, YE ROGUES have at ye.
Griffith ap Reese ap Howel ap Coh ap Gwillin,
Reese David Shone ap Ruthero ap William,
With many more whose names'twere long to write,
The rest their acts will get them names in fight.
We must conceive they all were men of fame
For here we see them all men of great name.
Jones with these blades advances to the A little village by Milford.
dale
There lines himself and them with noble Ale
Of such antiquity as has not been there
The like since An old Welsh Prophet, who foretold the landing of Henry the
seventh there.
Robert of the Vale was seen there
Who used to sink those kinterkins of merit,
To raise the heat of his prophetic spirit.
His forces slipped, at last a board he goes,
A lusty South-east gale so fairly blows
That forty hours easily brought him in
To Dubline Harber where he lands his men,
There getting knowledge where the Army lay,
To the Lord General he takes his way
From whom a noble welcome he receives,
And good fresh quarter to his troops he gives.
Jones first informs himself in what condition
Tyron's made up for war, what ammunition,
How fortified in camp, what force, what watch,
How victualled, all occasion he does catch
To take him tripping; when at length he found,
He would not give nor take an equal ground,
To hazard battle, he resolves to try him
In such a way as he should not deny him,
Unless with loss of honor; he indites
This fearful challenge which his squire writes:
False traitor to thy country and thy Queen,
I he who yet my peer have never seen
In feats of arms, whose martial hand has slain
Kings with their armies, half unpeopl'd Spain:
Done more than I can write; I say, I he
Urge thee to single duel: and to thee
Give thee free choice of weapon, time, and place,
On foot or horseback: think it no disgrace,
That I a private Captain, thou a Chief,
(My deeds make me admired, thee thine a thief)
Call thee to question, 'twere ambition
In thee, to hope to fall by such a one,
TO augment my praise I wish thee five times stronger.
Live till I meet thee, and but little longer.
This done, a Herald is strait charged with it,
In public to Tyron's own hand to give it,
Who to him hasts, and in the public view
Of all his Army says, (Tyrone) to you
I have command to bring from Captain Jones
This challenge; read it, and resolve at once.
He takes it, reads it, and admires the man,
That sends him this high Brave, who if he can
But half he writes, he counts himself but lost,
To meet him; yet in sight of all his host
This Brave was given him: thus his honor lies
At stake, and therefore desperately replies.
Tell your brave man I am not conquered yet,
Nor can by words but blows, he shall be met,
Before to morrow noon, on you green plot,
Surrounded with the bog, neither with shot,
Nor head steeled dart: this sword I wear shall do it,
Armed cap-a-pe, no horse, but foot to foot.
He thus dispatched, Tyrone does straight seek out,
Brain Mac-kill-cow a strong sturdy lout,
Made up with nerves, and brawn and bone so mighty,
He felt no burden were it nere so weighty.
The strongest man in all his camp by half.
Milo's great bull to him was but a calf,
Bred in the Irish wilds amongst bogs and woods,
And like an outlaw lived on others goods.
And this is he on whom Tyrone now fixed,
To personate himself in fight betwixt
Him and our Jones, true arms of largest size,
He donnes on him, then to his loins he ties
Morglay his trusty sword, then swears devoutly,
If in this combat he behave him stoutly;
He Will raise his means above two English Barons
In lands and sheep and cowes and lusty garrons:
Bryan's all confidence and hastens thither
Where Jones and he must try their force together,
The place designed was hardly twelve yards square,
No traversing of ground, no boyes-play there,
The rest was bog, ore which some planks were laid
To pass them ore; and then to stop all aid,
Were took from thence: here Jones our valiant fighter
Advances first: Bryan with his fell smiter
Is hard at hand, they spare no time for words,
Their mettle is the whetstone of their swords.
They clap together like two sons of thunder,
Their blades struck lightning, whilst the earth quaked under
The burden she bore; no stroke that is given, but death
Seems to attend it, till both out of breath
Consent to make a stand, but this short rest
Was like a sallet with a muttons breast
To their sharp stomachs, to it they go again,
And lay on load like devils, not like men.
Their well-try'd arms do blush with their own blood,
To find their flesh in whose defense they stood,
Stand, whilst it fell: for that their keen swords whipped off
As if they would each other make a chipt loaf.
At last, as I have seen a man of war
Exalt a Carrick, which exceeds him far,
In bulk and strength: so Jones deals now with Bryan,
With shuns and shifts, more like a Fox than Lion.
For (to speak truly) this fell Pagan lout
Does so belabour Jones from head to foot,
That both his ears do often with sorrow sing,
And's eyes see stars at noon (a wondrous thing)
We must conceive those furious blows he dealt,
Were well repaid with use, which Bryan felt.
But Jones esteeming it an equal thing
To be self-conquer'd, and long conquering,
Resolves to put the business out of doubt
With one Pass more, which was the fatal bour.
On this Resolve, with both his hands he pressed
The pummel of his sword against his breast,
Then like a thunderbolt tilts swiftly at him:
With the fear of this, Bryan had quite forgot him.
That't was a bog behind, so backward springs,
And his whole body up to the armpits flings,
Amidst the bog. Jones driven with his own force,
Missing his thrust falls headlong in the gorse,
But pitched upon his foe, by happy fate,
With which ore-born, our Jones so mawles his pate,
That the helmet flies, and leaves his head to the danger,
Of being the anvill of our Jones his anger:
And now the day is his, his strength he strains
With hand and hilt to beat out Bryans brains:
Who cries out quarter, Man of Mars I yield
My self and sword, the honor of the field.
And where the power rests, it is much better far
To give then take a life in chance of war.
This and the bog does cool the wrath of Jones,
He spares his life and draws him forth at once.
Besides he scorned posterity should tell,
That by his hand Tyrone so nobly fell.
And thus Oneale his captive (as he thought)
In this foul plight unto the camp he brought:
Presents him to the General, and then spoke,
Sir if you have ten more Tyrones to take,
Command, I Will do it; here see him hither led
By me, who all this charge and stir has bred.
The joy was great, but short; 'twas quickly known,
This was but some impostor for Tyrone:
And this an Irish Captive at first view
Made known, who him and his condition knew.
This bred a qualme in some, whilst others smiled
To see their British Champions so beguiled,
And that Tyrone had bobb'd him with this jeer,
To match his Cow-herd with our Mountaneer.
Jones vexed with this, retires unto his tent,
An angry, dirty, desperate, male content.
Three days thus spent, his wrath no longer bears
This base affront; (like Scaevola,) he-sweares Scaevola against Porsenna in
Livie.

He Will kill Tyrone in midst of all his force,
Though in the act himself be made a coarce:
In this wild mood by night he does convey
Himself, where he supposed the Rebel lay:
Who wisely raised his camp the day before,
Marched far through desert woods, and would no more
Of these affronts; which to put off again
Might breed contempt of him with his own men.
Two days Jones spends in quests to find him out;
At last he was encountered with a rout
Of ravening wolves, who fiercely all at once
Assailed the back and face of manly Jones.
'Twas time to draw, else these wild Irish dogs
Had been so bold to shake him by the logs:
But when his sword was out he makes them feel,
Their teeth are not so sharp as his true steel.
The first good blow he dealt took off a head,
The second made one two: the next he sped,
With a sore thrust at mouth, and out at tail:
A sourth which his posteriors does assail,
With his strong heel he hurles against a tree
Twelve paces from his kick, and there lies he:
His sword rips out another empty paunch;
The next limps off from him with half a haunch.
We must conceive 'twas time to lay about him,
For here were those that fought to eat, not rout him.
Nor escaped he free, the rich sword skarf he wore
About his loins, they all to fitters tore.
His boots plucked off by bits, some flesh to boot,
No quarter free from skarres from head to foot.
And (to conclude) from these wild Irish witches Lup^ntbropos, Witches that
take shipes of Wolves upon them in Ireland.

He scapes scant with a hands breadth of his breeches.
Wearied with blows and kicks, at last they fly him,
And take a snarling leave as they go by him.
Thus Jones half worried, hasts unto the camp.
There Is none could say the clothes he wore were damp
With night perdues, unless they meant to flout him;
For (to speak truth) he had no clothes about him.
Thus come, he swears by the immortal powers,
He had maintained a battle full five hours,
With forty duels, five and twenty killed,
Routed the rest; who all had took the field
Against him alone; all raised with him to fight,
To his destruction, or t'eclipse his might,
By that old timorous treacherous kern Tyrone,
Who durst as well meet death as him alone.
The plight our Jones appeared in, made none doubt
But he had had at least a devilish bout,
If not with Devils; on him each man sees
The fearful character of nails and teeth.
We may not stand to show what Essex's sense
Was on these actions, nor the consequence
They did import: the progress of this story,
Hastens our muse to Jones his farther glory.
Fame these achievements brings to Englands State;
Which held the Queen and Council in debate
About this man; and all at last supposed,
In policy he is not to be exposed
To the close dangerous plots of such a foe,
Who neither values faith nor honor, so
His mischiefs take success: and thus the State
Lose this dear Limb, and then repent too late.
Some looking deeper into Jones his spirit,
Knowing he knew too much of his own merit,
Hold it not safe he should be open to
The windy baits of that so subtle foe,
To gain him to his part; whose haughty mind
Would soon take fire; then could not be confined.
And if by such a plot they should be crossed,
They all conclude that Kingdom were but lost.
These grounds invite them wholly to decline
His warfare there; so on some grand design
Pretended they invite his quick repair
To Englands Court to act this great affair.
Heco mes, but leaves his British troops to fight
Tyrone to death; whose acts who please to write,
May meet with subjects brave to rant upon,
But for my self I am quite tired with one.
And thus transported from the Irish strands,
At Aberust with a Welsh Port he lands; A Town and Fort in the County of
Cardigan.

Where ere two days he fully spent for rest,
A goodly vessel with cross winds oppressed,
Comes boiling in; Jones by her colors knows
She is of Spain: his color comes and goes
At sight of hers; that such a godly prey,
Should come (as 'twere) to meet him in his way.
He musters strait a troop of british lads,
Who on their mountain geldings clap their pads;
With rusty bills instead of staves in rest;
Such were their horse, such were their arms at best.
Then with a fowling-piece the ship they hail,
With confidence that she would straight strike sail:
But she makes answer, that she was too hot,
From her broad side with twenty Culver'n shot.
This struck a stand, till Jones cried out what doubt ye?
The day is ours, masters lay about ye,
Lead the forlorn up bravely, and be bold,
I Will bring the rear, for they know me of old,
If once my name or person they descry,
My life for yours they will either yield or fly.
Made bold with this, in full carreere they ride
Up to the ridges of the flowing tide.
But when they came brest-high amongst the waves,
Their horse more wise by half then these mad knaves,
Snort at the foaming billows, turn their tails,
And make a fair retreat from Sea and Sails;
Which lest it should seem done on terms of fear,
Jones to the front, now hastens from the rear,
And leads them back again in good array,
Neither with hasty flight, nor much delay.
At his return he searches all that coast,
To find a herring-boat or two at most;
With which he doubts not but he will sink or take
This lusty Ship; whose bravest men will quake
To hear his name. But Fate that had decreed
To save her, caused her hoyse her sails with speed.
So with a strong fore-winde away she flies,
And leaves our Jones to seek some other prize.
Thus crossed in this design to Court he went,
Where he is met with noble complement;
And from the Queen such grace he does receive,
As he deserved, and stood with her to give.
Now for the great affair that called him back,
The Lords must pump for it in a cup of Sack
To help invention: Jones must be preferred
To some employment, be it nere so hard.
In deep consult and long discourse they sat on it,
And studied for it; at last they lighted pat on it.
It is resolved, that he must be the man
To go in ambassy to Prester John.
The business carried with it a glorious face;
Employed ambassador unto his Grace.
The dangerous voyage to a place remote,
Affects him most to get his name more note
In forain Lands; he will not refuse the work,
Were It to the Great Magul, or the Great Turk.
A lusty Ship's prepared, again he goes;
But what this great employment was, who knows?
Reader I know thy thoughts are strongly bent
To know this first design, on which he went.
But know this first, that Princes secret ways,
Are such as Ships cut through deepest Seas,
Which shut still as they open, and him that sounds
And enters too far in, their deepnesse drownes.
If bare conjectures may give light to thee,
Here take them freely; harmless thoughts are free.
Perhaps this high blown spirit now is sent
To forain air, where it may purge and vent,
And so return more fit the State to serve
In their commands, who yet must him observe.
Perhaps he went this Priestly Prince to gain
Unto our Church; who gave good proof in Spain
Of's power in this; or to negotiate
Commerce between the Aethiop and our State,
For tuskes of Elephants to have our knives,
Apes and Baboones and Pugges to please our wives;
Which things satiety makes common there,
And curiosity orepriseth here.
Be It what it will, our Jones is gone upon it,
And we may know he will make something on it.
His treacherous friend the Sea his charge receives,
And with some flattering gales his hopes deceives,
Making the Land his firmer friend appear
Still less; until at last it brought him where
He lost her sight: for three months time he makes
Good way; at last the wind his wings forsakes
The Ship's becalmed, and to the Port she seeks,
She gains not half a league for thirteen weeks.
Jones finds this lazy war offends him more,
Then all those hideous storms out-rid before.
These sad effects this sleepy calm attend;
Victual and beverage spent; less hope of end.
Then fear of further miseries ensues,
The Sea with calmes his patience does abuse,
Turns divelish Statesman, puts on a smooth face
Salutes and kills them with a soft embrace.
'Twas now far worse with Jones then erst with Skink
For three weeks his own Urine is his drink,
Which his hot body had so often sublimed.
It Is grow'n a cordial, like gold thrice calcined.
Breeses of wind at last his sails display,
And waft him into the Barbarick bay,
Then to the Arabic, next the Pilot laves
His boisterous charge in Mare rubrum's waves.
And lastly he attaines beyond all hope,
Errocco the sole Port of Aethiope,
And here he lands, and empties many a bowl
To allay the fury of his thirsty soul.
After some rest he gets intelligence,
Where 'twas the Prince then kept his residence;
Where he repaires, and's told when he comes thither,
The Prince and town are both removed to gether
Some ten miles off. The Prince and town? (quoth Jones)
I have met my match: here is people make no bones
Of things beyond belief. And yet 'twas true;
This town was tents which fifty thousand drew,
And raised in the instant wheresoere the Prince
State down to sport, or show magnificence.
By Mount Amara now his Court he reares;
A Mount far differing from the name it bears: Read purchase in his relations of
Aethiopia, touching this Mount.

If Paradise had ere a second birth
Below the seat of Saints, it is there on earth.
An humble valley is the Garden where
This Mount is raised; a vale so rich, so rare;
Nature grew bankrupt drawing this rich plot;
And striving to be quaint, she quite forgot
To keep reserves: for by this work we know,
She made it such she could make no more so.
Amidst this vale is raised this lofty structure,
Five leagues upright. It Is outsides architecture
Unpolished Marble; but so rich, so fair
You Would think it a pillar of one stone in the air,
By some high power unto Atlas given,
To ease his shoulders whilst it proppeth Heaven.
This goodly Mount a specious plain does crown,
Imbost with Natures gemmes, a velvet down
That Is always green; no frost, no winter here,
Continual Spring: here Phoebus all the year
From rise to set, does always fire his eye,
As loath to put so fair an object by.
Here grow those happy trees from whence there springs
That precious oil, which erst anointed Kings,
And sacred Priests. Nor crowd they here to take
One sense alone; the sent and sight partake.
So are they ranked, as well to give a grace,
As sweet perfumes, for tribute to the place.
No orchard here, nor garden but the plain;
The choicest fruit all Europe does contain,
Grow here unplanted, here is the luscious Grape,
That makes Joves Nectar: 'twas not Helens rape
That ruined Troy: the Apple got from Thence, The Apple which three goddesses,
Juno, Pallas and Venus, contended for, which was given by Paris to Venus:
whereupon followed the destruction of Troy.

Had worth enough to do it. Here every sense
Would surfeit, but each objects rarity
Gives appetite without satiety,
Roses and Tulips Flora gathers here
When we have none, to crown her golden hair,
And here Medea picked (if Jones speak truth)
Those herbs which turned antiquity to youth:
The only Phoenix deignes to wether here,
The only place like her without a peer:
Left all these sweets-should want sweet harmony
A numerous quire of nightingales, comply
To warble forth the sweet Amara's praise,
Who turns their mourning notes to merry lays.
Amidst this plaire there glide; a silver brook,
So gently, that the suttlest eye may look,
And find no motion; on his violet banks
Thick Cipres trees marshall themselves in ranks,
To keep out Phoebus: whose enamored beams,
Peep through each little crink to view his streams:
His pavement azure gravel intermixed
With orient pearls, and diamonds betwixt,
Which as the aires soft breath his surface purles,
Vary their gloss, and twinkle through his curles:
Like a steeled glass presenting to the eye,
The spangled beauty of the starry sky.
Here Dolphins leave the sea to wanton; here
Carps since the deluge their grown bodies cheer. A great epicure and Emperor
of Rome.

Umbrana's too; such had * Vitellius known,
A province should have gone to purchase one:
Such is Amara, such is Tempe field,
Elysium on earth unparaleld,
'Twas here this royal Priest now kept his Court:
A place well suting with his fame and port.
And here comes Jones, where having mad's address,
Letters of credence given at his access
In Latin writ: in the same tongue he gives
Jones gracious words, which language Jones conceives
To be Arabic, for the Latin tongue
He nere endured to learn nor old nor young,
But that is all one, there is no reply expected,
Unto a rich pavilion he is directed
By men of State, where he is well attended,
With all that is rich, and to his rest commended.
Some few days spent, and time for audience got,
When Prester John in royal State was set;
Jones studying how to express his eloquence
In some strange language which might pose the Prince,
Now trouls him forth a full mouthed Welsh oration,
Boldly delivered as became his nation.
The plot proved right, for not one word of sense
Could be picked from't, which vexed the learned Prince.
His learned Linguists are called in to hear,
Who might as well have stopped each others ear
For ought they understood, and all protest
It was the very language of the Beast.
Jones has his end, and then to make it known
He had more tongues to express himself then one;
In a new tone he speaks, not half so rich,
But better known, 'twas English; unto which
An English Factor is interpreter
Between our Captain and John Presbyter;
His business takes effect (what ere it was)
And great expresses of respect do pass
To Jones from him, as one he thought most rich
In unknown tongues expressed in his first speech,
And so admires him for he knows not what:
But Jones may thank his mother tongue for thot.
His business done, he is led for recreation,
To take the pleasures of that pleasant nation,
To mount Amara's top, the chiefest grace,
And perfect beauty of that Kingdoms face;
And finding his great heart was most inclined
To martial feats, all in one motion joined
T'invite him to their deserts, where he might
Make trial of his force in manly fight,
With their wild beasts, and promised him consorts
All truly tried t'assist him in those sports.
The motion takes, a brave accoutred horse,
And his own arms, he and's associate force
Advance to hunt; me thinks I see them all
Drawn to the life in canvasse painted cloths in Inns and victualling houses.
against the wall,
In some mean house made for good-fellowship,
How fierce they look, how brave they prance and skip;
With hounds and horns, and bil^s and picks and glaves,
And spears and clubs, and many light-foot knaves:
In this brave equipage they march away
To the known haunts where these wild creatures pray.
'Twas Jones his trick of old to ride alone:
In hard adventures he will admit of none
To share with him, from them he steals aside,
And in the desert by himself does ride.
Nor rode he long till just against him stalks
A ramping Lion new come from his walks,
Jones draws, the furious beast with fiery eyes
And bristled mane, against his bosom flies,
But his keen sword met full with his fore paws,
And whipped them off; and so he escaped his claws.
Nor stayed it there, but gave a cruel wound
To his left jaw, and fel'd him to the ground.
Then nimbly wheels about, and stepped aside,
Leaps from his horse which to a tree he tied:
Then turns again, and with his sword falls to it,
To end this combat with him foot to foot,
The wounded beast with all his power does hasten,
His fearful fangs in Jones his throat to fasten.
Whilst on's hin feet he assaults him bolt upright,
With left hand armed, Jones stunnes with him the right;
Strikes both his hin legs off: yet on his stumps
The noble beast unconquered fiercely jumps
Full at his face with open mouth, and there,
(For his grim face could raise in Jones no fear)
In shoots the deadly blade, and out behind,
Where't makes a second vent for life's short wind;
This thrust with right hand armed so home was lent
That hand and hilt quite throw together went,
Where taking hold of his strong stern (for truth
He swears) he drew't quite through his trunck this mouth.
Then with fine force (the like was never seen)
He strips his inside out, and's outside in.
Thus tergiverst upon his steed he flings him,
Then mounts himself, and to the Court he brings him.
Never was royal beast so grossly jaded,
But 'twas his fat which could not be evaded,
Unto the gallants of the Court he shows,
How hard th'adventure was, what thrusts, what blows;
On every circumstance he does dilate;
Nor adds he much to truth, nor much does bate:
For much he spoke, the Lion made it good
With loss of his four legs, and his best blood.
This strange achievement strikes them all with wonder,
'Twas never seen since Greeces Alexander.
Lysimachus, Lisander, nor Perdicas, Read Gurtius, touching these.

Nor any of his Chiefs, ere did the like as
Our Jones in this: It Is true, they write they killed,
In single fight some few of these in field;
But here is a force born with a higher sail,
Transtorting tail to head, and head to tail.
The Prince in words this high achievement praised:
But inward fear and jealousy it raised
Of our brave Queen, whose scepter does command
Such men whose power no Nation can withstand.
Jones might so far on his own strength presume, as
To seize his throne, as A private Span^sh Commander, that took this great King
of Mexico* with a handful of men.
Cortez Montezuma's
Had done before. These thoughts he often revolves
With troubled mind, and so in fine resolves
To shift him thence: makes for his fair pretense,
Matter of high and hasty consequence,
To be with speed conveyed unto our Queen;
Except her self it must by none be seen.
This past on Jones, who parts with high content,
Nobly presented with fair complement.
Amongst the rest, a Parrot that could speak
All tongues but Jones his own; that had a beak
Of perfect coral, plumed as white as snow:
This he accepts, and so to Sea does go:
Where under sail such welcome he receives,
As one dire foe unto another gives.
With calmes, and storms, and winds, all cross, that bear
The ship quite off the course that she would steer
Long time thus spent, into a Bay he drives,
And at a Port unknown at last arrives:
Where he beholds a glorious Castle built
High on a cliffe, whose walls pure gold, or guilt
To him appeared. Which object caused him land,
To know who did this Princely seat command.
He Is told it is the Queen of No-lands place,
The onle relict of her royal race,
A Maiden Queen that here does keep her Court,
Where many Kings and Princes of high port
Make their address, and lose themselves in love,
To purchase hers, for not a man can move
Her heart to wed, though nere so great his state,
Or form exact, such was the will of Fate.
Here as he lands, a large Cannow was sent
To know from whence he was, and whither bent.
In this a Dutch man came by happy Fate,
Who could his Language to the Queen translate.
This man he tells as briefly as he can,
His voyage from his Queen to Prester John:
How by cross winds in his return he is blow'n,
And forced into this port to him unknown.
Jones is resolved to see and to be seen
Of this great Princess, that our virgin Queen
Might know when he returns what form, what port
This royal virgin carried in her Court.
Thus like an errant Knight all armed complete,
He marches boldly to her Palace gate,
All massy polished brass; at his first ward,
Six milk-white Panthers fierce were chained for guard.
Thence through a large great specious Court he past,
And so ascends twelve ivory steps at last,
With ebon columns, unto which were tide
Twelve sharp kept Lions, who all yawned wide
When strangers do approach. Jones through them all
Is safely guarded to a goodly Hall.
From thence ascends to rooms of greater state,
And comes at last where this Princess royal sat
Upon a strange rich bed, not stuff d with down,
But closely wrought, and like a bladder blow'n;
Three Aethiops on each side, to fan the air
With Ostridge plumes perfumed as rich as fair.
Her beauty could not boast of white and red,
But jet like black; about her crisp curled head
And cheeks, there hang rich flaming stones and pearls,
That past Mark Anthony's Egyptian girls.
In brief; if Tuscan lived to limne the night
Sparkling with stars, this were her picture right.
No sooner to her sight does Jones appear;
Then to her heart his piercing eyes shot fire;
Which Cupid blows and raised into a flame,
That warmes her zeal to invocate his name.
No part of Jones but in her eye exceeds
All humane shape; some god he must be needs.
But when at here request he does relate
The chances of his past and present state;
Never was ear with Orpheus harp possessed
As hers with Jones, whilst he his life expressed.
Those that have warmed themselves by these strong fires
May easily guess what fruits her wild desires
Produced to Jones; The observance of the Court,
With feasts and banquets, and all Princely sport,
Are at his foot: he cannot name nor wish
That meat he likes, but straight it is in his dish.
In this high state some months he takes his ease,
Whilst this sick Princess feeds on her disease:
At last a sharp alarm damps these desires,
Which threatened death, but could not quench her fires
A Prince there was mighty in bulk and mind,
Whose Kingdoms confines unto No-land joined:
Descended in his race from Og of Basan;
You Would think his very name might well amaze one,
Bahader Cham Mombaza's King; he had been
A long hot suter to this mighty Queen,
But still repulsed: now this unruly fire
Suppressed with scorn, breaks forth from love to ire.
A mighty host he raised, and marches through
The heart of No-land, to command, not woo:
Approaching near her Court, he sends her word
She must be his own Queen at bed and board,
Or see her Kingdom burn in higher flames,
Then his for her: yet (for his spirit shames
To war with women) if she can find out
One man in all her Realm, that is so stout
In her defense with him his sword to try,
He Will bravely win her, or he will bravely dye.
Her Courtiers quail'd at this, who knew his force
Could not be paralleled by man nor horse.
Nor could it choose but make the Queen look black,
Not pale. Th'interpreter at Jones his back
Rounds in his ear this proud imperious speech;
Had she been thence, he had bid him kiss his breech
For this proud message: up howere he starts,
And this loud answer with his mouth he farts;
Go tell Bahader Cham Mombaza's King,
One Mars begot in's wrath will have a fling
With him ere night, that one who at one breath
Don Dego and Gonzago did to death,
Will look him dead; nor will I only be
This Princess champion, but (thy Cham to see)
I Will walk through beds of Scorpions: for I hear
He dares enough, and I can brook no peer.
This high reply nere moved the haughty Cham,
Let Jones be what he will he is still the same.
The day's his own before the fight's begun:
Were Mars himself in stead of Mars his son.
A back and breast and helmet strong he dond,
Well wrought and varnished by some Indian hand,
A whale-bone bow he takes of special strength,
With arrows barb'd, at least two yards in length:
A crooked Scimiter whose edge was flint,
Queintly conjoined and some tough speel was in it,
To make it proof against the strength of steel.
Often had this sword made headstrong Giants reel.
By his right side a massy Mace he hangs,
With which his sturdy foes to death he bangs.
A buckler like a Spanish ruff he wore
About his neck, full half yard deep, or more:
He wore not this for his defense, or grace,
But to keep off his urine from his face.
For you must know that member was still mounted:
The bravest woman's man on earth accounted.
And thus prepared, this lusty Termagant,
Ascends his Castle on his Elephant.
And then advances to a spacious Green,
Before the Castle of this maiden Queen.
A brave Arabian courser is prepared
For Jones, his own true arms he dons for guard,
Llwellins sword to do; and so descends
Down to the Green, where the fierce Cham attends.
Jones was to seek what kind of fight were best,
To make against this Giant and his beast.
Both far exceed in strength himself and horse,
And therefore art must now be joined with force:
No breast to breast, a nimble charge, and gone.
His ready steed as soon comes off as on.
Had not the well tried arms he wore proved true,
The Chams smart whale-bone bow had made him rue
This bold attempt: but what can whales weak bones,
When whales themselves came short to swallow Jones;
Thus thrice he charged, and thrice he came off clear,
At last he came close up in full career,
And turning short, the horses hind feet slipped:
Through which mischance the Carry-castle ripped
His bowels forth, with his tusk; down falls the horse:
The surious beast claspt Jones with his probosce;
And mounts him high; but in his rise he found
The means to give Bahaders face a wound,
And cuts in the instant off, the trunk that claspt him:
So down the Elephant was forced to cast him.
This hard exploit none ere performed before,
But one of Caesar's Soldiers and no more. Read the Commentaries de bello
Africno.

The wounded beast enraged with pain cries out
With hideous voice, and plunged and branc'd about
The Green, till from his seat the Prince he throw'th,
And then (for by the Cham from his first growth,
This feat he had been taught) though mad with pain,
He strives to mount him on his back again.
But Jones had lopt off his strong trunk before,
Whereby he could perform this feate no more.
Here Jones denies he bred this docill beast,
Taught to his hand, he got him to the East;
And his report must have belief before us,
Who swears it was the same that carried Read Curtius touching that Elephant of
Porus, who often remounted his master with his trunk in that battle between
him and Alexander.
Porus
Against the Macedon. I cannot see
How by wise natures rules this thing should be,
Unless in Plinies Volumes it appears,
That Elephants may live two thousand years.
Now Jones leaps up in have, and swiftly flies,
With sword in hand, where bruised Bahader lies;
And ere he could get up, one washing stroke
His head and buckler from his shoulders took;
Which when it was off, they may compare't that will,
To the grim S John's head on Ludgate hill.
His numerous Army struck with grief and fright
At his sad fate betook it self to flight,
And thus was No-lands Queen redeemed by Jones
From bondage, rape, and No-lands loss at once.
Now if she loved our Captain well before,
In reason she must love him ten times more,
Which she expressed by laying at his foot
Her people, No-land, and her self to boot:
But whether 'twas the god of loves deep curse,
That she refused for better, or for worse,
Those mighty Princes which to her he sent,
To make her dote on a non-resident;
Flings snow-balles at his heart, and flames at hers;
To keep conjunction from these errant Stars;
Or whether Jones his genitals had got
Some lame defect by Skinks late desperate shot
And so his noble heart made him refuse,
What having got he could not rightly use.
It Is not in me to judge, but this I know,
Her violent fires scorcht her, and him his snow,
So cold that to avoid her amorous sight,
He leaves her court, and steals to sea by night:
So Jason used Medea erst, but he is
So wise to take with him the golden fleece,
Which Jones contemned to do, and thought himself
When safe returned, his countries Mine of wealth.
No certain ground I have here to relate,
This great deserted Queens unhappy fate,
But Sr. John Mandevils, who does deliver,
As Jones reports, he came soon after thither,
And found the peoples outside all in black;
A sad expression for their Princess wrack*
Who told him lately there arrived a man,
All white, who for them wondrous things had done,
Redeeme'd their Queen and kingdom from the shame
Of rape and rapine, which Bahader Cham
Came there to act, and was in open field,
By this white man in single combat killed.
Their Queen enamored with this matchless man,
Refused and left by him: when nothing can
Quench her wild fires but Carthage Queens hard fate,
Whilst on the Cliffe with pensive thoughts she sat,
A sudden spring she gave, and so commends
Her self to sea, where life and love she ends.
No more of this sad stuff: let us all at once
Join in a joyful welcome home to Jones.
In six months sail he steers by Goodwin sands,
Casts anchor at the Downs: the next day lands,
Hasts to the Queen at London, there expresses
Every particular of his addresses
To Prester John; the great affairs success
As she desired: Lastly, in his progress,
He might have married the great Queen of No-land,
But this the Queen gave credit to at no hand,
'Till'twas confirmed by Sr. John Mandevill,
Whose strange reports they may believe that will.
Now let us well observe the happy Fate,
Which still provided for the Queen and State.
Jones had not rested fully three days here,
But out there breaks a great and fearful fire
Off (...) rebellion; and to quench it, none's
So (...) (...)mmon sense, as Captain Jones.
Brave Essex through affronts turned malcontent,
Hatches i^'s breast a desperate intent,
To seize the Person of the Queen, and those
He found most nere about her his strong foes.
Her Grace and Counsel call for Jones, to know
What in his judgment now were best to do.
Who first her gracious pardon does beseech.
And then delivers this short pithy speech.
First guard the Court with Westminsters strong bands,
Call in the neighboring Counties by commands.
Out with your household men, shut up your gates;
We Will make your foes turn tail with broken pates.
Then call to you the richest of your Citt's,
But seek no cash; for in their bags their wits
Are close knit up: but only thus much make
Them know, their wives and fortunes lie at stake;
That they shall want no succor, whilst your hand
Can grasp the sword, and scepter of this Land.
Thus arm their hearts, and rouse them from their beds,
And then let us alone to arm their heads.
She now requires, that Jones in person go
To Essex, his intents to sound and know;
To use all fairest means that may reduce him,
From those lewd ways, to which lost men seduce him.
He undertakes it; hastens to the Lord,
And is admitted in as soon as heard.
And here he finds Sr. Walter Rawleigh with him;
Some ill was in it, his fancy straight does give him.
He knew he came not to the Earl for good,
But to provoke him to some madder mood.
Therefore from thence our Jones does Rawleigh rate,
Shaking his martial truncheon ore his pate:
Bids him pack thence to th'knaves of his Grand Jury,
He Will make him else the example of his fury.
Rawleigh was wise, and ruled by his best sense;
Gives place to time, and so withdrawes from thence.
Then Jones these Counsels to the Earl began,
How full of dangers were the ways he ran.
How weak his power; much less unto the force
Of Englands then his Raine-deer's to a horse.
Thus his brave Family must be destroyed,
His honors lost, his ancient house made void:
Beside, his cause was naught; for though himself
Nere read the laws of this great Commonwealth.
Yet he had heard some Lawyer say long since,
There was no law to captivate our Prince.
Thus all the harmless blood that shall be spilt
In this bad cause, must lie on Essex guilt.
Lay hand on heart most noble Peer, (quoth Jones)
The Queen can pardon, and enrich at once.
Be you but good, she can be gracious,
Your own experience can inform you thus.
Thus Jones possessed his noble heart so far,
He is resolved to wave the chance of war;
Himself and house he yields unto the Queen,
And her cold mercy, which too soon was seen.
This is the last great act I can relate,
Of his good service for the Queen and State:
Rewards fit for his worth there were prepared,
Which his high spirit past by without regard:
And his great Queen was seriously bent,
To put him in some place of government;
But Nature only taught the man to fight,
And his rude Mother not to read and write.
Which was the chiefest cause that made him hate
To be employed in mysteries of State*
Besides, he was not pleased that her Grace
Cut off this Noble man before his face,
Whom he brought in; it may be his own lot,
With axe or cord for naught to go to pot.
Thus ignorance, a discontented mind,
And worth ill weighed, do make him fall behind
Occasions lock; which lost, he never more,
Though bred and breathed on hills, shall get before.
Now time and bruises, and much loss of blood,
Had made Jones feel cold age was not so good
As fiery youth; he needs must find a fail
Of what he was: declined from top to tail.
Which made him wish he might put up his rest,
And breath his last in his own Countries breast.
And for this cause he went unto her Grace,
And begged of her a Muster-masters place,
In Wales, near his first home: where he may spend
His later days in peace, and in it end:
And yet to leave behind his martial art,
To Wale's posterity, before he part.
This suit with speed and readiness is granted,
And so to Wales our Muster-master's janted.
Here many years he spent in telling more,
Or less of those strange things he did before:
At last in his old age he grows so wild,
He needs must marry, to beget a child.
Which though he mist, the mastery he must have
Ore every sex, Jones sent her to her grave*
Devotion now with his old age increast,
He meditates thrice every day at least.
His only prayer was the Absolution
In our old Liturgy, with some confusion
Of short ejaculations in his bed,
For some old slips, and for the blood he shed;
Especially for those six Kings he killed
Without remorce at the Juzippian field:
At last death comes, whose power he defied
From first to last, and, thus he lived and di'd.
Now you wild blads that make loose Innes your stage
To vapor forth the acts of this sad age,
Your Edghil fight, the Newberies and the West,
And Northern clashes; where you still fought best:
Your strange escapes, your dangers void of fear,
When bullets flew between the head and ear:
Your pia matters rent, perished your guts,
Yet live, as then ye had been but earthen buts:
Whether you fought by Dam me, or the Spirit,
To you I speak, still waving men of merit,
Be modest in your tales, if you exceed
My Captain's hard atchivements, I Will proceed
Once more to imp my rural muses wings,
And turn my lyre so high, I Will break her strings,
But I will reach ye, and thence raise such laughter,
As shall continue for sive ages after.
The Captains Elegy.
ANd art thou gone brave man? bath conqering death
Put a full period to thy blustering breath?
Thus has she played her masterpiece? and here
Fixed her nil supra on thy sable beer?
Scap'st thou those hideous storms, those horrid sights,
With many Giants; cruel beasts, fierce Knights?
Such dangerous stratagems, such foes intrapping,
And now has death don't? sure she took thee napping,
For had thou been awake to use thy sword,
She would have shunned thee, and have taken thy word
For thy appearance, till the last return
Of her long term. Or did thy mettle burn
Through thy chapt clay unto Elysiums shades
TO encounter with the ghosts of those old blades,
Great Caesar, Scipio, Annibal; 'cause here
Thy fiery spirit could not find its peer?
How could thou else find time to fold thy arms
In thy still grave, now Mars raines bloody storms,
On Christian earth? great Austria would be ours
Without pitched field, without beleaguering towrs:
Were thou but here, thy sword would strike the stroke
To break or bring their necks to Britains yoke.
Perhaps it was the providence of Fate,
To snatch thee up, lest thou should come too late,
Now soldiers drop pel mel, whose souls might thrust
Thine from the chiefest place, which thou from first
Have gained on earth; now what shall England do?
Limp like some grandame that has lost her shoe.
Put case a new Tyrone again should spring
From his old urne, no some such furious thing
As fierce Mac-kil-cow, where were then our Jones,
To bring these Rebels on their marrow bones?
Or say against Spain our pikes we re-advance,
For their old Sack, as such a thing may chance,
Where shall we then find out that Martial man,
That killed six thousand with nine score? he is gone.
And we that lick the dish that Homer lapt in,
What fury now shall our dull brains be rapt in?
We must go sing Sr. Lanchelot and rehearse
Old Huan's villainous prose in Wilder verse;
Or else put up our pipes, and all at once,
Cry farewell wit: all is gone with Captain Jones.
Well go thy ways (old blade thou have done thy share
For things beyond belief time (never fear)
Will give thee being here: thou have left us stuff,
To build thy Pyramid, more then enough,
To equal Cayre's, and happily it will out last it,
So with thy glorious deeds we may rough cast it.
Farewell great soul, and take this praise with many;
Except thy foes, thou nere did st harm to any:
And thus far let our Muse thy loss deplore,
Well she may sigh, but she shall nere sing more.
His EPITAPH.
T Read softly (mortals) ore the bones
Of the worlds wonder Captain Jones:
Who told his glorious deeds to many,
But never was believed of any:
Posterity let this suffice,
He swore all is true, yet here he lies.
FINIS.

