State-Worthies. OR, THE STATESMEN And FAVORITES OF ENGLAND Since the
Reformation. Their PRUDENCE and POLICIES, SUCCESSES and MISCARRIAGES,
ADVANCEMENTS and FALLS; During the Reigns of King HENRY VIII King EDWARD VI
Queen MARY. Queen ELIZABETH King ^AMES King CHARLES ^
The Second Edition with Additions.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas M^lbour^ for S^^ Speed, in Thread-needle-street near
the Royal Exchange, 1670.

TO The HOPE of ENGLAND, Its Young Gentry, Is most humbly Dedicated The HONONUR
of it, Its ANCIENT STATESMEN: A Renowned Ancestry TO An Honorable Posterity.

Whitehall.
BY permission and License of the Right Honorable Mr. Secretary Morice; This
Book may be Printed and Published.

Jo: Cook.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
FOr bestowing some vacant hours (by that excellent Personages direction, to
whom I am equally obliged for my Employment and my Leisure) in an attempt so
agreeable to the Lord Verulam's judgment, which may be seen in the next page;
and so pursuant of Sir Robert Naunton's design, which may be traced in the
following Book; Another person's abilities might have gained applause, and my
weakness may deserve an excuse, notwithstanding my years, (if yet any man be
too young to read and observe) or my profession (if yet a Divine should not (as
times go) be as well read in Men, as Books:) Especially since I gratify no
man's fondness, writing not a Panegyric, but an History: Nor pleasure any
persons malice; designing Observations, rather than Invectives: Nor tire any
man's patience; setting down rather the remarkes of men's public capacities,
than the minute passages of their private lives: but innocently discourse the
most choice instances our ENGLISH Histories afford for the three great
Qualifications of men ( 1. Nobleness in behavior: 2. Dexterity in business;
and 3. Wisdom in Government) among which are twenty eight Secretaries of
State, eight Chancellours, eighteen Lord Treasurers, sixteen Chamberlains, who
entertain Gentlemen with Observations becoming their Extraction, and their
hopes, touching, 1. The rise of Statesmen. 2. The beginning of Families. 3.
The method of Greatness. 4. The conduct of Courtiers. 5. The miscarriages of
Favorites, and whatever may make them either wise or wary.


The Chancellor of France had a Picture, that to a common eye showed many
little heads, and they were his Ancestors^; but to the more curious represented
only one great one, and that was his own.

It Is in^ended that this Book should to the vulgar Reader express several
particulars, i. e. all this last Ages Heroes; but to every Gentleman it should
intimate only one, and that is himself.

It Is easily imaginable how unconcerned I am in the fate of this Book, either
in the History, or the Observation; since I have been so faithful in the first,
that is not my own, but the Historians; and so careful in the second, that they
are not mine, but the Histories.

DAVID LLOYD.

The Lord Bacon's Judgment of a Work of this nature.
HIstory, which may be called just and perfect History, is of three kinds,
according to the object it propounds, or pretends to represent; for it
either represents a Time, a Person, or an Action, The first we call
Chronicles, the second Lives, and the third Narrations, or Relations.

Of these; although the first be the most complete and absolute kind of
History, and has most estimation and glory; yet the second excels it in
profit and use; and the third in verity and sincerity. For history of Times
represents the magnitude of Actions, and the public faces or deportments of
persons, and passes over in silence the smaller passages and motions of Men
and Matters.

But such being the workmanship of God, as he does hang the greatest weight
upon the smallest wyars, Maxima e minimis suspendens; it comes therefore to
pass, that such Histories do rather set forth the pomp of business, than the
true and inward resorts thereof. But Lives, if they be well written,
propounding to themselves a person to represent, in whom actions both greater
and smaller, public and private, have a commixture, must of necessity contain
a more true, native, and lively representation.

I do much admire that these times have so little esteemed the virtues of the
Times, as that the writing of Lives should be no more frequent. For although
there be not many Sovereign Princes, or absolute Commanders, and that States
are most collected into Monarchies; yet are there many worthy personages that
deserve better than dispersed Report, or barren Elogies: For herein the
invention of one of the late Poets is proper, and does well enrich the ancient
fiction. For he feigneth, that at the end of the thread or web of every man's
Life, there was a little Medal containing the person's name; and that Time
waits upon the Sheers, and as soon as the Thread was cut, caught the Medials
and carried them to the River Lethe; and about the bank there were many Birds
flying up and down, that would get the Medials, and carry them in their beak a
little while, and then let them fall into the River. Only there were a few
Swans, which if they got a Name, would carry it to a Temple where it was
consecrate.

THE TABLE.
A
Page SIr Thomas Audly 72 Fiz-Allan Earl of Arundel 415 Master Roger Ashcam 613
Archbishop Abbot 746 Sir Edmund Anderson 803 Bishop Andrews 1024 Sir Walter
Aston 932 Sir Robert Armstroder 951 Philip Earl of Arundel 953.
B.
CHarles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk 27 Sir Thomas Bollen 137 Edw. Stafford, D. of
Bucks 159 Sir Anthony Brown 164 Sir David Brook 386 Sir John Russel, 1 E. of B.
442 Sir John Baker 460 Sir Will. Cecil, L. Burleigh 473 Archbishop Bancroft
704 Sir Nich. Bacon 470 Thomas Lord Burge 591 Sir Thomas Bromley 609 Sir
Richard Bingham 612 Tho. Sackvil, L. Buckhurst 677. Sir Fulke Grevil, L. Brook
727 Sir Thomas Bodley 805 John L. Digby E. of Bristol 838 G. V. Duke of
Buckingh. 843 Sir Francis Bacon 828 Sir John Bramston 926 Lord Chief-Iustice
Banks 960
C.
Archbishop Cranmer 35 T. Cromwell, Earl of Es^ex 57 Sir William Compton 145
Sir Thomas Cheyney 466 Sir John Cheek 191 Sir William Cordel 369 Sir Anthony
Cook 373 Sir W. Cecil L. Burleigh 473 Sir Thomas Challoner 534 Sir James Crofts
569 Cliffords Earls of Cumberland 721 Sir R. Cecil E. of Salisbury 730 Sir
George Calvert 750 Sir Arthur Chichester 753 L. Cranfield E. of Mid. 778 Sir
Robert Carry 794 Doctor Richard Cousin 817 Lord Chief Justice Cook 820 Lord
Cottington 906 Sir Dudly Carleton 910 Lord Conway 919 Sir Julius Caesar 934
Earl of Carnarvan 1014 The Cary's Lords Viscoun^s Faulklands 938 Lord Capel
1021 Sir John Culpepper 1042 Sir Georg^ Crook 949 James Hay E. of Carlisle 774
Sir Thomas Coventry 978 Sir John Cook 944 L. Herbert of Cherbury 1017
D.
SIr Thomas Darcy 130 T. Gray, Marquess of Dorset 152 Dudly D. of
Northumberland 420 W. Devereux E. of Essex 486 Edward Earl of Derby 547 Sir
William Drury 558 Doctor Dale 564 Sir James Dier 595 Secretary Davison 624 Sir
G. Hume, E. of Dunb 740 Sir Robert Dudley 761 John L. Digby, E. of Bristol 838
The Digges 921 Earl of Danby. 9^8
E.
THomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex 57 W. Howard, L. Effingh Sir Ralph Ewers 458 W.
D. Earl of Essex 486 D. Devereux E. of Essex 634 Sir Thomas Edmonds 962 L.
Chancellor Egerton 755 Sir Clement Edmonds 772 Sir T. Ereskin, E. of Kelly.
782
F.
SIr Jeffery Fenton 626, 661 Sir John Fineux 81 Doctor E. Fox, Secretary 86 Sir
Edward Fines 408 Sir John Fortescue 556 Doctor Giles Fletcher 662 The Carys,
Lords Viscounts Faulkland 938 Sir John Finch 971
G.
THo. Gray, Marquess of Dorset 152 Ste. Gardener Bish. of Winch. 451 John Gray
of Pyrgo 569 Lord Gray of Wilton 571 Sir Henry Gates 569 Arthur Gray, Baron of
Wilton 588 Sir Humphrey Gilbert 626 Sir Fulk Grevil, L. Brook 727 Oliver
Saint-John Grandison 767
H.
SIr William Herbert 457 D. Walter Haddon 627 Sir Tho. Howard 131 of Surrey and
Norfolk. Sir Ed. Howard 141 of Surrey and Norfolk. Sir Th. Howard 142 of Surrey
and Norfolk. Will. Howard, L. Effingh 401 Sir G. Hume E. of Dunb. 740 James Hay,
E. of Carlis^le 774 Henry Howard Earl of Northampton 780 Sir John Ramsey, Earl
of Holderness 782 Sir Nicholas Hyde 931 Christopher Lord Hatton 521 Lord
Hunsdon 526 Sir Richard Hutton 967 W. Marquess Hertford 969 Lord Howard Earls
of Nottingham 735 Henry E. of Holland 987 Marquess Hamilton 1005 Sir Ralph Lord
Hopton 1008 L. Herbert of Cherbury 1017 Archbishop Heath. 526
I.
Sir John Fitz-James 114 Sir William Fitz-James 123 Sir John Jefferies ^21 Sir
Arthur Ingram 798 Archbishop Juxon 1038
K.
SIr William Kingston 462 Sir Henry Killigrew 584 The Knowls 617 Sir T. Ereskin
E. of Kelley 782
L.
SIr Anthony St. Lieger 89 Earl of Liecester 518 Sir Thomas Lake 777 and 788
Sir Ja. Ley, E. of Marlb. 943 Earl of Lindsey 975 Archbishop Laud 991
Lord Keeper Littleton 1003
M.
SIr Thomas Moor 42 Sir Rich. Morison 102 Sir William Molineux 118 Sir Henry
Marney 147 Sir John Mason 208 Sir Edward Mountague 404 Sir Thomas Manors 458
Sir Walter Mildmay 554 ^ir Roger Manwood 576 Lord Mountjoy 664 L. Cranfield E.
of M. 778 Bishop Mountague 800 Sir Henry Martin 925 Sir Ja. Ley E. of Marlb.
943. M. Earl of Manchester. 1027
N.
DUdley D. of Northumberland 420 Duke of Norfolk 540 Lord North 564 The
Norrices 617 H. Howard, E. of Northampton 780 Lord Howard, Earl of Nottingham
735 Sir Robert Naunton 795 Sir Francis Nethersole 795 W. Noy, Atturney-General
892 Sir Augustine Nichols 929
O.
SIr Thomas Overbury 796 H. Vere Earl of Oxford 810
P.
EEmund Plowden 573 Sir William Paget 99 Sir Ed. Poynings 248 The Parrs 187 Sir
Clement Paston 202 Sir John Portman 397 Sir Amias Pawlet 568 Sir William Pelham
599 Sir Barn. Fitz-Patrick 412 Sir William Peter 430 Cardinal Pool 435 Sir John
Perrot 510 Sir William Pickering 530 G. Earl of Pembrook 552 William Lord
Pawlet 593 Sir John Puckering 607 Sir John Packington 616 L. Chief-Iustice
Popham 759 Westons, Earls of Portland 914 Will. E. of Pembrook 917 Sir Paul
Pinder. 964
R.
LOrd Rich 204 Sir Tho. Randolph 564 Sir John Russel 1. E. of B. 442 Tho.
Ratcliffe, E. of Sussex 490 Sir William Russel 629 Sir ^homas Roper 630 Sir
Walter Rawleigh 670 Sir Joh. Ramsey, E. of Hold 782 Sir Thomas Ridley 923 Esme
Duke of Richmond 957 Edw. E. of Rutland 667 Sir Thomas Roe 1035 Judge Richardson
97^
S.
CHAPTER Brandon D. of Suffolk 27 Sir Richard Cecil E. of Salisbury 730 Sir Ralp
Sadler 95 Sir Tho. Wriothesly 1. E. of Southampton 111 Sir Edw. Stanly 136 Sir
Chapter Somerset 150 Sir Thomas Smith 560 R. Earl of Somerset 742 Ed. Stafford D.
of Bucks 159 The Seymours 172 Sir Will. Stamford 216 T. Ratcliff, E. of Sussex
490 Sir Philip Sidney 501 Sir Henry Sidney 602 Sir Th. Howard 131 of Surrey and
Norfolk. Sir Ed. Howard 141 of Surrey and Norfolk. Sir Th. Howard 142 of Surrey
and Norfolk. Fr. Talbot E. of Shrewsb. 533 Sir John Smith 668 Th. Sackvil, L.
Buckhurst 677 E. of Suffolk 792 Sir Thomas Smith 724 Lord Spencer 841 Oliver
Saint-John, L. Grandison 767 Sir John Savil 895 Lord Say 972 Sir T. W. E. of
Strafford 980
T.
BIshop Tonstal 531 Fr. Talbot E. of Shrewsbury 533 Sir Nich. Throgmorton 543
V.
SIr Henry Umpton 632 H. Vere E. of Oxford 810 The Veres 812 Sir H. Vane Senior
965 G. V. D. of Buckingham 843
W.
CArdinal Wolsey 1 Sir Thomas Wyat 76 Doctor Nich. Wott^n 107 Sir Tho.
Wrioth^^, 1. E. of Southampton 111 Sir Robert Wingfield 157 Sir Thomas
Wentworth 197 Doctor Tho. Wilson 390 Ste. Gardener Bishop of Winton 451 Lord
Willoughby 497 Sir Francis Walsingham 513 Sir Edward Waterhouse 536 Sir Will.
Fitz Williams 549 L. Gray of Wilton 571 Sir Christopher Wray 578 E. of
Worcester 581 Arth. Gray Baron of Wilton 588 Sir William W^ad 601 Sir Ralph
Winwood 826 Bishop Williams 897 Sir Isaac Wake 904 Westons Ea^ls of Portland
914 Sir Henry Wotton 1029 Lord Wilmot 1035 Sir T. Wentworth, Earl of Strafford
980 Robert Earl of Warwick 987
Y.
SIr Henry Yelverton 799
STATE-WORTHIES, OR, THE STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of
King Henry the VIII.
Observations on the Life of Cardinal WOLSEY.
CArdinal Wolsey was not so great in his Fortune, as he was mean in his
Original: his honest and industrious Parents helped him to a good Constitution,
and a large Spirit, (two hopeful steps to greatness;) though one has said of
him, Brave Priest, whoever was thy Sire by kind,
Wolsey of Ipswich nere begat thy mind.


His Ambition gave him the opportunity to increase his parts; he was as
pregnant at Ipswich-School, as he was promising in Magdalen College; where he
was Batchelour of Arts at 15 years of Age, and therefore called the
Boy-Batchelour; His Industry and parts advanced him to a command over Noble men
of the Marquess of Dorset's Family, as Schoolmaster; as his Policy promoted
him to an Imperiousness over Kings in the quality of Statesmen. The first step
to Greatness in a Scholar, is Relation to a Nobleman: The best Education for
the Court, is in the Palace. Nature made him capable, the School and University
made him a Scholar; but his Noble Employment made him a Man. At Oxford he read
Books, at my Lord's he read Men, and observed Things: His Patrons two
Parsonages bestowed upon him, was not so great a Favor as the excellent
principles instilled into him; he being not more careful to Instruct and
Educate the young Men, then their Father was to Tutor him: his Bounty makes him
Rich, and his Recommendation Potent: His Interest went far, his Money farther.
Bishop Fox was Secretary to K. Henry the seventh, and he to Bishop Fox; the one
was not a greater Favorite of the King's, than the other was his; as one that
brought him a Head capable of all Observations, and a Spirit above all
Difficulties. Others Managed the Affairs of England, Wolsey understood its
Interest: His Correspondence was good abroad; his observations close, deep, and
continued at home: He improved what he knew, and bought what he knew not. Being
a Master of so happy a reservedness, as to what he understood not, that in all
those variety of things that tried his parts, he never came under the reproof
of Meg^by^es, to whom Apelles said. Whilst thou wast (...) seemed^t to ^e some
bod^, but now the^e is not the meane^ Boy that g^i^^e^^ O^ker, bu^ he laugheth
a^ ^hee. And as he (...) in his spe^ch, so he ^as (...) in ^is ca^^^age, till
the suc^^ss of lesse^ ^ction^ fle^hed him for greater.

He could m^ke any thing he read or heard, his own; (...) imp^^ve any thing
that was his own to (...)

One Chri^tmas ^^^^^^ment to the Marquess of Dorsets from Ma^^al^n C^lledge,
where he was fellow and Scho^^e-^^^te^, was like to have undone him, at the
^ame ^ime that it made him; for that debonairne^^ whe^eb^ he hoped to open the
way to Honor as a Courtier, occasioned his disgrace as a Minister.

Sir James Pawlet, (who for six d^ys Imprisonment of him in Somersetshire,
s^ffe^^d six years Confinement by him in the Middle Temple and the Gate House,
until he was glad to ado^^e one Prison at a great Charge, with the badge and
Cognizance of the Cardinals greatness, to abate his displeasure, as he said, he
had di^graced another with a Schoolmasters meanness to provoke it,) thought
fit to Commit him for that activity, for which others advanced him; and that to
a Capacity, (^ee the instability of humane affairs; the Greate^t should not
presume, the meanest should not despond) of having the Knight as much at the
Sc^ool-Masters pleasure, as the School-Maste^ was at his humor. For having lost
the Marquess, through whom he hoped to show himself with advantage at Court, by
death, and his fellowship at Magdalen, where he might have appeared with
app^au^e in the University, by Resignation, he Traveled himself into the old
Trea^urer of Callis favor and service, first as his Chaplain, then as his
Deputy, and by him to K. H. 7ths. notice: to whom he became, by dextrous
addresses to the two then great Favou^ites Bishop Fox and Sir Thomas Lovel,
known as well by his sharp and solid discourses in the Closet, as by his
discreet and modest behavior in the Chapel, to be capable of two things,
Business by his diligence, and Trust by his Reservedness, both tried in an
Embassage to Maxamilian the Emperor; his first employment performed so
quickly, that the King checked him for not being gone, when he presented
himself to signify that he was returned; and so prudently and effectually,
that according to his duty he fulfilled all those Instructions given with him,
and out of hi^ discretion those likewise too late sent after him; answe^ing the
wise King, who asked him whether he met the Pursivant he sent after him? that
he met him and read his Letters, the matter whereof he had dispatched,
concieving it necessary, for which he craved pardon, confessing it a
presumption; the sage King vouchsafeing him not only pardon, but applause,
promising himself the greatest Services from one that had giv^n so good an
earnest. And indeed he had better success in serving others, than his
dependents had in serving him; for it was Mr. Cromwels great complaint to him,
and his great trouble within himself, that he had not taken all the
opportunities offered him, to advance his Servants while he stood, that they
might have had abilities to assist him when he was fallen; for when he was
reduced to a Pension of 4000. marks at Winches^er, and had his Lands belonging
to his Colleges at Ox^o^d and Ipswich seized on by the Praemunire to the Kings
use, and the Abbey at St. Albons divided among the Courtie^s, he was forced to
borrow 200. l. of John Higdon his first Dean of Christ-Church, to pay and
rewa^d some of his poorest Servants, on this condition, that they should not
suscipere gradum Simonis, and having served a Cardinal, wait on any other below
the King. Indeed his Estate in his prosperity was little enough for his
Magnificence, which performed great things, and designed greater; and in his
ad^ersity little enough, for his Charity, which he dispensed in all places
between the Charterhouse at Richmond, where he began to dye Religiously, and
the Abbey at Leicester where he dyed naturally: a Charity, which added to his
reading Divine Service, and Preaching in some Churh every Sunday, his open
house all the week days, the familiarity and sweetne^s of his converse, and the
humility of his life, gained him as great a Respect in the North as he had lost
in the South.

No sooner was he in with the Bishop of Winchester, but the Bishop was out with
the Earl of Surrey; to whom he must have stooped, as he did unto Nature and
Age, had not be raised his Servant equal to himself in the Kings Favor, and
above Howard. He was sorbid by the Canon, Heirs of his Body; he was enjoined by
his Prudence to make an Heir of his Favor, equally to support and comfort his
old Age, and m^intain his Interest. Children in point ^f Policy, as in Nature,
are a Blessing, an^ as Arrows in the hand o^ a mighty man; and ^appy i^ that
o^d Courtie^ that has his Q^iver ^ull of them, he shall not be a^^amed when he
speaks with his Enemies in the gate. The old man com^end^ Wo^sey to Henry the
Seventh ^or one fit to ^erve a King, and c^mmand Ot^er^. Foreign Employment is
the Statesmans first School; to France therefore he is ^ent, to poise his
English Gravity with French Debonairness: A well-poised Q^ickness is ^he
excellent temper. From Foreign Employment, under an old King, he i^ called home
to some D^mestick Services under the Young One. He as quickly ^ound the length
of His Foot, as he fitted him with an easy Shoo; the King followed his
Pleasures, and the Cardinal enjoyet^ His Power; The One pursued his sports
while Youth, the other his Bu^i^ess while Time served him^ ( Give me to Da^^
and take thou to Morrow, is both the Courtier and the Chri^tian's Language:)
The Favorite took in the C^uncil-Table Deba^es, and other State-affaires in
the Mass and whole Bulk of them by Day, and the King had the Q^intesse^ce of
them extracted, and the sum of them represented to him at Night. All
State-Business was disposed of by him, and most Church-Preferments bestowed
upon him; the Deanery of Lincoln, the Kings Almonership, a house near
Bridewell, Durham^ Winchester, Bath, Worcester, Hereford, Tourney, Lincoln,
St. Albons and York were in his p^ssession; and all other Promotions in his
Gift: He was installed in the Kingdom (during King Henry's youthfulness) and
had the Church in Commendam. His great Services indeed could not be managed
without a great Revenue, nor his greater Power supported, but by an able Purse,
which may buy off Expedients as readily as his Greatness may command them.

His pithy and his witty sentences at the Starr-Chamber made him Speaker there,
and his fluent Tongue the most forward every where else; his clear Head and
smooth Tongue engrossed all the Kings Favor, and most persons addresses, which
advanced his Estate much, and hi^ Reputation more: in so much that the
management of, and Provision for the great Voyage to France, 5. H. 8. by Sea
and Land was trusted to his sole Care; and ordered to very good effect by his
sole Discretion: not neglecting his own affairs while he provided for the
King's, being the most dextrous by his correspondents at discovering
Preferments, the closest at attaining of them; the quickest at Pos^essing them,
and the most skillful for Improveing them of any man living; Punctual in
keeping up the honor of his Place, witness his advanceing of his Cr^sses as
Primate of England, above those of Canterbury as Prima^e of all England (pity
s^ith one, that they who should conte^d de pascendis ovibus should fall out de
lana caprina) and what Jurisdiction he wanted as A^ch-B^shop, he made up as
Cardinal, Legate de latere and Chancellor. In which capacity, he kept 500
Servant^, among whom 9 or 10 Lords, 15 Knights, and 40 Esquires: in which
respect he was sent upon two Embassies of State to the Emperor Charles the
5th. in Flanders to the great honor of the English Nation. He entertained all
Ambassadors, to the great satisfaction of all Foreign Princes, and the King
often to his great content, administering to his Majesty's Pleasure, that he
might enjoy his power; discovering as great skill in his Treats as in his
Government, especially careful o^ three things.

1. His Pomp, to keep his place from contempt, it being not enough for a man in
Authority to have a power that may awe the Judgment of the wise to subjection,
unless he have a pomp too, that may dazzle the eyes of the vulgar into
Veneration: though Envy is the most dangerous thing that can happen to a
private man, yet contempt is the worst thing that can befall a public person;
this weakening the being of the later which consi^ts in his power, as the other
does the comfort of the first, which consists in his Peace. 2. His Devotion,
neglecting not one Collect of his Prayers for all the cumbrances of his place,
wherein he deceived many of the people, thinking he had no time for his
Devotion from his business, and his Servan^s wondering how he could gain time
for his business from his Devotion; he made Conscience of Religion, because in
his experience of affairs he met with many providence of God that made him
really believe it; he made no show of it, because the world believed such men
as he did but pretend it. 3. His Health, never going out without a perfumed
Orange into the great Crowd that always awaited him, to whom al persons came
first before they went to the King: that he wanted such things, was to sober
men argument of the Frailty of the greatest man; that he used them, was to
envious men an argument of the pride o^ a poor man. Which puteth me in mind of
Plinyes description of a man, than whom he says, there is not a living
Creature more wretched or more Proud: For the last of which qualities, it was
that our Icarus, though a man of great capacity, large expe^ience, and
comparative moderation, moultred his wing so soon in the beams of Royal
Majesty. Bu^ a^ our Laureate has it, God help the man so wrapped in Errors
endless train, one Anticyra, has no^ Hellebore enough to cure him.
Two Corrivals he had, Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Charles Brandon Duke
of Suffolk: Brandon he despised, as rather besides, says my Author, than
against him; h^ being the Kings Companion in pleasure, and Wolsey his
Counselor in Policy; the Duke great with young Henry, the Bishop with the
King: Buckingham he feared, as popular; and undermined, as proud: (that Tower
must fall, who^e Foundation is hollow) Buckingham was high in Birth, Honor,
and Estate, Wolsey higher in Prudence, whose Malice did the brave Duke much
mischief, and his own folly more: (Vainglory (writes my Friend) ever lies at
open guard, and gives much advantage of play to her Enemies:) A deboyst King is
jealous, and a weak Nobleman ambitious. In fine, he is attainted of High
Treason, (though rather Corrival to the King in his Clothes than his Crown, in
his Vanities than his Authority:) but a cunning Upstart quickly blows off a
young Noblemans Cap and Fea^her, and his Head too, when it stands in his way.
Tarquin instructed more than his own Son, by striking off the heads of the
Poppies.

His power against Buckingham was his Shield against all others: One defense
well managed, one Adversary thoroughly suppressed, is a Security at Court, where
two men s^ldom fall the same way.

Many envied the Archbishop, the Cardinal, the Legate de latere, the Lord
Chancellor; but all feared the Favorite: most were discontented, but none
durst shake their Heads, le^t they fell off with Buckingham's: the Bishops
displeasure was more fatal than the Kings, whose wrath was violent, but no^
lasting; as the Others anger was of less fury, but more malice, real, and more
secret, he having set up as indiscernible way of Intelligence, as Angels do of
Communication; he and his correspondents understanding one another, not by
discourse, but by the present state of things; as those Intelligences
understand one another, not by speech, but by Ideas. His Power was great, and
his Justice equal; for he was too proud to be bribed, and too powerful to be
overborn. But England was too narrow a Theater for this great Spirit, and he
aspires to Rome; and having been these many years Pope of this other world,
would have been of that beyond the waters: his leap was great, from York to
Rome, and his rise as good: Charles the Fifth was his Client, and his Masters
Servant; the Cardinals were his Pensioners; and when they failed (as he is no
Fox whose Den has but one hole, and he no Statesman who when one way is
stopped, cuts not out another) he falls off from the German Emperor to the
F^ench King: where, if he could not carry his own Design, he would hinder the
Emperors; (and Revenge is an Advancement) (so great was he, that his
Friendship balanced Europe, overawed Emperors, threatened Kings, and was fatal
to Queens) if he cannot be Pope of Rome, he will show he is as good as King of
England; for finding that the King wanted a meet Yoak-Fellow for his Bed, and a
lawful Heir-Male to his Crown, and observing Queen Katharines Age above her
Husbands, and her Gravity above her Age, being more Pious than pleasant, a
better Woman than Wife, and a better Wife for any Prince than King Henry; he
promotes a Divorce (upon some Scruples intimated by the Spaniard some years
before in a Treaty about the Princess Mary's Marriage, which others had
forgot, but the Cardinal laid up) between the King and Queen: but that was not
all; but knowing that King Henry could not have a Wife to his mind, until he
had a Pope of his own choosing, he would help him to a young Wife, but he must
raise him to a new Power; Wolsey must be Pope, or King Henry could not be
divorced: and to make all sure, he was no sooner to be parted from a Daughter
of Spain, than he was to be joined to a Princess of France; whose Nuptial Ring
should wed King Henry to Her, and King Francis to Himself.

Two ways did he disoblige Queen Anne Bullein that was his deadly enemy, 1. by
dissolving the Contract between her and the Lord Piercy, the Earl of
Northumberlands Eldest Son, to please the King, 2. by endeavoring to hinder,
or at least delay the Marriage between her and the King, to gratify himself;
whom in vain afterward, by Inventions unheard of, he endeavored to please as
well as the King; when he saw the Contrivances of a great Wit, the Allurements
of a Famous Beauty, and the malice of a disappointed Woman, joined to the envy
of the greatest Lord, whom he had ordered as irrespectively as the meanest
subject. When it is once past Noon with a Court-Favourite, it is presently
Night with him: for knowing that the Cardinal was cunning, and the King not yet
cruel, they longed to have him at York while at Londen; and again they contrive
to bring him to London while at York; the first upon pretense that he might do
good, the last with design that he might do no harm. Sed nullae sunt
occultiores insidiae quam hae quae latent in simulatione officij: as he
observed the method of some old cunning Parliament Men, who when they had a
mind to cross a Bill, were always highest for it in the House (as the Eagle
carried the shell up in the sky to break it) and would insert so many, and so
great inconveniences into the Act, that they were sure it could never pass.

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen.

Missing of Power, he meditates Honor; and instead of lavishing his infinite
Treasure upon airy Expectations, he bestows it on real Monuments; witness the
great work at Callice, etc. which makes his Memory a Renowned as his Life. That
Statesman lives to small purpose, whose Actions are as short as his Life, and
his Exploits of no longer duration than his Age.

At this time, though King Henry bore the Sword, yet Cardinal Wolsey (as I am
told) bore the stro^e all over the Land, being Legate a latere, by ver^us
whereof he visited all Churches and Religion, Houses, even the Friars
Observants themselves, notwithstanding the stoutness and stubbornness that
first opposed him. Papal and Royal Power met in him, being the Chancellor of
the Land, and keeping so many Bishoprics in Commendam, that his yearly Income
is said to equal, if not exceed the Revenues of the Crown. He gave the first
blow to Religious Houses, by making one great Cardinal College, now
Christ-C^urch, (of which one comparing his project with his performance, said,
Instituit Collegium, absolvit Popinam. And another being asked what he thought
of the ampleness of the Foundation, answered, Fundatione nihil amplius; to
which I may add his College at Ipswich,) of forty small Monasteries; to make
way, as some thought, upon the Popes consent, procured by him, to the overthrow
of all.

He called all Captains and Officers to an accoun^, who bought off their own
small corruption with his great one, and paid him the penalties of their Cheats
with the Gains of it; the Richest of them escaping, and the poorest only made
exemplary. Several Courts of pretended Equity he erected; to redress the poor,
that was the Color; to enrich himself, that was the Reality: at whose
constitution the Law-Courts were unfrequented, so specious was their seeming
Integrity; at the ls^t they are deserted, so manifest was their real
Grievances; the people not flocking so fast after the Novelty, as they ran away
from the Cheat: though his pretense was fair, that the Kingdom should not be a
Commonwealth of Fish, where the greater devoured the Less.

What he did to reform the Courtiers, as a F^vourite, he did to reform the
Clergy as Legate; erecting a Court Legantine (not without danger of a
Praemunire) wherein all Clergy were visited; the Rich in their Purses, that
excused them; the Poor in their Reputation, that compounded for them. Neither
did his profits arise from the Living only, but the Dead; he engrossing the
Probation of all Wills and Testaments within his own Court: he had petty
projects, viz. that Children should fo^low their Fathers Profession, saying
that he observed, that the Fathers Eminency in any act, begat in the Child a
propension to the same; and where two or three successi^e Generations happily
insist in the steps one of another, they raise an art to great pe^fection, and
liked well the prudence of our Parliaments in permitting the Eldest Son of
Barons to be p^esent at their C^nsultations to fit them by degrees, for the
person they are to sustain.

And not long after, he has a Pa^e^t under the Great Seal of England, to do
what he pleased in the French Count, in order to the King^ Progress thither;
as he has likewise after, with his Masters leave, under the great seal of
France: After which honor, he was with the Kings Order, by English Subjects,
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc. honored at no less rate than that of a
Prince; and by the Clergy (who kept close to the public temper) with
Processions, etc. at the same rate with a Pope. Great he was in England;
greater in Germany, where all the Nobili^y attended him, the Great Seal of
England was carried before him; and the Emperor o^serving his Commission and
Honor, met him with his whole Train, and harangued it with him no less than
two days. He that overruled Empires might well presume on Subjects; and no
sooner therefore does he return, than by his own Authority he levieth four
shillings in the pound of every man that was worth fifty pound per annum; and
when that would not do (pretending to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen that he had
been upon his Knees to revoke those Commissi^ns) other Letters for a
Benevolence, which lost him as much in the Country, as his Reformation of the
Household did him at Court. But the King employeth him to France, as his Second,
and takes his leave of him as hi^ intimate Friend; 1200 Horse attended him:
Callice^ Bullein, Amiens honor him with the name of The Peaceable Cardinal;
and the Statue of a Cardinal Rescuing a Church and a Pope from danger, whom yet
underhand he brought into danger, making the Duke of Bourbon General against
the King of France to Revenge himself; and yet making an underhand Peace with
France [which the Duke knew not of, till he took the Instrument of Peace Sealed
at the Castle of Pavia] to please others; for which last exploit, carried on
privately by receiving the French Ambassador as an Italian Jester, the Duke of
Bourbon resolved to go and Sack Rome, and punish all the Cardinals he could
come at for the fault of one he could not. But though his Arms reached him
not, the Court Wits did; persuading his Ambition to go upon a splendid
Embassy, to Reconcile all the Christian Princes abroad, that they might have
the better advantage to withdraw from him the Favor of his own Prince at home;
contriving likewise, that all the Friends he had at Court should be of his
Retinue in the Ambassie, both to increase the envy of his train, and to weaken
the strength of his Interest: It was observed that he gave three Rules to his
Company the morning he went from Callis; 1. That they should take care of the
Sovereigns Honor that Employed him. 2. That they should observe the natural
Civility and Sobriety of the Nation they came from. 3. That they should retain
as much reservedness as became the Affair he went abo^^; giving them a Caution
of the French in t^ese words, viz. that at their first meeting, they wou^d be
as familiar as if they had known them by long acquaintance; and of t^emselves
in these that they should not speak of any matter of Importance, but in their
own Language, lest they should ^^scover that for want of words which they
should hide with them.

Very exact he was in the honou^able circumstances of address, abateing the
French King not (...) in their approaches one to anoth^r, but most exact in the
particulars of the T^eaty, yei^ding not a point to the whole Council o^ France;
for knowing that their own convenience, not their Love brought the Treaty
about, he would often fling away, and make the King and Queen Regen^ Court him
to renew the Consultation, which otherwise he m^st have caressed them to. Fear,
not Love is the pas^ion of Commonwealths. But his entertainment from the King
his Master at home, was not answerable to his Service abroad; nor the applause
from the Noblemen, Judges, and Justices of the Peace of each shire in England
(cited from the Country to hear an account of his great League, that they
might report it to the Country) suitable either to his Eloquence or Action at
Star Chamber, or his great expectation. The first Court design upon him, after
his return, was an entertainment to the French Ambassador, enjoined by the King
to beggar him; the next was a discovery made to him of the Kings Love to Q. A.
Bullein, (its dangerous to know Kings Secrets) from which he dissuaded his
Majesty by Entreaties on his Knees, and by Arguments from the most Learned men
in the Kingdom which he Consulted with, and in both Universities which he sent
to. Its not safe standing in the way of a Kings Lust, though indeed the
Cardinals Enemies had possessed themselves both of the King and the peoples
apprehensions, so far, that his Majesty was wrought upon to be angry with him,
because he was persuaded that he was against his Divorce; and the people were
incensed against him (as he declared to the King at the Court in Bridewell)
because they were made believe that he was for it.

Many chafing discourses (as he called them) had he with the King, whom yet he
would cool with the gentleness of his behavior; many affronts from Noble men:
Especially one, whose head he had kept on, threatened his off. Often would he
dissuade the King from persuing his design; often upon the Kings solicitations
did he and Cardinal Campein persuade the Queen to Reti^e.

At Grafton in Northamptonshire was the first step of his Fall, when the King
went to Dine with Queen Anne Bullein, and left him to shift among the Servants.

Queen Anne pressed the King with the poor Condition he had brought the
Subjects to; others into what great Estate he had raised himself. First he
returns from Court to Westminster, and the broad Seal, with his rich furnished
house, being taken from him, afterward to Putney, or Ashur; when he that could
have furnished Kings with accomodations, was furnished himself by the Bishop of
Carlisle. Afraid they were he should have a sum of money to live upon at
Rome, therefore they searched Cardinal Campeius Train at Callis; more afraid he
should have an habitation near the King: therefore ^hey demanded his House as
Bishop of York called White Hall, which the Cardinal (entreating the Judges
that came to take his Recognizance, to teach the King not only what he might
do, but what he ought to do, and to put him in mind of the g^eatness of the
Eternal habitations as Hell and Heaven, as well as the convenience of earthly
dwellings) chose rather to give upon terms for Yorke-House, than to lose by
force.

The A^ticles against him in the House were bravely waved by his Servant Mr.
Cromwell, the grief of his heart much allayed by a Ring sent him from the King,
and a Tablet from the Queen; his Majesty's Physicians had a special Charge
about hi^ Health; and his Wardrobe about his House: but this was only a
Lightning before Death, to ex^sperate his Enemies rather than gratify him.

Cardinal Wolsey going over to France, upon an extraordinary Embassy, had for
his Attendance Tonstal Bishop of London, the Lord Sands, late Chamberlain, the
Earl of Derby, Sir Tho. More, Sir H. Guilford, and 200 Horse; and was met two
days journey from Paris by King Francis and his Mother, carr^ing with him
140000. l. though sil^er was but 20 d. an ounce, to assist that King in the War
against Charles the fifth; and furnished with such a Plenipotentiary
Commission, that he gave Law to France and the Popedom: and he ^^mported
himself with such dexterity and high wisdom, that all the Princes of
Christendom, who had their eyes fixed upon him, admired him.

The King gave him many places, and he bes^owed on him his magnificent Palaces;
White Hall, that Good Hypocrite, mo^e convenient within, than comely without,
Hampton Court, Windsor; the two first to be resident in, and ^he last ^o be
buried in. ( Arma tenenti omnia dat, qui justa negat)^ fi^ting his humor with
pleasant habitations, as he suited his ambition with power and authority.

But the King broke with him at last about the divorce, being vexed with so
many delays, defe^s, retardings, and prorogations between two Popes, Clement
that was, and Wolsey that would be: yet rather eased him of his bu^dens, than
deprived him of his preferments; continuing him Bishop of York and Durham,
(when he turned him out of his Chancellourship of England) where being sent by
that Lord, who would not endure him nearer the King, and could not get him
further, he lived rather like a Prince than a Priest, providing as
magnificently for his Installation, as a King should for his Coronation: which
unseasonable ambition was improved by his enemies malice, and the King's
jealousy to his ruin: for in the midst of his solemnities he is arrested by
the Kings order, signified by the Earl of Northumberland, whose wrath was the
Messenger of Death, and in his way to London, being distracted between hope and
fear, died at Leicester, where he was buried as obscurely as he was borne; and
breathing out his soul in words to this purpose, viz. If I had served the God
of Heaven as faithfully as I did my Master on earth, he had not forsaken me in
my old age, as the other has done. He died, swelling in his body, as he had
done in his mind, the pain being really in his heart, which seemed to be in his
guts; for when Northumberland whom he had b^ed, and a Privy Chamberman whom he
had preferred, were sent to him, he could still hope that ^he King intended him
Honor; but when Sir William Kingston, Lieutenant of the Tower, who carried a
restraint in his looks, came to him, he could not believe but he intended him
Punishment, keeping him only between the tickling hopes of p^e^erment, and
pinching fear of disgrace, to found his bo^tome, and to discover his Esta^e; so
well he took the first Arrest, that he di^ected the Messenge^s to execute their
Commission legally; saying, that he ought to yield himself to a
Privy-Chamb^rman on his word; though not to the Earl without his Commission;
So ill the second, that he could not govern himself tolerably. Very observant
he was of old Prophesies; applying that When the Cow rides the Bull,
Then Priest beware thy skull.
to Hen. 8. whose arms, as Earl of Richmond was a Cow; and Anne Bullein,
whose devise was a Bull: whose Love to each other, was the occasion of their
hatred to him.

And that, that he should have his end at Kingston, to King^ton upon Thames, a
Town he would not look on willingly while he lived; and to Sr William Kingston,
a man he would not with his good will hear of when he died: And fearful of new
Omens, Interpreting the falling of his Cross to break Bonners head, the f^ll
of the Church to the danger of his own. A serene and peaceable soul acts by
solid ^eason, a frighted and troubled one by fancy, imagination and
superstition; a mind in the dark of m^lancholy, and trouble, fears every
thing. The King not knowing his own changeble mind, would have given 20000 l.
he had lived; and his Enemies knowing it too well, gave 10000 l. that they
might be sure he should dye.

The one aiming at a booty from his Estate (as appeared afterward by his ^eward
to those Servants that discovered it; the other at their own security from his
power: both to his dying day, so great, that indifferent men thought them
enough, his foes too much, and he himself too little. Plenty without pomp, is
penury to pride, which Kings may make humbled, God only humble: He being able
to take away the fire, the Lu^t within; the other only to withdraw the Fuel,
the sta^e without.

Remarkable were his words of himself. This is the just reward that I must
receive for my diligent pains and study, not regarding my service to God; but
only my respect to the King. Flattery is the Common Moath of great Palaces,
where Alexanders friends are more than the Kings. Observable his caution to the
Counselors, whom he advised to take heed, what they should put into the Kings
head, for (said he) you can never put it out again. Heinous is the crime of
poisoning Fountains: and such is a Kings mind in a Commonwealth. Notable was
the Jealousy of his Enemies, who could not but believe he was alive, until the
Mayor and Corporation of Liecester [who were called therefore to view his
Corps] testified under their public Seal, that he was dead: But most notorious
his burial, that He, who from his own store late might have,
A Pala^e or a College for his Grave;
Should lie interred so obscurely, as if all
Of him to be remembered were his fall;
Nothing but earth to earth; no Pompous weight
Upon him, but a pibble or a quait.
Yet though his Fortune was not great, as his merit, or his merit as his mind;
he planted things that are like to last as long as men are either to do things
wo^thy to be written in books, or books are to record things worthy to be done
by men.

His Enemies made mock defenses for him, on pu^pose to overthrow him: So before
a serious War, Cities use to personate their adverse party, and feign mock
combats and skirmishes to encourage their friends, wherein you may be sure that
their own side shall conquer. Which puts me in mind of the Lions answer in the
Fable, when the picture of a man beating a Lion was produced to him, he said,
If a Lion had made this picture, he would have made the Lion above^ and the man
beneath. Nihil est quin male narrando possit depravarier.

One thing he advised young men to take care of in their public deliveries,
viz: that they should rather proceed, though more inaccurately, than stop
sensibly; few being able to discern the failu^e of a continued speech, when
all understand the mischance of a gross silence.

A Fellow having made a long Oration to his hearers, of the virtues of a
Feather, which he affirmed to have dropped from the wing of Michael the
A^ch-Angel; and the Feather being stolen from under his sleeve out of drollery,
and a Cinder put in the place of it to try hi^ humor, he went on c^^fidently
with his discourse; telling them, that though it was not the feather which he
had mentioned; yet it was one of the coals which St. Laurence was broyled with;
and had all those virtues which he had formerly ascribed to the feather.

When good men die suddenly, it is said they are poisoned; and when the bad
fall unexpectedly, as he did, it is said they poison themselves. He died
unpitied, because he had lived feared; being the great Bias of the Christian
World.

Too sudden prosperity in the beginning, undoeth us in the end: while we
expect all things flowing upon us at first, we remit our care, and perish by
neglecting. Every head cannot bear wine, nor every spirit ^ fortune: Success
eats up Circumspection. How many a man had ended better, if he had not begun so
well? It Is the Emphasis of misery, to be too soon happy: Prosperity growing up
with experience, makes a man in a firm settlement, inured to all events. I will
ever suspect the smooth waters for deepness: in my worst estate I will hope, in
the best I will fear; in all, I will be circumspect and still. R^ffling Ambition
reaches great Honor, a Sedate Humility supports it: the Lower the Basis, the
higher and stronger the Pyramide. Love, the Issue of Humility, guardeth the
weakest; Hat^ed, the Daughter of Pride, ruins the strongest. Ego and Rex meus,
was good Grammar for Wolsey a Schoolmaster; but not for the Cardinal a
Statesman. To be humble to Superiors, is duty; to Equals, is courtesy; to
Inferiors, is nobleness; and to all, safety; it being a virtue that for all
her lowliness commands those souls it stoops to. In a word, as I love Virtue,
so I hate Vice, for her inside and her end. Cardinal Wolsey is famous for two
things; that he never spoke a word too much, and but one too little.

The Lord Herbert's Character of Cardinal Wolsey, in his Life of Henry the
Eighth, page 314.
ANd thus concluded that great Cardinal: A man in whom ability of parts and
Industry were equally eminent; though, for being employed wholly in ambitious
ways they became dangerous Instruments of power, in active and mutable times.
By these arts yet he found means to govern not only the chief affairs of this
Kingdom, but of Europe; there ^eing no Potenta^e, which, in his turn, did not
seek to him: and as this procured him diverse Pensions, so, when he acquainted
the King therewith, his manner was, so cunningly to disoblige that Prince who
did fee him last, as he made way thereby oftentimes to receive as much on the
other side. But not of secular Princes alone, but even of the Pope and Clergy
of Rome he was no little courted; of which therefore he made especial use,
while he dr^w them to second him on most occasions. His birth being otherwise
so obscure and mean^ as no man had ever stood to single: for which reason also
his chief endeavor was not to displease any great person; which ^et could not
sec^re him For as all things passed through his hands. so they who failed in
their suits generally h^ted him: All whi^^, though it did but exasperate his
ill nature, yet this good resultance followed, that it made him take the more
care to be Just; whereof also he obtained the reputation in his public hearing
of Causes: For as he loved no body, so his Reason carried him. And thus he was
an useful Minister of his King in all points, where there was no ques^ion of
deserting ^he Roman Church; of which (at what price s^ever) I find he was a
zealous Servant; as hoping thereby to aspire to the Papacy, whereof (as the
fac^ious times then were) he seemed more capable than any, had he not so
immoderately affec^ed it. Whereby also it was not hard to judge of his
Inclination; that Prince, who was ablest to help him to this Dignity, being
ever preferred by him; which therefore was the ordinary Bait, by which the
Emperor and the French King one after the other did catch him. And, upon these
terms^ he doubted not to convey vast treasures out of this Kingdom, especially
unto Rome, where he had not a few ^ardinals at his devotion; by whose help,
though he could not attain that Supreme Dignity he so passionately desired, yet
he prevailed himself so much of their favor, as he got a kind of absolute
power in Spiritual Matters at Home: Wherewith again he so served the Kings
turn, as it made him think the less of using his own Authority. One error
seemed common to both, which was, That such a multiplicity of Offices and
Places were invested in him. For as it drew much envy upon the Cardinal in
particular, so it derogated no little from the Regal Authority^ while one man
alone seemed to exhaust all: Since it becomes Princes to do like good
Husbandmen, when they sow their Grounds; which is, to scat^er, and not to throw
all in one place. He was no great Dissembler, for so qualified a Person; as
ordering his businesses (for the most part) so cautiously, as he got more by
keeping his word, than by breaking it. As for his Learning, (which was far from
exact) it consisted chiefly in the subtilties of the Thomists, wherewith the
King and himself did more often weary than satisfy each other. His style, in
Missives, was rather copious than eloquent, yet ever tending to the point.
Briefly, if it be true (as Polydore observes) that no man ever did rise with
fewer virtues, it is true that few that ever fell from so high a place had
lesser crimes objected against him: Though yet Polydore (for being at his first
coming into England committed to Prison by him, as we have said) may be
suspected as a partial Author. So that in all probability he might have
subsisted longer, if either his pride and immense wealth had not made him
obnoxious, and suspected to the King, or that other. than Women had opposed
him: Who, as they are vigilant and close Enemies, so for the most part they
carry their businesses in that manner as they leave fewer advantages against
themselves than men do. In conclusion, As I cannot assent to those who thought
him happy for enjoying the untimely compassion of the people a little before
his end, so I cannot but account it a principal Felicity, that during his
favor with the King, all things succeeded better than afterward; though yet
it may be doubted whether the Impressions he gave, did not occasion diverse
Irregularities which were observed to follow. He died Nov. 29. 1529.

Observations on the Life of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
SIr William Brandon dying in King Henry the seventh's service, as his
Standard Bearer in Bosworth-field, no wonder if his son lived in his favor; it
being as prudent to continue his Loyal spirit in his son, as it was just to
reward it. He was as intimate with Henry the Eighth in his pleasures when a
child, as in his councels when a man. There was a sympathy between their active
spirits, which improved the familiarity of their tender years to a fi^m
friendship in their age; men of quick and large striding minds loving to walk
together: not to say the looser the lives, the faster the friends. At a Tilting
in Paris, to which many young Noblemen were licensed to go, Brandon overcame
others every day, and one day himself, (against a Giant Almain) where the Lords
looked not on him with more envious, than the Ladies with gracious eyes; who
(says my Author) darted more glances in love, than the other did spears in
anger against him. He is the complete Courtier, in whom Beauty and Valor, Mars
and Venus, are joined in one happy constitution, which awes and allures
Beholders.

Being employed to bring over Queen Mary, King Lewis the twelfth's Relict, to
her Brother, he won her to himself: whether his affections were so ambitious as
to climb up to her, or hers so humble as to condescend to him, may be ^he
subject of a more amorous discourse: and considering with himself that matters
of this nature are never sure till finished, that so Royal an opportunity
happened but seldom, and that leave ^or such an enterprise was easier gained
when it is done, than when doing; he humbly requested his Majesty to give way to
that Match, which was indeed already concluded: who, afte^ some State
discontent, was quickly pleased; the Duke being no less esteemed by him for
many years, than he was beloved by the people. His Genius was more Martial than
Mercurial; and we hear of him oftener in the French Wars, than in the English
Councils.

And in both, his plain overtures went farther than others fair harangues;
because these only hovered in men's fancies, those came home to men's business
and bosoms. He wondered at the m^n that pleased themselves in the liberty of
giddy fancies; and dreaded the ties of a ^ixed belief, for the public good,
not his own advantage, affecting (as one said well) free will in thinking, as
well as in acting; and at the new discoursing wits, that were as unsettled,
though not so rational as the old Scepticks, until he considered the difficulty
of discerning truth; the hardship of confining the Quicksilver thoughts within
the limits it prescribes, or submitting them to the burden it imposes. One of
the latter Schools of the Grecians examineth the matter, [it is the Lord
Verulams observation] and is at a stand to think what should be in it, that men
should love lies; where neither they make for pleasure as with Poets; nor for
advantage as with the Merchant, but for the lies sake. But I cannot tell why,
this same truth is a naked and open daylight, that does not show the Masks
and Mummeries, and triumphs of the present world half so stately and daintily
as Candlelights: Truth may perhaps come to the price of a pearl that shows
best by day; but it will not rise to the p^ice of a Diamond or Carbuncle that
shows best in varied lights: a mixture of lies does ever add pleasure. Does
any man doubt that if there were taken out of men's minds vain opinions,
flattering hopes, false valuations, imaginations as one would, and the like,
vinum daemonum as a Father calls Poetry, but it would leave the minds of a
number of men, poor shrunken things, full of melancholy, and indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves.

Clear and round dealing, this Noble man's temper, is the honor of man's nature;
and that mixture of falsehood is like allay in coin of gold and silver, which
may make the metal work the better, but embaseth it. For there winding and
crooked Courts are the goings of the Serpent, which goes basely upon the
belly, and not upon the foot. There is nothing of so ill consequence to the
public, a falsehood, or (speech being the current coin o^ converse) the
putting false money upon the world; or of so much prejudice to a man's own
interest, as perfidiousness which weakeneth his great security, which stands by
him when his estate and friend^ cannot; or so dark a blot as dissembling,
which, as Mountaign says prettily, is only to be Brave toward God, and a
Coward toward man: For a Lie faceth God, and shrinketh from man.

His hearr was too stout, and his head too clear to use those Arts of closeness
and dissimulation, which those need who have not judgment and wit enough to
discern all the circumstances of an affair, so as to know when to tell a truth;
nor courage and valor enough to look in the face of all the cons^quences of a
business, so as to own it: A man better made for the open Arts, and generous
policy of H. 8. than the suspicious closeness, and the wary reservedness of H.
7. His Father lost his life in completing the union of Roses, I mean York and
Lancaster; and he in beginning the union of Kingdoms, viz. England and Scotland
by treaty; and England and France by War: he being the first that durst fasten
the Royal Standard in the sides of Bulleign; and the last that advanced the St.
George in the middle of it, both taking and governing it. The greatest thing
that ever that age saw, was, if we believe Sleidan, the delivery of the Keys of
Bulleign by ^ French Governor to the Duke of Suffolks hand; and the greatest
thing King H. 8. saw, he says, was the delivery of those keys by the Duke,
into his hand: insomuch that despairing of greater, the one died that year, the
other the next.

Queen Elizabeth being to employ a famous Embassage into France, made choice of
two of the Noblest Peers of her Realm; equal in Rank, equal in Virtue: but the
one excused it by a defect in his hearing, and the other by an ignorance and
want of the French Language. To which the Queen smilingly replied: that it was
a miserable estate when her speaking Peers were deaf, and her hearing Peers
were dumb. Our Duke used to complain, that two of the most eminent m^n in the
Council in his time, had two different, but unhappy, qualities: the one a
well-spoken man, had such a humor, that he pretended he understood hardly any
body; the other a person of an excellent judgment, but speaking so darkly that
hardly any body understood him.

He avoided two things, first, Catching too soon at an offense: Secondly,
Yiedling too easy a way to anger; the one showing a weak judgment, the other a
perverse nature: which rendereth great men as ridiculous, as it did the
Ambassadors of Spain and Venice, who drew blood from one another in the most
August Assembly at the Coronation of R. H. 4th. Queen in France, because one of
them used the word excellency instead of the word Seigniory. But in these cases
he observed the Roman Discipline nec sequi, nec fugere, to be more prudent than
to catch at such trifling Cavils: and more courageous than to shun, if they
were offered to him: being very cautious also in mentioning the name of God in
small matters [ Nec deus Intersit nisi dignus vindice nodus, Inciderit.] and
more willing to build his resolution on the experience of former ages, than his
own thought; being very unwilling to be of the number of those people, who,
like the Chinois, think they have two eyes; their friends, as those think of
the Europaeans, one; and other men, as they think of the rest, blind.

Being vexed with the delays at Rome, and the delusions at Bridewel, (where the
Cardinals proceeded according to their instructions at Rome) one day he knocks
on the Table in the presence of the two Cardinals, and binds it with an Oath,
That it was never well in England since Cardinals had any thing to do therein:
and from that time forward, as an active Instrument, he endeavored the
abolishing of the Popes power in England; against whom he was not more active
in the Parliament 1534, than he was vigilant in the Committee, 1535: in the
one, cutting off the head; in the other, weakening the members of that Church.
He m^de provident, yet moderate use of his Masters favors; thereby obliging
others, and securing himself; being above Mercenary inclinations as much in his
thoughts, as in his ^ortune: he was neither too near the King, lest he were
weary of him; nor too far off, lest he forgot him, or thought himself neglected
by him. His intermissions of attendance gave others no advantage, but rendered
him more gracious: he neither engrossed nor confined his Masters affection. It
was easy for him to rise, being descended of Noble Blood, (which is never
envied for its advancement) and as easy to keep high, being well studied in
his Princes disposition, whose inclination when found is half fitted; ever
pleasing his Masters Natural humor, never his Vicious. Having attained a
competent height, he chose rather to grow stronger by relation, than higher by
advancement. Some Favorites, whose heels have been tripped up by their
adversaries, have with their hands held on their Allies till they could recover
their feet again. His familiarity, and the easy access to him, made him
popular: his pliant temper kept him a Favorite, until he died in the full
favor of his Prince; though (as Cardinal Pool observed) The^ who were highest
in the Kings favor, had their heads nearest danger. He had a becoming
Bluntness not unlike his Masters, which we call Free-heartedness in Courtiers;
Conscience and Christian simplicity in Clergymen; Valor in Soldiers. He died
anno 1544. and was buried at Windsor; much beloved and lamented of all, for his
Bounty, Humility, Valor, and all Noble Virtues since the heat of his Youth was
tamed by his reduced Age: whose two Sons Henry and Charles died within twelve
hours one of the other, of the sweating sickness at Cambridge, 1550.

He, knowing that learning has no enemy but ignorance, did suspect always the
want of it in those men, who derided the habit of it in others; like the Fox in
the Fable, who having lost his tail by mischance, persuaded others to cut
theirs as a burden. But he liked well the Philosophers division of men into
three Ranks, some who knew good, and were willing to teach others; these he
said were like Gods among men; others who though they knew not much, yet were
willing to learn; these he said were like men among Beasts; and some who knew
not good, and yet despised such as should teach them; these he esteemed as
Beasts among men. The most miserable men he esteemed them, who running their
head into a bush of confident ignorance, suppose that none see their weakness;
because they are not willing to take not^ce it of themselves.

1. A Calm Greatness is next the happiness of Heaven: Give me the man that by a
fair and calm course is rising to an higher state, yet content with his p^esent
fortune.

2. Integrity out-lasts Power, and Plainness survives Policy: An honest heart
keeps the head on the shoulders; a Noble and clear Virtue is lasting.

3. It Is likeness that makes the True-love-knot of friendship: When a Prince
finds another of his own disposition, what is it but the same soul in a divided
body? what finds he but himself inter-mutually transposed? And Nature, that
makes us love our selves, makes us with the same reason love those that are
like us: for this, is a Friend a more sacred Name than a Brother.

4. He that has a mind contentedly good, enjoys in it boundless possessions.
He is great indeed, that is great in a brave soul.

Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem,
Iucundissime Martialis, haec sunt:
Res^ non parta Labor, ^sed relicta;
Non ingratus Ager, focus perennis,
Lis nunquam, toga rara, men's quieta,
Vires Ingenuae, salubre Corpus,
Prudens simplicitas, pares amici,
Convictus facilis, sine art Mensa;
Nox non ebria, sed soluta curis;
Non tristis torus, attamen pudicus;
Somnus, qui faciat breves tenebras:
Quod sis esse velis, nihilque malis;
Summum ne metuas diem, nec optes.
Observations on Thomas Cranmer, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
CRanmer had a Noble Blood, quickening and raising his spirits, as he had an
indefatigable industry to improve it. He was a Gentleman born in Arselecton in
Nottinghamshire, and a Nobleman br^d in Iesus-Colledg in Cambridg. His
Ancestors were no less eminent at Cranmers-hall in Lincolnshire, than he was at
Lambeth in Surrey. They came in with the Conquest, (as one Cranmer a French
Ambassador in Henry the eighths time, at the Archbishops Table, made it
evident) and he with the Reformation. His Education was as Gentile as his
Birth, only his mild spirit meeting with a severe Master, his memory was
weakened, and his spiritfulness allayed: but the austerity of the School was
sweetened with the exercises of the Country, which his Father indulged him when
he was young, and he indulged himself when aged; handling his great Horse as
nimbly, his Bow and Net as dexterously as any man in his family. His Marriage
withdrew him from the College, and consequent Church-preferment, as the Kings
did him from the Church it self. He whose marriage forbid him a Fellowship in
Iesus-Colledge, had a Lecture in Buckingham-House for his Parts and Reputation,
where at once he prepared others for public Employments, and himself also. He
lived as soberly at the Dolphine-Tavern with his Wife, (whatever the Papists
have surmized) as he did studiously at Buckingham-house with his Scholars. His
Name was so famous, that Wolsey was not more solicitous to transplant him as an
Ornament to Oxford, then Fisher was to retain him in Cambridg; where he was
eminent for the Arts, mo^e for Divinity, which (when as one of the three
Censors he examined Candidates) he said he expected not in the difficult
trifles of Lumbard, but in the sacred sense of Scriptures, the ancient Doctrine
of Fathers, the grave Canons of Councils, the solid Politeness of the Greek and
Hebrew Learning, and which he lived as well as he taught, in his sober
temperance, his mild meekness, (so placable, so courteous, that to offend him,
was the way to ingratiate with him) his discreet moderation, his grave
resolution equally above the frowns and smiles of fortune. Thus qualified, he
was by a Providence commended to his Majesty: for there being a Plague in
Cambridge, as there was all over England, Dr. Cranmer retired to Waltham with
two of his Pupils, the sons of one Mr. Cressy: where upon the Kings Progress
thither, he met with his Chaplain and Almoner Dr. Fox, (afterward Bishop of
Hereford) who lodging with him at Mr. Cressy's, discoursed the Kings Divorce.
Cranmer conceived that the speediest course were to prove the unlawfulness of
the Ma^ch by Scripture; whence it would follow, that the Pope at first had no
power to dispense therewith; and that the Universities of Chri^tend^m would
sooner and truer decide the case than the Cour^ o^ Rome. This passage Fox
reports to the King, who well pleased thereat, professes that this man had the
Sow by the right Ear: Glad was the King to see him, (indeed he had a comely
Person, and a pleasing Countenance;) more to hear him enlarge himself on the
former Subject, That it was above the Popes power to dispense with Gods Word in
the Kings Case: What he said to the King, he was sent to make it good to the
Pope; whither, invested with the A^ch-Deaconry of Taunton^ he went with Thomas
Bullein Earl of Wiltshire; whose first Address to the Pope, was to present a
Book of Cranmers, proving Gods Law indispensible with by the Pope^ the Author
is preferred to the great Title of Supreme Poenitentiary, and the Treatise is
promised a Consideration and Debate: But the Pope delaying, and according to
Cranmer's Advice, ten Universities declaring against him; the Ambassador
returns to England, and the Dispu^ant goes to Vienna, where in Os^anders House
(whose Kinswoman he had married) he confirmed those that wavered, satisfied
those that doubted, and won those that contradicted in King Henry's Cause. But
he served not King Henry more faithfully in Germany, than he provided for him
honorably in England; where the Kings Cause waited for his Assistance, and the Sea of Cante^bury for his Acceptance: He was willing to promote Religion, he
was unwilling (for some Formalities he scrupled) to advance himself: but after
seven Weeks delay, it being as fatal to re^use King Henry's Favors, as to
offer him Inju^ies, he is Archbishop in his own De^ence; in which capacity, to
serve the King, and salve his own Conscience, he used the Expedient of a
Protestation to this purpose: In nomine, etc. Non est nec erit meae voluntatis
aut intentionis per hujusmodi Iuramentum and Iuramenta, qualiter verba in ipsis
posita sonare videbuntur, me obligare ad aliquid; ratione eorundem post hac
dicendum, faciendum aut attestandum, quod erit aut esse videbitur contra legem
Dei, vel contra Regem, aut Rempublicam, legesve, aut Praerogativa ejus: and
quod non intendo per hujusmodi juramentum quovis modo me obligare quo minus
libere loqui, consulere, and consentire valeam in omnibus and singulis
Reformationem Ecclesiae, prorogativam Coronae, concernentibus, and ea exequi
and reformare quae in Ecclesia Anglicana reformanda videbuntur. This
Protestation he made three times; once at the Charter House, another time at
the Altar, and a third time at the receiving of his Pall. In his place he was
moderate, between the Superstition of Rome, and the Phrensies of Munster. As he
was chief Instrument in beginning the Reformation, so he was in continuing it:
He withstood the Six Articles, and (though the King sent five prime Ministers
of State to comfort him) would not be satisfied, until he saw them mitigated in
King Henry's time, and repealed in King Edward's.

Gardener would have questioned him for entertaining foreign Heretics, and
promoting Domestic Schisms; the Northern Rebels accused him for subverting the
Church: but the King upheld him against both; suppressing the One, and checking
the Other; and advising the good Man, whom he called Fool, for his meek
disposition, to appeal to him: Whereupon Russel cried, The King will never
suffer him to be imprisoned, until you find Him guilty of High T^eason. He is
to be pitied for his intermediate failings, but renowned for his final
constancy.

The King having declared before all his Servants, that Cranmer was his best
Servant, he employeth him in his best service, the Reformation of Religion,
wherein all others failed; but the King, Cromwell, and Brandon backed him so
far, that he had the Bible and the necessary Offices of the Church translated
into English: He had both Universities at his command: He brought the Lords
House and Convocation to his Lure; and was invested with a Power. 1. To Grant
Dispensations in all things not repugnant to Gods Law, nor the Kings safety: 2.
To determine Ecclesiastical Causes. He as charitably as politickly advised the
King to accept of Bishop Fisher's partial Subscription, considering his
Learning and Reputation. As he is King Henry's Instrument at Dunstable, to
divorce him from Queen Katharine; so he is at Lambeth, to divorce him from Anna
Bullein. He promoted in the Convocation all Primitive Doctrines, and condemned
all newfangled Opinions. He was so charitable, that he interceded with the
King for his Enemies; so munificent, that he made the Church and his own House
a Refuge for Strangers; particularly for P. Fagius, P. Martyr, Martin Bucer,
etc. The King loved him for his Integrity, the People for his Moderation: He
was called the Kings Father, and was Queen Elizabeth's Godfather: His Piety
reduced the Church, and his Policy the State: He spoke little to others, he
conferred much with himself: Three words of His could do more than three hours
discourse of others: He would say, as Victorinus, There is a time to say
nothing, there is a time to say something, but there is never a time to say all
things. That King, who awed all Others, feared Him. A Second to the Eternal
Power, is the Wise Man incorrupt in his Life. He was the Executor of God's Will
in King Henry's Lifetime, and the first of His, after his Death.

As He spurred King Henry to a Reformation, so King Edward did Him; whose
Prudence was not so forward as the Others Zeal, who looked at what was Lawful,
as He did at what was Convenient. He maintained the Churches Power as
resolutely against Bishop Hooper's Scruples, notwithstanding potent
Intercession: as he reformed its Corruptions against the Popes Interest,
notwithstanding a general Opposition. He allowed not the least Error in, nor
the least contempt of the Church: He restored its primitive Doctrine and
Discipline, lest it should be an impure Church; he upheld them, lest it should
be none. He was one of fourteen that compiled the Common Prayer: He was One of
Two that set out the Homilies; and the only man that published the Institution
of a Christian man, and other good Books. With his Advice King Edward did much,
and designed more: He was the chief Author of King Edward's Injunctions, and
the first Commissioner in them: He was President of the Assembly at Windsor,
(for Reformation) and of the Council at London: His A^ticles were strict and
seve^e; as much grounded on the Canon of Scripture, as on the Canons of the
Church: He convinced more Papists with his Reason and Moderation, than others
by their Power: His Heart never failed him in his Life, and it was not burned
at his Death. He did so much for the Protestant Religion in King Henrys Days,
that he foresaw he should suffer for it in Queen Mary's. He was unwilling to
wrong Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, therefore he refused at first to sign
King Edwards's Testament, but Duke Dudley's Will: He was willing to continue
the Protestant Religion, therefore he signed it at last. It was a Bishop that
was one of the first that abolished Popery in England, and one of the last that
died for Protestantisme: It was a Bishop that maintained the Protestant Cause
with Arguments while he lived, and with his Blood when he died. This prelates
endeavor for Reformation is shadowed by this Mystical Relation.

The Castle of Truth (being by the King of Jerusalem) left to the guard and
keeping of his best Servant Zeal) the King of Arabia (with an infinite host)
came against it, begirt it round with an unreasonable Seige, cuts of^ all
passages, all reliefs, all hopes of friends, meat, or munition: which Zeal
perceiving, and seeing how extremity had brought her to shake hands with
despair; he calls his Council of War about him, and discovered the ^ffliction
of his state, the puissance of his Enemies, the violence of the siege, and the
impossibility of conveying either messages or Letters to the great King his
Master, from whom they might receive new strength and encouragement. Whereupon
the necessity of the occasion being so great, they concluded that there was no
way but to deliver up the Castle (though upon some unwholesome conditions into
the hand of the Enemy) but Zeal staggereth at the resolution, and being loath
to loose hope as long as hope had thread or hair to hold by; he told them he
had one friend or companion in the Castle, who was so wise, so valiant, and so
fortunate, that to him and his exploits alone, he would deliver up the manage
of their safelty; this was Prayer, Chaplain to the great King, and Priest of
that Colony; then Prayer was called for, and all proceedings deb^ted: he
presently armeth himself with Humility, Clemency, Sincerity and Fervency; and
in spite of the Enemy passes his Camp, comes to the King his Master, and with
such moving passion enters his ears, so that presently Arms are raised,
which returning under the Conduct of Prayer, overthrows the King of Arabia,
makes spoil of his Camp, and gives to the Castle of Truth its first noble
Liberty.

Observations on Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancellor of England.
HE rose^up high, because he stepped out well: Sir Thomas More was half way
Chancellor, when born to Sir John More Chief Justice. The Father's Prudence,
Wit, and Nobleness flowed with his Blood to the Sons Veins: Much Honor he
received from his Family, more he gave to it: His Mother saw his Face shining
in a Dream, on her Wedding Night; and his Father saw his Life so really: A
quick City-Spirit made him capable of great State-Employments.

He was saved by a Miracle, and was One: For his Nurse riding with him over a
Water, and being in some danger, threw him over a Hedge, where she found him
not hurt, but sweetly smiling upon S^. Anthonies under N^w-Hall.
her.

A Free School seasoned his forward Childhood; and the grave, wise, and
excellent Cardinal Mortons House his Youth: The One with Learning, to make him
a Scholar; the Other with Prudence, to make him a Man: But the Distractions of
that House were not so proper for his promising Ingenuity, as the Retirements
of the University; where in two years time he showed what Wonders Wit and
Diligence could do in Rhetoric, Logic, and Philosophy: The Christ-Church.
College kept him strict, and his Father short, so that (as he^ blessed God
afterward) He had neither the leisure nor the means to be vicious: The Cardinal
said he would be Great, and his excellent Genius said he would be Humble: The
Lord Chancellor would give place to, and ask blessing of the Lord Chief
Justice: The Father being not more happy in his Son, than the Son in his
Father. At 17 his wit was eminent for his Epigrams: His Antilucian Oration
commended by all men but Brixius, for pure, genuine and flowing: At 18 his
wisdom in overcoming his Antagonist Brixius with kindness, and himself with
Mortifications. His fastings were frequent, his watchings on the hard ground
severe; his Hair-cloath even in his Chancellourship course, his exercises among
the Carthusians in the Charterhouse for four years austere; his design^ for the
Franciscan Hood, and a Priesthood with his Friend Lilly, solemn; His prayers
uninterrupted; When the King sent for him once at Mass, he answered, That when
he had done with God, he would wait on his Majesty: He imitated Picus
Mirandula's Life, and writ it: He heard Dr. Collet his Confessors Sermons, and
followed his li^e; whose experience was his counsel, whose conversation was his
life. He could not away with the good Sermon o^ a bad man: Collet was his
Father; Lin^^re, Lilly, Grocine, were his Friends. He learned more by prayer,
than he did by study: his Poems were acute, his Speeches pure and copious, his
Latin elegant; yet his head was knotty and Logical: his Diet was temperate,
his Apparel plain, his Nature tractable and condescending (though very
discerning) to the meanest men's counsel; his Virtues solid, not boasted. In a
word, the foundation of his Li^e was as low as the building was to be high.

Words and Terms being not by Nature, but Imposition, verborum ut nummorum;
those were best liked by him that were most current amongst the best Artists;
he fearing new words as leading to new things: though the quitting of ancient
and allowed expressions to affect new phrases will be no advantage at long run,
for whatsoever be the forms of speaking, the state of things will be the same;
and the very argument, that convinces an erroneous person now in the old
received and Orthodox Language, would convince him likewise in the new ways of
speaking, which he desires to introduce, after it is formed, and generally
understood: All the benefit that he could make of it, would be only a little
time between the suppression of the one, and the introduction of the other,
wherein he might jugle and play Hocus Pocus under the Cloak of Homonymous and
Ambiguous expressions. In vulgar appellations we are to speak as the common
people; but in terms of Art (which says Scaliger are rudibus ingeniis acerba,
delicatis ridicula) we are to follow the most approved Artists, the Mushrome
Errors and Haeresies springing up in his time he advised should be rather
suppressed by Discipline, than increased by disputations; they, who in the
common principles of Religion clash ordinarily with the whole Church; who so
affectedly swerve from the approved rules, and healthful constitutions of all
orderly Commonwealths, to the disturbance of all humane society, and the
cutting off of all Relations between man and man; they who cannot preserve
Unity with themselves, but are ever and anon interfereing and tripping up their
own heels by contradictions, need no just confutation, or single, or other
adversary than God, themselves, and all mankind; since their opinions are
grounded upon their own imaginations, rather than approved Authority; and they
interpret Scripture not according to the perpetual tradition of the Church, but
according to their own distempered ^ancies, and that in discourses more full
fraught with supercilious confidence, than deep reason: It were a folly to draw
the saw of conten^ion with them, especially in such a case where it is impiety
to doubt, and Blasphemy to dispute; Quid cum illis agas; qui neque jus, neque
bonum aut aequum sciunt. ^Melius, pejus, prosit, obsit, nil vident nisi quod
lubet. Such daring men's opinions, creating truth, and falsehood by the words of
their mouth, being like a pillar of smoke breaking out of the top of some
narrow Chimney, and spreading it self ^broad like some Cloud, as if it
threatened to take possession of the whole Region of the Air, darkening the
sky, and seeming to press the Heavens; and after all this, when it has
offended the eyes a little for the present, the first puff of wind, or a few
minutes do altogether disperse it, The little Mouse steals up through the
Elephants trunk to eat his brains; the Indian Rat creeps into the belly of
the gaping Crocodile; and the least opposition overthrows these great
pretenders, especially if you give them line and space enough to bounce and
tumble up and down, and tire themselves out.

Great he judged was the influence Religion had upon humane societies, whether
we consider the nature of the thing, or the blessing of God; without which they
are soapy bubbles, quickly dissolved. Cicero could say that Rome ought more of
its grandeur to Religion, than either to strength or stratagems; we have not
exceeded the Spaniards in number, nor the Gauls in strength, nor the
Carthaginians in craft, nor the Graecians in Art, etc. but we have overcome all
Nations by our Piety and Religion.

He esteemed all Commonwealths happy, but those wherein Preachers, like the
Grecian Sophisters, described in Plato all whatsoever pleased the great Beast
[the multitude] holy, just, and good; and whatsoever the great Beast disliked,
evil, unjust, profane.

He married himself to He Married Mr. Colts Daughter of New-Hall.
Virtue, and not to an Estate: he likes a younger sister, yet out of civility
he embraces the elder. Happy he was in his modest Wives, happier in his
hopeful Children. His Government of his Family was exact, enjoining all his
Children to take Virtue for their meat, and Play for their sauce. His
proficiency in the Whereby he was double reader.
Law was admirable, his Practice successeful, his Judgment solid, his Integrity
eminent; his Determinations in the Sheriffs Court, his Activity for the
Stilyard, his Practice in the Courts of Justice, raised him to a Place in
Parliament: where he was so good a Patriot, that he displeased King Henry the
seventh; and so wise a man, that he awed King Henry the eighth: the one by Fox
demands one Subsidy and three Fifteens, and the beardless boy (as the
Courtiers called Sir Thomas) disappointed him; the other made a motion by
Wolsey, which he overthrew, so that the Cardinal wished him at Rome.

He retires to his studies to avoid Henry the seventh's displeasure, and
improves them to gain his sons favor, who by his Cardinal invited him to
Court, and employed him abroad to France to recover his debts; to Flanders, to
confirm the peace. Employments he avoided a while, to keep his City-interest;
and in case of controversy with the King, to prevent their jealousy: his
business was so urgent, that you would think he had no leisure; and his
writings so exact, that you would think he had no business. Not a minute of his
time escaped employment. His History of Richard the third is faithful, his
Vtopia is judicious and elegant, his On St. Aug. de civitate Dei.
Lectures at St. Laurence were learned and pious.

His Popularity in Parliament commended him to his Majesty: his strong
Arguments for the Popeship in Star Chamber, brought him to him against his
modest inclination, as much as against Wolsey's interest. His ability set him
on the Council Table, his integrity placed him in the Exchequer: His He was
made Chancellor of that Duchy.
Services promoted him to the Duchy of Lancaster, his Dexterity and Prudence
made him the Kings bosom friend, and his familiar all his spare hours; whose
Questions in every Art and Science were not more useful, than Sir Thomas his
Answers were satisfactory. His advice was his Majesty's and his Queens Oracles
in Counsel; his discourse was their recreation at Table. He was not more
delightful to the King at Court, than he was serviceable to him in appeasing
tumults, etc. in the City^ He was the Kings Favorite at White Hall, and the
Peoples Darling at Westminster, where he was Speaker as well with the unanimous
consent of the one, as with the approbation of the other; and between both,
impartial, equally careful of Prerogative and Privileges; neither awed from
right by power, nor flattered with popularity. He declined Foreign services with
as much Dexterity as he managed Domestic ones. He served the King faithfully,
but trusted him not, as one that enjoyed and suspected Fortune, saying, If his
Head could win King Henry a Castle in Wales, it would off.

The King and Kingdom trusted him, who Queen Katherine said so.
was that one sound Counselor the King had. The Cardinal told him he was the
veriest Fool in the Council: he replied, God be thanked my Master has but one
fool here.

His Honor was set off by a grave condescension, and a grave humility. Did he
argue? he was very moderate, civil, and modest. Did he reprove? he was pitiful,
grave, and prudent. Was he with the King at the University? he was ready and
eloquent. Was he abroad? he heard the Lectures attentively, and disputed A
fellow at Bruges would undertake to answer any question: Sir Thomas put up
this, Whether Averia capta in Withernamia sint irreplegiabilia, to that
Thrasces great amazement.
accurately. To his Friend as Dr. Tunstal, none more faithful: to learned men,
as Erasmus, none more civil: to devout men, such as Bishop Fisher, none more
fi^m: to hopeful men, such as Powle, there was none more encouraging: to
painful men, such as Grocinus, Linacer, Crocus, Lupsel, Lilly, Cocklee,
Budlera, Dorpin, Bewald Luscar, Grannould, Vines, Groclenius, Buslidian,
AEgidius, Rhenanus, none more familiar, constant, or liberal: in his conscience
none more satisfied and sedate: in his discourse none more innocent and
pleasant: in his heart none more devout and sincere.

His meditations were frequent; his retirements to a Chapel, built of purpose,
daily; his Prayers constant and zealous; his conversation with his Wives,
loving and debonnair, taking them off their cares to reading and music. His
Servants were always employed either in his, or Gods service, suffering them
not by idleness to be at leisure for sin, nor by wanton converse to be tempted
to it. His Table-talk after the Chapter was pleasing and useful, his counsels
useful, his converse exemplary; his family-instructions to hear afflictions
patiently, to withstand temptations resolvedly, to mind heavenly matters
devoutly, to go plainly and soberly, to recreate themselves moderately and
virtuously, were effectual. There went a blessing along with all his Servants,
and happiness with his whole Family.

His Apophthegms were grounded on experience and judgment. He would say, 1. He
was not always merry^ that laughed. 2. The World is undone ^y looking on things
at distance. 3. To aim at Honor here, is to set up a Court of Arms over a
Prisongate. 4. If I would employ my Goods well, I may be contented to loose
them; if ill, I should be glad. 5. He that is covetous when he is old, i^ as a
Thief that steals when he is going to the Gallows. 6. Bags of Gold to us when
Saints, will be but as a Bag of Pebble-stones when men. 7. The greatest
punishment in the World were to have our wishes. 8. Pusillanimity is a great
temptation. 9. Affliction undoes many; Pleasure most. 10. We go to Hell with
more pain than we might go to Heaven with. Of Heresy he said, Like as before a
great storm the Sea swells, and has unwonted motions without any Wind
stirring; so may we see here many of our Englishmen, which a few years ago
could not endure to hear the name of an Heretic or Schismatic, now to be
contented both to suffer them, and to praise them somewhat, yea, to learn by
little and little, as much as they can be suffered, to find fault, and to tax
willingly the Church, the Clergy, and the Ceremonies. 11. The more of any thing
else we have, but Riches, the more good we are. 12. Who would not send his Alms
to Heaven^ Who would not send his Estate whither he is to be banished? 13. Some
Men hate Hypocrisy, and love Impudence. 14. When any detracted others at his
Table, he said, Let any man think as he pleases, I like this room well. 15.
It Is easier to prevent, than redress.

Indeed throughout his Works he argues sharply, he reasons profoundly, he
urges aptly, stateeth exactly, expresses himself elegantly, and di^courseth
learnedly. He would rather convince, than punish; yet he would rather punish
than indulge them: his Epitaph be speaking him grievous to Heretics, Thieves
and Murderers.

When King Henry scrupled his first marriage, Sir Thomas told him, That neither
he nor my Lord of Durham were so fit to advise him in that case, as St.
Augustine, St. Jerome, and the other Fathers. His advice was so unseasonable,
that it opposed the King; yet^ so grave and honest, that it pleased him. His
Experience and Prudence had a fore-fight next door to Prophecy; and from the
unquiet times o^ King Henry, did he guess the ruin of King Charles. He would
say that it would never be well in England, until the same course obtained
there, that did in Syria, where Zeleucus was so severe against Innovators, that
he enacted that if any Man made a proposition for a change in their policy, he
should make it with an Halter about his Neck, that if he failed to justify it
by reason, he should justify his attempt by suffering, -- because as some
Philosophers hold, that there is not so much as an Aspin Leaf stirs in one
part of the World, but it makes some alteration in the whole, the efficacy of
it, like Drake and Cavendish compassing the Globe of the Earth, and making the
eighth Sphere of Heaven tremble: so wise men know that every change in a State
alters the constitution, and the effects of an Innovation in the body
politic circleth, as do those of a new Impr^ssion, according to Harvey's
method upon a body natural: though I must confess that many new proposals are
opposed, not for the distant effects of them feared in the Commonwealth, but
for some near influence they may have upon some Men's private Interest. -- It
has been given out, that the burning of our Hea^hs in England, did hurt their
Vines in France: b^t wise Men looked upon this pretense, ^s a mere scarecrow,
or made-dragon; the hurt it did was nearer home, to destroy the young
moore-fowles, and spoil some young burgesses game. -- He converted many with
his Arguments, more with his Prayers, which workt wonders of reformation on the
erroneous, as they did of recovery on the weak. He wished three things to
Chri^tendome: 1. An Universal Peace: 2. An Uniform Religion: 3. A Reformation
rather of Lives than Religion. He never a^ked any thing of his Majesty but
Employment, and nev^r took any thing more acceptable than Service. His Alms
were liberal to his Neighbors, and good works numerous He built a Chapel at
Chelsey, and hired an Almes-House there.
toward God. He would take no Fees from the poor, and but moderate ones from
the Rich. All London was obliged to him for his Counsel at home, and all
England for his Peace at Cambray, where he out-did expectation.

The King raised him to the Chancellorship, but not to his own opinion: he
professed he would serve his Majesty, but he must obey his God: he would keep
the Kings conscience and his own. His Wisdom and Parts advanced him, his
Innocence and Integrity ruined him: his Wit pleased the King, but his
Resolution crossed him. Wolsey was not so proud and reserved, as Sir Thomas was
open and free to the meanest: his mind was not so dazzled with honor, but he
could fore-^ee his ^all. When his ^on^ complained how little they gained under
him, I will do ju^^ice (said he) for your sakes to any man, and I will leave
you a blessing; dec^eeing one day against his own son that would not hear
reason. First, he offered the Judges the Reformation of Grievances; and when
they refused, he did it himself. -- No Subpoena was granted but what he With
the cause attested by the Attorney, in tok^n whereof when one Tubb brought him a
Snbpoena to subscribe, finding it frivolous, he writ under it a tale of a Tub.
saw, no Order but what he p^rused: nothing passed from ^im toward the
su^ject, but what became a good Magistrate, nothing toward his Master, but
what became a faithful servant. Neither King nor Queen could corrupt, neither
could the whole Church in Convocation fast ^n any thing upon him. To one who
told him of hi^ Detract^rs, he said, Would you have me punish those by whom I
reap more benefit^ than by all you my friends? Pe^fect Patience is the
Companion of true Pe^fection.

But he managed not his trust with more integrity and dexterity, than he left
it with honor; leaving not one cause undecided in the Chancery: foreseeing
that he could not at once con^ent his Majesty and his own heart. His Servan^s
upon his fall he disposed o^ as well as his Children; and his Children he
taught to live soberly in a great estate, and nobly in a mean one. He never put
an Heretic to death when Ch^ncellour, neither would he suffer Heresies to live
when a private man. When my Lord Cromwell came to him in his retirement, he
advised him to tell ^he King what he ought, not what he can do; so shall you
show your self a true and faithful servant. and a right worthy Counselor: for
if a Lion knew his own strength, hard were it for any man to rule him. The King
feared him when he could not gain him, and therefore he was ^i^ted in his
^ormer carriage and present temper, which continued constant to his duty, and
even under his changes. He was open-hearted to all that came, yet so wary in
his discourse with the Maid of Kent, that his enemies confessed he deserved
rather h^nor t^an a check for that matter. When the Duke o^ Norfolk told him,
that the wrath of a Prince is death; he said, Nay, if that be all, you must die
to morrow, and I to day. He behaved himself at all Examinations at once wisely
and honestly. When Archbishop Cranmer told him, he must obey the King which was
certain, rather than follow his conscience, that Lesbian rule which was
uncertain; he replied, It Is as certain that I must not obey the King in evil,
as that I must follow my conscience in good. When the Abbot of Westminster told
him, his conscience should yield to the wisdom of the Kingdom, he said, He
would not conform his conscience to one Kingdom, but to the whole Church. He
underwent his sufferings with as much cheerfulness as his preferment; pleasing
himself with his misfortunes, and enjoying his misery; resolving to obey God
rather than man, to leave others to their own consciences; to close with the
Catholic Church rather than the Church of England, and to submit to general
Councils rather than ^o Parliaments.

Mr. Rich put to him this Question, Whether if the Parliament made a Law that
he were Pope, would he not submit to it? and he replied, If the Parliament made
another that God should not be God, would you obey it? Though he could not own
the Kings Supremacy, yet he would not meddle with it either in his Writings or
discourse; showing himself at once a civil man, a good Christian, and a noble
Confessor. His soul was well settled; his stature was mean, but well
proportioned; his complexion phlegmatique; his countenance amiable and
cheer^ul; his voice plain and distinct; and his temper sound and healthful.

I can add nothing to the honor of this good man, yet will I pay this further
devotion to his virtue, whereof honor was a testimony, as long as it was its
self: wort^less men having made the honor bestowed on them as despicable as
themselves that wore it; that royal favor receiving more contempt from them,
than it gave reputation to them. A good name, the great instrument of doing
good while we live; and our other life when dead could [he said] if any thing
justify the barbarous way of duels: since he is the most bloody man to himself,
that is careless of reputation. So as to be indifferent what he does, or what
others say; is to bury himself alive.

His Credit, which he said was his Royalty (there being but two Empires in the
World, the one a general love and esteem, the other common dread and fear --)
put him upon, being watchful for occasions, constant in his actions, moderate
in prosperity; resolute in encounters; calm in troubles, above fortune, and
able to make and piece up the broken miscarriages of chance, that he might be
settled in that state, which is the work of greatness, and the inheritance of
goodness, the prospect whereof is pleasant (though the ascent be sharp and
slippery, ^he top shaking, the footing uncertain, and the downfall fearful:)
and the reflections of it, when moderated with humility, like those o^ the Sun,
when allayed in his declension, pleasing and cheerful. Toward the attainment
whereof, the Lives of former Worthies were such incitements to this, as
Hercules was to Theseus, Miltiades to Themistocles, and Achilles to Alexander;
-- And nothing, the good Man would discourse, should men be more render of,
than of Men's ho^our, since t^e^e were but two effectual restraints from Vice,
shame and fear; and but two motives to Virtue, Honor and Interest; the first
of which is so much the darling peculiarly of the English Nation; that this is
called by a French Author, the Land of Honor. His Fall was attended with a
greater fame than his height; as the Sun in the Evening has a greater ^hadow
than at Noon.

WHo is the honest man?
He that does still and strongly good pursue,
To God, his Neighbor and Himself most true:
Whom neither force nor fawning can
Vnpin or wrench from giving all their due.
Whose honesty is not
So loose and easy, that a ruffling wind,
Can blow away, or glittering look it blind:
Who ^ides his sure and even trot
While the World now rides by, now lags behind.
Who, when great trials come,
Nor seeks^ nor ^huns them; but does calmly stay,
Till he the Thing and the Example weigh
All being brought into a sum,
What Place or Person calls for, he does pay.
Whom none can work or woo
To use in any thing a trick or slight;
For above all things he abhors deceit:
His words and works and fashion too
All of a piece, and all are clear and straight.
Who never melts or thaws
At close tentations: when the day is done,
His goodness sets not, but in dark can run:
The Sun to others writes Laws,
And is their virtue; Virtue is his Sun.
Who, when he is to treat
With sick Folks, Women those whom passions sway,
Allows for that, and keeps his constant way;
Whom others faults do not defeat,
But though men fail him, yet his part does play.
Whom nothing can procure,
When the wide World runs Bias, from his will
To writhe his limbs, and share, not mend the ill.
It Is is the Mark-man, safe and sure,
Who still is right, and prays to be so still.
Observations on the Life of Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex.
Most of them from the Notes of Thomas Cromwell Esquire, one of his Posterity,
who made a Collection of Observations upon him, 1633. from the Ancestors of
Baronet Worseley, and Sir Ralph Hopton, who had been his Servant.

PVtney saw his Cradle in a Cottage, and England saw his Coffin in a Ditch; His
Original was mean, his End meaner: A sudden height in an unsettled time ruined
him: A moderate and leasurely Grea^ness is safe. His Blood ran low, but pure,
ennobling the veins it flowed in with a Spirit that was to raise a Family, and
Deserve that Honor that others Inherit. His honest Parents conveyed him a
strong Constitution that could support stronger parts: The poor man's good
Temper is an Inheritance, and the Rich his Effeminacy his Disease.

A private School civilized his parts; Travel and Employment improved them: His
Necessity, when at home, made him a Soldier abroad; and his Observations abroad
made him a Man at Home: The Experience of Travel enlarged his Soul, and the
Hardship of War knitted and consolidated it: His hard Fortune at Cambray was
the occasion of his good One in England; and had he not been undone, he had
been undone: For his promising looks commended him to Frescobald the Merchant
for Relief, and to Cardinal Wolsey for service, in whose private Service of
Secretary for his Embassy in France, he prepared himself for that more public
of Secretary of State in England. Great Scholar he was none, (the Latin
Testament gotten by heart being his Masterpiece) nor studied Lawyer: never
admitted to the Innes of Court; nor experienced Soldier, though Necessity cast
Him upon it, when the Duke of Burbon be^ieged Rome; no^ Courtier (till bred up
in Cardinal Wolsey's Court:) yet that of the Lawyer in him so helped the
Scholar, that of the Soldier the Lawyer, that of the Courtier the Soldier,
and that of the Traveller all the rest; being no Stranger to Germany, well
acquainted with France, most familiar with Italy; so that the result of all
together made him for Endowments eminent, not to say admirable. His
Apprehension was quick and clear; his Judgment methodical and solid; his Memory
strong and rational; his Tongue fluent and pertinent; his Presence stately and
obliging; his Heart large and noble; his Temper patient and cautio^s; his way
industrious and indefatigable; his Correspondence well laid, and constant; his
Converse insinuating and close: None more dexterous to find out by his
Setting-Dogges, and Coy-Ducks, none more reserved to keep a secret. He was
equal (^aith my Author) to the French Politicians, when under his Master; he
overreached them when alone; doing more in one month with his subtle Head,
than the other in twelve months with his stately Train. The King of France
would have pensioned up his parts, but the Viceroy of England advanced them.
His Master brought him first to serve his Country in Parliament (that great
School of Experience) and then his King at Court; where defending his Masters
great actions, he made it evident he could perform greater. His saying in
defense of his Master, that new Statesmen, like fresh Flies, bite deeper than
those which were chased away before them, stuck much with the House, that was
then sensible, that many of the Country-Gentlemen discoursed of the
Court-States-men, but with the same success that the Gown-man Harangued it
before Alexander of Military Affairs, who laughed at the Scholar for talking of
War to a Soldier: his defense of his Master being the more observable for his
civilities to his adversaries, he being very cautious of reflecting upon his
Patrons Enemies, while he excused him, the bespattering of others being not the
best method of purging him, and Memnon gave a railing Soldier a good blow with
his Lance, saying, I hired thee to fight, and not to rail. -- Neither
delighted he in being the Davus, the troubler of the Parliament, which he
observed played the part of fond Musicians, which spend so much time in tuning
their Instruments; that there is none left to spare for their Music. -- He
wished that our reformation might be in one respect, like the reformation of
the Turks, who thought that the best way to understand the Al^oran, was to
burn all the Interpreters, it being true of the Bible, what one observes of
one Text of it, that was clear before it was commented upon: A truth become
seasonable [as there is no new thing under the Sun, and what ^ath been, will
be] in a less revolution of time, than Plato's great Ye^r, even in our times,
when passion guides Religion, that should be governed by it, as being without
i^, but a short madness turning man into a wild Beast that is goared, which
runs upon every thing that comes in its way, without consideration; or like
a violent torrent descending down impe^uously from a steep Hill; which bears
down all respects before it, divine and humane; For whilst passion is in the
height, there is no room for reason, nor any use of the dictates of the
understanding, the mind for the time being like the Cyclopian Cave, where no
Man heard what another said, -- only what they want in them singly in reason,
may jointly be made up in noise; and their respective defects in Arguments, be
supplied by their communion in suffrage, -- And it is the wisdom of those, who
are concerned in what they oppose, to stand out of their way, at least till the
storm be over; -- Omnis campis duffugit Arator
Omnis and Agricola --
-- Dum pluit in terris, ut possint sole reduct^
Exercere diem. --


Their reason with time and due consideration will be better attended to, when
this earnestness has a little spent its self into a calmness and allay. Such
was his Wit, such his Eloquence, that they who hated the Client, admired the
Advocate: And though he could not keep his Patron from falling, yet he raised
himself; that being the first time his Eminent Parts were observed. An
advantageous starting is more than half way in the Race of Preferment. For
hereupon he is first Master of the Kings Jewels, and then of what was more
precious, his Secrets. His Conscience inclined him to the Churches Reformation,
his Interest complied with the Kings; he unlocked the secre^s of Monasteries by
his Spies, and put the King upon destroying them by his Power. The University
of Cambridge made him Chancellor, to save it self; where though he did no great
good, yet hi^ Greatness kept others from doing harm, in an Age w^erein
Covetousness could quarrel a College, as well as an Abbey, into superstition.
He was trusted by the King with the Roll^ and Records of England; and by the
Scholars, with the Charters and Satutes of their Universities. He reforms the
University, in order to the Reformation of the Church; enjoining the study of
the Scripture and the Tongues, instead of School Divinity and Barbarism;
recommending Aristotle, Agricola, Melancthon, to their reading; and the
Doctrine which is in Spirit and in Truth to their Faith: and razing the Popes
Bulls, to make way for the Kings Favor, and that Architectonical Power, to see
that all subjects within his Dominion, do their duties in their several
Callings, for the safety and tranquillity of the Commonwealth.

He was an eminent Minister of State, and Chief Governor of the Church;
proceeding in Convocation very discreetly, modelling the Church-Laws very
prudently and moderately: looking into Monastical Abuses very narrowly and
industrio^sly; mawling Religious Houses, violently pulling down those Nests,
that the Rooks might not return: His Master had disobliged the Pope, and he
weakeneth him. It was not safe to disown his Supremacy, and entertain thousands
of his Creatures: If a Kingdom be divided against it self, it cannot stand; and
if one part of the English pay their devo^ion to a supreme Head at Rome, and
another to a supreme Governor in England, they must both fall. If the Persons
might disturb the Government, it is fit their Estates should secure it; and if
the Papists should foment a War, their Lands should maintain it: But Cromwell
contrives that the Pope should confirm Alienations in Wolsey, before he should
practice it for the King. As the King knew whom he employed, when he trusted
him: so he knew whom he trusted, when he employed Docto^ Lee (an able servant
to an abler Master) He first dec^yed Religious Men out of their Covents by the
allurement of Liberty, and then forced them out by Power and Authority. As the
Abbeys improved his Estate, so his Master advanced his Honor. He had one Privy
Seal always to act by, and was Keeper of another: He had no sooner attained an
Earldom for himself, but foreseeing the alteration of Affairs, he secured a
Barony for his Son, nor forfeitable by the Attainder of the Father. Within five
years he was Master of the Jewel-house, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Secretary
of State, Baron, and Viscount Wimbledon in Middlesex, Vicar General, Master of
the Rolls, Knight of the Garter, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Lord High
Chamberlain, and Earl of Essex, Justice in Air of Forests, Chases, and Parks,
etc. N. Trent^ Within five Months he quitted most of these places, and in five
minutes lost all. He must needs be envied, whose Birth was so much beneath all
others, and his Preferment above them: especially when the King in preferring
him injured others; as, the Citizens, in managing the Jewels; the Courtiers, in
undertaking State Affairs; the Lawyers, in the Rolls When Master thereof^
; the Nobly descended, at When Knight of the Garter.
Winsor; the Clergy, in the When Vicar General.
Convocation; the Earl o^ Oxford, and the Family of the Bourchiers, in the
great Chamberlainship and Earldom of Essex. But he cares not whom he
displeases, if he can oblige his Master; whose power he advances in the
Pa^liament and Synod, as he improveth his Re^enue in the Office of
first-F^uits, and the Court of Augmentation. His Greatness wa^ allayed with his
Goodness; and the Envy of the One, mitigated by ^he Liberality of the other: He
had not more Suitors at his Door than Almes-men (two hundred at a time:) As he
was good abroad, so he was at home, calling upon his Servants yearly, to give
him an account what they had got under him; and what they desired of him,
warning them to improve their opportunities; because he said, he was too great
to stand long; providing for them as carefully, as for his Son, by his Purse
and Credit, that they might live as handsomely when he was dead, as they did
when he was alive. Sir Thomas was a Name of Awe and Reverence to the Rico, and
blessed by the Poor: That Name, when his Fortune and Power tempted him ^o an
insolency, S^ow Sur. London.
le^elled the proudest Ci^izens House for ^is convenie^cy, and bowed the
poo^est Man's Knee to his Honor, his mind being equal to his ^uccess. He c^uld
at pleasure work upon the Lo^ds b^ the Commons, and on the Commons by the
Lords: as Cardinal Wols^y persuaded the Commons to four S^illings in the P^und
upon the Lords president; and the Lords to as much upon the Commons: and he
kept up the Cardinals way of A^ticipation, that the People should be always one
Subsidy beforehand. He set up the old Taxation of Knighthood at Queen Anne's
Coronation, and levied it, making amends to ^he People ^or all his hard
Impositions: because a^ Vesp^sian to the Romans, so He to the English, was
Antiquo cultu victu ^ue praecipuus a^tricti moris Author^ by his observing of
^he ancient Diet of the Country, and the old fashion of Apparel, he was to
them a principal Author of their frugality.

He confi^ms the Kings S^^remacy by a Law, and estab^ishe^h his Daughter
Elizabeth'^ Succession by an Oath, first taken by ^he Pa^liament^ and then by
the Kingd^m: for whose support he contrives the lesser Monasteries should be
first escheated, and then the greater. He was so honest, that he acquits Queen
Anne in his Letter to the Queen; yet so much a Statesman, that he condemned her
upon the Bench.

But to secure the Interest of England, he by countenancing the translation,
and reading of the English Bible, improved its Religion; that as some few late
Acts had disobliged the Pope, a new frame of Christianity might exclude him:
The differences between Us and Rome, were to be widened, lest they should
close; and he judged it prudence to engage the conscience and the estate in one
bottom, that he might hold the One out of the tenderness of the Other. He used
to answer, those that applauded his service in the Reformation, that if he
should arrogate to himself any part in that revolution of providence, he should
be like the Fly on the Cartwheel, that said, what a Dust do I raise. The Kings
Supremacy cut off the Papists, and the Six Articles the Protestants:
Re^ormation must be managed leasurely, and alteration of Religion by just
degrees; Instruction preceding execution, and the Peoples capacity growing up
with their Governors Regulation. The mountainous expectation of a re^ormation,
some told him merrily ended in ^ Mouse; but he answered sadly, that it had been
well it had not ended in a Mouse-trap, that is a snare to many good People; as
well as a disappointment to all.

The times are troublesome, but Cromwell calm and quiet, and watchful over
Occurrences; Insurrection giving him an advantage of a new Settlement. He takes
down the Occasions and Ornaments of Idolatry, Images, Shrines, Pilgrimages,
etc. and then the Thing it self: Take off the paint of Rome, and you undo her.
As the Laws and Injunctions, so the Alliance of England must secure its
Inte^est: A Protestant Queen m^st be married to the Reformed King; the Duke of
Cleve's Sister must woo the King, that Essex might have that whispe^ed in the
Kings Bosom ^bed, where he was best disposed, which he insinuated into his Ear
at the Council Table where he was worst. But the King was not so well pleased
with her Beauty, as Cromwell was with her Religion: which Stephen Gardener (who
hated her for her Religion, and Cromwell for his Greatness) observing, showed
the Kings loose Affections, at once how to be rid of his Match, and, which he
was as weary of, his Match-Maker. The Queen is divorced (being never known by
Henry, who disliked her at first view, and kept he^ rather in Poli^y, to oblige
the German Princes, than of pleasure to fill his own Bed.) Cromwell is arrested
for presuming to act in some matters of State without the Kings privity or
Commission and attainted by a procedure he had invented; dying as cunningly as
he had lived, for some As when one said he was accused for disloyalty to the
King, he said, He would stab him with his Dagger, if he were.
ambiguous words which Power interpreted to his Ruin.

His last words were so wary, that they might become Bellarmine and Luther at
once; that the Protestants call them his Confession of Faith, and the Papists
his old Religion. And neither is he to be blamed, unless his troublesome
Adversaries will accuse him, as the quarrel some Roman did his Antagonist,
Because he would not receive his Weapon fairly with his whole Body: for
confessing his Offenses against God and the King, in his many Employments, he
said he died in the Catholic Faith. Some will say the Protestants think no
great gain to have him, and the Papists no loss to part with him; yet we must
needs confess that he was a Wise Man, because he always consulted the Learned
in the Laws about all his proceedings. He was a Good Man, witness Frescobald,
whose mean Person he took notice of, whose small Kindness he acknowledged,
whose Services he condescended to, whose Wants he relieved, and whose Debts he
recovered: He was a Nobleman, because he refused another Man's Coat of Arms who
was of his Name, saying, What shall I do with it? for he may pull it off my
back at pleasure. In a word, He was so Mean before he rose, so Worthy
afterward, that no Times had Raised but those more troublesome, none Ruined
him but those most loose of Henry the viii. Some reserved Men's parts he
compared to meat in a great Colchester Oyster, which would hardly requite the
pains of opening. -- But infinitely was he taken with those who were (as he
called them) like the Statues of Apollo, had a Lance in one Hand, and an Harp
in another; that is, resolution to awe on the one side, and sweetness to oblige
on the other. -- Being much pleased likewise with the reflecting Man, who needs
not the dull way of Persia, to keep a Boy behind him, to bid him remember what
he is, and what he ought to do; and with the devout Courtier: For as the
Ennamel, which adorneth the Doves Neck, never shines so clear and glorious, as
when the Sun looks upon it; so great Men are never so full of Majesty
themselves, as when they own the Majesty of God; never more Gods among Men, as
when humble Men before God; who [as St. Lewis of France once affirmed] boweth
the hearts of Men to a subjection to them, who kneel in adoration to him.

He loved not the Men that pedantically boasted their reading, but that
rationally made use of it; not ridiculously upon all occasions vaunting the
shreds of it, but skilfully to good purposes couching the result and substance
of it. -- So the admirable old Man Epictetus, as Lucian calls him that famed
Stoic, whose Lamp was preserved as a Relic, and sold for 3000. Drachmas,
would say, [ Encheir c. 16.] that Sheep bring not their grass to their
Shepherd, to show him how much they have eaten, but concocting their meat
inwardly do bring forth Wool and Milk. -- True learning is the improvement of
other Men's studies and experiences by our own meditation, adding to that frame
by consideration, which they had built from the ground by many Ages observation.

The Lord Herbert's Character of Cromwell.
ANd to this end came Cromwell, who from being but a Black-smiths Son, found
means to travel into foreign Countries, to learn their Languages, and to see the
Wars (being a Soldier of Bourbon at the taking of Rome;) whence returning, he
was received into Cardinal Wolsey's service: To whom he so approved himself by
his fidelity and diligence, that the King after his fall, voluntarily took him
for his Servant; in which place he became a special Instrument for dissolving
the Abbeys and other Religious Houses, and keeping down the Clergy; whom, in
regard of their Oath to the Pope, he usually termed the Kings half Subjects:
And for expelling the Monks, he said it was no more than a restoring them to
the first Institution, of being lay and laboring persons: Neither did it move
him that so much strictness and austerity of Life was enjoined them in their
several Orders, since, he said, they might keep it in any condition. But as
these Reasons again were not admitted by diverse learned and able Persons, so he
got him many Enemies, who at last procured his fall; but not before he had
obtained successively the Dignities of Master of the Rolls, Baron, Lord Privy
Seal, Vicegerent to the King in Spiritualities, Knight of the Garter, Earl of
Essex, Great Chamberlain of England, etc. He was much noted in the exercises of
his Places of Judicature, to have used much Moderation; and in his greatest
pomp to have taken notice and been thankful to mean persons of his old
acquaintance; and therein had a Virtue which his Master the Cardinal wanted.

As for his other Descriptions, I leave them to be taken out of Granmer's
Letter formerly mentioned, with some deduction; For it seems written to the
King in more than Ordinary Favor of his ancient service.

Archbishop Cranmer's Character of Cromwell, in a Letter to King Henry the
Eighth.
WHo cannot b^ sorrowful and amazed, that he should be a Traitor against your
Majesty? He that was so advanced by your Majesty, He whose surety was only by
your Majesty, He who loved your Majesty (as I ever thought) no less than God;
He who studied always to set forwards whatsoever was your Majesty's will and
pleasure; He that cared for no Man's displeasure to serve your Majesty; He that
was such a Servant in my Judgment, in wisdom, diligence, faithfulness and
experience, as no Prince in this Realm ever had: He that was so vigilant to
pres^rve your Majesty from all Treasons, that few could be so secretly
conceived, but he detected the same in the beginning. If the Noble Princes of
memory, King John, Henry II. and Richard II. had had such a Counselor about
them, I suppose they should never have been so Traitorously abandoned and
overthrown as those good Princes were. After which, he says again, I loved him
as my Friend, for so I took him to be; but I chiefly loved him for the love
which I thought I saw him bear ever toward your Grace, singularly above all
other: But now, if he be a Traitor, I am sorry that ever I loved, or trusted
him; and I am very glad that his Treason is discovered in time: But yet again,
I am very sorrowful; for who shall your Grace trust hereafter, if you might not
trust him? Alas! I bewail and lament your Graces chance herein! I wot not whom
your Grace may trust. But I pray God continually Night and Day, to send such a
Councellor in his place, whom your Grace may trust, and who for all his
qualities can and will serve your Grace like to him; and that will have so much
solicitude and care to preserve your Grace from all dangers, as I ever thought
he had.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Audley.
SIr Thomas Audley's Birth was Generous, his Education more: Essex bred him to
that Honor which his Ancestors lost: His Soul ennobled his Body, and his Body
graced his Soul: The one quick, solid, apprehensive and judicious; the other
tall and majestic: King Henry loved a Man; and here was one whose Austerity
was allayed with Debonairness, whose Gravity was sweetened with Pleasantness;
whose Knowledge was as large as his Authority, whose Wit was equal with his
Wisdom; whose Memory was strong, and Judgment solid. His fair Estate brought
him to the Temple; his proficiency in the Law, to the Court: His reading upon
the Statute of Privileges commended him to the Kings Service, his speaking for
the Prerogative in Parliament brought him to the Kings Favor: Although the
Liberties of the People can never be se^ured without the Prerogative of the
Sovereign (who cannot do the good they would, if he wants a power to do the
evil they fear;) yet his first Preferment was to withdraw him from Popularity,
and the second only to confirm him to Sovereignty. Noble Service is the way to
a Royal One^ His Stewardship to the Duchy of Suffolk, raised him to the
Attorneyship of that of Lancaster. But in troublesome and designing times a
popular Orator is a good Courtier; and leading Parts in Parliament or
Convocation are great Merits. In the black Parliament he was a Member by his
own Interest, and a Speaker by his Majesty's Choice: Sir Tho. More was to serve
the Crown in the Lords House, and Sir Tho. Audley was to succeed him in the
House of Commons. When Abbey-Lands were bestowed on the King in gross, and
returned by him to the leading Lords and Commons in the Retayl, most of that
Parliament looked for ^hares; Sir Thomas for the first cut, to secure himself
with the King. He was always in favor with the Queens, who had no less
interest in the Kings Heart, than the Kingdom had in his Head. The Age was
uncertain, Interest not so; Sir Thomas was fixed on the One, above the
alterations of the Other: understanding what was most convenient at a time when
there was nothing lawful. He was well seen in the flexures and windings of
affairs, at the depth whereo^ other Heads not so steady turned giddy: He had
the Arts of a Statesman, and the closeness of a Politician: Reserved he was,
but no Dissembler. For if a man have that penetration of judgment, as he can
discern what things are to be laid open, and what to be kept secret, and what
to be showed with half ^ights, and to whom and when, (which indeed are Arts of
States and Arts of Life) to him an Habit of Dissimulation is a hinderance and a
poorness. He (as an able man) was always frank and open, but wary; knowing how
to stop and turn within the compass of equity and honesty. He understood
business well, and men better; and knew King Henry's Temper better than
Himself, whom he surprised always to his own bent, never moving any of his
suits to him, but when in have, and most commonly amusing him with other matter
until he passed his Request. His Actions were managed for applause as well as
service: for when made Sergeant, he was the first of eleven; his
Entertaining-Day was the last o^ six: The King, who paid for his Dinner, was
invited to it. He watched the Circumstances of his Actions, that they might be
Taking, as well as their ^ssue, that they might be Useful; and contrived that
the least of his public actions should come off with reputation. He followed
the most passable rather then the most able men living, in a time when active
men were more useful than the virtuous. Sir Thomas at once gratified the
present humor of the King, and the constant temper of the people, in six Bills
against the Clergy: 1. Against the Extortions of their Courts. 2^ The Exaction
of their Corpse and Mortuaries. 3. Their worldly Occupations, as Grazing,
Tanning, etc. 4. Merchandise. 5. Their Non-Residencies. 6. The Pluralities of
the ^gnorant, and the mean Salaries of the Learned. When in some Debates
between the Lords and Commons, Custom was urged; Sir Thomas replied, The usage
has ever been for Thieves to rob at Shooters ^ill, is it therefore lawful? He
brought the Clergy within a Praemunire, to awe them; and a^terwards in their
pardon, he and other members included their own: which the knowing King would
not pass, when it was demanded as of right; yet afterward granted it of his
own accord, when it was received as of Grace. When Sir Thomas More could not
act with the times, Sir Thomas Audley could; the One being weary of the Seal,
the other takes it; being made Lord Keeper in Sir Thomas his lifetime, and
Lord Chancellor after his death^ owning no Opinion against the Government of
England, nor any Design against its Interest. The King might well trust him
with his Conscience, when he trusted the King with his, owning no Doctrine but
what was established, ever judging the Church and State wiser than himself. He
was forced to take Q. Anne, but he would not condemn her; rather escaping than
refusing unwelcome employments, wherein he must either displease his Master or
himself. He was tender, but not wilful; waving such services dexterously,
wherein he must oppose his Master dangerously. Those Insurrections which others
rigor had raised, his Moderation allayed; breaking the Factions with
Indulgence, which might be strengthened with Opposition: C^omwel pulled down
Popery with his Power, Audl^y kept it down with his Policy, enjoining the
Preachers to de^ect the follies of that way, which is reckoned the wisdom of
this World. He had a moderate way to secure the privileges of Parliament, by
freedom from Arrests; and the good will of the Citizens, by an Order about
debts.

By these courses he died as much in the Kings favor as he lived: Patience can
weather out the most turbulent Age, and a solid Judgment the most in^^icate
times; The reserved and quiet man is the most secure. Activity may raise a man,
Wariness keep him up. If he had done nothing, he had not been seen; if he had
done much, he had nor been suffered. Between two extremes Audley could do well.

T^easure of Arms and Arts, in whom were set
The Mace and Books, the Court and College met;
Yet both so wove, that in that mingled throng
They both comply, and neither neither wrong.
But poised and tempered, each reserved its seat;
Nor did the learning quench, but guide the Heat.
The Courtier was not of the furious strain,
The hand that acts, does first consult the brain.
Hence grew commerce betwixt Advice and Might,
The Scholar did direct the Courtier right.
And as our Perfumes mixed, do all conspire,
And twist their Curles above the hallowed fire,
Till in that Harmony of Sweets combined,
We can nor Musk nor single Amber find;
But Gums meet Gums, and their delights so crowd,
That they create one undistinguished Cloud:
So to thy mind these rich Ingredients pressed,
And were the Mould and Fabric of thy breast.
Learning and Courage mixed, and tempered so,
The Stream could not decay nor overflow.
And in that equal Tide, thou did not bear
From Courage, Rashness; nor from Learning, Fear^
Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wiat.
SIr Thomas Wiat was born at Allington-Castle in the County of Kent, which
afterward he repaired with beautiful Buildings. He fell out off his Master
King Henry the Eighth his favor, about the business of Queen Anna Bullein,
till his industry, care, discretion and innocence freed him. Very ingenio^s he
was; or, as his Anagram ^^lls us, he was [ A * Wit] in the abstract. Cambden
says he was, Eques auratus splendide doctus.


Holy he was and heavenly minded, and that appears by his translation of
David's Psalms into English Meter; and Leland gives him this great
Commendation: Bella suum merito jactet Florentia Dantem,
Regia Petrarchae Carmina Roma probat,
His non inferior Patrio Sermon Viatus,
Eloquii secum qui decus omne tulit.
Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast,
And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet,
In English Wiat both of them does coast,
In whom all grateful Eloquence does meet.


This Knight being sent Ambassador by K. Henry the eighth, to Charles the fifth
Emperor, then residing in Spain, before he took Shipping, died of the
Pestilence in the West-Country, Anno 1541.

Queen Anne's favor toward him, raised this man; and his faithfulness to her,
ruined him: So fickle is that man's station that depends only on humor, or
holds off love and hatred! Let my friend (says Malvezzi) bring me in, but let
my merit and service keep me there.

Four things a man went to Dine with Sir Thomas Wiat for: 1. For his Generous
Entertainment: 2. For his free and knowing discourse of Spain and Germany; an
in^ight in whose interest was his Masterpiece, studied by him as well for the
exigence of that present juncture, as for his own satisfaction. 3. For his
quickness in observing, his civility in entertaining, his dexterity in
employing, and his readiness in encouraging every man's peculiar parts and
inclinations. 4. For the notice and favor the King had for him. So ready was
he to befriend worthy men, and so ready was the King to entertain his friend;
that when a man was newly preferred, they said, He had been in Sir Thomas
Wiat's Closet. Happy is the Prince that has a ^aithful Favorite, to look him
out serviceable men! and happy those useful persons, that have a familiar and
honest Favorite, by whom they may have access to the Prince! a Favorite that
serves not his Country so much by employing and pleasing its active members, as
he secures his King, who has no less need of Counsel in reference to men, then
things.

His Wit pleased the King, and his Wisdom served him: He could not be without
his Advice at the Council Table, nor without his Jests in his Presence Chamber:
where yet he observed his decorum so exactly, that his Majesty could by no
means win him one night to dancing; this being his grave resolution, That he
who thought himself a wise man in the daytime, would not be a fool at night:
otherwise none carried himself more handsomely, none conversed more ingeniously
and freely, none discoursed more facetiously or solidly. In a word, it was his
peculiar happiness, that his deportment was neither too severe for King Henry
the eighth's time, nor too loose for Henry the seventh's; neither all honey nor
all gall, but a sweet mixture and temperament of affability and gravity,
carrying an equal measure of Sir Thomas More's ingenuity in his head, and Sir
Thomas Cromwell's wisdom in his heart; equally fashioned for discourse and
business: in the last whereof, he was active, but not troublesome; in the
first, merry, but innocent.

A Jest if it hit right, may do more good then sober Counsels. Archee made King
James sensible of the danger the Prince was in, in Spain, by telling him that
he came to change Caps with him^ Why? said the King. Because thou have sent the
Prince into Spain, from whence he is never like to return. But (said the King)
what will thou say when thou see him come back again? Marry (says he) I will
take off the Fools Cap which I now put upon thy head for sending him thither,
and put it on the King of Spains for letting him return.

A Jest of Sir Thomas Wiat's began that Reformation, which the seriousness of
all Christendom could not commence. King Henry was at a loss concerning the
Divorce, which he no less passionately desired, than the Pope warily delayed:
Lord, says he, that a man cannot repent him of his sin, but by the Popes
leave! Sir Thomas hinted, Doctor Cranmer opened, and the Universities of Europe
made the way to Reformation.

His Majesty was another time displeased with Wolsey, and Sir Thomas ups with a
story of the Curs baiting of the Butchers Dog, which contained the whole method
of that great man's ruin.

The Pope was incensed, Christian Princes were enraged, and the numero^s Clergy
discontented, and King Henry afraid of a Revolution: Butter the Rooks Nests,
(that is, sell and bestow the Papal Clergies Habitations and Land among the
Nobility and Gentry) said Sir Thomas, and they will never trouble you. One Day
he told his Master he had found out a Living of an hundred pounds in the year
more than enough, and prayed him to bestow it on him: Why? said the King, we
have no such in England. Yes, Sir, said Sir Thomas, the Provostship of Eaton,
where a man has his Diet, his Lodging, his Horse-meat, his Servants wages, his
Riding-charge, and an 100 l. per annum besides. What Lewis the eleventh said of
one Kingdom, i. e. France, may be true of all, That they want one thing, i. e.
Truth. Few Kings have such discreet Courtiers as Cardinal Wolsey, to look into
things deeply; fewer so faithful Servants as Sir Thomas Wiat, to report things
as they see them, honestly.

His Jests were always confined to these Rules: 1. He never played upon a man's
unhappiness or deformity; it being inhumane. 2. Not on Superiors: for that is
saucy and undutiful. 3. Nor on serious or holy matters: for that is irreligious;
applying to this occasion that of the Athenians, who would not suffer Pathus to
play his Comedies, where Euripides repeated his Tragedies. 4. He had much Salt,
but no Gall; often jesting, but never jearing. 5. He observed times, persons
and circumstances; knowing when to speak, and knowing too when to hold his
peace. 6. His apt and handsome Reparties were rather natural than affected;
subtle and acute, prompt and easy, yet not careless; never rendering himself
contemptible to please others. 7. Not an insipid changing of words was his
gift, bu^ a smart re^ort of matters, which every body was better pleased with
than himself. 8. He always told a story well; and was as good at a neat
continued discourse, as at a quick sentence; contriving it in an handsome
method, clothing it with suitable expressions, without any Parenthesis or
impertinencies, and representing persons and actions so to the life, that you
would ^hink you saw what you but hear: A no^able way, that argued the man of a
ready apprehension, an ingenious fine fancy, a tenacious memory, a graceful
Elocution, an exact judgment and disc^e^ion, and perfect acqu^intance with
things and circumstances. His phrase was clean and clear, the pictu^e o^ his
thoughts and language, (even in an argument) not harsh or severe, but gentle
and obliging, never contradicting but with an Under favor Sir; always
subjoyning to his adversaries discou^se, what the Dutch do to all Ambassadors
Proposals, It may be so.


Observations on the Life of Sir John Fineux.
SIr John Fineux born at Swinkfield, in the County of Kent, a place bestowed on
his Ancestors by a great Lord in Kent, called T. Criol, about the reign of King
Edward the second. He followed the Law twenty eight years before he was made a
Judge; in which Office he continued twenty eight years, and was twenty eight
years of Age before he ^etook himself to this study: whence it necessarily
^ollows, that he was four-score and four when he died. He was a great
Benefactor to St. Augustines in Canterbury; the P^ior whereof William Mallaham
thus highly commende^h him: (good deeds deserve good words.)

Vir prudentissimus, Genere insignis, Iustitia praeclarus, Pictate refertus,
Humanitate splendidus, and charitate foecundus. He died in 1526. and lies
buried in Christ-Church in Canterbury, having had a fair habitation in this
City, and another in Herne in this County, where his Motto still remains in
each Window: Misericordias Domini cantabo in AEternum.


Nile's original is hidden, but his stream is famous. This Judge's Ancestors
were not so obscure, as he was illustrious. His Device upon his Se^geants Ring
was, Suae quisque fortunae faber; and his discourse was always to this purpose,
That no man thrived but he that lived as if he were the first man in the world,
and his father were not born before him.

Forty years he said he lived by his industry; Twenty by his reputation, and
Ten by favor. King Henry the seventh knew not how well this Gentleman could
serve him, until he saw how effectually he did oppose him about the Tenth Penny
raised for the War in Britain, which raised another in York; where though the
Rabble (that murdered Henry Earl of Northumberland, who was to levy the Tax)
had not his Countenance for their Practice, yet had they his Principle for
their Rule, which was this, Before we pay any thing, let us see whether we have
any thing we can call our own to pay. So able, though reserved a Patriot,
thought the wise King, would be an useful Courtier, and he that could do so
well at the Bar, might do more at the Bench. Cardinal Morton was against his
advancement, as an encouragement to the Factious: (whose Hydra-heads grow the
faster by being taken off by Preferment, and not by an Ax) the King was for it,
as the most probable way of weakening of them, as who, when the most sober and
wise part of them draws off, are but a rude multitude, and a rope of sand.
When a Commoner, none so stiff for the subjects privilege; when a Judge, none
so firm to the Princes Prerogative: two things, (however, they fatally clashed
of late) that are solid felicities together, and but empty notions asunder: for
what is Prerogative but a great Name, when not exercised over a free people?
and what is privilege but a fond imagination, when not secured under a powerful
King, that may keep us from being slaves one to another by Anarchy, while we
strive to be free from his Tyranny? That people is beyond president free, and
beyond comparison happy, who restrain not their Sovereigns power to do them
harm so far, as that he has none left him to do them good. Careful he was of
the Law; for he was a Judge: and as careful of his Sovereigns Right; for he was
a Subject. No ominous clashing between Courts in his time; nor setting the
Kings Conscience in Chancery against his Will in the Kings Bench. A man tells
Aristides, to make him party in his cause, that his Adversary had abused him: I
sit not here (says that Impartial Judge) to right my self, but you. When a
notorious enemy of Judge Fineux had a cause depending before him, It might have
gone against you, my friend, (said he) had you not been my Enemy: His Motto
was; nemo prudem punit quia peccatum est sed ne peccetur.

Ten things, which are indeed ten of the most remarkable particulars of his
life, raised him.

1. An indefatigable industry, 1. In his reading, leaving behind him 23 Folio's
of Notes. 2. In his practice, bequeathing 3502 Cases he managed himself to his
Executor. 2. A freedom of converse, as about his business, none more close; so
in company, none more open; having so complete a command of himself, that he
knew to a minute when to indulge, and to a minute too when to restrain himself.
A gay and cheerful humor, a spriteful conversation, and clean^y manners, are
an exceeding useful accomplishment for every one that intends not to wind
himself into a solitary retirement, or be mewed in a Cloister. 3. A rich and a
well-contrived marriage, that at once brought him a large Estate, and a larger
Interest: the same tie that allied him to his Wives Family, engaged him to
many. 4. A great acquaintance with Noble Families, with whose dependants he got
in first, devoting an hour a day for their company; and at last with
themselves, laying aside his vacation-leisure for their service. He was Steward
of 129 Manors at once, and of Council to 16 Noblemen. 5. His Hospitality and
Entertainments. None more close than he abroad, none more noble at home; where
many were tied to his Table, more obliged by his company and discourse. 6. His
care and integrity in managing, his Repute in promoting, his Reason and
Eloquence in pleading, and his Success in carrying his causes. 7. His eminence
and activity in the two profitable Parliaments of Henry the seventh, where he
had the hearts and purses of the people at his command, and the eye of his
Sovereign upon his person. It was thought a reward adequa^e to the greatest
merit and adventure in the Grecian Wars, to have leave to play the Prizes at
Olympus before Kings. It was judged the most ambition could aim at in King
Henry the seventh's time, to show a man's parts before his judicious and
discerning Majesty; than whom none unde^s^ood Worth better, none valued it
higher. 8. His Opposition to Empson and Dudley's t^o severe Prosecution of
Poe^al Laws, while Henry the seventh was living; and his laying of it before
him so faithfully, that he repented of it when he was a dying. He is high a
while, that serves a Princes private interest; he is always so, that is careful
of the public good. 9. Hi^ entire Devotion to that sacred thing called
Friendship, that Bliss on this side Heaven, made up of Peace and Love. None a
worse Enemy, none a ^etter F^iend. Choice he was in commencing, but constant in
continuing Friends: Many Acquaintance, but few Friends, was his O^servation;
^^ying, He had been und^ne by his Acquaintance, had he not been raised by his
Friends. 10. His care of time. To day I have not reigned, said the Emperor
when he had done no good: To day I have not lived, said the Judge when he had
done nothing. So much he prayed Morning, Evening, and at Noon, according to the
way of those times, as if he never studied; so much he studied, as if he never
practiced; so great his practice, as if he never conversed; and so free his
converse with others, as if he lived not at all to himself. Time (of which
others are so prodigally expensive) was the only thing he could be honestly
covetous of: full whereof he died, leaving this instruction to posterity, That
we should not complain we have little time; but that we spend much either in
doing nothing, or in doing evil, or in doing nothing to the purpose.
Observations of the Life of Dr. Edward Fox, Secretary and Almoner to King
Henry the Eighth.
EDward Fox born in Dursly in Gloucestershire, brought up a Scholar in Eaton,
after fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, where he died Provost. He was
Almoner to King Henry the eighth, the first that brought Doctor Cranmer to the
knowledge of the King, as he brought the King to the knowledge of himself. Being
afterward Bishop of Hereford, he was a great Instigator of the Politic and
Prudential part of the Reformation, and was not less able, but more active than
Cranmer himself: yea, so famous was he, that Martin Bucer dedica^ed unto him
his Comment upon the Gospel: so pain^ul, that he wrote many Books, whereof
that, de Differentia utriusque potestatis, was the chief: so worthy he was,
that the King employed him on several Embassies into France and Germany. He
died May 8. 1538.

In his first years, none more wild; in his last none more stayed. The untoward
Youth makes the able Man. He that has m^ttle to be extravagent when he cannot
govern himself, has a spirit to be eminent when he can. His friends devotion
to the Church, and relation to the Bishop of Winchester, made him a Scholar;
his own Inclin^^ion, a Politician: an Inclination that brake through all the
ignoble restraints of pedantique studies and coercions, (wherewith many a great
Soul in England, (enjoying not the f^eedome of foreign parts, but tied to such
employments, though never so unsuitable, as their f^iends put them to) are
debased and lost) to an eminency (more by observation and travel, than by
reading and study) that made him the Wonder of the Unive^sity, and the Da^ling
of the Court. When he was called to the Pulpit, or Chair, he came off not ill;
so prudential were his parts of Divinity; when advanced to any Office of Trust
in the University, he came off very well; so incomparable were his parts for
Government!

His Policy was observed equally in the Subject, and in the contrivance of his
Sermons and disc^urse; where though all knew he read but little, yet all saw
that (by a Scheme and method his strong head had drawn up o^ all Books and
Discourses) ^e commanded all Lea^ning: his Explications of the Text were so
genuine, so exact, as if he had spent his time in nothing else but Critics and
C^mmentators. His Divisions ^o Analytical, as if he had seen nothing but
Logic: His Enlargements so copious and genuine, as if he had seen nothing but
Fathers and Schoolmen. The curious and pertinent mixture of Moral Sentences, so
various, as if he had been but a Humanist: ^he drift and design of all, so
close, that it argued him but (what indeed he was) a pure Pate-Politician. His
parts commended him to Cardinal Wolsey as his support: the Cardinal brings him
to his Master as his second, and he thrusts out Wolsey as his Rival; but yet
pretended to advance that ambitious Man more highly, that he might fall mo^e
irrecoverably. He sets him upon his designs of being Pope in Rome, and t^ose
make him none in England. He caught the Cardinal by his submission, as he would
have done Sir Thomas More by his Interrogations; at which he was so good, that
he would run up any man either to a Confession or a Praemunire. Fox was his
name, and Cunning ^is nature. He said, His Fathers money helped him to his
Parsonage, meaning his small Preferments; and his Mothers wit to his
Bishopric, meaning his greater.

Di^coursing one day when Ambassador, of terms of Peace, he said, Honorable
ones last long, but the dishonorable no longer than till Kings have power to
break them: the sures^ way therefore, said he, to Peace, is a constant
preparedness for War. Two things he would say must support a Government; Gold
and Iron: Gold, to reward its Friends; and Iron, to keep under its Enemies.
Themistocles after a Battle fought with the Persians, espying a Prize lying on
the ground, Take up these things, (says he to his Companion) for thou art not
Themistocles. Take the Emperors Money, said Fox to his followers, (that were
afraid to accept what he had refused) for you are not all the King of England's
Ambassadors.

Often was this saying in our Bishops mouth, before ever i^ was in Philip the
second's, Time and I will challenge any two in the world.

Portugal being revolted, the Conde d' Olivares come ^^iling to King Philip the
fourth, saying, Sir, I pray give me las Al^ricius to hansel the good news: for
now y^u are more absolute King of Portugal than ever: for the people have
forfeited all their privileges by the Rebellion and the Nobility their
E^tates; and now you may confirm your old Friends with their money, and make
you new ones with their Estates. When the Clergy began to ruffle with the King,
I tell you News, said this Bishop, we are all run into a P^aemunire: you shall
have Money enough to make your own Courtiers, and Places enough to advance your
own Clergy.

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony St. Lieger.
WE may say of him, he was born in Kent, and bred in Christendom: for when
twelve years of Age, he was sent for his Grammar-Learning with his Tutor into
France, for his Carriage into Italy, for his Philosophy to Cambridg, for his
Law to Grays-Inne; and for that which completed all, the Government of
himself, to Court; where his D^bonn^irness and F^eedome took with the King, as
his Solidity and Wisdom with the Cardinal. His Masterpiece was his Agency
between King Henry the eighth and Queen Anne, during the agitation of that
great business of the Divorce between the said King and his Queen Katherine.
His Policy was seen in catching the Cardinal in that fatal word, The Kin may
ruin me if he please! but that ruined him. His service was to be Cromwell's
Instrument in demolishing Abbeys, as he was the Kings. Caesar was the first
that came to undo the Commonwealth, sober; Sir Anthony St. Lieger was the first
that saved this Kingdom drunk: for in being abroad one night very late, and
much distempered, he must needs fancy an extraordinary light in the Cardina^'s
Closet; with which Fancy he ran to the King, and although much in drink,
prevailed with him so far, that he sends to the Cardinal, and there finds that
Juncto that threatened his Kingdom.

He esteemed it the bane of a good judgment, to look upon things through the
outside of some Customary formality; neglecting the steady consideration of
their inward nature; the first depending on the fancies of men, which are
volatile; the other on the being of things, which is fixed: and he was rather
for dressing his addresses in the smart way of a jest; than in the dull way of
a narrative. Ridiculum acri Fortius et melius magnas plerumque secat res. The
undigested fancies which please the Common people for a while, during the
distemper and green sickness, fit a troubled age, as Maids infected with that
Malady peferr ashes, or Coals in a corner, before healthful food in their
Fathers House; but when time has cured their malady, and expe^ience opened
their eyes, he would say that they should abhor their former errors, and the
misleaders that taught them.

He was the first Viceroy, because Henry the eighth was the first King of
Ireland. King Henry's affection would promote him any where, but his own
resolution and spirit commended him to Ireland.

He was a man whom all Ireland could not rule; therefore (as the Jest goes) he
should rule all England. Three times had the Irish Rebels made their solemn
submission to other Deputies: the fourth ^ime now they make it to him, throwing
down their Girdles, Skeans, and Caps. So great a man was the Lieutenant, so
great his Master! No sooner was he possessed of the Government, but he thought
of Laws, those Ligaments of it: The most rational and equitable Laws were those
of England, but too rational to be imposed on the Brutish ^^ish: therefore our
Knight considering (as he says in the Preface of his Constitution) that they
(poor souls) could not relish those exact Laws, to live or be ruled by them,
immediately enacted such as agreed with their capacity, rather than such were
dictated by his ability; his Wisdom (as all men's must) doing what was most fit
and convenient, rather than what was most exact; what they could bear, more
than what he could do: as remembering he had to do with Faeces Romuli, rather
than Respublica Platonis; a rude, rather than a reduced people. What he could,
he ordained according to the incompar^ble Rule of the English Laws; what he
could not, he established according to his present judgment of the Irish
capacity. He saw the Kingdom could never be subject to his Masters power,
while the Church was obedient to the Popes: therefore as he persuaded the
Nobility to surrender their Estates to his Majesty at London, so he compelled
the Clergy to make over theirs at Dublin: There remains but little of the first
in his Majesty's hands, so honorable was he in restoring it; and as little in
his Successors, so religious and just were they in resigning it to the same use
for substance, to which it was at first designed. But in vain it is to reform
Laws, unless we reform persons too: therefore as he sent Orders to reduce the
Irish Nobility in their several Count^ies, so he sent for themselves (to the
respective Houses built for them by his Majesty near Dublin) to be civilized in
the Court. Caesar came, saw, and overcame; Sir Anthony came, saw, and settled: A
man had thought there had not been so much cor^uption in the Romish Church, as
to admit Children to Church Livings, (for which Men are hardly s^fficient!) but
that Sir Anthony St. Leiger was forced to make this Law, That no Children
should be admitted to Benefices. We had not known this sin, had not the Law
said, You shall not invest any under sixteen years of age in Benefices. The
Clergy he found there too many, and the Nobility too few: he l^ssened the
number of the one to weaken the Pope, and improved the other to strengthen his
Master, of whom they held not only their Estates, but their Baronies too, as
obliged to duty in point of Honor as well as in point of Interest. But in vain
does he civilize the present Generation, and neglect the future: as therefore
he provided Cities for the Parents, so he erected Schools for the Children,
that the one might forget their Barba^ism, and the other never know it. Three
things he said would settle a State: 1. Good Godfathers and Godmothers
performing their Vows: 2. Good Householders overlooking their Families: 3. And
good Schoolmasters educating Youth; this last, the most useful, though the
most contemptible profession.

All War was mischievous to learning (Arts as well as Laws, being suppressed by
arms, the Muses Laurel is no security to them against Mars his Thunder) except
Sr. Anthonies, no man's Library being embezled; no man's study interrupted;
reserving learning for the Civilizing of that Nation which his arms had
Conquered.

An Athenian being asked what God was? said, He was neither Bow-man, nor
Horseman, nor Pikeman, nor Footman, but one that knew how to command [ all
these.] Sir Anthony St. Leiger was neither Soldier nor Scholar, nor Statesman,
yet he understood the way how to dispose of all these to his Countries service,
and his Masters honor; being all of them eminently, though none of them
pedantickly and formally in himself.

The Athenians (as Anaximander said) had good Laws, but used them ill; our
Deputy had bad Laws, but governed by good.

It was thought by many wise men, that the preposterous rigor and unreasonable
severity which some men carried there before him, was not the least incentive
that kindled and blew up into horrid flames the sparks of discontent, which
wanted not pre-disposed fuel in that place; where despair was added to their
former discontents, and the fears of utter extirpation to their wonted
oppressions: It is too easy to provoke a people too prone to break out to all
exorbitant violence, both by some principles of their Religion, and their
natural desires of Liberty; both to exempt themselves from their present
restraints, and prevent after-rigours: wherefore he was inclined to that
charitable connivence and Christian indulgence, which often dissipates their
strength, whom rougher opposition fortifieth, and puts the oppressed Parties
into such Combinations as may most enable them to get a full revenge on those
they count their Persecutors; who are commonly assisted by that vulgar
commiseration which attends all that are said to suffer for Religion or Liberty.

To conclude this: Four things Sir Anthony St. Leiger was eminent for: 1. That
there was none more grave in Council than he, in the morning: none more free at
Table, at noon: none more active in the afternoon: none more merry at night.
2. That his Orders were made but slowly, so wary he was; but executed quickly,
so resolute he was too. 3. That he contrived all his Designs so well
be^orehand, that in the course of affairs they were done to his hand; and he
was the Deputy that made no noise. 4. That as the Soldier (finding his first
admission to Alexander to be difficult) danced about the Court in an Antique
fashion, until the strangenes^ of the show made the King himself Spectator, and
then throwing off his disguise, he said, Sir, thus I first arrive at the notice
of your Majesty in the fashion of a fool, but can do you service in the place
of a wise man, if you please to employ me: So this Gentleman came to Court a
Swaggerer, but went off a Statesman. All Prudence is not lodged under a demure
look and an austere carriage: There are those that can be merry and wise; whose
Spirit is as lively, as their Judgment solid: And its no better a Character of
a wise man, than it was a definition of a man which Plato made, and Diogenes,
by showing a deplumed Cock, derided, that he is a living Creature that has two
feet, i. e. a grave, staid carriage; without feathers, i. e. a nimble fancy.
His only ^ault was, that he was a particular instance of that general rule,
Qui pauca considerat facile pronunciat.


Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Sadler.
SIr Ralph Sadler was born at Hackney in Middlesex, where he was Heir to a fair
Inheritance, and servant to the Lord Cromwell, and by him advanced into the
service of King Henry the VIII, who made him chief Secretary of State. He was
one that had much knowledge, therefore much employed in all, but especially in
the Intrigues of the Scots aff^irs: In the Battle of Muscleborow he ordered and
brought up our scattered Troops, inviting them to fight by his own Example; and
for his Valor was made There were two sorts of these Knights, the first made
by way of encouragement, the second by way of Reward: Sir Ralph was of the
second so^t, and the last that survived of that s^rt.
Knight Banneret. Queen Elizabeth made him Chancellor of the Duchy. During
his last Embassy in Scotland, his house a^ Standon in Hertfordshire was built
by his Steward in his absence, far greater than himself desired, so that he
never joyed therein; and died soon after, Anno 1587, in the 80 year of his Age.

King Henry understood two things: 1. A Man: 2. A Dish of Meat; and was seldom
deceived in either: For a Man, none more complete then Sir Ralph, who was at
once a most exquisite Writer, and a most valiant and experienced Soldier;
qualifications that seldom meet, (so great is the distance between the Sword
and the Pen, the Coat of Mail and the Gown) yet divided this man and his time;
his nights being devoted to contemplation, and his days to action. Little was
his Body, but great his Soul; the more vigorous, the more contracted. Quick and
clear were his thoughts, speedy and resolute his performances. It was he that
could not endure the spending of that time in designing one action, which might
perform two; or that delay in performing two, that might have designed twenty.
A great Estate he got honestly, and spent nobly; knowing that Princes honor
them most, that have most; and the People them only that employ most: A Prince
has more reason to fear money that is spent, than that which is hoorded;
because it is easier for Subjects to oppose a Prince by Applause than by
Armies. Reward (said Sir Ralph when he was offered a sum of money) should not
empty the Kings Coffers; neither should Riches be the Pay of Worth, which are
merely the Wages of Labor: He that gives it, em^aseth a Man; he that takes it,
vilifieth himself: who is so most Rewarded, is least. Since Honor has lost
the Value of a Reward, Men have lost the Merit of Virt^e, and both become
mercenary; Men lusting rather after the Wealth that buyeth, than after the
Qualities that deserve it.

Two things he observed broke Treaties; Jealousy, when Princes are successful;
and Fear, when they are unfortunate. Power that has need of none, makes all
confederacies, either when it is felt, or when it is feared, or when it is
envied.

Three things Cato repented of: 1. That he went by water when he might go by
land. 2. That he trusted a Woman with a secret. 3. That he lost Time. Two
things Sir Ralph relented for: 1. That he had communicated a secret to two. 2.
That he had lost any hour of the morning, between four a clock and ten.

He learned in King Henry the Eighth's time, as Cromwell's Instrument, what he
must advise (in point of Religion) in Queen Elizabeth's time, as an eminent
Counselor: His Maxim being this, That Zeal was the Duty of a private Breast,
and Moderation the Interest of a public State. The Protestants Sir Ralph's
Conscience would have in the commencement of Queen Elizabeth, kept in hope; the
Papists his Prudence would not have cast into Despair. It was a Maxim at that
time in b another case, That France should not presume, nor Spain be desperate.

He saw the Interest of this State altered six times, and died an honest Man:
The Crown put upon four Heads, yet he continued a Faithful Subject: Religion
changed, as to the public constitution of it, five times, yet he kept the
Faith.

A Spartan one day boasted that his Countrymen had been often buried in
Athens; The Athenian replied^ But we are most of us buried at home. So great
was Sir Ralph's success in the Northern Wars, that many a Scotch man found his
Grave in England; so exact his conduct and wariness, that few English men had
theirs in Scotland; the same ground giving them their Coffin, that did their
Cradle; and their Birth that did their Death. Our Knights two incomparable
Qualities were Discipline and Intelligence; the last discovered him all the
Enemies advantages, and the first gave them none.

His two main designs were, 1. An Interest in his Prince, by service. 2, An
Alliance with the Nobility by Marriage: upon which two Bottoms he raised
himself to that pitch of Honor and Estate, that time could not wear out, nor
any alterations embezle; he bequeathing to his Wo^shipful Posterity the
blessing of Heaven upon his Integrity; the love of M^nkinde for his Worth; and
(as Mr. Fuller says) a Pa^don granted him when he attended my Lord Cromwell at
Rome, for the sins of his Family for three immediate Generations, (expiring in
R. Sadler Esquire, lately dead.) His last Negotiation was that in Scotland,
during the troubles there about Queen Mary: So searching and piercing he was,
that no Letter or Adviso passed, whereof he had not a Copy; so civil and
obliging, that there was no Party that had not a Kindness for him; so grave and
solid, that he was present at all counsels; so close and industrious, that his
hand though unseen was in every motion of that State: and so successful, that
he left the Nobility so divided that they could not design any thing upon the
King; and the King so weak, that he could not cast off the Queen; and all so
tottering, that they must depend on Queen Elizabeth.

Three things he bequeathed such as may have the honor to succed him, 1. All
Letters that concerned him since of years, filed: 2. All Occurrences, since he
was capable of Observation, registered. 3. All expenses, since he lived of
himself, booked. Epaminondas was the first Grecian, and Sir Ralph Sadler was
one of the last Englishmen.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Paget.
SIr William Paget was born in the City of London, of honest Parents. He was so
able and trusty a Minister of State, that he was privy Counselor to four
successive Princes: He was Secretary to King Henry the Eighth; who employed him
Ambassador to Charles the Emperor and Francis King of France. King Edward the
Sixth made him Chancellor of the Durchy, Comptroller of his Houshole, and
created him Baron of Beaudefert. Queen Mary made him Keeper of the Privy Seal.
Queen Elizabeth highly respected him, dispensing with his Attendance at Court,
in favor to his great Age. Duke Dudley in the days of King Edward,
ignominiously took from him the Garter of the Order, saying, He was not
Originally qualified for the same: But this was restored unto him by Queen
Mary. He died very old, Anno 1563. and was buried in Lichfield. His Education
was better than his Bi^th, his Knowledge higher than his Education: His Parts
above his Knowledge, and his Experience beyond his Parts: A general Learning
furnished him for T^avel, and Travel seasoned that Learning for Employment. His
Masterpiece was an inward Observation of other Men, and an exact knowledge of
Himself. His Address was with state, yet insinuating: His Discourse free, but
weighed; his apprehension quick, but staid: His ready and present mind keeping
its pauses of thoughts and expressions even with the occasion and the
emergency: neither was his carriage more stiff and uncompliant, than his Soul.
Gundamore could not fit King James so well as Sir William did Charles the
Fifth, who in a rapture once cried, He deserved to BE a King, as well as to
REPRESENT One: and one day as he came to Court, Yonder is the Man I can deny
nothing to.

Apollonius coming to Vespatian's Gate betimes in the morning, and finding him
up, said, Surely this man will be Emperor, he is up so early. This Statesman
must needs be eminent, who was up the earliest of all the English Agents in
discovering Affairs, and latest in following those Discoveries. Three sorts of
Ambassadors the Emperor Charles observed were sent him from England; the first
was Wolsey, whose great Train promised much, as his great Design did nothing:
The second was Morisin, who promised and did much: The third Paget, who
promi^ed nothing, and did all. What Scholars observed then of Luther
Melancthon, Carolostadius.
three Divines, that a Statesman has set down of our three Agents: the first
was words without matter; the second was matter without words; the third was
words and matter. Quick and regular were his Dispatches, when Secretary,
pleasing all with his proceedings, even when he could not but displease many
with his Decision. It was much none went away ever sad from Augustus an
Emperor, it was more none was dismissed ever in discontent from Sir William
Paget a Secretary of State. The King was not happier in his abilities to serve
him, than he was in their dexterity who waited upon him: These are my eyes,
(says the discreet man) these are my right hands. For his service he would
choose a Man before a Scholar, a Traveller before a Homebred: Parts he
preferred in his Office, a Presence in his Chamber; Parts and Presence in the
Closet.

Beecher was King Henry the Eighth his Map of England, (so well skilled he was
in our English Customs, Trade, Improvements, Situation, Interest and
Inclination) Paget was his Table of Germany, France, and Rome, so exact an
account could he give of their Situation, Havens, Forts, Passages, Provision,
Policies, Revenue and Strength: secured he was, in King Henry's changeable
times, by his foreign Travels and Employments. Escape he did King Edward's
Reformation, by his Moderation and peaceableness: He complied with Queen Mary's
Zeal, out of conscience; and submitted to Queen Elizabeth's Authority, out of
Duty and Allegiance: being one of those moderate men that looked upon the
Protestants primitive Foundations of The Creed, The Lords Prayer, and the
Commandments.
Faith, Duty and Devotion, as safe: and on the Papists superstructures, as not
damnable: Whose life was Grotius and Cassander's Wish, An Accommodation to the
Christian World. Privacy is the Favorites In^erest, and concealment his ^are:
Sir William wished for success for his Masters sake, but dissembled it for his
own: He is the man, that loses neither his Privacy, nor his Reputation. Quiet
was his temper, though noble his resolution: Troublesome is a witty man on a
stage, as a Monkey in a cup-board of glass. Placed, sweet and composed is the
prudent Man, like an Intelligence in the Heavens, or a god in the World. Up he
went, but by just degrees; that if down he must, he might do so with the same
leisure and safety.

When he had managed the Secrets and Negotiations of Henry the Eighth, with
Dexterity and Faithfulness; the Lands of King Edward the Sixth, with Skill and
Improvement; the Purses of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, with good Husbandry
and Ca^e; When he had lived enough to his Countries, to his Sovereigns, to his
Friends, and the Public Good; he retired to live to Himself first, and then
to his GOD.

Observations on the Life of Sir Richard Morisin.
SIr Richard Morisin born in Essex (or in Oxfordshire Says Si^ Ri^h. Baker.
) was brought up Per celebriora Anglo^um ^yn^nasia ^^tes ex^luit.
at Eaton, Cambridge, and Inns of Court. He was so skilful in Latin and Greek,
and in the Common and Civil Law, that he was often employed Ambassador by King
Henry the VIII, and Edward the VI, unto Charles the Fifth Emperor, and other
Princes of Germany; which he discharge^ with all honesty and ability. After the
death of King Edward the VI, he was forced to fly beyond the Seas; and
returning out of Italy, died at Strasburgh, on the 17. of March, 1556.

Three things made a complete man in those days: 1. A public School, where
their School-fellows Genius's instruct much more t^an their Schoolmasters
pains; where a man attains at once to Learning, Prudence, and a Spirit: 2. A
comprehensive insight into Tongues and Sciences; by the first whereof they
unlocked Men, and by the second, Things^ 3 Travel, where they saw what they
read, and made that a solid apprehension and observation, which was before but
a fluid notion and a floating imagination: Our Knight was happy in all Three,
but so complete in the last, that he had the Virtues and Port of a German, as
if he had been a Native of that place; and loathed the Vices, as if he had
never seen it: Thereby he could get so far within that people, that he saw all
their Intrigues; and be yet so reserved, that they could see nothing. The
ablest German Divines guided his conscience, and the greatest Statesmen his
Negotiation. He kept under the Emperor by the Princes, the French by the
Emperor, and the Pope by them all. So much service did the good Knight to King
Henry the Eighth, in his Wise Katharine's Case; and so much the whole Kingdom,
in that of Religion; that he equally fled Queen Mary's wrath, and her Religious
Persecutions. His strong pa^ts set off his comprehensive knowledge; his
resolute spirit, his parts; and his presence and mode, all: King Henry always
choosing an Ambassador that might represent his Person as well as his power: And
Sir Richard had his Hegh in Germany, as well as Henry in England.

His knack was his foresight, which made that an Adviso in England, which was
hardly a known design there: saying usually, His Master maintained not
Ambassadors so much to write Histories as Prophecies. The Trejans sent to
condole with Caesar for his Son that was dead two years ago; he thanked them,
and condoled with them for Hector, that was slain as many hundred years. Our
Ambassador in France advises Sir Richard of a Battle fought a Week before, and
he in answer makes a large discourse of the Battle of Spurs fought many years
before; and adds, I and You are not here to tell old stories.

Two things, he said, he was troubled with, Envy and Malice; and two Remedies
he had against them, Patience and Resolution. Always he wheeled with the first
Mover, yet he had private motions of his own: Singular, but modest: So faithful
he was, that he would d^clare his Opinion; yet so wary, that he would not stand
in it against his Prince; knowing, that if he did it out of prudence, he
rendered the Princes Ability suspected; if out of his own sagacity, it
blemished his Integrity; Both equal inconveniences, to intimate the Master
Unable, or the Servant Corrupt.

When others pressed for an over-strict Reformati^n, this Gentleman urged, That
Distempers in the Body and State are reduced by Physicians and Politicians not
to what they should be, but to what they can be; Freedom, Moderation, and
Impartiality are the best tempers of Reforming Counsels and Endeavors: What is
acted singularly, must offend more than it pleases; a study to gratify some
men, being a likely way to injure all: The novelty of excessive and immoderate
undertakings giving not so much content to the vulgar of a present Age, as the
mischiefs of them give offense to the Generations of future times.

And Melancthon's discourse to him was to this purpose: That the Reformation of
hearts should go before that of Churches; and men should try that on their own
hearts which they design upon the Church: For Deformities within, will soon
betray the Pretenders of public Reformation to such private designs as must
needs hinder the public Good. It would be an easy matter for Favou^i^es to
reform Kings Palaces (says Malvezzi) if it were not a hard thing to reform
their own houses.

One asked him, Why his Embassy tended so much more to preserve his Masters
Dominions, than to augment them? And he replied what is fathered on Henry the
Fourth, That getting is a Chance, but Keeping is a Wit.

After a long re^idence abroad, he thought of an Habitation at home; which he
no sooner began at Cashobery in Hertfordshire, but King Edward going out of the
World, the good Knight was forced out of his house and the Kingdom.

He was the first that said, Policy is not the learning of some Rules, but the
Observation of Circumstances, with a present mind in all junctures of affairs;
which (he would say) was their happiness only, that had good memories: For when
one said he had seen much, heard more, and read most: You were (said he) a more
complete man, could you say, I remembered as much. Secretary Walsingham would
say, My Lord, stay a little, and we shall have done the sooner: Secretary Cecil
said, It shall never be said of me, That I will defer till to morrow what I can
do to day: And Sir Richard Morisin, Give me this day, and take the next your
self. Noble was his Resolution, when he said, He scorned to take pensions from
an Emperor of Germany, since an Emperor of Germany took pay of the King of
England.

His stature was something tall, and procured him reverence; his temper
reserved, and commanding security to his person and his business. He that
knows to speak well, knows also where he must hold his peace, said the old
Grecian: Think an hour before you speak, and a day before you promise, said
this English-Roman. With Ferdinand the Emperor he prevailed for the Popes
assistance, and with Maximilian for his Masters against the French.

Never was his Master Henry so high, as to set him above treating; nor his
Sovereign Edward so low, as to make him afraid of War; although he looked upon
the way of Treaties, as a retiring from fighting like Beasts, to arguing like
men; whose strength should be more in their understandings, than in their
Limbs. I have (said a great Prince) greater confidence in my Reason than in my
Sword; and am so resolved to yield to the first, that I thought neither my self
nor others should use the second, if once we rightly understood one another.
It Is humane to use Reason rather than Force, and Christian to seek peace and
ensue it.

Christian was his Temper, and Religious his carriage; so charitable, that he
relieved the Con^essors, as though he had been none himself; and so constant,
that he continued his sufferings, as if there were no other. Much good did his
Countenance do the Exiles in the Courts of Foreign Princes; and more his
Authority at the Troubles of Frankford, where his Motive to love, was the
hatred of the Enemy.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Nicholas Wotton.
NIcholas Wotton, Son to Sir Robert, born at Bockton-malherb in the County of
Kent, (a place so named, from some noxious and malignant Herbs growing therein)
was bred in Oxon, Doctor of the Civil Laws; and was the first Dean of the two
Metropolitan Churches of Canterbury and York. He was Privy-Counsellour to ^our
successive Sovereigns, viz. King Henry the VIII. King Edward the VI. Queen
Mary. Queen Elizabeth.


He was employed thirteen several times in Embassies to Foreign Princes.

Five times to Charles the Fifth Emperor.

Once to Philip his Son, King of Spain.

Once to Francis the First, King o^ France.

Once to Mary Queen of Hungary, Governess o^ the Netherlands.

Twice to William Duke of Cleve.

Once to renew the peace between England, France and Scotland, Anno 1540.

Again to the same purpose at Cambray, Anno 1549.

Once sent Commissioner with others to Edinburgh in Scotland, 1560.

He refused the A^chbishoprick of Canterbury, proferred him in the first o^
Queen Elizabeth. He died January 26. in 1566. being about seventy years of Age,
and was buried in Canterbury.

Ius^inian reduced the Law of Nations to one Body, and Doctor Wotton
comprehended them in one Soul: Public was his spirit, and such his thoughts:
That profession that was designed for the settlement of the Wo^lds commerce,
was now confined to a Bishops Court, a Churchwardens Oath, or a rich man's
will; when this excellent Person first enlarged it as far as the Sea, in the
Cases of the Admiralty; and as wide as the world, in the Negotiations of
Embassy. Others were trusted with the Interest of Princes, He with that of
Nations. He that saw him, would think he could deny nothing, so modest
Scholar-like his looks! He that heard him would judge he would grant nothing,
so undeniable his Reason! so irrefragable his Arguments! His speech was as
ready as his resolution was present. His apprehension quick and clear: his
method exact: his reading vast and indefatigable: his memory (strong as to
things, though not to words) tenacious: his clocution copio^s and flowing. What
si^ Henry Wotton said of sir Philip Sidney, I may say o^ Nicholas Wotton, That
he was the very measure of congruity. What that Counselor writ to the French
King in a great sheet (when he required his advice) that our Doctor advised our
Princes in several Discourses, viz. Modus, a mean^ Sir, (said King Henry to
him, now not forty years old) I have sent a Head by Cromwell, a Purse by Wolsey,
a Sword by Brandon, and I must now send the Law by You, to treat with my
Enemies.

Augustus lamented for Varus his death, because, he said, Now I have none in my
Country to tell me the truth: With Wotton went off that faithfulness that
Peasants have, and Princes want: None more resolute abroad, none more bold and
downright at home. His plain dealing saved King Henry some Treasure, King
Edward the North, Queen Mary Calice for a while, and Queen Elizabeth her Faith
and Crown: A Virtue that made him the Overseer of most Foreign Ministers Actions
abroad, and one of the sixteen Executors of King Henry's Will and Testament at
home. Gardener was sly and close, but Wotton prudent and wise. In the Treaty at
Calice there are two things remarkable of our Doctor, 1. That he first insisted
on the peace with France, before that of Scotland^ 2. He would say, Rather give
away Calice, than reserve a Right in it fifteen years hence: for never was the
Interest of any Nation so constant, as to keep a promise half so many ^ears.

Indeed Sir William Cecil's reach went no further for a Layman, than Doctor
Wotton for a Churchman: Therefore they two were pitched upon for the management
of the Intrigues and Affairs o^ Scotland.

Many envied this happy man, but none could be without him, who was ^he Oracle
of both Laws at Councils; who could sum up the merit of any Cause, recollect
the circumstances of any Affair; and show Tables of Trade, Commerce,
Situations, Counsels, Revenue, Interest, etc. the readi^st and exactest of any
in England.

But all these Qualifications must die, and he with them: leaving it as his
Advice,

First, To Churchmen: To understand well the Common and Canon Law, as well as
the Divine; by the first whereof, they might understand their right; as by the
second, they info^med themselves and othe^s of their duty.

Secondly, To Statesmen: Travel and History.

Thirdly, To Ambassadors: 1. A good Pu^se: 2. A noble and sober Train^ 3.
Constant correspondence and observation: 4. A happy medley of Debonairness and
Complacency, Reservedness and Gravity: with the first he had taken Princes, and
with the last Statesmen: the one discovers others, while the other conceals
you. 5. Resolution: I made often (said h^ as if I would fight, when they knew
my calling allowed me only to speak: 6. Civility: That man (said the Prince of
Orange) is a great bargain, who is bought with a bare salvation.

Fourthly, To Privy-Counsellours: That excellent caution, Always to speak last,
and be Masters of other strength before they displayed their own.

This was that rare man that was made for all business, so dexterous! This was
he that was made for all times, so complying! This was he who lived Doctor of
both Laws, and died Doctor of both Gospels; the Protestant, which had the
Statesmans part of this man; and the Popish, who had the Christian. Noah Being
called Bifrons
had two faces, because he was a son of the old world before the flood, and a
father of the new one after: Wotton sure had four faiths, who was a Favorite
in King Henry's days, of the Counsel in King Edward's, of the Juncto in Queen
Mary's, and the Cecil was the first.
second Statesman in Queen Elizabeth's.

With these two things of this person, I shall conclude:

1. His refusal of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, which argued his
extraordinary humility or wariness.

His admission of Doctor Parker, as Dean of Canterbury, to that See; which
argues the legality of his calling, there being no circumstance with any
likelihood omitted, by so exquisite a Civilian as Doctor Wotton; or forgotten,
by so great an An^iquary as Doctor Parker.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wriothesly, the first Earl of
Southampton.
THomas Wriothesly Knight of the Garter, was born in Barbican, Son to William
Wriothesly (descended from an Heir general of the ancient Family of the
Dunste^viles) King of Arms. He was bred in the University of Cambridge, as it
appears by Mr. Ascam's Letter unto him, writing in the behalf of the
University, when he was Lord Chancellor.

Quamobrem Academia cum omni literarum ratione, ad te unum conversa (cui uni
quam universis aliis se charior^m intelligit) partim tibi ut alumno suo, cum
authoritate imperat: partim, ut patrono summo, demisse and humiliter supplicat,
etc. His University-Learning prepared him for the Law, and ^is indefa^igable
study of the Law promoted him to the Court; where, for his Honor, he was
created Baron of Tichbourn, Jan. 1. 1543. and ^or his Profit, the next year,
May 3. Lord Chancellor; a place he discharged with more Applause than any
before him, and with as much Integrity as any since him: Force (he said) awed,
but Justice governed the World.

It is given to that Family to be Generous and Resolute: This incomparable
Person was under a cloud in King Edward's time, for being a
rigidly-conscientious Papist; and his great Grandchild suffered in King Charles
his time, for being a sincerely honest Protestant: Ye^ so reverenced was the
first of this Family by his Adversaries, that he was made Earl of Southampton;
and so honored was the other by his Enemies, that they courted him to their
party. Integrity has a Majesty in its full, and a Glory in its lowest Estate;
that is, always feared, though not always loved.

No Nobleman understood the Roman Religion better than the first Earl of
Southampton; and none the Protestant better then the last, the Right Honorable
and truly Excellent Thomas Earl of Southampton, and Treasurer of England.

His Court, he said, gave Law to the Kingdom; His constant and exact Rules, to
the Court; and his Conscience guided by the Law of the Kingdom, to his Rules.
Affable and acceptable he was, as More; quick and ready, as Wolsey; incorrupt,
as Egerton; apprehensive and knowing, as Bacon. Twice were all Cases depending
in Chancery dispatched; in Sir Thomas Wriothesly's time, 1538. and in Sir
Thomas More's 1532. Truly did he judge intra Cancellos, deciding Cases with
that Uprightness, that he wished a Window to his Actions, yea and his Heart
too. King Philip was not at leisure to hear a poor Woman's Cause; Then, said
she, cease to be King. My Lord over-hearing a servant putting off a Petitioner,
because his Master was not at leisure, takes him up roundly, and repli^s, You
had as good say, I am not at leisure to be Lord Chancellor. Two things he
would not have his servants gain by, his Livings and his Decrees; The first, he
said, we^e Gods, the second the Kings, (whom every man, he said, sold, that
sold Justice:) To honest men, your places, said he, are enough; to Knaves, too
much. Every Week he had a Schedule of his own Accounts, and every Month of his
Servants. Cato's greatest Treasure was his Account-Book of Sicily; and my Lord
of Southampton's was his Table of the Chancellours place. A great Estate was
conferred upon him, which he took not in his own name, to avoid the odium of
Sacrilege; as great an Inheritance he bought, but in others names, to escape
the malice of Envy.

He loved a bishop, he said, to satisfy his Conscience; a Lawyer, to guide his
Judgment; a good Family, to keep up his Interest; and an University, to
preserve his name.

Full of Years and Worth, he died 1550. at Lincoln-place, and was buried at St.
Andrews Church in Holborn, where his Posterity have a Diocese for their Parish,
and a Court for their Habitation.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Fitz-James.
JOhn Fi^z-Iames Knight, was born at Redlinch in Somersetshire, of Right
Ancient and Worthy Parentage, b^ed in the study of our Municipal Laws; wherein
he proved so great a Proficient, that by King Henry the Eighth he was advanced
to be Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. There needs no more to be said of his
Merit, save that King Henry the Eighth preferred him; who never used either
Dunce or Drone in Church or State, but Men of Ability and Activity. He sat
thirteen years in his place, demeaning himself so, that he lived and died in
the Kings Favor. He sat one of the Assistants when Sir Thomas More was
arraigned for ^efusing the Oath of Supremacy, and was shrewdly put to it, to
save his own Conscience, and not incur the Kings Displeasure: For Chancellor
Audley, supreme Judge in that pla^e, (being loath that the whole burden of
More's condemnation should lie on his shoulders alone) openly in the Court
asked the Advice of the Lord Chief Justice Fitz James, Whether the Indictment
were sufficient or no? To whom our Judge warily returned, My Lords all, by St.
Gillian, (which was ever his Oath) I must Mr. More in the printed Life of his
Grandfather Sir Thomas More, page 334.
needs confess, That if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful, then the
Indictment is not in my conscience sufficient.

He died in the Thirteeth Year of King Henry the Eighth; and although now there
be none left at Redlinch of his Name and Family, they flourish still at Lewson
in Dorsetshire, descended from Alured Fitz-Iames brother to this Judge, and to
Richard Bishop of London.

The two main Principles that guide humane Nature (says Judge Dodderidge) are
Conscience and Law: By the former we are obliged in reference to another world,
by the latter in relation to this. P^iests and Judges are the Dispensers of
^hese Principles: No Prince more unhappy in his Priests than King Henry (whose
unhappiness it was, that all the juggle, prevarication, and imposture of his
time was in the Pulpit,) none more happy in his Judges, (to whose Reason his
People were more willing to submit, than they were to hearken to his Clergy's
Instruction) among whom none more renowned than Sir John Fitz-Iames, who was so
fearful of the very shadow and appearance of corruption, that it cost his chief
Clerk his place but for taking a Tankard, after a signal Cause of 1500 l. a
year, wherein he had been serviceable, though not as a Bribe, but as a
Civility. Caesar would have his Wife without suspicion of lewdness, and
Fitz-Iames his servants without the appearance of corruption. What was Law
always, was then a Resolution, Neither to deny, nor defer, nor sell justice.
When our Judge came upon the Bench, he knew no more then Melchisedech or Levi,
Father or Mother, neither Friend nor Interest: for when his Cousin urged for a
kindness, Come to my House (says the Judge) I will deny you nothing; come to
the Kings Court and I must do you justice: And when the Attorney General
bespake his favor in a public Cause, Trouble not your self, (said he) I Will do
the King right: The King is cast, the Attorney expostulates; the Judge
satisfies him, That he could not do his Majesty Right, if he had not done
justice.

His P^udence so tempe^ed his zeal for his Sovereign, that he over-strained not
the Prerogative to bring in fears and jealousies of Tyranny on the one hand;
and his Integ^ity so balanced his Popularity, that he never depressed it to
broach bold opinions and attempts of Liberty, on the other: complying with none
of those humors that an Imaginary dread of oppression, or a dangerous
pres^mption of freedom may transport to irregular excesses either for the one,
or against the other.

As his Majesty was secured by his Loyalty, so his Subjects were by his
Patience, a Virtue he carried with him to the Bench, to attend each
circumstance of an Evidence, each allegation of a Plea, each plea in a Cause;
hearing what was impertinent, and observing what was proper. His usual saying
(as Sergeant Mandevil reports it) being, We must have two souls, as two sieves,
one for the Bran, the other for the flour; the one for the Gross of a
Discourse, the other for the Quintessence.

The same day that there was no Cause to be tried in the Chancery in Sir Tho.
More's time, there were but three in the Kings Bench, in Sir John Fitz-Iames
his time: the reason whereof some imagine was Cardinal Wolsey's extraordinary
power (that engrossed all Causes to his Legantine Court;) others know it was
the Judges Integrity, who was too honest to allow, as that Age was too plain to
contrive, delays and obstructions.

Lewis the Eleventh of France would say, when he was advised to take Revenge of
those that had affronted him before he came to the Crown, That it became not
the King of France to revenge the Injuries done to the Duke of Orleans. A
Person that had no^oriously wronged Sir John when a Templer, in the case of his
Chamber, was to be tried before him for his whole E^tate when a Judge; the
Adversaries among other shifts made use of this old Q^arrel; whereupon Sir John
said, It does not become a Judge upon the Bench to revenge a wrong done in his
Chamber.

Two things upheld him in those boisterous times: 1. Silence, 2. Patience: both
wary Virtues that seldom endanger their Owner, or displease their Superiors.
The People of those times would live and die with the Pope and Council; and
this Judge, with the King and Parliament: The grand Article of his Faith was, I
believe as the Church beleives: and the great Rule of his Practice was, I will
live as the Law directs.

He was a tried Man, whose Faith and Honor was above his Life and Fortune;
whose Generosity was above that first temptation of Money, as his Spirit was
above the second of Danger: No fear here of delivering up Privileges to day,
for fear of the King; or Prerogative to morrow, for fear of the Subject: No, an
unbiased Temper between both, make up this honest man; who came on to
preferment with great Expectations, and went off with great Applause: being one
of the three men of whom it is said, That because they never pleased their
Master in doing any thing unworthy, they never displeased him in doing any
thing that is just. When base compliance goes off with the contempt of those
it has humoured, a Noble Resolution comes off with the Reverence of those it
has discontented.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Molineux.
SIr William Molineux Junior, Descendent from Sir William Molineux Knight, of
Sefton in Lancashire, flourished under King Henry the Eighth, being a man of
great command in Lancashire; bringing the considerable strength thereof to the
seasonable succor of the Duke of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal
service ^a Flodden-Field. The Image of whose mind, he was as well as the
Portrait of his body. Peculiar was our Knight for nobly forgiving his Enemies
if reconcilable; and refusing ignobly to be revenged of them, though obstinate:
for honestly would he betray the Villainies of them, that dishonestly offered to
betray them to him; as Fabricius delivered up to Pyrrhus, though a sworn Enemy,
the Physician that would have Poisoned him; Lewis the 11th. discovered to the
Duke of Burgundy, though his mortal Foe, the conspiracy that would have ruined
him; And Queen Elizabeth of England, with King Philip of Spain, gave Henry the
great of France, (when Friends with neither of them) notice of two Plots upon
his person, that would have ruined him.

It is confessed on all sides that the Scots lost the day, by not keeping their
Ranks, but not agreed on the cause thereof. Buchanan (who commonly makes the
too much Cou^age of his Countrymen, the cause of their being conquered)
imputes it to their indiscrete pursuing of the English routed at the first:
Others say, They did not break their Ranks, but were broken, unable to endure
the Lancashire Archers, and so forced to sunder themselves. In this Battle the
Scottish King and chiefest Gentry were slain, the English losing scarce any;
the Scots scarce any but of prime note. The King a^terward wrote his
Gratulatory Letter to Sir William Molineux, in form following.

TRusty and Well-Beloved, We greet you well:
And understand as well by the Report of Our Right Trusty Cousin and
Counselor, the Duke of Norfolk, as otherwise, what acceptable service You
amongst Others lately did Us by your valiant Towardness in the assi^ting of Our
said Cousin against Our Enemy, late King of Scots; and how courageously you, as
a very hearty loving Servant acquitted your self for the overthrow of the said
late King, and distressing of his Malice and Power, to Our great Honor, and
the advancing of your no little Fame and Praise; for which We have good cause
to favor and thank you, and so We full heartily do; and assured may you be,
that We shall in such effectual wise remember your said Service in any your
reasonable pursuits, as you shall have cause to think the same right well
employed to Our comfort and weal hereafter.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Castle at Windsor, the seven and twentieth of
November.

It appears by our Author, that the like Letters, mutatis mutandis, were sent
unto Sir Edward Stanley, and some other men of princip^l note in Lancashire and
Cheshire.

There is more in the Education than the Birth (though that be Noble too) of
this Gentleman: much Generous Blood sparkled in his Veins, more Arts and
Sciences thronged in his S^ul: A learned Prince brought up a learned Gentry,
the most hope^ul of whom think themselves as much obliged to imitate his
Virtues, as the most degenerate were inclined to practi^e his Vices. Four
excellent Artists were at once entertained in his Fathers House: 1. A complete
Grammarian and Linguist, Parker. 2. An exact Mathematician and Historian,
Calvius: 3. A skilful Musician, Palleviceno. 4. An active Dancing Master and
Soldier.


The Latin Tongue then wearing out its Barbarism, he spoke and writ elegantly:
Cicero's Works he kenned particularly: Plutarch's Lives and Morals (that Book
which, as Gaza said, would furnish the World, if Learni^g were lost) he
epitomized punctually: The active and practical part of Geometry, he studied
intently. And, as the complaisance of his Nature and sweetness of his Temper,
he added to these severer studies, those more airy of Music, Poetry, and
Heraldry.

Si ad naturam eximiam eruditio accesserit tum demum singular quoddam existere
solet. This Noble Nature, advanced by this Heroic Education, must needs do
Wonders, as it did: first, In the University: where his Company was choice, his
Carriage even and staid, his time exactly observed and prudently spent:
secondly, abroad: where his Converse was wary, his Conduct Noble and Plausible,
his observations and exercises manlike and knowing: Thirdly, at Court: where
his presence was graceful, his discourse solid, digested, distinct, and clear;
much improved by reading, more by traveling, most by con^erence with those
that speak well: Fourthly, in the Country: where his Hospitality was renowned,
his Equity and Prudence beloved, and his Interest large and commanding. None
pleased the King at Court more, such his Learning to satisfy him, such his
Debonairness to delight him; (for as Cardinal Wolsey, so Sir William Molineux
got in with King Henry the Eighth by a Discourse out of Aquinas in the morning,
and a Dance at night.) None served him better in the Country: Such his
obligations upon Tenants and Neighbors, that he had six thousand men at
command: such his prudence and justice, that there were more differences ended
in his Parlour, than in Westminster Hall: such his ca^e and watchfulness, that
no Treason stirred, but his Agents discovered, and his Militia was at an hours
warning to suppress it: The Idea of the English Gentleman! In Favor at Court!
In Repute in the Country! At once Loved and Feared!

Four things he took special care of: 1. That the Poor might have their stated
Alms. 2. That the Priests might enjoy their known Dues. And 3. That his Tenant
might be so well used, that he might thrive; and but so well, that he should
not be idle. 4. That every Body should be employed: saying, He had rather they
should be busy, though doing nothing to the purpose, at the charge of his
Purse; than that they should be idle, doing nothing at all, at the charge of
their own precious time. In a word, he lived in all Capacities a public Good,
and died a common L^ss: Leaving in his Family that best Legacy, A good Example;
and his Country that lasting Mo^ument, A good Name, for two things that he
hated; 1. Depopulating enclosures: 2. Unworthy Inhancements of Rents: For he
died with this Advice to his Son, Let the Underwoods grow. The Tenants are the
supports of a Family, and the Commonalty are the strength of the Kingdom.
Improve thriftily, but force not violently either your B^unds or Rents above
your Forefathers. His Popula^ity never failed of being called to the
Parliament, nor his Activity of being useful there: None understood better how
to move, to press, to quit, to divert, to escape, to watch and mould a
business: None knew better the confederacy of Contrivers, Speakers, Sticklers,
Dividers, Moderators, and the ^ and No-Men, their Method and Correspondence:
None more patient and industrious, when a lower Faction was firmer in
conjunction, and a few that were stiff, tired out many more moderate. He had no
easiness to be imposed upon, no weakness to be deluded, no low Interest to be
corrupted by fond hopes or fair promises of Preferment, to wave the very pinch
of a dispute; no pleasure or vanity to be debauched, while the vigilant Faction
steals a Vote worth a Kingdom; no sloth nor neglect, to be surprised; no
vanity of discourse, to lose his Master, no partiality to be biassed, no
discontent to satisfy, no passion to misguide: As one that hated nothing, but
what was Dishonest; feared nothing, but what was ^gnoble; and loved nothing,
but was Just and Honorable: having a care of his Virtue, as lying in his
power, but not of Fortune, as lying in the power of Superiors, from whom he
could only by deserving command a favor; he being of Plato's opinion, that a
man's mind is the Chariot; Reason the Coachman; Affections the Horses; desire
of Honor the Whips; both exciting to go forward, and awing to be exact:
Honor, always keeping up curiously the honored person in an height of
action, that keeps an even pace with admiration; evenness and constancy being
the Crown of Virtue.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Fitz-James.
HIs Judgment in Parliament brought him to the notice, and his Activity and
prowess in the Wars recommended him to the service of King Henry. The Bishops
pleaded for the Catholiq^e Religion, the People for a Reformation; Sir William
offered his Opinion for a mean between both; That since it was unreasonable to
tie up Mankind in blind obedience one toward another, and impossible to run
through all Difficulties and Controversies our own selves, (so much Time and
Money must be spent in such an Undertaking, so many Languages learned, so many
Authors read, so many Ages looked into, so many Faiths examined, so many
Expositors conferred, so many Contradictions reconciled, so many Countries
traveled, for any considerable satisfaction) to believe all, is inconsistent;
to neglect all, is impious: There remains no other way for the Laics, but to
recollect and ^ick to the most Common, Authentic and Universal Truths, tending
to Virtue and Godliness; apart from what is doubtful and controverted, and
tending only to strife and perplexity; and by these to live our selves, and
exa^ine all other pretensions whatever; there being no part of Religion but
what has Virtue and Grace as its Foundation and Design: A way that would keep
men from Atheism, under a sense o^ Religion; from endless controversies, in the
solid p^actice of Virtue; from fatal Divisions, in peace and concord. Let us
(said he) establish and fix these Catholic and Universal Notions, and they
will settle our Souls, and not hinder us to believe whatsoever is faithfully
taught by the Church, or submit to what is authoritatively enjoined by the
State. So that whether the Eastern, Western, Northern, or Southern Teachers,
etc. and particularly whether my Lord of Rochester, or Luther, etc. be in the
Right, we Laics may so build upon those Catholics and infallible Guards of
Religion, as whatsoever superstructures of Faith be raised, these Foundations
may support them.

This Discourse opened a Door to the Reformation intended, and shut out all
those prejudices it might lie under from the State, and Religion o^
Forefathers, etc.

Hereupon Sir William is invited to Court; and when the air and softness of
that place suited no^ his more severe and stirring Temper, he is promoted to
Authority first by Land, and then by Sea; where none was more watchful in the
War^ between Us and France, none so active in those between Us and Scotland:
With thirty six Ships he gave Law to the narrow Seas, as Poynz with forty more
did to the Main: There was not a serviceable man belonging to him, but he knew
by name; It being his Rule, That none fought well, but those thet did it for a
fortune.

While he watched the Coast of France, he discovered twelve French Ships, in
which the Archbishop of Glasco, and diverse others of Quality were, (whom the
Duke of Albany had sent before him into Scotland;) these he chased to a
shipwreck: and leaving a Squadron to shut up the French Havens, went along the
French Coasts, landing in diverse places, wasting the Country, till at last he
came to Treport, a Town strongly situated, and garisoned with three thousand
men, which yet he took; and finding it not his Interest to dwell there,
pillaged and burned it, going off with Success and Glory: Insomuch that King
Henry joined him with the Bishop of Bath in the Commission for the Treaty at
Paris; where such Articles were agreed on touching a Marriage with the Princess
Mary, and the joint Embassy to the Emperor, as spoke Sir William as well seen
in the state of Europe, as any particular Person in the seven Kingdoms of it:
whereof one was, That they should unite by all the Ties of Alliance. Friendship
and Interest, against the growing Power of Austria, so far as that there should
be no League, Correspondence, War or Peace, wherein they both should not be
concerned.

From his Foreign Negotiations he returns to his home-services: and the next
view we have of him is in the Parliament, bringing up with Sir Anthony
Fitz-Herbert, a Bill against the Cardinal; who wi^hed then, as Philip Duke of
Burgundy did, that with Alexander he had Died young.

1. For encroaching upon his Sovereigns power by his Legantine Authority. 2.
For treating between the Pope and the King of France, without his Master's
privity and consent; as likewise between Himself and the Duke of Fer^ara. 3.
For joining Himself with his Majesty; saying, The King and I. 4. For swearing
his Houshold-servants only to himself. 5. For speaking with the King, when
infected with the Pox, pretending it was only an Imposthume. 6. For giving by
prevention diverse Benefices away, as Legate. 7. For receiving Ambassadors
before they came to the King: As also for opening all the Kings Letters, and
taking an account of all Espials, concealing what he pleased 8. For carrying
things with an high hand in the Privy Council. 9. For transporting Grain, and
sending advertisements of the Kings Affairs abroad. 10. For taxing or
alienating Religious men's lands, to the great decay of hospitality and charity.
11. For controuling the Nobility, and engrossing all Causes in his
Jurisdiction. 12. For taking all ordinary Jurisdiction from them by prevention,
and seizing their Estates, as be did all other Ecclesiastical persons upon
their death. 13. For persuading the Pope by indirect practices to suppress
Monasteries. 14. For passing Judgments without hearing, and reversing such
Judgments as had duly passed. 15 For suspending the Popes pardons until he was
^ee'd. 16. For turning out his old Tenants. 17. For his general encroachments
upon the Rights of Religious Houses, and the encroachments of Courts of
Justice. 18. For saying to the Pope, in order to the obtaining of a Legantine
power, to the indelible shame of the Church of England, That the Clergy of
England were given in reprobum sensum. 19. For embezling the Goods of the most
wealthy Prelates that died in his time. 20. For bringing off his Servants from
the Law against extortion, at York. 21. For dividing the Nobility. 22. For
keeping as great state at Court, and exercising as great authority in the
Country for purveyance, etc. as the King. 23. For forbidding petitions and
purveyances within his Jurisdictions. 24. For engrossing all Copy holds within
his power, to his Lemans, Procurers, etc. 25. For altering the Market-prices
set under ^His Majesty's Hand and Seal. 26. For impressing his Hat under the
King's Crown, in the Coin at York. 27. For hindering the due course intended by
visiting the Universities to suppress heresies. 28. For disposing of men's
Estates and Proprieties at his pleasure.
This Bill was aggravated most effectually, by three most pinching
considerations: Viz. That the King's Honor was by him diminished: That the
state of the Realm was by him decayed and discontented: That the course of
Justice was by him obstructed. A great Undertaking, this! To bring down this
lofty Prelate! (whom his Master created the * King's Fellow, and his own pride
made his Superior) But as Wise as Great, if we regard the five Politic
circumstances: 1. The Queen was engaged. 2. The People were oppressed. 3. The
King was needy and covetous. 4. The Nobility were kept under. 5. The Clergy
were harrassed: And all by this proud man: And at that juncture is he convened
before the Parliament, and charged home by this excellent Knight, who never
left him till he was humbled, as Justice Fitz-Herbert did not his servants,
until they were reformed.


Neither did the Pope escape him abroad, better than the Cardinal at home: For
his next action we find is a Declaration drawn by him, Io. Fits-Warren, Tho
Audley, and Others, to Pope Clement the Seventh, expostulating his Delays, and
conjuring his Dispatch in the Business of the King's Marriage.

Very serviceable he was to his Master in time of Peace, more in time of War,
where he said as the great General did, that he never saw fear, but upon the
back of his enemies: and particularly ^t the Insurrection 1536. where he cut
off the Rebels Passes, distressed their Arms, and when they refused a Treaty
but upon condition that Ash their Leader was pledged, advised an engagement
with them out of hand; saying, No Englishman should be undervalued so far as
to be an Hostage for a Villain: and adding further (so good was his
Intelligence) That if they were not defeated speedily, the Scots and Germans
would discover that they had but too much hand in this plot.

For which his services, his Master raised him to the Admiralship of England,
and the Earldom of Southampton; in which Qu^lity he was one of the three
Noblemen that managed the Business of Divorce between the King and Anne of
Cleve, with that applause that made him Lord Privy Seal, Nov. 14. Anno 1541.
and the grand Examinant of the particulars in the Lady Katharin Howard's Case,
a matter of great trust and secrecy; which he performed with a searching and
deep Judgment, beyond that Ladies fear, and the King's expectation; as appears
from the exact Account given under Sir Tho. Audley and his own hands, touching
that matter.

Having provided for the Kings Safety at Home, he is One of Four that treat for
his Intrest abroad, I mean upon the Borders of Scotland; where our excellent
Persons dexterity was observed, in gaining that time by various Proposals ^or
Peace, that served his Master to provide against the War; in the beginning
whereof, the brave Lord died at York: so much esteemed, that for the Honor of
his Memory his Standard was born in the Fore-ward, all this Expedition. A
Person in whom prudence was even with activity, resolution with prudence;
Success with Resolution, Moderation with Success; Honor and Favor with All.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Darcy.
SIr Thomas Darcy was one of King Henry the Eighth'^ first Counselors, so
advanced (a^ most of his Fellows) not for Affection, but Interest; owing his
Promotion to his own sufficiency, rather than his Masters favor. His Counsel
was weighty at Home, his Assistance necessary Abroad; where in behalf of Pope
Julius the second and the Emperor, he did more with 1500 Archers in ^ year for
the balancing of Europe, than had been done before in an Age.

No Employment so dangerous at that time as that of the Warden of the West
Marches of Scotland, none so noble for that Employment as my Lord, who was
equally knowing and stout, and at once most feared, and most loved.

The Earl of Shrewsbury made some Inroads into Scotland, the Lord Darcy seconds
him: But being surprised by the Duke of Albany's preparations, he had as much
Wit to make Peace, as he had Resolution to carry on the War. None knew better
when to yield, none better when to conquer; so great ^ command had he over
himself! so great over the Enemy, that he brought them to request his Wish, and
offer what was his Interest! With the Duke of Surrey's assistance by Land, and
Fitz-William^ his by Sea, he reduced that Nation to a good Intelligence with Us
that year, and a Peace the next; a Peace (as he observed) that would ^e no
longer kept, than we had a Sword in our Hands, and an Army on their Borders:
For Con^cience guided other parts of the World, (he said) and Fear Scotland:
Whence he invaded them duly once a year.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Howard.
SIr Edward's Brother in Worth, as well as Blood: His Fathers Interest set him
up, and his own Industry kept him so: All the Children were brought up for
Sea-Services, this Gentleman for Sea Commands. He immediately succeeds his
younger Brother in the Admiralty; and wisely considering the advantage of the
French Galleys in a calm, the number of their ships, the danger of their winds
for us, if they blew South-west, desired of the King so many Soldiers as might
man the ships, and make good the landing, wherewith he scoured the seas, and
secured the Kings passage, with so much Honor, that he was able to assist his
Father at Court, as much as Wolsey did Fox: his Gallantry being no less
pleasing to his Master, than the other young Favou^ites Compliance; and both
these young men had no less Art to govern his Prince, than he had to govern his
Kingdom: These Arts, which all other Favorites use, being Hopes and Fears,
which as Doors and Passages to the heart, a^e so guarded by their vigilance,
that they c^n both let themselves in, and keep all others out: the two Ends
upon which the Thread of Government depends. His Father is made Duke of
Norfolk, and he Earl of Surrey; both are an eyesore to the Cardinal, who^e
Fortune h^d no Superior in the Ki^gs Favor, whose Ambition would endure no
Equal The Old Man's years and cares are fitted with a Retirement in the Country;
the Young Man's ambition and activity, with a Government in I^eland, which he
reduced as speedily to obedience (notwithstanding Desmond's Rebellion) as he
had to civility, had it not been for Wolsey's Underminings, who endured no
public service but what he did himself; and would choose rather that the
Kingdom should perish by a Traitor, then be saved by a Nobleman. Beloved he was
by that Country (where he left a Peace and a Parliament, Anno 1521.) so that
they were loath to part with him: Wanted he was by the King, to scour the narrow
seas for the French War; so that he must have him. The King has made him
formerly His Admiral, the Emperor upon his return from England makes him his;
and with both their Commissions he lands in Normandy, wastes the adjacent
Countries, (sparing only Religious Houses) takes and sacks Morlais in Bretaign
(which he entered under the smoke) burns their ships, commands the sea, and
sets the Emperor safe in Spain; advising his Majesty from thence to make a
general Muster of his Subjects for his own satisfaction and others terror,
March 27, 1522. The troubles in Scotland required an able Head and a stout
Heart, two Endowments that no man was more Master of than the Earl of Surrey,
now Duke of Norfolk (upon his beloved Fathers decease) whose Prudence toyled
the Scots to deliver up their King, as his Prowess frighted them to yield up
themselves, as they did in that most exquisi^e Treaty, where the Earl of
Worcester beat the Bush, says my noble Author, and our Duke catched the Hare.

A while after he is Earl Marshal, and Ambassador to King ^rancis about t^ose
two grand poin^s: 1. That the French King should set up a Patriarch: 2. That he
should stop up all the payments made to Rome, wi^h fair promises of that supply
of men and money he then most wanted


When the Pope stuck to Queen Katherine, three things he advised the King to:
1. To teach the people that a general Council was above the Pope, and proclaim
that he did appeal to it. 2. To fix upon every Church-Door the Dowagers Appeal
to Rome, and the late Statute against it. 3. To confederate with the Kings of
Hunga^y and Poland, the Estates of the Empire and the Hanse Towns. Three things
that would settle his People at home, and strengthen his Interest abroad: To
which he added the Statute of Succession, the Oath of Supremacy, Sir William
Howard's Embassy to the Scotch King, the suppression of Religious Houses, the
War in Ireland under Sir William Sheffington, and a through search into the
bottom of the Rebellion in the North, by a connivance and delay.


But all his services could not quit him from suspicion, nor his popularity
from envy: The Lord Da^cy accuses him to excuse himself, and Cromwell seconds
him ^o secure himself: and (as unhappinesses follow one another in the same
order as one wave flowe^h after another) his Nieces miscarriages threatened his
fall; but that the honest man (as appears from a Letter the whole Council sent
to Sir William Paget then resident in France) was the first that declared
against her, and put the King upon the most safe and honorable ways of trying
her; which sati^fied his Majesty so far, that he employed him as c^ief in the
Treaty upon the Borders, and General in the War when that Treaty failed; Sir
Anthony Brown, upon his Recommendation, being added to the Commissioners in
Scotland, and to the Privy Council in England, ^s Master of the King's Horse,
as Sir John Gages was Compt^oller of his House.

Several Persons came to London for a Reward of their Scotch service^; this
Duke gave the King a wa^y and grave counsel, to bestow upon them as much Land
as they could win in Scotland.

But Greatness is fatal: The King is old and testy, the Government disordered
and irregular, the Duke too stiffly honest to comply, the Council envy him; and
in this Juncture his Wives passion discovers his Minions, and they, to save
themselves, his privacies and secrets: His son, a man of a deep unde^standing,
of a sharp wit and great valor, bred up with Henry Fitz-roy at Windsor, and
afterward at Paris, was beheaded before his face. His Favorite M^s. Holland
deposed, That he said many, looked for the Protectorship (when the King, who
lived and moved by Engines and Art, rather than by Nature, should die) but he
would carry it: That the King did not love him because he was loved by his
Country; but he would follow his Fathers Lesson, which was, That the less
others set by him, the more he would set by himself: That he had a Daughter for
the King as well as others^ etc. His Estate was great, his power greater; the
King's occasions had swallowed up the one, and his Enemies ambition the other,
notwithstanding his humble submission before the Council, and his many services
to the King, had not his Majesty's Death saved his Life.

As the deepest Hate is that which springs from violent Love, so ^he greatest
Discourtesies often arise from the largest Favors. It is indiscreet to oppress
any, dangerous a Prince with Kindnesses; which being Fetters, are Treason on
that Person: But Suspicion! Ah sad Suspicion! The Companion of the Weak or
Guilty! The Cloud of the Mind! The Forfeiture of Friends! The check of
Busine^s! Thou that disposest Kings to Tyranny! Husbands to Jealousy! Wise men
to Irresolution and Melancholy! Trust, and you need never suspect: But Policy
and Friendship are incompatible, I see; where Norfolk begs that Life from the
Block at last, which he had ventured two and thirty times for his Sovereign.
Who knows the Cares that go to Bed with Statesmen! Enemies Abroad, Treache^ies
at Home, Emulations of Neighbors, Dissatisfaction of Friends; Jealousies of
most, Fear of all: unwelcome Inventions to palliate unjust Courses: fears of
Miscarriage and Disgrace; with Projects of Honor and Plausibility, with
restless thoughts how to discover, prevent, conceal, accommodate the
Adversaries, or his own Affairs. Let us live, and love, and say, God help poor
Kings!

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Stanley.
THe Stanley's service to Henry the Seventh, was a sufficient pledge of their
faithfulness to Henry the Eighth. Honor floated in Sir Edward's blood, and
Valor danced in his spirits: His stirring childhood brought him to Henry the
eighth's company, and his active manhood to his service. The Camp was his
School, and his Learning was a Pike and Sword; therefore his Masters Greeting
to him was when they met, Hoh, my Soldier! In many places did he show himself,
but no where more than at Flodden, where his Archers fetched down the Scots
from their fastness, and relieved the English from their distress; the Earl of
Surrey beginning the Conquest, and Si^ Edward crowning it: for which the King
immediately set him high in his favor, and not long after, as high in the
world, being made Baron Stanley, and Lord Mounteagle. Twice did he and Sir John
Wallop land with only 800. Men in the heart of France, and four times did he
and Sir Tho. Lovell save Callis; the first time, by Intelligence; the second,
by a stratagem; the third, by valor and resolution; and the fourth, by
hardship, patience, and industry.

In the dangerous Insurrection by Ash and Cap^^in Cobbler, his Zeal for the
States welfare was above scruples, and his Army was with ^im before ^is
Commission: for which dangerous piece of ^oyalty, he asked pardon, and received
thanks. Two things he did toward the discomfiture of the Rebels, (whose skill
in Arms exceeded ^is Follow^rs, as much as his policy did their Leaders) first,
he cut off their provisions, and then secondly, sow^d sedition among them,
whilst his Majesty gained ^ime by pretended Treaties to be even with them,
drawing off the most eminent of the factions every day, and confounding the
rest. He lived wi^h this strange opinion, that the soul of Man was like the
winding up of a Watch, and when the String was run out, the Man died, and there
the Soul determined, but he died not so.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bolen.
THe City enriched this Family, their Parts raised them: His Activity was as
taking with King Henry, as his Daughters beauty. He was the Picklock of
Princes: upon his word only would the King model his Designs, and upon his word
alter them. He discovered Ferdinand's underhand-treaty with Lewis, and his
design upon Navarre; and writ to his Master to press the ambiguous man to a
conclusion, and to send over some treasure: for, said he, the whole World i^
now to be sold; adding the necessity of a peace, o^ at least a truce with
Scotland. Sir Thomas Bole^ was against the Kings going to France in person
before he had some more issue, or One of the house of York.
Edmund de la Po^^ were dispatched out of the way. Sir Thomas Howard was for
it, it being dangerous to entrust so Noble an Army, or so renowned an Action
with any subject, especially when Maximilian the Emperor offered to serve
under his Majesty as Lieutenant, and the Pope to attend him as Chaplain. There
is nothing more remarkable of Sir Thom^^ Bolen, than, 1. The Education of his
Children; his eldest son being bred at the Emperors Court, his youngest with
the Pope at Rome, and his Daughter with Queen Mary in France. 2. His
Negotiation with the Lord St. John's in Germany, where he overreached the
Emperor no less than the Earl o^ Worcester did the French King: so cunningly
binding him, that he understood nothing of our Affairs; and yet so narrowly
si^ting him, that we knew all his Intrigues. Visible was all the world to our
State then, and invisible our State to all the world.

From Germany he is sent with Richard Sampson, D. H. to Spain, to set Charles
as forward against the French, as he had done Maximilian. His service advanced
him to the honor of a Barony and a He is made^ Viscount Rochford.
Viscountship, and the profit of the Treasureship of the Household; and his
success upon the Malecontent Duke of Bourbon by Sir Io. Russel, who treated
with him in Disguise, set him as high in the Kings favor, as his Wife was; a
virtuous Lady, that was the Kings Friend, but not his Mistress; his delight,
and not his sin.

In Spain so earnestly did our Sir Thomas mediate ^or the delivering up of the
French Hostages, that (as Sandoval says) Charles protested to him, that for
his sake onl^ he would relinquish his Demand for the restitution of Burgundy,
in which the difficulty of the peace consisted: adding further, That for the
same reason he would accept as well for Francis his two sons ransom, as his
charge, what was freely offered, viz. 2000000 Crowns: and he with Sir Robert
Poyntz make up that treaty, the great Arbi^rators of Europe! at whose disposal
Kings set their Crowns, and Kingdoms their Peace; in whose breast fate the fate
of Christendom, by their voices to stand or fall.

As faithful is he to the King at home, though to his own prejudice, as he is
serviceable abroad, to his honor: for when the people talked oddly out of envy
to his Daughter, (now visibly in favor) and pi^y to Queen Katherine, Sir
Thomas advises his Majesty to ^orbid his Daughter the Court, and declare that
those proceedings ^ere more to satisfy his Conscience, and secure Succession,
than to gratify any other more private respect: so far to his Daughters
discontent, that she would not come near the King until her Father was
commanded (not without threats) to bring her thither; who by representing the
common danger to them both, obtained at length (says my Lord Herbert) though
not without much difficulty, the cons^^t of his unwilling Daughter to return:
where yet she kept that distance, that the King might easily perceive how
sensible she was of her late dismission. Sir Thomas would have married her to
the Lord Percy, but the King and Cardinal forbad it; deterrin old
Northumberland from it, and he his Son. Many Love Letters between King Henry
and Anne Bolen are sent to Rome: one Letter be^w^en the Cardinal and his
Confede^ates is fetched thence by Sir Thomas his Dexterity; who advised Sir
Francis Bryan, then Resident, to get in with the Popes Closet-keepers
Courtezan, and show her the Cardinals hand, by which she might find out and
copy his Expresses; as she did to his ruin, and our King's great satisfaction.
To which Letter is annexed a Declaration under his hand, and the Lords Darcy,
Mountjoy, Dorset, and Nor^olk, of 44 Articles against the great Cardinal. His
hand being now in, he must through: He advises the King to consult the
Universities of Christendom: He goes in person when made Earl of Wiltshire to
the Pope, and contrives that a Declaration of the whole Kingdom in Parliament
should follow him: which so amused his Holiness with our Earls stratagems, that
he was asleep as it were until the state of England was quite altered. To this
he adds the peace with France, and the interview with King Francis, where his
Daughter is married privately, and her Brother made Yiscount Rochford.
Convening a Parliament to his mind at Blackfriars, and advancing an
Archbishop to his purpose in Canterbury, he is secure of the Church and of the
Kingdom; whereof the first hallowed the action, and the second confirmed it. I
say nothing of the bird, the egg is bad, and left by the hard hearted and
Orstredg posterity in the Sand: thinking it more engenuous to confess that the
scandal of it is not to be answered, than to bustle and keep a coil, and twist
new errors with old, falling to Scylla for fear of Charybdis, for fear of the
absurditie^ that dropped from that first one as thick as Sampsons Enemies heaps
upon heaps.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Howard.
HE set out with his Fathers Reputation, and came home with his own: Britain
feels his Arm to this day. and the French his success. Desperate were his
Undertakings, yet happy; rash his Engagements, yet honorable; it being his
Maxim, That never did Seaman good, that was not resolute to a degree of
madness. The French Fleet he pursues to the Haven under their own Forts
closely. Sir Edward considering the order wherein the French lay, thought fit
to advertise his King and Master thereof; advising him withal, (says my
Author) to come in person, and have the glory of this Action: but the Kings
Council taking this Message into consideration, and conceiving that it was not
altogether fear, (as was thought) but stratagem and cunning that made the
French thus attend their advantage, thought the King was not invited so much to
the honor, as to the danger of this Action; therefore they write sharply to
him again, commanding him to do his duty: whereof that brave person was so
sensible, that he landed 1500 men in the sight of 10000, and wasted the
Country, until being too confident, he fell a while after into his Enemies
hands; the Lord Ferrers, Sir Thomas Cheyney, Sir Richard Cornwall, and Sir John
Wallop looking on, but not able to relieve him. Four Reasons he would usually
give against a War with the Low Countries: 1. The decay of Trade: 2. The
Diminution of Customs. 3. The strengthening of France: 4. The loss of their
industry and inventions, and so of the improvement of our Commodities and
Manufactures. In the youth of this State, as of all others, Arms did flourish;
in the Middle-gate of it, Learning; and in the Declining, (as Covetousness and
Thrift attend Old Age) Mechanic Arts and Merchandise: and this Gentleman was
made for each part, being not so much a Soldier as a Scholar, nor so much a
Scholar as a Merchant. But a private spirit is most unfortunate; and (as my
Oracle assures me) whereas men of that temper all their time sacrifice to
themselves, they become in the end themselves sacrifices to fortune, whose
wings they thought by their wisdom to have pinioned.

Observations on the life of Sir Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey.
SIr Thomas Howard was this Kings prime Counselor; a brave and an
understanding man: who was obliged to be faithful to his Master, because an
Enemy to Winchester: (emulation among Favorites is the security of Princes.)

Four motives he offered for a Marriage with the Princess Katharine: 1. A
League with Spain, against the growing power of our dangerous Neighbor France.
2. The saving of much time and expense in Marriage, by her being here. 3. The
consideration of that vast sum of Money that must be exported if she goes
away. And 4. The great Obligation laid on the Pope by that Dispensation, which
would secure to him the King and his Posterity, not otherwise Legitimate but by
his Authority.


His Estate was much wasted in the service of Henry the seventh, and as much
improved by the treasures of Henry the eighth, which amounted in the beginning
of his Reign to 1800000 l. i. e. at the rate of money now adays, six millions
and an half; which he dispensed so thriftily, that old Winchester could not
trapan him; and yet so nobly, that young Henry was pleased with him. Sir
William Compton set up the King's They were 50. with an Archer, a Demilance and
a Constillier apiece: They and their horses being vested in Cloth of Gold.
Rich Lifeguards, (under Bourchier Earl of Essex as Captain, and the valiant
Sir Io. Peachy who kept Calais in so good order with 300 men, as Lieutenant)
but this wary Earl put them down again. When News was brought that Empson and
Dudley were slain, it was the Earls opinion that his Majesty had done more like
a good King than a good Master. When the narrow Seas (whereof the Kings of
England have been very tender) were infested, this old Treasurer and
Earl-Marshal cleared it by his two sons Edward and Thomas, saying, The King of
England should not be imprisoned in his Kingdom, while either he had an Estate
to set up a Ship, or a son to command it. In three weeks did he settle the
North against the Invasions of James the fourth, now inclining in to the
Feench; and in a fortnight did he raise 40000 l. to pay the Army, now ready to
mutiny: insomuch, that when King James denounced War against King Henry, he
said, He had an Earl in the North that would secure his Kingdom; as he did
with much resolution, prudence, and success at Flodden-Field, where he saw a
King at his feet, and a whole Kingdom at his mercy; where he was forced to
fight, so barren the Country, ( una salus victis nullam sperare salutem!) where
yet he pitched upon the most advantageous place and time; so great his Command
of himself, and so noble his Conduct!

He sends Rouge Croix to the Scotch King, to tell him, That though he saw no
Enemy at Sea, he hoped to find some upon the Land: That he came to justify
Bretons death, which it was as much below a King to revenge, as it was below a
Privy Counselor to have deserved: That he expected as little mercy as he
intended; his sword being commissioned to spare none but the King, whom no hand
must touch. To this Defiance, he added a Caution to the Herald, That he should
bring no messenger from the Enemy nearer than two miles of the Camp. So well
were the Scots encamped, that when neither Arguments nor Stratagems would draw
them out, the Earl cuts off their provision there; and under the covert of a
smoke got the Earl under the hill, and under another of mist got they atop: The
Scots played the men, until Stanley and Darcy did more than men: and the old
man's Reserve concluded the doubtful day in so c^mpleat a Conquest, as brought
12000 Arms, 16 Cannons, 4000 Prisoners, and a Peace to the English Borders.
Upon which, the General retires to those more necessary exercise^ of Justice
and Government, until his Masters return: When all his Services advanced him
(at that time, when it was ^ Maxim of State, That Honors are the Luster and
Security of Crowns) to his Fath^rs Dukedom of Norfolk, as his Sons Merits
promoted him to his of the Earldom of Surrey.

The Kings Coffers decay, and his Occasions grow: The old man retires to his
Country House, having enjoyed his Honor Thirty years, to enjoy Himself Three:
One of his last Undertakings being the appeasing of the London Tumults, May 1.
1517. when he left this behind him, A potent and wanton City, is a shrewd Enemy.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Compton.
HE was chief Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Henry the Eighth, and next to the
chief in the affections of the same Prince: If his spirit had been as even with
his favor, as his favor was with his Merits, he had been the most useful as
well as the most eminent man in England: but he was too narrow for his Fortune,
and more attentive to his private advantage, than to the public affairs: This
Saying is at once his History and Monument; Kings must hear all, but believe
only one: for none can give a solid advice but he that knows all, and he must
not be every body. As to the affairs of Europe^ S^ William was clearly for the
League against France as an opportunity to regain our Right in France and
strenghthen our Interest in the Church and the Empire. My Lord Darcy was
against it; becau^^ France was too hard for us before it swallowed u^ our Of
Bretany and Normandy.
Confederates, and much more since: advising some mo^e noble attempts for our
just Empir^ upon the Indies. The young King is for a Wa^ with France, a^ an
Engagement upon the Pope t^ advance England above all other Kingdoms; an^
declares himself as much Sir William's in opinion as he was his in affection.

This Gentleman had a deep insight in any thin^ he undertook, because he had a
great patience t^ consider, an advantageous slowness to recollect, ^ strong
memory to grasp, and an indifferent tempe^ to judge: but when a matter exceeded
his capaci^ty, or out-reached his sphere and orb, he had ei^ther a peremptory
and great word to urge it, or ^ slight to wave it, or a subtlety to perplex
it, (tha^ his amazed fellow-Commissioners should as little unde^stand it) or a
countenance and ge^ture too verbear it. However, in general he was close an^
reserved, (he had need go softly that cannot we^ see) leaving himself without
observation or hol^ to be taken what he was. He studied the King nature, rather
than his bu^iness; and humoure^ rather than advised him. The referring of all
t^ a man, becomes a Prince, whose self is not him^self, but the community,
(their good and evil be^ing (as my Lord Bacon writes) at the peril of ^ public
fortune) but not a subject, whose privat^ advantage may be a public ruin; not
a Favou^rite, whose benefit by that selfishness may be narrow as his own
Fortune, but the hurt done by it is as large as his Masters, who must needs be
undone, when his servants study to please Him, and to profit Themselves.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Marney.
SIr Henry Marney was one of young Henry's first Council, who loved his Peson
well, and his Prospericy better; and impartially advised him for his good, and
modestly contested with him against his harm; that Council that was hand as
well as head, and could perform as well as advise: This was the searching
Judgment that discovered Buonviso the Lucchess his Letters to the French King,
betraying our designs as soon as thought on, and instructing him for
prevention, before our King was ready for the attempt. Industry and Thrift
overrules Princes: This Personage had no time to transcribe Intelligence, but
what he borrowed from his sleep; nor money to buy it, but what he saved out of
his allowance: yet he understood more than any one Prince of Europe, and was
more consulted than any one Statesman. His Judgment was much valued, his
Integrity more; ever offering what was solidly safe, rather than what was
superficially plausible: as one who was a stranger to the wisdom of the latter
Age, (as Sir Francis Bacon describes it) which is rather fine Deliveries and
shifts from Inconveniences, than solid and grounded courses for advantage. His
foresight was large, and his spirit larger: he considered all Circumstances
that occurred to him; judged what he considered, and spoke what he judged with
that resolution as to his opinion, that argued he understood the matter in
question; with that modesty as to his Superiors, that showed he understood
himself. He would say that he that could not with the Cameleon change color
with the Air he live^ in, must with the Cameleon live only upon Air.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Poynings.
SIr Edward Poynings was the third of eighteen Counselors bequeathed by Henry
the VII. to his Son, with his Kingdom; a Privy Council wherein there was not
one Lawyer! and a Cabal that never condescended for advice to any below
themselves, or for performance of any of their Degrees to any be^ides
themselves; being a complete Body of active and knowing men in their own Orb.
Who more prudent than Surrey? who more resolved than Poynings? whose Vigilance
made him Master of the Cinque Ports, as his Valor advanced him General of the
Low Country Forces, whom he led on to several services with such success, and
brought off (with the loss of not above an hundred men) with Honor from the
Lady Margaret, and Applause from the whole Country.

No less happy was he in his Government of Tournay, until the Council at home
(now (...) thin by the secession of Warham, Fox, (...) Norfolk) had more need
of him than Garrisons a^road: Vainly is that spirit penned within a City, that
was equal to a Kingdom. It is the unhappiness of other Monarchies, that they
have not Men answerable to their Employments; it was the unhappiness of this,
that it had not Employment suitable to its Men.

He lived and di'd in Arms: Bulloign saw him first a Soldier, and Bulloign saw
him last the best Camp-Master in all Christendom: always observing three
things: 1. The Situation of his Camp to secure his Army. 2. The Accommodation
of it, to supply it. 3. His Retreat, to draw off: the Avenues, to be guarded
with Soldiers, and strengthened with Re-doubts; which he made Triangular, that
more men might engage the Enemy at once: during erection whe^eof, the Army was
pallisado'd in the Front with stakes headed with iron on both ends five foot
long, and stuck slope-wise into the ground, to keep off both Horse and Foot:
the Foot-Sentinels were without the Redoubts, the Horse-Guards beyond them, at
distance enough to descry the Enemy, and not too much, to retire to their
works. A serious and plodding brow bespoke this Noble Knights deep Prudence,
and a smart look his resolved Valor; who was a man vastly different in his
public capacity, from what he was in his priv^te employment: Quemquam posse
putas mores narrare futuros
Dic mihi, si fias tu leo, qualis eris.



Observations on the Life of Sir Charles Somerset.
SIr Charles Somerset, afterward Lord Herbert of Gower, etc. endeared himself
to King H. as much for his Maxim, That Reason of State was Reason of Law; as
for his Advice, That the King should never suck at Law, in case of Public
Good; and yet that all ^is Acts for public Good should come as near as
possible to the Law. So Popular was this Gentleman, that he received all the
Petitions against Empson and Dudley; yet so loyal, that he advised his Master
neither to spare those Leeches, lest any should p^esume to alienate his Peoples
affections from him by Extortions for the future; nor yet too severely to
punish them, lest any should be discouraged to serve the Crown for the present:
(for indeed Empson and Dudley suffered for that which others were advanced for;
the Parliament punished them for putting their Laws in execution, and the King
deserted them for improving his Exchequer to a Treasury.)

Two things this Lord advised his Master to, before he put the Crown upon his
head.

1. To redress the Peoples Grievances under his Father. 2. To marry not in
France, where he had a Title: A Kingdom so near us, that by reason of mutual
jelousies we may have peace with it sometimes, but Friendships never.
In the Household he was Lord Chamberlain, so discreet his Carriage! In the
French Expedition, Anno 1513. he was General, so Noble his conduct! His
Assi^stants were the Earls of Northumberland, Shrewsbury, Kent and Wiltshire;
his Followers, the Lord Audley, De la Ware, Master of the Ordinance, who was
killed the first Night before Therovene.
Carew and Curson, etc.

Therovene he besieges in good Order, and with Wolsey's advice, who had lived
long in that Town; understands all the Avenues of it; and with Sir Oughtred,
Sir Henry Guilford, Sir Edward Poynings, Sir Charles Brandon and, Sir Alexander
Baynam's assistance, sprung several Mines, repulsed the French Relief and the
City-Assailants, so that the Town was yielded August 22. 1513. and upon
Mazimilian's Entreaty razed as he did Tournay, September 22. Herbert was for
razing this place, as farther from us than Therovene; but Wolsey for the
Bishoprics sake, is for the garisoning of it, as a Trophy. The King
recollecting his former occasions, Febr. 3. 1514. thought he could not do a
more just or a more prudent Act, than recompense his Noble Servants (but the
cheapest way, I mean that of Honor) as he did old Somerset with the Earldome
of Worcester.

With this Honor at home, is joined another abroad, viz. That of Embassy to
Maximilian, where he reached that Germans depth^, and clearly demonstrated that
those fond and impossible Offers of the Empire, were but Artifices rather than
Kindnesses: to drain the Kings Treasure, rather than enlarg his Dominions:
Advising him or raise a Citadel at Tournay, and an Army in Normandy: He
finished the Espousals between the Princess Mary and the Dolphin; and delivered
Tournay, by the ^ame token that he would not let the Marshall de Castilion to
enter with Banner displayed, but rolled up, it being (as he said, who when Lord
Herbert was at the taking of it) voluntarily yielded up, and not gotten by
Conquest: and then bestowed himself with Sir Richard Wingfield for the great
enterview between King Francis and King Henry; an interview I know not whether
more solemn or more dangerous: Kings cannot meet without great state, and they
seldom part without much envy; who never are further asunder than when they
meet, His most eminent Action here, was the Device of that Motto, Cui adhareo,
praee^t; a Motto that speaks the Honor of England, and the Interest of Europe.
The Arbitrators commanding both the parties, submitting ^o their Arbitration
for two Cities in Italy, contending about their bounds, chose the People of
Room to be their Arbitrators; they gave either City a small pittance, and
reserved all the rest to themselves; Quod in medio est Populo Romano
adjudicetur.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Gray Marquess of Dors^t.
THe Kings Wars called for Soldiers, and his Peace for Statesmen; and here is
a Person ex utroque magnus: When the whole design ^for ^he Invasion of France
was ripened, this Marquess ^s made General, and attended by the Lord Thomas
Howard, the Lords Brook, Willoughby, and Fer^ers, with diverse Knights,
Gentlemen, and others ^o the number of ten thousand men, armed not only with
Bows, but Halber^s: He distresseth Navar to a submission to his Master; forces
his way to Bayon, and with Sir John Styles assistance, kept up the English
Honor above that of France and the Empire, keeping close to his Commission,
and not stirring a foot without exp^ess Orders from Ireland: Although his
pre^ence countenanced some Actions his hands could not perform.

Three things he was very careful of.

1 Of Good Pay, lest his Soldiers m^^ined. 2. Of Good Diet and Qu^rters, lest
they failed. 3. Of Order, Discipline, and Temperanc^, especia^ly in strange
Climates, lest they should be distempered.
Two things he was unsuccessful for: 1. The narrowness of his Commission. 2.
The reach of Ferdinand, who designed the Conquest of Navar, rather than of
France.


Yet what reputation he lost by Land, Sir Edward Howard gained by Sea,
commanding the French ships to their Harbors: Overrunning Britain, and with
Sir Tho. Knevet the Master of the Horse, Sir John Carew, and Sir Henry
Guilford's assistance he gave Law in the Mediterranean, until he awed the
Neighbour-Princes to terms as honorable for his Master, as dishounorable for
themselves: Now we find him valiant in earnest at Sea, anon so in jest at C^urt
(at the solemn Justs proclaimed by Francis de Valois, Duke of Angoulesm in
France) his Nature being not s^inted, buy equally free to debo^ar and serious
Enterprises of Pleasure or of Honor; where six Germans were at his mercy, and
four Frenchmen at his feet. His spirit equalled those active times, and his
temper his spirit.

Three things set him up 1. His large expenses for show at Court. 2. His
strength and manhood at Justs. 3. His skill and experience in the Field.


He was the best for embattelling an Army in those times: Observing 1. The
number, strength, and experience of hih Camp. 2. The Nature and extent of the
place, whether Champain or enclosed, hilly or plain, woody or moorish,
straight or large; that he might accordingly di^pose of distances and stands.
3. Inclosure^ he aimed at for his Foot, and Champain for his Horse, together
with the advantages of Wind and Sun. 4. He impales the Flank and Rear with
Muskets, Pikes, and Carriages. 5. His Divisions were sundry, but well ordered
to relieve one another: His main Battles three: the largest in the front, the
next in the middle, with some spaces between for the first to rally it self, or
embody with the second; the third and strongest in the Rear, so divided that
the two first Battles may retreat into it, and draw up in it is rear to watch
the Enemies disorder in pursuit.


It Is observed of the Turks, that they never put their Ianizaries (their best
Soldiers) in the Front, but make use of them for Reserves, by which they have
been very succesful: This Noble Marquess went not by rote or fore-conceived
^ules, but by present Prudence, observing time, ^lace, and persons; neither
would he lie open to ^n Enemies design by a constant Method, but alter ^is
Stratagems, and contradict all the Rules of Discipline, to disorder the Enemy,
and disappoint ^is expectation.

He has sometimes compounded the wings of his Battle of ablest men, and the
Battle it self of the meanest; ordering them, if overpowred, to make make their
retreat to the Rear of the other Divi^ions, through the spaces appointed for
that end; which the Enemy perceiving, follows (not smel^ng the drift) not
without disorder, as in all pursuits) between the two strong wings, who crush
them in pieces: His Field-Piec^s after once or twice discharging, were drawn
within the Divisions of the main Battle, to f^^e the Enemy at his next
approaches if the Front were disordered: And to avoid the execution of hi^
Enemies, his files were thin, and his Dragoons ready to seize theirs, whereby
at least they were hinderd from shooting; his Forlorn retired to the main
Battle, and out of the Flanks thereof issued with Fire-pots and Grenades upon
the engaged Enemy.

His Horse were in four Battalia's, whereof the first was the greatest, lined
with shot, placed on each wing of the main Army; ways opening upon the opening
of the Enemy.

The greatest trust between man and man, is the trust of giving Counsel: For in
other confidences (says my Lord Bacon) men commit the parts of life, their
Lands, their Goods, their Children, their Credit, some particular affair; but
to such as they make their Counselors, they commit the whole, by how much the
more they are obliged to faithfulness and integrity. None was more trusted than
the Marquess, none more trusty: None understood clearer what was fit, none
spoke plainer what he understood. What wants a Sovereign? (said a flattering
Crurtier) Truth; (said a serious King) Never had King more need of it than
Henry, never less of it than he; whom it was less fatal to Ruing, than to
Displease. But this Soldier was as much above fear as Flattery, that told him
when pensive, That never was that man merry, that had more than one Woman in
his Bed, more than one Friend in his Bosom, more than one Faith in his Heart.

So wa^y was this Gentleman, that he was not rash, and so lost his advantage;
so valiant, that he was not contemptible, and so Lost his command: He led
others by the strongest authority of his own forwardness, his own example; he
was led himself by the best Guide, his own Observation, his own Experience: His
Book limited not his Design, nor his Paper-plot his Undertakings.

Land-service was his Exerci^e, but the Sea his Delight: The Compass his Study,
the Stars his Care, Trade his Thoughts, our own and ^orein Havens his
Discour^e, a Seaman his Familiar, and three Sea Fights his T^iumph: His
converse and speech was Souldier-like, plain, short, smart and material: There
was a time when he would say noth^ng, and a time when he would say something;
but ^e^er a time when he would say all.

He was in a word the happy man, who, notwithstanding that the times could not
endure his Virtues, nor he their Vices, died at once full of hohonour at Court,
and applause in the Country, with this Monument from the King, That Honest and
Good Man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Wingfield.
HIs Parts and Person endea^ed him to the English Court, his Travel and
Experience recommended him to Foreign Negotiations particula^ly in the Emperor
Maximilians Court whom his arguments and his own Interest drew off from France;
Sir Robert helping him to some Observations touching the breach of the Article
of Cambray, as his pretense to this alteration, and offering him what men and
money he pleased, as his encouragement to this undertaking: Sending in the mean
time one Nicolas West, D. L. and Dean of Windsor, to feel the Pulse of all the
Princes in Christendom; and advising, upon an entire reflection on their
several Interests, the repair of our frontier Towns and Forts, an Army ready in
the North, and a constant Parliament. He is Deputy of Calice, and Viceroy of
France: What the French lost in the Fie^d, they got by Treaty, until Sir
Richard's time, whose Policy went as far as his Masters Power, in that Accord,
Which tied up (they said) the French Kings hands behind his back, and the
Scotch between his legs. Yea, he almost persuaded Maximilian out of his Empire,
1615. though he wished the King not to accept of until the French were out of
Italy. Some do bett^ by Friends or Letters, Sir Robert best by himself
observing that he never failed, but when he i^^trusted others with what he
could do himself; h^^ person breeding regard, and his eye seeing more than any
he could employ; and his present min^ being more ready in his own affairs upon
any a^^teration to come on, draw back, or otherwise ac^comodate matters, than
any Substitute, who see^^ not the bottom of things, nor turn to occasions^ He
had about him his Blades and Gallants, to ex^postulate; his Orators and
fair-spoken-men, t^ persuade; his close and subtle ones, to enqui^^ and
observe; his froward men, to perplex; an^ his plain Agents, to report:
Attendants for al^ services, whose experience made them knowing and confident.
Doctor West, Pace, Lee, and Gardener's way was the Circuit afar off; Sir
Robert's was the Surprise, quick and nicked, No man observing time more
closely; no man watching Natures tempers, interests advantages and ends more
inde^atigably. It was the observation of those days, That Sir Robert Wingfield
was the best to prepare and ripen Designs, and Sir Thomas Bolen to execute
them: But that Age was two boisterous, and he too wary to advance beyond the
reputation of a knowing Agent, in which c^pacity he lived; or of a resolved
Patriot, with which honor he dies.

Observations on the Life of Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham.
HIs Blood was high, his Revenue large; and he was born to adorn the Court,
rather than to serve it. He vied with the King in Gallantry, and with the
Cardinal in Pride: of the one he speaks irreverently, That Women governed him
more than he did the Kingdom; of the other indiscreetly, That Francis governed
France, and Harry England, and Wolsey both; adding, That the Commonalty might
well complain, when we had two Kings to maintain. That which ruineth the world,
ruineth him, his Tongue. Fate never undid a man without his own indiscretion;
and her first stroke is at the Head. Abroad, none more Gorgeous; at Home, none
more Noble: at Court, splendid; among his Tenants, Prince-like; to his
Relations, impartial. A Servant always pulled down the house of the Staffords;
and now one Knevet his Steward, whom he had discharged for oppressing his
Tenants, undoeth him: for his Father in-law the Earl of Northumbe^land is set
under a Cloud, and his Son-in-law the Earl of Surrey is removed, on pretense of
honorable employment, out of the way; and Wolsey's malice at the Duke has its
full scope, who now deals with Knevets discontent to discover his Masters life,
and suggest that the Duke by way of discourse was wont to say how he meant to
use the matter, that if King Henry died without issue, he would attain the
Crown, and punish the Cardinal. George Nevil Lord Abergavenny his Son-in-law,
impeached him, to save himself. His Title to the Crown was, his Descent from
Anne Plantagenet, Daughter of Thomas of Wood^tock, Son to Edward the third. His
Accusation was, 1. That he had conferred with a Cunning Man, ( Hopkins, Monk of
Henton) concerning the future state of this Realm; who advised him to
Popularity: for he should have all, if he had but the love of the People: the
Wizard confirming this by Revolutions, and the Duke rewarding it with great
encouragment. 2. That he disparaged the present Government, and used Arts to
secure the succession. 3. That he had threatened King Henry with the same D^gger
that should have murdered Richard the third.


He denied the Charge very eloquently, and disclaimed his Life very rashly; his
foolish words, rather than any designed malice, deserving rather pity then
judgment. Much lamented was he by the People, and as much was the Cardinal
maliced, being now called by the whole multitude, The Butchers Son. When
Buckingham fell, three things fell with him: 1. The Splendor of the Court. 2.
Hospitality, and good Landlords in the Country. And, 3. The High-Constableship
of England.


All Greatness is subject to Envy; but none more than that which is insolent
and affected, being never its self without its pomp and show. Plain and modest
Greatness is only safe: A Witch then blasts a man when most prosperous, and the
Envious (the only Wizard in the world) when most glorious. Wise men therefore
have eclipsed themselves, that they might not be gazed on; and great Ones have
shrunk, and suffered themselves to be ove^-born, to be secure. Vainglorious
men are the scorn of the Wise, the admiration o^ Fools, the Idols of Parasites,
and the envy of the Unworthy, the Busy, the Unfortunate, the Ambitious, and
the Rivals. He lives well, that lives in peace; and he is safely great, that is
great in his Conscience. Anger sure is but a weakness in any man, (it belongs
so much to the Aged and the Childish) and an indecency in a Noble^man: yet it
might have been a Gallantry in this Duke, had it no^, 1. Revealed secrets, and
so betrayed him; And, 2. Spoke bitterly and dangerously, and so abused him. So
far will Discontent carry Nature, that it easily believes what it wishes: So
much does a Prophetic Vanity sway Englishmen, (that have the most of men of
any in the world in Divinations, and an itch to know things to come) that the
wittiest Sir Thomas More, the most devout Bishop Fisher, the wisest Cardinal
Wolsey, and the most Noble the Duke of Buckingham, have been undone by
hearkening after P^edictions; the two first, of Elizabeth Barton; the third, of
John Sacheveril; and the fou^th, Monk Hopkins. Always are these Divinations
(like the Ast^ologers in Rome) by seve^e Laws forbidden; yet alw^ys a^e they by
vain persons obtruded. Many Wives, woe England! hardened many a Malcontent to
his ruin in King Henry the eighth's time: When HEMP is spun, England is done,
encouraged many a Papi^t to his undoing in Queen Elizabeth's time: Leo, Nullus,
confirmed many a deluded soul to hi^ downfall in our days.

It was as fatal to this great man to trust his Steward, as his Wizard; the one
deluded, the other betrayed him. It undoeth a man to be too close; therefore we
have f^iends to ease our selves: it ruineth a man to be too open; therefore
there is a secret not to be communicated to a friend. When the Duke of
Buckingham made Knevet his Confessor, he made him his Master. He that is
Master of my Heart, is Master of my Life: If my Shirt, said Metellus, knew my
mind, I would burn it. If my Servant or Friend knows my intentions, I must
either undo him, o^ be undone by him, unless he be so much above a man, as not
out of weakness to discover me; or so much above a sinner, as not out of
corruption to betray me. Wild Beasts dwell in Dens, Fishes be in Mu^, and Birds
in Nests, and a Wise Man is wrapped up in security. Gyges hi^ Ring was his
wi^dome, whereby he unde^stood others, and was reserved himself. It Is pity he
ever learned to speak, that knows not how to be silent. I would first be so
wise, (s^ith a Wit and Wi^dome of our Ag^) as to be my own Counselor, and
next so secret as to be my own Counsel-keeper. Some of my Servants may be of my
Bedchamber, but none shall be of my closet. Before I told you of this, (says
Charles the Fifth of a Design discovered upon the seventeen Province^ to his
Favorite Lunembergh) I was Emperor, but now you are so.

But the height of the Dukes ^p^^it was equally unfortunate with the openness
of it; and he fell no less because he despi^ed Knevet, than because he trusted
him.

Contemned Dangers ruin surely, while ^hey su^prize us at once naked, and
carele^s; as ill prepared to offend the slighted Adversary, as to defend our
misunderstood Selves. The least Beings have their ^pleen, and command our
caution: No creature too mean to be mischievous; none too inconsiderate to be
feared. As long as Weakness can cling to Power, and Power to Malice, what
Knevet would, but could not, that Wolsey could and would. If my Enemy be
strong, he shall awe; if weak, he shall guard my Life. Two things are necessary
in this Life, Faithful Friends, or Severe Enemies: The fewer of the former men
of the Dukes fortune have, the more use they should make of the latter. The
greatest Enemy, when observed, may do me a great kindness; the least neglected,
can do no little mischief: Security is the only misfortune, and Carelessness
the only fate that distresseth the World.

But the Duke threw away his life in a fatal word that could not be recalled, (
I Will not ask the King for my Life.) Great need have we to guard that Tongue,
whence flow the issues of Li^e and Death; and weigh those words that go abroad
for the measure of our Weal or Woe; our words being given us to treat with the
World about either, discreetly to our happiness, or weakly to our ruin. It
has repented men that they have spoken at all times; it repented none to have
been silent in King Henry's, when there was no security but to the Reserved,
and the Pliable. Dionysius the Tyrant, seeing one knocked down at one blow,
said to his f^iends; what a folly is it to quit so fair a command for fear of
dying, which lasts, no longer a space!

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony Brown.
HE was always one of the Council to King Hen^y at home, and of his
Commissioners abroad: no Treaty passing without his presence, no Negotiation
without his advice; the first carrying as much Majesty with it, as the second
did Authority: the Court having bred the one to a noble Mein, as Experience had
done the other to an Oracle; Experience, I say, whereby he saw more, as
Alexander boasted, with his eye, than others comprehended in their thoughts;
that being knowledge in him, that was but conjecture in others.

He was the best Compound in the World; a learned, an honest, and a traveled
man; a good Nature, a large Soul, and a settled Mind, made up of Notes and
Observations upon the most material points of State he could learn at Courts;
of Religion, among the Clergy; of Discipline, among Soldiers; of Trade, among
Merchants; or of the situation, interest, avenues and strong holds, by his own
eyes. It Is a pleasure to stand upon the shore, and to see ships tossed upon the
Sea; it is pleasure to stand in the window of a Castle, and to see a Battle,
with the adventures thereof below: but no pleasure is comparable to the
standing upon the Vantground of Truth: ( an Hill says my Noble Author) not to
be commanded, and where the air is always clear and serene;) and to see the
Errors and Wanderings, the Mists and Tempests in the Vale below: That content is
better felt than expressed that this Noble Person took in his own clear
thoughts, when it was Mist all round about him; and King Henry cried, What say
Cromwell and Brown?

Vespasian asked Apollonius, What was Nero's overthrow? and he answered him,
Nero could tune the Harp well; but in Government sometimes he wound the pins
too high, and sometimes he let them down too low. Sir Anthony told Henry the
Eighth, That his Government had been more easy, if he had either set it not so
lose at first, or not so strict at last; (as there was indeed no King so
various as his Master, no State so changeable as his Government.) An even
temper begets awe and reverence; whilst the wide extremes create either on the
one hand contempt and insolence, or on the other discontent and murmuring.
Haughty and violent Courts never bless the Owners with a settled Peace.

This deep man was Leiger in Rome six years, and Agent in France ten: A person
of great dispatch, because of an orderly method and procedure; which he
observed to a superstition, saying, Time and Method are my Masters. There are
(says my Oracle) three parts of business; Preparation, Debate, and Perfection:
The middle King Henry comunicated to the whole Council, the first and last to
few, viz. to my Lord Cromwell and Sir Anthony Brown.

The highest matters were his care; as the Interview in France, 1533. the most
eminent Statesmen his fellows, as the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Rochford and
the Lord Paulet; those Noble Persons bearing the state, and he managing the
business of the Embassies.

The wise man of Florence took care that Ferdinando of Naples, Medices of
Florence, Sforza of Millain should gain nothing of one another, to the great
secu^ity of Italy: Sir Anthony watched our Neighbors Conquest^, Trade,
Approaches, etc. so closely, that none of those Potentates, Charles the Fifth,
or King Francis, could win a spot of Ground, but his Master would balance it,
and so secure Europe.

The Interviews between Princes he disallowed; yet to satisfy his Master, he
provided for that in France so sumptuously, as one that understood the
fo^mality of a Pageant was a real advantage to a Government whose Interest is
as much to gain a reputation by pomp and show, as support a welfare by prudence
and strength: others apprehension of our greatness, contributing as much to our
welfare, as our welfare it self: Opinion governs the World: Princes with their
Majesty, may be o^t envied and ha^ed; without it, they are always scorned and
contemned: Circumstances are often more than the main, and shadows are not
always shadows: Outward Esteem to a great Person, is as skin to Fruit, which
though a thin cover, preserves it: King Henry's Person and State did England
more Right in a Year, than his Predecessors Arms in an Age; while they only
impressed a resolution in the Neighbors, he a reverence. As the Reason of man
corr^cting of his sense about the m^gnitude and distance o^ heavenly bodies, is
an argument that he has an Inorganical, Immaterial, Impassible, and Immortal
soul; so this Gentleman's Conscience often reflecting upon his policy, about the
Circumstances of many of his actions, was an argument that he was ^uled by
holy, serious, and heavenly Principles: One effect whereof, was, that he
desired rather the admonishing pains of a lingering death, than the favorable
ease of a quick one, he reckoning it not an effect of cruelty, but a design of
mercy, that he should dye so, ut sentiat se mori; and he looked on nothing as
so great a snare to his thoughts as the opinion of Origin, and some othe^s
called merciful Doctors, who did endeavor to possess the Church with their
opinion of an universal restitution of all Creatures to their pristine Estate,
after sufficient purgation; or any thing more a temptation to other men's souls,
than the Blasphemy of some, making God the Author of good and evil, so much
worse than the Manichees or Marcionites, as they held it not of their good God,
whom they called Light; but of their bad God whom they called Darkness.

As Princes govern the People, so Reason of State the Princes: Spain at that
time would command the Sea, to keep us from the Indies; and our Religion, to
keep us from a Settlement: France suspected our Neighborhood, and engaged
Scotland; the Pope undermined our Designs, and obliged the French. Sir Anthony
at Rome, in respectful terms, and under Protestation that his Majesty intended
no contempt of the Sea Apostolic, or Holy Church, intimated his Masters Appeal
to the next General Council lawfully assembled; exhibiting also the Authentic
Instruments of the same, and the Archbishop of Canterbury's at the Consistory,
where, though the Pope made forty French Cardinals, yet our Agent and his money
made twelve English, and taught Francis to assume the power of disposing
Monasteries and Benefices, as King Henry had done; advising him to inform his
Subjects clearly of his proceedings, and unite with the Princes of the
Reformation, taking his Parliament and People along with him, and by their
advice cutting off the Appeals to and Revenues of Rome, by visitations, etc.
with a Praemunire, together with the Oath of Supremacy, and the publication of
the prohibited Degrees of Marriages: He added in his Expresses, That his
Majesty should by disguised Envoys divide between the Princes and the Empire.

The next sight we have of him is in Scotland; the French Kings passage to
England, (as he calls it:) Where in joint Commission with the Earl of
Southampton, and the Bishop of Durham, he with his variety of Instructions
gained time until the French King was embroyled at home, the season of Action
was over there, and the Duke of Norfolk ready to force that with a War, which
could not be gained by Treaty. Fortune is like the Market, where many times if
you can stay a little, the Price will fall: The ripeness and unripeness of the
Occasion must be well weighed: Watch the ^eginning of an Action, and then
speed! Two things make a complete Politician, Secrecy in Council, and Celerity
in Execution.

But our Knights Prudence was not a heavy Wariness, or a dull caution, as
appears by his preferment at Court, where he is Master of the Horse; and his
service in the North, where he and the Comptroller Sir Anthony Gage are in the
head of 10000 men: In both these places his excellence was more in choosing his
Officers and Followers, than in acting himself: His servants were modest and
sober, troubling him with nothing but his business, and expecting no higher
conditions, than countenance, protection, and recommendation; and his Retainers
peaceable, reserved, close, plain, and hopeful: the deserving Soldier and the
promising were seen often at his gate, not in throngs, to avoid popularity:
Equal was his favor, that none might be insolent, and none discontented; yet
so di^creetly dispensed, as made the Preferred faithful, and the Expectants
officious. To be ruled by one, is soft and obnoxious; by many, troublesome: to
be advised by few, as he was, is safe: because (as he said in some things out
of his element) the Vale best discovers the Hill.

Although he understood not the main matter of War, yet he knew many of its
falls and incidents; his prudence being as able to lay a stratagem, as others
experience was to embattail an Army. Sir Thomas Wharton Warden of the Marches
he commands with 300 men behind an Ambush, whither he draws the rash Scots, and
overthrows them more with the surprise than his power, taking the Lord
Admiral Maxwel, etc. who was committed to his custody; and putting that King to
so deep a melancholy, that he died upon it. His death suggests new counsels,
and Sir Anthony watches in Scotland to gain hi^ Daughter for our Prince, or at
least to prevent the French, whom Sir Wil^iam Paget watches there, as Sir
Ralph Sadler did in Rome, and Sir John Wall^p at Calais: and when that Kings
design was discovered, we find our Knight with Charles Duke of Suffolk,
Lieutenant General; Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel, Lord General; Will.
Paulet, Lord St. John, Stephen Bishop of Winchester, with a rich and strong
Army, expecting the King before Montrevil, (which they took with Boulogn) and
forcing the French to a Peace and Submission that secured England, and settled
Europe.

Three things facilitate all things: 1. Knowledge, 2. Temper, 3. Time. Knowledge
our Knight had either of his own or others, whom he commanded in what ever he
went about, laying the ground of matters always down in writing, and debating
them with his friends, before he declared himself in Council. A temperance he
had, that kept him out of the reach of others, and brought others within his.
Time he took, always driving, never being driven by his business; which is
rather a huddle, than a performance, when in haste: there was something that
all admired, and which was more, something that all were pleased with, in this
man's action. The times were dark, his carriage so too: the Waves were
boisterous, but he the solid Rock, or the well-guided Ship that could go with
the Tide. He mastered his own passion, and others too, and both by Time and
Opportunity; therefore he died with that peace the State wanted, and with that
universal repute the Statesmen of those troublesome times enjoyed not.

By King Henry's Will he got a Legacy of 300 l. for his former Service; and the
Honor to be of Prince EDWARD's special Council for the future.

By his Order he had, as his share of Abbey-Lands, Battle-Abbey in Sussex,
enjoyed by his Heirs Males in a direct Line to this day: And by his Authority
he had the Honorable Garter.

He was the first man that durst bring his Master the sad news, That He must
die: And no wonder he durst do it, for the next news is, That he is dead
himself. How dare thou to be so plain? said Heliogabalus to the Courtier:
Because I dare die, said he: I can but die, if I am Faithful; and I must die,
though I Flatter.

T^is Gentleman's humor of crossing present proceedings, was prettily reproved
by King Hen. the Eighth's little story of a poor Woman drowned by mischance,
whose dead body, whilst her Neighbors sought for down the River; her Husband
who knew her condition better than they, advised them to seek up the River; for
all her life long she loved to be contrary to all others, and he presumed she
would swim against the stream being dead.

The End of the Obse^vations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
THE STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King Edward the VI.
Observations on the Lives of the Seymours.
EDward Seymour and Thomas Seymour, both Sons of Sir John Seymour of Wolful in
Wiltshire. I join them together, because whilst they were united in affection,
they were invincible; but when divided, easily overthrown by their Enemies.

EDward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector and Treasurer of England, being the
elder Brother, succeeded to a fair Paternal inheritance He was a valiant
Soldier for Land-service, fortunate, and generally beloved by Martial Men. He
was of an open nature, free from jealousy and dissembling, affable to all
people. He married Anne, Daughter to Sir Edward Stanhop, a Lady of a high mind,
and haughty undaunted spirit.

THOMAS SEYMOUR the Younger brother, was made BARON of Sudley; and, by Offices
and the favors of his Nephew, King Edward the sixth, obtained a great Estate.
He was well experienced in Sea-Affairs, and made Lord Admiral of England. He
lay at a close postu^e, being of a reserved nature, and more cunning in his
carriage. He married Queen Katherine P^rr, the Widow of King Henry 8.

Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives; the Duchess refusing to bear
the Queens Train^ and in effect justled with her for precedence: se that what
betwixt the Train of the Queen. and lon^ Gown of the Duchess, they raised so
much dust at the Court, as at last put out the eyes of both their Husbands, and
occasioned their Execution^.

Their Sisters Beauty commended them to the King^ favors; (but a frail support
that! which is as lasting only as a Fancy, and only as certain as Passion:)
therefore their Parts recommended them to his service. Affection shall lead me
to Court, but I Will take care that In^erest keeps me there.

Sir Edward Seymours temper suited with the Kings Inclinations, and his spirit
with his times; both high, both stirring. In the throng of Courtiers, there a^e
but three steps to raise a man to observations: 1. Some pecu^iar sufficiency;
2. Some particular exploit; and, 3. An especial Friend: This Noble Person
showed the first with advantage, in that draught of Military Discipline
presented to Henry the eighth, wherein the embattling is most remarkable, viz.
"Twenty two complete Companies make up four Squadrons; every Squadron of Pikes
and Muskets being drawn up apart, the Pikes and Colors on the left h^nd, and
the Musketeers on the right. These Squadrons make up a Brigade, to be drawn up
as follows, viz. Ten Corporalships of Musketeers being 34 Rots, divided into
five Plattons, every Platton being nine or so in front, led by a Major, and
every division by a sufficient Commander. Next after these, Thirty six Rots of
Pikes are to follow, (being twelve Corporalships) with their Colors following
them, till they are drawn up even in front with the 32 Rots of Musketeers:
This makes the Right Wing of the Brigade. 2. The Battle of Pikes moves forward
in division, doing in all respects as the former, till they range even in front
with the Pikes of the Right Wing: Then the other 32 Rots of Musketeers
belonging to the middle Squadron, (who are appointed to make the Battle of the
Brigade) are led up as the first Musketeers in all points, but at a reasonable
distance behind the Pikes of their own Squadrons. Then the last Squadron of
Pikes marches up, in all respects observing the same order. until they have
attained to range in front even with other ^ikes.

This being done, the Battle or middle Squadron o^ Pikes and Muskets advances
in one body, until it is clear of the Wings. Lastly, the Surplus of the three
Squadrons being 48 Rots of Mu^quet^e^s, are drawn up behind the Brigad^e, where
they are to attend the Commands of their Officers, to guard the Baggage or
Cannon, to be Convo^es for Ammunition or Victuals to the rest, or continue a
reserve to wait upon all occasions.

2. Eminent was his ability for this Draught, more eminent for his performance
agreeable to it in Britain; where he sat before a Town six weeks to no
purpose, while it expected relief from Italy: But at last he in^inuates a
jealousy between the Pope and the French King touching that City, that
obstructed all relief: He with a^ much speed and policy sets upon the two main
Sc^^res for defense of the Town, and took them b^th; battering the Town and
Castle with that violence and noise, that they say it was heard 100 miles off.
A Train of Powder is laid to blow them up when they should enter; but this
succeeded not: For the French in passing the Ditch had so weted their clothes,
that dropping upon the Train, the Powder would not take fire; and so all things
conspiring to crown his valor with success; he takes the Castle first, and
then dividing the Town, and weakening it by several assaults at once, brought it
to his own terms. Here his Valor had been eminent, but that his conduct was
more; and his Conduct renowned, but that his nobleness toward the Conquered:
his civility and obligingness toward the Soldiery, and his integrity toward
all persons, had outdone that.

There are but two things that a subject can honestly oblige his Prince in: 1.
Keeping his subjects in peace at home, 2. Keeping his enemies under abroad: 1.
Those soft, but prudent Acts of Peace; 2. Those resolved, but well-managed
ways of War: Sir Thomas wanted neither a resolution for the one, nor a temper
for the other.

But sufficiency and merits are neglected things when not befriended: (Princes
are too reserved to be taken with the first appearances of worth, unless
recommended by tried judgments: It Is fit as well as common, that they have
their Counselors for persons as well as things:) His Sister therefore was
married on Whit sunday, and he is on the Tuesday following created Viscount
Beauchamp. But next year his Nephew is born; the hope and stay of his Majesty
and his Realms, and he is made Earl of Hertford.

King Henry understanding that the Pope upon his own and Cardinal Pool's
account stirred up all the Princes against him, as a provident Prince, rode
himself to the Seacoasts to see them fortified. Admiral Fitz-williams is old,
Sir Thomas Seymour assists him to rigg the Navy to be in readiness in six days
time: Sir Edward is to muster the Landforces, and particularly the City of
London, where were 15000 Armed men ready, May 8, in St. Iameses, at which place
the City seemed a Camp, and the Ci^izens men not of the Gown, but of the
Armor. Great this Lords interest in, and respect with the people; as great his
brothers with the Seamen: The Multitude would leave all for their good Lord of
Hertford, and the Seamen would die with their noble Lord Seymou^ When the King
of Scots had deluded King Henry in his correspondencies with France beyond all
patience, and had been forborne beyond all sa^ety or prudence, Sir Edward
Seymour is first sent to treat, and then to fight; which he did with much
success, that 300 of his men, and a Stratagem, (to possess the Scots with an
apprehension that the whole English Army was upon them) took and killed 30000
Scots, had more prisoners than they could keep, more booty than they could
dispose of; and adding this to their Victory, that they broke the Kings heart.

There was no end to be expected of a War with Scotland, but by marrying that
Kings Daughter to our Sovereigns Son. This Match was my Lord Seymour's interest
as well as the Kings: His prudence and experience is therefore employed first
to persuade it; and when that would not do, (so great and so cross the Papal
power there by Cardinal Betons means) his Valor and Resolution, is sent with
10000 to compel it: in order whereunto, May 4. landing at Granther-Gray, he
marches in order toward Leith, which (after a defeat given the Cardinal, the
Earls of Arran, Huntley, etc. by his Harquebusiers) they entered, and thence
proceeded to Edinbu^gh: My Lord Dudley leading the Front, our Earl the Battle,
and the Earl of Shrewsbury the Reerward:) the^e the Keys are offered t^em upon
conditions; which they refusing; (and so making the Enemy desperate, who
resolves rather to perish nobly, than to be undone by submission) the Town
holds out, and they are able to do no more, with some considerable loss, then
burn the suburbs, wast the Country to an utter desolation for seven miles
compass, demolish Leith, Dunbar, etc. take all their Ships and Ammunition,
returning to Berwick with the loss only of 14 men.

Two things he was eminent for: 1. His Advice, that not the least Punctilio of
the Law should be neglected: Whereupon the Earl of Surrey and other Nobility
were imprisoned for eating Flesh in Lent. A secret and unobserved contempt of
the Law, is a close undermining of Authority; which must be either its self in
indulging nothing, or be nothing in allowing all. Liberty knows no restraint,
no limit, when winked at. 2. For his Popularity, in advancing the Benevolence
52000 l. beyond expectation.


The Scots must have War as long as there is Poverty in their Country, and
interest in France: This Noble Earl cutteth off the Invaders, lays wast the
Country, and (that the source of those troubles might be dammed up) enters
France with 80000 men; and afer some skirmishes, brought the King thereof to a
peace and submission.

In pursuance whereof, while King Henry was in Bologn, he made his Will,
wherein the Earl of Hertford Lord High Chamberlain is appointed Principal
Counselor to his Nephew: and not long after he dies, and leaves the Kingdom
to his son, and his Son to his Uncle, whom the common Vote made Protector, and
interest a Moderator of the Council, which the time required able, but their
humors made f^ctious. The peace with King Francis and the Emperor was but
uncertain; the Scots we^e irreconci^eable, the Pope implacable, Religion
unsettled, the Clergy out of frame, the People dist^acted, and the Nobility at
variance. A great Counselor King Henry leaves his Son, and a greater his
Uncle makes him: Bacons Es^. 116.
in Counsel is stability: Things will have their first or second agitation: If
they be not tossed upon the Arguments of Counsel, they will be tossed upon the
Waves of Fortune. But yet this Lord miscarried, in that the Council understood
him better than he did them: And he advised with them rather in public, where
men speak warily, and in compliance with othe^s humor; than in private, where
they deliver themselves more freely, and agreeable to their own humors. (The
Rule is, Ask an inferior man's advice in private that he may be ^ree; and a
superiors in public, that he may be respectful.) But he did well, 1. In that
the same matter if weighed, was never propounded and resolved the same day. 2.
In that he h^d fixed days of petitions, for the peoples and his own ease. 3.
In that he poyzed his Committees of contrary inclinations, that watched and
balanced each other to a moderation most safe for the Kingdom and himself. 4.
That he had of all Professions such at his command as opened the state of a
business before any Commissioners debated it. 5. That he seldom discovered his
own inlination, lest it byas^ed his Counsel. 6. That to prevent a Combination
in the Council, he weakened their power and pri^iledges, their credit, their
dependencies, either by office or expectation, their opportunities and
correspondencies, so that he could easily remove any when faul^y, discover any
when dangerous, disgrace any when bold, and not fit to be entrusted with the
Counsels, Resolves, Deliberations, and Necessities of the State. In order to
which, he had two useful Resolutions. 1. To suppress Calumnies, 2. To encourage
Accusations. His first Acts were Show and Pomp, (necessary for Greatness^ viz.
The Knighting of the King, and making himself Duke. His next are Realities: as,
1. His mode^ling the Country for a Parliament, considering the temper of the
people, and the pulse of the last Parliament; redressing Grievances, settling
Elections by such Legal Rules, as that the people should not be corrupted with
money, overborn by importunity, transported by fear or favor to an unworthy or
an unsuitable choice; and taking a just time to prepare the people for the
designed settlement, by his grave and sober Injunctions, by godly and good
Books of Instructions, by a wholesome form of Prayer, (composed at Windsor) by a
more exact translation of the Bible, by several Proclamations for moderation
and order on all hands, by inhibiting all Preachers but such learned, sober,
grave and discreet men as were Licensed thereunto under the Lord Protector's
and my Lord of Canterbury's hand.

2. His promoting the Match with Scotland first by Ambassadors, and then by an
Army, whose order was this: The Duke of Some^set's ma^^h.
viz. The Avant-guard of 3 or 4000 footmen at Arms, and 600 light horse led by
the Earl of Warwick; the main Battle of 6000 foot, and 600 men at Arms, and
1000 light horse, led by the Protector; and the Rear of half so many, led by
the Lord Dacres; the Artillery of 16 Pieces of Ordnance making one Wing, the
men at Arms and Demilances the other. For the Avant-guard and half of the
Battle ^iding about two flight-shot from their side, the other half of the
Battle: and the whole Flank of the Rear was closed by the Carriages, being
12000 Carts and Wagons; the rest of the men at A^ms and D^mi^ances marching
behind. A f^w ski^ mishes and stratagems passed, when a Trumpeter is sent by
Huntley to challenge the Protector; to whom the Protector replying like a wi^e
man, That it was not for a person of his trust to duel it with a private man;
The Earl of Warwick said, Trumpeter, bring me word that thy Master will perform
the Combat with me, and I Will give thee 100 Crowns. Nay, rather, said our Duke,
bring me word that he will give us Battle, and I will give thee 1000 l. But in
25 days he gains a greater The same day that 30. y^ars ago they were beaten at
Flodden.
Battle, over-runs the Country with the loss of no more then 65 men, to that of
25000 Scots.

3. His third Exploit was, Dispensing H^ made the first and last Bannerets.
Honors so nobly, that they were due encouragements to Virtue; though yet so
warily, that they should not be either a burden or a danger to the Crown.

4. He gave the Commonalty great content, in pulling down Enclosures by
Proclamations; and the Nobility no less, by setting up Land-improvements by
Rule.

5. He engaged both, by a good bargain of Church Lands, confirmed by this
Parliament.

6. He weakneth the Papists, 1. By conniving at them until they broke out to
such outrages as made them liable. 2. By dividing them when engaged, with hope
of mercy on the one hand, and fear of his Army on the other.

7 The French taking the advantage of our seditious to break off their Treaty,
and proclaim a War, he con^i^ca^es their Estates, and secures the persons of a^
many of them as lived in England.

But Greatness is fatal; and his Brother that should have suppo^ted this great
man, ruins himself and him. The Lady S^anhope.
He had married a Lady high in spirit; his Brother the Queen-Dowager, higher in
place: the Ladies quar^el first, and then (as it must needs follow) the Lords.
Thomas the Admiral is questioned for aiming at the Crown, 1. By marrying the
Lady Elizabeth, and then by seizing the King-person and the Government: so
honest this Protector, (a plain man, and of no over-deep insight into
practices) that he gave way to his Trial, saying, (though somewhat ominous as
it happened) I Will do and suffer Justice: so Uxorious, that he sealed his death.
And now he stands alone, wanting his Brothers cunning to reach Warwick, or his
resolution to check Norfolk. The people are troubled at that one weak and
unjustifiable Act of his, The pulling down of so many of Gods ^hu^che^ in the
City, to build one Somerset House in the Strand.

The Earl takes notice of their discontent, and asse^bleth eighteen
discontented Counselors, who arm themselves and their W^^m t^^y put in ^^w
Li^er^^s.
followers, calling the City and the Kingdom to their assistance by a
Proclamation. The Protector flees with the King and a Guard to Hampton Court:
the City sometimes resolved to assist the Lords, out of malice to the
Protector; sometimes to forbear out of such consideration of its many
misfortunes in opposing Kings, set forth not with more Integrity by George
Stadlow, then Eloquence and Life by John Ayliffe. They delay: Sir Anthony
Wingfield Captain of the Guard persuades the King of the Lords moderation and
Loyalty; the Duke is to answer for himself: the Lawyers charge him with
removing Westminster Hall to Somerset House, where he kept a Court of Request,
and determined Title of Lands; the Soldiers with the detaining of their pay,
and betraying our French Garrisons; the Statesmen with the engrossing of all
Authority. The Earl of Warwick vigilantly but closely manageth all discon^e^^s
of his design with this great advantage, that we was subtle, close, and
implacable; while the other was free-spirited, open-hearted, humble, hard to
distrust, easy to forgive. His friend the Lord Russel is absent: he is first
tried and acquitted, but with the loss of his Protectorship, Treasure^s^ip,
Marshalship, and 2000 l. of Land more.

But Warwick's design for the Crown ripening, and Somerset being the most
eminent obstruction in his way, having weakened, before he ruins him, now he
charge him with Treason, to make a noise; and with Felony, to do execution:
the Council is packed, he loses his life (for a small crime, and that on a
For contriving the death of a Privy Counselor.
nice point, subtly devised and packed by his Enemies) forgetting to ask the
benefit of the Clergy, that had saved it. This person, as one charactereth him,
was religious himself, a lover of all such as were so, and a great promoter of
the Reformation: Valiant and successful, generally beloved by Soldiers, envied
by Statesmen, though the most conscientious of them all; doing nothing
irregularly, but in compliance with the necessities of Government; open to
dangers, as one that could not be jealous; better to act, than design; to
perform, than plot. When he was discharged of Treason, there was so loud a
shout in Westminster Hall, as was heard to Long-Acre; when condemned of Felony,
there was a ^ilence and amazement for three hours. It is observed of some, that
they have despised the benefit of their Clergy while they lived; and by a just
pro^idence of God, could not make use of it when ^hey were to dye: It was pity
that this Noble person should forget to crave that benefit of the Clergy, which
might have saved him; when he was so unwi^^ing to enjoy any ^enefit of the
Clergy, which might Incommode them. The controversy between him and the Earl
of Warwick is like that between Demades and Phocion; Demades threatened Phocion,
that the Athenians would destroy him when they fell into their mad fits; and
thee Demades [saith Phocion] when they return to their right minds: it
appearing afterward, that what he was charged to have designed against others,
he did only in his own defense, cum moderamine. Inculpatae cautelae, in whose
behalf Cicero had pleaded thus, Si vita nos^ra in aliquas Insidias, si in vim,
in tela aut latronum^ aut in imicorum incidisset; omnis honesta ratio esset
expediendae salutis; hoc and ratio doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos
gentibus, and feris natura ipsa praescrips^t, ut omnem semper vim quacunque open
possint a corpore, a capite, a vita sua propulsare-nitantur.

Beheaded he was on Tower Hill, with no less p^aise for his piety and patience,
than pit^y and grief of the spectators. His Death was at^ended with many signs
and wonders, and his Name with an indelible character, his house being cal^ed
Somerset House to this day, though solemnly proclaimed by King of James
Denmark-house, because inhabited by the King o^ Denmark and his Sister. Surely
(says my Author) this Duke was well belo^ed, since his Name made such
indelible impression on his house, whereof he was not five years in possession.
Death has this also, That it opens the Gate to good Fame, and extinguisheth
Envy. Philip asked Demetrius if he did not fear to lose his head? He answered,
No: for if he did, the Athenians would give him one immortal; He should be
statued in the Temple of Eternal Fame.

Nil non Mortale tenemus,
Pectoris exceptis ingeniique bonis:
En ego, cum Patria caream vobisque dem^que
Raptaque sint, adimi quae potuere mihi,
Virtute attamen ipse mea comitorque fruorque
Caesar in hoc potuit juris habere nihil.
Quilibet hanc saevo vitam mihi, finiat ense,
Me tamen extin^o fama perennis erit.
" All that we hold will die,
" But our brave Thoughts and Ingenuity:
" Even I that want my Country, House and Friend,
" From whom is ravished all that Fate can rend,
" Possess yet my own Genius, and enjoy
" That which is more than Caesar can destroy.
" Each Groom may kill me: but whensoe'er I die,
" My Fame shall live to mate eternity.
Bra^e m^n never die: Worth begets in wea^ and base min^s, Envy; in the
Magnanimous, E^^lation^ in P^sterity, Renown: A Renown, that is as the beams
about the Sun, or the glory about an holy picture that shows it to be a Saint,
though it be no essential part: it riset^ from the body of that Virtue, which
cannot choose but shine, and give a light through all the clouds of error and
distraction. And though some^imes (...) mists and vapors of ^he lower earth
impede the light it gives, yet there will be apparent Rays, that show there is
Dese^t unseen, which yields those gleams of brightness to the whole Horizon,
that it moves and shines in, which sur^ive to a glorious kind of immortality,
when the Good Man is dead and gone; a Good Name being the embalming of the
Virtuous to an e^ernity of ^^ve and gratitude among posterity. For my own
Honor (says the Royal Martyr) I am well assured, that as mine Innocence is
clear before God in point of any calumnies they object; so my Reputation shall
like the Sun (after Owls and Bats have had their freedom in the night) rise
and recover ^ts self to such a degree of splendor, as those feral birds shall
be grieved to behold, and unable to bear.

Observations on the Lives of the Pars.
SIr William Par Uncle and Lord Chamberlain to Queen Katharine Par, There was
another of his name Sheriff, Nephew to this Knight, in 25 of H. 8.
was by King Henry the Eig^th created Baron Par of Horton: he left two
Daughters only, married into the Fami^ies of Tressam and Lane. His Relation
cal^ed him to Court, but his Age forbid him the pleasure^, and his own
Reservedness the freedom of that place; before which he preferred the pious,
peaceable, and hospitable way of the Country, where Popularity affected him,
more than he affected it; No man being more beloved by the vulg^r, no man less
in love with them: It being his Observation rather than his Countryman Sir
Edward Mountague's saying, That if you do the common sort of people nineteen
courtesies together, yet you may lose their love, if you go but ove^ the s^ile
before them.

H^s Cousin Sir Will^am was brought by his Sister to Court, and advanced by his
Brother to Honor; b^ing for his Majesty's sake as well as his own, made Lord
Par of Kendal, Ea^l of Essex by King Henry ^he Eighth, and Ma^ques, of
No^thampton by King ^dward: Queen Mary deprived him of his Estate and Honor
for siding with the Lady Jane, and Queen Elizabe^h restored him to both, for
favoring the Protestant Religion.

His Delight was Music and Poetry, and his Exe^cise War; being a happy
composure of the hardest and softest Discipline, equally made for Court and
Camp, for Delight or Honor: But his skill in the Field answered not his
industry, nor his success his skill: Ye^ King Edward called him His Honest
Uncle; and King Henry, His Integrity. The whole Family was made by a Marriage,
but died Issueless.

The common Rule of Favorites is, to bring in all their Relations about them,
to adorn and suppo^t them: bu^ this Marq^ess would say, A wall that has a firm
Bottom, had need of no Buttress; and that which wants it, is often rather
thrust down than upheld by it. The Antiquaries crouch, as though they upheld
the Church, when they are upheld by it: Clients a^e more a burden than a
strength: and when the chief Favorite dares not displease his So^e^eign
because he is so near him, they dare, because he is between them and Majesty.
His Followe^s were not gaudy, to render him suspicious; nor discontented, to
b^eed ill blood, and a misunderstanding; nor too open, to discover him; but
deserving, to honor him; and hopeful, to be advanced by him. Active men were
recommended by him to King Henry's busy Occasions, and Virtuous to King
Edward's pious Inclinations.

In his last years he found that there was little love in the World, and least
o^ all among Equals; and that that which war, is between Superior and
Inferior, whose fortune may comprehend the one the other. To ease his mind
therefore, to satisfy his Judgment, to observe his oversight, he adopted Sir
William Cholmley, bringing him first to his House, and then to his Heart, to
show him that impartially, which he could not discern in himself. There is no
such Fla^terer as a man's self: and there is no such Remedy against Flattery of
a man's self as the liberty of a Friend: Counsel is of two sorts; (to go on in
my Au^hors words) the one concerning manners, the other concerning business:
for the first, the best preservative to keep the mind in health, is the
faithful admonition of a ^riend: The calling o^ a man's self to a strict
account, is a medicine sometime ^oo piercing and corroding; Lord Ba^on's
Ess^yes.
reading good Books of Morality is a little flat and dead; observing our ^aults
in others is sometimes improper for our case: but the best receipt (best I say,
to work, and bent to take) is the Admonition of a Friend.

So much solid Worth he had, that he had no use of Ambition; so much Modesty,
that he made little use of his Worth: Mean thoughts he entertained of himself,
and as mean thoughts did he by his down-cast though grave look, his sparing
though pertinent discourse, and his submiss^v^ though regardful carriage^
suggest of himself. B^t a well-manag'd boldness is the Virtue of Mon^rchick
Courts, and a discreet submission that of a Republican; no advantageous
admission into the one, without the first, nor ^a^ety in the other, without the
second: Here, if you are bold, you must look for an Ostracism; there, if you
are modest, for Neglect: Yet a sober and moderate man may be i^ fashion once in
an Age. The Soldier and the Gentleman are the Warlike Princes Darling^:
Churchmen, the Religious; Physicians, the Sickly and Old; Scholars, the
Learned; Exchequerers, the Poor, Covetous, or Prodigal; Lawyers, the Just; and
They of a Healing, Sof^ and Pliable Temper, (King James his character and
commendation of my Lord Bacon) the Settling and the Peaceable, such as Edward
the VI, in whose Reign he was adva^ced, and Queen Elizabeth, in whose Reign he
was restored.

It was in pursuance of King Henry's Statute, that he clo^ed with King Edward's
Will: For this Clause he p^oduced for himself:

Provided, That if the Lady Mary do not keep nor perform such Conditions, which
shall be limited and appointed, as aforesaid, that then and from thenceforth,
for lack of Heirs of the Kings Body, and the said Lord Prince, lawfully
begotten, the said Imperi^l Crown, and other the Premises, shall be, come and
remain to suc^ Person and Persons, and of such Estate and Estates as the Kings
Highness by his Letters Patents sealed under His Great Seal, or by His last
Will in Writing, signed with His Hand, shall limi^ and appoint.

Isocrates was a man of an excellent Wit, but finding himself destitute of
countenance, gesture and confidence, he never durst speak in public,
contenting himself to teach, even to his decrepit days; and commonly saying, He
taught Rhetorique for a thousand Ryals, but would give more t^an ten thousand
to him that would teach him confidence:

T^is Marq^e^s brought up many a Courtier, yet had not the face to be One
himself, until Queen Elizabeth, who balanced her Council in point of Religion
in the beginning of her Reign, a^ she did her Court in point of Interest
throughout, threatened him to the C^uncil-Board first, and then to her Cabinet;
where none more secret, to keep counsel; none more faithful, to g^ve it; and
more modest, to submit. A sincere, plain, direct man; no^ crafty nor involved.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Cheek.
SIr John Cheek, born over against the Market-Cross in Cambridge, became Tu^or
to King Edward the Sixth, and Secretary of State: Not ^o mean^y descended as
Sir John Heyward pretends, (who writes him, The Son of his own Deserts) being a
B^anch of the Cheeks of Moston in the Isle of Wight, (where their Estate was
^hree hundred pound a year, three hundred years ago, and no more within this
thi^ty years;) happy in his Father, Mr. Peter Cheek, whose first tui^ion
seasoned him; happier in his good A Duffeild,
Mother, (that grave Matron) whose good Recommending to him the care of three
things: 1. His God. 2. His Soul. 3. His Company.



counsel and Christian charge when he was going to Court, set^led him; and
happiest of all in the place of his birth, where he fell from his Mothers Womb
to the Muses Lap, and learned as soon as he lived, being a Scholar sooner than
he was a man. A German had the care of his younger studies, and a Frenchman of
his carriage; his par^s being too large to be confined to the narrowness of
English Rules, and too sprightly to attend the ^edio^sness, and creep by the
compass of an English method. The same day was he and Mr. Ascham admitted to
St. John's, and the same week to Court, the one to the Tuition o^ Edward the
sixth, the other of Queen Elizabeth: there they were both happy in their Master
Doctor Metcalf, who though he could not (as Themistocles said) fiddle, yet he
could make a little Col^edge a great one, and breed Scholars, th^ugh he was
none: His advice deterred them from the rough Learning of the Modern Schoolmen,
and their own Genius led them to the more polite studies of the ancient Orators
and Historians; wherein they profi^ed so well, that the one was the copious
Orator, the other the Greek Professor of that University.

A contest began now, between the Introducers of the New, and the Defenders of
the Old Pronunciation of the Greek: the former endeavored to give each Le^ter,
Vowel and Diphthong its full sound: whilst Doctor Caius and others of the Old
stamp, cried out against his Project, and the Promoters of it; taxing It ^or
novelty, and Them for want of experience, and affirming Greek it self to be
barbarous, so clownishly ut^ered; and that neither France, Germany nor Italy
owned any such Pronunciation. John Cheek and Thomas Smith maintained that this
was no Innovation, but the ancient utterance of Greek, most clear, and most
full. Chancellor Gardener then interposed against the Pronunciation, and the
Authors of it: But custom has since prevailed for the use of the one, and the
due commendation of the other.

Sir John Cheek's Authors were Isocrates and Thucydides; his Auditors the
youngest that came thither, for Language; and the oldest that heard him, for
his Discourse and Policy: The one preferred him to the ample Provostship of
Kings, the other to the great t^ust of Secretary of State: Prince Edward
studied not his Book more sedulously, than he studied him, that his Rules might
comply with his Inclination, and his Lectures with his temper: Lectures, that
were rather Discourses instilled to him Majestically, as a Prince; than Lessons
beaten into him pedantiquely, as a Schoolboy. The wise Man would not be
debasing his Royal Pupils mind with the nauseated and low crumbs of a Pedant,
but ennobling it with the free and high Maxims of a Statesman; sugaring the
more austere parts of Learning with the pleasures of Poetry, Discourse,
Apologues; and so deceiving the Royal Youth to an improvement before his own
years, and others comprehension. His very Recreations were useful, and his
Series of lighter exercises (for he observed a method in them too) a constant
study; his Table, his School; his Meat, his Discipline: the industrious Tutor
filling up each space of his time with its suitable instruction; it being his
Maxim, That Time and Observation were the best Masters, and Exercise the b^st
Tutor. While others doated over their Rules, his Pupils practiced them; no day
passing without his Letters to the King, as that, Literae meae unum semper
habet Argumentum (Rex Nobilissime and Pater Illustrissime) hoc est, in omnibus
Epistolis ago t^bi gra^ias, etc. or to the Queen, as that, Quod non ad te
jamdiu scriberoni in causa fuit non negligentia, sed studium; non ^nim hoc feci
ut nunquam omnino scriberem, sed accuratius scriberem, etc. I have two Tutors,
(said King Edward to Cardan) Diligence and Moderation, Sir Jo. Cheek and
Doctor Coxe. So exact an account he gave Prince Edward of his Fathers Kingdom,
and its Interest, that King Henry designed him for Secretary, and King Edward
made him one.

Three years he had that place; and in that three years did England more
service, so great his Parts, Learning and Religion! more kindness, such his
eminency in both! and gave the People more satisfaction, such his Integrity and
Dexterity! than all that went before him, and most that came after him. He was
the first that brought in the use of a Diary, and his Pupil the next that
practiced it: His Aphorism it was, That a dark and imperfect reflection upon
Affairs floating in the memory, was like words dispersed and insignificant;
whereas a complete view of them in a Book, was like the same words pointed in a
period, and made significant.

Much did the Kingdom value him, but more the King: for being once desperately
sick, the King carefully enquired of him every day; at last his Physician told
him there was no hope for his life, being given over by him for a dead man: No,
said the King, he will not die at this time; for this morning I begged his life
from God in my Prayers, and obtained it. Which accordingly came to pass; and he
soon after, against all expectation, wonderfully recovered. This (says Doctor
Fuller) was attested by the old Earl of Huntington, (bred up in his childhood
with King Edward) to Sir Tho. Cheek, who anno 1654. was alive, and ^0. years
of Age.

But though his Prayers saved his Tutors Life, none could save his; who died
with the Protestant Religion in his heart and arms: and Sir John had died with
him, but that being outed of all his preferments, he outed himself from the
Kingdom: loving to all the English Exiles at Strasburgh, and well beloved all
over Germany; until trusting to the Stars too much, (would he had either not
gone so high, or gone a little higher for advice) and his friends too little,
he went to meet his dear Wife in Brabant; where neither my Lord Paget's
promise, nor Sir John Mason's pledges, nor Abbot Fecknam's intercession, could
excuse him from being unhorsed and carted, imprisoned and tortured, vexed with
all the arts of power, and perplexed, until his hard usage meeting with some
fair promises, brought him to a Recantation that broke his heart; and after
much melancholic sighing and silence, brought him to his Grave; The great
example of Parts and Ingenuity, of frailty and infirmity, of repentance and
piety. Forced he was to sit with Bonner in his Courts, but forced he would not
be to join with him in his judgment: look on he did, but weep and groan too.

A good Christian he was, witness his pious Epistles; an excellent Statesman,
as appears by his True Subject to the Rebel; a Book as seasonably republished
(by Doctor Langbaine of Queens College in Oxford) in the excellent King
Charl^s his troubles, as it was at first written in the good King Edward's
commotions.

Vespasian said of Apollonius, That his Gate was open to all Philosophers, but
his Heart to Him: And Sir John Cheek would say to Father Latimer, I have an
Ear for other Divines, but I have an Heart for You.

A Countryman in Spain coming to an Image enshrined, ^he extruction and first
making whereof he could well remember, and not finding from the same that
respectful usage which he expected, You need not (quoth he) be so proud; for we
have known you from a Plum-Tree^ Sir John Cheek one day discoursing of the
Pope's Threats, said, He need not be so high; for we have known him a Chaplain.
He took much delight in that saying of Herod the Sophist, when he was pained
with the Gout in his hands and feet: When I would eat, (said he) I have no
hands; when I would go, I have no feet: but when I must be pained, I have both
hands and feet. Applying it thus: When we would serve God, we have no soul;
when we would serve our Neighbors, we have no body: but when we suffer ^or
neglecting both, we shall find we have both a body and a soul.

Gustavus Adolphus some three days before his death, said, Our affairs answer
our desires: but I doubt God will punish me for the folly of my People, who
attribute too much to me, and esteem me as it were their God; and therefore he
will make them shortly know and see I am but a man: I submit to his will, and I
know he will not leave this great Enterprise of mine imperfect. Three things
Sir John Cheek observed of Edward the sixth: 1. That the Peoples esteem of him
would loose him. 2. That his Reformation should be overthrown. 3. That yet it
should recover, and be finished.

As to public Councels: 1. Sir John was against the War with Scotland, which
he said was rather to be united to England, than separated from it. 2. He was
against King Edward's will, saying, He would never distrust God so far in the
preservation of his true Religion, as to disinherit Orphans, to keep up
Protestantism. 3. He laid a Platform of a War with Spain. 4. He kept Neuter in
the Court-factions. 5. Bishop Ridley, Doctor Coxe, seconded; and Sir John
Cheek contrived all King Edward's Acts of Charity.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wentworth.
SIr Tho. Wentworth of Nettles^ed in Suffolk, of a younger Family, (confessed
by the Crescent in his Coat) descended from the Wentworths of
Wentworth-wood-house in Yorkshire, and was created Baron Wentworth by King
Henry the viii. He was a stout and valiant Gentleman, a cordial Protestant, and
his Family a Sanctuary of such Professors; John Bale comparing him to the good
Centurion in the Gospel, and gratefully acknowledging him the cause of his
conversion from a Carmelite. The memory of this good Lord is much (but
unjustly) blemished, because Calis was lost the last of Queen Mary under his
Government: The manner was huddled up in our Chronicles, (least is best of bad
business) whereof this is the effect: The English being secure by reason of the
last Conquest at St. Quintin, and the Duke of Guise having notice thereof, he
sat down before the Town at the time (not when Kings go forth to, but return
from battle) of mid-winter, even upon New-years-day. Next day he took the two
Forts of Risebank and Newman-bridge, (wherein the strength of the City
consisted) but whether they were undermined or overmoneyed, it is not decided,
and the last left most suspicious. Within three Days the Castle of Calis,
which commanded the City, and was under the command of Sir Ralph Chamberlain,
was taken, the French wading through the Ditches, (made shallower by their
artificial cut) and then entering the Town, were repulsed back by Sir Anthony
Ager Marshal of Calis, the only Man, says Stow, who was ^illed in the Fight,
(understand him, of note) others, for the credit of the business, accounting
four-score lost in that service. The French re-entring the City the next Day,
being Twelfth-day, the Lord Wentworth Deputy thereof made but vain resistance,
which (alas) was like the wrigling of a Worms tail after the head thereof is
cut off; so that he was forced to take what terms he could get, viz. That the
Townsmen should depart (though plundered to a Groat) with their Lives, and
himself with 49 more, such as the Duke of Guise should choose, should remain
Prisoners to be put to ransom.

This was the best news brought to Paris, and worst to London ^or many years
before: It not only abated the Queens cheer the remnant of Christmas, but her
mirth all the days of her life. Yet might she thank her self for loosing this
Key of France, because she hung it by her side with so slender a string, there
being but Five Hundred Soldiers effectually in the Garrison; too few to manage
such a piece of importance. The Lord Wentworth the second of June following,
was solemnly condemned for Treason, though unheard, as absent in France: which
was not only against Christian Charity, but Roman Justice; Festus confessing it
was not fashionable amongst them to deliver any Man to die, before he which is
accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself
concerning the crime laid against him. It was well for this Lord that he was
detained in France till his ransom was paid, and Queen Mary dead, who
otherwise probably had lost his life, if he had had his liberty. But Queen
Elizabeth coming to the Crown, he found the favor, or rather had the justice
to be tried again, and was acquitted by his Peers; finding it no treachery,
cowardice, or carelessness in him, but in Sir John Harlston, and Sir Ralph
Chamberlain, the one Governor of Risebank, the other of Calis-Castle: for
which they were both condemned to die, though their Judgment was remitted. This
Lord was the only Person I have read of, who thus in a manner played Rubbers,
when his Head lay at stake; and having lost the fore, recovered the after-game.
He died a very aged Man, 1594. Thus far Mr. Fuller.

Two ways a Courtier advances himself: the first, that more leisurely, slow,
though sure, of watching Offices, Preferments and Dignities that may by steps
bring them to the Kings Presence; The second, that more quick and short, but
most practiced, of following the Court for such extraordinary Commissions and
particular services to the Empire, as may (without the danger of delays that
must be fatal amidst so many Competitors) recommend him to his favor. It was
below Sir Thomas his Estate to stoop to that first method; it suited more with
his activity to embrace the second. Two usually-inconsistent qualities he had,
The closeness of an Agent, and The Valor of a Soldier. To Rome he was sent in
disguise, and to Treport with an Army: so graceful his carriage, so insinuating
his affability, so clear and well-weighed his discourse, so searching and
comprehensive his Judgment; so gravely Aerie, so Majestically pleasant his
countenance, so becoming his gate and apparel, so watchful his Negotiations, so
winning his Addresses, so discr^etly smart his Reparties, (darting a sudden
luster and vigor to the darkness and heaviness of his graver D^scourses,
neither common nor unsavory, neither affected nor far-fetched, neither abusive
of others, nor mis-becoming himself) so discreet and well-managed his
complaisance, (with re^erence to circumstances, Person, Place, Time, matter and
cause) that he had Cardinal Senhault's Secretary, to bring him to the Pope's
Closet; the Emperor's Agent Randolphus, to introduce him to Court; that he won
Friar Paul, to show him the mysteries of the Church; Engineer Palvino, to
represent the Pop^'s Cities, Towns, Fortification^, Havens, Harbors,
A^tiquities, Seminaries, Exercises, Ships, Treasure, Armories, Arsenals,
Magazines, (having always by him a Card of the Territories) and the Pope's
Bed-chamber-man, to show him all the Papers and Transactions that concerned
Henry the eighth. So well experienced his Conduct, so well disciplined his
Army, so watchful and industrious his Nature, so good his pay, (though he
pawned, at once in Normandy, his own Estate to satisfy his Soldiers) so noble
his rewards of v^lour and service, (it being his rule, That every man should
enjoy as much as he could conquer) so prevalent his example, that he did more
with 2000 Men in three Months, than the Duke of Suffolk had done with 8000 in
three years. The Duncery and idleness of the Monks in his time, (as he writes
himself) made Erasmus a Student: the sloth and carelessness of Commanders in Sir
Thomas his time, made him a Soldier.

Edward the third of England having sent to France to demand the Crown by
Maternal Right, the Council there sent him word, That the Crown of France was
not tied to a Distaff. To which he replied, That then he would tie it to his
Sword. Sir Thomas Wentworth demanding Normandy in right of the Dukes thereof,
Kings of England, was told, That Dukedomes were never given away in France by
the Wills of the Dead: Nay then, replied he, we will have them against the
Wills of the Living.

It Is written of our Henry the fifth, that he had something of Caesar in him,
which Alexander the Great had not, That he would not be Drunk; and something of
Alexander the Great, which Caesar had not, That he would not be Flattered: Sir
Thomas had both their Virtues, none of their Vices; Non tam extra Vitia, quam
cum summis Virtutibus. Though he could not avoid misfortune, and prosper; yet
he could yield to it, and retire: (that experienced File that could not
withstand the enemies ^hot, could fall down and escape it.) Privacy at once
secured and supported this unfortunate Gentleman: It is much to know how to
lead and bring on successfully; it is more to retreat, and come off handsomely,
and give over a bad game.

Since he heard ill, I hear no more of him but this: One being designed an
Agent, waited upon this knowing and experienced Lord for some Directions for
his conduct and carriage; he delivers himself (says my Author) thus: To
secure your self, and serve your Country, you must at all times^ and upon all
occasions, speak truth: for (as he added) you will never be believed; and by
this means your truth will secure your self if you be questioned, and pu^ those
you deal with (who will still hunt counter) to a loss in all their
disquisitions and undertakings.

Observations on the Life of Sir Clement Paston.
SIr Clement Paston was a Soldier, and a Soldiers Son; Valor running in the
Blood for three Generations, and maturated by Noble and Heroic Actions for
Glory and Success. Designed he was by his Friends for the Gown, but by his own
Nature for Armor: Born for Action rather than Contemplation. When his Father
asked him what he would desire of him, he desired a Horse and a Sword. He was
tried in the King of France his service in Henry the Seventh's time, for his
overthrow in Henry the Eighths. He was the first that made the English Navy
terrible, and the last that made our Army so: He took the Admiral of France:
and saved him of England: 30000 Crowns he received by way of Ransom from the
first, and 1000 l. by way of Gratitude from the other: A Cup he would show that
the first gave him every Holy Day, and a Ring of the seconds every Christmas.

Two Kings made use of his Person, and two Queens of his Counsel, which he gave
even on his Deathbed. His advice was short, but resolute; his words few, but
pertinent: his discourse commanding, and Souldier-like: his word, the Decree of
the Medes. King Henry the Eighth called him His Champion: the Protector, in
Edward the sixth's time, His Soldier; Queen Mary, Her Seaman; and Queen
Elizabeth, Her Father. When Wyat was overthrown, he would deliver himself up
to a Gentleman, and therefore only to Sir Clement Paston.

The two great Interests of Soldiers is Pay and Honor: He mortgaged his
Estate twice, to satisfy them for the one; and pawned his credit at Court
often, to encourage them for the other; getting his Commanders always power and
authority enough to do their Masters business, but never enough to do their own.

There being always a contest between the Populacy and the Soldiers, ( whom
nothing reconciles, but downright force and necessity) it was death to his
Followers to be irregular, because one of their miscarriages exasperates a
million, and distastes a Kingdom; so necessary is a strict Discipline in the
Camp, and an impartial Justice in the Country.

Outward occasions help Fortune, a Man's own temper makes it, when there be, as
my Lord Bacon writes, no stops or restiveness in a Man's mind, but that the
wheels of that keeps even with those of fortune. Sir Clement and Cato Major
were both of a make, both having tantum robur corporis and animi; ut, quocunque
loco nati essent, fortunam sibi facturi viderentur.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Rich.
HE must needs be preferred, who was so richly descended and nobly allied, as
to show at Court upon his first appearance sixty Noblemen and Knights of his
Relation, and a hundred and fifty thousand Pound a Year Revenue among his
Friends. He was more beholding to the Temple for his Law, than to the
Universities for his Learning. His severe and active Nature aspiring above the
pedantiqueness of a Scholar, to the usefulness of a Statesman: I could never
endure (says he) those Studies that furnish me only with unactive thoughts and
useless discourse, that teach me only to think and speak.

His staid and solid parts commended Him to Cromwell, and Cromwell recommended
him to King Henry the Eighth: He was Solicitor-General to His Majesty, and
Steward to his Master: Cromwell was the M^wl, and Rich the Hammer of Abbeys: He
laid open to the Monks their faults, and his Master made use of it to force
them to a surrendry: For as he said, when those Religious Societies saw they
had faults enough discovered to take away their Lands, they had wit enough to
give them up. His Counsels overthrew Popery, and his Deposition cut off Sir
Thomas More: for being sent to Sir Thomas, after much discourse with him, he
asked him this subtle Question, Whether he would acknowledge the King Supreme
Head, if it were enjoined by an Act of Parliament? Sir Thomas asked him again,
If the Parliament enacted that God should not be Lord, whether he should
consent to it? And those words undid him. He saw that the Protestant Religion
was the Interest of England, as well as the Doctrine of Scripture; and
therefore he carried it on in point of policy, as Archbishop Cranmer did in
point of conscience. King Henry the eighth admired his distinct reasoning, and
stayed judgment; and Queen Anne Bullen was taken with his graceful eloquence,
and ingenious discourses: In the morning his plyant soul, that could answer all
the turnings and windings of business, was as reserved and solid as that of a
demure Statesman; in the evening, as cheerful and merry as that of a Debonair
Courtier. He was the wisdom of the Court in the Presence, and its wit in the
Closet; its Oracle there, and its pleasure here.

King Henry the eighth made him one of his Legators, and King Edward the sixth
one of his Council: Under him he carried on the Protestant Religion in point of
conscience, which others managed in point of interest. He designed the degrees
of the Reformation, and he set out its method, than whom none more zealous in
things necessary, none more moderate in things indifferent. Active he was, but
wary; stirring, but cautious. To him the Reformers resorted in point of Law, as
to Cranmer and Ridley in point of Religion. Such his Prudence, that the
Protector made him his Friend; such his Integrity, that the King made him
Chancellor: where his Decrees were just, his Dispatches quick, his Judgments
speedy, his Sums of Debates ^ull and satisfactory, his Sentences irreversible;
his Assistants in the Rolls, an^ other Courts, able and honest. None more
complyant to Reason, none more stiff in things against Reason: He would do any
thing for King Edward the sixth's interest, nothing for Duke Dudley's ambition:
therefore he observing the course of Affairs, would rather resign his Place,
than his Integrity: when he could not with a safe conscience keep it, he with a
contented mind parted with it; being honored with the Barony of Leez, and
enriched with the Western Abbeys; it being the Prudence of that time to
interest the Nobility in the Papal Revenues, that so they might be engaged
against the Authority.

R. Rich Lord Chancellor, (says my Author) then living in Great St.
Bartholomews, though outwardly concurring with the rest, began now secretly to
favor the Duke of Somerset, and sent him a Letter, therein acquainting him
with all passages at the Council Board, subscribing the same (either out of
have or familiarity) with no other Direction save To the Duke; enjoining his
servant, a new Attendant, as newly entered into his Family, safely to deliver
it. The Man made more have than good speed; and his Lord wondering at his quick
return, demanded of him where the Duke was when he delivered him the Letter? In
the Charter House, (said the servant) on the same token that he read it at the
Window, and smiled thereat. But the Lord Rich smiled not at the Relation, as
sadly sensible of the mistake, and delivery of the Letter to the Duke of
Norfolk, no great friend of his, and an utter enemy to the Duke of Somerset.

Wonder not if this Lord rose early up the next morning, who may be presumed
not to have slept all Night: He hieth to the Court; and having gotten
admittance into the Bedchamber before the King was up, This story is related
from the mouth of his Grandchild the Earl of Warwik that last was.
fell down on his Knees, and desired that his Old Age might be eased of this
burdensome Office; pleading that there ought to be some preparatory intervals
in Statesmen between their temporal business and their death: in order to
which, he desired to retire to Essex, there to attend his own Devotions. Nor
would he rise from the ground till the King had granted his Request. And thus
he saved himself from being stripped by others, by first pulling off his own
Clothes, who otherwise had lost his Chancellours place for revealing the
secrets of the Council Board.

There are few places so impregnable, but Nature has left in them some place
or other by which they may be taken: none being armed at all points so well,
but there is some way left whereby he may be surprised. He is the strongest
that has fewest accesses. He was a wise Man that said, Delay has undone many
for the other World, Have has undone more for this, Time well managed saves
all in both.

But there is a Wheel in things, which undoeth all those that have not a Wheel
that answers it in their Souls; I mean a great capacity to comply and close
with those grand Vicissitudes that with small and unobserved circumstances turn
round the World, which this great Man was Master of, who had his Eye upon the
turns, flexures and points of things and business, and his state and interest
ready to correspond: He knew when to proceed, when to make a stand, and when to
retire. It Is said of Grandees, That they are the first that find their own
Griefs, and the last that find their Faults. Our Lord was quick in both, and
has taught us this, That certainly Men of great fortunes are strangers to
themselves, and while they are in the puzzle of business have no time to tend
the welfare either of Body or Soul; and that they must withdraw from this
World, before they retire into another: For, Illi mors gravis incubat, qui not
us nimis omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi.

There are no more Remarques of this Personage, than that he was the Father of
this Apophthegme, Well done, if warily; and Great-Grandfather to the present
Earl of Warwick.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Mason.
HE had his Birth at Abingdon, and his Education at Oxford: His Birth commended
him to All Souls, and his Breeding to the Court: His Study was like his
Inclination, rather active than contemplative, his present thoughts foreseeing
and providing for his future Employments. But Industry and Parts may prepare a
Man, it is opportunity and occasion that must advance him; and never had a Man
fairer opportunity, never made a Man better use of it.

None but Mr. Mason would the University pitch upon, to complement Henry the
Eighth; none but Mr. Mason could please him, although he was as great a Scholar
as he was a King, and as much an Humorist as both: as he was inclined, so he
studied; as he studied, so he writ; not with a Pedants impertinence, but a
States-man's prudence: so elegant was his Latin, that a Critic would have
advanced him Professor; so various his Learning, that Cranmer would have
preferred him Prebend; and yet so grave and wise the matter and composure of
his speech, that the King designed him a Statesman.

When King Henry the Eighth came to Oxford, Sir John is deputed to congratulate
his coming: who considering that a Man cannot every Day speak to Kings,
contrived (says my Author) the matter of his speech most Man-like, politic
and pertinent, the phrase of it polite and majestic; so that what with his
comely presence, his becoming carriage, his flowing expression, his graceful
elocution, he gained that applause from the Court and University, that the one
was as eager to have him, as the other was loath to part with him: the
University was proud of him, but King Henry commanded him, and disposes of him
in Foreign parts, to add practical experience to his speculative studies: It was
the excellent way of that time, to pick out the choice youths of both
Universities, and maintain them some years abroad, to make such Observations as
might render them serviceable at home^

Dwelt with Books he had long enough, now he must converse with Men, and open
his recluse and retired soul, to a practicable and social temper, by
debonairness and freedom, too long mewed up with study and melancholy: Think
and speak he could very well already, now he must learn to act and live: Books
furnished, Travel must enlarge and settle his soul.

Four things made a Statesman in those Days.

1. The University and good Letters. 2. The City and Converse. 3. The Court and
Freedom of spirit. 4. Travel and Observation.
It was the politic Discipline of those days to selec^ (says mine Author) the
pregnancies of either University, ana breed them i^ Foreign parts for public^
Employments. Agreeable whereunto, Mr. Mason i^ sent beyond sea with
Instructions to guide him, and a pension to support him^ With Order, 1. To keep
exact correspondence with the Secretary at home. 2. To entertain, 1. The most
eminent Scholar, who might represent the Church: 2. The ripest Undersecretary,
who might decipher to him the State: 3. The ablest Soldier and Seaman, that
might open to him the Interest of both Nations 3. To take an exact account of
the Havens, Forts, Cities, Avenues, Passages, Ways, Treasure and Interest of
the place he lives in. 4. To follow the respective Ambassadors Directions in
every Court. 5. To appear in each place upon any solemnity, Civil or Military,
suitable to the occasion, all charges to be defrayed from the English Exchequer.


His Pension was two hundred and twenty pounds a year; his Circuit was France,
the Netherlands and Italy; his Commission was to engage any knowing person of
those respective Courts, that could transcribe their Edicts or Orders, give
exact Intelligence, make any Interest, or had any influence upon their
respective Governments: His Rules were, 1. To correspond with his Majesty's
Agents. 2. To have few and choice Acquaintance. 3. To make Collections of, and
Observations upon the Histories, the Laws, Customs, and the most considerable
Statesmen, Governors, and Great Men, with their Relations and Dependencies in
those Courts. 4. To give a monthly account of such Remarques as occurred, at
large to the Secretary, and in brief to the King and Cardinal.


His first undertaking was in France, where his Gravity was too severe, beyond
the dalliances of that place. His next was to Italy, where he showed as great a
reach in countermining, as the Inhabitants of that place do in managing their
plots: None designs (says the Character) further off than the Italian: None
sees (said Sir Tho. Audley) further off than Sir John Mason. His last Voyage
was to Spain, where he out- engraved the Don Himself, and then returned with the
Italians quickness, the Spaniards staidness, the Frenchmans Air, the Germa^s
Resolution, and the Dutchmans Industry: Q^alities that demonstrated he
understood other Countries, and could serve his own.

Th^re th^s pregnant Gentleman being at some distance, could look more inwardly
into the Constitution, Situation, Interest, State and Complexion of his own
Country; and being near, could discern those of other parts wi^h the mutual
aspect of England upon them, and theirs upon it. They that liv^d in those times
say that none understood the affairs of England and France, together with their
mutual advantages or disadvan^^ges, better than Sir John Mason.

He that had seen the mysteries of four Courts, might be trusted with those of
one, as he was in King Henry the Eighth's time, in the capacity of a Privy
Counselor; and in Edward the Sixth's, in the Trust of chief Secretary. At the
Board, none clearer in his Proposals; in his Office, none quicker for Dispatch:
Let me hear Sir John Mason, said the King; Let us to Sir John Mason, said the
Subjects: so much the reputation of his prudent integrity with the one, and of
his familiar access with the other!

Four things he said kept him in, under all the Revolutions, during the four
Princes Reigns whom he served: 1. That he thought few Things would save a Man.
2. That he was always intimate with the exactest Lawyer, and ablest Favorite.
3. That he spoke little, and writ less. 4. That he had attained to something
which each party esteemed serviceable to them, and was so moderate, that all
thought him their own.


When a complete man, he was called home, to be first Clerk of the Council, a
place of great Trust; secondly, Secretary of State, a place of great
Employment; thirdly, Master of the Requests, an Office of great Dispatch and
Business; and fourthly, Treasurer of the Household, an Employment of constant
care.

No Age wanted an able man more, no Age had one more willing to secure the
Universities, than that which chose him to be Chancellor of Oxford, at the
same time that his Prince made him Treasurer of the Household. Sacrilege it
self then gaping after the University-Lands, durst not tempt so honest a Man,
nor persuade so great a Scholar, nor fright so resolute a Statesman to betray
or yield up those ancient Encouragements of Learning and Virtue. Loath was
Oxford to part with him when a Scholar, glad to entertain him a Statesman,
with a power to protect her, well tempered with Obligations to love her; he who
is now the Father being lately the Son; maintained by a part of it, as he now
maintained the whole. That was a scrambling time, when it was catch who catch
can. I find not any particular favor conferred, or benefaction bestowed by him
in person on the University; but this great good he did, That his Greatness
kept others from doing any harm. Many hungry Courtiers had hopes to catch Fish,
(and Fish it would be, whatever came into their Nets) on this turning of the
Tide, and alteration of Religion: How easy was it for covetousness in those
times to quarrel the Colledge-Lands into superstition! Sacrilege stood ready
to knock at their Gates; and alas! '^was past their Porter's power to ^orbid it
entrance, had not Sir John Mason vigorously opposed it, and assisted the
University on all occasions.

He inciteth them to the study of the Tongues; because sensum alicujus rei non
potest ille assequi, qui r^dis es^ Idiomatis quo traditur: and directed the
reading of Aristole, Agricola, Melancthon, etc. instead of Scotus, Burleus,
Bricot: calling for all their Charters, Donations, Statutes, Popes Bulls, with
an exact Rental of their Lands, and Inventory of their Goods, which were
restored entire and safe.

The University, that could not enjoy his presence, craves his protection; and
foreseeing in the fall of Abbeys, their danger, especially when Foundations
erected for superstition were given by statute to the King, chose Sir John
Mason their Chancellor, who was at once a favorite o^ Power and of Learning;
the greatest Lay-Statesman that was a Scholar, and the greatest Scholar that
was a Lay-Statesman: He was not contented to secure, but he must improve
Oxford, gaining it New Privileges, when it feared the loss of its old ones.

A grave and reserved Man he was, who understood the Intrigues and Motions of
those dark and uncertain times, and his nimble and present Prudence could
accommodate them. His Maxim was, Do, and say nothing: Commending the active
and close man, whose performances were as private, coherent, continued and
sudden as his counsels; who would not spend that time in advising, that would
serve for executing: Many were his pensions to Scholars at home, more to Agents
abroad that assisted either his studies or employments, whom he designed an
honor to his middle, and a support to his old Age. He had a peculiar way of
satisfying suitors by plain dealing and dispatch: he would divide all suits
either into matter of Equity, or a suit of Controversy; or into matter of
Desert, or a suit of Petition: In the first he had his Referrendaries, to see
the matter compounded between both parties, rather than carried by either: In
the second, he preferred all suitably to their Abilities. No M^n understood
better the nature of Court-places than he, and none saw further into
Court-persons.

Two things, he said, always promoted a mat^er: 1. Secrecy: (Boasting, which
is the way of some Courtiers, though it discourageth some Competitors, yet it
awakeneth Others.) 2. Timing of it, with an Eye to those about us.


He would advise a Man to begin with a little and mean suit: For though (as my
Lord Bacon observes) iniquum petas and aequum feras, is a good Rule, where a
Man has strength of favor; yet otherwise a Man had better rise in his suit:
For he that would have ventured at first to have lost his Suitor, will not in
the conclusion lose both the Suitor and his own former Favor.

It Is from him, while he lived, that we learned Celerity is the best Secrecy;
Pru^ence and Resolution is the only Fortune; Converse is the great Education;
Boldness a Man's surest Success; Good Nature is the eminent Nobility; and a
well-weighed Honesty the only Favorite.

It Is by him, when he died, we are taught that Moderation out-lasts Violence,
Modesty Ambition, a public Spirit a private One: That to act alone may be as
profitable as Honorable, but to join with others most safe: That to study the
nature of a Prince, may for the present advance; but to understand the Interest
of his Kingdom, is always secure: The one way being as uncertain as the frail
Person it depends upon, the other as sure as the lasting State it serves.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Stamford.
SIr William Stamford was of Straffordian extraction; Robert his Grandfather
living at Rowley in that County: but William his Father was a Merchant in
London, and purchased Lands at Hadley in Middlesex, where Sir William was born,
August 22. 1509. He was bred to the study of our Municipal Laws; attaining so
much eminence therein, that he was preferred one of the Judges of the Common
Pleas. His most learned Book of The Pleas of the Crown, has made him for ever
famous amongst Men of his own Profession. There is a spirit of retraction of
one to his Native County, which made him purchase Lands, and his Son settle
himself in Straffordshire. This worthy Judge died Aug. 28. and was buried at
Hadley in this Shire, in the last year of the reign of Queen Mary, 1558.

King James had a Judge that would give no money, and King Henry had one that
would take none. There have been those Lawyers that turned the point of Law
upon the Law it self; that wounded the Eagle with a feather from his own Wing,
and stabbed the person of Princes with their Authority; that dethroned Kings
with a moot-point, and overthrowed a Government at a Reading. This Judge
understood, that as the Law is the security of the people, so Prerogative is
the strength of the Law; and that that is the best temper of Government where
Kings have so much power to do evil, that they may be able to do good.

Miserable experience has taught us, that since power has been wrested from
Princes, that neither they nor their people can ^e ^^fe, if both be not in such
a way as the Law has entrusted the public safety and welfare; which consists
in a full power belonging to the King, to secure Liberties, preserve Property,
and protect their People in the enjoyment of the fruits of their industry, and
the benefit of those Laws to which themselves have consented. He sets himself
good Rules, as well to create good presidents, as to ^ollow them; reducing
things to their first institution, and observing wherein and how they have
degenerated: yet still taking counsel of both times: of the ancienter time,
what is best; and of the latter, what is fittest. He made his course regular,
that Men might know what to expect; but not peremptory, that Knaves might not
know how to impose upon him: always expressing himself well, when he digressed
from his Rule. Preserve the right of his place he would, but not stir Questions
of Jurisdictions; rather assuming his right in silence, and de facto, then
voice it with claims and challenges. He directed in most Affairs, but was busy
in none: none readier to give, none readier to take helps and advices. His
speech was more discreet than eloquent; rather particularly suitable to the
present things and persons, than generally orderly and artificial. He could
speak quick and deep too, never using many circumstances, lest he were tedious;
ever some, lest he were blunt: so warily did he deliver what he knew, that he
was sometimes thought to know what he did not. He knew what might be said, so
good his fancy; and he knew what should be thought, so great his judgment:
commanding the discourse wherever he was, by that prudence that could bring
it on and off; and that variety that happily intermingled Arguments with Tales,
Reasons with Opinions, and earnest with jest. His Decrees were the Hedges of
Propriety, his Dispatches cool, his Cases rightly stated; his Reports favor of
Integr^ty and Prudence, of Books and Men. How discree^ly would he moderate the
rigorous circumstances of petty and poenal Laws! how exactly observe the design
and drift of the more fundamental and reasonable! Here no Intrigues to perplex,
no Attendance to tire, no Hazards to discourage, no Checks or Delays to vex, no
surreptitious advantages to surprise; no defeats of hopes, or falseness of
friends to disappoint; no negligence of Agents, or interest of parties to
betray; no Oratory or Sophism to varnish or hide a matter: all things clear as
Justice, and smooth as Integrity.

By diligence and moderation, with their gentle degrees and augmentations, and
his own watchful observance, he climbed to Excellency. A man is neither good,
nor rich, nor wise at once; it being a double work to be great: 1. To remove
Obstruction, and accommodate Adversaries: 2. To watch and assume the advantage.
What is longest in proving, is longest declining: the Rose that buds one day,
withers the ne^^ The Oak that is an Age a growing, is five stanc^^^^ He had
those lower Virtues that drew praise from the Vulgar, which he neglected,
(knowing that they were more taken with appearances than realities) he had
middle that they admired, and good Men observed; he had his highest Virtues,
which they perceived, and great Men honored: In a word, a fragrant fume he
had, that filled all round about, and would not easily away. Although he
despised the Flatterers praise, as base; and avoided the Cunnings, as
dangerous; yet he would say of a deserved Fame, That being nothing, or but air
at best, it does all: for it is sufficient to breed Opinion, and Opinion brings
on substance.

He observed of himself, that he came very hardly to little Riches, and very
easily to great Riches: For when a Man's stock is come to that, as my Lord
Verulam observes, that he can expect the prime of the Markets, and overcome
those Bargains which for their greatness are few Men's Money, and be Partners in
the Industries of younger men, he cannot but mainly increase with those two
Advancers of Gain, 1. Diligence; and, 2. A good Name.

He has left these two Principles behind him for those of his own profession^
1. That they should reduce every Statute to the Common Law and Custom whereon
it is grounded. 2. That they should as well look into the History of former
times ^or the Reasons and Circumstances of our Laws, as into their Law Books
for the matter of them.


Some Lawyers assert the Subjects Liberty, and retrench the Prerogative (as too
much power to be trusted for a mortal Man) within the known Limits of Law, that
so Subjects may be at a certainty How to square their Loyalty and Obedience. He
always upheld that Prerogative, saying, That the discretion of the Scepter as
Guardian for the general good of the Common-weal^h, must be trusted against all
Emergencies, with the management of its own might: Concluding always thus;
Submission is our Duty, and Confidence our Prudence. Bishop Bancroft of Oxford
said in King Charles the first his time, Eo tempore occubui quo mallem
Episcopatus rationem coram Deo dare, quam Episcopatum coram hominibus exercere.
Judge Stamford said in Q. Mary's time, In quae reservamur tempora! dct Deus nt
Magistratus rationem coram eo reddam potius quam Magistratum coram hominibus
exerceam.

His Book contains two parts; One of The Pleas of the Crown, the other of The
Kings Prerogative. In him (says Mr. Fulbeck) there is force and weight, and no
common kind of style; in matter very few have gone beyond him, in method none
have overtaken him: in the order of his writing he is smooth, yet sharp;
pleasant, yet grave: and surely his method may be a Law to the Writers that
succeed him. Heavy says he is the weight of innocent blood, consider we either
the inward fears attending the guilt of it; or the outward providence of God
watching for the discovery of it; one that was before him, having apprehended a
Fishes head in the Platter, for the head of him whom he had murdered; and
another, after a horrid murder, being observed to have his Hand continually
upon his Dagger. --

Observations on the Life of Sir John Jeffrey.
SIr John Ieffrey was born in Sussex, where he left behind him a fair Estate to
his Daughter. He so profited in the Study of our Municipal Law, that he was
preferred secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, and thence advanced by Queen
Elizabeth, in Michaelmas-Term, the Nineteenth of her Reign, to be Lord Chief
Baron of the Exchequer: which place he discharged for the Term of two years, to
his great commendation. He left one Daughter and Heir, married to Sir Edward
Montague, (since Baron of Boughton) by whom he had but one Daughter, Elizabeth,
married to Robert Barty Earl of Lindsey, Mother to the truly honorable
Montague Earl of Lindsey, and Lord great Chamberlain of England. This worthy
Judge died in the 21. of Queen Elizabeth.

This was he who was called the Plodding Student, whose industry perfected
Nature, and was perfected by experience. He read not to argue only; for that is
vanity: nor to believe and trust; for that is easiness: nor to discourse; for
that is idle: but to weigh and consider; for that is prudence. He had his
Studies for pleasure and privacy, for ornament and converse, and for judgment
and business. To spend too much time on his Book, was sloth; to talk by Book,
was affected; and to act by it, was humoursome and Scholar-like.

Four things he would say helped him.

1. His Inclination: ( It Is a great happiness to a Man (says Aristotle) when
his Calling is one of the (...), of those things that agree with his nature.)
2. Method. 3. Religion, with that just and composed mind that attends it. 4, A
great happiness in all the four faculties that make a Lawyer: 1. A sharp
invention, and clear apprehension to search all the circumstances of a case
propounded. 2. Judgment to examine and weigh the particulars invented and
apprehended: ^or truth lies in things, as Gold in Mines. 3. Memory to retain
what is judged and examined. 4. A prompt and ready delivery of what is
conceived and retained, set out with ingenuity and gravity. Oration prompa non
audax. What he said, was close and pinching, and not confident and earnest;
allowing passion not to disturb either the method or delivery of his discourse,
but to quicken it. To speak well and much, he said, was not the work of one
man: yet if a Philosopher be eloquent, said Cicero, we must not despise him; if
he be not, he must not affect it, so that he can comprehend in words what he
conceives, and speak them plainly, that he may be understood. His Latin and
French were Grammatical, his Rhetoric Natural, his Logic Reason: The first,
opened the terms; the second, pressed the Vigor; the last, collected and
disposed of the Axioms, Grounds, and Rules of the Law, and all prepared him
for that comprehensive Profession: in the ashes whereof, the sparks of all
other Sciences were raked up.
His gesture and habit was grave, but not affected: speaking as much to the
eye, as his tongue did to the ear: (the gesture being a great discoverer of the
constitution, and a great direction to business: what a man misseth in the
speech, he may sometimes ^ind in the looks.) His temper was moderate and sober;
a Virtue, and a seasoning of all others, attended with the Lawyers gift, and
that is Patience. Modest he was, but not fondly bashful; his prudence, and not
his softness. His humility begat affableness; his affableness, society; that,
conference; conference, parts, and they acquaintance; and that, practice; and
practice, experience; experience, renown; and that, preferment.

Sir John's inclination was studious; his mind, constant, solid, and settled,
and able to dive into the Whirl-pools of that intricate and perplexed faculty;
his thoughts being orderly, and his conceptions methodical: his search
comprehensive, avoiding Epitomes, as the banes of Learning. Nullu: illi per
otium dies exit, partem noctium studiis vindicat; non vacat somno, sed
succumbit, and oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere detinet.

Considerable were the parts he had, but more so the making up of those he had
not: his cover^ng of his defects being of no less importance than the valuing
of good parts, which he did three ways: 1. By caution, ingeniously and
discreetly waving and putting off things improper. 2. By color, making his
Defects his Virtues, and his Faults his Endowments. And, 3. By that freedom of
Spirit that daunts the weakest, and prevails with the wisest.


He proposed to himself five things to enquire into, in order to that
compleatness he arrived unto: 1. The ancient Maxims and Principles, or the
more ancient Customs that make up the Common Law of England. 2. The Acts and
Constitutions that make up its Statute Law. 3. The particular Privileges,
Liberties, Immunities and Usages of Counties, Buroughs, Cities, etc. that do
swerve from this Law. 4. The ancient Grounds and Reasons (as far as History can
direct) of all these: our Law being an exact Reason. 5. The most satisfactory
explanations of the Law: 1. From Commentaries, as Bractons: 2. Abridgments, as
Stathams: 3. History, as the years and terms of the Common Law: And 4. From
more particular Tracts, that handled their peculiar subjects, as Fortescue,
Glanvil, Britton, Fleta, Littleton, which he thought not unprofitable to read,
though dangerous to rely upon: (with the Lord Cook, not liking those that
stuff their minds with wandering and masterless reports: For, as he said, they
shall find them too soon to lead them to error:) Beginning with the terms of
Art, and then to the matter; perusing what is antiquated, and observing what is
suitable to the present constitution and complexion. It Is my Lord Cook's Rule,
That for the most part the latter Judgments and Resolutions are the surest, and
therefore fittest to season a man withal in the beginning; both for settling of
his Judgment, and retaining them in memory; yet as he goes on, out of the old
fields must spring and grow the new Corn.


Our Lawyers course was slow and leisurely, his reading digested and
deliberate: His considerations wary, and distrust his way to knowledge. He that
begins with certainties, ends in doubts: and he that begins with doubts, ends
in certainties, and looks into the bo^^^m of things.

Upon serious and solid Books he bestowed a double reading; the one cursorily,
by way of p^eparation; and the other exact, by way of digestion.

Three things made him a Pleader: 1. Reading. 2. Observation. 3. Exercise.


And indeed, Vid. Co^. in Littl. Presat.
in ancient times, the Sergeants and Apprentices of Law did draw their own
pleadings, which made them good Pleaders.

He observed the affections, the intent, the analogy, the validity of the Law,
putting all his reading to writing; having the places he was most to handle in
all the variety that could be, with his Rules and Maxims, as far as reading,
hearing, meditation, conference and memory could help him.

Thus his first thoughts were upon his Profession, until that advanced him to
the highest Eminence; and his last upon his Interest, until that was improved
to as much fortune as lies in a well-laid Estate and Alliance.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
Books Printed for Samuel Speed Bookseller, near the Royal Exchange.
PHaramond, the famed Romance in Folio, written by the Author of those other
two eminent Romances, Cassandra and Cleopatra.

Palmerin of England in three parts, in Quarto.

The Destruction of Troy in three parts, in Quarto.

Quintus Curtius, his Life of Alexander the Great in English, in Quarto.

Montelion, Knight of the Oracle, in Quarto.

Primaleon of Greece, in Quarto.

The Jewel-house of Art and Nature, by Sir Hugh Plat, in Quarto.

The Woman's Lawyer, by Sir John Dodridge, in Quarto.

Divine Law, or the Patrons Purchaser, by Alexander Huckston, in Quarto.

The Complete Parson, by Sir John Doddridge, in Qu.

Star Chamber Cases, in Quarto.

Actions of the Case for Deeds, by William Shepherd Esquire, in Folio.

The Life of Henry the Great in English written by the Bishop of Rhodez, in
Octav.

The Villain, a Tragedy, by Tho. Porter Esquire, in Quarto.

Observations on the Statesmen and Favorites of England since the Reformation,
their Rise, and Growths, Prudence, and Policies, Miscarriages, and Falls,
during the Reigns of Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first, in Octav. by D. Lloyd, A. M.

The Precedence of Kings, in Folio. by James Howel Esquire.

The Description of Tangier, with an account of the Life of Gayland, Usurper of
the Kingdom of Fez, in Quarto.

The Golden Coast, or a Description of Guiney, in Quarto.

An Abridgement of the three Volumns of Sir George Crookes Reports in Octavo.

An Abridgement of the Reports of Sir Francis More, in Octavo.

The Complete Lawyer, by William Noy of Lincolns-Inne, in Octavo.

The Tenants Law, a Treatise of great use for Tenants and Farmers of all kinds,
and all other persons whatsoever. Wherein the several Natures, Differences, and
kinds of Tenures and Tenants are discussed, and several Cases in Law touching
Leases, Rents, Distresses, Replevins, and other accidents between Landlord and
Tenants; and Tenant and Tenant between themselves and others, especially such
who have suffered by the late conflagration in the City of London, by R. T.
Gent. in Twelves.

Memories of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths of those Noble,
Reverend, and excellent Personages that suffered by Death, Sequestration,
Decimation or otherwise, for the Protestant Religion, and the great Principle
thereof, Allegiance to their Sovereign, in our late intestine Wars, in Folio;
by D. Lloyd. A. M.

Arithmetical Recreations, by W. Leybourne, in Twelves.

The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, in F.

The Complete Copyholder by the Lord Cook, in Octavo.

Machiavels Discourses, and Prince, in Twelves.

The Roman History of Lucius Florus in English, in Octavo.

The City and Country Purchaser, and Builder; with directions for purchasing,
building, and improving of Lands, and Houses, in any part of England, in
Octavo, by Stephen Primate Gent.

A brief Chronicle of the late intestine War, in the three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, from the years of our Lord, 1637. to the year 1663. in
Fol. by James Heath Gent.

The new Academy of Complements erected for Ladies and Gentlemen, containing
variety of Complements, and Letters fitted to the occasions of all persons of
both Sexes, with an exact Collection of the newest and choicest Songs a la
mode, both Amorous and Jovial, in Twelves,

Systema Agriculturae, being the whole Mystery of Husbandry, made known by I.
W. Gent. in Folio.

The Kings Primmer, containing easy and pleasant directions for the reading of
English, in Thirty two.

Kings Psalter, stored with observable varieties, fit either for the School, or
for the Closet, all which are profitable, plain and pleasant, in Octavo.

The Life and Death of that matchless Mirror of Heroic Virtues, Henrietta
Maria de Bourbon, late Queen to King Charles the first, and Mother to the most
Magnificent Prince, King Charles the second, in Twelves.

An Advertisement. To all Gentlemen, Booksellers, or others.
WHereas Samuel Speed Bookseller, has lately disposed himself to a Wholesale
trade for Books, not making any appearance of that employment, as ^ormerly he
did. These are to Certify, That those persons that please to apply themselves
to him for Books, shall be as well used as by any person whatsoever: and
whosoever has any Study, or Library of Books, or Copies, either in Manuscript,
or such as have been already Printed, to dispose of, shall receive from him the
full value thereof, to the said Parties ample satisfaction.

FINIS.
THE Statesmen and Favorites OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of Q. MARY.
Observations on the Life of Sir William Cordel.
SIR William Cordel, where ever he was born, had a fair Estate at Long-Melford
in Suffal^, and lies buried in that fair Church, under a decent Monument: We
will tran^late his Epitaph, which will perfectly acquaint us with the great
Offices he had, and good Offices he did to Posterity.

Hic Gulielmus habet requiem, Cordelliae avito,
Stemmate q^i elanus, cla^i^r inge^io:
Hi^ Studiis primos consumpsit fo^titer dunos,
Mox and causarum stren^^^ actor erat^
Tanta illi doctrina inerat, facundia tanta,
V^ Parlamento publica linguaforet:
Postea factus Eques, Reginae arcana Maria
Con^ilia, and Patriae grande subibat opus.
Factus and est Custos Rotulorum; urgente senecta,
In Christo moriens cepit ad astra viam.
Pauperibus largus victum vestemque ministrans,
Insuper Hospitii condidit ille domum.
" Here William Cordel does in rest remain;
" Great by his Birth, but greater by his Brain:
" Plying his studies hard, his youth throughout,
" Of Causes he became a Pleader stout,
" His Learning deep such Eloquence did vent,
" He was chose Speaker to the Parliament:
" Afterward Knight Queen Mary did him make,
" And Counselor, State-Work to undertake;
" And Master of the Rolls: Well-worn with Age,
" Dying in Christ, Heaven was his utmost Stage.
" Diet and Clothes to poor he gave at large,
" And a fair Almshouse founded on his charge.
He was made Master of the Rolls November the fifth, in the fifth of Queen
Mary, continuing therein till the day of his death, the 23 of Queen Elizabeth.
Eight weeks and upwards passed between the Proclaiming of Queen Mary, and the
first Parliament by her assembled; du^ing which time, two Religions were
together set on foot, Protestantism and Popery; the former hoping to be
continued, the latter laboring to be restored: And as the Jews Children after
the Captivity spoke a middle Language, betwixt Hebrew and Ashd^d; so during the
foresaid Interim, the Churches and Chapels in England had a mixed celebration
of their Divine Service between Reformation and Superstition: The ^ame day
there was a Mass sung for Edward the Sixth's soul in the Tower, and the English
Service for his Burial in Westminster. No small justling was there between the
zealous Promoters of these contrary Persuasions: The Protestants had the Law on
their side, and the Papists the Prerogative: These the Queens Opinion, the
other her Promise. Besides, seeing by the Fidelity of the Suffolk and Norfolk
Protestant Gentry, the Queen was much advantaged for the Recovery of her Right;
Fuller E^cles. Hist. B. ^. Cont. ^^.
they conceived it but reason, that as she by them regained the Crown, so they
under her should enjoy their Consciences: Thus it is in the Evening Twilight,
wherein Light and Darkness at first may seem very equally marched, but the
later in a little time does wholly prevai^. The Catholic canvass for the next
Parliament, upon the Queens credit and authority^ the Reformed, upon the
Nations Inclination.

The Body of the Kingdom meets, and chooses our Knight for Speaker, whose
temper was a Representative of the Parliament, as that is of the Kingdom: A
temper made up of an equal mixture of Loyalty and Piety, that could at once
stand to their Religion, and submit to their Sovereign; Render to Caesar what
was Caesar's, and to God, what was Gods: Long did he expect that the Queen would
comply with the Parliament, and as long did she, stay for their compliance with
her: Unite they could not unanimously among themselves, dissolved they are
therefore peaceably by her.

But Cordel was too Popular to be neglected, and too honest to be corrupted:
Useful Parts will find Preferment, even when the Dissenting Judgment finds
not Favou^. The Speaker of the unhappily healing Parliam^nt was made Master of
the Rolls in Queen Mary's days, and of a more happily healing one was made so
in Charles the Second's Reign: The one was of that Primitive Faith that was
before the Modern names of Papists and Protestants; the other of a Moderation
that was elder than the new Heats of Disciplinarians and Anti-Disciplinarians.

The miscarriages of Authority are chiefly six^ 1. Delay. 2. Faction. 3.
Roughness. 4. Corruption. 5. Ambition. And 6. Private Designs.


No delay hindered: where set times of hearing were observed, access was easy,
the order and method of business uninterrupted. No corruption, where there
durst be no suspicion of it; insomuch as that it was heinous to offer a Bribe
to him, as to take it in another. Here was severity that awed men to a
discontent, but no austerity that sowred them to discontent; all was smooth and
grave, pleasing and becoming, yet nothing easi^ or soft; it being worse to
yield to importunities that are daily, than to be bought with money, which
comes but seldom.

V^rtue in Ambition is violent, but in Authority, as here, it was calm and
settled. He ^ided with no Faction in his rise, but balanced himself by all: He
had no design when he lived, but to be spent in the Public Service; and none
when he dyed, but to spend himself in public charity, a charity that is at
once the continued blessing and grace of that worshipful Family. Cato Major
would sa^, That wise men learn more of fools, than fools do of wise men: And
King Charles the first would say, That it was wisdom in fools to jest with wise
men, but madness for wisemen to jest with fools: And Sir william Cordel
bequeathed us this O^servation, There is no man that talks, but I may gain by
him; and none that holds his tongue, but I may lose by him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Anthony Cook.
SIr Anthony Cook, great Grandchilde to Sir Thomas Cook Lord Mayor of London,
was born at Giddy-Hall in Essex, where he finished a fair House begun by his
great Grandfather, as appears by this Inscription on the Frontispiece
thereof: AEdibus his frontem Proavus Thomas dedit olim,
Addidit Antoni caetera sera manus.


He was one of the Governors to King Edward the ^ixth when Prince, and is
charactered by Mr. Cambden, Vir antiqua ^erenitate. Cambd. Eliz. a^^ 1576.
He observes him also to be happy in his Daughters, learned above their Sex in
Greek and Latin: namely, 1. Mildred married unto William Cecil, Lord Treasurer
of England. 2. Anne married unto Nicholas Bacon. L. Chancellor of England. 3.
Katherine married unto Henry Killigrew, Knight 4. Elizabeth married unto Thomas
Hobby, Knight 5. (...) married unto Ralph Rowlet, Knight


Sir Anthony Cook dyed in the year of our Lord 1576. leaving a fair Estate
unto his Son, in whose name it continued till our time. Gravity was the Ballast
of his Soul, and General Learning its Leading. In him met the three things that
set up a Family.

1. An Estate honestly gotten in the City. 2. An Education well managed in the
University. And, 3. Honor well bestowed at Court.
Yet he was somebody in every Art, and eminent in all the whole circle of Arts
lodging in his soul. His Latin, fluent and proper; his Greek, critical and
exact; his Philology, and Observations upon each of these Languages, deep,
curious, various and pertinent: His Logic, rational; his History and
Experience, general; his Rhetoric and Poetry, copious and genuine; his
Mathematics, practicable and useful. Knowing that souls were equal, and that
Women are as capable of learning as Men, he instilled that to his Daughters at
night, which he had taught the Prince in the day; being resolved to have Sons
by Education, for fear he should have none by birch; and lest he wanted am ^eir
of his body, he made five of his mind, for whom he had at once a Gavel-kind of
affection, and of Estate.

His Childrens maintenance was always according to their quality, and their
employment according to their disposition; neither allowing them to live above
their fortunes, nor forcing them against their natures. It is the happiness of
Foreigners, that their Vocations are suited to their Natures, and that their
Education seconds their Inclination; and both bias and ground do wonders. I^s
the unhappiness of Englishmen, that they are bred rather according to their
Estates, than their temper; and Great Parts have been lost, while their Calling
drew one way, and their Genius another; and they sadly say, Multum incola fuere
animae nostrae, We have dwelt from home. Force makes Nature more violent in the
return; Doctrine and Discourse may make it less importune; Custom may hide or
suppress it, nothing can extinguish it: Nature even in the softer Sex runs
either to Weeds or Herbs: careful was this good Father therefore, seasonably to
water the one, and destroy the other. Much was done by his grave Rules, more by
his graver life, that Map of Precepts. Precepts teach, but Examples draw.
Maxima debetur pueris reverentia, was Cato's Maxim. Three things there are
before whom (was Sir Anthony's saying) I cannot do amiss^ 1. My Prince. 2. My
Conscience. 3. My Children. Seneca told his Sister, That though he could not
leave her a great portion, he would leave her a good pattern. Sir Anthony would
write to his Daughter Mildred, My example is your inheritance, and my life is
your portion. His first care was to embue their tender souls with a knowing,
serious and sober Religion, which went with them to their graves. His next
business was to inure their young^r years to submission, modesty and obedience;
and to let their instructions grow with their years. Their Book and Pen was
their Recreation; the M^sick and Dancing School, the Court and City, their
accomplishment; the Needle in the Closet, and House-wifry in the Hall and
Kitchings their business. They were reproved, but with reason that convinced
and checked, that wrought as well an ingenious shame, as an unfeigned sorrow,
and a dutiful fear. Fondness never loved his Children, and Passion never
chastised them; but all was managed with that prudence and discretion, that my
Lord Seymor standing by one day when this Gentleman chi^ his Son, said Some men
govern Families with more skill than others do Kingdoms; and thereupon
commended hi^ to the Government of his Nephew Edward the sixth. Such the
M^j^stie of his looks and gate, that A^^ governed; such the reason and
sweetness, that love obliged all his Family: a Family equally afraid to
displease so good a Head, and to offend so great. In their marriage they were
guided by his Reason, more than his Will; and rather directed by his Counsel,
than led by his Authority. They were their own portion: Parts, Beauty and
Breeding bestow themselves. His care was, that his Daughters might have
complete M^n, and that their Husbands might be happy in complete Women: never
promising, yet always paying a great Dowry. Their spirit and business kept them
from that weak p^ssion of love that embaseth Mankind^ their Noble converse
improved that friendly love that perfecteth it; and their marriage completed
that Nuptial love that makes it. He said first, and his Grandchilde my Lord
Bacon after him, That the Ioys of Parents are Secrets, and so are their griefs
and fears, Children swe^ten Labors, but they embitter Misfortunes: they
increase the care of Life, and mitigate the remembrance of Death. Very
providently did he secure his Eternity, by leaving the image of his nature in
his Children, and of his mind in his Pupil. The Recreations he indulged were
moderate, lawful, sober, becoming, useful, and seasonable: the Expenses he
allowed, not so illiberal as to acquaint them with shifts, make them sort with
mean company, nor surfeit when they came to plenty; nor yet so prodigal, but
that they were taught how to live in the world. The Books he advised were not
many, but choice: the business he pressed was not reading, but digesting. The
King of Sweeden's men were but six deep; and Sir Anthony's exercises were not
thick, but methodical and armed: the Die: he prescribed, moderate: in Apparel
he allowed for necessity, for decency, and in some cases for magnificence,
provided that it were neither too costly, nor too vain^ neither above the
Purse, nor beyond the Calling, nor besides the Estate.

Sir Anthony took more pleasure to breed up Statesmen, than to be one.
Contemplation was his Soul, Privacy his Life, and Discourse his Element.
Business was his Purgatory, and Publickness his torment: yet so serviceable was
he in Edward ^he sixth's time, that he was an Exile in Queen Mary's. What
though he and others were useful and peaceable in the Commonwealth? What though
they were sound in the Faith, and cordially embracing the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church? What though those in this condition were many, and such as in
whose peace and industry the welfare of the whole Nation was exceedingly
concerned? What if they offered to be instructed by any who would take that
work upon them, in the things about which their differences are? What if they
plead conscience toward God, and that alone, in their dissent, it being
evidently against their whole Temporal interest? What if they have given
evidence of their readiness in the ways of Christ and the Gospel, to oppose
even error that seemed pernicious to the souls of men, or of an evil Aspect to
Public peace and tranquillity? all is one, they are upon some odd jealousies
of future events to be forborne, neither jointly nor severally, no one nor all
of them in a case that concerns the interest of a predominant party, though the
hands of a thousand be by those means taken off from labor, their stocks from
employment, their minds from contrivances of industry in their own concerns,
the revenues of those under whom they live decayed; in all which the common
good has no small interest, fullness and plenty in the mean time diverting the
thoughts of such who might remedy these things, before the stock of the Nation
is wasted, and the affairs of it entangled beyond remedy, from taking notice of
them, or keeping off any impression on their minds and judgments, from what is
represented concerning them; though men should look well to the ground of their
actings, in things wherein they proceed against the common consent of mankind,
expressed in all instances of the like occasion, that have occurred in the
world; which is as great an evidence of the light and Law of nature, as any can
be obtained: For what all men generally consent in, is from the common nature
of all, who have by a common experience found, that the inward power of
Religion always prevailed upon the world, and its greatest opposition, more
than any outward force: And men do not consider aright, what a secret influence
into the enervating of Politic Societies, such Intrenchments upon the
principles of the light of nature will assuredly have: for those things which
spring up in the minds of men, without arguing or consideration from without,
will insensibly prevail in them against all Law and Constitution to the
contrary, force from the prevalent i^fluence of a particular interest to the
contrary, -- P^ssimus diuturnitatis Custos -- will not always prevail, nor ever
at any time, without great regret and commotion in the minds of men, who have
no concern in that interest, but act unavoidably according to that principle
which sooner or later will perform i^s work; which is to make a judgment of a
man's self and his actions, with reference to the future judgment of God, which
men must be suffered to do (notwithstanding the abuse of that pretense of
Conscience by brainsick or Enthusiastic persons in their Paroxisms, which is
to take no place in consideration of what becomes a guidance of the actions of
Mankind one toward another) in things belonging properly to its cognizance;
unless, which all that have exercised any r^flect acts upon themselves, and
know that neither they nor others can; and that God himself (who procures the
assent of men only by conviction and evidence to what he reveals) will not
for^e men's minds.

A wicked design it is of putting our Gods great Vicegerent out of his place
and Throne, and to act not in a pious way of Imitating the holiness, wisdom and
clemency of God, in an ambitious way of usurping his Sovereignty, who yet
enjoyneth not the belief of any thing he proposes as an object of Faith; nor
obedience in any thing which he commands, as matter of duty, till he has
given, what no man can, sufficient evidence of reason for the one; and
warrantry of Authority for the other; for Religion is a matter of choice, and
he that chooses not his Religion has none. Allege, that any sort of men may
act otherwise, and impose upon men practices, without refe^ence to the
judgment of God, is to suppose, that he has set up an authority against
himself; provided that the pretenses of Conscience, shroud not any practices
that may interfere with the common light of Nature or Reason of Mankind, the
Fundamental Articles of Christian Religion, Moral honesty, Civil Society, and
Public Tranquillity, the Church and Commonwealth standing on the same bottom,
and their interest being of the same breadth and length, and to be mutually
narrowed or widened by each other, like Hippocrates his Twins, not only being
born and dying, but laughing and crying together, as equally affected with
their mutual concerns. I mean, those most fixed and considerable: otherwise to
build the unchangeable interest of a Na^ion, which should be obnoxious to
nothing, but the overruling Providence of the most High, much less to the
impressions of various opinions, which will always be in the world, upon Laws
mutable and changeable, according to men's experience of their use or
inconvenience: And though various state of things, is a thing of so evil an
aspect toward the solid foundation of the Polity of that Nation, in shaking its
settlement in the minds of men, and as things may happen, narrowing its
interest unto a scan^ling unproportionate unto its Superstructure, as
undoubtedly, those who are principally concerned that the Kingdom should not be
a floating Delos, are obliged not to admit an avowance of it, being dangerous,
and scarce consistent with the prudence that should steer the peace of the
world, to bring any one of the numerous and disputable apprehensions, that will
be likely to the end of the world among men, to be the Constitution of a
Government, as to its Civil interest, to which otherwise all men of all persons
profess they are born, and indispensably engaged to an obedience to and
observance of, as exposing that (an awful reverence whereof grows up with all
men, their Temporal concerns being wrapped up in it, so far as to free it) to
all the uncertain events of Religious Controversies, especially when the
principles owned by the Government, and suited to the interest of a few men,
are so far from being diffused among a people, that the greatest part of them
must unavoidably, and will resolvedly di^sent from them, who otherwise
acquiesce in the Civil Government; and abating those opinions of not great
concernment, as to the substance of Religion, or the peace of the Nation, are
willing to their utmost endeavors to the welfare thereof, which is hoped
consists not in the impossibility of a precise determination of the
differences in the minds and Consciences of men, who are generally confirmed in
their own persuasions, and into a further alienation from the things they are
compelled to by compulsion and penalties; and who if brought to an outward
Conformity, without inward persuasion, without which rigor has little
influence on the minds of men, will not be wanting to any opportunity offered,
to ease themselves of a condition, which being contrary to their strong
inclination, they will cast off, as we have known thousands do, as their
insupportable burden. Experience has baffled the attempt of rigor and
imposition, without reason and inward satisfaction, it never succeeding any
where to extinguish the persuasions and opinions it was designed to extirpate,
which returned in a short space to make it manifest, that violence has only
laid in provisions for future troubles, oppositions and animosities, by ruining
some, provoking many, obstructing trade, by discouraging and hindering men to
exercise their faculties or stocks, enforcing few to an hypocritical
compliance, compassion stirred up in all who after the su^siding of the
impetuous impressions of provocations, abhor severity about small opinions, so
deeply rooted in the minds of men for a long time with great success and
advantages against men, come up to a resolution to suffer, as appears every day
by what they suffer, and forget the utmost of their earthly concerns, than live
and dye in an open rebellion to the commanding light of God in their
Consciences; and think it strange, that noble disposition, thoughts, counsel
and care in uniting men by Indulgence to Loyalty and Gratitude (which can be
united to nothing else, save an unanimous discontent under the impositions they
may undergo) should be all sacrified to the interest or prejudices of any one
party of men whatsoever, upon pretense of that tranquillity and peace, to which
there is not a greater enemy, than the fears and restlessness of oppressed
multitudes; nor a better friend, than the satisfaction and contentedness of all
men, having no fears when indulged, but of the disturbance of the Government,
which has by its condescensions, secured to them all their principal Interests
in the world, and made it unlikely, that if they have any Conscience, which
their great sufferings give evidence of, or reason, they will join with any
sort of men to trouble that State of things, wherein they have that Liberty,
which they have been taught to value, by their miserable condition under the
want of it: A way of obliging, real, sensible and effectual to many thousands,
without the least semblance of difadvantage to any one man: Yea, attended with
assurance of peace to all, ^upon the admission of counsels impartially tending
to the good of all, uninfluenced by a mixture of fears and jealousies, against
which former settlement were established^ Res durae and regni novitas cum talia
cogunt.
Contrary to that experience, and those second thoughts, which a new
consideration of things may suggest unto them, to alter their resolutions in
compliance with the alteration of affairs, always provided, it be in
subordination to the great Establishment, which may be secured by the truth and
order settled in it, the abilities and worth of it, the public favor of
Authority, the persons maintaining it, the legal privileges and encouragements
promoting it; the supposed inconsiderableness of the persons opposing it, and
the things for which they do it, the great inconveniency, disadvantage and
charge of carrying on the dissenting, though indulged ways if it have any
foundation in the Consciences or minds of men, and stand not only, which is a
secret not to be published, on the props of Law and Power: It being (whatsoever
some may imagine, who have scarce a better argument of the truth of their own
Religion, than their inclination to suppress those of the contrary) s^ far from
being an evidence of truth in any, that they are ready to destroy those who are
otherwise minded, that it is a sign of error and superstition, which being
conscious of its own weakness, is generally heightened to more or less cruelty
and revenge, according as men by them are steeped in folly and blindness,
I^m^rtale odium, and nunquam sanabile bellum
Ardet adhuc Ombos and Tentyra^ summus utrinque
Inde furor v^lgo quod ^^mi^a vicinorum
Odit uterque locus --
and what was the ground and occasion of the quarrel?

-- Croeodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam Serpentibus ^bin.
All other Nations, as France, Holland, Poland, the Palatinate, Brandenburgh,
Hastia, some parts of Denmark, the Empire, and most of the free Cities of it,
indulging their numerous and divided Dissenters, upon their sustaining all
Offices and burdens in the Commonwealth equal with others, with a freedom from
Ecclesiastical Courts, Censures, Offices, and all penalties for their dissent,
and an allowance for the Worship of God in their own Assembly, provided by
themselves, and known to the Magistrates under whose Jurisdiction they are;
though considering the temper of the people of this Nation, the impression of
the principles of dissent, in multitudes; the resolution that their spirits are
raised to; the value they put ^p^n their Consciences, and liberty of it, there
is no people under Heaven, to whom forbearance would he more welcome, useful,
acceptable, or more sulservien^ to Tranquillity, Trade, Wealth and Peace. An
Exile, whose exemplary resolution supported Religion, whose obliging Authority
maintained Peace, and whose inexhaustible Charity provided for the poor at
Zurick and Fran^ford. A Sussex (and not a Kentish) Knight, having spent a great
Estate at Court, and brought himself to one Park, and a fine House in it, was
yet ambitious to entertain not the Queen, but her Brother at it; and to that
purpose had new-painted his Gates with a Coat of Arms, and a Motto overwritten,
thus, OIA VANITAS, in great Golden Letters: Sir Anthony Cook (and not his Son
Cecil) offering to read it, desired to know of the Gentleman what he meant by
OIA? who told him, it stood for Omnia. Sir Anthony replied, Sir, I wonder
having made your Omnia so little as you have, you notwithstanding make your
Vanitas so large. King Edward would say of his Tutors, That Radolph the German
spoke honestly, Sir John Cheek talked merrily, Dr. Coxe solidly, and Sir
Anthony Cook w^ighingly: A faculty that was derived wi^h his blood to his
Grandchilde Bacon, which informs the world of this great truth, That Education
does much toward Parts; Industry more; Converse, Encouragement and Exercise,
more yet; but a sound temper and nature, an wholesome blood and spirit, derived
from healthful and well-constitutioned Parents, does all.

Observations on the Life of Sir David Brook.
DAvid Brook Knight, born at Glassenbury, Son to John Brook Esquire who was
Sergeant at L^w to King Henry the Eighth. Our David was also bred in the Study
of our Laws, and in the first of Queen Mary was made Chief Baron of the
Exchequer: but whether dying in, or quitting the place in the first of Queen
Elizabeth, I am not informed. He married Katherine Daughter of John Lord
Chandois, but dyed without issue.

A Lawyer, and a Lawyers son? yet one whose zeal for the Religion of that time
advanced, rather ^han his Law; to serve rather his Princes interest, than his
Court? that being the happy, shall I say? or unhappy time, when the Sovereign
and the State did often consult with Judges, and the Judges more often consult
with the Sovereign and State. Yet although a particular respect raised, a
general fair carriage kept him up; He observed not only things, but times; not
only times, but persons: therefore when old Po^nal Laws came before him, he
confined them in the execution, that that which was made for terror, should not
be for rigor; and the Instrument of Government should not be the snare of the
People. When Informers of that Court were too busy, he checked them: when
violent prosecution, cunning advantages, combinations, power, or great counsel
balanced an honest cause, he set all things even. His invention was good to
improve his Mistresses Revenue, his conscience was as tender to diminish it. Q.
Mary was ready of her own inclination, but readier upon Sir David Brooks
motion, to part with the Church-Profits. Patient and grave he was in hearing,
sparing and weighty in speaking: None would direct an Evidence more orderly,
none moderated the length or impertinency of Pleaders more discreetly? None
would recapitul^^^e, select, collate the material points of what had been said,
more exactly; none gave judgment more satisfactorily, always commending a good
Lawyer that miscarried; a good way to uphold in the Client the reputation of
his counsel, and beat down in him the conceit of his cause. He dyed with some
projects in his breast for the Revenue, and some for the Law; whereof one was a
composition for the Purveyances, and another a regulation of the Wards: both at
that time thought, till regulated, as unprofitable for the Crown, as they
seemed to be burdensome to the subject. He had a close way of discovering
Concealments, as he had a severe one of punishing frauds. His word was, One Law
executed, is worth twenty made. None more austere in case of others wrong, none
more mild in that of his own; and he would say, What is done, is done. Weak men
concern themselves in what is past, while the wise take care of what is present
and to come. If a man wrongeth me once, God forgive him (says the Italian:) if
he wrongeth me the second time, God forgive me. Others may be even with their
enemies in r^venge, he would be above them in forgiveness. An enemy, I say,
though otherwise to a perfidious and unworthy friend, he was much of Cosmus
Duke of Florence his temper, who said, You shall read that we are commanded to
forgive our enemies, but you never read that we are commanded to forgive our
friends.

Many have in veighed against Usury, none have done more against it than this
Knight; who if he had lived, was resolved to reduce it to these Rules.

1. That it should be declared unlawful. 2. Being declared so, if any practiced
it (as men must do, or Traffic will fall) that there should be a penalty upon
the Usurer, which might amount to an Excise or Custom that would arise from
that money, if employed in merchandise. 3. That yet if any exacted above five
in the hundred, they should lose the principal. A rate that on the one hand
would keep up the necessary Commerce of Lending and Borrowing among the Old and
the Idle, and yet direct men to that more ne^essary of buying and improving
Land, and other Commodities that are more industrious and ingenious. 4. That
none yet presume this, but in some principal places of merchandising: for then
(as my Lord Bacon has projected it) they will hardly be able to color other
men's money in the Country: for no man will lend his money far off, or put it
into unknown hands.
Or, Lastly, That there be no money lent out upon terms but to the State, which
may make its advantage of it.

Indeed, considering on the one hand that Usury decays the Kings Custom,
brings money to few hands, damps Industry and Invention, beats down the price
of the land, and by eating up private Estates, breeds a public poverty: It
were to be wished it were forbidden. And on the other, That Borrowers trade
most; that, No usury, no young Merchants; that, Without usu^y men must sell
their Estates at under-rates, more sad than usury; that, No borrowing, no
living; no usury, no borrowing: It were wished it were regulated, so that the
inconveniences of it were avoided, and the advantages retained, and extort^on
be checked, as Traffic is encouraged.

Thus he that has no private care, advances the public Good, and the
childless man is most thoughtful for Posterity: Certainly the best Works and of
greatest merit for the Public, have proceeded from the unmarried, or the
childless man; who both in affection and means have married and endowed the
Public: He that has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune: For
they are Impediments either to Virtue or Mischief.

A fat man in Rome riding always upon a very lean Horse, being asked the Reason
thereof, answered, That he fed himself, but he trusted others to feed his
Horse. Our Judge being asked what was the best way to thrive; said, Never do
anything by another, that you can do by your self.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Thomas Wilson.
THomas Wilson born in Lincolnshire, was Doctor of Laws, bred Fellow of Kings
College in Cambridge, and afterward was Tutor in the same University to Henry
and Charles Brandon, successively Dukes of Suffolk. Under Queen Elizabeth he
was made Maste^ of the Hospital of S. Katherines nigh the Tower of London. At
last he became Secretary of State to the Queen for four years together. He dyed
Anno 15. To whose various and yet deep knowledge, not of the surface of Arts
and Sciences for shows, but of inside and ground of them for use, not only
apprehending the frame, but perceiving the power and importance of them. There
is no character that ever I read, so agreeable as that which the most Eloquent
Cicero gave the most Learned Varro, Tu aetatem patriae, tu descriptiones
temporum, tu sacrorum jura, tu sacerdotum, tu bellicam disciplinam, tu sedem
regionum, locorum, tu omnium divinarum, humanarumque rerum nomina, genera,
officia, causas aperuisti; plurimumque Po^tis luminis attulisti, elegans poema
fecisti, Philosophiamque multis locis inchoasti. An argument of a great
capacity in a man of his great place, and greater Imploymen^; whose candor was
yet equal with his parts, ingenuously passing by the particular infirmities of
those who contributed any thing to the advancement of a General Learning;
judging it fitter that men of abilities should jointly engage against ignorance
and Barbarism, than severally clash with one another^ giving this advice to all
men concerned in public Writings, that they might avoid both cens^re from
others, and trouble to themselves, temperanter rem gero: and this he
recommended, not only to Scholars in general, but to some peculiarly discreet
persons in particular; knowing that that which touches all, usually reaches
none: admonishing l^k^wise his friends, to use no words, but such as had some
correspondent things, and to take care that their conceptions should answer
their expressions; there having been of late in the world, a way of Learning
that overthrew Knowledge, consisting of opinions remote from men's cogitations,
which men spoke, but thought not, thinking they had invented new things, when
they found out new words. The reason why his Writings excelled so much in the
worth and use of the subject; in the exactness of the method, in the ingenuity
of the design, and in the temper of the Writer, who discoursed not, but
demonstrated, framing first the disordered minds of men to an exact way of
reasoning, and afterward digesting things to a strict form of argument; which
a man learneth not from Precepts, but by use, and reading such Books as are
compiled, not with a loose fancy, but a severe reason, especially suck Politic
Books as are made up of experience, which is our recollecting of things past;
and prudence, which is our expectation of things to come, according to our
experience of things past, especially such as have the happiness of perceiving
things exactly as they are, and expressing them clearly and orderly as they
conceive them.

He had the breeding of Courtiers so long, until he was one himself: At once
reading Machiavel for my Lord Burleigh's Instruction, and observing it for his
own use. His Parents designed him for study, his nature for business. His
presence assisted his inclination, and his complisance his presence; and his
good nature, both: A good nature that would have spoiled a Politician in any
other but Doctor Wilson, whose wisdom was the largeness of his Soul, not the
narrowne^s of a shift. He had that comprehensive and penetrating judgment,
that he could at once show the greatest prudence in laying his design, and the
greatest Integrity in managing it, as rather securely knowing, than warily
close. But he that is only real, had need have exceeding great parts of
Virtue; as the Stone had need be rich, that is se^ without foil: Therefore he
was something a Courtier. There are small matters that win great commendation,
because they are continually in use; whereas the occasion of any great action
comes but on festivals, and it is enough to attain so much ceremony and
courtship, not to despise it. He had a way of conveying effectual and
imprinting passions among complements, suitable to persons and business: He had
his familiarity to Inferiors, that made him not cheap: his state among Equals,
that made him not envied: and his observance to Superiors, that made him no
Flatterer: His behavior like a well-made suit, not too strait, or
point-device, but justly measured, and free for exercise or motion. He had a
slow, but a sure way to honor, which was nothing else in him but a discovery of
his Virtues and Worth upon any occasion, without any disadvantage.

It was his interest as well as his gift, to be more learned than witty, more
reverend than plausible, more considerate than active. His thoughts were as his
inclination, grave; his discourse as his reading, subtle; his actions as his
Education, well weighed, regular as his temper, even and smooth as custom, and
resolved as a habit gotten in that advancement of virtue, a well-disciplined
Society; where Example teaches, Company comfort, Emulation quickneth, Glory
raises: None had a more skilful method to sway nature in others, none more
prudent minut^s and seasonable degrees to check it in himself; his Rule being,
Never to practice any thing until perfect: for so he might exercise his
we^kness as well as his abilities, and induce one habit of both.

Three things he aimed at: 1. The search of Truth by Industry. 2. The
attainment of it by apprehension. 3. The enjoyment of it by assent.


He is a happy man that is above the troubled and confused Regions of Opinions,
Fancies, Preposs^ss^ons, in that clear and undisturbed one of Truth and
Reality: Though yet my Lord Verul'am observes, That if there were taken out of
men's minds vain opinion, flattering hope, false valuations and imaginations, as
one would, and the like, etc. it would leave the minds of a number of poor men
poor shrunken things, full of melancholy and indisposition, and unpleasing to
themselves.

Neither took he greater pleasure in knowing than in relating and doing what is
true, sound and plain, without those crooked courses that show a creeping
rather than a raised nature; and, as Mr. Mountaign^ observes, is a bravery and
facing of God, and a shrinking from, and being coward before man.

He said, what all great men know, That he wax six times a Slave: 1. To Himself
and his Inclination, till he had advanced Reason. 2. To the World and its
Insolence, till he had impr^ved his Fortune. 3. To his Pupils and their
Tempers, till he understood their Genius. 4. To Fame and its Reports, till he
was known in the World. 5. To his Sovereigns and their Humors, till he found
their In^erest. And 6. To his Business, till he had attained Experience.


Thus it is with all Grandees, who exchange their power over themselves for
that over others, and with great pains com^ to greater.

Two things he wished when called to the world, Power and Resolution. A naked
man is contemptible (for it is Power that begets Fear, it is Fear that makes
Gods, and rules the world) an easy man is useless: a facile-natured man may be
a good Companion for a private person, but no Servant to a Prince: Remisness
and Connivance are the ruins of unsettled Governments. The Game of Authority
will not admit of too open a play.

In a word, he was one that knew the resorts and falls o^ business, though he
could not sink into the main of a matter; being one that packed the Cards
better than he played them.

Three things completed this Secretary: 1. Quick dispatch and industry. 2.
Constant intelligence and correspondence. 3. A large and strong memory.


Queen Elizabeth would needs at first favor my Lord of Leicester against the
E^rl of Sussex, which this Doctor and my Lord Burleigh dissuaded upon this
account, Because if she who should be the common Mother of all, inclined to one
party, and leaned to a side, the Ship of the Commonwea^th would be as a Boat
overturned by too much weight on the one ^ide, and too little on the other^
Take heed (said the Royal Mart^r to his Son our Sov^raign) of abetting any
Faction, or applying to any public Discriminaetion: your partial adhering as
head to any one side gains you not so great advantages in some men's hearts (
who are prone to go on in the Kings way) as it loses you in others, who think
themselves first despised, and then persecuted by you. Take such a course as
may either with calmness and charity quite remove the seeming differences and
offenses by impartiality: or so order affairs in point of power, that you shall
not need to fear or flatter any faction: for if ever you stand in need of them,
or stand to their courtesy, you are undone.

His Place called upon him to suppress with severity such seditious reflections
upon the State, as came to his knowledge: but his inclination was to dissipate
them with connivance and contempt. To be opposed, renders a Faction
considerable; to be despised (and wretched) ridiculous: To go about to stop the
first appearances of sedition, is (says my Lord Bacon) but to make wonder
long-lived.

His knack was a politic and artificial nourishing and ^ntertaining of hopes;
and keeping men in suspense is one of the best Antidotes against the poison of
discontent: it being observed by the foresaid Statesmen, to be a certain sign
of a wise Government and Proceedings, to hold men's hearts by hopes, when it
cannot by satisfaction; and when it can handle things in such manner, as no
evil shall appear so peremptory, but that it has some ou^-let of hope: which
is the easier done, because both particular persons and factions are apt enough
to flatter themselves, or at least to boast what they believe not.

In a word, although he made not so much noise as other men, yet he as
effectually promoted the three main Supporters of this Nation, 1. Its Native
Commodities, 2. Its Artificial Manufactures, 3. Its V^cture and Cor^iage; and
so dyed with that con^ent and r^solution, that they do who are overta^en by
Fate in the pursuit of great Actions, and public Designs.

Observations on the life of Sir John Portman.
John Portman Knight, was born of wealthy and wo^sh^pful Extraction at
Portman's Orchard in Somersetshire, a fair Manor, which d^scended to him by
inheritance, the Heir of the Orchard being matched into his Family. He was bred
in the study of the Common Law; attaining to such eminency therein, that June
11. 2d of Queen Mary, he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, continuing
two years in the place, and dying therein for ought I find to the contrary; and
a Baronet of his Name and Lineage flourishes at this day with a great and
plentiful Estate. No doubt but he dyed in his place, there being none of those
things that carry disgrace and downfall with them, incident to him.

For the first thing that ruins a Courtier, The things that overthrow a
Favorite.
is a boasting of his own service; and than our Knight, none more modest.

The second, is an undutiful observation of our Princes actions; and none more
faithful and meek.

The third, is the revealing or abusing os secrets; and none more reserved and
civil.

The fourth thing, is either provoking the Nobility against himself, or
dividing them among themselves: he was too wise for the one, his design being
rather alliance than quarrel, to add inter^st to his Estate, and honor to his
Riches; and too quiet for the other. Many have an Opinion not wise, (says that
Oracle) that for a Prince to govern his Estate, or for a great Person to guide
his Proceedings, according to the respect of factions, is a principal part of
policy: whereas contrariwise, the chiefest wisdom is e^^her in ordering those
things that are general, and wherein men of several factions do nevertheless
agree; or in dealing with, or correspondence to particular persons one by one.
Mean men in their rising must adhere; but Great men that have strength in
themselves, were better to maintain themselves indifferent and neutral.

The fifth particular that pulls down a man, is a misunderstanding of his own
interest, or the Princes: Our Judge unde^stood both, being equally made up of
The first of these loved Alexanders interest, the other his person.
Craterus and Haephestion, faithfulness and compliance.

The sixth, is the hatred of the many (whom this persons integrity always
obliged, there being no herd more feral than an en^aged multitude) or the envy
of the great, whom his wariness disobliged not: it being more fatal to incense
a Favorite who would be above all affronts by his greatness, than a Prince who
is so by Law.

The seventh misfortune, is to be too much concerned in the secrets of Princes;
wherewith Sir William never meddled without assistants, never acted without a
Warrant.

The eighth, is unsuccessful Counsel; and our Knight went the safe and middle
way, neither to be feared nor envied, which he was always present to second,
prosecute or correct, as he saw most cause.

His sharp and sound judgment to distinguish Persons, Affairs and other
Circumstances, and accordingly how to order the manner of his Proceeddings, was
much; his well-weighed and wary, though quick apprehension and experience from
Men and Books, more; his particular memory, and its minute observation for his
conduct and business, most of all. His care of vain and idle Preposessions
balanced his soul, his temper managed it: his love was choice and cautious; his
hope moderate and knowing; his confidence slow, but certain; his desires and
joys allayed and checked, or quickened by the edge of his anger, or the caution
of his fear; and all sedate with his foresight.

Nature did this person some wrong in his Body, but made him amends in his
Soul: the fails of the one, are f^ils to set off the other: the first comes off
with more Glory, by the pully and defect of the second^ Besides that the
unkindness of Nature puts men often upon being eminent in Art; that the
happiness of this, may divert men from observing the unhappiness of that.

But of all the Virtues his constant and growing Soul raised him to, this was
one, That he durst not entertain a Gift, which (as he said) conquers both the
foolish and the wise: which in public places i^ is a Vice to accept, and not a
Virtue to offer: It being a snare rather than a favor.

His next was Diligence: Neglect wastes a man as insensibly as Industry
improves him: We need no more but sit still, and Diseases will arise only for
want of exercise. Man's a Watch that must be looked to and wound up every day:
the least incuriousness steals to improficiency or offense, which degreeingly
weighs us down to ex^remity: Diligence alone is a fair Fortune, and Industry a
good Estate.

There are five men's Activities that raise to Estates, 1. The Divine to a
small, but an honest one. 2. The Physit^an to a competency, but uncertain. 3.
The Courtier to a great one, and an honorable. 4. The Citizen to a large one,
but not lasting. And 5. The Lawyer to one large, and firm too.


Seldom does his Family fa^l, who is sure to tie his Estate to his Child by an
Entail, and his Child to his Estate by an Education and an Employment.

When we observe the several alterations in Gentry, we find four principal
Actors on the Theaters of great Families; the Beginner, the Advancer, the
Continuer, and the Ruiner.

1. The Beginner, who by his virtues refineth himself from the dross of the
vulgar, and lays the foundation of his house. 2. The Advancer, who improveth
it. 3. The Continuer, who conveyeth it to his Posterity as he received it from
h^s Ancestors. 4. The Ruine^, that degenerates from his Fathers. Our Judge
began not, but advanced that excellent Family, whose original I cannot find, so
ancient it is; and whose end I hope none will see, it is so noble.
Observations on the Life of William Howard.
WIlliam Howard, son to Thomas Howard, second of that Surname Duke of Norfolk,
was by Queen Mary created Baron of Essi^gham in Surrey, and by her made Lord
Admiral of England; which place he discharg^d with credit. He was one of the
first Favorers and Furtherers with his Purse and Countenance of the strange
and wonderful discovery of Ru^^a. He died anno Dom. 1554.

This Noble Person had his plainness from his Father, his ingenuity from his
Mother, his experience by Travel and Navigation: his Blood endeared him to his
Sovereign, and his Abilities advanced him to her service: H^ promised no less
to his Mistress, t^an his F^ther and Uncle had performed to her Father. The
Ancestors merit is security for Posterie^ies, who will hardly forfeit that
favor with one act of their own unworthiness, that was ganed by so many of
their Predecessors service. Like a well-drawn picture this Lord had his eye on
all round: on his Queen, to be faithful; on his Country, to be
publick-spirited; on his Family, to be honorable; on the present Age, to be
activ^; and on the future, to be renowned.

The Old Lord Burleigh, sometime Treasurer of England, coming to Cambridge with
Queen Elizabeth when he was led into the public Schools, and had much
commended their convenience, beauty and greatness, together with their Founder
Humphrey the good Duke of Gloucester; Yea, marry, (said he) but I find one
School wanting in our Universities, and that is the School of Discre^ion. When
private Tutors had initiated, public Schools had seasoned, and the University
had improved this Gentleman's sprightly and noble parts, vet did his Father
observe one great defect in his Education, and that is Discretion: Discretion
in Carriage, for which he sent him to Count; Discretion in Business, for which
he sent him to travel and fight. Not long had he been abroad to furnish himself
with experience, but he is called home to ennoble himself with action. The
Alve^ of Spain were for four Generations together Commanders by Land, and the
Howards of England for as many, Admirals at Sea. None ever had more power, none
used less than he: The more Authority he had allowed him over others, the more
Command he obtained over himself.

Twice did he mortgage his Estate for his followers pay; many times did he
venture his life for their encou^agement. None directed more ^kilfully, and yet
none acted more resolutely. Equally did he divide the profit, equally share the
honor with his follower^, who under him never dared, and never feared a danger.
Manners make a man, says the Courtier^ Money makes a man, says the Citizen;
Learning makes a man, says the Scholar; but Conduct makes a man, says the
Soldier. This Lords spirit never put hi^ on so forwardly, but his wariness
to^k care how to come off as safely. He that fights should despair, but he that
commands should hope. The Soldier among the Persians is drawn with his eyes
before him, and the General with his behind him. Young men in the manage of
Affairs embrace more than they can hold, stir more than they can q^iet, flee to
the end without consideration of the means and degrees; pursue some few
principles, and extreme remedies they have chanced upon rashly, which they will
neither confess nor reform. Old men object too much, consult too long,
adventure too little, repent too soon, and seldom pursue things home to their
full period. My Lord was an happy composition of both himself, and had of
either about him, that the coldness and wariness of Age might correct the heat
of Youth, and the activity of younger might be directed by the experience of
riper ones: The one gave Authority, and the other Life to his Actions. He
himself was better to invent than to judge, fitter for Action than Counsel, and
readier for new Projects than for settled business. The Lord Clinton's prudence
served him in old and usual matters, but in new things abused him: My Lord
Howard's was quick for present Emergencies, but not comprehensive of ordinary
transactions. Of the three Admirals of those times, we may say as they did of
the France Spain and England
three Kingdoms, Lisle was wise before the Action, my Lord Howard in it^ my
Lord Clinton after it.

England without a freedom of commerce, was but a larger Prison: others opened
the Trade to the Indies, to Asia, and other parts of the world; but we wanted
the Hemp, the Flax, the Pitch, the Firr, and the other usual Commodities of
Russia, serviceable to our selves, and more to our Ships. His purse in this
case did much, his direction more, his servant Ie^kinson most of all, who made
curious observations of Russia, set forth a Geogra^h^cal description of it, and
was the first of the English, that sailed through the Caspian Sea. With his
assistance the Muscovia Company was set up in Queen Mary's days; and with his
servants it obtained the Privilege of sole Traffic into the Northern Parts of
Russia in Elizabeth's.

Nihil habet fortuna magna majus nec natura bona melius quam ut velit
bene-facere quam plurimis. Cicero.


Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Mountague.
EDward Mountague,, Son of Thomas Mountague, born at Brigstock in
Northamptonshire, was bred in the Inner Temple in the study of the Laws,
until his ability and integrity advanced him Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, in the Thirtieth of Henry the Eighth. He gave for his Motto, AEquitas
Iustitia Norma: And although Equity seems rather to resent of the Chancery
than the Kings Bench, yet the best Justice will be Wormwood without a mixture
thereof.

In his times though the golden showers of Abbey-Lands rained amongst great
men, it was long before he would open his lap, (scrupling the acception of such
Gifts) and at last received but little, in proportion to Others of that Age.

In the thirty seventh of King Henry the Eighth he was made Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, a descent in Honor, but ascent in Profit; it being given to
old Age, rather to be thrifty than ambitious: Whereupon he said, I am now an
old man, and love the Kitchen before the Hall; the warmest place best suiting
with my Age.

In drawing up the Will of King Edward the Sixth, and settling the Crown on the
Lady Jane, for a time he swam against the tide and torrent of Duke Dudley, till
at last he was carried away with the stream.

Outed of his Judges Office in the first of Queen Mary, he returned into
Northamptonshire, and what contentment he could not find in Westminster Hall,
his Hospital-hall at Boug^ton afforded him. He died Anno 1556. and lies bu^ied
in the Parish Church of Weekly.

His well-managed Argument in Dodderige his Case, brought him to Cromwell's
knowledge, who was vexed with his reason, but well pleased with his Parts.
Crowmel's recommenda^ion and his own modest nature set him up with Henry the
Eighth, who could not endure two things: 1. A Lawyer that would not be guided:
2. A Divine that would not be taught. Yet as modest as he was, he was honest;
and though he would submit to the Kings Power, yet would he act by his Law: For
his Apophthegm was, Meum est Ius dicere, potius quam Ius dare: I^'s my duty to
interpret rather than give Law.

He never denied or delayed J^stice; always discouraging those cunning L^ws
that perplexed a Cause, those contentious Clients that delayed a suit, and
those nice Cummin-seed men that strained i^ferences, and w^ested c^nstructions,

Patient, stayed and equal he was in hearing, grave in speaking, pertinent in
interrogating, wary in observing, happy in remembering, seasonable and civil in
interposing. The Council durst not chop with him, neither would he chop with
the Council, unless he defended his cause over-boldly, urged indiscreetly,
informed slightly, neglected grossly, renewed the debate unseasonably, or
ensnared his Adversaries cunningly; in those and other the like cases, he would
do the Public Right by a check, and the person by an admonition.

Six sorts of persons he discountenanced in his Courts: 1. The scandalous
Exactors. 2. The sly shifters, that, as that Chancellor observed, pervert the
plain and direct courses of Courts, and bring Justice into oblique lines and
labyrinths. 3. Those that engaged Courts in quarrels of Jurisdiction. 4. Those
that made suits. 5. Those that hunted men upon Poenal Statutes. 6. Those that
appeared in most Testimonies and Juries.


His Darling was, The h^n^st Clerk, who was experienced in his place, obliging
in his carriage, knowing in Presidents, cautious in Proceedings, and skilful in
the affairs of the Court.

Two things he promoted in King Henry's days; 1. The Law against Gaming. And 2.
The Order against Stews.


And two in King Edward's: 1. That Act against s^reading of Prophecies. 2. That
Statute against embasing of Coin.


But King Edward's Testament and the Duke of Northumberland's Will is to be
made: The pious Intentions of that King wishing well to the Reformation, the
Religion of Queen Mary obnoxious to exception, the ambition of Northumberland
who would do what he listed, the weakness of Suffolk, who would be done with as
the other pleased, the flattery of the Courtiers most willing to comply,
designed the Crown for the Lady Jane Gray. Mr. Cecil is sent for to London, to
furnish that Will with Reason of State; and Sir Edward to Sergeants Inn, to
make it up with Law. He according to the letter sent him, went with Sir Io.
Baker, Justice Bromley, the Attorney and Solicitor-General to Greenw^ch, where
His Majesty before the Marquess of Northampton, declaring himself for the
settlement of Religion, and against the succession of Queen Mary, offered them
a Bill of Articks to make a Book of; which they, notwithstanding the Kings
Charge, and the re^teration of it by Sir William Peter, declared upon mature
consideration, they could not do, without involving themselves and the Lords of
the Council in High Treason, because of the Statutes of Succession.

The Duke of Northumberland hearing of their Declaration by the Lord Admiral,
comes to the Council Chamger all in a rage, trembling for anger; calling Sir
Edward Traitor, and saying, He would fight in his shirt with any man in that
Quarrel.

The old man is charged by the King upon his Allegiance, and the Council upon
his Life, to make the Book; which he did, when they promised it should be
ratified in Parliament. Here was his obedience, not his invention; not to
devise but draw things up according to the Articles tendered unto him. Since
shame is that which ambitious Nature abhors, and danger is that which
timorous Nature declineth; the honest man must be resolute. Sir Nathaniel Brent
would say, A Coward cannot be an honest man; and it seems by this Action, that
modesty and fear are great temptations. Give me those four great Virtues that
makes a man: 1. A clear Innocence. 2. A comprensive Knowledge. 3. A
well-weighed experience. And 4. The product of all these, A steady Resolution.


What a Skein of Ruffled Silk (says the ingenious Resolver) is the incomposed
man!

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Fines.
EDward Fines Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Admiral of England
for more than thirty years. He was wise, valiant, and very fortunate, as
appears by his Masterpiece in Museleborough field, in the reign of King Edward
the sixth, and the Battle against the Scots. He was afterward created Earl of
Lincoln, where he was born, May 4. 1474. and where he had a proportionable
Estate to support his Dignity, which he much increased, beside his Paternal
Inheritance He died January 16. 1558. and lies buried at Windsor, in a private
Chapel, under a stately M^nument, which Elizabeth his third Wife, Daughter to
the Earl of Kildare, erected in his remembrance. His Fortune made him a younger
B^other, and his Industry an Heir; coming to Court, where they that have
Estates, spend them; and they that have none, gain them. His recreation was at
Court, but his business in the Country; where notwithstanding the Statute in
^enry the sevenths time against Pasturage for Tillage, he Grazed 11000 Acres of
Ground: then a noble and gaining Employment, that advanced many a Family in one
Generation; and now a saving one, that has kept up as many ten.

The best tempered Swords will bend any way, and the best metalled men will
comply with any occasion. At White Hall, none more affable and courteous than
our Lord; at Sea, none more skilful; in the field, none more resolute; in the
Country, none more thrifty and hospitable. His Entertainments were orde^ly and
suitable, made up of solid particulars, all growing upon his own Estate. King
Charles would say, Every man has his vanity, and mine (^peaking of the
Sovereign) is Building: Every man has his humor, and mine (said he, speaking
of the Fens) is Drayning. Adding withal, He that would be merry for a day. let
him be trimmed; he that would be merry for a week, let him marry; ^e that would
be merry for a year, let him build; he that would be merry for Ages, let him He
means Land.
improve. Now you would have him among his Workmen and Stewards in Lincoln,
anon among the Commissioners either in France or Scotland; by and by before
Bulloign or Calice, and a while after at Spieres or Muscleborough, and on a
sudden at a Mask in Court. Neither was his Soul less pliable to persons than
things: as boisterously active as King Henry could expect, as piously meek as
King Edward could wish, as warily zealous as Queen Marys times required, and as
piercingly observant as Queen Elizabeth's perplexed occasions demanded. It was
by him and my Lord Bacon said of business, That it was in business as it is in
ways, that the next and the nearest way is commonly the foulest; and that if a
man will go the fairest way, he must go somewhat about.

Sitting in a Committee about invading Scotland, whereof Sir Anthony Brown then
Viscount Mountacute presented a Draught, there arose as great a debate between
him and my Lord in Council, as afterward in the Field, about the point of
Entrance; Nay, said my Lord in the heat of the Discourse, with as much power on
others passions, as command over his own, We stand quarrelling here how we
shall get in, but here is no discourse how we shall get out.

It Is a Rule, Whosoever has any thing fixed in his person that does induce
contempt, has also a perpetual spur in himself to rescue and deliver himself
from scorn, either by virtue or malice; and my Lord having some disadvantage
from Nature, made it up by Art: None more bold, none more industrious and more
successful, because that disadvantage took off envy on the one hand, and
jealousy on the other: so that upon the matter, in a great Wit, Contempt is a
great advantage to rising.

Judge Brook had a Project against Usury, which came up to the Lords House:
this rich Peer upon the first motion of it, stands ^p, and says, Show me a
State without Usury, and I Will show you a State without Men and Trade.

Rich he was for expense, and expend he did upon honor and good action: his
ordinary expenc^s were the third of his Estate, and his extrao^dinary none of
it; his Rule being, Extraordinary disadvantages must be balanced with
extraordinary advantages. He would not stoop to petty gains, but he would
abridge petty charges: but his occasions calling him often from his Estate, he
turned it all to certainties; often changing his Servants, who being
unacquainted with him and his Estate, were less subtle, and more timorous. Much
behind-hand he was when he came to the Estate, and as much before when he left
it. Neither was he too sudden or too slow in paying his Debts; equally avoiding
a disadvantageous sale on the one hand, and devouring interest on the other:
and so inuring himself by degrees into ^n habit of frugality, he gained as well
upon his mind, as upon his Estate^ For husbanding the English Treasure in
Scotland, he was Knighted in the Field, May 11. 34 H. 8. by the Earl of
Hertford: for the Clause concerning Scotland he put in at the Treaty of
Guisnes, 35 H. 8. he was made Baron by Patent: for his discreet Conduct in
demanding the young Queen of Scots, together with the performance of the
Articles made in Henry the eighth's time, with 60 sail of ships before the
battle of Muscleburgh, he had 600 l. a year assigned him by the Protector: for
his great experience at Sea, his interest in Seamen, and his Renown among the
Neighbour-States, he was made E^rl of Lincoln.

Observations on the Life of Sir Barnaby Fitz-Patrick.
BArnaby Fitz-Patrick had the honor of being King Edward the sixth his Proxy
at School, and one of his Bedchamber at Court. In King Henry the eighth's time
he was sent to School, in King Edward the sixth's to travel, where he had these
Directions following from that King, how he might learn fashions there, and
send intelligence hither.

EDWARD,

WE understand by your Letters received the eighth of this present month, your
good entertainment, being glad thereof; and also how you have been once to go
on Pilgrimage: Wherefore we think fit to advertise you to desire leave to go to
Mr. Pickering, or to Paris, in case hereafter any such chance happen. And if
that will not serve, to declare to some person of estimation, with whom you are
best acquainted, that as you are loath to offend the French King by reason of
his kind usage of ^ou; so with safe conscience you cannot do any such thing,
being brought up with me, and bound to obey my Laws; also, that you had
commandment from me to the contrary. Yet if you be^^hemently procured, you may
go as waiting upon the King, not as intending to the abuse, nor willingly see
the Ceremonies: and so you look on the Mass, but in the mean time regard the
Scripture, or some good Book, and give no reverence to the Mass at all.

Furthermore, remember when you may conveniently be absent from the Court, to
tarry with Sir William Pickering, to be instructed by him how to use your self.
For Women, as far forth as you can, avoid their company; yet if the French King
command you, you may sometime dance, so measure be your mean: else apply your
self to Riding, Shooting, Tennis, or such honest Games; not forgetting
sometimes (when you have leisure) your Learning, chiefly reading of the
Scriptures. We would not have you live too sumptuou^ly as an Ambassador, but so
as your proportion of living may serve you, we mean, because we know many will
resort to you, and desire to serve you. I told you how many I thought
convenient you should keep. After you have ordered your things at Paris, go to
the Court, and learn to have more intelligence if you can; and after to the
Wars, to learn somewhat to serve us. By your Letters of the second and
fifteenth of April, we perceive that you were at Nancy, ready to go together
with Mr. Pickering to the French Camp; and to the intent you might be better
instructed how to use your self in these Wars, we have thought good to
advertise you of our pleasure therein. First, we would wish you; as much as you
may conveniently, to be in the French Kings presence, or at least in some part
of his Army, where you shall perceive most business to be; and that for two
causes: One is, because you may have more experience in the Wars, and see
things as might stand you in stead another day: The other is, because you might
be more profitable in the Language. For our Ambassador, who may not wear
Harness, cannot well come to those places of danger, nor seem so to serve the
French King, as you may, whom we sent thither for that purpose. It shall be
best for you therefore hereafter, as much as you may, to be with the French
King^ and so you shall be more acceptable to him, and do your self much good.
This I write, not doubting but you would have done it, though I had not
written, but to spur you on.

Adding withal, To learn the Tongue, to see the manner of the Court, and
advertise His Master of Occurrences, keeping close to the King of France, to
whom he shall offer his service in the Wars, where he is to observe the
fortifications of the Cities, the Conduct of the Armies, the advantages and
disadvantages of both Parties; their Skirmishes, Battles, Assaults, and the
Plots of the chief Towns, where any enterprises of weight have been done. His
Exercises were to be Hunting and Riding, his Company few, but choice, etc.


This Gentleman after his return out of France, was created by the King Baron
of Upper Ossory in Ireland; where he dyed a good Protestant, a Publick-spirited
Patriot, and an honest man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry fitz-Asane, Earl of Arundel.
HIs first appearance in the World was to adorn the Court, his next was to
serve it. Anno (...) 8.24
First his Estate and Train attends King Henry to the Interview with France,
and a while afte^ his valor and Conduct is commanded by him to the War.

Equally prepared is he to please and awe tha^ Country: The Duke of Suffolk is
made General for his Popularity, and the E^rl of Arundel Lord Marshal, for his
Spirit and Prudence; and both being before Bulloign, this Noble Lord run up his
Squadron under a running shelter about eleven at night, to the very Walls of
the City; which being battered down by the Canon, which was mounted some forty
yards higher, opened to the close B^siegers a passage that gained the whole
Town by composition.

Neither was he less active in Peace than War. A piercing apprehension, a
strong memory, a large and capacious judgment, a dexterous prudence, a
discerning wisdom, was the least of his happiness^ For to his sufficiency and
capacity, he added a good disposition and ^ntegrity, and to that, vigor and
gracefulness. He was the excellent Personage, that 1. Discerned, 2. Embraced
and performed what was Noble and Public: ( To know, to will and effect what is
good, make up a God.) To these were added a strong nature, a deep study, and a
very great Experienc^; qualities separated in others, but united in him: Nature
will out, Education is rude; Education without Resolution, is loose; Resolution
without ^xperience, is heady; Experience grounded upon particul^r Events, is
uncertain without the study of General and Immovable Principles: Knowledge of
things in their sourc^s and original causes, without Nature, is a Burden: All
these without Exercise, are a Notion.

This Nobleman thus furnished, derived much Honor from his Ancestors, more to
them; ^nnobling that Blood to a Glory, which some had debased to a Blush. That
great Name after four hundred years shining in that Honor with various luster,
setting in him as the Sun he bore with a full splendor: The last effort of
Nature is a Maste^-piece; the last blaz^ of the Candle a shine.

Other ^oblemen were made ^^ing Edward's Overs^^rs for their Integrity; he one
of his Assistants for his Abili^y: When an Enemy was to be awed to a
submission, he was General, such his F^me! When the Country was to be obliged
to a loan, he was Agent, such his Popularity^ The first advanced him to the
Comptrollership under Henry the ^ighth; the second to the Chamberlainship under
Edward the Sixth.

Nature has provided that ravenous Beasts should not associate, lest they
should be too hard for it; and Government, that prime Counselors should not
agree, lest they overthrow it: Warwick envied the Prot^ctors Greatness, and
Arundel would limit his Power: both with the rest of the Council declare
against him. But lest he should urge the same things against Warwick that he
did against Somerset; they, who love the Treason, but hate the Traitor, turn
him first out of Favor, and then out of Council, until Queen Mary's time,
when h^ as an ancient Nobleman of England, (that owned no upstart-designs
against the old way of succession) stood for her Right, and as a stiff
Catholic promoted her Religion: So that July 21. 1553. he came from the Queen
to Cambridge, where the Duke of Northumberland was, and entering his Chamber,
the Duke fell at his fee^, desiring him for Gods sake to consider his case, who
had done nothing but ^y Warrant from the Council: My Lord, (said the E^rl) I am
sent hither by the Queen to arrest you. And I (said the Duke) obey your Arrest;
^eseeching your mercy for what I did by Commission. You should have thought of
that sooner, (said the Earl) Here you might have seen at once the vicissitude
of Fortune, the frailty of Man, the dejectedness of Guilt, the brave^y of
Innocence, who would neither be trampled on by Greatness, nor trample on
misery; of an equal temper between pity and resolution. As long as his Youth
bore it^ we find him for Action; but when years came upon him, we find him in
Council, as with Wott^n at the great Treaty at Cambray: Yet not so unactive,
but that as Sir William Pickering for hi^ sweet Demeaner, so he for his Estate
was voiced an Husband to Queen Elizabeth.

When the rest of the Council were for deali^g with the ^ueen of Scots
underhand and at distance, he was for treating wi^h her plainly^ and said in
the Queens presence, The Wisdom of the former Age was so provident that it
needed not, and so plain that it endured no^ shifts. Leicester would persuade
the Duke of Norfolk to court the Queen of Scots, but Arundel would not hear of
it without the Queen of England's consent: Experience is always wary, yet has
its weaknesses, wherein it may be surprised. For this Noblemans kindness to his
Friend, balancing his Duty to his Mistress, brought him, the Earl of
South-hampton, the Lords Lumley, Cobham, Piercy, etc. to a Praemu^ire^:
whereupon he said, He is never wise, that is not distrustful.

Fear, that betrayeth the succors of Reason, when predominant, guardeth them
when moderate, and is more safe, ^h^ugh not so Noble as that valiant confid^nce
that bequeath^ a dilated Freedom to all faculties and senses.

But of all his Actions this is most remarkable: Treating with the Scots, he
writ to his Majesty King Henry the Eighth, what he had gained already,
requiring to know his farther pleasure: The King takes advice with his Council,
who all agree that the Peace should be concluded: Whereupon the King caused his
S^cretary the Lord Paget to ^rite to him to that purpose; but withal, he called
Mr. Ce^il secretly to him, bidding him tell my Lord, That w^atsoever he had
written in his Letter, yet with all speed possible he should break the Treaty,
Mr. Cecil replying, That a message by word of mouth being contrary to his
Letter, would never be believed; well (said the King) do you tell him as I bid
you, and leave the doing of it to his choice, Upon Mr. Cecil's arrival, the
Earl of Arundel showed the other Commissioners as well the Message as the
Letter; they are all for the Letter; he said nothing, but ordered that the
Message should be written before, and signed by his fellow-Commissioners, and
thereupon immediately broke up the Treaty, sending Cecil wi^h the adver^isem^nt
of i^ to the King; Who, as soon as he saw him, a^ked aloud, What, will he do
it, or no? Cecil replied, that his Majes^y might understand that by the
enclosed. But then the King half angry, urged, Nay tell me; will he do it or
no? Being then told it was done, he turned to the Lords and said, Now Yo^ will
hear news, The fine Treaty is broken; Whereto one presently answered, That he
who had broke it deserved to lose his Fead; to which the King straightly replied,
That He would lose a dozen such heads as his was that so judged, rather than
one such Servant as had done it^ and therewith commanded the Earl of Arundel's
Pardon should be presently drawn up, the which he sent with Letters of Thanks,
and assurance of Favor.

Five things must a Statesman comprehend.

1. The L^w. 2. The Government. 3. The Time. 4. The People. And 5. The Prince.
Under an active Prince, you must regard the P^erogative; under an easy one,
the Law; under a complete one made up of a just measure of Greatness and
Goodness, those two things are distinguished only in the nice discourses of
some Speculativ^, being but one great Rule in the solid actions of that Prince.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Dudley Duke of Northumberland.
HI, favor was first purchased by his^ Fathers blood, and improved by his own
cunning. King Henry sacrificed Sir Edmund Dudley to allay the Peoples rage, and
raised his Son to appease his Ghost. He that disobligeth a multitude, must fall
himself; Match: Prince, p. 56.
but he that in so doing serves his King, may advance his Posterity. Something
high he was in the Kings favor, because standing on his fathers Grave; but
hig^er as he stood on his own Merit: He knew his Fathers service made his way
to favor; h^s own education therefore must prepare him for employment. Favor
without Parts is a reproach; Parts without Favor are a burden. The King
restored him to his Fathers blood, and his own industry recovered his
Abilities. There are those that under the notion of wisdom comm^t the g^eat^st
folly, either in too much conversing with the world without, or in too much
re^^ecting on themselves within: Sir John was made up of both; some time he
allowed for Action, more for Consideration. There is not any thing so
prejudicial to Action, as to be bent upon Action without intermission^ for as
the eye sees no^ the Objects touching it, but those only more remote: so the
understanding continually plunged in Affairs, is not so quick-sighted in
occurrents, as his who sometime retireth himself from publi^k A^tion, beholding
it aloof off by consideration. In the heat and tumult of Affairs, Reason has
not that power as may give conduct and motion to active life: besides,
experience teaches us, that the ey^ having lost its quickness with too much
looking upon the light, recovereth it again in the dark: the spirit in like
manner dazzled, weakened, transported and distracted among the multitude and
variety of Affairs, ought to recollect and recover its force in the privacy of
some small retreat; which Sir John made to Italy, the seat of policy and
experience; whence I pray God he brought no more (says my Author) than his
closeness and reach.

His S^veraign saw he deserved Honor, but saw not without offense to the
Populacy how to confet it, until the subtle Youngster showed him a middle way,
(upon the strange death of the Viscount Lisle, who lost his life for joy that
it was saved) by petitioning for that honor as a favor, which upon his
Mothers account was his right: The crafty Youth entered himself of the
Cardinals Retinue first, and then of the Kings. Much was he employed by him at
Sea, as an Overseer of the Nav^; more in the Field, as Director-General; most
of all in the Romish and French Court, as a Spy. He was too good a Proficient
in his School to fall wi^h him, therefore we immediately observe him rising
with Cromwell, until the King made him Admiral, and he with his 200^ sail upon
the Coast of Scotland ^ale himself renowned; insomuch that the Kin^ left him
the next year Vic^roy of France, and Deputy of Calice and Bulloign: where to
revenge the French attempts upon the Isle of Wight, he drew his Fleet up to the
Coasts of Normandy; landed 6000 men at Treport, burned the Suburbs of that Town
with the Abbey, destroyed 30 Ships there in the Haven, and then returned, not
having lost above fourteen persons in the whole Voyage: insomuch that in a
Treaty between Ard and Guisnes wherein he was Commissioner with the Earl of
Hertford, Secretary Paget, and Dr. W^tton, the French were contented that we
held Bulloign till they paid us 800000 Crowns within the term of eight years.
For the further Establishment whereof, he and the Bishop of Duresm are employed
to take Oath of the F^ench King and the Daulphine, His Master Henry dies, but
not his design with him: Norfolk is out of his way; Seymour will be so: he is
now Executor of King Henry's Will, he will be of his own. B^t as Nature, so
Policy works by degrees; first the graft, then the tree; after that, the
blossom; next that, the fruit; first meaner Essays, and then higher Actions.
There was nothing to be attempted at home, until we were secured and feared
from abroad; he therefore leads the Van^guard ag^i^st the Scots so
successfully, that he is made Earl of Warwick. H^re his spirit had ensnar^d
him, had not his conduct brought him off. When the Protector refused a Combat
as not becoming him, Warwick offers on^: Bring me word (said he to the H^rald
that brought the Protector a Challenge from the Lord Huntley) that thy Master
will perform the Combat with me, and thou shall have an hundred Crowns for thy
pains. But a public Conduct becomes a General better than pe^sonal Valor; and
he must so far only remember he is a Soldier, as not to forget he is a
commander, and so a whole Army too.

Against the Rebels in Devonshire so happy he was, that upon his discreet
Overture of Pardon, (Mercy is a Virtue with Valor, and but a Weakness with
Cowardice) and coming in person to assure them of it, they saying, They knew
him so honorable, that if he came himself they would embrace it; threw down
their Arms, and submitted to Mercy.

Against the French, that took the opportunity of those Turmoyls, he was so
prosperous, that he sent them home from Iersey and Guernsey with the loss of
two thousand men.

Honor he had enough, and Power too, yet not what he aimed at; (our Souls are
infinite as in their duration, so in their capacity.) Ambition is like cholar,
which is an humor that makes men active, earnest, full of alacrity and
stirring, if it be not stopped; but if it be stopped, and cannot have its way,
it becomes adust, and thereby malign and venomous; So aspiring men, if
progr^ssive and successful (their passage to advancement being clear) are
rather active than perilous; but if curbed with some obstructions, their sccret
discontent casts an evil aspect upon all persons and actions, and becomes
rather dangerous than serviceable.

This great Earl's greater mind was useful, when prosperous abroad; but at
home troublesome, when finding a plain man in his way to height, great in his
power, greater in his Sovereigns affections and greatest of all in his knowing
brother; whose spirit bare up his Authority, as his Authority supported His
Courage: In that Viz. The Lord Tho. Seymour.
man's Breast there was a Prudence that could reach, and a stoutness that could
balance this at once close and fierce man.

Interest and Blood united these Brothers so strongly, that there was no
dividing of them, but by practicing on their Wives, whose Humors were above
their Interest, and Fancy above their Relation. Their precedence is made a
question at Court, where it bred first a distance, and upon an Interview
contrived in this Lords house, a diff^rence^ that difference is improved to an
animosity, (^e can do little that cannot blow up a spark in a Woman's Breast to a
flame) that animosity to malice, and malice cannot dwell long in those weaker
breasts without a mischief; mischief they cannot do themselves:) The Ivy cl^aves
to the Oak, and these Women to their Husbands, though both ruin the things
they cling to:) What suggestions! What insinua^ions! What pretty fears and
jealousies! What little tales and passions^ Yet continual droppings wear a
Stone: The Women's discords derive themselves into the Husbands hearts, until
the Admiral falls, and leaves the Protector to his own Integrity: Whose large
Trust and infinite Business ^ould not but bewray him to some Error, as his
great Power did to much Envy, that first divested him of that Power, and then
of his Life.

There is not a more admirable Wisdom directing the contrarieties of Nature to
an Harmony, than ther^ is a close ^each in some men to reconcile vari^ty of
Humors, Affections, Opp^sitions, Rancounters, Events and Changes to one
Design. The Pr^tectors easine^s is betrayed to confidence; ^is too late fears,
to a confidence at first, and at last to irregularities: the hopes of some were
encouraged the g^ievances of others were aggravated and pitied, ^he envy of a
(...), and he the soul in all and every part of the action. The Protector was
free-spirited, open hearted, humble, hard to distrust, easy to forgive: The
Earl was proud, subtle, close, cruel and implacable; and therefore it was
impar congressus between them, almost with as much disadvantage as between a
naked and armed person. Two nets are laid to take the Protector; the one
breaks, the other holds: The Treason was only to give a Report, the Felony for
designing the death of the Earl of Warwick a Privy Counselor, did the
execution.

He being removed out of the way, this Earl of Warwick, as his Predecessor,
meditates the honor of King-making. To this purpose he joins himself by
alliance to the best Families, and advances his children by employments to the
greatest trusts; particularly (what Sir Richard Baker says had been better if
it had never been) his Son Robert (afterward Earl of Leicester) was sworn one
of the six ordinary Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber: upon which particular the
foresaid Historian observes, That after his coming into a place so near him,
the King enjoyed his health but a while. The Duke of Somerset is trained by his
enemies to such fears and j^alousies, as transport him beyond his ow^ go^d
nature, to an attempt one morning upon the E^rl of Warwick, now Duke of
Northumberland, abed; where being received with much kindeness, his heart
relented, and he came off re infecta. At his coming out, one of his company
asked him if he had done the deed? he answered, No. Then said he, You are ^our
self undone. And indeed it so fell ours for when all other Accusations were
refelled, this only s^uck by him, and could not be denied; and so he was found
guilty by a Statute of his own procurement, viz.

That if any should attempt to kill a Privy-Councellour, although the fact were
not done, yet it should be Felony, and to be punished with death.

This, notwithstanding many Divertisements used, went so near the consumptive
Kings heart, that he prepares for death. The Duke now within ken of his design,
considering the Kings affection for Reformation, the Lords and other Purchasers
kindness for Church Lands, the Judges fear, the Courtiers compliance, carried
on a Will with a high hand, (trembling with anger^ says Judge Mountague, if
any opposed him; yea, saying, That he would fight in his Shirt with any that
contradicted it) wherein the Crown was bestowed on Jane Gray, his fourth Sons
Wife, (the Princesses Mary and Elizabeth being laid aside.) But he forgot (as
what man, though never so reaching, can consider all things?) that there is an
invisible Power in Right, that there is a natural Antipathy in English men
against usurpation, and as great an inclination for the succession: A Point
they had conned so well of late out of the Statute made for that purpose, that
they could not well be put out of it by this new-started Design. The People
stand by Queen Mary: the Council notwithstanding their Engagement to stand by
him at his going away, (when he observed in Shore^ditch that the People gazed
on him, but bid him not God sp^ed; and he ^old the Lords, They might purchase
their safety with his ruin. To which one of the Lords replied, Your Grace
mak^^ a doubt of that which cannot be: for which of us all can wash his hands
clear of this business?) proclaimed the Queen at London, as he does at
Cambridge; where yet the Earl of Arundel (who offered his life at his feet when
he marched out: O the Vicissitudes of this lower world?) arrests him
^esolutely, and h^ submits weakly, first to an Imprisonment, and then to a
Trial and Ex^cution.

The first night he came to Cambridge, all the Doctors supped with him; and
Doctor Sandys is appointed to preach before him next day. The Doctor l^^e at
night betakes himself to his Prayers and Study, desiring God to direct him to a
fit Text for that time. His Bible opens at the first of Jo^hua, and (though
he heard no voice with St. Augustine, saying, Toll and lege) a strong fancy
inclined him to fix ^n the first words he beheld, v. 16. And they answered
Joshua, saying, All that thou command us we will do; and whithersoever thou
sendest, we will go: A text he so wisely and warily handled, that his Enemies
got not so full advantage against him as they expected.

The next day the Duke advanced to Bury with his Army, whose feet marched
forward while their minds moved backward. Upon the News brought him, he
returned to Cambridge, with more sad thoughts within him, than valiant
Soldiers about him. Then went he with the Mayor of the Town, and proclaimed
the Queen; the Beholders whereof more believing the grief in his eyes when they
let down tears, than the joy professed by his hands when he threw up his Cap.
Slegge Sergeant at Arms arrests him in Kings^ College; and when the
Proclamation of Pardon set him at liberty, the Earl of Arundel re-arrests him,
at whose feet he craves mercy; a low posture in so high a person! But what more
poor and prostrate than Pride it self, when reduced to extremity? Hist. Camb.
p. 131.
Behold we this Duke as the Mirror of Humane Unhappiness!

As Nevil Earl of Warwick was the make-King, so this Dudley Earl of Warwick was
the make-Queen. He was Chancellor of the University, and Steward of the Town
of Cambridge; two Offices which never before or since met in the same person.

Thus as Cambridg^ was his Vertical Point, wherein he was in the height of
Honor: so it was his Vertical, where he met with a sudden turn, and a sad
Catastrophe. And it is remarkable, that though this Duke (who by all means
endeavored to aggrand his Posterity) had six sons, all men, all married, none
of them left any issue behind them. Thus far better it is to found our hop^s of
even ear^hly happiness on Goodn^ss, than Greatness. Thus far the Historian.

I^ was Lewi^ the elev^nth's Motto, Pride and Presumption go before, Shame and
Loss follow after. In three sorts of men Ambition is good: 1. In a Soldier, to
quicken him. 2. In Favorites, to balance others. 3. In great Statesmen, to
undertake invidious Employments: For no man will take that part except he be
like a seeled Dove, that mounts and mounts because he cannot see about him. And
in these men it is safe if they are mean in their original, harsh in their
nature, stirring in many little, rather than in any great business. Greater in
his own interest than in his Followers. Humility sojourneth with safety and
honor, Pride with Danger and unworthiness. No man below an Anointed One, is
capable of an unlimited Power; a temptation too great for Mortality, whose
highest Interest if indulged, is Self; and if checked, Malice. Dangerous is the
Power of an aspiring Person near a Prince, more dangerous his Disguise, as who
acts all things against his Master by his Authority.


Let no man upon this example ever repose so much upon any man's single Counsel,
Fidelity or Discretion, as to create in himself or others a diffidence of his
own judgment, which is likely to be most faithful and true to a man's own
Interest. Let every m^n have some things that no man shall obtain, and some
things that no man must dare ask; because you see here, if we let all go
without reserve, our Reputation is lost in the world by the Reputation our
Favorite gains with us-

There was in Rome a certain man named Enatius, somewhat entered in Age, and of
natural condition mu^inous, ambitious, and troublesome: Adrian being advertised
that he was dead, fell into a great laughter, and swear, That he could not but
wonder he could intend to die, considering what great business he had night and
day; Con^idering how many Affairs he had to manage, how many cross accidents to
accommodate, I wonder what time he had to die: And considering his many
pretenses for the Protestant Religion, especially that for King Edward's, I
wonder with what face he could die a Papist.

But I have forgot my self: for there are two sorts of persons in Machiavel
that must either not believe, or not profess any Religion: The first, the
Statesman, that acts in public Affairs; the second, the Historian, that
writes them.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Peter.
HE was born in that great Nursery of Parts Devonshire; and bred in a greater,
Exeter-Colledge. That College made him a Scholar, and All Souls a Man. H^s
capacity was contemplative, and his Genius active; observing, rather than
reading; with his eye more on men, than Books; studying behavior, rather than
notion; to be accomplished, rather than knowing? and not to err in the main,
rather than to be excellent in circumstance. His Body set off his Parts with a
grave dignity of presence, rather than a soft beauty of aspect: His favor was
more taking than his color, and his motion more than favor; and all such, as
made his early Vices blush, and his riper Virtues shine.

The Earl of Wil^shire first pitched upon him for his Sons Tutor, and then for
his own Companion. Noble Families set off hopeful Parts, and improve them.

Cromwell's quick eye one day at my Lord, spyeth his Personage, and observes his
Carriage. ( He was a man himself, and understood one.) Nothing would satisfy
him, but that the young Gentlemen should come to Court, and go to Travel. King
Henry loved any All Souls man; but was enamoured with him, in whom concurred
the three Perquisites of that Society.

1. A Gentle Extraction. 2. A graceful Behavior. 3. Competent Learning.
The young man designed for business, was to travel for Education, and the
Scholar for Experience.

1. His Pension is allowed him, 125 l. a year. 2. His Tutor is assigned, who
had been there before, and could instruct him what he should see, where he
should go, what acquaintance to entertain, what exercise or discipline to
undergo. 3. His Instructions were drawn up: as, 1. That he should keep a Diary
of what the chiefest places and the eminent persons, either apart or in
Conventions, yielded worthy of Remarque and Observation. 2. To have before him
a Map or Card of every place he goes to. 3. Not to stay long in any one place.
4. To converse with no Englishmen but Agents, Ambassadors, or such grave
persons as his Majesty would direct him to. 5. To endeavor after
Recommendations from persons of quality in one place, to those in another;
keeping still his correspondence with the most public and eminent persons of
every respective place.

Within five years he returned a complete Gentleman, correcting the Vices of
one Country with the Virtues of another; and being one happy Composition of
every Region. Sir John Philpot was not so much the worse, as Sir William was
the better for travel; He returning to the shame of all Nations; of his own, by
his weakness abroad; of others, by their follies at home: This coming home the
honor of his own by his abilities abroad, of others by his perfections at home.

Two things improved his travel: 1. An Artificial and careless freedom, that
opened others. 2. A natural gravity, that shut him up, and was more capable of
observing their Virtues, and escaping their Vices.


Peter Earl of Savoy came to do his homage to Otho the fourth in a double
attire; on the one side Cloth of Gold, on the other shining Armor: the
Emperor asked him what meant that Lindsey-Woolsey? he answered, Sir, the
attire on the right side is to hono^r your Majesty, that on the left is to
serve you. Sir William Peter returns with those Gayeties of carriages on the
one hand that might adorn a Court, and with those abilities on the other that
might support it. His first employment was the Charts, the Lattin Letters, and
the Foreign N^gotiation: the next, was Principal Secretary: In which Office,
Wriothesly was rough and stubborn, Paget easy, Cecil close, Mason plain, Smith
noble; Peter was smooth, reserved, resolved, and yet obliging. Both the Laws he
was Doctor of, and both the Laws he made use of; the Civil Law to direct
Foreign Negotiations, and the other to give light to Domestic Occasions.

In the Kings absence in France 1554. Craumer and Thorleby are to assist the
Queen in matters of Religion, the Earl of Hertford in Affairs of War, the Lord
Parr of Horton, and Doctor Peter, in the Civil Government; (whose Maxim it
was, It is the interest of the Kings of England to be the Arbiters of
Christendom.) Thus much he was to the Queen by Henry the eighth's Deputation,
and no less to King Edward by his Will.

A man would wonder how this man made a shift to serve four Princes of such
distant Interests as King Henry, King Edward, Queen Mary. Queen Elizabeth;
until he recollects the French King, who enquired of a wise man how he might
govern himself (...) his Kingdom? the wise man took a fair large sheet of
Paper, and instead of an infinite number of Precepts, which others use to offer
upon that subject, he only writ this word, Modus, A Mean. In King Henry's time
he observed his Humor, in King Edward's he kept to the Law, in Queen Mary's he
intended wholly S^ate-affairs, and in Queen Elizabeth's he was religious, his
years minding him of death, and his death of his faith. He moved with the first
Movers in most transactions to his apparent danger, yet he had motions of his
own for his real security. Able he was at home, and very dexterous abroad;
particularly at Bulloin. The Philosophers exercising their Gifts before an
Ambassador, he asked one that was silent what he should say of him? Report to
your King (says he) that you found one among the Graecians that know how to
hold his tongue. Ah, (said Mounsieur Chatillon) we had gained the last 200000
Crowns without Hostages, had it not been for the man that said nothing,
(meaning Secretary Peter.)

Neither was he better at keeping his own counsel, than at discovering other
mens^ as appeared by the intelligence he had, that the Emperor had ^ent ships
to transport the Lady Mary into Germany, in case the King would not allow her
the practice of her Religion, (though three men knew not that Design in the
German Court) whereupon he fetched her two Leez; and thence, under the notion
of preparing for Sea-matters, he sent over five thousand pounds to relieve the
Protestants.

Active he was about the Will in compliance with his duty to King Edward, but
as nimble in his intelligence suitable to his Allegiance to Queen Mary; whom he
assisted in two Particulars (...). In making the Ma^ch: 2. In searching the
bottom of Wiat's Insurrection: therefore, 1. When the Church Lands went against
her conscience, Sir William Peter must be sent for. 2. When the Pope sent
another Legate to turn out Pool, he must be sent for; (who advised her to
forbid him this Land, as she very resolutely did.)


As serviceable was he to Queen Elizabeth, till his Age not being able to go
through the difficulties, and his Conscience being impatient of the severities
of those ^^^ie and harsh times, he retired to Essex, where his Estate was
great, and his Charity greater: both which he bequeathed his Son John, who was
by King James made Baron of Writtle in that County.

Observations on the Life of Cardinal Pool.
HIs Extraction was so high, that it awakened King Henry the Eighth's
Jealousies; and his Spirit so low, that it allayed it: When he reflected on his
Royal His Mother was Daughter to the Duke of Clarence, and Grandchild to Edward
the IV.
Relation, he was enjealousied to hard thoughts of restraint and security; when
he observed his modest Hopefulness, he was obliged to those more mild of
Education and Care, as more honorable than the other, and as safe: Religion
and Study would enfeeble that spirit to quiet contemplation, which more manlike
exercises might ennoble for Business and Action. It was but mewing him up in a
study with hopes of a Mitre, and there would be no danger of his ambition to
the Crown. The Privacies of the School and College made him a stranger to the
transactions of Court; and he was two follow his Book, that he might not
understand himself.

His preferments were competent to content him, and yet but mean to expose him.

Three things concurred to his escape from King Henry's Toil.

1. His Relation's ambition, that could not endure he should be wrapped in
Black, that was born to be clothed in Purple. 2. His own Inclination to add
Experience to his Learning. 3. The Kings Policy, to maintain him abroad, who
could not safely keep at home.
No sooner arriveth he at Paris, than the Pope caresseth him as a person ^it to
promote his Interest: The House of York supports him, as one that kept up their
Claim; and the general Discontent cries him up as one that was now the hope of
England, and might be its Relief.

That he might not come short of their Expectation, or his own Right, his large
capacity takes in the Learning of most Unive^sities, observes the way of most
Nations, and keeps correspendence with all eminent men: The first of these
improved his Learning, the second his Experience, the third his Converse.

The Marquess of Exeter, the Lord Mountacute, Sir Nicholas Carew, Sir Edward
Nevil, Sir Geoffery Poole, would have made him a King, (but to gain him a
Crown, they loft their own Heads) and Pope Julius made him a Kings Fellow; but
he was never Head of this Church since he put the Red Hat on this Cardinal.

The King had him declared for a Traitor in England, and he him excommunicated
for an Hereti^k at Rome. His Friends are cut off by the King at home, and the
Kings Enemies che^ished by ^im abroa^.

But Princes are mortal, though their hatred not so: For before the Kings
death, he would needs be reconciled to Pool, and as some thought, by him to
Rome; wherefore he sends to him now in great esteem in Italy, desiring his
opinion of his late Actions clearly, and in few words: Glad was Pool of this
occasion to dispa^ch to him his Book de Union Ec^lesiarum, inveighing against
his Supremacy, and concluding with an advice to Henry to reconcile himself to
the Catholic Church, and the Pope as Heads thereof. Our King having perused
this, and knowing it could not lie hid in Italy (though Pool had promised not
to publish it) sends for him by Post to come into England, to explain some
Passages ther^of: but Pool knowing tha^ it was declared Treason there to deny
the Kings Supremacy, r^fused; desiring the King nevertheless in Letters to him
and Tonstal, to take hold of the present time, and redintegrate himself with
the Pope; whereby he might secure his Authority, and advance it with the honor
of being the cause of a Reformation of the Church in Doctrine and Manners.

King Edward is King of England, and the Cardinal like to be Pope of Rome,
keeping pace with the Royal Family; He Head of the Church Catholic, They of
that in England: but King Edward's weakness of Body sus^ered him not long to
enjoy his Throne, and the Cardinals Narrowness and easiness of spirit suffered
him not at all to sit in his chair.

For upon Paul the Third's death, the Cardinals being divided about the
Election, the Imperial part, which was the greatest, gave their voice for
Cardinal Pool; which being told him, he disabled himself, and wished them to
choose one that might be most for the glory of God, and good of the Church, Upon
this stop, some that were now friends to Pool, and perhaps looked for the place
themselves, if he were put of^, laid many things ^o his c^a^ge; among other
things, That he was not without susp^tion of Lutheranism, nor without ble^ish
of Incontinence: ^ut he cl^a^ed himself so handsomely, that he was now more
impo^^^^^d to take the place then before, and therefore one night (they say)
the Cardinal came to him being in bed, and sent word they came to adore him, (a
circumstance of the new Popes Honor) but he being waked but of his sleep and
acquainted with it, made answer, That this wa^ not a work of darkeness, and
therefore requir^d them to forbear until next day, and then do as God should
put in their minds. But the Italian Cardinals attributing this put-off to a
kind of stupidity and sloth in Pool, looked no more after him, but the next day
those Cardinal Montanus Pope, who was afterward named Julius the Third.

I have heard of many that would have been Popes, but could not; I write this
man one that could have been one, but would not.

But though he would not be Pope of Rome, yet when Mary was Queen, he was one
of England^ where he was Legate, and if it had not been for the Emperor, had
been King: For as soon as she was in the Throne of England, he was sent for out
of Italy into the Chair of Canterbury; but Charles the Emperor, by the Popes
power, secretly retarded his return, fearing it might ob^truct the propounded
marriage between his Son and the Queen. Indeed the Queen bare the Cardinal and
unfeigned affection for six reasons: 1. For his grave and becoming presence,
that endeared him no less to those that saw him, than his parts and prudence
did to those that conversed with him: The Diamond is then orient, when set in
Gold. 2. For his disposition, as calm as her Majesties^ and as ^eek a^ his
Profession. 3. For his Age: being about ten years older, the proportion allowed
by the Philosopher between Husband and Wife. 4. For Alliance: she being
daughter to Henry the Eighth, and he Grandchild to Edward the Fourth. 5. For
his Education with her, under his Mother. 6. For his Religion, for which he was
an Exile, as she was a Prisoner, and both Confessors.


But now when the marriage with Prince Philip was consummated, Pool at last got
leave for England; and to wipe away all suspicion of Lutheranism, wherewi^h he
was formerly taxed, he became a cruel, that he might be believed a cordial
Papist: Full. Hi^^^ Cent. 19^ p. 14^
For meeting in Brabant wi^h Emanuel Tremelius, requesting ^ome favor from
him, he not only denied him relief, but returned him railing terms; though
formerly he was not only his very familiar Friend, but his Godfather too,
when of a Jew he turned Christian. Arrived in England, ( as the Historian goes
on) he was first ordained Priest, being but Deacon before, and then consecrated
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Queen being present, at Bow; where rich in costly
R^bes, and sitting on a gilded Throne, his Pall was presented to him: Adorned,
he presently mounts the Pulpit, and makes a dry Sermon of the use and honor of
the Pall, without either Langu^ge or matter; all admiring the jejuness of his
Discourse, as if putting off his Parts, when putting on his Pall.

He made the breach formerly between England and Rome, by exasperating both
sides: he now reconciles it, obliging many by his carriage, awing as many by
his presence, dazzling all by his pomp and splendor. Now he confirms the
In^titution of Clergy-m^n into their Benefices; he legitimateth the C^ildren of
forbidden marriages; he ratifieth the Processes and Sentences in matters
Ecclesiastical; and his Dispensations were confirmed by Act of Parliament.

Two things he was intent upon: 1. The Church-P^iviledges; whereof one he
procured was, That the Clergy should not show their Horses with the Layty, but
under Captains of their own choosing. 2. The Spanish Interest; and therefore
P^^l the fourth, who was as intent upon the French, and looked upon the Legate
as the principal Promoter of the last War in France, sends Cardinal Peito to
ease him of his Legantine Power in England. But the Queen so ordered the
matter, that by her Prerogative she prohibited Peito entrance into England, and
got the foresaid Power established and confirmed on Cardinal Pool, as she did
likewise 1000 l. a year for his better support out of the Bishopric of
Winchester. The more he lived in England, the more he was Italianized;
conversing with their Merchants, and practicing their thrift; his Pomp being
(^aith my Author) rather g^udy than costly, and his attendance more ceremonious
than expensive. Fea^full he was of a Bank here, (if Queen Mary died) careful of
one beyond Sea if he lived: therefore as he sends all his Estate to Italy by
his Will when he died, so he did most of it by Bills of Exchange while he
l^v^d: the first was j^dged his ^olicy, q (the heart whereof is prevention) the
second his Gratitude, bestowing his Superfluities on them who had relieved his
Necessities. Of all his Estate, Aloisius Priol took but the Breviary he had
always in his Pocket, so devou^ he was and the Diary he had always in his
Closer, so exact he was to observe what was done by others, and recollect what
had escaped himself Die he did not of Italian Physic wilfully taken by
himself, as Mr, Fox suggests; nor of English Poison; given him by the
Protestants, as Osorius affirms; but of a Quartain Ague, then Epidemical in
England, and malignant above the ordinary nature of that Disease. This man was
a Catholic in his Interest and Charity, and a Protestant in his Conscience, We
cannot (was his ^aying) give too much to God^ grace, nor too little to our own
merits. He said when he came to England, I came hither not to condemn, but
reconcile; not to compel, but desire. He would burn the Ashes of one or two
Protestants when dead, to avoid the suspicion of Here^ie; but the Bodies of
none when alive, to contract the real guilt of Cruelty. In Council sound were
his Debates for the main; circumspect his Suggestions of Circumstances;
reaching his foresight of Consequences^ wary his Precautions of Impediments;
moderate and soft his Advices^ prompt and steady his Expeditions; happy his
Memory; many his Observations; large his Reading; strong his Spirit; solid his
Judgment; sharp his Apprehen^ion^ fluent, but weighed; full, but pertinent:
grave, but quick his Discourse: what he pronounced, was a D^cree with Queen
Mary; what he said, was Law with King Philip: His naked Proposition was
Demonstration: his Word Reason, fetched from the Principles of things, and
grounded on their Causes. His Modesty never sued for Greatness, though that
sued for him: for great men he said were Slaves to six things: 1. To men's
humors; 2. To business; 3. To Fortune^ 4. To their own Followers; 5. To Fame;
and, 6. To the Public. I will say no more of him, but that Modesty undoeth a
Maid, and is the fool only that puts Virtue out of Countenance. Bashfulness is
at best but a weak and treacherous Virtue.


Observations on the Life of Sir John Russel.
HIs Name and his Valor is as ancient as the Conquest; Virtue flowing in every
Age of that Family with its Honor and Worth, keeping pace with their
Advancements. In every man that we meet with, there are three things that
immediately offer themselves to our Consideration: 1. The Mind. 2. The
Behavior. And 3. The Person.


His Mind was befriended by Nature with a quickness and a capaciousness, helped
by public Education to a solidity and stayedness^ improved in Travel with
Observation, and raised by the slow, but happy degrees of his Preferments to
Skill and Experience. They had need be slow and wary in that place where there
is no failing the second time, the first error being irremediable: therefore
well-ordered Policy imitateth Nature, which works slowly^ and step by step,
causing the Blade to come from the Grain, the Tree from the Graft, the Blossom
from the Tree, and Fruit from the Blossom: so (says my Author) ought Policy to
raise great persons from one degree to another; to the end, that having made
their Essays in meaner matters, they may finish their Masterpieces in more
eminent Affairs, 2. He that demeans himself well, is ever ushered in by a
friend that recommends him to the company that knew him nor.

Sir John had a moving beauty that waited on his whole Body, as that standing
one does upon the Face and Complexion: Such a grace and comeliness waited on
His Noble Men, as exacted a liking, if not a love from all that beheld him.

A midling Clarity and quickness is best in Wine, that is, neither to thick
upon the Lees, nor yet too quick: our Knights comportment and carriage was
neither dull nor vapouring, neither gross nor affected, but of a becoming
temper, at equal distance with the Clown and the Pedant, what is contemptible,
and what is invidious. 3. But both these were set off with his Person, of a
middle stature, neither tall to a formidableness, nor short to a contempt:
straight and proportioned, vigorous and active, with that pure blood and
spirits that flowed and flowred within his swelling Veins, and disposed him to
those natural and innocent, those manly and noble Exercises of Dancing, etc.
Dancing, I say, which he was not exquisite in, for that is vanity: nor ignorant
of, for that is meanness: but a graceful exercise, (wherein he was carelessly
easy, as if it were rather natural motion, than curious and artificial
practicing) which endeared his severer Virtues to that place where the worth
that rises must be complaisant and pleasing, as well as serviceable and
useful. But the favor which proceeds from personal grace and comeliness,
although it seem to be doubly united, yet it is that which is soonest dissolved
and dissipated, there being nothing so inconstant as men's humors, which not
only change through Ages, but also by some small occasion or accident which
may arise: Sir John therefore brought himself into Court by what humoured, but
kept himself in there by those things that did oblige him; and stood not upon
his Majesty's pleasure, but his Interest; adding to his more aerie Courtships,
more solid Employments. From the softer Court therefore we must follow him to
the Camp, and that before Terwyn, where we find him daring and active: 1. In
skirmishing the French every day; 2. In recovering the red Gun overthrown in a
L^ne from 10000 French, under the Earl S. Paul as General, with 250 resolute
Reformades under himself but Captain; although he was once taken Prisoner, as
before Calice, where he redeemed himself from the Officer that had taken him
for 250 Crowns, on condition ^he would conduct him safe from the French
Quarter, as the man did, until they were gone so far, that Sir John takes him
Prisoner, compelling him to the Reimbursement of his money, with 200 Crowns
more, to be bestowed on the Common Soldiers. As severely active was he at the
siege of Tournay, as the oldest Soldier; and yet as indocently pleasant at the
Mask there, as the youngest Courtier. One of the sixty he was that went with
the King to cut off the Passage between that City and the Army, and one of the
eleven that went with his Majesty to entertain the Ladies at Lisle. From
serving one King in France, he had the honor as it was thought to kill another
in England, (I mean James of Scotland) and challenge a third in Paris. The same
thing raised him, that advanced Wolsey: for he being sent to Maximilian, (after
Treasurer Naphant had brought him to Court) dispatched his business so soon,
that the King chid him for not being gone, when he was returned; and withal
asked him, Whether he had seen the Post that he had sent after him about a
circumstance that had escaped him? He answered, He met him in his return^ but
he had presumed to add that particular of his own head, for which he asked his
Majesty's pardon, and had his favor too for the Deanery of Lincoln, and the
Almonership. Sir John was commanded with 1500 men to cut off the Convoy to
Terwyn: which he performed with that speed and success, that when the King saw
him, he said, I, I, Sir John, while we are fooling, the Town is relieved. So it
is indeed, (said he) for I have sent them 2000 Carcases, and they have spared
me 1200 Wagons of Provision. I but, said the King, I sent after you to cut off
the Bridge Dreban. That, replied the Knight, was the first thing I did:
wherefore I am upon my knees for your Majesty's grace and pardon. Nay then,
(said the King) by Lady, thou have not my pardon, but my favor too. He is the
man for a Princes service, whose mind is present, and prudence is ready to
meet with sudden occasions, and accommodate unexpected emergencies. The first
effect of that favor, was his Nomination for one of the sixteen that answered
the French challenge at the Lady Mary's Marriage, at Pa^^s, November 7, 1513.
which showed his manhood, and how valiant he was. The second was, that he was
one of the Forty five that were to be about his Majesty at the instant of his
Interview with the King of France at Guisnes^ which was an Argument of his
presence^ and how goodly a man he was. The third was, that he was one of the
Twenty two that with the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral, and Sir William
Fitz-Williams Vice Admiral, proposed that secret, and therefore successful
D^signe upon Britain, under pretense of Scowring the Narrow Seas, (for now he
is as good in the Sea as he had been in the Field) for which he and eight more
of his fellow-Captains, Sir Ioh. Cornwallis, etc. are Knighted by the aforesaid
Lord Admiral: which speaks him a Seaman, and indeed one of a general capacity.
The fourth was, the great Trust his Majesty reposed in him, when he was sent in
disguise to widen the difference that was newly broken out between the Duke of
Bourbon, the high Constable of France, and the French King; which he managed so
well, that the discontented Duke declares for the Emperor and the King of
England, to the great encouragement of the English, the satisfaction of his
Majesty, and the success of his Design upon Anchor, Boungard, Bray, and other
places, where Sir John showed himself as active now, as he was before cunning
as much surpassing the French Spirit in action, as he had overreached their
Prudence in Negotiation.

But in vain was it to serve that King, unless a man obliged the Cardinal, (he
that Courts the Virgin Mary, must not neglect her little Saints) him he
attended in his second Journey to France, first to honor, and then to serve
him. And now after his decease, when King Henry had done the work of mercy
(which was most proper for himself, as being most popular) upon the
Lincolnshire Rebels, he deputed the Duke of Suffolk, Sir Francis Brians and Sir
John Russel to perform that of Justice, which is most distastful: wherein yet
he behaves himself with that exactness, that the Country was very well pleased,
and the King as well satisfied; insomuch that we find our Knight now called
from a Commander in in the Field, to be Controller at Court: where he managed
his Masters Expenses thriftily, reduced his Family discreetly, reformed his
followers effectually, and filled up his place with the awe of his presence,
and the influence of his Authority, that he was at once its support and its
glory. Indeed Courts being those Epitoms wher^through strangers look into
Kingdoms, should be Royally set of as with Utensils, so with attendance^ that
might possess all Comers with reverence there, and fear elsewhere.

Her Person graced his Employment, and therefore his Majesty honored his
Person with the Order of the Garter, and the Title of Lord R^ssel; and that his
Preferment might keep pace with his Honor, he is made Lord Privy Seal, and his
Nephew Sir John Cage Controller. His Honor flacked not his Activity, but
improved it; neither was his Virtue only violent in Ambition, and dull in
Authority. Power to do good, is the true and lawful end of aspiring: therefore
my Lord to his Staff, added his Sword; and to his Court-honour, his Field
service, as Lieutenant General before Muttrel, and Marshal before Bulloign; to
the relief of the first whereof, he drew Mounsieur Governor ^f Bies.
Bies, that his Majesty might take the second. In the Camp he drew up the
Designs, in the Field he managed the Treasure, and in Action to him was
intr^sted the Conduct and manage. In the Kings last Will and Testament he was
the fifth person, and in his Sons Council the fifth; to whom he discovered a
French Plot the first year of his Reign, and for whom he broke the Devonshire
Rebels, what with delays, what with stratagems, to divide them according to
their several Inclinations, the second, for which service he was made Earl of
Bedford: The third, in the Faction at home between the Seymours and the
Dudleys, he was Neuter: in the Treaties abroad between the French King and his
Majesty of England, he was Principal; where he observed three Rules: 1. That
there should be a general Muster at home, while this Treaty went on abroad. 2.
That there should be a blow given the Scots before there was a Peace made with
the French, 3. That we should first know the French Overtures before we made
our own,

But while he was here, he discovered a Plot that the Emperor had to transport
the Lady Mary over to his Dominions, and thereby bring her Brother to his
terms: whereupon he with 200 men watches one Port, the Duke of Somerset with
200 more a second, and Master St. Leiger with 400 men a third, while the Lady
was fetched by my Lord Chancellor to the King. But while he was serving his
Master the King abroad, his Friend the Protector wanted his advice and
assistance at home, he being of purpose sent out of the way, while that
unfortunate Duke is first betrayed by his own folly, and then ruined by his
Enemies power. I find his hand among the rest of the Counselors in a Letter
to Queen Mary, but not in Arms against her^ He was concluded by the major Vote
to a Commission for Peace, but not to Action for conscience sake. Faithful he
is therefore to her in Council, and serviceable in Spain and France; from the
first of which places he brought her a Husband, and from the second a Treasure.
He understood her Right, and disputed not her Religion; regarding not so much
her Opinion, as his own Duty; not what she was, but what he should be. And thus
he behaved himself, until his dear Mistress Elizabeth took him for one of her
Protestant Councillors to balance her Popish ones: and not only of her
Council, but of her Cabinet: (for as every man must have his Friend to ease his
heart, so Princes have their Favorites to partake of their cares) and the
Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir William Cecil, were the
only Persons to whom the Queen communicated her design of Reformation, and
correcting the Common Prayer; and they ordered affairs so, that the Protestants
should be in hope, and yet the Papists should not be out of hope.

King Philip had a quarrel with the Queen for rejecting his suit, the King of
Sweden for slighting his Son, the King of France in his Wives Right, the Queen
of Scots in her Own, and the Pope for excluding his Supremacy; her Subjects
were as unsettled in their Loyalty as in their Religion: What remained? but
that my Lord of Bedford and Sir William Cecil should make up a well-tempered
House of Commons by their Interest, who should carry along an indifferent House
of Lords by their Resolution?

When he had served the Queen in Parliament for the settlement of her Kingdom
at home, he served the Kingdom in an Embassy to Scotland, to set up its
correspondence abroad.

The Earl of Leicester aimed at the Queen of England, and the Earl of Bedford,
to divert him and secure Scotland, designed him for the Queen of Scots; whom he
watched for two things: 1. That she should either match with an English
Subject, or 2. With a soft and weak Forreigner; that either the Scots might be
in league with us, or have no peace at home.

His last service I find is a complement, when he was sent by the Queen as her
Deputy, with a font of massy Gold worth 1043 l. to hold King James at his
Baptism; with express command not to acknowledge my Lord Darley as King. This
his service was as lasting as his life, which ended in old Age and Renown. He
conveyed his Virtue and Honor to the Excellent Francis, as he did to the Right
Honorable William Earl of Bedford: now living.

Observations on the Life of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester.
THe tuition of the Earl of Dorset's Children raised Wolsey; traveling with
the Duke of Norfolk's raised Gardener: Fox his service in the quality of
Secretary, made the first; and his in the same quality, made Gardener.

There are three kinds of Understanding; The one, that is advised by its self;
the second, that understands when it is informed by another; the third, that
neither is advised by its self, nor by the assistance of another. If this
Doctor failed in the first, and his own invention, he exceeded in the second,
of making use of others; for he was one of them that never heard or read what
was not his own. His Profession was the Civil Law, that guides foreign
Nego^i^tions: His Inclination was that general Policy that manageth them.

His Eminencies were three: 1. His Reservedness: Whereby he never did what he
aimed at, never aimed at what he intended, never intended what he said, and
never said what he thought; whereby he carried it so, that others should do his
business, when they opposed it; and he should undermine theirs, when he seemed
to promote it. A man that was to be traced like the Fox, and read like Hebrew,
backward: if you would know what he did, you must observe what he did not. 2.
His Boldness. Authority sometimes meets with those impediments, which neither
power can overcome, nor good fortune divert, if Courage and Fortitude break not
through and furmount them; and the motions of the irascible faculties, such as
Hope, Boldness and Choler, being well ordered, and conducted by Reason, engage
those difficulties she encountereth in the execution of her designs: Reason
discovered him his enterprises, his Will inclined him to them, and the noble
transports of his regular passions ^et out both with that ardour and
vehemency, as bear down obstacles, and compass the design: A hope he had, that
never rashly engaged him in desperate under^akings; an audaci^y that
precipitated him not weakly into impossibilities; and a choler that led him not
blindly to inevitable ruins: Consideration managing ^he first, Discretion and
Forefight the second, and Reason the third. What does is avail a man to be
wise, in knowing what is fit to be done; prudent, to invent means; just, to
appropriate affairs to public good; authorized and happy, to cause them to
succeed; if a Courage, guided by Reason, accompanied with Prudence, ^uled by
Discretion, animated by a generous Boldness, be not diligent, quick and p^ompt
for Execution? His nature was generous and constant: His Education (like that
of the Roman Youth among Statesmen) manifold and solid: His Soul was free, and
dis-engaged from any particular Design. 3. El^quence; That added to his Parts
what colors do to a Picture^ s^ate, grace and light: Reason is the O^nament of
a Man, Speech the Interpreter of Reason, and Eloquence the grace of Speech;
wherein the Orator excels other men, as much as they do other creatures. His
Wisdom advised, his Prudence contrived, his Courage resolved, and his Eloquence
persuaded; adding at once gracefulness to his Designs, and vigor to his
Enterprises; as that wherewith he could satisfy men's Reasons, and master their
Passions, by which he carried them whither he pleased: His lively Expre^s^on
animates his Reason, his Eloqu^nce his Expression, and his Gesture hi^
Eloquence; whereby he charmed the Senses, mollified Hearts, incited Affections,
framed Desires, check^d Hopes, and exercised a sacred Empire over every man he
dealt with.


These qualities improved with Travel, raised the D^ctor to be the
Chancellou^'s Secretary, and the Kept a^ Black Fi^ars.
Legantine Courts chief Scribe at home, a ^ly Agent in Italy, a successful
Orator in Germany, and Leiger Ambassador in France. In Italy, he with D^ctor
Fox (hav^ng the King of France his Agent to second them) gained the Popes
Commission for hearing of the Cause between King Henry the VIII, and Queen
K^therine.

In Germany he undermined the French King, and in France the Emperor.

Upon the poor Pope (whom he found not worth 20 l.) perplexed between the King
of England, who had set him at liberty, and the King of Spain, who had
maintained him, he wrought so far, as to gain a dubious Letter in Cipher to the
King, and a clear promise to the Cardinal, both about the suppression of some
Monasteries, and the Divorce; which the craf^y Agent extorted from the fearful
man, with his Necesse est, etc. although all this while he palliated this his
main business, with some impertinent ov^rtures about King Henry the seventh's
Canonization: None better understanding the just degrees, seasons and methods
of Affairs, than this Doctor: Where he spoke one word for his Majesty's
Divorce, he spoke two for the Cardinals Advancement, having the French Kings
Letter with him to that effe^t, in omnem eventum: In order whereunto he
threatened the Pope from Germany, and Germany from Rome; so that their mutual
jealousies forced them to a compliance with his Royal and Sacred Master. A
great Agent he was in this business while Woolsey's Secretary, a greater when
the King^; in which capacity he writ, they say, one Book for the Pop^'s
Supremacy in his Masters Name, and another for the Kings in his own.

He draws the Kingdom's Remonstrance against the Pope, wherein he has one
shrewd argument; to this purpose those sacra or ways of Religion that have
any thing in them in any nation against the light of nature, and the being of
humane society were severely animadverted on by the Romans upon this principle,
that it was to be supposed that Gods Religion should interfere with government
which is Gods institution, and that way of Religion which has in woven in it
principles that make the Ecclesiastical power a Competitor with the Civil, and
the Pope's against the Kingdom: He and Doctor Fox are employed to gain the Vote
of Cambridge for the Divorce; where he brought it from the Negative to even
Voices, and from even Voices to a Dispu^ation, and upon that, to a
Determin^tion on the Kings ^ide: for which we find him now Bishop of
Winchester, Archbishop Cranmer's Assistant at pronouncing the Divorce at the
Priory of Dunstable, and one of the two Ambassadors at the Interview between
King Francis and King Henry.

As he had declared himself by writing, so he drew up a Form whereby others
might declare themselves by oath for the Kings Supremacy: And as he owneth the
Kings Authority, so he maintains it in his Apology for Fisher's Death.

But because no power is lasting, when Religion is not venerable, the wary
Bishop promotes the Statutes of six Articles in the House of Commons, in spite
of Cromwell and Cranmer; and urges the retaining of some essential Latin As,
Ecclesia, poeniteniia, Episcopus, Sacrificium, Pontifex.
words in the translation, in the Convocation; Words, for their genuine and
native meaning, and for the Majesty of the matter in them contained, not to be
Englished: Though he could not keep the word from shining, yet he had wit
enough to keep it in a da^k Lanthorn, to keep the Laity at their distance, and
bear up the Will Worship of Rome.

H^d he kept here, King Henry had been satisfied; but when his success improved
his boldness, and that precipitated his undertakings, he must be quarreling
with the Protestant Queens, and so fall out with the Ux^rious King, under whose
displeasure he continued while he lived, as he did under his sons afterward:
(First, for refusing a confession of his fault, and then for not subscribing
some Articles proposed unto him, though he owned the Supremacy, the
Reformation, and said of the Common Prayer, That though he would not have made
it so himself, yet he found in it such things as satisfied his conscience; and
therefore he would both execute it himself, and cause others of his Viz Those
of his Diocese.
Parishioners to do it; and if he were troubled inconscience, he would reveal
it to the Council, and not reason o^enly against it:) so that he lost his
Liberty and his B^sh^prick, until he was restored to both by Queen Mary, (who
kissed and called him her Prisoner in the Tower) and likewise advanced him to
the Chancellourship; wherein he did more harm by others than himself; keeping
always behind^ the Curtain, and acting in Oxford by Visitors, in London by
Bonner, and in his own Diocese by Suffragans; Only in two Particulars he
declared himself: 1. Against the Princess Elizabeth: saying, In vain it is to
lop the Branches, while the Root remains. 2. Against the Exiles: Threatening
that he would watch their supplies, so that they should eat their nails, and
then feed on their fingers ends.


But threatened Folks live long; and before the Confessors were brought to that
Bill of fare, the Bishop was eaten of worms himself, dying suddenly and
strangely; wholly a Protestant in the point of merit, who had been in other
things so zealous a Papist.

One piece at once of his Prudence and Resolution, and I have done: The Lord
Protector by Letters solicited Gardener to resign Trinity-Hall to the Kings
hand, who designed one Co^ledge out of that and Clare-Hall: Most politic
Gardener (says my Author) not without cause suspecting some design or casualty
might (surprise the Interval between the dissolution of the old, and the
erection of this new Foundation, civilly declined the motion, informing his
Grace, That the way to advance the study of the Law, was by promoting the
present Professors of that Faculty, (now so generally discouraged) and not by
founding a new College for the future Students thereof; seeing Trinity Hall
alone could breed more Civilians than all England did prefer according to their
deserts.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Herbert.
HIs Family had not endeared its self to the ancient Kings by its service, nor
his Grandfather himself to King Henry the Seventh by his Relation, more than He
did Himself to King Henry the Eighth by his Merit. He was a great Pattern of
ancient Virtue, that in the greatest Fortune enjoyed the least Liberty:
Vigilant and careful: One whose Power was attended with Solicitude, ( there
was an Eye in the ancient Scepters) and his solicitude with Temperance; (he
that commands himself, commands the World too.) While some men's imprudent
integrity can do no harm, and others base cunning can do no good; Sir William's
Prudence and integrity was equally able for both, as there was occasion. Very
close and successful were his and my Lord Shefield's Negotiations abroad: Very
resolute and manly his Conduct at home. He was one of the twenty four
Counselors to Henry the Eighth while he lived, and one of the sixteen
Executors of his Will when he died. All great undertakers must avoid softness
and effeminacie, the bane of great Natures and Actions: For where there is love
and pleasure, there is fear; and where there is fear, there is that which
enchains Generosity and confines Courage.

He had his double Diary; the first for Actions, the second for Observations
upon them: And indeed his and Sir William Kingston's Manuscripts give a great
light to the History of those times: In which Diary we find what actions he
did against the Scots by constant alarms with three thousand Welsh, and what
against Ket's Rebels by notable stratagems with two thousand. The man is
complete that has a Head and a Heart.

As to the Faction in King Edward's time, he would not concern himself, looking
on accusations in a Commonwealth as great advantages to check ambition, and
vent discontent; that the one may not aspire too dangerously, nor the other
break out too irregularly. And as little concerned was he in King Edward's
Will; his business being rather obeying the Sovereign that was, than
determining who should be.

He was a thoroughly advised man; one that gazed not on the issues, but enquired
into the reasons and spring of Actions.

Very useful he was in Queen Mary's Council, and no less in King Philip's War,
where he got St. Quintin for him, and a lasting Renown for himself: who died in
Queen Elizabeth's time, and left this plain Character behind, That he was a
noble Gentleman, of a trusty, a free and an open Nature.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Thomas Manors, and Sir Ralph Evers.
I Join them both in my Observations, because they agreed both in their
dispositions: 1. Both Nobly Religious, and so blessed themselves, and being a
blessing unto others; Their Religion was attended with Magnanimity, Constancy,
Wisdom, Prudence, Valor and Counsel, as the Products of it; and with Success
as the Issue. 2. Both famous and renowned; having Honor, as the shadow does
the Sun, going before them in their younger years, to make their way to action;
keeping even with them in their middle age, to countenance and credit their
proceedings; and following them in old Age to eternize and embalm them: Both
making their way to Honor as Agesilaus in Plutarch, or Epictetus in Strabo, by
saying what was well, and doing what was better; or with Socrates, by being
what they appeared, and appearing no more than they were: (Virtue, though
obscure, may satisfy me; it must be renowned, or it c^nnot serve othe^s:) But
action is the life of things, and good dispo^itions are rather a man's
Inclinations than his Virtue. Both therefore are in their Courage regular, in
their Conduct observant, in their Addres^es obliging, in their Passions even,
in their Enjoyments severe, and in their Services equal.


Sir Thomas Manors first weakened the In King H. 8's time, when they rise
against the Reformation.
Northern Rebels, by such discree^ Propositions as met with many of their
Humors and Interests, and then resolved to engage them, but that the little
Brook Dua swelled miraculously to a River, b^tween both Armies: And at the same
time Sir Ralph Evers held Scarborough^ Castle, where he had no Soldiers but
his own Servants, nor any sustenance for twenty days, but bread and water. For
this service he is made Lord Warden of the Marches, as Sir Thomas is Lord
Governor of the North.

Both did his Majesty as much service in Peace for his Revenue, as in War for
his Security: Both against the Cardinal's way of raising Money, which was but
the relieving of a present need by laying the foundation of a lasting
inconvenience; being very careful that their Master did not lose in the
president what he gained in the money.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Baker.
THere is one of this Name remarqueable in every Kings Reign since the
Conquest; here is one now renowned in this: 1. For Integrity, to be neither
awed nor corrupted: 2. For a Spirit public as Nature, neither moved with
particular respects, nor terminated in a private Design.

The French were so insolent in London the eighth year of Henry the Eighth,
that when one Williamson a Carpenter was about to pay for two Pigeons he
bought, a Frenchman takes them out of his hand^ saying, They were no meat for
Carpenters, but for my Lord Ambassador; who concerned himself so much in the
case, that he had Williamson imprisoned: Sir John sued to the Ambassador for
the man, who answered, That the English Knave deserved to be hanged for denying
any thing to a French man. Whereupon Sir John replied, You know not that you
are in London: A no^able reply, considering that the City was up next day
against Strangers, in so d^s^erate a tumult, that none could suppress but Sir
Thomas More, and none settle but Sir William Kingston and Sir John Baker. No
sooner had he allayed the disorder at home, but he with the Bishop of St.
Asaph, are sent to appease a Rebellion abroad, I mean in Denmark, though in
vain; when the Kings cruelty exceeded their apology, and ruin was more
elegiable with that people, than duty or obedience: Where he observed these six
Maxims, in order to a newly conquered Kingdom: 1. That the Royal Line should
be extinguished. 2. That the old Customs in Laws and Taxes should be observed.
3. The Prince must be there to observe their humors in person. 4. That the
Officers be moderate and honest. 5. That there be Colonies planted in one or
two places that are the Keys of the S^ate. 6. That the Neighbors should be
weakened and divided, and the Inland Forts demolished.


As he would have composed the troubles of foreign Princes, so he served the
necessities of his own, being the most successful Commissioner for the
Benevolence in the Country; and the most active Agent for the loan in London:
Wherefore I find him Chancellor of the Exchequer, An. 1545, and one of the
assistants to the Trustees for King Edward, 1547.

Judge Mountague was the only person that durst dispute King Edward's Will:
Judge Hales and Sir John Baker were the only Councillors that durst refuse
it; the first whereof stood to the Law, against ^ower; the second, to his
Allegiance against Interest; and both to the rights of the Crown which are
lasting, rather than the Designs of some Favorites that are as momentary as
their Greatness, and as uncertain as their Grandeur.

This constant and firm resolution to stick to his Duty and L^yalty, brought
him to his Grave in peace and honor; having been a faithful Counselor and
Servant to King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Kingstons.
HE was one of the greatest Courriers at Masks and Revels, one of the best
Captains at Sea, and one of the most valiant and Skilful Commanders by Land.
None more pleasing to the English Ladies, none more terrible to the F^ench
King. Cunningly did he discover the King of Spains Design upon Navarre to his
Majesty, by pre^ending a Revolt to that King of Spain; and as cunningly did he
draw the French Troops into a snare, by counterfeiting a retreat toward
Britany. His Advice had saved the Admiral at Breast, and his Foresight did
rescue Sir Edward Belknap near Guis^es. He was Knighted for his Service at
Tournay, and made Marshal for his Success at Flodden. He was one of them that
persuaded the City to its duty at When the rising was there.
Shoreditch; and if that would not do, he was to command it from the Tower;
being Commissi^ner in the first place, Aug. 2. and Lieutenant of the second,
September 6. ( The Multitude is rather to be awed than reasoned with. Some
Princes have disarmed their Subjects, others have divided them, a third sort
have obliged them; others yet have kept up Plots amongst them: but all have
built and commanded Fortresses to secure themselves.) It were well if Love did,
it is necessary that Fear should guide this World. The King condescended one day
to Just with him; and he, though invincible, to fall by his Majesty, (You must
let a Prince be a Prince in every thing.) So complaisant he was, that he was
one of the six Maskers at Court at 50; and yet so grave, that when diverse young
men that were familiar with the King after the French mode were banished, he
kept his Station, as one of the stayed men, at 30. He was one of the 16 that
attended the King in his first Interview with the Emperor; and one of the 40
that waited on him in the two last with the King of France; narrowly escaping
at the last that poison as some thought, or ill vapors, as others conclude,
whereof the open-hearted Lord Brooks, the valiant Sir Edward Poynings, reserved
Sir John Pechy, and active Sir Edward Belknap, died: whereupon with his advice,
all Frenchmen were put to their Fines, and all Scotch to their ransom.
Neither was he only for show, but service too, leading the Right Wing of the
Army at Guisnes, when Sir Everard Digby commands the Left, the Lord Sands the
Vanguard, Sir Edward Guilford then Marshal of Callis the Horse, Sir Richard
Wink-field the Rear, and the Duke of Suffolk the main Battle. Where his
Assaults on Cappe and Roy spoke him a Soldier, as his underhand correspondence
with the Lord I^^lstein argued him a Statesman.

Sir Thomas Maunors the first Earl of Rutland of that Name discovered, and Sir
William Kingston told His Majesty the Cardinals Plots against the Kings
Marriage with Queen Anne, and his Design to marry him to the Duchess of
Alanzon: A Design, that because it seemed to overreach his Majesty in
cunning, and really did cross his Inclination in malice, that incensed his
Majesty to a passion which could be appeased with no less a sacrifice than the
Cardinals fall: in order to which, the next service of this Knight, is as
Lieutenant of the Tower to take him to custody: which he did at Leicester with
a Noble resolution, considering that man's greatness, with a due reverence
regarding his calling, and with a tender compassion respecting his condition;
persuading him gently of the Kings Favor, at that very time when he was come
to be an Instrument of his Justice. And what he did to a Cardinal now, he did
to Queens afterwa^ds; never Prince commanded higher services than King Henry,
nor subjects discharging them more undauntedly than Sir William: because
therefore he was so severe a Lieutenant in ^he Tower, he is made a
P^ovost-Marshal in the Field; in which capacity, after the Devonshire-Rebels
defeat, we have these two remarkable stories of him.

1. One Bowyer Mayor of Bodmin in Cornwall, had been amongst the Rebels, not
willingly, but enforced; to him the Provost sent word he would come and dine
with him; for whom the Mayor made great Provision. A little before Dinner the
Provost took the Mayor aside, and whispered him in the Ear, that an Execution
must that day be done in the Town, and therefore he must set up two Gallows.
The Mayor did so. After Dinner Sir William Kingston thanks him for his
Entertainment, and then desires him to bring him to the Gallows: where when
they were come, Sir William asked him, Whether they were strong enough; I, I Will
warrant thee, says the Mayor. Then, says Sir William, get you up upon them, I
hope, says the Mayor, you do not mean as you speak. Nay, Sir, says he, you
must die; for you have been a busy Rebel. And so without any more ado hanged
him. 2. A Miller that had been very active in the late Rebellion, fled, and
left another to take his Name upon him. Sir William Kingston calls for the
Miller, His Servant tells him that he was the Man. Then, says he, you must be
hanged. Oh Sir, says he, I am not the Miller, If you are not the Miller, you
are a lying Knave: if you are the Miller, you are a traiterous one, and however
you must dye. And so he did.
Punish the Multitude severely once, and you oblige them ever: for they love
that man only for his Good Nature, whom they fear for his Resolution.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Cheyney.
THree things advised men in King Henry the Eighth's days: 1. Their Extraction:
2. Their Wit: 3. Their Comeliness and Strength. For the first, his Name was up
since Battle-Abel-Roll; as to the second, it was enough that he traveiled with
Wolsey: and touching the third, there need be no other instance than that at
Paris, where upon the Daulphin's Proclamation of solemn Justs, the Duke of
Suff^lke, the Marquess of Dorset, Sir Edward Nevil and He, answered the
Challenge; as not long after he encountered King Henry himself at Greenwich,
where he had the great Honor of a strong and valiant Knight and a greater of
being overthrown by his Majesty.

Having engaged his Majesty's Person at home, he had the Honor to represent it
abroad: where his Commission was to complement the French King about his
Liberty, but his Business to observe the state of that place: Where he saw that
a Kingdom governed by a Prince who has under him other independent Lords, as
that of France, is no longer safe, than those Lords are either in Humor, or in
Purse; being always in danger either from their discontent or corruption: 2.
That Faction is always eager, while Duty is modest and temperate.

This Occasion ennobled his Virtue, and his Virtue improved the Occasion so
well, that I find him so eminent a Parliament Man the 22th of King Henry, that
as Sir Brian Tuge had the Honor to open the several Boxes sent from the
respective Universities, with their opinions about the Kings Divorce^ so Sir
Thomas had the happiness in a set Speech to insist upon them all in general,
and every one in particular. And at Queen Anne's Coronation my Lord Vaux, Sir
John Mordant, Sir Thomas, and ten more, are made Knights of the Bath.

Having acquitted himself Nobly in Court and Council, he attends the Earl of
Hertford against the Scots, as Commissary; and Sir John Wallop with Sir John
Rainsford, as Marshal: for his Services in both which capacities, he is made
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in England; and with the Comptroller, Sir John
Gage, made Field-marshal, and Treasurer of the Army before Bulloign: And not
long after, Treasurer of the Household, and one of the Assistants for the
Over-seeing of King Henry's Will.

When some were joining others with the Protector, others for limiting him, Sir
Thomas would say, That (as Machiavel says, No Laws, so) No good could be done
by a Governor that was not absolute, without either a Restraint or a
Competitor.

Upon the Reformation he would say, That the disesteem of Religious Ceremonies
argued the decay of the Civil Government: good Princes have first kept their
People Religious, and thereby Virtuous and united: both old and new Rome stand
by this.

In a word; what makes all men, made him, A generous industry of Mind, and a
well-set hardiness of Body, which were attended while he lived with Honor and
Success, and since he is dead, with Repu^e and Renowe.

Where eminent and well-born Persons out of a habit of sloth and laz^ness,
neglect at once the Noblest way of employing their times, and the fairest
occasions of advancing their fortunes; that State, though never so flourishing
and glorious, wants something of being completely happy: As soon as ever
therefore the Kingdom is settled (sedate times are the best to improve a Common
wealth, as his quiet hours are the best to improve a man) he and Sir William
Howard addressed themselves as vigorously to the opening of Commerce and
Traffic, for the enriching of this Nation, as they had before to the exercise
of Arms, to secure it: Pursuing the Design with Resolution, and keeping the
frame of it in order with Industry, their constant Spirit surmounting all
Difficulties that stood in the way of their own Glory, or their Countrey's
^appiness; working so well upon the Russians, that they not only obtained
their Desire, but gained so far upon the Affections of that people, that they
obtained the greatest privileges any Tradesmen ever enjoyed in Muscovy; which
the Russians were not easi^r in the promise of, than just in the execution of
that promise: So that the Trade is advanced not only beyond our hopes, but our
very pretenses too, by those three particulars that never fail of success: 1.
Union: 2. Conduct: 3. Courage in enterprises vigorously begun and watchfully
pursued: Until Queen ELIZABETH concerned her self so far in the Undertaking, as
to influence it with a Character peculiar to the Dignity of such a
Constitution: which carried that Commerce higher than others could raise their
Imaginations, as we see; whose profit by it is as remarqueable in this Age, as
their zeal for it was in the last: When Fear and Distrust, those ignoble
passions that disparage all great Undertakings, which judged that Design a
piece of extravagant Folly, sees it now an Act of profound Wisdom; especially
when it may be improved under CHARLES the Second and the Great, a Prince who by
admirable order of his conduct, the just administration of his Revenue, and by
his fatherly goodness toward his people, has put himself into a condition to
u^dertak^ without fear whatsoever may be put in execution with honor or
Justice.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of Queen Mary.
THE STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Observations on the Life of Sir Nicholas Bacon.
Sir Nicholas Bacon, a man full of wit and wisdom^, was a Gentleman, and a man
of Law, and of great knowledge therein, whereby, together with his other parts
of Learning and Dexterity, he was prompted to be Keepe^ of the Great Seal; and
being kin to the Treasurer Burleigh, was brought by his help into the Queens
favor.

This Gentleman understood his Mistress well, and the times better: He could
raise Factions to serve the one, and allay them to suit the others. He had the
deepest reach into Affairs of any man that was at the Council-^able: the
knottiest Head to pierce into di^ficulties: the most comprehensive Judgment to
surround the merit of a Cause: the strongest memory to recollect all
circumstances of a Business to one View: the greatest patience to debate and
consider; (for it was he that first said, Let us stay a little, and we will
have done the sooner:) and the clearest reason to urge any thing that came in
his way in Court or Chancery. His favor was eminent with his Mistress, and his
Alliance strong with her Statesmen. No man served his Sovereign more
faithfully, none secured himself more wisely. Leicester seemed wiser than he
was, Bacon was wiser than he seemed to be; Hunsdon neither was nor seemed wise.
Much Learning my Lord Bacon gained in Bennets College in Cambridge, more
Experience in Paris of France: His De^terity and Dispatch advanced him to the
Court of Wards, his deep Experience made him Lord Keeper. Alliance was the
policy of that time. Bacon and Cecil married two Sisters; Walsingham and
Mildmay two more: Knowles, Essex and Leicester were linked; the prudent Queen
having all her Favorites Relations and Dependencies in her eye, and disposing
of them according to their several Interests. Great was this States-mans Wit,
greater the Fame of it; which as he would say, being nothing, made all things:
For Report, though but Fancy, begets Opinion; and Opinion begets Substance. He
was the exactest man to draw up a Law in Council, and the most discreet to
execute it in Court. When others urged the repeal of that Act whereby Queen
Elizabeth was declared Illegi^imate, he rather suppressed it, choosing the
closure of a festered Wound more prudent than the opening of it; and judging it
more wisdom to satisfy the world with the old Law, That the Crown takes away
all defects; than to perplex it with new disputes, Whether Queen Elizabeth were
Legitimate. State-miscarriages are rather to be privately connived at, than
publicly redressed; the remedy it may be doing no more service than putting
the people in mind of the mishap. He neither affected nor attained to
Greatness: Mediocra firma was his Principle and his Practice. When Queen
Elizabeth asked him, Why his House was so little? he answered, Madam, my House
is not too little for me, but you have made me too big for my House, Give me,
said he, a good Estate, rather than a great one. He had a very Quaint saying,
says Robert Naunton, and he used it often to very good purpose, That he loved
the Jest well, but not the loss of his Friend. He would say, That though
unusquisque suae fortunae faber, was a true and good Principle; yet the most in
number were those that marred themselves: but I will never forgive that man
that loses himself, to be rid of his Jest. The Excellency of his Parts was set
off with the Gravity of his Person; and the Queen would say, My Lord Bacon's
Soul lodges well. His Account of England and all its Affairs, was punctual:
his use of learned Artist, was continual: his correspondence with his
fellow-Statesmen, exact: his apprehension of our Laws and Government, clear;
his model of both, methodical: his faithfulness to the Church, eminent: his
industrious invention for the State, indefa^igable. He was, in a word, a Father
of his Country, and of Sir Francis Bacon. Sir Nicholas ^acon was the moderate
man that was appointed to preside at the Disput^tion between the Protestant and
Popish Doctors in the first of Queen Elizabeth. H^ was that Judicious
Statesman, to whom was trusted the management of that Parliament and
Convocation: The satisfaction of the People and Kingdom, and those Delatory
proceedings with France, Spain and Rome, that were at the bottom of the great
work of Reformation, and settlement at that time.

Observations on the Life of William Cecil Lord Burleigh.
WIlliam a Cecil was born with the advantage of being Richard Cecil's Son, (who
was of the Robes to King Henry, and Descended of the Roman Cecilii, say some.
Legatee in his Will) and bred with that of being Commoner of St. John's in
Cambridge, and Student at the Gray^ Inn.
Innes of Court in London; whence he was advanced by his Pregnancy to serve the
Duke of Somerset in quality of Master of Requests, as he was afterward by his
Master to attend King Edward the sixth, in the capacity of Secretary of Stat^;
where he furnished all Acts and Orders with Reasons of State, as he had them
fitted by able Lawyers with Arguments of Law. He loved always, they say, to
wrap the Prerogatives in the Laws of the Land. He was constant, but not
obstinate in his Advice. Fulle^ Holy State ex Arist^ l. 2. de Coelo, c. 4,
and^.^
As the Planets are whirled about daily From East to West by the motion of the
Primum Mobile, yet have a contrary motion of their own from West to East, which
they slowly, yet surely move at their leisures: so our Statesman, though
yielding in some things to Greatness of some Persons in an Age wherein it was
present drowning not to swim against the stream; Yet had he his
counter-endeavours against the prevailing strain, and privately advanced his
rightful Intentions against othe^s wrongful Ambitions. If dissenting from his
Superiors, he did it with all humility and m^deration; yet choosing always
rather to displease than betray. He was in much favor with King Edward, in
some with Queen Mary, in most with Queen Elizabeth; who though sparing of her
honors, yet heaped on him the trust of Secretary of State, the Profits of the
Master of the Wards, the A^vancement of Lord Treasurer, and the degree of Baron
of Burleigh: for as he followed the Marquess of Winchester in his Employment,
so he did in his Compliance. When he was out of place, he was not out of
service in Queen Mary's days; his Abilities being as necessary in those times
as his Inclination; and that Queens Council being as ready to advance him at
last, as they were to use him all her Reign.

In Queen Elizabeth's time he settled the Crown by settling Religion; and by an
utter separation from Rome, strengthened England. He made equal use of those
that were then Protestants by Interest, and they who were so in Conscience:
Those that had affections for Church Lands, and those that had affections for
the Church. The Pope would by a Bull confirm the sale of Abby-Lands; But who,
said Burleigh, can confirm the Popes Bull; The King of Spain secured the Queen
in hope of her Bed, the Pope winked at her in hope of her Heart: Burleigh
overreached the one by a fair complaysance, and the other by insensible
alterations.

During the Q^eens ten years calm, Cecil provided for a tempest; and improved
her Shipping and Ammunition to a dreadfulness at Sea, as he did her Army to a
great skill and experience by Land. He made Holland our Stage of War, and our
School of Discipline; where England gained the security and experience of War
without its calamity and desolations; always Offensive, and once only
Defensive.

His Intelligence abroad, was no less than his Prudence at home; and he could
write to a friend in Ireland what the King of Spain could do for two years
together, and what he could not do. His Advic^s from his Pensioners abroad,
were presented Queen Elizabeth once a fortnight; 1. clearly and plainly; 2.
methodically and distinctly; 3. speedily and seasonably; 4. truly and fully. He
exchanged his Interest for Walsinghams Intelligence, who commanded what he
could do, as he did what the other knew. The Bull clapped at London-house, was
first in our S^ates-mans study: where they might learn what they were to do,
and Protestants what to expect, many years before any thing was visible.

When Leicester would have no Equal, and ^^ssex no Superior, then Ceeil as
Neuter served himself of them both. He would wrestle with neither of them, yet
he would trip them both: they having many rubs in their way, yet never saw who
laid them. He never quarrelled with any; neither, says Cambden, did he ever
sue, or was he ever sued. Prud^ns qui Patiens, was his saying, before it was
Sir Edward Cooks Motto: and he had rather tire our Opposition by his
moderation, than improve it by his Impatience. Others were raised to balance
Factions, he to support the Kingdom: Fickle Favor tossed them, constant
Interest secured him. No fewer than the Marquess of Winchester, the Duke of
Norfolk, the Earls of Northumberland, Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester and
Westmorland contrived his fall; but reason of State and his Mistress kept up
his ^tanding. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton advised them to clap him up, saying,
That then men would open their mouths to speak freely against him: but the
Queen understanding hereof, and standing, as I may say, Camb. Eliz. anno. 1579.
80.
(says my Autho^) in the very prison-door, quashed all their Designs, and
freed him from the mischief projected against him. Great was the value the
Queen set upon him, as her ablest Minister of State: for coming once to visit
him being sick of the Gout at Burleigh-house in the Strand, and being much
heightened with her Head-attire then in fashion, the Lords servant who conducted
her through the door, said, May your highness be pleased to stoop. The Queen
returned, For your Masters sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spain.
She would make him always sit down in her presence: saying, My Lord, we make
use of you not for your bad L^ggs, but your good Head.

He was a good friend to the Church as then established by Law; advising his
son Thomas never to build a great house, or bestow any great charge upon an
Inpropriation, as fearing the foundation might fail hereafter: yet conniving at
sober Non-conformists, to strengthen the foundation at present, he checked the
forwardness of private men, and advanced the honor of the public
Establishment on all hands. Good my Lord, (says he in his Letter to Archbishop
whitgift, in the behalf of some squeamish Ministers) bear with my scribbling; I
write with the testimony of a good Conscience: I desire the peace of the
Church; I desire concord and unity in the exercise of our Religion: I fear no
sensual or wilful Recusant. I would not make Offenders, neither would I protect
them. And I pray your Grace bear this, (and perchance a fault) and yet I have
sharply admonished them, that if they will be Disturbers in their Churches,
they must be corrected: and yet upon your Graces answer to me, Ne suitor ultra
Crepidam; neither will I put Falcem in alterius Messem, (Was his Chaplain
Traverse his hand in all this?) And then again: If I had known his fault,
(says he of Brown) I might be blamed for writing for him. Thus he carried
matters without passion and prejudice prudently, as became so great a
Statesman. He was not rigid, yet he was careful: He would help the
good-natured, yet punish the stubborn: He would rather be where nothing is
lawful, than where all things are so. He would never skrue up the Law to the
pitch of cruelty, nor unloose it to the remissness of Libertinism.

He was no less honorable a Patron of the University, than he was a faithful
son of the Church: (the Church strengthens the State, and the Universities
furnish both:) particularly in the case of Rent-corn, which (says my Author)
first grew in Sir Thomas Smiths head, yet was ripened by Burleighs assistance;
whereby, though the Rents of the Colleges stand still, their Revenues increase.

He was not surer of all Churchmen and Scholars by his Obligations upon them,
than he was of all by his complaisance and pleasantness. None more grave than
he in Public, none more free in private; especially at his Table, where he
drew something out of his heaviest guests; having an admirable Dexterity in
reading and observing men, their own occasional openings in common discourse;
there being more hold to be taken of a few words casually uttered, than of set
solemn Speeches, which rather show men's Arts than their Natures, as indicted
rather of their brains than hearts. His power awed many, his conversation
obliged more. He had his hour to put on his Gown, and his hour to put it ^ff:
When he would say, Lie thou there Lord Treasurer; and bidding Adieu to all
State Affairs, he dispo^ed himself to his quiet and rest.

He laid the Designs of War by his own Theory, and his friends Intelligence;
yet he advised peace and died before the Qu^stion was determined, whether a War
with Spain? Others understood the Nature of War, but he only the Expediency
and Convenience, If War was necessary, none more forward to promote it, none
more careful to maintain it^ knowing, that in vain do the brows beat, the eyes
sparkle, the tongue threaten, the fist bend, and the arm strike, if the belly
be not fed, and the back clothed: and indeed this was his Masterpiece, that
the Queen vying Gold and Silver^ with the King of Spain, had Money or Credit
when the other had neither; Her Exch^quer, says my Author, though but a Pond
in comparison, holding water, when his River fed with a spring from the Indies,
was dreined d^y. It was with his advice that that Queen paid her Obligations in
Preferments, rather than Money; giving away not above two Largesses of that
nature in her life. In a word, when others set in a Cloud, he shined clear to
his last: He saw Essex dead, Leicester slighted, Mount-joy discountenanced; and
what with the Queens constant favor, which lodged where it lighted, and his
own temper and moderation, when more violent men failed, he died as great a
Favorite as he lived; leaving his son Thomas so much Estate as advanced him to
the Earldome of Exeter; and his son Robert so much state-Discipline as raised
him successive to be Secretary of state, Master of the Court of Wards, Lord
Treasurer, and Earl of Salisbury.

He was a very exact and a wary Observer of Foreign Transaction; witness this
passage to Sir Henry Norris Ambassador in France: The rare manner of your
Entertainment, has moved the Queens Majesty to muse upon what score it should
be, being more than has been used in like cases to her Ambassadors, and such
as besides your own report has been by others lately advertised: And for that
in such things Gueses be doubtful, I pray you by your next advertise me what
your self do think of it; and in the mean time I know you are not untaught to
judge of the difference between fair words and good deeds, as the saying is,
Fortuna cum ad bla^ditur Capitum advenit.

His thoughts of a Rebel that submitted, take in these words: Of late Shane
Oneal has made means to the Lord Deputy of Ireland to be received into grace,
pretending that he has meant no manner of unlawfulness toward the Queen: by
which is gathered that he grows weary of his lewdness: yet I think he is no
otherwise to be reformed than by sharp prosecution, which is intended to be
followed no whit the less for any his fair Writings, as reason is.

Of Intelligence he writes thus: I doubt not but you shall have of his hand no
lack of Intelligence, which you must credit as you see cause by proof of the
event.

About Ambassadors Dispatches he says, He must write apart to the Secretary in
matters containing trouble and business, and to his Sovereign of Advice.

In a particular Negotiation about Pirates, he advised, That the King of France
and his Council might perceive that it is well known how the Pirates are
suffered to do what they will, notwithstanding it be contrary to Proclamation.
And yet you shall so order the matter, (says he to a French Ambassador) as
not that you shall find fault with this manner of suffering for that ought
properly to be to the Spanish or Portugal Ambassador, with whom you may
sometime deal, to understand how they do, know what is done, and how they do
interpret it.

Touching the King of Scots murder, he would say, There are words spoken which
I hold best to suppress: Neither would I have you (says he to his friend)
utter any of these things, not doubting but shortly God will cause the truth to
be revealed.

Of an underhand Traitor he writes to his friend, I pray write unto me somewhat
more particularly for the proof of his traiterous speeches, whereby there might
be some ground made how to have him demanded.

Of the demanding of a Town promised in a Treaty: Sir Thomas Smith went to
demand Callis, not that we think the Governor will deliver it, but to avoid
all cavillation which they might invent: (for by Law it must be demanded upon
the very place; and being not delivered, the sum of 500000 It is forfeited) Mr^
Winter shall pass secretly with him to take possession thereof, if they deceive
our expectation: but not past three of the Council know of Winte^s going.

Concerning the unreasonable words of Princes, he says, If hereof the
Ambassador (meaning the French) shall make any sinister report, you may as you
see cause well maintain the Queens answer to be very reasonable, as having
cause to mislike the manner of writing of the Queen thereon: which neverthe
less you may impute to the unadvisedness of the Secretary: for so the Queens
Majesty does impute it.

Of the troubles in Scotland, he observed the French made their present
advantage to the damage of England; and you know that Scotland is the French
King to it, as Ireland is the Spanish.

Of F^rraign News he writes to Sir Henry Norris, That h^ would be glad to have
a Note of the Names of the chiefest Nobility of Fr^nce, and with whom they be
married: adding thereto any other thing that may belong to the knowledge of
their lineage and degree^, as you shall think meet.

He writes, That her Majesty being a Prince her self, is doubtful to give
countenance to subjects. I wish (says he) to have a Calendar of them who are
with the Prince, and also to see the Edicts that have lately passed from the
King against them, and that in these troublesome times: wherein accidents are
so diversely reported, your advices were large and repeated, and that we had
such Articles as pass on both sides.

Of France he s^i^h, You must think that seeing all the parts of Christendom
are intentive to hear of the matters of France, we cannot be careless to whom
the same belongs next of all, whatsoever the end thereof shall be.

Of the Distractions of France, thus to our Ambassador in France: If you told
the Queen Mother so as of your own head, as a thing you hear spread abroad in
the world, I think you might do well, and speak truly: for as for the Popes
Ministers, their ^ rofession is to prefer the Weal of their own Church before
the good state of any Kingdom on earth and whatsoever come of any thing, they
look only to the continuance of their own ambitious Ruling. And as for other
Ministers of Princes, or for men of War, it is a truth infallible, The more
they do impoverish that Monarchy of France, the better they think their own
Estates.

Of a plot discovered, he writes: We can truly hit no man, wherefore it is
necessary that you speak again with the Party that gave you this Intelligence;
and if the matter be of truth, and not a disguising to some other purpose, he
can as we^l obtain you the knowledge of the party in certainty, as thus to give
a guise at him: for as he has his Intelligence of the matter which he uttered
to you, so may he attain to a more perfect knowledge.

For the Protestants he says, I pray you put them in comfort; that if
extremity shall happen, they must not be left: for it is so universal a cause,
as none of the Religion can separate themselves one from another. We must all
pray together, and stand f^st together.

Of a Professor he writes, The Queens Majesty will in no wise hear of such
matters, which she thinks are but changeable, and without fruit; although I
hade arnesty moved her Majesty to have adventured some small piece of money
upon such a max: therefore I see no remedy but to pay him as well as may be
with good words.

Touching the Plotagain: Methinks that the Parties that tell you such pieces of
tales, if the whole were true, might as well tell you the whole, as such
obscure parts: which if they do not, you might well allege them to be but
devi^es to breed unquietness and suspicion; and as I wrote before unto you,
they might be tempted with offer of rewards, that the truth of the matter might
be disclosed: and surely methinks still, since the Informers will not be known
of the particulars in more certainty, that these things are intended to bring
us into their places: but yet no diligence is to be omitted.

Touching the delivery of an Embassy, he writes, And I think if you would in
the Translating thereof distribute it into sundry members by way of Articles,
you shall the better carry it in your mind; making thereby an account with
your self of the better delivery thereof. And you shall do well to let some
such as favor the intention of the Queens Message, to see the Copy of the
Letter; whereby they may percase being called to give advice to the King,
further the cause, to the benefit of them of the Religion, I would be glad to
hear a Brief, or as they call it, a List of the Names of the principal persons
that havc a charge now in these wars of France on both parts, with the Contents
as near as you can of their numbers.

Of the Queen of Scots Affairs, he concludes: God send her Majesty clear of
these Scottish matters, whereinto the entry is easy, but the passage within
doubtful; and I fear the end will be monstrous: I am thrown into a maze at
this, that I know not how to walk from dangers. Sir Walter Mildmay and I are
sent to the Scottish Queen, as by the Queens Majesty's Letters you may see: God
be our Guide; for neither of us like the Message.

1. Knowledge is the Treasure of the Mind, Discretion is the Key: the Practick
Part of Wisdom is the best: a native Ingenui^y is beyond the watchings of
industrious study.

There are no such Guards of safety as Virtue and Wisdom: Danger cannot make
impression on the Virtuous; nor Fortune subvert the Wise: The Wise man cannot
fall. Prudence is a safe Conduct through the various Casualties of mortality.
He declines in wisdom, that falls in Fortune. Discretion sways the Stars and
Fa^e.

Ad summum sapiens uno minor est Jove, dives;
Liber, Honoratus, pulcher, Rex denique regum.
Take all there is but one Jove above him: He
Is Rich, Fair, Noble, King of Kings, and free.
The world is a shop of Instruments, whereof the wise man is Master; and a
Kingdom but a Frame of Engines, whereunto he is the wheel.

2. Smoothness declineth Envy and Danger, Humility advances to Honor,
Moderation preserves in it. Men come down by Domineering. Haste undo^th that,
which a j^st Delay ripeneth. Our Wise man would say, Stay a little and we will
have done the sooner, An estate evened with these thoughts, endures. It Is an
excellent Motto: Nolo Minor me timeat, despiciat ve Major.
My Inferior shall not fear, my Superior shall not despise me.


3. Humility shuns Honor, and is the way to it^ The purest Gold is most
Ductile. It Is commonly a good Blade that bends well. The Reed that bends and is
whole, is better than the strong Oak that not bending breaks.

4. There is no such prevalent Workman as Sedulity and Diligence: A man would
wonder at the mighty things which have been done by degrees, and gentle
augmentations. Patience, Diligence and Moderation are the common steps to
Excellency. It Is for Omnipotence to do mighty things in a moment; but
degreeingly to grow to Greatness, is the course he has left for man.

Observations on the Life of Walter Devereus Earl of Essex.
WAlter Devereux was by his Cicely, Daughter of Thomas Bourchi^^ late Earl of
Essex.
mothers side born to, and by his Sovereigns favor possessed of the Earldome
of Essex: His spirit was as the time martial and active, equally impatient of
rust in his soul, and in his sword: Foreign Countries bred then those
Soldiers that England employed: The University mad^ a Scholar, the Court a
man, and Flanders the Soldier.

His Actions brought him to the presence, and his Presence commended him to the
heart of Queen Elizabeth: B^t the shadow does not more naturally attend the
Sun, than Envy does Favor: Since he must rise, its contrived he should rise so
high, that he must fall: Yet he might have lived longer, it was thought, if his
wife had not there more favor than himself; Abraham was afraid of, and Sir
Walter was undone by his Sarah's Beauty; This is certain, he was no sooner in
his Grave, than the same great man whom he declared his Enemy at his Death, was
his successor in his Marriage Bed.

Ambitious was he of the Irish service, and subtle were others to fill up his
sayls so wide, as to be over-turned; at once diving into, and ruining him by
his Humor; Weary was he of the Court, and weary, as he observed, was that of
him^ In comes Leicester in this juncture, and advances him to the Sovereign
honor of maintain^ng an Army at his own charge, and the Royalty of Claudboy in
vlster; the first he knew would (as it fell out) undo him; the other was the
Bears skin, when he could catch, kill and ^ley it; and the whole plot was but
the supplan^ing of him out of a real Estate in England and Wales, to an
imaginary one in Ireland Over he goes with as splendid a Retinue of kindred,
Friends, supernumerarie Volunteers, as his son to the same service, or his
Grandson to one more unhappy; Sir William Fitz-William's Jealousy heard of his
Parade, and his Industry out-reached him so far, that all that preparation
amounted to no more honor, than to have been commissioned, after much
importunity and attendance, by him; nor to any more advantage than the bare
Government of Vlster: Little good did he in Vlster, (now under the discouraging
and heartless impressions of discontent) less in the South of Ireland, whither
he was remanded by the Deputy, whose design was not to set how successfully he
would conquer, but how dutifully he would obey; in six months time spending
4000 l. to ruin himself: B^t alas ^ in vain does he conquer^ who was always
forbid to pu^sue and improve his Victory: no sooner did his Fortune favor him
in one place, but he was called to his Misfortune in another: for no sooner
does he by experience and acquaintance with the situation of any place, the
humor or interest of any People, the weaknesses and strengths of any Enemy,
the advantages or disadvantages of any Undertaking, ^ipen circumstances toward
success, but he is called off to a new and unacq^a^nted scene of action, where
he shall lose his Ar^y, be^o^e he knows how to employ it. His friends at
Court grew few and cold, his foes many and active; his affronts continual to
disorder him by passion, or sink him in despair.

His Commission was but short before, but is none now; only three hundred men
stick to him: his Money failing, his Noble Followers withdrawing, his Common
Soldiers mutiny, and he is recalled. And happy had he been, could he have been
quiet: but nothing would complete some men's Designs, but his Ruin; and
nothing could ruin him but Honor, that at once pleased his humor, and wasted
his Estate. Earl-Marshal of Ireland he is made, and thither he goes in great
state to die, anno 1576, and the 36 of his Age: a year fatal to that Family,
which none of them exceeded but the last, who had been happy if he had died
sooner, or lived longer than he did. Although Sir Walter Devereux had not that
success over others which his Valor deserved, yet he had that conquest of
himself that Virtue only gives; showing himself as good at the Buckler, as at
the Sword; at suffering, as well as acting. All his changes from without he
bore with, none within; his even and solid mind that fashioned its own fate,
enjoying its constant calm amidst all the tempests of malice and ambition.
Those ignoble courses were not greater Arguments of his Enemies narrowness and
degeneracy, than his resolved Patience was of his largeness and generousness of
spirit; he being as much above those smaller tricks, as they were below his
Adversaries. We make our selves more Injuries than are offered us; and the
apprehension of wrong does more har^ than the smartest part of the wrong it
self. It Is the Wise-mans glory, and the States-mans prudence, to pass by
Offenses. A Fool struck Cato in the Bath; and when he was sorry for it, Cato
had forgot it: for, (says Seneca) Melius putavit non agnoscere quam ignoscere.
Light Injuries are made none by a not-regarding: which with a pursuing Revenge
grow both to height and burden, and live to mischief us, when they might die
to secure us. It Is Princely (says one) to disdain a Wrong, who when
Ambassadors have offered Undecences, use not to chide, but deny them audience:
as if silence were the way Royal to revenge a Wrong. The upper Region is most
composed; The wisest rage the least, knowing that Observation and Resentment do
but pro^oke and encourage that Malice which neglect and silence deads and
dissipates. And it was Sir Walter's Fathers Maxim, That Discontent was the
greatest weakness of a generous Soul, which is always so intent upon its
unhappiness, that it forgets its remedies.

This Lord was a great instance of that Maxim, That it is an equal mischief to
distrust all: as to believe all; although of the two, the safest is to
distrust: for Fear had secured this Noble Person, while Confidence ruined him;
it being a Virtue only when men were innocent, but ever since, the bane of
those that own it.

Three things undid this Earl: 1. That he could not imagine he was to be ruined
by his Advancement. 2. That he never mistrusted an Oath. 3. That he never
considered, that as Princes, so Favorites, have many eyes, and long hands;


He that is so open as to reserve nothing from friends, is renowned for
Charity; but he that is so to lie at the mercy of all, is marked for ruin. No
sooner unde^stood my Lord of Leicester Essex his Disposition, but the bitter
Fool Pace could tell his Fortune, begging of my Lord at his departure the
making of his mourning; and adding, You and I have done for this world.

Walter E^rl of Essex had been happy if he had not lived in my Lord of
Leicester's time: his son Robert renowned, had he not been Sir Robert Cecil's
Contemporary; and his Grandchilde an Hero, had he not known my Lord Say and
Mr. Hampden.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Rat^lif Earl of Sussex.
THomas Ratclif Earl of Sussex, was of a very Noble and Ancient Lineage,
honored through many Descen^s by the Title of Viscounts Fitz-Walters. He was a
goodly Gentleman, and of a brave noble-Nature, true and constant to his friends
and servants, noted for honesty: a very excellent Soldier, being one of the
Queens martialists, who did very good service in Ireland at her first
accession, til^ she recalled him to the Court, where she made hi^ Lord
Chamberlain; and though he was no^ endowed with the cunningness and dexterity
as others were, yet upon his Deat^-h^d he gave his f^iends a caveat whom they
should beware. His words, (says Sir Robert Naunton) are these: I am now
passing into another World, and must leave you to your Fortunes, and to the
Quee^s Graces: but beware of the Gyp^ie for he will be too hard for you all;
you know not the beast so well as I do, His Prowess and integ^ity drew the
Soldiers after him, Leicester's Cour^ship and Cunning the Courtiers, Cecil's
Prudence and service the Statesmen.

This Thomas Ratclif Lord Fitz-Walter, second Earl of Sussex of that surname,
was twice Lord Deputy of Ireland, by his prudence he prevented the breaking out
of an actual Rebellion in that Kingdom, and no wonder if in his time it rained
not War there, seeing his diligence dispersed the Clouds before they could
gather together. Thus he who cures a disease may be skilfullest, but he that
prevents it, is the best Physician.

Being called home by the Queen to be Lord Chamberlain, a constant Court
faction was maintained between him and Robert Earl of Leicester, these two
parties dividing the Court, whilst the Cecilians as Neuters did look upon them;
Sussex had a great Estate left by his Ancestors, Leicester as great given, or
restored him by the Queen, Sussex was the honester man, and greater Soldier;
Leicester the more facete Courtier, and deep Pollitician, not for the general
good, but his own particular profit. Great was the animosity betwix^ them, and
what in vain the Queen endeavored, Death performed, taking this Earl away: and
so ^he competition ended. New-hall in Essex was the place (if not of his birth)
of his principal habitation, he lies buried in the Church of St. Olives
Hartstreet London.

The first of Queen Elizabeth found this brave Earl commanding Ireland in peace
and plenty, with three hundred and twenty Horse, and eight hundred and sixty
foot, prudently garrisoned, and well paid; and the second employed him thither
again, with instructions, that he should beware above all things, lest the
Irish being an uncivil people, and therefore the more superstitious, should by
the cunning practices of the French be excited to Rebellion under the pretext
of Religion.

2. That he should fortify Ophale with Castles, and Forts.

3. That he should engage the Soldiers with large possessions.

4. That the Irish Nobility should hold their Estates in Fee.

5. That he should improve the Queens Revenues moderately, and reduce her
exchequer there, to the form of that in England.

At what time Maximilian the Emperor courted Queen Elizabeth whom all
Englishmen wished married, all Protestants married to a Protestant, and the
Earl of Leicester had designed for himself, there arose a deady feud in the
English Court between the Earl of Sussex, that favored the match upon common
principles of government, and the Earl of Leicester who opposed it upon a
private design of his own, certainly very great and shameful hopes do they
foster, who have already attained things beyond hopes. The open hearted Earl
would call his Antagonist an upstart that had but two Ancestors, his Father, a
Traitor; and his Grandfather, a Publican. Thus the Court is divided, the Earls
are always attended with their armed guards, until the Queen who took
pleasure in the innocent Emu^ation of her women, became fea^ful of the
dangerous contests of her Favorites, and rather skinned over, than healed the
rupture.

At the Emperors Court, whither he is sent with the order of St. George, he
presses the marriage closely, as much out of love to his Country, as hatred
to Leicester; having nothing more ordinary in his discourse than that a
Foreign Prince was to be preferred before the noblest Englishman for the
three grand things, of Honor, Power, and Wealth. But what he promoted
publicly, the Lord North, who was joined with him rather ^as his guardian than
his colleague, opposed privately, until a few fond scruples broke the most
solemn negotiations wherein yet this Earl behaved himself with a gallantry that
gained him a familiarity from the Emperor, a reverence from the Archduke, a
respect from the people, and his M^stress a kindness in that Court, that stood
her in great stead, against the attempts of Spain and Rom^.

From Germany he returned with much Honor to command in the North with more,
where he and his old setters at Court discovered the grand plot in the N^rth,
as Hunsdon and his old Souldier^ at Berwick defeated it, and both harassed the
Scottish borders: all things yielding to those two grand disposers of the
World, now predominant in England, Wisdom and Cecil at home, Arms and Hunsdon
abroad; and both with Sussex at home, now for his approved wisdom and fidelity
made privy Councellour^ and abroad always Lord General.

Of many I pitch on this one argument of the greatness of his mind, that he
scorned to trample the prostrate, that he had a just passion, but not an
unworthy malice for an enemy whom he had a generous goodness to pity when
unhappy, as well as a brave spirit to contest with when injurious. The lesser
fry of adversaries railed against, this great one pleaded for Leicester, when
his practices against A^jou's marriage with the Queen confined him to the
Castle of Windsor. And his menaces had cast him to the Tower of London, had not
my Lord, minding more the common interest than his p^ivate resentments, first
moderated the Q^eens passion with Reason, and th^n overcame it with this Jest,
you must allow Lovers their Jealousy.

H^ succeeded his Father in his Fortune, and in his Favor, his P^udence and
Resolution promoting him to the Government of Ireland and the North; his good
husbandry and skill in Surveying, making him justice in Air of all the Pa^ks
beyond Trent; and is comely p^esence advancing him Lord Chamberlai^. Queen
Elizabeth poyzed her State by Factions a^road, and Parties at home; her
chiefest wisd^me lying in her general correspondence and compliance with each
Party, as her Interest lay in their compliance and distance from one another.
My Lord of Sus^ex left his mem^rial behind him, That for Rising men to stick to
a side, is necessary; For Great men to be indifferent, is wise: and this, That
he and my Lord of Leicester cleared and purged the Court: their cross
Observations refining each person that was admitted to Court; none daring any
injustice while Leicester observed him on the one hand, and Sussex punished him
on the other. Then no deserving Person could be excluded by the one, that could
serve his Princ^; not any undeserving one admitted, that might disparage him:
one Interest being sure to receive the one, as the other was to exclude the
other.

Diverse persons (says one) of equal Authority, though both wicked, do in
experience produce more Justice than a greater Probity in a single individual
has been heard to pronounce; in a divided Court the Creatures of one Party
being the Enemies of another, no less powerful; and so they both become liable
to accusation, or capable of defense: and from the sparkles of this clashing,
not only Persons and Actions, but the Public Councils came to be refined from
the Rusts and Cankers that grow by an Unanimity. Faction can be as little
spared in a monarchy, as an Eye or an Ear, as through which the Prince has a
clearer apprehension of his own and others Affairs, than he can have when his
followers are all agreed: through the pe^cussion of equal Factions, as through
that of Flint and Stee^, all things coming to light by Debates, that might
either advance or eclipse a Princes glory.

When my Lord of Sussex could not overbear Leicester with Power, he did it with
Policy; and by yielding to him, conquered him: for (as he observed) when ^e and
his friends retired, Leicester and his subdivided; and he was checked more by
the Ambition he taught his own Followers, than by the competition of his
Adversaries.

When Factions are carried too high, and too violently, it is a sign of
weakness in Princes, and much to the prejudice of their Authority and Business:
The motions of Factions under Kings, Verulam's Essays
ought to be like the motions (as the Astronome^s speak) of the Inferior Orbs,
which may have their proper Inclination, but yet are still quietly carried by
the higher motion of the Primum Mobile. Queen Elizabeth had an happy time of
it, if it were but for this, That her Favorites Divisions were her support:
for thereby she attained the knowledge of all things that happened, so as no
Suit or D^signe passed the Royal Assent, before she understood as much of
Reason as Enemies or Friends could bring for or against it.

The Character this third great Lord of his Family left behind him, was, This
year died a man of a great spirit and faithfulness to his Country: and
therefore none freer than he of his thoughts, none sounder than he in his
councels. Nor did this freedom of Communication betray his future Resolutions
to the discovery of his Enemies, as they opened his heart to the observation of
his Prince: for through a seeming unconstancy, not of words, but of action; not
his weakness, but his nimbleness, (the Bird on the wing is safe) he could so
often vary, as it was no^ easy to discover where or when he would be buzzing,
and give the blow: by which unsteady carriage, He so befooled his Adversary
with their Spies and Pensioners, as they were at a lo^s what to inform their
Patrons of, or themselves how to resolve. Fortune and Conduct set up this
Favorite, it falling in his Character as at Primero, and other Plays, wherein
Fortune is directed and conducted by Art. The best and subtilest Gamester may
lose, if it cross him; but if it smiles and favors, he knows best how to
manage and govern it.

Five things raised this person to a respect as great as his fortune; to be as
high in the Queens favor, as he was in his Descen^, 1. A Civility set off with
State. 2. A pleasing Modesty of Countenance, and Af^fability of Speech;
ennameled with Gravity. 3. A Boldness attended with Patience, 4. A great
Capacity, enlivened with as great Dexterity. And 5. An Integrity secured with
wariness in the dark, of which quality both in his Expression, and in his
Actions he wrapped himself as this sepia to preserve her self undiscovered,
does shed forth about her a quantity of blushes in his blood to hide her self
from the Fisherman.


Observations on the Life of the Lord Willoughby.
THe Lord Willoughby was one of the Queens first Swordmen: he was of the
ancient extract of the Bart^es, but more ennobled by his Mother, who was
Duchess of Suffolk. He was a great Master of the Art Military, and was sent
General into France, and commanded the second of five Armies that the Queen
sent thither in aid of the French. As he was a great Soldier, so was he of a
suitable Magnanimity, and could not brook the obsequiousness and assiduity of
the Court at that tim^. He had more favor than he courted, and he courted more
(rather to comply with the Queens humor, than his own inclination) than he
desired. He would say, and that saying did him no good, (says Sir Robert
Naunton) That he was none of the Reptilia being made Brother to march as a
Soldier, than to creep as a Courtier. But Civility must allay Nature in a
Courtier, Prudence regulate it in a Statesman, and modest submission check and
soften it in a Subject. Its as dangerous to be stubbornly abave the kindness,
as it is to be factiously against the power of Princes. Willoughby got nothing,
Stanl^y lost all his haughtiness; which when it cannot be obliged, is
suspected. But his service in France, Holland, and on the Borders, compounded
for his roughness: so that they who could not endure he should be high at
Court, were pleased he should be so in the Field. Stiffness which displeased
when looked on as Pride at home, took when heard to be Resolution abroad. Each
Nature is advanced in its own Element: Leicester among the Ladies, my Lord
Willoughby among the Soldiers. It^s a step to Greatness to know our own way to
it; to exercise and show our proper Virtues as he did: ^i^ Magnanimity in these
two instances, Camden.
among many others.

1. When one challenged him then sick of the Gout, he said, That though he were
lame in his feet and hands, yet he would carry a Rapier in his teeth to fight
his Adversary. 2. Having taken a Spanish Gennet designed a present to that
King, and being offered either 1000 l. or 100 l. a year in exchange for it, he
nobly answered, If it had been a Commander, he would have freely released him;
but being only a Horse, he saw no reason he could not keep a good Horse as
well as the King of Spain himself. Sir Christopher Hatton was to an excess a
courtier, and my Lord Willoughby so a Soldier.
Queen Elizabeth on the Lord Willoughby,
Good Peregrine.
WE are not a little glad that by your Journey you have received such good
fruit of amendment; specially when we consider what great vexations it is to a
mind devoted to actions of honor to be restrained by any indisposition of body
from following those courses, which to your own reputation and our great
satisfaction you have ^ormerly performed. And therefore (as we must now out of
our desire of your vvell-doing) chiefly enjoin you to an e^pecial care to
increase and continue your health, which must give life to all your best
endeavors; so we must next as seriously recommend to you this consideration.
That in these times, when there is such appearance that we shall have the ^ryal
of our best noble Subject^^ you f^^m not to affect the satisfaction of your own
private contentation beyond the attending of that which Nature and Duty
challenges from all persons of your quality and Profession. For if necessarily
(your health of body being recovered) you should Eloign your self by residence
there from those Employment^ whereof we shall have too good store, you shall
not so much amend the state of your body, as happily you shall call in question
the reputation of your mind and judgment, even in the opinion of those that
love you, and are best acquainted with your Disposition and Discretion.

Interpret this our plainness we pray you to our extraordinary estimation of
you; for it is not common with us to deal so freely with many: and believe
that you shall ever find us both ready and vvilling in all occasions ^o yield
you the fruits of that interest, which your Endeavors have purchased for you
in our Opinion and Estimation: Not doubting, but when you have with moderation
made trial of the success of these your sundry Peregrinations, you will find
as great comfort to spend your days at home as heretofore you have done: of
which we do wish you full measure, howsoever you shall have cause of abode or
return. Given under our Signet at our Manor of Nonsuch, the seventh of October
1594. in the 37 year of our Reign,

Your most loving Sovereign. E, R.

Observations on the Life of Sir Philip Sidney.
HE was son to Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales.
A Person of great parts, and in no mean grace with the Queen. His Mother was
Sister to my Lord of Leicester, from whence we may conjecture, how the Father
stood up in the place of Honor and Employment; so that his Descent was
apparently Noble on both sides. For his Education, it was such as Travel and
the University could afford: for after an incredible proficiency in all the
species of Learning, he left the Academical life for that of the Court, whither
he came by his Uncles invitation, famed aforehand by a Noble report of his
Accomplishments; which, together with the state of his Person, framed by a
natural propension to Arms, he soon attracted the good opinion of all men; and
was so highly prized in the good opinion of the Queen, that she thought the
Court deficient without him: and whereas (through the fame of his deserts) he
was in the election for the Kingdom of Poland, she refused to further his
advancement, not out of Emulation, but out of fear to lose the Jewel of her
times. He married the daughter and sole Heir of Sir Francis Walsingham, then
Secretary of State; a Lady destinated to the B^d of honor, who (after his
deplorable death ^t Zutphen in the Netherlands, where he was Governor of
Flushing, at the time of his Uncles being there) was marri^d to my Lord of
Essex, and since his death to my Lord of S^. Albans; all persons of the Sword,
and otherwise of great Honor and Virtue. He had an equal temperament of Mars
and Mercury, Valor and Learning, to as high a pitch as Nature and Art could
frame, and Fortune improve him: so Dexterous, that he seemed born for every
thing he went about. His ^^presentations of Virtue and Vice, were not more
lively in his B^oks, than in his Life: his Fancy was not above his Virtue: his
Humors, Counsels and Actions, were renowned in the Romancer, Heroi^k in the
Statesman. His Soul was as large as his Parents, and his Complexion as Noble;
an equal Line of both: the modesty of the Mother allaying the activity of the
Father. A man so sweetly grave, so familiarly staid, so prettily serious he was
above his years: Wi^dome gained by travel, Experience raised from Observations,
solid and useful Learning drawn from knowing Languet his three years Companion,
and cho^c^st Books, accompl^shed him for the love of all, and the reverence of
most. His Converse was not more close at home, than his Correspondence abroad;
equally mixed with Policy, Pleasure, Wisdom and Love: his Worth being penned
up, and smothered within the narrowness of his fortune, sallied not out to
discontent, bu^ pleasure; sweetning the Affairs of State with the Debonnareness
of the Stage; his Romance being but policy played with Machiavil in jest, and
State maxims sweetened to a Courtiers palate. He writ men as exactly as he
studied them, and discerned humors in the Court with the same deep insight he
described them in his Book. His Infant-di^courses teach men, O what had his
riper years done.

He put Life into dead Notions of Ancestors, made Philosophy practicable;
joined the A^t as closely in him, as they are in themselves. His Book is below
his spirit^ a spirit to be confined with Kingdoms, rather than St^dies; to do
what was to be written, than only to write what was to be done. All eyes were
upon him but his own: at first, in all Affairs he was the last; at last, he was
the first: obliging all men that ever he saw, and seeing all that were worth
obliging: All were pleased with his Arcadia but himself, whose years advanced
him so much beyond himself, as his parts did beyond others: He condemned his
Arcadia in his more retired judgment to the fire, which wise men think will
continue to the last Con^lagration. His private Corr^spondence with William of
Nassan about the highest Affairs of Europe, was so exact and prudent that he
assured Sir Fulke Grevil he de^erved a Kingdom in Foreign Parts, though he
had not an Office in England. The Earl of Leicester held his Authority in the
Low Countries by his Council when alive, and gave it over when he was dead.

Sir Francis Walsingham was so much overshot by him in his own Bow, that those
with whom Sir Philip were acquainted with for his sake, were his friends for
Sir Philips. King James was honored when King of Scotland with his friendship,
Henry the fourth with his correspondence, Don Iuan highly obliged with his
Visits, the King of Spain himself concerned in his death, whom England (he
said) lost in a moment, but could not breed in an Age, The Universities were
proud of his P^tronage, the Field of his presence: the Studio^s in all Parts
communicated with him; the H^^eful were encouraged by him; all excellent
Persons thronged to him; all serviceable men were entertained by him; and he
among them a Prince, whose mind was great, but his spirit greater. He taught
England the Majesty of honest deal^ng, the Interest of being Religious. He
looked deep into men and Councels, and found no Wisdom without Courage, no
Courage without Religion and Honesty: with which solid and active reaches of
his, I am persuaded (says my Lord Brooks) he would have found or made a way
through all the Trave^sers ^ven of the most weak and irregular ^imes. Although
a private Gentleman, he was a public Good; of a large, yet uniform
disposition: so good, that the great Monarch might trust; so great, that a
little one must fear him: something he did for Fame, most for Conscience: His
public spirit, which might have enjealoused the cautious wisdom of other
Princes, promoted the concerns of his own. He was sent to complement Rodolph,
but he dealt really with the Protestant Princes, and raised a Ceremony to a
piece of Interest. He showed that long-breathed and cautious people, that
imminent danger from Romes Superstition, joined with Spains Power, their
private confederacies and practices, their cruelty and design; which awaked
their drowzy wariness into an association for Conscience and Religion more
solid, as he demonstrated, than a Combination out of Polic^. He went against
the stream and current about the Fr^nch match, which he dissuaded from the
consequent inconveniences of Engagements and charge to England, and the little
advantage from France; backing his Argument with a la^e experience; and so
staying Queen Elizabeth's match by some reflections on Queen Mary's: which was,
A five years Design or Tax, rather than a Marriage: adding withal, That in a
foreign match, besides the inequalness and danger of it, (when a strange
Prince has such an influence on our Constitution) the different Religion would
make the Queen either quit the reputation of a good Protestant, or the honor
of an obedient Wife.

Te^ ways he laid down a Foreign Prince might enda^ger our Religion by, 1.
Opposing and weakening the reverend Fathers of our Church. 2. By disgracing her
most zealous Ministers. 3. By Latitude and Connivance. 4. ^y a loose and too
free a behavior, steering men's Consciences which way he pleased, and setting
u^indifferency. 5. ^y decrying Customs and Statutes, and enhansin^
Proclamations to the Authority of Laws. 6. ^y provoking the English with French
Oppressios. 7. ^y entrenching on the British Liberties with Gallic^^e
Prerogatives. 8. ^^ breaking our League and Correspondence with over Protestant
States. 9. ^ightning our Queen to a Compliance. 10. And at last attempting the
Protestant cause.


He vould say to his Friend the Lord Brooks, That if the Netherlands join with
France, they are terrible to Spain: if with Spain, they are dreadful to France:
if with us, they s^pport the Reformation: if they stand on t^eir own legs, they
are too strong to be forced to Pyracy. He, though a private person, opposed her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth in that Affair, with that sincerity, with tha^
ingenui^y, that freedom, that duty and peaceableness, that angered and p^ea^ed
her. His Opinion was not more against her humor, than his manage of it was to
her mind^: in which Affair, when most were hood-winke^ with ignorance, and many
captived with fear, he ^njoyed the freedom of his own thoughts with daily
access to her Majesty, hourly converse wi^h the French, and constant respect
from the people. None more dutiful to his Sovereign than Sir Philip, none more
resolute against Encroachers upon Gentemen and Freemen, non^ more dear to the
whole State: which when he had designed Sir Francis ^rake's second Voyage, and
stolen to him at Windso^ commanded his stay by an E^rl, and for his ske the
whole Fleets, although his stay disturbed, and his death destroyed his most
exact Model for the Conquest of America, the exactest Europe ever^aw: a
Conquest not to be enterprized but by Sir Philips reaching spirit, that grasped
all circumstanes, and commanded all interests on this side the Li^^.

When his great Soul could not improve ^urope, he considered it; and made that
the F^eld o his meditation, that could not be the stage of his ^ctions: England
he saw so humoursome and popul^s, that it was to be refined with War, and
corru^ed with Peace. Her interest was, he said, to balance ^eighbo^-Princes.
France he observed weak and efem^nate, the Empire enslaved and secure, the
Hanses to^ big, Rome subtle and undermining, Spain cre^t to the Power and
Councils of Europe, the Protetant Princes enjealoused and dist^ustful, Poland
div^^ed, Denmark strong, Sweden environed or impri^oned, the Muscovite
distressed and ignorant, the Switz enemies, yet servants to Monarchs, (a
dangerous body for the soul of any aspiring Monarch to infuse designs into)
the Princes of Italy awed by their S^periours, and cautious against their
equals; Turkey asleep in the Seraglio; but Spain all this while Master of Rome,
and the wisest Council or Conclave in the World; Lord of the Mines of America,
and the Sword of Europe: Concluding, that while the Spania^d had Peace, Pope
Money or Credit, and the World Men, Necessity or Humors, the War could hardly
be determined upon this Low-Country-stage; And that there were but two ways to
conquer Spain, the one, That which diverted Hannibal: and by setting fire on
his own House, made him draw his spirit to comfort his heart: The other, that
of Jason, b^ fetching away his Golden Fleece, and not suffering any one quietly
to enjoy that which every man so much affected. The assistance of Portugal, the
surpriz^ of Cales her key, and Sevil her treasure; the drawing in of other
Well-willers; ^he command of the S^a, an exact Intelligence; the Protection of
Rochel, Breast, Bourdeaux, or some other distressed Protestant, to balance the
over-mytr^d Countries, the Encouragement of religious or ambitious Roytolets to
advance and secure themse^ves, the engaging of the French and Spaniards, a
League with Venice and the Maritime States: some temptations to Italy to remove
their French and Spanish Garrison^, an opportunity to recover Sicilly, some
insinuations to the Pope of the Austrian Greatness, the setting up of the World
in an AEquilibrium, the invasion of America, removing the disfidence,
ove^poyzing the Neutrality, and working upon the Complexions of Kings and
Kingdoms, was this young, but great man's design.

An Expedition to the Indies he would persuade with these motives: 1. That
Honor was cheaper abroad than at home; at Sea, than at Land. 2. That the
Spanish Conquests like the Jesuits Miracles, made more noise at distance than
nearer hand. 3. That the Indians would join with the first Undertaker against
their cruel Masters. 4. That Spain was too far for supply. 5. That the Spaniard
was Undisciplined, and trusted more to the Greatness of his Name, than to
Order, Policy or Strength. 6. That England was po^ulous. 7. That it was an
action compliant with the present Humor, and not subject to Emula^ions. 8.
That it would either cut off the Spa^ish treasure, or make it chargeable. 9.
And at last set up a free Trade by Sea, open a great Door to Valor or Ambition
for new Conquests, and to Zeal for new Converts.


He said the Inquisition would overth^ow Spain, being a design upon Humane
Nature, and freedom; to govern men at the rate of ^easts. His great Abilities
recommend him to Leicester's Cabinet, whose Horse he commanded in the Field,
whose Council he guided at home. Prudent and valiant he was in contriving and
excuting the su^prize of Axil: Liberal and Noble to his Sou^diers at Flushing;
wary and de^p^ sighted in his Council about Graveline; wise and stayed in the
jealousies between Leicester and Hollock, His Patience and Resolution before
Zutphen, his quiet and composed spirit at Arneim, his Christian and religious
comportment in his sickness and death, made his Fame as lasting as his Life was
wished. And why died he lamented by the Queen, mourned for by the Court,
bemoaned by Europe, wept over by Religion and Learning, the Protestant
Churches, celebrated by Kings, K. H. ^. K. James^
and e^ernized by Fam^? because he was one who^e Parts were improved by early
Education, whose Education was raised by Experience, whose Experience was
enlarged by Travel, whose Travel was laid up in Observations, whose
Observations were knit up to a s^lid Wisdom, whos^ Wisdom was graced with his
P^esence; and the one was as much admired by Kings, as the other was by Q^eens.
One whose Learning guided Unive^sities, whose alliance engaged Favorites,
whose Presence filled Courts, whose Soul grasped Europe, whose merit could fill
a Th^one, whose Spirit was above it. It was he who was deserving and quiet,
neglected and patient, great and familiar, ingenious and devout, learned and
valiant, sweet and solid, contemplative and active. It was he whom Queen
Elizabeth called her In Opposition to him of Spain.
Philip, the Prince Orange his Master, and whose friendship my Lord Brook was
so proud of, that he would have no other Epitaph on his Grave than this, Here
lies Sir Philip Sidneys Friend. It was he whose last words were, Love my
memory, cherish my Friends; their faith to me may assure you they are honest:
but above all, govern your will and affections by the Will and Word of your
Creator. In me behold the end of this world, and all its vanities.

THey that have known thee well, and search thy parts
Through all the chain of Arts:
Thy apprehension qui^k as active light,
Clear Iudgememt, without Night:
Thy fancy free, yet never wild or m^d,
with wings to fly but none to g^d:
Thy language still enrich, yet comely dress,
Not to expose thy mind, but to express.
They that have known thee thus, sigh, and confess,
They wish they would nown thee still, or known the less.
To these, the wealth and Beauties of thy mind,
Be other Virtues joined,
Thy modest Soul, strongly confirmed and hard^
Never beckned from i^s Guard.
Observations on the Life of Sir J^hn Perrot.
SIr John Perrot was a goodly Gen^^eman, and of the Sword: and as he was of a
v^ry ancient descent, as an H^ir to many Exst^acts of Gentry, especially from
Guy de B^y^n o^ Lawhern; so he was of a vast Estate, and came not to the Court
for want. And to these Adjuncts he had the Endowments of Courage, and height
of Spirit, had it lighted on the allay of temper and discr^tion: the defect
whereof, with a native freedom and boldness of speech, drew him into a Clouded
setting, and laid him open to the spleen and advantage of his Enemies. He was
yet a wise man, and a brave Co^rtier, but roug^, and participa^ing more of
active than sedentary motions, as being in his Constellation destinated for
Arms. He was sent Lord-Deputy into Ireland, where he did the Queen very great
and many Se^vices: Being out of envy accused of High Treason, and against the
^ueens will and consent condemned, he died suddenly in the Tower. He was
Englands professed Friend, and Sir Christopher Hattons professed Enemy: He fell
because he would stand alone. In the English Court at that time he that held
not by Leicesters and Burleighs favor, must yield to their frowns: What g^ound
he gained in Foreign merits, (as the Sea) he lost in Domestic Interests. The
most deserving R^cess^s, and serviceable absence from Courts, is incompatible
with the way of interest and favor. Hi^ boisterous carriage rather removed
than preferred him to Ireland, where he was to his cost, what he would have
been to his advantage; chief in Command, and first in Counci^. His spirit was
too great to be ruled, and his Interest too little to sway. He was so like a
Son of Henry the They say his father married a Familiar of King Henry's.
eighth, that he would not be Q^ueen Elizabeth's su^j^ct: but Hattons sly
smoothness undermined his op^n roughness; the one dancing at Court with more
success than the other fought in Ireland, He was born to enjoy, rather th^n
make a Fortune; and to command, rather then stoop for respect. Boldness indeed
is as necessary for a Soldier, as the Action for an Orator; and is a
prevailing quality over weak men at all times, and wise men at their weak
times: yet it begins well, but continues not; closing always with the wiser
sorts scorns, and the vulgars ^aughter. Sir John Perrot was better at Counsel
than Complement, and better at Execution than Counsel. None wo^se to command
first on his own head, none better to be second, and under the direction of
others. He could not advise, because he looked not round on his dangers: he
could not execute, because he saw them not. His alliance to his Sovereign
commended him at first to her favor, and gave him up at last to her j^alousie;
being too near to be modest, and too bold to be trusted: and the more service
he performed, he was thereby only the more dangerous, and withal unhappy; his
Successes only puffing up his humor, and his Victories ripening his ambition
to those fatal Sallies against the Q^eens honor and Government, that had cost
him his life, had he not saved it with those very Rants he lost himself by: for
when he had out of an innocent confidence of his cause, and a haughty conceit
of hi^ Extraction, exasperated his Noble J^ry to his Condemnation, he had no
more to say for himself than Gods death will the Queen su^ser her Brother to be
offered up as a sacrifice to the envy of my frisking Adversaries? On which
words the Queen refused to sign the Warrant for his E^ecution, though pressed
to it from Reason and Interest, saying, They were all Knaves that condemned
him. It Is observed of him, that the Surplusage of his services in Ireland
aba^ed the merit of them; and that it was his oversight to have done too much
there. His mor^al words were those in the grear Chamber of Dublin, when the
Queen sent him some respectful Letters after her Expostulatory ones, with an
intimation of the Spaniards Design: Lo, now (says he) she is ready to piss her
self for fear of the Spaniard; I am again one of her white Boys.

A great Birth and a great Mind a^e c^ushed in Commonwealths, and wa^ched in
K^ng^omes: They who are to tall too stand, too stub^orn to bow, are but too fit
to break. R^ssling Spirits ^aise themselves at the settlement of Governm^nts,
but fall after i^; being but unruly Wav^s to a st^ady Rock, breaking themselves
on that solid Constitution they would break. Few aimed at Favorites as Sir
John did at the Lord Chanc^llor, but their Arrows fell on their own heads;
Sovereignty being always struck through prime Councillors, and Majesty
through its chief Ministe^s. Sir John Perrot no sooner cla^hed with Hatton,
^han he lost the Queen^ and ever since he reflected on his Dancing, he lost his
own footing, and never stood on his legs.

Observations on the life of Sir Francis Walsingham.
HE was a Gentleman (at first) of a good house^ but of a better Education; and
from the University traveled for the rest of his Learning. He was the b^st
Linguist of the times, but knew best how to use his own tongue, whereby he came
to be employed in the chief^st Affairs of State. He was sent Ambassador into
France, and stayed there a Leiger long, in the heat of the Civil Wars. At his
return he was taken Principal Secretary, and was one of the great ^ngin^s of
State, and of the times, high in the Queens favor, and a watchful servant over
the ^afety of his Mistress. He ^cted the same part in the Courts of France
abo^^ that Match, that Gundamor, if I be not mistaken (says Sir Robert
Naunton) did in the Court of England about the Spanish. His apprehension wa^
quick, and his Judgment solid: his ^ead was so strong, that he could look into
the depth of men and business, and dive into the Whirlpools of State Dexterous
he was in finding a secret, close in keeping it: Much he had got by Study, more
by Travel^ which enlarged and actuated his thoughts. Ceci^ bred him his Agent,
as he bred hundreds. Hi^ Converse was insinuating and rese^ved: He saw every
man, and none saw him. His spirit was a^ public as his parts; and it was his
first Maxim Knowledge is never too dear: yet as Debonnair as he was prudent;
and as obliging to the so^ter, but pr^^dominant par^s of the wo^l^, as he was
serviceable to the mo^e severe: and no less Dexterous to work on humou^s, than
to convince Reason. He would say, he must obse^ve the joints and flexures of
Affairs; and so could do more with a Story, than others could with a Harangue.
He always surprised business, and preferred motions in the hea^ of other
diversions; and if he must debate it, he would hear all; and with the advantage
of aforegoing speeches, that either cautioned or confirmed his resolutions, he
carried all before him in conclusion beyond reply. He o^t-did the Jesuits in
their own bow, and overreached them in their own equivocation, and mental
reservation^ never settling a Lie, but warily drawing out and discovering truth.
As the close Room sucketh in most Air, ^o this wary man got most intelligence,
being most of our Papists Confessor before their death, as they had been their
Brethrens before their Treason. He said what another writ, That an habit of
secrecy is policy and virtue. To him men's faces spoke as much as their tongues,
and their countenances were Indexes of their hearts. He would so beset men with
Questions, and draw them on, and pick it out of them by piece-meals, that they
discovered themselves whether they answered or were silent. This Spanish
Proverb was familiar with him, Tell a Lie, and find a Truth; and this, Speak no
more than you may safely retreat from without danger, or fairly go through with
without opposition. Some are good only at some affairs in their own
acquaintance; Walsingham was ready every where, and could make a party in Rome
as well as England. He waited on men's souls with his eye, discerning their
secret hearts through their transparent faces.

He served himself of the Factions as his Mistress did, neither advancing the
one, nor depressing the other: Familiar with Cecil, allied to Leicester, and an
Oracle to Sussex. He could overthrow any matter by undertaking it, and move it
so as it must fall. He never broke any business, yet carried many: He could
discourse any matter wi^h them that most opposed; so that they in opposing it,
promoted it. His fetches and compass to his designed speech, were things of
great patience and use. Twice did he deceive the French as Agent, once did he
settle the Netherlands as Commissioner, and twice did he alter the Government
of Scotland as Ambassador. Once did France desire he might be recalled,
because he was too hard for the Counsel for the Hugonots; and once did Scotland
request his remand, because he would have overturned their Constitution: 53
Agents did he maintain in Foreign Courts, and 18 Spies:: for two Pistols an
Order, he had all the private Papers of Europe: few Letters escaped his hands,
whose Contents he could read and not touch the Seal^. Bellarmine read his
Lectures at Rome one month, and Reynolds had^ them confute that next. So
patient was this wise man, Chiselhurst never saw him angry, Cambridge never
passionate and the Court never discomposed. Religion was the interest of his
Country, (in his judgment) and of his Soul; therefore he maintained it as
sincerely as he lived it: it had his head, his purse, and his heart. He laid
the great founda^ion of the Protestant Constitution as to its policy^ and the
main plot against the Polish as to its ruin. ^e would cherish a plot some
years together, admitting the Conspirators to his own and the Queens ^^e^ence
familiarly, but dogging them out watch^^^^y: his Spi^s waited on some men every
hour, for ^^^ee yea^s; and le^t they could not keep counsel, (...) dispatched
them to foreign parts, taking in new S^^vants^ H^s train^ng Parry of who
d^signed (...) of Queen Elizabeth, the admitting of hi^ under the p^etence of
discovering a Plot to the Q^eens presence, and then letting him go where he
would, only on the security of a Dark Sentinel set over him, was ^ piece of
reach and ha^ard beyond common apprehension. But Kingdoms were acted by him,
as well as private persons. It is a likely report (says one) that they father
on him at his return ^^om France, when the Queen expressed her (...) of the
^panish design on that Kingdom with (...) ^^cernment, Madam, (says he) be
content not (...) the Spaniard has a great appetite, and an (...) digestion:
but I have fitted him with a bone for this twenty years, that your Majesty
shall have no cause to doubt him: Pr^vided that if the fire chance to slack
which I have kindled, you will be ruled by me, and now and then cast in some
English fuel which may revive the flame. H^ first observed the great Bishop of
Winchester fit to serve the Church, upon the unlikely Youths first Sermon at
S^^ Alhallows Barking: He brought my Lord Cook first to the Church upon some
private discourse with him at his Table. The Queen of Scots Letters were all
carried to him by her own Servant, whom she trusted, and decyphered to him by
one Philips, as they were sealed again by one Gregory, so that neither that
Queen, or her correspondents ever perceived either the Seal defaced, or the
Letters delayed to her dying day. Video and Taceo, was his saying, before it
was his Mistresses Motto.

H^ could as well ^it King James his humor with sayings out of Xenophon,
Thucydides, Plutarch, Tacitus: as he could King Henry's with Rablais's
conceits, and the Hollander with mechanic Discourses. In a word, Sir Francis
Walsingham was a studious and temperate man; so publick-spirited, that he spent
his Estate to serve the Kingdom; so faithful, that ^e bestowed his years on
his Queen; so learned, that he provided a Library for Kings College of his own
Books; which was the best for Policy, as Cecil's was for History, Arundels for
Heraldry, Cottons for Antiquity, and Vshers for Divinity: finally, he ^qualled
all the Statesmen former ages discourse of, and hardly has been equalled by
any in following Age^.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Leicester.
THe Lord Leicester was the youngest son then living of Dudley Duke of
Northumberland: he was also one of the first to whom Queen Elizabeth gave that
honor to be master of the horse. He was a very goodly person, and singular
well featured, and all his youth well favored, and of a sweet aspect, but high
foreheaded, which was taken to be of no discommendation: but toward his latter
end grew high-colored and red-faced. The Queen made him Earl of Leicester for
the sufferings of his Ancestors sake, both in her Fathers and Sisters Reigns.
The Earl of Essex his death in Ireland, and the marriage of his Lady yet
living, deeply stains his commendation. But in the Observations of his Letters
and Writings, there was not known a Style or Phrase more religious, and fuller
of the streams of Devotion. He was sent Governor by the Queen to the United
States of Holland, where we read not of his wonders; for they say, Mercury, not
Mars, in him had the predominancy. To the Policy he had from Northumberland his
Father, and the Publican Dudley his Grandfather, he added, it is said, Magic
and Astrology; and to his converse with Wise men, his familiarity with Wizards.
Indeed he would say, A Statesman should be ignorant of nothing, but should
have all notices either within his own or his Confidents command.

His Brother Ambrose was the heir to the Estate, and he to the Wisdom of that
Family. He was the most reserved man of that Age, that saw all, and was
invisible; carrying a depth not to be fa^homed but by the Searcher of Hearts.
Many fell in his time, who saw not the hand that pulled them down; and as many
died that knew not their own Disease. He trusted not his Familiars above a
twelvemonth together, but either transported them for Foreign services, or
wafted them to another world. His Ambition was of a large extent, and his
headpiece of a larger. Great was his Influence on England, greater on
Scotland, and greatest of all on Ireland and the Netherlands; where this close
Genius acted invisibly, beyond the reach of friends, or the apprehension of
enemies. Declining an immediate opposition in Court-factions, the wary Sir
raised always young Favorites to outshine the old ones: so balancing all
others that he might be Paramount himself. The modern policy and practices were
but shallow to his; who by promoting the Queens match, could hinder it; who
could decoy Hunsdon to Berwick, Pembroke to Wales, Sidney to Ireland; while
what with his great Train, what with his growing Popularity, he was called the
Heart of the Court.

To make his Basis equal to his height, he enlarged and strengthened his
Interest by Alliance with the chief Nobility, to whom he was related. By his
Patronage of Learning, over which he was Chancellour^ by kindness to the
Clergy, whose head he seemed to be; by his command over all men, whom either
his favors had won, or his frowns awed; every body being either within the
Obligation of his Cour^esies, or the reach of his Injuries. He advised some
compliance with Philip of Spain for the match he proposed; while by degrees he
altered Religion so, as it must be impossible; designing Queen Elizabeth for
his own Bed, while she made his way to the Queen of Scots: whose re^usal of him
he made as fatal to her, as his marriage would have been advantageous; (The
Queen of England promising to declare her next heir to the Crown of England, in
case she failed of Issue, upon that match.) Leicester trepans Norfolk to treat
a match with the Scotch Queen; and her to accept it, to both their ruin: both
being engag^d in such foolish Enterprises by their enemies practices, as made
Leicester able in the head of a new Association in the Queens defense, to take
off Norfolk and his Ladies head. He was always beforehand with his Designs,
being a declared enemy to After-games.

His Interest was Popery, until my Lord North put him upon Puritanism, but his
Religion neither: he promoted the French and Polish match at Court, and
disparaged them in the Country. When Cardinal Chati^^ian advertized her Majesty
how Leicester drove Royal Suitors from her Court, he was sent to another World.
He that would not hold by his favor, must fall by his frown; Archbishop
Grindal not excepted. His hand bestowed all favors, and his brows all frowns:
the whose Court was at his Devotion, and half the Council at his beck. Her
Majesty suspected, but durst not remove him. His Intelligence was good in
Scotland, better in Ireland, best in Spain. The Country was governed by his
Allies, and the Court by himself. The Tower was in his servants hands, London
under his Creatures Government, and the Law managed by his Confidents. His
treasure was vast, his gains unaccountable, all passages to preferment being in
his hand at home and abroad. He was never reconciled to her Majesty under 5000
l. nor to any Subject under 500 l. and was ever and ^non out with both. All
Monopolies are his, who commanded most men's Purses, and all men's Parts. A man
was oppressed if he complied with him, and undone if he opposed him. In a word,
his design was thought a Crown, his Parts too large for a Subject, his
Interest too great for a Servant, his depth not fathomable in those days, and
his Policy not reached in these.

Observations on the Life of Christopher Lord Hatton.
SIr Christopher Hatton was a Gentleman who for his activity and Person was
taken into the Qu^ens favor. He was first made Vice-Chamberlain, and shortly
after advanced to the place of Lord Chancellour^ A Gentleman, that besides the
Graces of his Person, and Dancing, had also the Adjectments of a strong and
subtle c^pacity: one that could soon learn the Discipline and Garb both of
Times and Court. The truth is, he had a large proportion of Gifts and
Endowments, but too much of the season of Envy. As he came, so he continued in
the Court in a mask. An honest man he was, but reserved. Sir John Perr^t
talked, and Sir Christopher Ha^ton thought, His features set off his body, his
gate his features, his carriage his gate, his parts his carriage, his prudence
his parts, and his close patience his prudence. The Queen loved him well for
his activity, better for his parts, best of all for his abilities, which were
as much above his experience, as that was above his learning, and that above
his education. The little the wary man did, was so exactly just and discreet;
and the little he said, was so prudent and weighty, that he was chosen to keep
the Queens Conscience as her Chancellor, and to express her sense as her
Speaker: the Courtiers that envied the last capacity, were by his power forced
to confess their errors; and the Sergeants that would not plead before him in
the first, by his prudence to confess his abilities. The Chancellourship was
above his Law, but not his Parts; so pregnant and comprehensive, that he could
command other men's knowledge to as good purpose as his own. Such his humility,
that he did nothing without two Lawyers: such his ability, that the Queen did
nothing without him. Two things he said he was jealous of, his Mistresses the
Queens Prerogatives, and his Mother the Churches Discipline: the one, that
Majesty might be at liberty to do as much good; and the other, that Iniquity
might not be free to as much evil as it pleased. His enemies advanced him, that
they might weaken him at Court by his absence, and kill him at home by a
sedentariness. This even and clear man observed and improved their practices,
closing with Malice it self to his own advancement, and tempering the most
perverse enmity to the greatest kindness.

His first Preferment at Court was to be one of the fifty Pensioners; whence
his modest sweetness of Manners advanced him to the Privy Chamber: where he had
not been long, but his face and tongue (which most eloquent, which most
powerful, was in those days a question) made him Captain of the Guard^ his
presence and service Vice-Chamberlain; and his great improvement under my my
Lord Burleigh, placed him in that grave Assembly, (the wisest Convention in
Europe at that time) the Privy Council; where he had not sat long, when his
enemies as well as his friends made him Chancellor and Knight of the Garter:
the one to raise him, and the other by that rise to ruin him. The Eagle-eyed
men of those times carried up on high the Cockleshel they had a mind to crack.
A man of a pious Nature, very charitable to the Poor, very tender of dissenting
Judgments, (saying, That neither searing nor cutting was to be used in the
cause of Religion) very bountiful to Scholars, (who chose him Chancellor at
Oxford) very exact in his Place; whence he went off, though not with the
applause of a great Lawyer to split Causes, yet with the Conscience and comfort
of a just man, to do equity.

Take his Character from his own words, those words that prevailed with the
Queen of Scots to appear before the Commissioners at Fotheringaz, when neither
Queen Elizabeth's Commission, nor the Lord Chancellours Reason, nor the Power of
the Kingdom could persuade that good Lady to it. The words are these: You are
accused, but not condemned. You say you are a Queen; be it so: if you are
innocent, you wrong your Reputation in avoiding trial. You protest your self
innocent, the Queen fears the contrary not without grief and shame. To
examine your innocence are these honorable, prudent, and upright Commissioners
sent: glad will they be with all their hearts if they may return and report you
guiltless. Believe me, the Queen her self will be much affected with joy, who
affirmed to me at my coming from her, that never any thing befell her more
grievous, than that you were charged with such a crime: Wherefore lay aside the
bootless privilege of Royal Dignity, which here can be of no use to you,
appear in Judgment, and show your Innocence; lest by avoiding trial, you draw
upon your self suspicion, and lay upon your Reputation an eternal blot and
aspersion.

Four things I observe he did that deserve a Chronicle: 1. That he delayed the
Signing of Leicesters P^t^nt for the Lieut^nantcy of England and Ireland, the
Preface to his Kingdom, until that Earl was sick. 2. That he reduced the
Chancery, and all other Courts, to Rules. 3. That he stood by the Church
against the enemies of both sides. Archbishop Whitgift when checked by others
for his due severity, writes to him thus: I think my self bound to you for your
friendly Message as long as I live: It has not a little comforted me, having
received unkind speeches not long since, etc. And therefore (after an
^xpostulation about some States-mens Proceedings against the Law and State of
the Realm, and a Declaration of his own resolution) says he, your Honor in
of^ering that great courtesy, offered unto me as great a pleasure as I can
desire. Her Majesty must be my Refuge, and I beseech you that I may use you as
a means, when occasion shall serve; whereof I assure my self, and therein rest,
John Cant. 4. That he promoted the Proclamations for plain Apparel, for Free
Trade, for pure Relig^on, and the Laws against the Papists.


None Nobler, none less aspiring: none more busy, yet none more punctual in
his hours and orders. Corpulent he was, but temperate; a Bachelor, (and the
only one of the Queens Favorites) yet chaste: quick were his Dispatches, but
weighty, many his Orders, and consistent: numerous were the Addresses to him,
and easy the access. Seldom were his Orders reversed in Chancery, and
^eldomer his Advice opposed in Council. So just he was, that his sentence was
Law with the Su^j^ct; so wise, that his Opinion was Oracle with his Sovereign:
so exact was Queen Elizabeth, that she called upon him for an old debt, though
it broke his heart; so loving, that she carried him a Cordial-broath with her
own hand, though it could not r^vive him.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Hunsdon.
THe Lord Hunsdon was of the Q^eens nearest Kindred; and on the decease of
Sussex, both he and his Son took the place of Lord Chamberlain. He was a fast
man to his Prince, and firm to his friends and servants, downright, honest, and
stout-hearted, having the charge of the Queens Person both in the Court, and in
the Camp at Tilbury. The integrity of his temper allayed the greatness of his
birth; which had rendered him dangerous, if the other had not vouched him
faithful. He spoke big, but honestly; and was thought rather resolute than
ambitious. His words were as his thoughts, and his actions as his words. He had
Valor enough to be an eminent Soldier in Ruffling times, and a r^nownedly
honest man in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. His Latin, says Sir Robert Naunton, and
his dissimulation, were both alike. His custom of swearing, and obscenity in
speaking, made him seem a wo^se Christian than he was, and a better Knight of
the Carpet than he should be. The Pol^ticians follow^d Cecil, the Courtiers
Leicester, and the Soldiers Hunsdon, whose hands were better than his head,
and his heart than both. He led so brave a Train of young Gallants, as after
another threatened a Court, but after him secured it; whose Greatness was not
his Mistresses jealou^^e, but her safeguard. One of his blunt Jests went
further than others affected Harangues; the one being Nature, the other forced.
His faithfulness made him Governor of Berwick; a place of great ^ervice: and
General of the English Army; a place of great Trust. He had something of
Leicesters Choler, but none of his Malice. A right Noble Spirit, not so stupid
as not to resent, not so unworthy as to retain a sense of Injuries. To have the
Courage to observe an Affront, is to be even with an Adversary: to have the
patience to forgive it, is to be above him. There goes a story of him, that
when his Retinue, which in those times was large, would have drawn on a
Gentleman that had returned him a box on the ear, he forbad them in these
Souldier-like words: You Rogues, cannot my Neighbor and my self exchange a box
on the car, but you must interpose?

He might have been what he would, for relieving Queen Elizabeth in her
distress: he would be but what he was: Others Interests were of^ered him to
stand upon; he was contented with his own. He suppressed the Court Factions,
and the Northern Commotions; the one by his Inter^^t, the other by his Valor:
for the one, he had always the Queens heart; for the other, he had once a most
G^acious Letter.

His Court-^avour was as lasting as his Integrity. One has left this remarque
concerning him: see Fuller in his Worthies.
That he should have been twice Earl of Wiltshire in right of his Mother
Bollen. And the Queen, when he was on his Deathbed, ordered his patent and
Robes to his bedside: where he who could dissemble neither well nor ill, told
the Queen, That if he was not worthy of those Honors when living, he was
unworthy of them when dying.

In a word, Sir William Cecil was a wise man; Bacon was reaching, ^eicester
cunning; Walsingham was a Patriot, and my Lord Hunsdon was honest.

Observations on the Life of Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, and Lord
Chancellor of England.
AT once a most wise and a most learned man, of great Policy, and of as great
Integrity; meek and resolute: more devout to follow his own Conscience, than
cruel to persecute others. It is enough to intimate his moderate temper, equal,
and di^-engaged from violent extremes; that the first of Queen Elizabeth, in
the Disputation between the Papists and Protestants, he was chosen by the
Privy Council one of the Moderators, when Sir Nicholas Bacon was the other.

The Civility ^e showed in pros^erity, he found in Adver^ity: for in Queen
El^zabeths time he was rather ^ased, than deposed, [like another Ab^athar, sent
home by Solomon to his own fields in Anathoth] living cheerfully a^ Co^ham in
Surry, where he devoted his Old Age to Religion and Study, being much comforted
with the ^ueens Visits and kindness, and more with his own good conscience;
that (as he would often say) he had been so intent upon the service, as never
to enjoy the greatness of any place he was advanced to.

Sir Henry Wotton being bound for Rome, asked his Host at Siena, a man well
versed in men and business, What Rules he would give him for his port^, Conduct
and Carriage? There is one short remembrance (said he) will carry you safe
through the world; nothing but this, (said he) Gli Pensiere str^tti, and el
viso Scio^^o: (i. e.) Your thoughts close^ and your Countenance loose.

The Character of this prelate, a man of a calm and reserved mind, but of a
gravely obliging carriage: wise and wary; and that a solid wisdom rather than
a formal; well seasoned with practice, and well broken to Affairs: of a fine
Composition, between F^ugality and magnificence: A great Cherisher of manual
Arts, especially such as tended to splendor or ornament; entertaining the most
exquisite Artists with a settled pension. ^qually divided he was between the
Priest and the Statesman; Great with his double power, Ecclesiastical and
Civil: by Nature more reserved than popular, with Virtues fitter to beget
estimation than love. In his Chancellourship he was served with able followers,
rather by choice than number, and with more neatness and service than noise. As
midland Countries in busy times are most secure, as being farthest, and most
participating of the common Interest: so your moderate and middle men in
troublesome and perplexed times, are most quiet, as least concerned in the
respective Controversies, and most intent upon the common good.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Pickering.
HIs Extraction was not Noble, his estate but mean; yet was his person so
comely, his carriage so elegant, his life so gravely reserved and studious, and
his Embassies in France and Germany so well managed, that in King Edwards days
he was by the Council pitched upon as the Oracle, whereby our Agents were to be
guided abroad^ and in Queen Eli^abeths, designed by common vote for the Prince
by whom we were to be governed at home. He received extraordinary favors, no
doubt, so deserving he was: he was wish^d to more, he was so popular: and when
his service wa^ admitted to her majesty's bosom, all fancies but his own
placed his person in her Bed. And I find him a prince in this, That retiring
from those busy Buslings in the State, wherein he might be matched or
outdone, he devoted his large soul to those more sublime and noble researches
in his Study, wherein he sat monarch of hearts and letters. Anxious posterity
no doubt enquires what great Endowments could raise so private a man to such
public honor and expectation; and it must imagine him one redeemed by the
politure of good Education, from his younger vanities and simplicities, his
Rustic ignorance, his Clownish con^idence his Brutish dullness, his Country
solitude, his earthly ploddings, his Beggarly indigencies, or covetous
necessities; racked and refined from the Lees of sensual and inordinate lust,
from swelling and surly pride, from base and mean designs, from immoderate
affections, violent passions, unreasonable impulses, and depraved asp^cts; of a
strong and handsome body, a large and publ^ck soul, of a gentle and patient
access, of benign and just re^entments, a grand awful presence. This is he that
is born to teach the world, That Causa Virtus ^ Deo, vel ipse Deus.
Virtue and Wariness make^ Kings as well as Gods.

Observations on the Life of Cu^hberth Tonstal, Bishop of Durham.
A Man passing well seen in all kind of polished litera^ure; who having run
through many degrees of honor at home, and worthily performed several
Embassies abroad, was very hot against the Popes primacy in his young days,
very moderate for it in his middle years, and very zealous in his old age: like
the waters in Curtius, that are hot at midnight, warm in the morning, and cold
at noon. In the Reign of Queen Mary he spoke more harshly against the
protestants, (calling Bishop Hooper Beast for being married) then he acted,
being politickly presumed to bark the more, that he might bite the less; and
observed to threaten much in London, and do little in his own Diocese: for I
meet (says my Author) with a marginal note in Mr. Fox, which indeed justly
deserved even in the fairest letters to be inserted in the body of his Book:
Note, that Bishop Tonstal in Queen Mary's days was no great bloody Persecutor:
for Mr. Russel a Preacher was before him, and Dr. Hinmer his Chancellor would
have had him examined more particularly: the Bishop staid him, saying, Hitherto
we have had a good report among our Ne^ghbours; I pray you bring not this man's
blood upon my head.

When the more violent Bishops were confined to close prisons, primo
Elizabethae he lived in Free Custody at my Lord of Canterbury's, in sweet
Chambers, warm Beds, by warm Fires, with plentiful and wholesome Diet at the
Archbishops own Table: differing nothing from his former Grandeur, save that
that was at his own charges, and this at another; and that he had not his
former suit of superfluous Servan^s, that long Train that does not warm but
weary the Wearer thereof. In a word, his custody did not so much sour his
freedom, as his freedom sweetened his custody; where his Soul was most free,
using not once those Oracles of Seneca, That the good things of Prosperity are
to be wished, and the good things of Adversity to be admired. It Is true
Greatness to have at once the frail^y of a man, and the security of a God.
Prosperi^y (says my Lord Bacon) is the blessing of the Old Testament, and
Adversity of the new: the first wants not its fears and distastes, therein
therefore our prelate was temperate; nor the second its comforts and hopes, and
therein he was resolved: in the one ( -- virtus vel in host) he was not
vicious, under the other lie was virtuous.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.
NObility without Virtue is a disgrace, Virtue without Nobility low; but
Nobility adorned with Virtue, and Virtue embellished by Nobility, raises a man
high as Nature reaches: and he in whom these two concur, has all the glory a
man can attain unto, viz. both an Inclination and a Power to do well.

This is the man whose Greatn^ss was but the servant to his Goodness, and whose
honor the Instrument of his Virtue; who was reverenced like the Heavens he
bore, for his B^neficence, as well as for his Glory. He saw four troublesome
Reigns, but not troubled himself, as one that was so espoused to the common and
grand Concerns of Mankind, as to be unin^e^ested in the particular and petty
Design of any party of it.

He had friends (and none more sure to them, or more devoted to that sacred
thing called Friendship) to ease his heart to, to support his judgment by, to
reform, or at least observe his defect in, to compose his mind with; but none
to countenance in a Faction, or side with in a quarrel: Usefulness is a Bond
that tieth great and good men, and not respects.

How low Learning ran in our Land among our Native Nobility some two hundred
years since, in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, too plainly appears by the
Motto in the Sword of the Martial Earl of Shrewsbury, (where (says my Author)
at the same time a man may smile at the simplicity, and sigh at the
barbarousness thereof) Sum Talboti pro occidere inimicos men's: the bent Latin
that Lord, and perchance his Chaplain too in that Age could afford. The case
was much altered here, where this Lords Grandchild was at once the chiefest *
Counselor, and the most eminent Scholar of his Age. It Is a reverend thing to
see any ancient piece standing against time, much more to see an ancient Family
standing against Fortune. Certainly Princes that have able men of their
Nobility, shall find ease in employing them, and a better ^lide into their
business: For people naturally bend to them, as born in some sort to command.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Chall^ner.
THis Gentleman's birth in London made him quick, his Education in Cambridge
knowing, and his travail abroa^ ^expert. In Henry the eighth's time he reserved
Charles the fifth in the expedition of Algier: where being ship-wracked, after
he had swum till his strength and arms fa^led ^im, at the length catching hold
of a Cable with his teeth, he escaped, not without the loss of some of his
teeth. (We are consecrated by dangers to services; and we know not what we can
do, until we have seen all we can fear.) In Edward the sixth's Reign, he
behaved himself so manly at Muscleborough, that the Protector honored him with
a Knighthood, and his Lady with a Jewel; the delicate and valiant man at once
pleasing Mars and his Venus too. The first week of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he
is designed an Ambassador of honor to the Emperor; such his port and
carriage! and the second year, her Leiger for business in Spain; such his trust
and abilities! The first he performed not with more Gallantry, than he did the
second with policy; bearing up King Philips expectation of the match with
England for three years effectually, until he had done the Queens business
abroad, and she had done her own at home. In Spain he equally divided his time
between the Scholar and the Statesman, his recreation and his business; for he
refreshed his more careful time with a pure and learned Verse, de rep. Anglorum
instauranda, in five Books, whilst as he writes in the preface to that Book, he
lived Hieme infurno, aestate in Horreo: i. e. Wintered in a Stove, and Summered
in a Barn. He understood the Concerns of this estate well, and those of his own
better; it being an usual saying, engraven on all his Plates and Actions, --
Frugality is the left hand of Fortune, and Diligence the right. Anthony Brown
Viscount Mountacute urged with much Zeal and many Arguments the Danger and
Dishonor of revolting off from the Catholic and Mother Church: Sir Thomas
Challener with more Eloquence enlarged on the just Cause for which we deceded
from the Errors of Rome the true Authority by which we deceded from the
Usurpation of Rome, and the Moderation in what we deceded from the Superstition
of Rome.

When the Spanish Ambassador urged that some Catholics might with the Queens
leave remain in S^ain; he answered him in a large Declaration, That though the
instance seemed a matter of no great moment, yet seeing the Parties concerned
would not receive so much advantage by the licen^e as the Commonwealth would
damage by the President, it was neither fit for the King of Spain to urge, or
for the Queen of England to grant. He was very impatient of Injuries, pressing
his return home when his Coffers were searched, but admonished by his Mistress,
That an Ambassador must take all things in good part that has not a direct
tendency to the Princes dishonor, or his Countries danger. Oct. 1 65.
His death was as honorable as his life, Sir William Cecil being chief Mourner
at his Funeral, St. Paul's containing his Grave, and he leaving a hopeful Sir.
Tho.
Son that should bring up future Princes, as he had served the present; being as
worthy a Tutor to the hopeful Prince Henry, as his Father had been a faithful
Servant to the renowned Queen Elizabeth.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edward Waterhouse.
SIr Edward Waterhous^ was born at Helmstodbury Hartfordshire: of an ancient
and worshipful Family, deriving their descent lineally from Sir Gilbert
Waterhouse of Kyrton in Low-Lindsey in the County o^ Lincol^^ in the time of
King Henry the third. As for our Sir Edward, his Parents were,

John Waterhouse Esquire, a man of much fidelity and sageness, Auditor many
years to King Henry the eighth; of whom he obtained (after a great
Entertainment for him in his house) the grant of a weekly Market for the Town
of Helmsted.

Margaret Turner of the ancient House of Blunts-Hall in Suffolk, and Cannons in
Hertfordshire.

The King at his departure honored the children of the said John Waterhouse,
^ythe learned, industrious and ingenious Edward Waterhouse Esquire, of
Sion-Colledge.
being brought before him, with his praise and encouragement, gave a Benjamins
portion of Dignation to this Edward; foretelling by his Royal Augury, that he
would be the Crown of them all, and a man of great honor and wisdom, fit for
the service of Princes. It pleased God afterward to second the word of the
King, so that the sprouts of his hopeful youth only pointed at the growth and
greatness of his honorable Age. For, being but twelve years old, he went to
Oxford; where for some years he glistered in the Oratorick and Poetic sphere,
until he addicted himself to conversation, and observance of State-^ffairs,
wherein his great proficiency commended him to the favor of three principal
Patrons. One was Walter Devereux E^rl of Essex, who made him his bosome-friend;
and the said Earl lying on his deathbed took his leave of him with many
kisses: Oh my Ned, Oh my Ned, (said he) Farewell: thou art the faithfullest and
friendliest Gentleman that ever I k^ow, In testimony of his true affection to
the dead Father in his living Son, this Gentleman is thought to have penned
that most judicious and elegant Epistle, (recorded in Holinshed's History, page
1266.) and presented it to the young Earl, conjuring him by the Cogent
Arguments of Example and Rule to patrizare.

His other Patron was ^ir Henry Sidney, (so often Lord Deputy of Ireland)
whereby he became incorporated into the familiarity of his Son Sir Philip
Sidney; between whom and Sir Edward there was so great friendliness, that they
were never better pleased than when in one another companies, or when they
corresponded each with other. And we find after the death of that worthy
Knight, that he was a close-concerned Mourner at his Obsequies, as appears at
large in the printed representation of his funeral Solemnity.

His third Patron was ^^r John Perrot, Deputy ^lso of Ireland; who so valued
his council, that in State affairs he would do nothing without him. So great
his Employment betwixt State and State, that he crossed the Seas thirty seven
times, until deservedly at last he came into a port of honor, wherein he
sundry years anchored and found safe Harbor. For he receiving the honor of
Knighthood, was sworn of her Majesty's Privy Council for Ireland, and
Chancellor of the Exchequer therein. Now his grateful soul coursing about how
to answer the Queens favor, laid it self wholly out in her service: wherein
two of his Actions were most remarkable. First, he was highly instrumental in
modelling the Kingdom of Ireland into shires, as now they are; showing himself
so great a lover of the polity under which he was born, that he advanced the
Compliance therewith (as commendable and necessary) in the Dominions annexed
thereunto. His second service was, when many in that Kingdom shrouded
themselves from the Laws, under the Target of power, making Force their
Tutelary Saint, he set himself vigorously to suppress them. And when many of
the Privy Council, terrified with the greatness of the Earl of Desmond, durst
not subscribe the Instrument wherein he was proclaimed Traitor, Sir Edward
amongst some others boldly signed the same, (disavowing his, and all Treasons
against his Fri^nds and Country) and the Council did the like, commanding the
publication thereof. As to his private sphere, God blessed him, being but a
third Brother, above his other Brethren. Now, though he had three Wives, the
first a Villiers, the second a Spilman, the third the Widow of Herlakenden of
Wood-church in Kent, Esquire; and though he had so strong a brain and body, yet
he lived and died childless, intercommoning therein with many Worthies, who
are, according to AElius Spartianu^, either improl^fick, or have children in
Genitorum Vituperium and famarum Laesuram. God thus denying him the pleasure of
posterity, he craved leave of the Queen to retire himself, and fixed the
residue of his life at Wood-church in Kent, living there in great Honor and
Repute, as one who had no design to be popular, and not prudent; rich, and not
honest; great, and not good. He died in the 56 year of his Age, the 13 of
October 1591. and is buried at Wood-church under a Table-marble monument,
erected to his memory by his sorrowful Lady surviving him.

Observations on the Life of the Duke of Norfolk^
HIs Predecessors made more noise it may be, but he had the greater fame: their
Greatness was feared, his Goodness was loved. He was heir to his Uncles
Ingenuity, and his Fathers Valor; and from both derived as well the Laurel as
the Coronet.

His God and his Sovereign were not more taken with the ancient simplicity that
lodged in his plain breast, than the people were endeared by that noble
humility that dwelt in his plainer clothes and ca^riage. (The most honorable
Pe^sonages, like the m^st honorable Coats of Arms, are least gaudy.) In the
Election of the first Parliament of Que^n Elizabeth, and as a consequent to
that in the settlement of the Kingdom, Sir William Cecils Wisdom did much,
the Earl of Arundels Industry more, but the Duke of Norfolks Popularity did
m^st. Never Peer more dread, never more dear: as he could engage the people to
comply with their Sovereign at home, so he could lead them to serve her abroad.
That martial but unfor^unate Gentleman William Lord Gray, draws first
toward Scotland, (for the first Cloud that would have da^k^ned our glorious
star, came from the North, Whence all evil, is equally our Proverb and our
experience) as Warden of the middle and East m^^ches: but he is seconded by the
Duke, as Lieutenan^-General of the North-parts; where his presence commands a
Treaty, and his Authority a League, Offensive and Defensive, to balance the
French Interest, to reduce the North parts of Ireland, and keep the peace of
both Kingdome^. Now as the watchful Duke discovered by some private Passages
and Letters that Scotland was to be invaded by the French: so he writ to his
Sovereign, That notwithstanding the Spanish and French Ambassadors Overtures,
^he would proceed resolutely in her preparations for Scotland; as she did under
his Conduct, until the young Que^n was glad to submit; and the King of France,
by Cecil and Throgmortons means now b^sied at home, to come to terms.

He brought the Kingdom to musters, the People to ply husbandry, the nobility
to keep Armories, and the Justicers to Salaries. The Ensigns of St. Michael
were bestowed upon him as the Noblest, and on Leicester as the dearest person
at Court: N^w Arundel, who had spent his own Estate in hope of the Queens,
under pretense of recovering his health, traveled abroad to mitigate his
grief. When the Earls of Pembroke and Leicester were openly for the Queens
marriage, for the future security of our present happiness; the Duke, though
privately of their mind, yet would discourse.

1. That Successors take off the peoples eyes from the present Sovereign. 2.
That it was the safest way to k^ep all Competitors in suspense. 3. That
Successors, though not designed, may succeed. 4. Whereas when known, they have
been u^done by the Arts of their Competitors. 5. And that most men (whatever
the busy Agitators of the Succession pretended) have no more feeling in
public matters than concerns their own p^ivate interest. But he had a
p^ivate kindness for ^he Queen of Scots, which he discovered in all the
Treaties wherein she was concerned. 1. In Lov^-Letters to her, notwithstanding
that Queen Elizabeth bid him take care what pillow he rested his head on. 2. In
his meditations at Court so importune for her, that the Queen would say, The
Queen of Scots shall never want an Advocate while Norfolk lives. And, 3. By
some private transaction with the Pope and Spaniard: to which Leicesters craft
trepanned him against his friend Cecils advice, which in a dangerous juncture
cost him his life. For the people wishing (for the securi^y of the succession
in a Protestant and an E^glish hand) that the good Duke were married to the
mother, and his only Daughter to her young Son; subtle Leicester and
Throgmorton laid a Train for the plain man by Conf^rences with Murray, Cecil,
etc. until a Plot was discovered; and the Duke, notwithstanding Cecils advice
to marry a priva^e Lady, retiring to Norfolk to finish the Ma^ch with the
Queen, was upon Letters taken with Rosse surprised, and committed to the Tower,
he saying, I am betrayed, and undone by mine own, whilst I knew not how to
mistrust, which is the strength of wisdom. After a solemn Trial, he is beheaded
for Indiscretions rather than Treasons, losing his head because he wanted one.
Never any fell more beloved, or more pitied: such his singular Courtesy, such
his magnificent Bounty, not unbecoming so great a Peer. High was his Nobility,
large his Interest, singularly good his Nature, comely his Person, manly his
Countenance, who (says Cambden) might have been a great strength and Ornament
to his Country, had not the cunning practices of his malicious Adversaries, and
slippery hopes, under color of public good, diverted it from his first course
of life. His death was a blot to some men's Justice, to all men's Discretion that
were concerned in it, as generally odious, though quietly endured^ which proves
(says one) That the common people are like Rivers, which seldom grow so
impetuous as to transcend the bounds of Obedience, but upon the overflowing of
a general Oppression.
Observations on the Life of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.
SIr Nicholas Throgmorton, fourth son of Sir George Throgmorton of Coughton in
Warwickshire, was bread beyond the Seas, where he attained to great experience.
Under Queen Mary he was in Guild Hall arraigned for Treason, (in co^pliance
with Wiat) and by his own wary pleading, and the Juries upright Verdict, hardly
escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him her Leiger a long time, first in France,
then in Scotland, finding him a most able minister of state: yet got he no
great wealth; and no wonder, being ever of the opposite party to Burleigh Lord
Treasurer: Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and Chief Butler of England, were his
highest Preferments. I say, Chief Butler; which Office, like an empty-covered
Cup, pretended to some State, but afforded no considerable profit. He died at
supper with eating of sallats: not without suspicion of poison; the rather,
because it happ^ned in the house of one no mean Ar^ist in that faculty, R Earl
of Leicester. His death, as it was sudden, was seasonable for him and his,
whose active (others will call it tur^ulent) spirit had brought him unto such
trouble as might have cost him, at least, the loss of his personal Estate. He
died in the 57 year of his Age, Febr. 12. 15^0. and lies buried in the
South Side of the Chance^ of St. Martin Cree-church London.

A stons and a wise man, that saw through pretenses, and could look beyond
dangers. His skill in Herald^y appears in his grim Arguments against the King
of France, in ^ight of his Queen of Scots Usurping of the Arms of England; and
his exper^ence in History, in his p^^emptory D^clarations of the Queen of
Englands Which he made out from Dr. Wottons Discourse on that subject at
Cambray.
Title in the right of her ^welve Predecessors to t^ose of France. But his
policy much mo^e, b^ putting Mo^tmorency, the great Enemy of the Guizes, upon
persuading his Master out of the humor of wearing those Arms, with this
Argument, That it was below the Arms of F^ance to be quartered with those of
England; those being comprehensive of these and all other of his Majesty's
Dominions. An Argument more suitable to that Prince his ambition, than
convincing to his R^ason. Wise men speak rather what is most fit, than what is
most rational, not what demonstrates, but what persuades his, and takes. But
being endang^red in his person, affronted in his Retinue, and served with
nothing at his Table but what had the Arms of England quartered with those of
France, he dealt underhand wit^ the E^rl of Northumberland, to understand the
scope the Reformed propounded to themselves, their means to compass what they
aimed at, and (if at any time they were assisted) upon what terms a League
might be concluded between the two Kingdoms. The Advices collected from all
his Observations he sent to the Queen, were these: 1. That she should not rest
in dull Counsels of what is lawful, but proceed to quick Resolutions of what is
safe. 2. That to prevent, is the policy of all Nations, and to be powerful, of
ours. England is never peaceable but in Ar^^. 3. That how close soever they
managed their Affairs, it was a Maxim, To which Queen Elizabeth adds a
saying of Valentinians. Have the French for thy Friend, not for thy Neighbor.
That France can neither be poor, nor abstain from War three years together.


Francis Earl of Bedford bore the state of the French Embassy, and Sir Nicholas
the burden, who gave daily Directions to Sir Thomas Challone^ in Spain, Sir
Henry Killigrew in Germany, and Sir Thomas Randolph and Si^ Peter Mewtas in
Scotland: to the two first, to enjealous the Princes of those Countries; and to
the last, to unite the Nobility of Scotland; he in the mean time suffering
himself to be taken prisoner by the Protestants at the battle of Dreux, that he
might with less suspicion impart secret Counsels to them, and receive as secret
Advices from them; until discovering their lightness and unconstancy, they
secured him as a person too cunning for the whole Faction, and too skilful in
raising Hurley-burleys and Commotions. When the young Queen of Scots would
needs marry the young Lord Darley, he told her that was long to be deliberated
on which was to be done but once. And when that would not do, he advised, 1.
That an Army should appear upon the borders: 2. That the Eccl^siast^cal Laws
should be in force against Papists: 3. That Hereford should be secured: and, 4.
That the Lord Dudley should be advanced. But the Queen being married to the
Lord Darley, an easy and good-natured man, whom Qu^en Elizabeth wished to her
bed next Leicester, and affronted by her subjects, Throgmorton disputes the
Que^n^ Authority and non-accountableness to any against Buchanans damned De
jure Reg. apud Scotos.
Dialogue of the Peoples power over Kings: until ^melling their design of
revolt to the French, and cruelty upon the Queen, he persuaded her to resign
her Government, saying, That her Resignation extorted in Prison, which is a
just fear, was utterly void. The next news we hear of this busy man, was in
his two Advisoes to the Queen of Scots friends: 1. To clap up About moneys
transported beyond Sea.
Cecil, whom they might then (he said) deal with: 2. To proclaim the Queen of
Sexs succession; and in the Train he laid to serve Leicester in the Duke of
Norfolks ruin. But he was too familiar with that Politicians privacy, to live
long: anno 1570, he died. A man, says Mr. Cambden, of great experience,
passing sharp wit, and singular dili^gence; an overcurious fancy, and a too
nimble activity: like your too fine Silks or Linen, and more for show than
service; never bl^ssing their Owners but when allayed with something of the
heavy and the wary; nor rising, but when stayed.

Observations on the Life of Edward Earl of Derby.
HIs Greatness supported his Goodness, and his Goodness endeared his Greatness;
his Height being looked upon with a double aspect: 1. By himself, as an
advantage of Beneficence: 2. By others, as a ground of R^verence. His great
birth put him above private respects, but his great Soul never above public
service. Indeed he repaired by ways thrifty, yet Noble, what his Ancestors had
impaired by neglect. Good Husbandry may as well stand with great Honor, as
Breadth may consist with Height. His Travel when young, at once gained
experience, and saved expenses; and his marriage was as much to his profit as
his honor. And now he shows himself in his full Grandeur, when the
intireness of his mind, complied with the largeness of his soul.

1. In a spreading Charity. Other Lords m^de many poor by Oppression; he and my
Lord of Bedford, as Queen Eliabeth would jest, made all the Beggars by his
liberality.

2. In a famous Hospitality: wherein, 1. His House was orderly: a College of
Discipline, rather than a palace for Entertainment; his Servants being so many
young Gentlemen trained up to govern themselves by observing him; who knew
their master, and understood themselves. 2. His provision Native, ( all the
Necessaries of England are bred in it) rather plentiful than various, solid
than dainty^ that cost him less, and contented his guests more. His Table
constant and even, where all were welcome, and none invited. 3. His Hall was
full most commonly, his Gates always; the one with the honest Gentry and
Yeomen, who were his Retainers in love and observance, bringing good stomachs
to his Table, and resolved hearts for his service; the holding up of his hand
in the Northern business, being as affectual as the displaying of a Banner: The
other with the, 1. Aged, 2. Maimed, 3. Industrious Poor, whose craving was
prevented with doles, and expectation with bounty; the first being provided
with meat, the second with money, and the third with employment. In a word, Mr.
Cambden observes, That Hospitality lies buried since 1572, in this Earls
Grave: whence may that Divine Power raise it, that shall raise him; but before
the last Resurr^ction, when there will be plenty to bestow in one part of the
world, and no poor to be relieved; poverty in the other, and no bounty to
relieve.

Neither was he munificent upon other men's charge: for once a month he looked
into his Income^, and once a weak to his Disbursements, that none should wrong
him, or be wronged by him. The Earl of Derby, he would say, shall keep his own
House: wherefore it is an Observation of him and the second Duke of Norfolk,
That when they were buried, not a Tradesman could demand the payment of a
Groat that they owed him, nor a Neighbor the restitution of a penny they had
wronged him. They say, The Grass grows not where the Grand Seigniors Horse
treads; nor does the People thrive where the Noblemen inhabit^ But here every
Tenant was a Gentleman, and every Gentleman my Lords Companion: such his
Civility cowards the one, and great penny worths to the other. Noblemen in
those days esteemed the love of their Neighbors more than their fear, and the
service and fealty of their Tenants more than their money. Now the Landlord
has the sweat of the Tenants brow in his Coffers, then he had the best blood
in his Veins at his command.

That grand word, On mine Honor, was security enough for a Kingdom, and the
only Asseveration he used. It was his privilege, that he need not swear for a
testimony; and his renown, that he would not for his honor. Great was this
Families esteem with the people, and eminent their favor with their
Sovereigns; as which ever bestowed it self in obliging their Liege-people,
improving their interest, and supporting their Throne: for though they were a
long time great Kings of Man and Hearts, yet were they as long faithful
subjects to England.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Fi^z-Williams.
A Child of Fortune from his Cradle, made u^ of confidence and reputation:
never unwarily showing his Virtue or Worth to the world with any disadvantage.

When Britain had as little sleepiness and sloth as night, when it was all
day, and all activity; He, as all young Sparks of that Age, trailed a Pike in
the Netherlands, (the Seminary of the English Soldiery, and the School of
Europes Discipline) as a Soldier, and traveled as a Gentleman; until that
place graced him civilly with a Command, which he had honored eminently with
his service. His friends checked him for undertaking an Employment so
boisterous; and he replied upon them, That it was as necessary as it seemed
irregular: for if some were not Soldiers, all must be so. He said, He never
durst venture on War with men, till he had made his Peace with God: A good
Conscience breeds great Resolutions, and the innocent Soul is impregnable: None
more fearful of doing evil, none more resolved to suffer: there being no
hardship that he would avoid, no undecency that he would allow. Strict he was
to his Commission, and yet observant of his advantage: never tempting a danger,
never flying it: careful of his first life and himself, but more of his other
and his name. When the methods of Obedience advanced him to the honor of
commanding, six things he was Chronicled for.

1. Never making the Aged, the Young, or the Weak, the Objects of his Rage,
which could not be so of his Fear. 2. That he never basely killed in cold
blood, them that had nobly escaped his Sword in hot. 3. That he never led the
Soldiers without p^y, or quartered in the Country without money. 4. That
though he was second to none that acted in War, such his Valor! yet he was the
first that spoke for Peace, such his sweet Disposition! 5. That he would never
suffer that a Clergyman should be abused, a Church violated, or the Dead be
unburied. 6. That he would never force an Enemy to a necessity: always saying,
Let us disarm them of their best Weapons, Despair: nor fight an Enemy before he
had skirmished him, nor undertake a design before he consulted his God, his
Council, his Friends, his Map and his History.
His own Abilities commended, and his alliance with Sir Henry Sidney Lord
Deputy, whose Sister he married, promoted him to the government of Ireland.
Once did the Queen send him thither for his Brothers sake, four times more for
his own sake; a sufficient evidence (says my Friend) of his Ability and
Integrity, since Princes never trust twice, where they are once deceived in a
Minister of State. He kept up his Mistress^s Interest, and she his Authority;
enjoying the Earl of Essex, so much above him in honor, to truckle under him
in Commission when Governor of vlster, and he Lord Deputy of Ireland. Defend
me, said Luther to the Duke of Saxony, with your Sword, and I will defend you
with my Pen. Maintain my Power, says the Minister of State to his Sovereign,
and I will support your Majesty.

Two things he did for the settlement of that Kingdom: 1. He raised a
Composition in Munster. 2. He established the Possessions of the Lords and
Tenants in Monahan.


Severe he was always against the Spanish Faction, but very vigilant in -- 88,
when the dispersed Armado did look, but durst not land in Ireland, except
driven by Tempest, and then finding the shore worse than the Sea. But Leicester
dies, and he fails; when his Sun was set, it was presently night with him. Yra
la soga con el Calderon; where goes the Bucket, there goes the Rope; where
the Principal miscarrieth, all the Dependants fall with him: as our r^nowned
Knight, who died where he was born, (there is a Circulation of all things to
their Original) at Milton in Northamptonshire, 1594.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Pembroke.
AN excellent man, and one that fashioned his own Fortune: His Disposition got
favor, and his Prudence wealth, (the first to grace the second, and the second
to support the first) under King Henry the eighth, whose Brother-in-law he was
by his wife, and Chamberlain by his place. When others were distracted with
Factions in King Edwards Reign, he was intent upon his Interest, (leaning (as
he said) on both sides the stairs to get up) for his service, being promoted to
the master of the Horses place; for his relation to the Queen Mother, to the
Order of St. George; and in his own Right, to the Barony of Caerdiffe, and the
Earldome of Pembroke.

Under Queen Mary his Popularity was very serviceable when General against
Wiat; his Authority useful, when President of Wales; and his Vigilance
remarkable, when Governor of Calice; And under Queen Elizabeth, for his
Fidelity and ancient Honesty he was made great master of the Household. But
herein he failed, That being more intent upon the future state of the Kingdom
under the succession, than his own under the present Sovereign, he was cajoled
by Leicester to promote the Queen of Scots match with Norfolk so far, (neither
with an ill will, (says the Annalist) nor a bad intent) as to lose his own
favor with the Queen of England, who discovered those things after his death
that made him weary of his life^ which was an Instance of my Lord Bacons Rule,
That ancient Nobility is more innocent, though not so active as the young one;
this more virtuous, but not so plain as that; there being rarely any rising but
by a commixture of good and evil Arts. He was richer in his Tenants hearts than
their Rents: Alas! what has not that Nobleman, that has an universal love
from his Tenants? who were observed to live better with their encouraged
industry upon his Copyhold, than others by their secure sloth on their own
Free-land. 2. His Chaplains, whose Merits were preferred freely and nobly to
his excellent Livings, without any unworthy Gratuities to his Gehazi's or
Servants, or any unbecoming Obligations to himself. 3. His Servants, whose
youth had its Education in his Family, and Age its maintenance upon his Estate,
which was favorably Let out to Tenants, and freely Leased to his Servants; of
whom he had a Train upon any occasion in his Family, and an Army in his
Neighborhood: an Army, I say, in his Neighborhood;; not to enjealous his
Prince, but to secure him; as in Wiats case, when this King of Hearts would be
by no means a Knave of Clubs.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Mildmay.
Cambden Eliz. 1566
WAlter Mildmay, that upright and most advised man, was born at Chelmsford in
Essex, where he was a younger-son to Thomas Mildmay, Esquire. He was bred in
Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, where he did not (as many young Gentlemen) study
only in Complement, but seriously applied himself to his Book. Under King
Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth, he had a gainful Office in the
Court of Augmentations: during the Reign of Queen Mary, he practiced the
Politic Precept, Been vixit, qui been latuit. No sooner came Queen Elizabeth
to the Crown, but he was called to State-employment; and it was not long before
he was made Chancellor of the exchequer. It is observed, That the exchequer
never fares ill but under a good Prince; such who out of Conscience will not
oppress their People, whilst Tyrants pass not for that they squeeze out of
their Subjects. Indeed Queen Elizabeth was very careful not to have her Coffers
swelled with the Consumption of her Kingdom, and had conscientious Officers
under her; amongst whom, Sir Walter was a principal one. This Knight, sensible
of Gods blessing on his estate, and knowing that, Omne beneficium requirit
Officium, cast about to make his return to God. He began with his Benefactions
to Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, only to put his hand into practice: then his
Bounty embraced the Generous Resolution, (which the painful piety of St. Paul
propounds to himself, viz.) Not to build on another man's foundation, but on his
own cost he erected a new College in Cambridge by the name of Immanuel. A
right godly Gentleman he was; a good man, and a good Citizen; though some of
his back friends suggested to the Queen that he was a better Patriot than
Subject: and he was over-popular in Parliaments, insomuch that his Life set sub
nubecula, under a Cloud of a Royal Displeasure: yet was not the Cloud so great,
but that the beams of his Innocence meeting those of the Queens Candor, had
easily dispelled it, had he survived longer, as appeared by the great grief of
the Queen, professed for the loss of so grave a Counselor, who leaving two
Sons and three Daughters, died anno Domini 1589.

This Gentleman being employed by virtue of his place to advance the Queens
Treasure, did it industriously, faithfully, and conscionably, without wronging
the Subject, being very tender of their P^iviledges; insomuch that he
complained in Parliament, That many Subsidies were granted, and no Grievances
redressed: which words being represented to his disadvantage to the Queen, made
her to disaffect him, setting in a Court-Cloud, but (as he goes on) in the
Sunshine of his Country, and a clear Conscience, (though a man's Conscience can
be said no otherwise clear by his opposition to the Court, than a man is said
to have a good heart when it is but a bold one.) But coming to Court after he
had founded his College, the Queen told him, Sir Walter, I hear you have
erected a Puritan foundation. No, Madam, said he, far be it from me to
countenance any thing contrary to your established Laws: But I have set an
A^orn; which when it comes to be an Oak God alone knows what will be the fruit
of it.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Fortescue.
AN upright and a knowing man, a great master of Greek and Latin, and Overseer
of the Qu: Studies in both the Languages; master of the Wardrobe, one whom she
trusted with the Ornaments of her soul and body: succeeding Sir Walter Mildmay
in his prudence and piety, and in his place of Chancellor and Under-treasurer
of the exchequer.

Two men Qu: Eliz would say out-did her expectation; Fortescue for Integrity,
and Walsingham for Subtlety, as Cambden writes, and Officious services. His and
Rawleigh's failure was their design of Articling with K. James at his first
coming, not so much (say some in their behalf) for himself, as for his
followers, in regard of the known feud between the Nations. However, conditions
unworthy of English Subjects to of^er, and below the K. of Great Britain to
receive, who is to make no more terms for his Kingdom than for his Birth, The
very solemn asking of the Peoples consent, which the Archbishop of Canterbury
in all the corners of the stage at a Coronation makes, importing no more than
this; Do you the people of England acknowledge, that this is the Person who is
the Heir of the crown? They being absolutely obliged to submit to the
Government upon supposition that they absolutely believe that he is the King.

He thought it not convenient to alter frames of Government, in compliance with
the humors of people, which are to be managed by Government, not pleased; for
he said God changed not the order of the Government of the world to comply with
man's defects, when he can by his Almighty power draw good out of their evils,
and great Glory to himself out of the fall of others, as in nature he does not
fit the frame of things to the ugly nature of Monsters; but the irregular shape
of Monsters to the beauty of things, being of opinion, tha^ we should thank our
Governor, (as the Ethiopian flaves do their Emperor when they are slashed;
and we should God when we are corrected) for thinking of us: and having a care
of us universal as that God has of the world, whom they represent Rulers
within their dominions, having much of the Character that God has in the
universe; viz. That he is a Circle whose center is every where, and
Circumference no where.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Drury.
SIr William Drury was born in Suffolk, where his Worshipful Family had long
flourished at Haulsted. His name in Saxon sounds a Pearl, to which he
answered in the pretiousness of his disposition, clear and heard, innocent and
valiant, and therefore valued deservedly by his Queen and Country. His youth
was spent in the French Wars, his middle^ Age in Scotland, and his old Age in
Ireland. He was Knight-Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had
p^ss^ssed themselves of the Castle of Edinburgh, in the minority of King James.
Queen Elizabe^h employed this Sir William with 1500 men to besiege the Castle;
which service he right worthily performed, reducing it within few days to the
owner thereof. Anno 1575. he was appointed Lord President of Munster, whither
he went with competent Forces, and executed impartial Justice in despite of
the opposers thereof. For as the Sign of Leo immediately precedeth Virgo and
Libra in the Zodiac; so I hope not that Innocence will (...) protected, or
Justice administered in a barbarous Country, where power and strength do not
first secure a passage unto them. But the Earl of Desmond opposed this good
President, forbidding him to enter the County of Kerry, as a Palatinate
peculiarly appropriated unto himself. Know by the way, as there were but four
Palatinates in England, Chester, Lancaster, Durham and Ely, (whereof the two
former many years since were in effect invested in the Crown) there were no
fewer than eight Palatinates in Ireland, poss^ssed by their respective Dynasts
claiming Regal Rights therein, to the great retarding of the absolute Conquest
of that Kingdom. Amongst these, (says my Author) Kerry became the Sanctuary
of Sin, and Refuge of Rebels, as outlawed from any Jurisdiction. Sir William no
whit terrified with the Earls threatening, and declaring that no place should be
a privilege to mischief, entered Kerry with a competent Train, and there
dispensed Justice to all persons, as occasion did require. Thus with
seven-score men he safely forced his return through seven hundred of the Earls,
who sought to surprise him.

In the last year of his Life he was made Lord Deputy of Ireland; and no doubt
had performed much in his place, if not afflicted with constant sickness, the
forerunner of his death, at Waterford, 1598.

He was one of that Military Valor which the Lord Verulam wishes about a
Prince in troublesome times, that held a good esteem with the Populacy, and an
exact correspondence with the noble; whereby he united himself to each side by
endearments, and divided them by distrust; watching the slow motions of the
people, that they should not be excited and spirited by the nobility; and the
ambition of the Great Ones, that it should not be befriended with the
turbulency, or strengthened with the assistance of the Commonalty. One great
Act well followed did his business with the natives, whom he sometimes
indulged, (giving their Discontents liberty to evaporate) and with the
strangers, whom he always awed. In those that were commended to his service, he
observed two things: 1. That they were not advanced for their dependence,
because they promote a Party: which he noted to be the first ground of
Recommenda^ion: 2. Nor for their weakness, because they cannot hinder it; which
he remarked to be the second.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Smith.
SIr Thomas Smith was born at Cambd. Eliz. anno 1577.
Saffro^-Walden in Essex, and b^ed in Queens College in Cambridge; where such
his proficiency in Learning, that he was chosen out by Henry the eighth to be
sent over, and to be brought up beyond the Seas. It was fashionable in that Age
that pregnant Students were maintained on the cost of the State, to be
Merchants for experience in Foreign Parts; whence returning home with their
gainful Adventurers, they were preferred according to the improvement of their
time to Offices in their own Country. Well it were if this good old Custom
were resumed: for if where God has given five talents, men would give but
pounds, I mean, encourage hopeful Abilities with hopeful maintenance, able
persons would never be wanting, and poor men with great Parts would not be
excluded the Line of Prefermen^. This Sir Thomas was first Servant and
Favorite to the Duke of Somerset, and afterward Secretary of State to Queen
Elizabeth, and a grand Benefactor to both Universities.

Anno 1577, when that excellent Act passed^ whereby it was provided, That a
third part of the Rent upon Leases made by Colleges, should be reserved in
Corn, paying it either in k^nd or in money, after the rate of the best prices
in Oxford or Cambridge- markets, the next Market-days before Michaelmas or our
Lady-day^ For the passing of this Act, Sir Thomas S^ith ^urprized the House;
and whereas many conceived not the difference between the payment of Rents in
Corn or money, the knowing Patriot took the advantage of the present cheap
year, knowing that hereaft^r Grain would grow dearer, Mankind daily
multiplying, and License being lately given for Transportation; so that now
when the Universities have least Corn, they have most Bread. What his foresight
did now for the Universi^y, his reach did the first year of Q. Eliz. for the
Kingdom: for the first sitting of her Council he advised twelve most important
things for the public safety.

1. That the Ports should be shu^. 2. That the Tower of London should be
secured good hands. 3. That the Deputy of Ireland's Commi^^^on should be
renewed and enlarged. 4. That all Officers should act. 5. That no new Office
should be bestowed in a month. 6. That Ministers should meddle with no
Controversies. 7. That Ambassadors should be sent to Foreign Princes. 8. That
no Coin should be transported beyond Sea. 9. That no person of quality should
travel for six weeks. 10. That the Trai^-bands should be mustered. 11. That
Ireland, the Borders, and the Seas, should be provided for. 12. And that the
dissenting Nobility and Clergy should be wa^ched and secured. Adding withal a
Paper for the Reading of the Epistle, the Gospel, and the Commandments in the
English tongue, to encourag^ the Protestants expectation, and allay the Papists
fear. In the same Proclamation that he drew up, the Sacrament of the Altar was
to be reverenc^d, and yet the Communion to be administered in both kinds, He
advised a Disputation with the Papists one day, (knowing that they could not
dispute without leave from the Pope, and so would disparage the^r Cause; yet
they could not say but they might dispute for the Queen, and so satisfy the
People) and is one of the The Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford,
John Gray of Pyrgo, Sir William Cecil, Tho. Smith
^ive Councillors to whom the D^signe of the Reformation is opened, and one of
the The Doctors ^arker, Bill, May, Cox, Grindal, Whi^e-head, Pillington, and
Sir Tho. Smith.
eight to whom the management of it was entrusted. There you might see him a
Leading man among the Statesmen, here most eminent among Divines; at once the
most knowing and pious man of that Age. As his Industry was taken up with the
establishment of our Affairs at home, so his Watchfulness (upon Sir Edward
Carnees deposition of his Embassy) was intent upon the plot of France and Rome
abroad: in the first of which places he made a Secretary his own, and in the
second a Cup Bearer. At the Treaty of Cambray my Lord Howard of Effingham, the
Lord Chamberlain, and he, brought the King of Spain to the English side in the
business of Calice: 1. That France might be weakened: 2. That his Netherlands
might be secured: 3. That the Queen his Sweetheart might be obliged, until he
discovered Queen Elizabeth's averseness to the marriage: whereupon had it not
been for the Viscount Mountacute (who was not so much a Papist as to forget
that he was an ^nglish-man) and Sir Thomas, the Spaniard had stolen over
Catharine Gray, Queen Elizabeth's Niece, for a pretense to the Crown, as the
French had the Queen of Scots her Cozen. After which, he and Sir William Cecil
advised her Majesty to that private Treaty apart, without the Spaniard, which
was concluded 1559^ as much to the honor of England, now no longer to truckle
under Spain, as its interest, no longer in danger from France. Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton was the metal in these Treaties, and Sir Thomas Smith the Allay:
the ones mildness being to mitigate that animosity which the others harshness
had begot; and the others spirit to recover those advantages which this man's
easiness had yielded. Yet he showed himself as much a man in demanding, as Sir
William Cheyney in gaining Calice; replying smartly upon Chancellor Hospitals
Discourse of ancient Right, the late A^ Cambray.
Treaty; and upon Montmorency's Harangue of Fears, Conscience. Pitying the
neglected state of Ireland, he obtained a Colony to be planted under his base
Son in the East-Coast of Vlster, called Ardes, at once to civilize and secure
that place. So eminent was this Gentleman for his Learning, that he was at once
Steward of the Stannaries, Dean of Carlisle, and Provost of Eaton in King
Edward's time, and had a Pens^on (on condition he went not beyond Sea, so
considerable he was) in Queen Mary's.
Well he deserved of the Commonwealth of Learning by his Books; 1. Of the
commonwealth of England, 2. Of the Orthography of the English Tongue, and o^
the Pronunciation of Greek; and 3. an exact Commentary of matters, says Mr.
Cambden, worthy to be published.

Observations on the Lives of Doctor Dale, the Lord North, Sir Thomas Randolph.
I Put these Gentlemen together in my Observations, because I find them so in
their Employments: the one Agent, the other Leiger, and the third extraordinary
Ambassador in France; the first was to manage our Intelligence in those dark
times, the second to urge our Interest in those troublesome days, and the third
to represent our Grandeur. No man understood the French correspondence with the
Scots better than Sir Thomas Randolph, who spent his active life between those
Kingdoms: none knew better our Concerns in France and Spain than Valentine
Dale, who had now seen six Treaties; in the first three whereof he had been
Secretary, and in the last a Commissioner: None fitter to represent our state
than my Lord North, who had been two years in Walsinghams house, four in
L^^cesters ^e^v^ce; had seen six Courts, twenty Bat^les, nine Treaties, and
four solemn Justs; whereof he was no mean part, as a reserved man, a valiant
Soldier, and a Courtly Person. So ^ly wa^ Dale, that he had a servant always
attending the Q^een-mother of France, the Queen of Scots, and the King of
Navarre: so watch^ul Sir Thomas Randolph, that the same day he sent our Agent
in Scotland notice of a d^signe to carry over the young King, and depose the
Regent, he advised our Queen of a match between the King of Scot's Uncle and
the Countess of Shrewsbury's Daughter; and gave the Earl of Huntington, then
President of the North, t^ose secret instructions touching that matter, that
(as my Lord Burleigh would often acknowledge) secured that Coast. My L. North
watched the successes of France, Dr. Dale their Leagues; and both took care
that the Prince of Orange did not throw himself upon the Protection of France,
always a dangerous Neighbor, but with that accession a dreadful one. Sir John
Horsey in Holland proposed much, but did nothing: Sir Thomas Randolph in France
performed much, and said nothing: yet both with Dr. Dales assistance made
France and Spain the scales in the balance of Europe, and England the tongue or
holder of the balance, while they held the Spaniard in play in the Netherlands,
watched the French Borders, and kept constant Agents with Orange and Don John.
Neither was Sir Thomas ^ess in Scotland than in France, where he betakes
himself first to resolution in his Protestation, and then to cunning in his
Negotiations encouraging M^rton on the one hand, and amusing Lenox on the
other: ^eeping fair weather with the young King, and yet practicing with Mar
and Anguse. Nothing plausible indeed, says Cambden, was he with the wi^e,
though youthful King James; yet very dexterous in Scottish humors, and very
prudent in the northern Affairs; very well seen in those interests, and as
successful in those negotiations; witness the first and advantageous League
1586. Video and rideo, is Gods Motto upon Affronts; Video and Taceo, was Queen
Elizabeth's; Video nec vident, was Sir Thomas Randolphs. These three men treated
with the Spaniard near Ostend for peace, while the Spaniard prepared himself on
our Coast for Wa^. So much did Sir James Crofts his affection for peace exceed
his judgment of his Instruction, that he would needs steal over to Brussels to
make it, with no less commendation for the prudent Articles he proposed, t^a^
censure for the hazard he incurred in the Proposal. So equal and even did old
Dale carry himself, that the Duke of Parma saw in his Answers is the English
spirit, and therefore (says my Author) durst not try that Valor in a nation,
which he was so afraid of in a single person; That he had no more to say to the
old Gentleman, than onel^ thi^, These things are in the hand of the Almighty.

None mo^e inward with other men than Sir Francis Walsingham, none more inward
with him than Sir Thomas Randolph: well studied he was in Justinians Code,
better in Machiavels Discourses; both when a ^earned student of Christ-church,
and a worthy P^incipal of Broadgates: three therefore was he an Ambassador to
the Lords of Scotland in a commotion; thrice to Queen Mary in times of peace;
seven times to James the sixth of Scotland for a good understanding; and thrice
to Basilides Emperor of Russia for Trade: Once to Charles the ninth King of
France, to discover his design upon Scotland; and once to Henry the third, to
open a Conspiracy of his su^j^cts against him: Great services these, but meanly
rewarded; the serviceable, but moderate and modest man, (though he had as many
children at home as he had performed Embassies abroad) being contented with the
Chamberlainship of the Exch^quer, and the Postermasters place; the first but a
name, and the second then but a noise: to which were added some small Farms,
wherein he enjoyed the peace and innocence of a quiet and retired Life; a Life,
which upon the reflections of a tender Conscience, he wished a great while, as
appears by his Letters to his dear Walsingham, wherein he writes, How worthy,
yea, how necessary a thing it was, that they should at length bid Farewell to
the snares, he of a S^cretary, and himself of an Ambassador; and should both
of them set their minds upon their Heavenly Country; and by Repenting, ask
Mercy of GOD.

O^servations on the Life of Sir Amias Poulet.
SIr Ami^s Poulet, born at Hinton St. George in Summerse^shire, Son to Sir
Hugh, and Grandchild to S^r Who put Cardinal Wolsey, then but a Schoolmaster in
the Stocks.
Amias Powlet, was Chancellor of the Garter, Governor of the Isles of Iersey
and Gernsey, and Privy-Councellour to Queen Elizabeth. He was so faithful and
trusty, that the Queen committed the keeping of Mary Queen of Scots to his
custody, which he discharged with great fidelity.

As Caesar would have his Wife, so he his spirit, above the very suspicion of
unworthiness; equally consulting his Fame and his Conscience. When he performed
his last Embassy, with no less satisfaction to the King of France, than honor
to the Queen of England, (at once with a good humor and a great state) he
would not accept a Chain (and all Gifts are Chains) from that King by any
means, until he was a League from Paris: then he took it, because he would
oblige that Prince: and not till then, because he would not be obliged by any
but his Sovereign, saying, I will wear no chains but my Mistresses. It is the
interest of Princes, that their Servants Fortune should be above the
temptation; it is their happiness, that their Spirits are above the respects of
a private concern.

Observations on the Lives of Sir James Crofts^ John Gray of Pyrgo, Sir Henry
Gates.
EMblems of honor derived from Ancestors, are but rotten Rags, where ignoble
posterity degenerates from their Progenitors: but they are both glorious and
precious where the children both answer and exceed the Virtues of their
extraction; as in these three Gentlemen, whose Ancestors fill both Pages of
former Kings Chronicles, as they do the Annals of Queen Elizabeth: Three
Gentlemen whom it is pity to part in their Memoires, since they were always
together in their Employments. All three were like to die in Queen Mary's days
for the prosession of the Protestan^ Religion, all three spending their Lives
in Queen Elizabeth's for the propagation of it: 1. Sir Henry Gates lying in
Rome as a Spy, under the Notion of Cardinal Florido's Secretary, six years;
John Gray drawing up the whole Proceedings and Methods of the Reformation for
ten years; and Sir James Crofts being either the vigilant and active Governor
of Berwick, or the prudent and successful Commissioner in Scotland for seven
years. When the French threatened us by the way of Scotland, the Earl of
Northumberland was sent Northward for his interest, as Warden of the middle
March; Sir Ralph Sadler for his wisdom, as his Assi^tant and Counselor; and
Sir James Crofts for his Conduct, as both their Guide and Director-general. An
estate in the Purse, credits the Court; wisdom in the Head, adorneth it; but
both in the Hand, serve it. Nobly did he and Cuthbert Vaughan beat the French
that sallied out of Edinburgh into their Trenches, but unhappily stood he an
idle Spectator in his quarter the next Scalado, while the E^glish are
overthrown, and the Duke writes of his infidelity to the Queen, who discharged
him from his place, though not from her favor: for in stead of the more
troublesome place, the Government of Berwick, she conferred on him that more
honorable, the Controllership of her Household. Great service did his Valor at
Hadington in Scotland against the French, greater his prudence in Vlster
against the Spaniards. Al^hough his merit made his honor due to him, and his
Blood becoming: though his Cares, Travels and Dangers de^erved pity; his quiet
and meek Nature love: though he rise by wary degrees, and so was unobserved;
and stood not insolently when up, and so was not obnoxious: yet ^nvy reflected
as hot upon him as the Sun upon the rising ground, which stands firm though it
does not flourish, as this Gentleman's resolved honesty did; overcoming
Court-envy with a solid worth; waxing old at once in years and reverence, and
dying (as the Chronicle wherein he dies not but with Time, reports it) in good
favor with his Prince, and sound reputation with all men, for three infallible
sources of Honor: 1. That he aimed at Merit more than Fame: 2. That he was not
a Follower, but an Example in great Actions: and, 3. That he assisted in the
three great concerns of Government. 1. in Laws, 2. in Arms, and 3. in Councils.
In AEsop there is a slight Fable of a deep moral: it is this: Two Frogs
consulted together in the time of Drowth (when many plashes that they had
repaired to were dry) what was to be done; and the one propounded to go down
into a deep well, because it was like the water would not fail there; but the
other answered, Yea, but if it do fail, how shall we get up again? Mr. Gray
would Nod, and say, Humain affairs are so uncertain, that he seems the wisest
man, not who has a spirit to go on, but who has a wariness to come off: and
that seems the best course, that has most passages out of it. Sir James Crofts
on the other hand hated that irresolution that would do nothing, because it may
be at liberty to do any thing. Indeed says one, Necessity has many times an
advantage, because it awaketh the powers of the mind and strengthens
Endeavor. Sir James Crofts was an equal Composition of both; as one that had
one fixed eye on his Action, and another indifferent one on his retreat.

Observations on the Life of William Lord Gray of Wilton.
THat great Soldier and good Christian, in whom Religion was not a softness,
(as Machiavil discoursed) but a resolution. Hannibal was sworn an Enemy to Rome
at nine years of Age, and my Lord bred one to France at fourteen. Scipio's
first service was the rescue of his Father in Italy, and my Lord Grey's was the
safety of his Father in Germany. He had Fabius his slow way, and long reach,
with Herennius his fine polices, and neat Ambuscadoes; having his two
Companions always by him, his Map and his Guide: the first whereof discovered
to him his more obvious advantages, and the second his more close dangers. His
great Conduct won him much esteem with those that heard of him, and his greater
presence more with those that ^aw him. O^servable his Civility to Strangers,
eminent his Bounty to his Followers; obliging his Carriage in the Countries he
marched through, and expe^t his Skill in Wars, whose end he said was Victory,
and the end of Victory Nobleness, made up of pity and munificence. It lost him
his estate to redeem himself in France, and his life to bear up hi^ R^putation
in Berwick. H^ving lived to all the great purposes of life but Self-interest:
he died 1563, that fatal year; no less to the public sor^ow of England which
he secured, than the common joy of Scotland, which he awed. Then it was said,
That the same day died the greatest Scholar, and the greatest Soldier of the
Nobility; the right honorable Henry Manors E^rl of Rutland in his Gown, and
the honorable Lord Gray in his Armor; both, as the Queen said of them,
Worthies that had deserved well of the Commonwealth by their Wisdom, Council,
Integrity and Courage.

Two things my Lord always avoided: the first, To give many Reasons for one
thing; the heaping of Arguments arguing a neediness in every of the Arguments
by its sel^; as if one did not trust any ^f them, bu^ fled from one to a^o^her,
helping himself still wi^h the last. The second, To bre^k a n^go^iation to too
many distinct particul^rs, or to couch it in too compact generals: by the first
whereof we give the parties we d^al with an opportunity to look down to the
bottom of our business; and by the second, to look round to the compass of it.
Happy are those Souls that command themselves so far, that they are equally
free to full and half discoveries of themselves, always ready and pliable to
the present occasion. Not much regarded was this gallant spirit when alive, but
much m^ssed when dead; we understand what we want, better than what we enjoy;
and the beauty of worthy things is not in the face, but the backside,
endearing more by their departure than their address.

Observations on the Life of Edmund Plowden.
EDmund Plowden was born at Plowden in Shropshire; one who ^xcellently dese^ved
of our Municipal Law in h^s learned Writings thereon. A plodding and a studious
man; and no wonder if knowing and able: Beams in reflection are hottest, and the
Soul becomes wise by looking into its self. But see the man in his Epitaph^

Conditur in hoc Tumulo corpus Edmundi Plowden Armigeri. Claris ortus
Parentibus, apud Plowden in Comitatu Salop, natus est; a pueritia in literarum
Studio liberaliter ^st educatus, in Provectiore vero aetate Legibus, and
Iurisprudentiae operam dedit. Senex jam factus, and annum aetatis suae agens
67. Mundo Valedicens, in Christo Jesus Sancte obdormivit, die Sexto Mensis
Februar. Anno Domini 1585. I have the rather inserted this Epitaph inscribed on
his Monument on the North-side of the East End of the Quire of semple-Church in
London, because it ^ath ^^cape^ (but by what c^sualty I cannot conjecture)
Maste^ Stow in his Survey of London. We must add a few words out of the
Character Mr. Cambden gives of him:

Vitae integritate inter homines suae professionis nulli secundum. As he was
singularly well learned in the Common laws of England, whereof he deserved well
by wri^ing; so for integrity of life he was second to none o^ his profession.
And how excellent a m^dley is made, when Honesty and Ability meet in a man of
his profession! Nor must we forget how he was T^easurer for the honorable
Society of the Middle Temple, Anno 1572, when their magnific^nt Hall was
builded; he being a great advancer thereof. Finding the Coin embased by Henry
the eighth, so many ways prejudicial to this State, as that which first
dishonored us abroad; secondly, gave way to the frauds of Coyners at home, who
exchanged the best Commodities of the land for base moneys, and exported the
current moneys into Foreign parts; and thirdly, enhansed the prizes of all
things vendible, to the great loss of all Stipendiaries: He offered, 1^ That no
man should melt any Metal, or export it: 2. That the Brass money should be
reduced to its just value: 3. That it should be bought for good; by which
silent and just methods, that defect of our Government for many years was
remedied in few months, without any noise, or (what is proper to alterations
of this nature) discontent.

The middle Region of the Air is coolest, as most distant from the direct beams
that warm the highest, and the reflexed that heat the lowest: the mean man,
that is as much below the favor of the Court, as above the business of the
Country, was in our Judges opinion the most happy and composed man; this being
the utmost of a knowing man's wish in England, That he were as much out of the
reach of contempt, as to be above a Constable; and as much out of the compass
of trouble, as to be below a Justice. A Mean is the ut^ost that can be
prescribed either of Virtue or Bliss, as in ou^ Actions, so in our State.

Great was the Capacity, and good the Inclination of this man^ large the
Furniture, and happy the Culture of his Soul; grave his mien, and stately his
Behavior; well-regulated his Affections, and allayed his passions;
well-principled his Mind, and well-set his Spirit; sol^d his Observation,
working and practical his Judgment: and as that Roman Hero was more eminent
whose image was missing, than all the rest whose Portraictures were set up; so
this accomplished Gentleman is more observable because he was not a Statesman,
than some of those that were so. There is a glory in the obscurity of worthy
men, who as that Sun (which they equal as well in common influence as luster)
are most looked on when eclipsed.

Observations on the Life of Sir Roge^ Manwood.
SIr Roger Manwood born at Sandwich in Kent, a^tained to such eminency in the
Common Law, that he was prefe^red second Justice of the Common Pleas by Queen
Elizabeth; which place he discha^ged with so much Ability and Integrity, that
not long after he was made chief Baron of the Exchequer; which Office he most
wisely managed, to his great commendation, full fourteen years, to the ^ay of
his death.

Much was he employed in matters of State, and was one of the Commissione^s who
sat on the trial of the Qu^en of Scots. He wrote a Book on the Forest-Laws,
which is highly prized by men of his pro^ession. In vaca^ion-time he constantly
inhabited at St. Stephens in Canterbury, and was bounteously liberal to the
poor Inhabitants thereof: and so charitable was he, that he erected and endowed
a fair Fre^-school at Sandwich, dying in the 35 of Queen Elizabeth, anno Dom.
1593.

Clothes for necessity, warm Clothes for health, cleanly for decency, lasting
for st^e^gth, was his Maxim and P^actice, who kept a State in decent
plainness; insomuch that Que^n Elizabeth called him her Good-man-Judge. In
Davison's Case, Mildmay cleared the man of malice, but taxed him with
unskilfulness and rashness: Lumley said he was an ingenious and an honest man,
but presumptuous. I will ever esteem him an honest and good man, said Gray. The
Archbishop of Canterbury approved the fact, commended the man, but disallowed
of the manner and form of his proceedings. Manwood made a narrative of the
Queen of Scots proceedings, confirmed the sentence against her, extolled the
Queens clemency, pitied Davison and fined him 10000 l.

A man he was of a pale constitution, but a clear, even, and smooth temper; of
a pretty solid consistence, equally sanguine and flegmatique: of a quiet soul,
and serene affections: of a discreet sweetness, and moderate manners; slow in
passion, and quick enough in apprehension; wary in new points, and very fixed
and judicious in the old. A plausible, insinuating, and fortunate man; the Idea
of a wise man; having) what that elegant Educator wishes) that great habit
which is nothing else but a promptness and plentifulness in the storehouse of
the mind, of clear imaginations well-fixed: which was promised in his erect and
forward stature, his large breast, his round and capacious forehead, his
curious and ob^erving eye, (the clear and smart argument of his clearer and
quicker soul, which owed a liveliness equally far from volatileness and
stupidity) his steady attention and his solid memory, together with what is
most considerable, a grand Inclination to imitate and excel. What Plutarch
says of Timoleon with reference to Epaminond, that we may say of th^s
gentleman, That his Life and Actions are like Homer's Verses, smooth and
flowing, equal and happy: especially in the two grand Embelish^ents of our
Nature, Friendship and Charity. 1. Friendship, that sacred thing whereof he was
a passionate Lover, and an exact Observer, promoting it among all men he
conserved with. Surely there is not that Content on Earth like the Union of
minds and Interests, whereby we enjoy our selves by reflection in our Friend; it
being the most dreadful Solitude and Wildness of Nature, to be friendless. But
his Friendship was a contracted beam to that S^n of Charity, that blessed all
about him. His Salary was not more fixed than his Charity; He and the poor had
one Revenue, one Quarter-day: Instead of hiding his face from the poor, it was
his practice to seek for them; laying out by Trustees for Pensioners, either
hopeful or indigent, whereof he had a Catalogue that made the b^st Comment upon
that Text, The liberal man devises liberal things. This is the best Conveyance
that ever Lawyer made, To have and to hold to him and his Heirs for ever.

Observations on the Life of Sir Christopher Wray.
SIr Christopher Wray was born in the spacious Parish of Bedal, the main motive
which made his Daughter Francis, Countess of Warwick, scatter her Benefactions
the thicker in that place. He was bred in the study of our Municipal Law; and
such his proficiency therein, that in the sixteenth of Queen Elizabeth, in
Michaelmas. Term^ he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. He was not
like that Judge, who feared neither God nor man, but only one Widow, ( left
her importunity should weary him;) but heartily feared God in his religious
Conversation. Each man he respected with his due distance off of the B^nch, and
no man on it to bias his Judgment. He was pro tempore, Lord Privv Seal, and
sat Chief in the Court when Secretary Davison was sentenced in the
Star Chamber. Sir Christopher collecting the censures of all the Commissioners,
concurred to Fine him: but with this comfortable conclusion, That, as it was in
the Queens Power to have him punished so^ Her Highness might be prevailed with
for mitigating or r^mitting of the Fine: and this our J^dge may be presumed no
ill Instrument in the procuring thereof.

He bountifully reflected on Magdalen-Colledg^ in Cambridge; which
I^fant-foundation had otherwise been starved at Nurse for want of maintenance.
We know who says, The righteous man leaves an inheritance to his childrens
children, and the well-thriving of his third Generation may be an evidence of
his well-gotten Goods. This worthy Judge died May the eighth, in the thirty
fourth of Queen Elizabeth. When Judge Mounson and Mr. Dalton urged in Stubs his
Case, (that Writ against Queen Elizabeth's marriage with the Duke of Anjon)
That the Act of Philip and Mary against the Authors and sowers of seditious
Writings was mistimed, and that it died with Queen Mary; my Lord Chief Justice
Wray, upon whom the Queen relied in that case, showed there was no mistaking in
the noting of the time; and proved by the words of the Act, that the Act was
made against those which should violate the King by seditious writing^ and that
the King of England never dies: yea, that that Act was renewed anno primo
Eliz. during the life of her and the heirs of her body.

Five Particulars I have heard old men say he was choice in: 1. His Friend,
which was always wise and equal; 2. His Wife; 3. His Book; 4. His Secret; 5.
His Expression and Garb. By four things he would say an Estate was kept: 1. By
understanding it: 2. By spending not until it comes; 3. By keeping old
servants; 4. By a Quarterly Audit. The properties of Infancy, is Innocence; o^
Childhood, Reverence; of Manhood, Maturity; and of Old Age, Wisdom: Wisdom!
that in this grave person acted all its brave parts; i. e. was mindful of what
is p^st, observant of things pr^sent, and provident for things to come. No
better instance whereof need be alleged than his pathetick Discour^es in the
behalf of those two great Stays of this Kingdom, Husbandry and Merchandise:
for he had a clear discerning Judgment, and that not only in points o^ Law,
which yet his Arguments and Decisions in that profession manifest without
dispute; but in matters of Policy and Government, wherein his Guess was usually
as near Prophecy as any man's: as also in the little mysteries of private
manage, by which upon occasion he has unravel^ed the studied cheats and
intrigues of the Closetmen: to which when you add his happy faculty of
communicating himself, by a free and graceful elocution, to charm and command
his Audience, assisted by the attractive dignity of his presence, you will not
admire that he managed his Justiceship with so much satisfaction to the Court,
and that he left it with so much applause from the Country: for these two
Peculiarities he had. That none was more tender to the Poor, or more civil in
p^ivate; and ye^ none more stern to the Rich, I mean Justices of Peace,
Officers, etc. or more s^vere in public. He desighted indeed to be loved; not
reverenced: yet knew he very well how to assert the Dignity of his place and
function from the Approaches of Contempt.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Worcester.
THe Lord of Worcester, (as no mean Favorite) was of the ancient and noble
blood of the Beauforts, and of the Queens Grandfathers line by the Mother;
which she could never forget, especially where there was a concurrency of old
Blood with Fidelity, a mixture which ever sorted with the Queens Nature. He was
first made Master of the horse, and then admitted of her Council of State. In
his Youth (part whereof he spent before he came to reside at Court) he was a
very fine Gentleman, and the best Horseman and Tilter of the Times, which were
then the manlike and noble recreations of the Court: and when years had abated
these exercises of honor, he grew then to be a faithful and profound
Counselor. He was the last Liver of all the Servants of her favor, and had
the honor to see his renowned Mistress, and all of them laid in the places of
their rest; and for himself, after a life of a very noble and remarkable
reputation, he died in a peaceable Old Age, full of Riches and Honor. His
Fathers temperance reached to 97^ ye^r^ of Age, because he never eat but one
Meal a day; and his sparingness attained to 84, because he never eat but of one
dish. He came to the Queens favor, because as her Father so she loved a man;
he kept in, because as her Father too so she loved an able man. His manlike
Recreations commended him to the Ladies, his prudent Achievements to the
Lords. He was made master of the horse because active, and privy Counselor
because wise: His mistress excused his Faith, which was popis^; but honored
his Faithfulness, which was Roman; it being her usual speech, that my Lord of
Worcester had reconciled what she thought inconsistent, a stiff Papist to a
good subject. His Religion was not pompous, but solid^ not the show of his
life, but the comfort of his soul. A great master he was of others affections,
and greater of his own passions: many things displeased, nothing angered my
Lord of Worcester, whose maxim was, That he would not be disordered within
himself, only because things were out of order without him: He had this maxim
whence he had his Nature, from his prudent Father Sir Charles Somerset, the
first Earl of Worcester of that name, whose temper was so pliable, and nature
so peaceable, that being a^ked (as it is usually reported of him) How he passed
so troublesome a Reign as King Henry's, so uncertain as King Edward's, so
fierce as Queen Mary's, and so unexpected as Queen Elizabeth's, with so quiet,
so fixed, so smooth, so resolved and ready a mind and frame? answered, It was
because he understood the Interest of the Kingdom, while others observed its
Humors. His first public service was to represent the Grandeur of his
mistress at this Christening of the Daulphine of France, and his last the like
at the marr^age of the King of Scots, whom he honored with the Garter from his
Mistress, and advised to beware of Papists from the Council.

The frame of this noble man's body, (as it is delineated by Sir W. P.) seems
suited to the noble use it was designed for, The entertaining of a mos^ pure
and active soul; but eq^ally to the advantage of strength and comeliness,
befriended with all proportionate Dimensions, and a most grave, yet obliging
Carriage. There was a clear sprightfulness in his Complexion, but a s^d
reservedness in his nature; both making up that blessed composi^ion of a wise
and winning man, of as great hardship of body, as nobleness of spirit. Of a
quick sight, and an accurate Ear; a steady observation, and ready expression:
with the Torrent whereof he at once pleased King James, and amazed King Henry,
being the most natural Orator in the world. Among all which Endowments, I had
almost forgot his memory, that was very faithful to him in things and business,
though not punctilio's and formalities: Great parts he had, the range and
compass whereof filled the whole circle of generous Learning in that person, as
it has done in the following Heroes of that Family to this day.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Killigrew.
TRavellours report, That the place wherein the body of Absalom was buried is
still extant at Jerusalem, and that it is a solemn custom of Pilgrims passing
by it to cast a stone on the place: but a well-disposed man can hardly go by
the memory of this worthy person without doing grateful homage thereunto, in
bestowing upon him one or two of our Observations. It Is a question sometimes
whether Diamond gives more luster to the Ring it is set in, or the Ring to the
Diamond: This Gentleman received honor from his Family, and gave renown to it.
Writing is the character of the speech, as that is of the mind. From Tully
(whose Orations he could repeat to his dying day) he gained an even and apt
style, flowing at one and the self-same height. Tully's Offices, a Book which
Boys read, and men understand, was so esteemed of my Lord Burleigh, that to his
dying day he always carried it about him, either in his bosom or his pocket,
as a complete piece that, like Aristotle's Rhetoric, would make both a Scholar
and an Honest man. Cicero's magnificent Orations against Anthony, Catiline and
Verres; Caesar's great Commentaries that he wrote with the same spirit that he
fought; flowing Livy; grave, judicious and stately Tacitus; elquent, but
faithful Curtius; brief and rich Salust, prudent and brave Xenophon, whose
person was Themistocles his Companion, as his Book was Scipio Affricanus his
Pattern in all his Wars; ancient and sweet Herodotus; sententious and observing
Thucidides; various and useful Polybius; Siculus, Halicarn^sseus, Trogus,
Orosius, Iustine, made up our young man's Retinue in all his Travels, where (as
Diodorus the Sicilian writes) he sat on the stage of Humane Life, observing
the great circumstances of places, persons, times, manners, occasions, etc. and
was made wise by their example who have trod the path of error and danger
before him. To which he added that grave, weighty, and sweet Plutarch, whose
Books (said Gaza) would furnish the world, were all others lost. Neither was he
amazed in the Labyrinth of History, but guided by the Clue of Cosmography,
hanging his Study with Maps, and his mind with exact Notices of each place. He
made in one View a Judgment of the Situation, Int^rest, and Commodities (for
want whereof many Statesmen and Soldiers have As Cyrus a^ Thermopylae,
Crastus in Parihia: therefore Alexander had exact Maps always above him to
observe Passages, Streights, Rocks, Plains, Rivers, etc.
failed) of Nations: but to understand the nature of places, is but a poor
knowledge, unless we know how to improve them by Art; therefore under the
Figures of Triangles, Squares, Circles and Magnitudes: with their terms and
bounds, he could contrive most tools and instruments, most Engines, and judge
of Fortifications, Architecture, Ships, Wind and Waterworks, and whatever
might make this lower frame of things useful and serviceable to mankind: which
severer Studies he relieved with noble and free Poetry-aid, once the pleasure
and advancement of the Soul, made by those higher motions of the mind more
active and more la^ge. To which I add her Sister music, wherewith he revived
his tired spirits, lengthened (as he said) his sickly days, opened his
oppressed breast, eased his melancholy though^: graced his happy pronunciation,
ordered and refined his irregular and gross inclination, fixed and quickened his
floating and dead notions; and by a secret, sweet and heavenly Virtue, raised
his spirit, as he confessed, sometime to a little less than Angelical
Exaltation. Curious he was to please his ear, and as exact to please his eye;
there being no Statues, Inscriptions or Coyns that the Vert^osi of Italy could
show, the Antiquaries of France could boast off, or the great Hoarder of
Rarities the great Duke of Tuscany, (whose antic Coyns are worth 100000 l.)
could pretend to, that he had not the view of. No man could draw any place or
work better, none fancy and paint a Portraicture more lively; being a Durer for
proportion, a Goltzius for a bold touch, variety of posture, a curious and true
shadow, an Angelo for his happy fancy, and an Holben for Oil works.

Neither was it a bare Ornament of Discourse, or naked Diversion of leisure
time; but a most weighty piece of knowledge that he could blazon most noble and
ancient Coats, and thereby discern the relation, interest, and correspondence
of great Families, and thereby the meaning and bottom of all transactions, and
the most successful way of dealing with any one Family. His Exercises were such
as his Employments were like to be, gentle and manlike, whereof the two most
eminent were Riding and Shooting, that at once wholesomely stirred, and nobly
knitted and strengthened his body. Two Eyes he sai^ he traveled with; the one
of wariness upon himself, the other of observation upon others. This complete
Gentleman was Guardian to the young Brandon in his younger years^ Agent for Sir
John Mason in King Edward the sixth's time, and the first Ambassador for the
State in Queen Elizabeth's time. My Lord Cobham is to amuse the Spaniard, my
Lord Effingham to undermine the French, and Sir Henry Killigrew is privately
sent to engage ^he German Princes against Austria in point of Interest, and for
her Majesty in point of Religion: he had a humor that bewitched the Elector of
Bavaria, a Carriage that awed him of Mentz, a Reputation that obliged them of
Colen and Hydelbergh, and that reach and fluency in Discourse that won them
all. He assisted the Lords Hunsdon and Howard at the Treaty with France in
London, and my Lord of Essex in the War for France in Britain. Neither was he
less observable for his own Conduct than for that of others, whose severe
thoughts, words and carriage so awed his inferior faculties, as to restrain
him through all the heats of youth, made more than usually importunate by the
full vigor of a high and sanguine Constitution; insomuch that they say he
looked upon all the approaches to that sin, then so familiar to his calling as
a Soldier, his quality as a Gentleman, and his Station as a Courtier, not
only with an utter disallowance in his judgment, but with a natural
abhorrency and antipathy in his very lower inclinations. To which happiness it
conduced not a little, that though he had a good, yet he had a restrained
appetite (a Knife upon his Throat as well as upon his Trencher) that indulged
it self neither frequent nor delicate entertainment; its meals, though but once
a day, being its pressures; and its fast, its only sensualitie^: to which
temperance in diet, add but that in sleep, together with his disposal of
himself throughout his life to industry and diligence^ you will say he was a
spotless man, whose life taught us this Lesson, (which if observed, would
accomplish mankind; and which King Charles the first would inculcate to noble
Travelers, and Dr. Hammond to all men) To be furnished always with something
to do: A Lesson they proposed as the best expedient for Innocence and pleasure;
the foresaid blessed man assuring his happy hea^ers, That no burden is more
heavy, or temptation more dangerous, than to have time lie on ones hand: the
idle man being not only (as he worded it) the Devils shop, but his kingdom
too, a model of, and an appendage unto Hell, a place given up to torment and to
mischief.

Observations on the Life of Arthur Gray Baron of Wilton.
ARthur Gray Baron of Wilton is justly r^ckoned amongst the Natives of
Buckinghamshire, whos^ Father had his habitation (not at Wilton a decayed
Castle in Hertfordshire, whence he took his Title, but) at Waddon, a fair house
of his Family not far from Buckingham.

He succeeded to a small estate, much diminished on this sad occasion. His
Father William Lord Gray being taken Prisoner in France, after long ineffectual
soliciting to be (because captivated in the public service) redeemed on the
public charge, at last was forced to ransom himself with the sale of the best
part of his Patrimony. Our Arthur endeavored to advance his estate by his
Valor, being entered into Feats of War under his martial Father at the siege of
Leith 1560, where he was shot in the shoulder, which inspirited him with a
constant antipathy against the Scots. He was afterward sent over Lord Deputy
into Ireland, anno 1580; where before he had received the Sword, or any emblems
of command, ut acrioribus initiis terrorem incuteret, to fright his foes with
fierce beginnings, he unfortunately fought the Rebels at Grandilough, to the
great loss of English Blood. This made many commend his Courage above his
Conduct, till he recovered his credit, and finally suppressed the Rebellion of
Desmond. Returning into England, the Queen chiefly relied on his counsel for
ordering our Landforces against the Spaniards in 88, and fortifying places of
advantage. The mention of that year (critical in Churc^-differences about
discipline at hom^, as well as with foreign force abroad) minds me that this
Lord was but a back-friend to Bishops; and in all divisions of Votes in
Pa^liament or Council Table, sided with the Anti-prelatical party. When
S^creta^y Davison, that State-pageant, (raised up on purpose to be put down)
was censured in the Star Chamber about the business of the Queen of Scots, this
Lord Gray only defended him, as doing nothing therein but what became an able
and honest Minister of State. An Ear-witness says, Haec fuse oratorie and
animose Greium disserentem audivimus. So that besides bluntness, (the common
and becoming Eloquence of Soldiers) he had a real Rhetoric, and could very
emphatically express himself. Indeed this Warlike Lord would not wear two heads
under one Helmet, and may be said always to have born his Beaver open, not
dissembling in the least degree, but owning his own Judgment at all times what
he was. He deceased anno Domini 1593.

Three things he was observed eminent for: 1. D^spatch; San Joseph having not
been a week in Ireland, before he had environed him by Sea and Land. 2. For his
resolution, that he would not parley with him till he was brought to his mercy,
hanging out a white flag with Misericordia, Misericordia. 3. For his prudence:
1. That he saved the Commanders, to oblige the Spaniard: 2. That he plundered
the Country, to enrich his Soldiers: 3. That he decimated the Soldiery, to
terrify Invaders; and hanged all the Irish, to amaze the Traitors.

Henry Fitz-ala^ Earl of Arundel when Steward at King Edward's Coronation, or
Constable at Queen Mary's, was the first that rid in a Coach in England; my
Lord Gray was the first that brought a Coach hither: one of a working Brain,
and a great Mechanist himself, and no less a Patron to the Ingenious that were
so. That there was an emulation between him and Sussex, was no wonder; but that
the instance wherein he thought to disgrace him, should be his severity to the
English Traitor, and the Foreign Invadors, would seem strange to any but those
that con^ider, 1. That Princes of late would seem as they look on the end, and
not the means; so they hug a cruelty, and frown on the Instrument of it; who
while he honestly sacrifices some irr^gular particulars to the interest of
Sovereignty, may be made himself a sacrifice to the passion of populacy. And,
^^ which is the case here, that a^piring Princes may employ severer Natures,
but settled ones use the more moderate. Love keeps up the Empire which Power
has set up.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Lord Burge.
THomas Lord Burge or Borough was born in his Fathers noble house at
Gainsborough in the County of Lincoln. He was sent Ambassador into Scotland in
1593, to excuse Bothwel his lurking in England, to advise the speedy
suppression of the Spanish Faction, to advance the Pr^testants in that Kingdom
for their Kings defense, and to instruct that King about his Council; which was
done accordingly.

He was made Lord-Deputy of Ireland anno 1597, in the room of Sir William
Russel. Mr Cambden says thus of him: Vir acer and animi plenus, sed nullis fere
Castrorum rudimentis.


As soon as the Truce with Tyrone was expired, he st^aightly be^ieged the Fort
of Black-water, (the only receptacle of the Rebels in those parts, besides
their Woods and Bogs.) Having taken this Fort by force, presently followed a
bloody Battle, wherein the English lost many wo^thy men. He was struck with
untimely death before he had continued a whole year in his place; it being
wittily observed of the short Lives of many worthy men, Nethersol. F^n. Orat.
Prince Hen. p 15, 16, 17.
Fatuos ^ morte defendit ipsa ins^lsitas, si cui plu^ caeteris aliquantulum
salis insit (quod miremini) statim putrescit. Things rare destroy themselves;
t^ose two things being incompa^ible in our nature, Perfection and Lasli^^ness.

His Educa^ion was not to any particular Profession, yet his parts able to
manage all. A large soul and a great spirit apart from all advantages, can do
wonders. His Masterpiece was Embassi, where his brave Estate set him above
respect^ and compliance, and his comely person above contempt. His Geography
and history led to the Interest of other princes, and his Experience to that of
his own. His skill in most Languages helped him to understand others; and his
resolu^ion to use only his own, to be reserved himself. In two things he was
very scrupulous: 1. In his Commission, 2. In his servants, whom he always (he
said) found honest enough, but seldom quick and reserved. And in two things
very careful: viz. 1. The time and humor of his Addresses; 2. The Interest,
Inclinations and Dependencies of Favorites. A grave and steady man, observing
every thing, but affected with nothing; keeping as great distance between his
looks and his heart, as between his words and his thoughts. Very exact for his
privileges, very cold and indifferent in his motions, which were always guided
by the emergencies in that Country, and by his intelligence from home. Good he
was in pursuing his limited instruction, excellent where he was free; and his
business was not his obedience only, but his discretion too: that never failed
but in his last enterprise, which he undertook without any apparent advantage,
and attempted without intelligence: An Enterprise well worthy his invincible
Courage, but not his accustomed prudence; which should never expose the person
of a General to the danger of a common Soldier.

Observations on the Life of William Lord Pawlet.
WIlliam Pawlet (wherever born) had his la^gest estate and highest Honor
(Baron of Basing, and Marquess of Winch^ster) in Hantshire^ He was descended
from a younger house of the Pawlets in Hinton St. George in Somersetshire, as
by the Crescent in his Arms is acknowledged. Sir Rob. Naunton in his Fragmenta
Regalia.
One tells us, That he being a younger Brother, and having wasted all that
was left him, came to court on trust; where, upon the stock of his Wit, he
trafficked so wisely, and prospered so well, that he got, spent, and left, more
than any subject since the Conquest. Indeed he lived at the time of the
dissolution of Abbeys, which was the Harvest of Estates; and it argued idlene^s
if any Courtier had his Barns empty. He was servant to King Henry the seventh;
and for thirty years together Treasu^er to King Henry the eight^. Edward the
sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth: the latter in some sort owed their
Crowns to his Counsel, his policy being the principal Defeater of Duke Dudley's
Design to dis-inherit them. I behold this Lord Pawlet like to aged Adoram, so
often mentioned in Scriptures, being over the Tribute in the days of King 2 Samuel 2^ 24.
David, all the Reign of King 1 King 4. 6.
Solomon, until the first King. 12
year of Rehoboam. And though our Lord Pawlet enjoyed his place not so many
years, yet did he serve more Sovereigns, in more mutable times, being (as he
said of himself) No Oak, but an Osier. Herein the parallel holds not: the hoary
hairs of Adoram were sent to the Grave by a violent Ibidem.
death, slain by the people in a Tumult; this Lord had the rare happiness of
(...), setting in his full splendor, having lived 97 years, and seen 103 out
of his body. He died anno Domini 1572. Thus far Mr. Fuller.

This Gentleman had two Rules as useful for mankind, as they seem opposite to
one another.

1. That in our Considerations and Debates, we should not dwell in deceitful.
Generals, but look into clear Particulars. 2. That in our Resolutions and
Conclusions, we should not rest on various Particulars, but rise to uniform
Generals.
A Man he was that reverenced himself; that could be virtuous when alone, and
good when only his own Theater, his own applause, though excellent, before the
world; his virtue improving by fame and glory, as an heat which is doubled by
re^lexion.

Observations on the Life of Sir James Dier.
JAmes Dier Knight, younger Son to Richard Dier Esquire, was born at Round-hill
in Somersetshire, as may appear to any by the Heralds Visitation thereof. He
was bred in the study of our Municipal Law, and wa^ made Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, primo Eliz. continuing therein twenty four years. When Thomas
Duke of Norfolk was, anno 1572, arraigned for Treason, this Judge was present
thereat, on the same to^en, that when the Duke desired Council to be assigned
him, pleading that it was granted to Humphrey Stafford in the Reign of King
Henry the seventh, our Judge returned unto him, That Stafford had it allowed
him only as to point of Law, then in dispute, viz. Whether he was legally taken
out of the Sanctuary? but as for matter of Fact, neither he, nor any ever had
or could have Council allowed him.

But let his own works praise him in the Gates^ (known for the place of public
Justice amongst the Jews) let his learned Writings, called, The Commentaries or
Reports, evidence his Abilities in his Profession. He died in 2^. Eliz. (thoug^
married) without any issue; and there is a House of a Baronet of his Name
(descended from an elder Son of Richard, Father to our Judge) at great
Stoughton in Huntingtonshire, well improved I believe with the addition of the
Judges E^t^te^

There is a Manuscript of this worthy Judge^ wherein are six and forty Rules
for the pre^ervation of the Commonwealth, as worthy our Observation as they
were his Collection.

1. That the true Religion be established. 2. To keep the parts of the
Commonwealth equal. 3. That the middle sort of people exceed both the extremes.
4. That the Nobility be called to serve, or at least to appear at the Court by
themselves, or by the hopes of their Families their Children. 5. That the Court
pay well. 6. That Trade be free; and Manufactures, with all other Ingenuities,
encouraged. 7. That there be no coequal Powers, nor any other usurpations
against the Foundation. 8. That their be notice taken of wise and well-affected
Persons to employ them. 9. That Corruption be restrained. 10. That the Prince
show himself absolute in his Authority first, and then indulgent in his Nature.
11. That the first ferment of sedition, w^nt, etc. be considered. 12. That
Preferments be bestowed on merit, and not faction. 13. That troublesome persons
be employed abroad^ 14. That Emulations be over r^led. 15. That the ancient and
most easy way of Contributions when necessary, be followed. 16. That the Youth
be discipled. 17. That Discourses and Writings of Government, and its
mysteries, be restrained. 18. That the Active and busy be taken to Employment.
19. That the King show himself often in Majesty, tempered with familiarity,
easy access, tenderness, etc. 20. That the Prince perform some expected
act^ons at Court himself. 21. That no one man be grat^fied with the grievance
of many. 22. That Acts of Grace pass in the chief Magi^trates Name, and Act^ of
Severity in the Ministers. 23. That the Prince borrow when he has no need. 24.
That he be so well furnished with Warlike Provisions, Citadels, Ships, as to be
renowned for it. 25. That the Neighbour-States be balanced. 26. That the Prince
maintain very knowing Agents, Spies and Intelligencers. 27. That none be
suffered to raise a Quarrel between the Prerogative and the Law. 28. That the
People be awaked by Musters. 29. That in c^ses of Fa^tion, Colonies and
Plantations be found out to receive ill humors. 30. That the Seas, the
Seacoast, and Borders be secured. 31. That the Prince be either resident
himself, or by a good natured and popular Favorite. 32. To act things by
degrees, and check all the hasty, importunate, rash and turbulent, though
well-affected. 33. That the Inhabitants have honor promiscuously, but that
Power be kept in the Well-affected's hands. 34. That there be as far as can be
plain dealing, and the people never think they are deceived. 35. That there be
a strict eye kept upon Learning, Arms, and Mechanical Arts. 36. That there be
frequent Wars. 37. To observe the Divisions among Favorites. though not to
encourage them. 38. That an account be given of the Public Expenses. 39. That
Inventions be encouraged. 40. That the Country be kept in its due dependanc^ on
the Crown against the times of War, Elections, etc. and to that purpose that
the Courtiers keep good houses, etc. 41. That no disobliging person be trusted.
42. That Executions be few, sudden and severe. 43. To improve the benefit of a
Kingdoms Situation. 44. That the L^berties and Privileges of the subject b^
so clearly stated, that there may be no pr^tences for worse purposes. 45. That
the Coin be neither transported nor ^mbased. 46. That luxury be suppr^ssed.
Maxims these! that spoke our Judge so conversant with Books and men, that
that may be applied to him, which is attributed to as great a Divine as he was
a Lawyer, viz. That he never talked with himself.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Pelham.
SIr William Pelham was a Native of Sussex, whose ancient and wealthy Family
has long flourished in Laughton therein. His Prudence in Peace, and Valor in
War, caused Queen Elizabeth to employ him in Ireland, where he was by the
Privy Council appointed Lord Chief Justice to govern that Land in the interim
betwixt the death of Sir William Drury, and the coming in of Arthur Gray, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.

Say not that he did but stop a gap for a twelvemonth at the most, seeing it
was such a gap, Destruction had entered in thereat, to the final ruin of that
Kingdom, had not his providence prevented it. For in this juncture of time,
Desmond began his Rebellion 1579, inviting Sir William to side with him; who
wisely gave him the hearing, with a smile in to the Bargain. And although our
Knight for want of Force could not cure the wounds, yet he may be said to have
washed and kept it clean, re^igning it in a recovering condition to the Lord
Gray, who succeeded him. Afterward he was sent over into the Low Countries
1586, being Commander of the English Horse therein. It is said of him,
^rabautiam persultabat, He leapt through Brabant; importing celerity and
success, yea, as much Conquest as so sudden an expedition was capable of.

He had a strong memory whereof he built his experience, and a large experience
whereon he grounded his actions: There was no Town, Fort, Passage, Hill or
Dale, either in Ireland or Holland, but he retained by tha^ strong faculty,
that was much his Nature, more his Art; which observed privately, what it saw
publicly; recollected and fixed in the night, when he observed by day;
trusting his head with solids, but not burthening it with impertinencies.
Company is one of the greatest pleasu^es of Mankind, and the great delight of
this man, (it is unnatu^al to be solitary; the world is linked together by love,
and men by friendship) who observed three things in his converse, that it
should be, 1. even, 2. choice, and 3. useful; all his friends being either
valiant, ingenious, or wise: that is, either Soldiers, Scholars, or
Statesmen. Four things he was very intent upon during his Government in
Ireland: 1. The Priests, the Pulpits, and the Press: 2. The Nobility: 3. The
Ports: 4. The Foreigners. Which he pursued with that Activity, the Earl of
Ormond assisting him, that anno 1580, that Kingdom was delivered to my Lord
Gray after his one years Government, in a better condition than it had been for
threescore years before; the Populacy being encouraged, the Nobility trusted,
F^^ds laid down, Revenue settled, the Sea-towns secured, the S^ul^iery
disciplined, and the Magizines furnished. Whence he returned to overlook
others, settling England against the Spaniards, as he had done Ireland; himself
being an active Commi^^oner in England in 88, and an eminent Agent in Scotland
in 89.

Observations on the Life of Sir William Waad.
A Scholar himself, and a Patron to such that were so; being never well but
when employing the Industrious, pensioning the Hopeful, and preferring the
Deserving. To his Directions we owe Riders Dictionary, to his Encouragement
Hooker's Policy, to his Charge Gruter's Inscriptions. As none more knowing, so
none more civil. No man more grave in his Life and Manners, no man more
pleasant in his Carriage and Complexion; yet no man more resolved in his
Business: for being sent by Queen Elizabeth to Philip King of Spain, he would
not be turned over to the Spanish Privy Council, (whose greatest Grandees are
Dwarfs in honor to his Mistress) but would either have audience of the King
himself, or return without it; though none knew better how and when to make his
close and underhand Addresses to such potent Favorites as strike the stroke in
the State; it often happening in a Commonwealth, (says my Author) that the
Masters Mate steers the Ship better than the Master himself. A man of a
constant toil and industry, busy and quick, equally an enemy to the idle and
slow undertakings, judging it a great weakness to stand staring in the face of
business, in that time which might serve to do it. In his own practice he never
considered longer than till he could discern whether the thing proposed was fit
or not; when that was seen, he immediately set to work: when he had finished
one business, he could not endure to have his thoughts lie fallow, but was
presently consulting what next to undertake.

Two things this Gentleman professed kept him up to that eminence; 1. Fame,
that great inci^ement to Excellency. 2. A Friend, whom he had not only to
observe those grossnesses which Enemies might take notice of, but to discover
his prudential failings, indecencies, and even suspicious and barely doubtful
passages. Friendship (says my Lord Bacon) eases the heart, and clears the
understanding, making clear day in both; partly by giving the purest council
apart from our interest and prepossessions, and partly by allowing opportunity
to discourse; and by that discourse to clear the mind, to recollect the
thoughts, to see how they look in words; whereby men attain that highest
wisdom, which Dionysius the Areopagite says, is the Daughter of Reflection.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Sidney.
SIr Henry Sidney, eminent for his son Sir Philip, and famous for his own
Actions, was born well, and bred better: His Learning was equal to his
Carriage, his Carriage to his Good Nature, his Good Nature to his Prudence, his
Prudence to his Resolution. A little he learned at School, more at the
University, most at Court. His Reading was assiduous, his Converse exact, his
O^servations close: His Reason was strong, and his Discourse flowing. Much he
owed to his Studiousness at home, more to his Experience abroad, where Travel
enlarged and consolidated his Soul. His own Worth fitted him for Advancement,
and his Alliance to my Lord of Leicester raised him to it. Merit must
capacitate a man for Interest, and Interest must set up merit. His person and
his Ancestry invested him Knight of the Garter, his Moderation and Wisdom
President of Wales. His Resolution and Model of Government made him Lord Deputy
of Ireland; a people whom he first studied, and then ruled; being first master
of their humor, and then of their Government. Four things he said would reduce
that Country: A Navy well furnished, to cut off their correspondence with
Spain; An Army well paid, to keep up Garrisons; Laws well executed, to alter
their Constitutions and Tenures; A Ministry well settled, to civilize and
instruct them; and an unwearied Industry to go through all.

Nine things he did there to eternize his Memory.

1. Connaught He divided to six Shires. 2. Captainships, something answering to
Knighthood here, He abolished. 3. A Surrendry of all Irish Holdings He
contrived, and the Irish Estates He settled on English T^nures and Services. 4.
That the ablest five of each Sept should undertake for all their Relations He
ordered. 5. One Free School at least in every Diocese He maintained. 6. Two
Presidents Courts in Munster and Connaught He erected. 7. Their Customs He
reduced to the Civility, and their Exchequer to the Exactness of England. 8.
Their Purveyance He turned to Composition. 9. Their Statutes He printed, and a
constant correspondence He kept; especially with the English Ambassador in
Spain, and King James in Scotland.
Fitz^Williams was mild, Essex heady, Perrot stout; but this Lieutenant or
Deputy was a stayed and resolved man, that Royally heard ill, and did well;
that bore up against the clamours of the people with the peace of his
conscience. His Interest he had devoted to his Soveraign^ and his Estate to the
public; saying as Cato, That he had the least share of himself. See Daves of
Ireland, and Wa^e and Powel of Wales.
From the Irish he took nothing but a Liberty to undo themselves; from Court he
desired nothing but service; from Wales he had nothing but a Good Name. I^'s
observed of him, that He had open Virtues for Honor, and private ones for
Success, which he said was the daughter of reservedness: there being not (says
my Lord V^rulam) two more fortunate properties, than to have a little of the
fool, and not too much of the honest man. The Crown was obliged by his
services, the Nobility engaged to him by Alliances, the People enamoured with
his Integrity, and himself satisfied with a good Conscience. Much good counsel
he gave at Court, more at home in Shropshire, where his Dexterity in composing
the private Quarrels of the Country, was as eminent as his Prudence in settling
the Affairs of Ireland. He had that Majesty in his Countenance that he awed,
and Affability in his Speech that he obliged the Country. His Counsel would be
smart and solid, his Reproof grave and affectionate, his Jests quick and
taking; doing more with a quick Droll toward the peace of the Country, than
others did with longer Harangues. Secretary Bourns Son kept a Gentleman's Wife
in Shropshire; when he was weary of her, he caused her Husband to be dealt with
to take her home, and offered him 500 l. for reparation. The Gentleman went to
Sir Henry Sidney to take his advice; telling him, That his Wife promised now a
new life, and to say the truth five hundred pounds would be very seasonable at
that time. By my troth (said Sir Henry) take her home, and the Money; then
whereas other Cuckolds wear their Horns plain, you may wear yours gilt. His
great word after a difference ended, was, Is not this easier than going to
London or Ludlow? When a man fretted against himself or other, My Friend, he
would say, take it from me, a weakman complains of others, an unfortunate man
of himself, but a wise man neither of others nor of himself. It was his Motto,
I Will never threaten. To threaten an Enemy, is to instruct him; a Superior, is
to endanger my person; an Inferior, is to disparage my conduct. Old servants
were the Ornament and stay of his Family, for whom he reserved a Copyhold when
aged, a service when hopeful, an Education when pregnant. Twice was he sent
underhand to France, and once to Scotland, to feel the pulse of the one; and to
embroyl the other. It Is for settled Kingdoms and for Wealthy men to play
above-board, while the young State as the young Fortune should be least in
sight.

He and Sir Thomas Randolph amuse the Queen of Scots with the hope of the Crown
of England, and the King of France by a League with his protestant subjects; to
whose a^sistance Sir Adrian Poynings arrives as Field-marshal, and the Earl of
Warwick as General.

Sir Nicholas Arnold had disposed Ireland to a settlement, when Justicer; and
Sir Henry Sidney formerly Justicer and Treasurer, was now to complete it as
D^puty, being assisted in Munster by Sir Warham St. Leiger, and elsewhere by
the brave Earl of Ormond, having procured his Antagonist the Earl of Desmond to
be called to England in order of a peace and tranquillity. Great was his
Authority over, far greater his love to, and esteem of the Soldiers, with whom
he did wonders against Shane Oneals Front, while Randolph charged his Rear
until the wild Rebels submits, and is executed. When he resigned his Authority
and Honor to Sir William Drury, he took his farewell of Ireland in these words,
When Israel departed out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from a barbarous
people. A singular man he was, (says the Historian) and one of the most
commendable Deputies of Ireland, to whose Wisdom and Fortitude that Kingdom
cannot but acknowledge much, though it is as impatient of Deputies as Sicily
was of old of Procurators.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Puckering.
HE was born at Flamboroughead in Yorkshire, second Son to a Gentleman that
left him an Estate neither plenteous nor penurious, his breeding was more
beneficial to him than his portion, gaining thereby such skill in the common
Law, that he became the Queens Sergeant, speaker in the house of Commons, and
at last Lord Chancellor of England. How he stood in his Judgment in the point
of Church Discipline, plainly appears by his following speech, delivered in
the house of Lords 1588.

You are especially commanded by her Majesty to take heed, that no Ear be
given, nor time afforded to the wearisome solicitations of those that commonly
be called Puritans, where with all the late Parliaments have been exceedingly
importuned, which ^ort of men, whilst that (in the giddiness of their Spirits)
they labor and strive to advance a new eldership, they do nothing else but
disturb the good repose of the Church and Commonwealth, which is as well
grounded for the body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the
discipline, as any Realm that confesses the truth. And the same thing is
already made good to the world by many of the Writings of godly and learned
men, neither answered nor answerable by any of these new fangled Refiners. And,
as the present case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits,
do offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For, albeit the
Jesuits do empoyson the hearts of Her Majesty's Subjects, under a pretext of
Conscience to withdraw them from their Obedience due to Her Majesty yet do they
the same, but closely, and in privy-corners: But these men do both teach and
publish in their printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles, sundry
Opinions, not only dangerous to a Well-setled Estate, and the Policy of the
Realm, by putting a Pi^e between the Clergy and the Layty; but also much
derogatory to her sacred Majesty and her Crown, as well by the diminution of
her ancient and lawful Revenues, and by denying Her Highness Prerogative and
Supremacy, as by offering peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In
all which things, (however in other Points they pretend to be at war with the
Popish Jesuits) yet by this separation of themselves from the unity of their
fellow subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do both join and concur with the Jesuits in opening the Door, and
preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion that i^ threatened against the Realm.

And thus having according to the weakness of my best understanding delivered
Her Majesty's Royal pleasure and wise direction, I rest there, with humble Suit
of her Majesty's most gracious Pardon in supplying of my defects, and recommend
you to the Author of all good council.

He died anno Domini 1596, charactered by Mr. Cambden, Vir Integer. Hi^ Estate
is since descended, (according to the solemn settlement thereof) the Male Issue
failing, on Sir Henry Newton; who, according to the Condition has assumed the
surname of Puckering.

Sir Thomas Egerton urged against the Earl of Arundel methodically what he had
done before, in, and since the Spanish Invasion: Sir John Puckering pressed
things closely, both from Letters and Correspondence with Allen and Parsons,
that few men had seen; and from the saying of my Lord himself, (which fewer had
observed) who when Valongers Cause about a Libel was handled in the
Star Chamber, had said openly, He that is thoroughly Popish, the same man cannot
but be a Traitor. A man this was of himself of good repute for his own
Carriage, but unhappy for that of his servants; who for disposing of his
Livings corruptly, left themselves an ^ill name in the Church, and him but a
dubious one in the State. David is not the only person whom the iniquity of
his heels, that is, of his followers, lays hold on.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bromley.
SIr Thomas Bromley was born at Bromley in Shropshire, of a right ancient
Family. He was bred in the Inner Temple, and made, before he was forty years of
age, General solicitor to Queen Elizabeth; and afterward, before he was
fifty, succeeded Sir Nicholas Bacon in the Dignity of Lord Chancellor: yet
Bacon was not missed while Bromley succeeded him; and that loss which otherwise
could not have been repaired, now could not be perceived; Which Office he
wisely and learnedly executed with much discretion, possessing it nine years,
and died anno 1587, not being sixty years old.

My Lord Hunsdon first employed this Gentl^man, and my Lord Burleigh took first
notice of him. He had a deep head to dive to the bottom of the abstruse Cases
of those times, and a happy mean to manage them, with no less security to the
Estate, than satisfaction to the people. A man very industrious in his place,
and very observant of the Court: happy in his potent friends, happy in his able
followers; men of great faithfulness toward him, and of great integrity and
respectfulness toward any that made Addresses to him. He never decided the
^quity of any Case before he had discoursed with the Judge that heard it, of
the Law of it. He never disposed of a Living without the Bishop of the Diocese
his consent where it lay^ nor ever engaged he in any State-business without
dir^ction from my Lord Burleigh, the Earl of Leicester, my Lord Delaware. Sir
Ralph Sadler was to observe the policy, Dr. Wilson the Civil law, and Sir
Thomas Bromley the English law, in the Queen of Scots answer to Queen
Elizabeth's last expostulation. The Spanish Soldier never takes wages against
his King, and Sir Thomas Bromley never took fe^s against the Crown. He would
have the cause opened clearly by his Client in the Chamber, before ever he
would declare it at the Bar: He lost money for not admitting all causes
promiscuously at first, but he gained it at last; when never f^iling in any
cause, says my Author, for five years: during which space, what he wanted in
the retayl of advantage, he made up in the gross of esteem; being by that time
the only person that the people would employ, and one of the three the Court
would favor; being excellent (because industrious) in a leading and an
untrodden cafe. Physicians, they say, are best like Beer when stale, and
Lawyers like Bread when young: This person was eminent in all the periods of
his Age; each whereof he filled with its just and becoming accomplishment. In
that Lord of N^rthumberland's case that pistolled himself, none more subtle to
argue his guilt; in the Queen of Scots, none more strict to keep to the law;
for when the Queen of Scots would explain something in the Queens commission,
he answered, We are subjects, and not come hither to explain the Queens words,
but to perform them. None more discreet and grave, prefacing that great
business with these words^ The high and mighty Queen our Sovereign, that she
might not be wanting to her God, her self, her people, or your honor, sent us
hither, not so much to try, as to clear you; not so much to urge her
Accusations, as to hear your Defense. And none more steadfast to his Sovereign:
for when that unfortunate Lady protested her unaccountableness to the English
laws, he replied, This protestation is vain: for whosoever, of what place
soever, offends against the Laws of England in England, was subject to the
same Laws, and might be examined and tried. The sentence against her he
declared had three things in it: 1. Justice, 2. Security, 3. N^cessity: but
added presently, And that wisely too it should no ways prejudice King James his
Title or Honor.

Observations on the Life of Sir. Richard Bingham.
SIr Richard Bingham, born in Binghams^Melcolm in Dorsetshire, of a very
ancient Family, in his youth traveled most parts of the world: he was at the
Siege of St. Quintin in France; the sacking of Leith in Scotland; served in
Ca^dia under the Venetians against the Turk; then returned into the
Netherlands, being strong and fortunate in all his undertakings. After all
this, he went into Ireland, and was there President of Co^naught, and conque^ed
the great and dangerous Rebel ORork.

A Gentleman this, rather skilful in many mysteries than thriving in any: of a
fancy too high and wild, too defulto^y and over-voluble: yet Imagination has
often produced Realities, and fancy done the work of Judgment; as in this
Gentleman, whose daringness went for conduct, whose spirit passed for
resolution, whose activity had the honor of skill, and whose success the glory
of prudence. It Is a wonder of parts that Caesar could write, read, dictate, and
discourse at the same time; it is a miracle of fancy that this man should
command a Regiment in the Netherlands, preside in a province of Ireland, manage
a Trade in Russia, carry on a plantation in America, and husband a manor in
England. But as the King of Spain is painted with a handful of sand running out
between his fingers, in reference to his many, but unprofitable Dominions; so
might this grand Projector be described, who attempted so many things, that he
did nothing. Yet one thing his Quicksilver soul was good for, and that is
Stratagems: Now you should have him surprise a Town by Butter-women, another
time by Workmen; anon he would face the enemy, and draw them with success upon
a train of Gunpowder he would lay for them, and Iron Pricksteds he would sow
for them: He would steal their hands and seals, buy the very keys of their
closets; and so amuse them with letters, and distract them with Jealousies,
while in the mean time the vigilant man alarmed them every hour of the day, and
each watch of the night; so that he tamed those wild Irish as we do some wild
beasts, by watching.

Observations on the Life of Roger Ashcam.
FRom his cradle a Royal servant, and to his grave a favorite: a good man,
(says Cambden) and if his ambition had been but as great as the occasion was
fair, a great one too. Born he was honestly in Yorkshire, and bred handsomely
at Cambridge; and both born and bred for that age which was to refine Greek and
Latin to a politeness, and raise them to an Eloquence. He was the
University-Orator at Cambridge, and at Court; there using his eloquence, here
his interest against that sacrilege, that having Dined on the church, as he
writ, came to Sup on the Universities. Thence he was rather removed than
advanced, more suitably to his me^it than his expectation, to be Queen
Elizabeth's Schoolmaster for the Latin tongue in her Sisters time, and her
Secretary for the same in her own.

What he got by his ingenuity, he lost by his gaming, viz. at Dice and
Cock-fighting, dying rich only in those two books, his estate and monument,
whereof the one is entitled T^xophilus, and the other Scholarcha. He and his
dear Smith were the happiest men in the nation; their large and ingenious souls
clasping together in an entire friendship, made up of kindness and integrity,
apart from the little fears, the jealousies, the suspicions that vex mankind.
What learned letters! what loving expostulations! what discreet intimations!
what faithful advertisements! what indifferent community! what common cares and
pities! how they loved! how they child! and how they loved again! how plain!
how malleable! how sweet! What little observations upon one another
inadvertencies, neglects or miscarriages! how they improved their Mollia
tempora to the great end of friendship, information and advice! How secretly
they vented their thoughts into each others breasts, and there looked upon them
by reflection, and the advantage of a second consideration! And it is a happiness
to have another self to show our selves to before we appear to the world, that
all men wish, and the good men only enjoy. An honest man this, that abhorred
all artifice and cunning, and hated all concealments and pretensions, which he
had sagicity enough to discover and look through, but a spirit too generous to
practice it; none being more able for, yet none more averse to that
ci^cu^locution and contrivance wherewith some men shadow their m^in drift and
purpose. Speech was made to open man to man, and not to hide him; to promote
Commerce, and not betray it.

HOw happy is he born and taught
That serves not another will,
Whose Armor is his honest thought,
And simple truth his utmost skill?
Whose passions not his Masters are,
Whose soul is still prepared for death;
Untied unto the world by care
Of Public fame, or private breath.
Who envies none that chance does raise.
Nor vice has ever understood;
How deepest wounds are given by praise,
Nor Rules of State, but Rules of Good.
Who has his life from rumors freed,
Whose conscience is his strong retreat^
Whose state can neither flatterers feed,
Nor r^ine make Oppressors great.
Who God does late and early pray,
More of his grace, than gifts to lend;
And entertains the harmles day
With a religious book or friend.
This man is freed from servile bands
Of hope to rise, or fear to fall:
Lord of himself, though not of lands;
And having nothing, yet has all.
Observations on the Life of Sir John Packington.
SIr John Packington was a person of no mean Family, and of form and feature no
way despiseable: for he was a brave Gentleman, and a very fine courtier; and
for the time which he stayed there, was very high in the Queens grace: but he
came in, and went out, and through disassiduity lost the advantage of her
favor; and death drawing a vail over him, utterly deprived him of recovery.
Had he broughtless to the Court than he did, he might have carried away more
than he brought: for he had a time for it, but he was an ill husband of
opportunity. His handsome features took the most, and his neat parts the wisest
at Court. He could smile Ladies to his service, and argue Statesmen to his
design with equal ease. His reason was powerful, his beauty more. Never was a
brave soul more bravely seated: Nature bestowed great parts on him, education
polished him to an admirable frame of prudence and virtue. Queen Eli^abeth
called him Her T^mperance, and Leicester His Modesty. It is a question to this
day, whether his resolution took the Soldiers, his prudence the Politicians,
his compliance the Favorites, his complaisance the Courtiers, his piety the
Clergy, his integrity and condescension the People, or his knowledge the
learned, most? This new Court-star was a nine-days wonder, engaging all eyes
until it set satisfied with its own glory. He came to Court, he said, as
S^lomon did, to see its vanity; and retired as he did, to repent it. It was he
who said first what Bishop Sanderson urged afterward, That a sound Faith was
the best Divinity, a good Conscience the best Law, and Temperance the best
Physic. Sir John Packington in Queen Elizabeth's time was virtuous and modest,
and Sir John Packington in King Charles his time loyal and valiant; the one did
well, the other suffered so: Greenham was his Favorite, Hammon his; the one
had a competant estate, and was contented; the other has a large one, and is
noble: this suppresseth Factions in the kingdom, the other composed them in
the Court, and was called by Courtiers Moderation. Westmerland tempted his
fidelity, and Norfolk his stedfastness: but he died in his bed an honest and an
happy man, w^ile one of them goes off tainted on the S^rffold, and the other
dies a begg^r in Flanders.

Observations on the Lives of the Norrises and Knowles.
MY Lord Norris had by his Lady an ample Issue, which the Queen highly
respected: for he had six sons, all martial brave men; of haughty courage, and
of great experience in the conduct of military affairs, Greater was not the
Faction between Leicester and Sussex at court, than that between the Knowles
and the Norrises in the Country: both Families of Oxfordshire; the one resolute
at Greys, the other valiant at Rycote: the former got great estates at home,
the latter attained to great honor abroad. The Knowles were beloved by the
Queen for their own sakes, the Norrises for theirs and her own sake, the
Knowles were of the same blood with her Majesty, the Norrises spent theirs for
her.

1. My Lord Norris died at Court an honest man.

2. Sir Francis at Bulloign a good Soldier.

3. Sir William at Berwick a brave Governor.

4. Sir Thomas at Munster a wise President.

5. Sir Maximilian at Bretaign an expert Engineer.

6. Maximilian at Groen a renowned Hero.

7. Sir John was a most accomplished General, no less eminent for his safe
retreats, than for his resolute onsets. France has recorded this testimony of
him, That he brought on his men so warily, as one that could bring them off:
and England this, That he brought them off so resolutely, as one that durst
bring them on. His fortune often overthrew his enemy, and his wisdom oftener
saved his friends: His conduct was famous, and his Discipline exact: His
Actions are Presidents, and his Orders Laws of War to this day. He was bred
under Castilion, and out-did him. Ireland was always possessed, but never
conquered till Norris came, who could lie on the coldest earth, swim the
deepest Rivers, force the straightest Passes, find out the most secret corners,
and tread the softest Bog; who could endure any thing but an affront, and a
Superior: the first whereof, upon a repulse at Court, saddened his heart; as
the second, upon another Deputies being sent over him, broke it. Unsuccessful
he was with Don Antonio in Spain, because he understood not the Country. In the
Low Countries he gained experience first, and then victory: in Ireland he had
Connaught for his Grave, Mount- Norris his Monument, and the Letter of Queen
Elizabeth to his Mother his Epitap^.

As the first eminent Norris suffered for Anne Bullen, the Qu. Mother: so the
first eminent Knowles suffered with Protestantism her Religion. Norris could
not rise though he deserved his honor, because of Leicester that favored his
Brother, Knowles and Essex that envyed him; neither could Knowles advance
because of Sussex that feared and Cecil that suspected him. The Knowles were
deserving, but modest; favored, but humble; powerful, but quiet; rather firm
at Court, than high; allied to the Queen, and faithful to the Crown. Queen
Elizabeth advanced Sir Francis to the Vicechamberlainship, treasurership of the
household, Captainship of the Guard, and the order of the Garter, because she
said, He was an honest man; and King James, and King Charles raised his Son Sir
William to the Earldome of Bambury, because he was a serviceable man. Honestly
faithful was that family to their Mistress that was, and providently so were
they to their Master that should be. Handsome men they were when attending at
Court, and valiant when called to the Camp.



Norrises.
1. The Norrises are employed in Embassies of War, wherein they were active. 2.
My Lord Norris his resolution was very becoming in the demand of Calice. 3. The
Irish Conspirator Thoumond opened a Plot against the Government in Ireland to
the Agent Norris.
Knowles.
1. The Knowles are abroad in religious Negotiations, for which they had been
Confessors, Sir Francis in France, and Sir Henry in Germany. 2. Francis Knowles
his meekness was suitable to his persuasions for Religion: 3. And the Scots
Schismatic Humes discovered a design against the Church in England to the
Ambassador Knowles.
In 88,

My Lord Hunsdon guarded the Queens person with 34000 foot, and 2000 horse; the
Earl of Leicester commanded the Midland Army of 22000 foot, and 1000 horse: Sir
Roger Williams and Sir Richard Bingham were in the head of 20000 in the Thames
mouth, and Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Knowles with other Assistants sat
in the Council of War to overlook all. Sir John advised three things: 1. The
Guarding of the Havens, 2. The Training of the Militia, and the preparing of
them to be at an hours warning upon a signal given, which was then the firing
of a Beacon. 3. That if the enemy did land, the Country should be laid waste
before him, the Train-bands alarming him day and night: Sir Francis added, 1,
What shires and what numbers should assist each Coast, how the men should be
armed, how commanded, and in what order they should fight. 2. That the Papists
should not be massacred, as some would have it, but secured. 3. That the Deputy
of Ireland should be instructed. 4. That the King of Scots should be engaged.
5. That Agents should be sent to the Netherlands and to France. And, 6. That
the Queen should encourage the people with her own presence. Sir John Norris
died when he saw beyond others expectation and his own merit, the Lord Burge
made Lord-Deputy, and himself but President of Munster; his great mind sinking
under one affront from his Sovereign, which had born up against all the
assaults of her enemies; leaving this honor behind him, That he laid the best
grounds of military practice in England^ But who can stand before Envy?

A further Character of Sir John Norris from Queen Elizabeth's Letter to his
Mother.
My own Crow.
HArm not your self for bootless help, but show a good example to comfort your
dolorous yoak-fellow. Although we have deferred long to represent to ^ou our
grieved thoughts, because we liked full ill to yield you the first reflection of
misfortune, whom we have always rather sought to cherish and comfort; yet
knowing now, that Necessity must bring it to your ear, and Nature consequently
must move both grief and passion in your heart; We resolved no longer to
smot^er, neither our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of our grief for
your loss. Wherein if it be true, That Society in sorrow works diminution, We
do assure you by this true Messenger of our mind, that Nature can have stirred
no more dolorous affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, than Gratefulness
and memory of his Service past has wrought in us his Sovereign apprehension of
our miss for so worthy a Servant. But now that Natures common work is done, and
he that was born to die has paid his Tribute, let that Christian discretion
stay the flux of your immoderate grieving, which has instructed you both for
example and knowledge, that nothing in this kind has happened but by Gods
divine providence. And let these Lines from your loving gracious Sovereign
serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively Character of our
Estimation of him that was, in our gracious care of you and yours that are
left, in valuing rightly all their faithful and honest Endeavors. More at this
time we will not write of this unpleasant subject, but have dispatched this
Gentleman to visit both your Lord and you, and to condole with you in the true
sense of your love; and to pray that the world may see what time cures in a
^eak mind, that Discretion and Moderation helps in you in this accident,
where there is so just cause to demonstrate true Patience and Moderation.

Your Gracious and Loving Sovereign, E. R.

Observations on the Life of Secretary Davison.
THat Meteor of the Court! raised only in an an excess of heat and vapors, to
fall in a clearer day: for having good parts to act, an easy nature to comply,
and a good disposition to be imposed on, he was raised to play others parts
rather then his own, in those intricate and dark times, when fools were put to
execute what wise men advised; and the world saw but the plain side of the
great watch of State, within which all the springs were enclosed and hid.

That he was but of a private capacity, and so safely to be raised, as one that
would neither outshine nor outdare his Patron, ( Machiavil has a Rule, ( Disc.
l. 3. c. 2.) That it is a very great part of wisdom sometimes to seem a fool,
and so lie out of the reach of Observation and Jealousy) appears from his
Negotiations, that were either payment of money in the Netherlands, a Merchants
business; or taking security of the Merchants in France, a Scriveners part; or
pacifying the tumult in Holland, the t^sk of a Bu^gomaster. Beale the Clerk of
the Council and he were joined in Commission, always to deal with the Scots;
the one the austerest, and the other the sweetest man living. When the first
frighted those rude people with expostulations, the second got into them with
insinuations. A hard and a soft, a Hammer and a Cushion, breaks a Flint Fear
and Love rule the world. His Grand Case, as that great Historian lays it, is
briefly this; Many Protestants thought themselves in danger while the Queen of
Scots was alive; many Papists thought themselves undone while she was
imprisoned: these last press her to some dangerous undertakings; of the first,
some were for securing, others for transporting, and a third party for
poisoning her: to which purpose many Overtures were made, though yet none durst
undertake it that had either estate or honor to lose; being so wise as not to
understand what was meant by the strange Letters that were sent, else they
might have fallen into this Gentleman's fortune; who unadvisedly venturing between
the honor and safety of his Sovereign, was ground to nothing betwixt the fear
of one party, and the shame of the other.

But this mild, but stout because honest man^ was not so weak in the
perpetration of this fault, as he was wise in his Apology for it, saying, He
would not confess a guilt, and betray his integrity; nor yet stand upon a
Justification, and forget his Duty. He would neither contest with his
Sovereign, nor disparage himself; but clear himself as an honest man, and
submit as a thankful servant, and a good subject.

Dazzled thus with height of place,
Whilst our hopes our wits beguile,
No man marks the narrow space
'Twixt a prison and a smile.
Then, since Fortunes favors fade,
You, that in her arms do ^leep,
Learn to swim, and not to wade;
For, the hearts of Kings are deep.
But, if Greatness be so blind
As to trust in Towers of Air,
Let it be with Goodness lined,
That at least the fall be fair.
Then though darkened, you shall say,
When friends fail, and Princes frown,
Virtue is the roughest way,
But proves at night a Bed of Down.
Observations on the Lives of Sir Humphrey Gilbert and Sir Jeffrey Fenton.
SHarp and lively-spirited men, skilful in War, and prudent in Peace: of a
restless and a public Spirit, well skilled in the Trade of England, better in
the Wealth of America; in the North-part whereof, which we call Newfound Land,
whither they had sailed a little before with five Ships, having sold their
Patrimony in hope to plant a Colony there, they undid themselves: for after
they had by the voice of a common Crier proclaimed that Country to belong to
the English Jurisdiction, and had assigned Land to each of their Company, they
were distressed by Shipwracks, and want of necessary provision, and constrained
to give over their Enterprise; learning too late, and teaching others, That it
is matter of greater difficulty to tr^nsport Colonies into far Countries upon
private men's wealth, than they and others in a cred^lous and sanguine fit
imagine: and this, Quod si^ ^ss^velis, nihilque malis.

Observations on the Life of Do^^or Walter Haddon.
WAlter Haddon was born of a Knightly Family in Buckinghamshire, bred at Eaton,
afterward Fellow in Kings College in Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of
Law, and was the Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen Vice Chancellor of
the University 1550. soon after he was made President of Mag^alen^Colledge in
Oxford, which place he waved in the reign of Queen Mary, and sheltered himself
in obscurity. Queen Elizabeth made him one of the Masters of her Requests, and
employed ^^m in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her Majesty being demanded
whether she preferred him or Buchanan for learning, wittily and warily
returned, Buchanum omnibus antep^no, Haddonum nemini postpono.


S. Memoriae.
Gualtero Haddono Equestri loco nato juris Consulte^ Oratori, Poetae
celeberrimo, Graece Latin^que Eloquen^^^ su^ temporis facile principi sapientia
and sanctitate vitae, in i^ erecto ut Reginae Elizabethae a supplicum libellis
Magister esset, destinareturque majoribus, nisi facto immaturius cessisset:
Interim in omni gradu viro long Eminentissimo, Conjugi sui optimo
meretissimoque Anna Suttona, uxor ejus secunda slens m^rens desiderii sui
signum posuit. Obiit anno Salut. hum. 1572. AEtatis 56.

This his fair Monument is extant in the Wall, at the upper end of the Chancel
of Christ-Church in London, where so many ancient Inscriptions have been
barbarously defaced. He and Dr. Wotton settled Trade between us and the
Netherlands, and removed the mart to Embden: and both were famous for their
reservedness in the case of succession, which they kept locked in their own
breasts; so always resolved to do, (notwithstanding Leicesters Solicitations
of them to a Declaration for the Queen of Scots now his mistress, and hereafter
in the Queen of Englands design to be his Wife) unless (as they alleged)
their Mistress commanded their Opinion; who certainly never heard any more
unwillingly than the controversy about the Title of succession: and both as
famous for their disswasion against the making of the Netherlands a Free State;
urging that of Machiavel, That people accustomed to live under a Prince, if by
any accident they become free, are like beasts let loose; and have much ado to
maintain either their G^vernment or their Liberty.

Observations on the Life of Sir Wi^liam Russel.
HIs very Name brought Tyrone upon his knees to him, and Iniskillyn to a
surrendry. He was for detaining Tyrone, notwithstanding his letters of
Protection: the Council was for dismissing him, either out of favor to him, or
out of their reverence to their former promise; as much to the danger of
Ireland, as the displeasure of the Queen. Pretending an Hunting-match, he had
almost taken Feagh Mac Hugh, or shut him up; and under the disguize of a
progress, he shut up all the Passages and Avenues of Tyrone. Agiges the Cretan
King would say, That he that would govern many, must fight with many: Our
Deputy found that great honor had its great difficulties; yet was he so
constant and resolute, that with Marcellus he would say, That as there are many
things a good Governor ought not to attempt; so ought he not to desist, or
give over an Enterprise once begun and taken in hand. Therefore his Character
is One daring in his person, close to his purpose, firm to his dependencies, of
a deep and large soul; who looked upon the chargeable War in Ireland as an
equal remedy against a worse in England, to the letting of blood in one part,
against the effusion of it in another^ and advised the bestowing of
Church Lands among the Nobility of both Persuasions in Ireland as in England,
who would then hold their Religion with their Land, in Capi^e, and stick to the
Queen as the great support of both, against all pretenders, whom then most
would v^gorously oppose, and all would fairly leave.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Roper.
SIr Thomas Roper, servant to Queen Elizabeth, was born in Friday-street in
London; whose Grandfather was a younger son of the house of Heanour in
Derbyshire. He going over into the Low Countries, became Page to Sir John
^orrice, and was Captain of a Foot-company at sixteen years of Age. What
afterward his Martial Performances were, will appear by the following lines
transcribed out of the Original of his Patent.

Whereas Thomas Roper Knight, one of our Privy-Councellours of the Kingdom of
Ireland, long since has been known unto us famous, with the splendor of his
warlike Virtue; as who by the many Achievements valiantly performed by him in
the late War of this Kingdom, has gained the eminent Repute both of a stout
Soldier, and a discreet Commander; whose Valor chiefly appeared in his
Retreat near le Boil in our Province of Connaught, where with very few horse
he undauntedly charged great troops of the horse of the Enemy, who in a h^^tile
manner forraged ^he very bowels of the Kingdom; and by his wisdom made such a
singular retreat, that he not only saved himself and his men, but also
delivered the whole Army from great danger, and slew very many of his Enemies.
Who also when our Province of Vlster was all on fire with war, being one out of
many, was for the tried Resolution of his mind, chosen by the Right honorable
the Earl of Essex, then General of the Army, to undertake a Duel with Makal,
and declined not to expose himself to the appointed Duel. And also when the
aforesaid Thomas Roper in the late war in the Kingdom of France at Breast, by
exposing himself to the greatest perils, and shedding of his own blood,
demonstrated his Courage to be unconquerable. Who also in the Voyage to
Portugal, behaved himself valiantly and honorably: as also at Bergen in the
Netherlands, when it was besieged by the Spaniards, approved himself a young
man of invincible Valor in the defense thereof. Who also in the day wherein
Kinsale was assaulted, was placed in the first Rank, nearest of all unto the
Town; and with no less Success than Valor, to the great safety of the whole
Army, beat back, and put to flight the Spaniards, who in the same day made
several Sallies out of the Town.

Know therefore, that we, in intuition of the Premises, have appointed the
aforesaid Thomas Rope^ Knight, etc.

Then follows his patent, wherein King Charles the first, in the third of his
Reign, created him Baron of Bauntree, and Viscount Baltinglass in Ireland.

He was a principal means to break the hearts of the Irish Rebels: for wh^re^s
for^erly the E^glish were loa^ed with their own Clothes, s^ that their ^^ipping
into Bogs did make them, and the clopping of their breeches did keep them
prisoners therein; he first, being then a Commander, put himself into Irish
Trouzes, and was imitated first by all his Officers, then Soldiers; so that
thus habited, they made the more effectual execution on their enemies. He died
at Ropers Rest, anno Dom. 164. and was buried with Anne his Wife ( Daughter to
Sir Henry Harrington) in St. John's Church in Dublin.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Umpton.
SIr Henry Umpton was born at Wadley in Barkshire He was son to Sir Edward
Umpton, by Anne ( the Relict of John Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) the eldest
Daughter of Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset. He was employed by Queen Elizabeth
Ambassador into France; where he so behaved himself right stoutly in her
behalf, as may appear by this particular, In the month of March, anno 1592,
being sensible of some injury offered by the Duke of Guise to the Queen of
England, he sent him this ensuing Challenge.

For as much as lately in the Lodging of my Lo^d Du Main, and in public
elsewhere, impudently, indiscreetly, and over-boldly you spoke badly of my
Sovereign, whose sacred person here in this Country I represent: To maintain
both by word and weapon her honor, (which never was called in question among
people of honestly and virtue) I say, you have wickedly lied in speaking so
basely of my Sovereign; and you shall do nothing else but lie, whenever you
shall dare to tax her honor: Moreover then her sacred person (being one of the
most compleet and virtuous Princess that lives in this world) ought not to be
evil spoken of the tongue of such a per^idious Traitor to her law and Country
as you are. And hereupon I do defy you, and challenge your person to mine,
with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it either on horseback
or on foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality of person between us,
I being issued of as great a Race and Noble house (every way) as your self. So
a^signing me an indifferent place, I will there maintain my words, and the lie
which I gave you, and which you should not endure if you have any courage at
all in you. If you consent not to meet me hereupon, I will hold you, and cause
you to be generally held one of the arrantest Cowards, and most slanderous
Slave that lives in all France. I expect your answer.

I find not what Answer was returned. This Sir Henry dying in the French Kings
Camp before Lofear, had his Corpse brought over to London, and carried in a
Coach to Wadley, thence to Farington, where he was buried in the Church on
Tuesday the eighth of July 1596. He had allowed him a Barons Hearse, because he
died Ambassador Leiger.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Essex.
IT is observed, that the Earl of Essex had his In^roduction to favor by the
Lord of Leicester, who had married his Mother; a tie of Affinity. This young
Lord was a most goodly person, in whom was a kind of Urbanity, or innate
Cou^tesie, which both won the Queen, and too much took upon the people, to gaze
upon the new-adopted son of her favor. He was noted even of those that truly
loved and honored him, for too bold an Ingrosser both of Fame and Favor.
Having upon occasion left the Court for a while, he gave a fair opportunity for
his foes to undermine him; so that he lived a mixture between Prosperity and
Adversity; once very great in her favor, which was afterward lost, for want
of consideration and cunningness. He was raised by Leicester to poize Rawley,
as Rawley was by Sussex to check Leicester. Indeed pity first opened the door
to him for his Fathers sake that died in Ireland, Alliance led him in for his
Father-in-laws sake Leicester See Sir H. Wottons Observati^ns.
that reigned at Court. His own Royal blood welcomed him for his Mother
Knowles, that was kin to her Majesty; his good parts, his tall and comely
personage, his sweet disposition, and incomparable nature; his noble Ancestors,
his fair, though impaired fortune, brought him first to favor, and then to
dalliance.

He was a Maste^-piece of Court and Camp; his Beauty ennamelling his Valor,
and his Valor being a foil to his Beauty; both drawing those noble respects
of love and honor; both awing, both endearing. It was his Nobleness that ^e
distrusted none, it was his Weakness that he trusted all; whereby he suffered
more from those that should have been his friends, than from them who were his
enemies. Good Man! his ruin was, that he measured other breasts by his own;
and that he thought mankind was as innocent as his own person. His merit
gained applause, and his Parasites swelled it to Popularity; and the last
enjealousied that majesty which the first had obliged. His youthful and rash
Sallies abroad, gave too much opportunity to his enemies whispers, and too
visible occasions for her Majesty's suspicion, that he was either weak, and so
not to be favoured^ or dangerous, and so to be suppressed. Absence makes
Princes forget those they love, and mistrust those they fear. Exact
Correspondence is the sinew of private and of public friendship. So great a
master he thought himself of his Sovereigns affection, that he must needs be
master of himself, and steal to France without leave, where, said the Queen, he
might have been knocked on the head as Sidney was. His Journey to France was
not more rash, than his Voyage to Cales was renowned; yet the one gave the
Envious arguments of his disobedience, and the other of his Disloyalty; his
enemies suggesting, that in the first he contemned his mistress, and that in
the second he had a design upon her.

His Action at Cales was applauded; but his Triump^s were too solemn, his
Panegyric^s too high, his Train t^o Princ^ly, his H^n^u^s and Knigh^hoods too
cheap, his Popularity too much affected, and his ear more open to^ hear what he
had done^ t^an what he was. If his Manhood had been as slow as his He was one
of them whose Natures disclose b^t slowly.
Youth, he had been moderate: if his Life had answered his Under Dr. Whitgift.
education, he had been patient: if his Eye had been as open upon his enemies,
as his Ear to his f^iends, he had been cautious; if he had been as happy in his
constant converse, as he was obliging in his first address, he had been a
Prince: if he had had either less Fortune, or a greater Soul; eith^r l^ss of
the Dove, or more of the Serpent, he had bid fair for a Crown; or at least had
saved his Head. The people wished him well, but they are unconstan^; the Queen
loved him, but she is jealous: his followers are numerous, but giddy;
affectionate, but ill advice: his enemies are few, but w^tchful on all
occasions: for is he pleased? they swell it to pride and vain imaginations: is
he crossed? they improve it to discontent and sedition. An Army must be sent
against Tyrone; he is not willing that any other should lead it, and unwilling
to lead it himself; yet over he goes fatally: for the service was knotty, and
his disposition smooth; his power was large, but that with as large a mind
entangled him: his Army was great, but that meeting with a great design,
precipitated him: his Title to the Crown was defended, but that lost him his
head. He had exact advices from friends, especially from Sir Francis Bacon; and
great directions from his Prince, but he followed his own: when he should have
fought the main body of his enemy, he skirmisheth their Forlorns; when he
should have returned with a noble Conquest, he stole home aft^r a suspicious
Trea^y: the Royal Checks that should have instructed, incenseth him; and what
was designed a chastisement, he turns to a ruin Beloved he is of the people,
but that aggravateth^ his rashness; flattered by Courtiers, but that swells
his humor: followed he is by the discontented of Church and State, but that
increases the jealousy: ill advised he is by heady Cuffe and Meyriche, and
that hasteneth his fall: humbled he is by the advancement of his Rivals, and
that enrageth hi^: easy and open was his Nature; close, ^ctive, and vigilant
his Enemies.

Valiant he was, but therefore feared; Noble and obliging to all hop^ful men,
and therefore watched. A great Party he had, but they had no Head: A Minion he
was at once to Prince and People, but he had no Balance. A man of great
pe^formances, but no design: One that had too much Religion and Fidelity to be
a Traitor, too good a Nature to be safe, too much presumption on affections
when absent to be steady. He presumed too much on his own stren^^h, or his
friends wi^dome, when he came out of Ireland; he was too much wrought upon by
his enemies when he came to London, which had too much to lose to hazard a
Rebellion; and went not to Wales, where his fathers and his own goodness had
engaged 1000 Lives and Fortunes. In a word, Leicester's reservedness, Bacon's
stayedness, Sir Robert Cecil's humility, Sir F^lke Grevil's mod^sty, added to
his parts and presence, his valor and liberality, his good nature and large
heart: his favor with his Prince, and popularity with the su^jects, had raised
him to a capacity with the great Earl of Warwick, to set the English Crown on
what head he pleased; although it was the universal opinion, he had no other
ambition than to set it on King James his head, which it belonged to, with his
own hands: his design was well principled, but not well molded; he had many
hands, but no able heads: his corre^pondence was universal, but not firm and
exact^ his Nature was active, but impatient; his ^nterest was popular, not
thoroughly understood; he neither comprehending the Inclina^ions of the Kingdom
in gross in Parliament, nor in the retayl in its particular divisions. The
Catholics might h^ve been his, but he was too good-natured to cajole them: the
State was well inclined, but effeminate after so long prosperity. Hope of
pardon sent him to his grave with more silence than was expected from him, and
the peoples regret; and with more sorrow than became a Queen or her Kingdoms
safety. His party was too needy, and their counsels too violen^. Ambition and
good Nature are incompatible: Others counsels are never so faithful as our own.
When we hear others advice, let our reason j^dge of it: when great, be wary;
when successful, reserved; when rising, stayed; especially in that Age when men
were poisoned with Oil, and undone with Honey: when active, modest; when
checked, yiedling; when dandled, distrust^ul; when flattered, fea^ful; when
great, not absolute, (^s my Lord would have been in point of favor against my
Lord Mountjoy, and valor against my Lord Norris.) Serve not your Followers,
but employ them: Let others service administer to your design, not your power
to theirs: Let great Actions encourage greater; and let honor be your merit,
and not your expectation. Some have been busy in the enquiry of what reason
the Virgin-Queen had for her kindness to Leicester and this man, (if there be a
reason in any, much less in Royal love, save the affection its self that bears
it) true, he had Virtue and suffering enough at his first arrival to engage the
kindness and the pity of a worse Princess: yet some then discoursed of a
Conjunction of their Stars that made way for that of their minds. Certainly
(says Cambden) the inclination of Princes to some persons, and their disfavour
toward others, may seem fatal, and guided by higher Powers.

A Parallel between the Earl of Essex and the Duke of Buckingham, by H. W.
THe beginning of the Earl of Essex I must attribute wholly, or in great part
to my Lord of Leicester; but yet as an Introducer or supporter, not as a
Teacher: for as I go along, it will easily appear, that he neither lived nor
died by his Di^cipline. Always certain it is, that he drew him first into the
fatal Circle from a kind of resolved privateness at his house at Lampsie, in
South Wales; where, after the Academical life, he had taken such a taste of the
Rural, (as I have heard him say) and not upon any flashes or fumes of
Melancholy, or traverses of discontent, but in a serene and quiet mood, that he
could well have bent his mind to a retired course. About which time, the said
Earl of Leicester bewrayed a meaning to plant him in the Queens favor: which
was diversely interpreted by such as thought that great Artizan of Court to do
nothing by chance, nor much by affection. Some therefore were of opinion, that
feeling more and more in himself the weight of time, and being almost tired (if
there be a sa^iety in power) with that assiduous attendance, and intensive
circumspection which a long-indulgent fortune did require, he was grown not
unwilling, for his own ease, to bestow handsomely upon another some part of the
pains, and perhaps of the envy.

Others conceived rather, that having before for the same ends brought in, or
let in Sir Walter Rawleigh, and having found him such an Apprentice as knew
well enough how to set up for himself, he now meant to allie him with this
young Earl, who had yet taken no strong impressions. For though the said Sir
Walter Rawleigh was a little before this, whereof I now speak by occasion, much
fallen from his former splendor in Court: yet he still continued in some
luster of a favored man, like billows that sink by degrees, even when the wind
is down that first stirred them.

Thus runs the discourse of that time at pleasure; yet I am not ignorant that
there was some good while a very stiff aversation in my Lord of Essex from
applying himself to the Earl of Leicester, for what secret conceit I know not;
but howsoever, that humor was mollified by time, and by his mother; and to the
Court he came under his Lord.

The Duke of Buckingham had another kind of Germination; and surely had he
been a plant, he would have been rec^oned amongst the Sponte Nascentes: for he
sprung without any help by a kind of congenial composure (^s we may term it) to
the likeness of o^r late Sovereign and master of ever blessed memory: who
taking him into his regard, taught him more and more to please himself, and
molded him (as it were) Platonically to his own Idea; delighting first in the
choice of the Materials, because he found him susceptible of good form; and
afterward by degrees, as great Architects use to do, in the workmanship of his
Regal hand: nor staying here, after he had hardened and polished him about ten
years in the School of observance, (for so a Court is) and in the furnace of
trial about himself, (for he was a King could peruse men as well as Books) he
made him the associate of his Heir apparent, together with the new Lord
Cottingto^ (as an adjunct of singular experience and trust) in foreign
travels, and in a business of love, and of no equal hazard (if the tendern^ss
of our zeal did not then deceive us) enough (the world must confess) to kindle
affection even betwixt the distantest conditions; so as by the various and
inward conversation abroad, (besides that before and after at ^ome) with the
most constant and best-natured Prince, Bona si sua norint, as ever England
enjoyed, ^his Duke becomes now secondly seized of favor, as it were by
descent, (though the condition of that estate be no more than a Tenancy at
Will, or at most ^or the life of the first Lord) and rarely transmit^ed: which
I have briefly set down, without looking ^eyond the vail of the Temple, I mean
into the secret of high inclinations; since even Satirical Poets, ^who are
otherwise of so licentious fancy) are in this ^oint modest enough to confess
their ignorance.

Nescio quid certe est quod me tibi temperet Astrum.
And these were both their Springings and Imprimings, as I may call them.

In the profluence or proceedings of their fortunes, I observe likewise not
only much difference between them, but in the Ea^l not a little from himself.
First, all his hopes of advancement had like to be st^angl^d almost in the very
Cradle, by throwing himself into the Portugal Voyage without the Queens
consent, or so much as her knowledge; whereby he l^ft his Friends and
Dependents near six months in desperate suspense what would become of him. And
to speak truth, not without good reason: For first, they might well consi^er,
That he was himself not well plumed in favor for such a ^light: besides, that
now he wanted a Lord of Leicester at home (for he was dead the year before) to
smooth his absence, and to quench the practices at Court. But above all, it lay
open to every man's discourse, that though the bare offense to his Sovereign and
Mistress was too great an adventure, yet much more when she might (as in this
case) have fairly discharged her displeasure upon her Laws. Notwithstanding, a
noble report coming home before him, at his return all was clear, and this
excursion was esteemed but a Sally of youth. Nay, he grew every day more and
more in her gracious conceit: whether such intermissions as these do sometimes
foment affection; or that having committed a fault, he became the more
obsequious and plyant to redeem it; or that she had not received into her Royal
Breast any shadows of his popularity.

The^e was another time long after, when Sir Fulke Grevil, (late Lord Brook) a
man in appearance intrinsecal with him, or at the least admitted to his
Melancholy hours, either belike espying-some weariness in the Queen; or
perhaps, with little change of the word, though more in the danger-some marks
toward him, and working upon the present matter, (as she was dexterous and
close) had almost super-induced into favor the Earl of Southampton; which yet
being timely discovered, my Lord of Essex chose to evaporate his thoughts in a
Sonnet (being his common way) to be sung before the Queen, (as it was) by one
Hales, in whose voice she took some pleasure; whereof the complot me thinks had
as much of the Hermit as of the Poet: And if thou should by Her be now
forsaken,
She made thy Heart too strong for to be shaken.


As if he had been casting one eye back at the least to his former retiredness.
But all this likewise quickly vanished, and there was a good while afer fair
weather over-head. Yet still, I know not how, like a gathering of Clouds, till
toward his latter time, when his humors grew tart, as being now in the Lees
of favor, it brake forth into certain sudden recesses; sometimes from the
Court to Wansteed, otherwhiles unto Greenwich, often to his own Chamber, Doors
shut, Visits forbidden; and which was worse, diverse contestations (between)
with the Queen her self, (all preambles of ruin) wherewith though now and then
he did wring out of her Majesty some petty contentments, (as a man would press
sour Grapes) yet in the mean time was forgotten the counsel of a wise, and
then a Prophetical Friend, who told him, that such courses as those were like
hot Waters, which help at a pang, but if they be too often used, will spoil the
stomach.

On the Dukes part, we have no such abrupt strains and precipees as these, but
a fair, fluent and uniform course under both Kings: And surely, as there was in
his natural Constitution a mavelous equality, whereof I shall speak more
afterward; so there was an image of it in his Fortune, r^nning (if I may
borrow an ancient comparison) as smoothly as a numerous Verse, till it meet
with certain Rubs in Parliament, whereof I am induced by the very subject which
I han^le, to say somewhat, so far as shall concern the difference between their
times.

WHen my Lord of Essex stood in favor, the Parliaments were calm: nay, I find
it a true observation, that there was no impeachment of any Nobleman by the
Commons from the Reign of King Henry the sixth, until the eighteenth of King
James, nor any intervenient preced^nt of that nature; not that something or
other could be wanting to be said, while men are men: For not to go higher, we
are taught easily so much by the very Ballads and Libels of Leicestrian time.

But above the aforesaid year, many young ones being chosen into the House of
Commons more than had been usual in great Councils, (who though of the weakest
wings, are the highest Flyers) there arose a certain unfortunate and unfruitful
Spirit in some places; not sowing, but picking at every stone in the field,
rather than tending to the gene^al harvest. And thus far the consideration of
the Nature of the Time has transported me, and the occasion of the subject.

Now on the other side, I must with the like liberty observe two weighty and
watchful Sollicitudes, (as I may call them) which kept the Earl in extreme and
continual Cau^ion, like a bow still bent, whereof the Dukes thoughts were
absolutely free.

First, he was to wrestle with a Queens declining, or rather with her very
setting Age, (as we may term it) which, besides other respects, is commonly
even of it self the more umbratious and apprehensive, as for the most part all
Horizons are charged with certain vapors toward their evening.

The other was a matter of more Circumstance, standing thus, viz.

All Princes, especially those whom God has not blessed with natural issue,
are (by wisdom of State) somewhat shie of their Successors; and to speak with
due Reverence, there may be reasonably supposed in Queens Regnant, a little
proportion of tenderness that way, more than in Kings. Now there were in Count
two names of Power, and almost of Affection, the Essexian and the Cecilian,
with their adherents, both well enough enjoying the present, and yet both
looking to the future; and therefore both holding correspondency with some of
the principals in S^otland, and had r^c^ived advertisements and instructions,
either from them, or immediately from the King as induciat Heir of thi^
I^perial Crown.

But lest they might detect one another, this was mysteriously carried by
several instruments and conducts, and on the Essexian side, in truth, with
infinite hazard: For Sir Robert Cecil who (as Secretary of State) did dispose
the public Addresses, had prompter and safer conveyance; whereupon I cannot
but relate a memorable passage on either part, as the st^ry following shall
declare.

The E^rl of Essex had accommodated Master Anthony Bacon in par^ition of his
house, and had assigned him a noble entertainment. This was a Gentleman of
impot^nt feet, but a nimble head; and through his hand run all the
intelligences with Scotland: who being of a provident nature, (contrary to his
brother the Lord Viscount Saint Albans) and well knowing the advantage of a
dangerous secret, would many times cunningly let fall some words, as if he
could amend his Fortunes under the Cecilians, (to whom he was near of alliance,
and in blood also) and who had made (as he was not unwilling should be
believed) some great proffers to win him away: which once or twice he pressed
so far, and with such tokens and signs of apparent discontent to my Lord Henry
Howard, afterward Earl of Northampton, (who was of the party, and stood
himself in much Umbrage with the Queen) that he flees presently to my Lord of
Essex, (with whom he was commonly primae admissionis) by his bedside in the
morning, and tells him, that unless that Gentleman were presently satisfied
with some round sum, all would be vented.

This took the Earl at that ^ime ill provided, (as indeed oftentimes his
Coffers were low) whereupon he was fain suddenly to give him Essex-house; which
the good old Lady Walsingham did afterward dis-engage out of her own sto^e
with 2500 pound; and before, he ha^ distilled 1500 pound at another time by the
some skill. So as we rate this one secr^t, as it was finely car^ied, at 4000
pounds in present money, besides at the least 1000 pound of annual p^nsion to a
private and bedridden Gentleman: What would he have gotten if he could have gone
about his own business?

There was another accident of the same nature on the Cecilian side, much more
pleasant, but less chargeable, for it cost nothing but wit. The Queen having
for a good while not heard any thing from Scotland, and being thi^sty of news,
it fell out that her Majesty going to take the air toward the heath, (^he
Count being then at Greenwich) and Master Secretary Cecil then attending her, a
Post came crossing by, and blew his Horn: The Queen out of curiosity asked him
from whence the Dispatch came; and being answered, from Scotland; she stops her
Coach, and calls for the Packet. The Secretary, though he knew there were
some Letters in it from his Correspondents, which to discover, were as so many
Serpents; yet made more show of diligence than of doubt to obey; and asks some
that stood by (forsooth in great haste) for a Knife to cut up the Packet, (for
otherwise he might perhaps awak^d a little apprehension) but in the mean time
approaching with the Packet in his hand, at a pretty distance from the Queen,
he tells her it look^d and smelt ill-favouredly coming out of a fil^^y
Budget, and that it should be fit first to open and air it, because he knew she
was averse from ill Scents.

And so being dismissed home, he got leisure by thi^ seasonable shift, to sever
what he would not have seen.

These two accidents precisely true, and known to few, I have reported as not
altogether extravagant from my purpose, to show how the Earl stood in certain
perplexities, wherewith the Dukes days were not distracted. And this has been
the Historical part (as it were) touching the difference between them in the
rising and flowing of their fortunes.

I will now consider their several Endowments both of Person and Mind, and then
a little of their Actions and Ends.

The Earl was a pretty deal the taller, and much the stronger, and of the abler
body: but the Duke had the neater limbs, and free delivery: he was also the
uprighter, and of the more comely motions: for the E^rl did bend a little in
the neck^, though rather forwards than downwards: and he was so far from being
a good Dancer, that he was no graceful Goer. If we touch particulars, the Duke
exceeded in the daintiness of his leg and foot, and the Earl in the
incomparable fairness and fine shape of his hands; which (though it be but
feminine praise) he took from his Father: for the general Air, the Earl had the
closer and more reserved Countenance, being by nature somewhat more cogitative,
and (which was strange) never more than at meals, when others are least:
Insomuch, as he was wont to make his observation of himself, that to solve any
knotty ^usiness which cumbred his mind, his ablest hours were when he had
checked his first appetite with two or three morsels, after which he sat
usually for a good while silent: yet he would play well and willingly at some
games of greatest a^tention^ which showed, that when he listed he could license
his thoughts.

The Duke on the other side, even in the midst of so many diversions, had
continually a very pleasant and vacant face, (as I may well call it) proceeding
no doubt from a singular assurance in his temper. And yet I must here given him
a rarer Elogie, which the malignest eye cannot deny him, That certainly never
man in his place and power, did entertain greatness more familiarly, nor whose
looks were less tainted with his felicity; wherein I insist the rather, because
this in my judgment was one of his greatest Virtues and Victories of himself.

But to proceed: in the attiring and ornament of their bodies, the Duke had a
fine and unaffected politeness, and upon occasion costly, as in his Legations.

The Earl as he grew more and more attentive to business and matter, so less
and less curious of clothing: insomuch, as I do remember, those about him had
a conceit, that possibly sometimes when he went up to the Queen, he might scant
know what he had on: for this was his manner: His Chamber being commonly stived
with Friends or Sui^ers of one kind or other; when he gave his legs, arms, and
breast to his ordinary servants to button and dress him with little heed, his
head and face to his Harbor, his eyes to his letters, an^ ears to Petitioners,
and many times all at once, then the Gentleman of his Robes thro^ing a cloak
over his shoulders, he would make a step into his Closet, and after a short
prayer, he was gone: only in his Baths, he was somewhat delicate. For point of
diet and luxury, they were both inordinate in their appetites, especially the
Earl, who was by nature of so different a taste, that I must tell a rare thing
of him (though it be but a homely note) that he would stop in the midst of any
physical Potion, and after he had licked his lips, he would drink off the rest;
but I am weary of such slight Animad versions.

To come therefore to the inward furniture of their minds, I will thus much
declare.

The Earl was of good Erudition, having been placed at study in Cambridge very
young by the Lord Burleigh his Guardian, with affectionate and deliberate care,
under the oversight of Doctor Whitgift, then master of Trinity College, and
after Archbishop of Canterbury; A man (by the way) surely of a most reverend
and sacred memory, and (as I may well say) even of the Primitive temper, when
the Church in lowliness of temper did flourish in high examples, which I have
inserted as a due recordation of his virtues, having been much obliged to him
for many favors in my younger time.

About sixteen years of his age (for thither he came at twelve) he took the
formality of master of Arts, and kept his public Acts. And here I must not
smother what I have received by constant Information, that his own Father dyed
with a very cold conceit of him, some say through the affection to his second
son Walter Devereux, who was indeed a diamond of the time, and both of an hardy
and delicate temper and mixture: But it seems, this Earl, like certain
vegetables, did ^^d and open slowly; Nature sometimes delighting to play an
aftergame as well as Fortune, which had both their turns and tides in course.

The Duke was Illiterate, yet had learned at Court, first to ^i^t and question
well, and to supply his own defects by the drawing or flowing unto him of the
best Instruments of experience and knowledge, from whom he had a sweet and
attractive manner, to suck what might be for the public or his own proper use;
so as the less he was favored by the Muses, he was the more by the Graces.

To consider them in their pure Naturals, I conceive the Earls Intellectual
faculties to have been his stronger part, and in the Duke his Practical.

Yet all know, that he likewise at the first was much under the expectation of
his after^ proof; such a sudden influence therein had the Sovereign aspect. For
their Abilities of discourse or pen, the Earl was a very acute and sound
speaker when he would intend it; and for his Writings, they are beyond example,
especially in his familiar Letters and things of delight at Court, when he
would admit his serious habits, as may be yet seen in his Impresses and
inventions of entertainment; and above all, in his darling piece of love, and
self-love; his Style was an elegant perspicuity, rich of phrase, but seldom
any bold Metaphors, and so far from Tumor, that it rather wanted a little
Elevation.

The Dukes delivery of his mind I conceive not to be so sharp as solid and
grave, not so solid and deep as pertinent, and apposite to the times and
occasions.

The Earl I account the more liberal, and the Duke the more magnificent; for I
do not remember that my Lord of Essex in all his lifetime did build or ado^ne
any house, the Queen perchance spending his time, and himself his means, or
otherwise inclining to popular ways; for we know the people are apter to
applaud hous-keepers, than hous-raisers. They were both great cherishers of
Scholars and Divines; but it seems, the Earl had obtained of himself one
singular point, that he could depart his affection between two extremes: for
though he bare always a kind of filial reverence toward Dr. Whit gift, both
before and after he was Archbishop; yet on the other side, he did not a little
love and tender Master Cartwright, though I think truly, with la^ge distinction
between the persons and the Causes, howsoever he was taxed with other ends in
respecting that party.

They were both fair-spoken Gentlemen, not prone and eager to detract openly
from any man; in this the Earl has been most falsely blemished in our vulgar
Story: only against one man he had forsworn all patience, namely Henry Lord
Cobham, and would call him (per Excellentiam) the Sycophant (as if it had been
an emblem of his name) even to the Queen herself, though of no small
insinuation with her; and one Lady likewise (that I may civilly spare to
nominate, for her sex sake) whom he used to term the Spyder of the Court: yet
generally in the sensitive part of their Natures the Earl was the worse
Philosopher, being a great Resenter and a weak Dissembler of the least
disgrace: And herein likewise, as in the rest, no Good Pupil to my Lord of
Leicester, who was wont to put all his passions in his pocket.

In the growth of their Fo^tunes, the Duke was a little the swifter, and much
the greater; for from a younger brothers mean estate, he rose to the highest
degree whereof a Subject was capable either in Title or Trust. Therein I must
confess much more consortable to Charles Brandon under Henry the Eight, who was
equal to him in both.

For matter of Donative and addition of substance, I do not believe that the
Duke did much exceed him, all considered, under both Kings.

For that which the Earl of Essex had received from her Majesty, besides the
Fees of his Offices and the disposition of great Sums of money in her Armies,
was (about the time of his Arraignment, when faults use to be aggravated with
precedent benefits) valued at three hundred thousand pounds sterling in pure
gift for his only use, to the Earl of Dorset then Lord Treasurer; who was a
wise man, and a strict Computist, and not ill affected toward him. And yet it
is worthy of note in the Margent of both Times, that the one was prosecuted
with silence, and the other with murmur; so undoing a measure is popular
judgment.

I cannot her omit between them a great difference in establishing of both
their Fortunes and Fames.

For the first, the Duke had a care to introduce into near place at the Court
diverse of his confident Servants, and into high places very sound and grave
Personages. Whereas, except a Pensioner or two, we can scant name any one man
advanced of the E^rls breeding, but Sir Thomas Smith, having been his
Secretary, who yet came never further (though married into a noble house) than
to the Clerk of the Council, and Register of the Parliament: not that the E^rl
meant to stand alone like a Substantive (for he was not so ill a Grammarian in
Court;) but the Truth is, in this point the Cecilians kept him back, as very
well knowing, that upon every little absence or disassiduity, he should be
subject to take cold at his back.

For the Other, in managing of their Fames, I no^e between them a direct
contrary wisdom; For the Earl proceeded by way of Apology, which he wrote and
dispersed with his own hands at large, though till his going to Ireland they
were but airy objections. But of the Duke this I know, that one hav^ng offered
for his ease to do him that kind of Service; He refused it with a pretty kind
of thankful scorn, saying, that he would trust his own good intentions which
God knew, and leave to him the pardoning of his Errors; and that he saw no
fruit of Apologies, but the multiplying of discourse: which surely was a
wel-setled Maxim. And for my own particular (though I am not obnoxious to his
memory) in the expression of Tacitus, Neque injuria, neque beneficia, saying
that he showed me an ordinary good Countenance: And if I were, yet I would
distinguish between Gratitude and Truth. I must bear him this Testimony, that
in a Commission laid upon me by Sovereign Command to examine a Lady about a
certain filthy accusation grounded upon nothing but a few-single names taken up
by a Footman in a kennel, and straight baptized, A list of such as the Duke had
appointed to be poisoned at home, himself being then in Spain; I found it to be
the most malicious and frantic surmise, and the most contrary to his nature
that I think had ever been brewed from the beginning of the World, howsoever
countenanced by a Libellous Pamphlet of a fugitive Physician even in Print; and
yet of this would not the Duke fuffer any answer to be made on his behalf, so
constant he was to his own principles.

In their Military services the Characters of the Earls employments were these,
viz.

His forwardest was that of Portugal, before mentioned.

The saddest, that of Roan, where he lost his brave Brother.

His fortunatest piece I esteem the taking of Cadiz Malez, and no less modest;
for there he wrote with his own hands a censure of his Omissions.

His jealousest employment was to the relief of Calais besieged by the Cardinal
Archduke: about which, there passed then between the Queen and the French King
much A^t.

His Voyage to the Azores was the best, for the discovery of the Spanish
weakness, and otherwise almost a saving Voyage.

His blackest was that to Ireland, ordained to be the Sepulcher of his Father,
and the Gulf of his own Fortunes.

But the first in 88, at Tilbury-camp, was in my judgment the very poison of
all that followed; for there whilst the Queen stood in some doubt of a Spanish
Invasion (though it proved but a Morrice-dance upon our Waves) she made him in
Field Commander of the Cavalry (as he was before in Court) and much graced him
openly in view of the Soldiers and people, even above my Lord of Leicester:
the truth is, from thenceforth he fed too fast.

The Dukes employment abroad in this nature, was only in the Action of the
Isle of Reez, of which I must note somewhat for the honor of our Country, and
of his Majesty's times, and of them that perished and survived, and to redeem
it generally from misunderstanding. Therefore after enquiry amongst the wisest
and most indifferent men; of that Action, I dare pronounce, that all
Circumstances pondered, A tumultuary banding on our part, with one thousand in
the whole on theirs ready to receive us with two hundred horse, with near two
thousand foot, and watching their best time of advantage, none of their foot
discovered by us before, nor so much as suspected, and only some of their
Horse descried straggling, but not in any bulk or body: their Cavalry not a
Troop of Eascoignors mounted in haste, but the Greater part Gentlemen of
Family, and of picked Resolution, and such as charged home both in Front and on
both Flanks into the very Sea; about sixscore of their two hundred horse
strewed upon the Sand, and none of them but one killed with a great shot; and
after this their foot likewise coming on to charge, till not liking the
business they fell to flinging of stones, and so walked away:

I say, these things considered and laid together, we have great reason to
repute it a great impression upon an unknown place, and a noble argument that
upon occasion we have not lost our ancient vigor. Only I could wish that the
Duke who then in the animating of the soldiers showed them very eminent
assurance of his valor, had afterward remembered that rule of Apelles, Manum
de Tabula. But he was greedy of honor, and hot upon the public ends, and too
c^nfident in the prosperity of beginnings, as somewhere Polybius, hat great
Critique of war, observes of young Leaders whom fortune has not before
deceived. In this their military care and dispensation of reward and
punishment, there was very few remarkable occasions under the Duke, saving his
continual vigilancie and voluntary hazard of his person, and kindnesses to the
Soldiers, both from his own Table and purse; for there could be few disorders
within an Island where the troops had no scope to disband, and the Inferior
Commanders were still in ^ight.

In the Earl we have two examples of his severity^ the one in the Island
Voyage, where he threw a Soldier with his own hands, out of a Ship; the other
in Ireland, where he decimated certain troops that ran away, renewing a piece
of the Roman Discipline.

On the other side, we have many of his Lenity, and one of his Facility, when
he did connive at the bold trespass of Sir Walter Raleigh, who before his
arrival at Fyall, had banded there against his precise Commandment; at which
time he let fall a Noble word, being pressed by one, (whose name I need not
remember) that at the least he would put him upon a Martial Court: That I would
do (said he) if he were not my friend.

And now I am drawing toward the last Act, which was written in the Book of
necessity.

At the Earls end I was abroad, but when I came home (though little was left
for Writers to glean^ after Judges) yet, I spent some curiosity to search what
it might be that could precipitate him into such a prodigious Catastrophe; and
I must, according to my professed freedom, deliver a circumstance or two of
some weight in the truth of that story, which was neither discovered at his
arraignment, nor after in any of his private Confessions.

There was amongst his nearest attendants one Henry Cuffe, a man of secret
ambitious ends of his own, and of proportionate Councels smothered under the
habit of a Scholar, and slubbered over with a certain rude and clownish
fashion, that had the semblance of integrity.

This person not above five or six weeks before my Lords fatal irruption in
the City, was by the Earls special Command suddenly discharged from all
further attendance, or access unto him, out of an inward displeasure then taken
against his sharp and importune infusions, and out of a glimme^ing oversight,
that he would prove the very instrument of his Ruin.

I must add hereunto, that about the same time my Lord had received from the
Countess of warwick (a Lady powerful in the Court, and indeed a virtuous user
of her power) the best advice that I think was ever given from either sex; That
when he was free from restraint, he should closely take any out-lodging at
Greenwic^, and sometimes when the Queen went abroad in a good humor, (whereof
she would give him notice) he should come forth, and humble himself before her
in the field.

This Counsel sunk much into him, and for some days he resolved it: but in the
mean time, through the intercession of the Earl of Southampton, whom Cuffe had
gained, he was restored to my Lords ear, and so working advantage upon his
disgraces, and upon the vain foundation of Vulgar breath, which hurts many good
men, spun out the final destruction of his master and himself, and almost of
his restorer, if his pardon had not been won by inches.

True it is, that the Earl in Westminster Hall did in general disclose the
evil persuasions of this man; but the particulars which I have related by this
dismission and restitution, he buried in his own breast for some reasons
apparent enough; Indeed (as I conjecture) not to ^xasperate the Case of my Lord
of Southampton, though he might therewith a little peradventure have mollified
his own. The whole and true Report I had by infallible means from the person
himself that both brought the advice from the aforesaid excellent Lady, and
carried the discharge to Cuffe, who in a private Chamber was stricken,
therewith into a Sound almost dead to the Earth, as if he had fallen from some
high steeple; such Turrets of hope he had built in his own fancy.

Touching the Dukes sudden period, how others have represented it unto their
Fancies, I cannot determine: for my part, I must confess from my soul that I
never recall it to mind without a deep and double astonishment of my discourse
and reason.

First, of the very horror and atrocity of the Fact in a Christian Court,
under so moderate a Government; but much more at the impudency of the
pretense, whereby a desperate discontented Assassinate would after the
perp^tration have honested a mere private revenge (as by precedent
Circumstances is evident enough) with I know not what public respects, and
would fain have given it a Parliamentary cover howsoever. Thus these two great
Peers were dis-roabed of their Glory, the one by judgment, the other by
violence, which was the small distinct on.

Now after this short contemplation of their diversities, (for much more might
have been spoken, but that I was fitter for Rhapsody than commentary) I am
lastly desirous to take a Summary view of their Conformities, which I verily
believe will be found as many, though perchance heeded by few, as are extant in
any of the ancient Parallel.

They both slept long in the arms of Fortune: They were both of ancient blood,
and of Foreign extraction: They were both of strai^ and goodly stature, and of
able and active bodies: They we^e both industrious and assiduous, and attentive
to their ends: They were both early Privie-Counsellours, and employed at home
in the secretest and weightiest affairs in Court and State: They were both
likewise Commanders abroad in Chief, as well by sea as by land, both Masters of
the ^orse at home, both chosen Chancellours of the same University, namely,
Cambridge: They were both indubitable strong and high-minded men; yet of sweet
and accostable nature, almost equally delighting in the press and a^fluence of
Dependence and Suitors, which are always the Burres, and sometimes the B^ie^s
of Favorites. They were both married to very virtuous Ladies, and sole Heirs,
and left issue of either Sex; and both their Wives converted to contrary
Religions. They were both in themselves rare and excellent examples of
Temperance and Sobriety, but neither of them of Con^inency.

Lastly, after they had been both subject (as well Greatness and Splendour is)
to certain o^^^quise of their actions: They both concluded their earthly
felicity in unnatural ends, and wi^h n^ great distance of time in the space
either of Life or Favor.

Observations on the Life of Sir J^ffery Fenton.
SIr Ieffery Fenton, born in Nottinghamshire, was for twenty ^even years
Privy-Counsellour in Ireland to Queen Elizabeth and King Iames^ He translated
the History of Francis Gu^^^iardine out of Italian in^o English, and dedicated
it to Queen Elizabeth. He deceased at Dubli^, October 19. 1608, and lies
b^ried in St. Patrick^ Church, under the same Tomb with his Father-in-Law
D^ctor Robert Weston, sometimes Chancellor of Ireland. It is an happy age when
great m^n do what wise men may write; an happier, when wise men write what
great have done; the happiest of all, when the same men act and w^ite, being
Histories, and composing them too. For these men having a neerer^ and more
thorow-insight to the great subjects of Annals than men of more distant
capacities and fortunes, are the only persons that have given the world the
right no^ion of Transactions, when men of lower and more pedan^ique spirits
trouble it only with more H^avy Romances. Give me the actions of a Prince
transcribed by those Historians who could be instruments, The best History in
the world is Caesar's Commentaries, written by him, and translated by Edmonds,
with the same spirit that they were acted. Xenophon and Thucydides, whose pens
copied their Narratives from their Swords. Tacitus, Malv^zzi, Machiavel,
Comines, Moor, Bacon, Herbert and His Eliz. ^o which Cambden gave but the
language and ^he transcript.
Burleigh (who writ the affairs of former Ages with the same judgment that
they managed those of their own.) In a word, an History written by such a
Courtier as Guicciardine, and translated by such a Counselor as Fento^.
Diamond only can cut Diamond, the great only express the great: a person that
has a sight of the Intelligence, Negotiations, Conferences, and inward
transactions of States, i^^ one from whom I expect a more exact Chronicl^^ ^f
this age than yet this Nation has been happy in.

Observations on the Life of Doctor Fletcher.
GIles Fletcher (brother to Richard Fletcher Bishop of London) was born in
Kent, as I am credibly From the mouth of Mr. Ramsey Minister of Rougham in
Norfolk, who married the widow of Mr. Giles Fletcher son to this Doctor.
infor^ed. He was bred first in Eaton, then in Kings College in Cambridge,
where he became Doctor of Law. A most excellent Po^t (a quality hereditary to
his two sons, Giles and Phineas) was sent Commissioner into Scotland, Germany,
and the Low Countries, for Queen Eliz^beth, and her Ambassador into Russia,
Secretary to the City of London, and Master of the Court of Requests, His
Russian Embassy to settle the English Merchandise was his Masterpiece, to
Theodor, Juanowich, Duke of Muscovia. He came thither in a dangerous juncture
of time, viz. in the end of the year 1588.

First, some Forreiners (I will not say they were the Hollanders) envying the
free Trade of the English, had done them bad offices.

Secondly, a false report was generally believed that the Spanish Armado had
worsted the English Fleet, and the Duke of Muscov^, who mea^ured his favor
unto the English, by the possisbility he apprehended of their returning it)
grew very sparing of his smiles, not to say free of his frowns on our Merchants
residing there. However, our Doctor demeaned himself in his Embassy with such
cautiousness, that he not only escaped the Dukes fury, but also procured many
privileges for our English Merchants, exemplified in In his volume of English
Navigation^, p. 374.
Mr. Hacklui^. Returnng home and being safely arrived at London, he sent for ^
his intimate friend Mr. Wayland, Prebendary of St. Paul's, and Senior fellow of
Trinity College in Cambridge ( Tutor to my Father, from whose mouth I received
this report) with whom he heartily expressed his thankfulness to God for his
safe return from so great a danger; for the Poets cannot fancy Ulysses more
glad to be come out of ^he Den Polyphemus, than he was to be rid out of the
power of such a barbarous Prince, who counting himself by a proud and voluntary
mistake Emperor of all Nations, cared not for the Law of all Nations, and who
was so habited i^ blood, that had he cut ^ff this Embassador's head, he and his
friends might have sought their own amends; but the question is, where he would
have found it? He afterward set forth a book called The Russian Commonwealth,
expressing the Government, or Tyranny rather thereof; wherein (says my Camb.
in his Eliz. Anno 158^. when he was Agent in Muscov, as afterward Ambassador^
Author) are many things most observable: but Queen Elizabeth indulging the
reputation of the Duke of Muscovy as a confederate Prince, permitted not the
public printing of that; which such who have private Copies, know to set the
valuation thereon.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Mounjoy.
THe Lord Mountjoy was of the ancient Nobi^ity; as he came from Oxford, he took
the Inner Temple in his way to Court, whither no sooner come, but (without
asking) had a pretty strange kind of admission. He was then much about twenty
years of age, of a brown hair, a sweet face, a most neat composure, and tall in
his person; so that he coming to see the fashion of the Court, was spied out by
the Queen, and out of the affection she bare to the very sight of his face,
received him into favor: upon the first observation whereof, she professed
that she knew there was in him some noble blood. He was one that wanted not wit
and courage, for he had very fine attractions; and being a good Scholar, yet
were they accompanied with the re^ractives of bashfulness, and a natural
modesty. There was in him an inclination to Arms, with an humor of Traveling:
and as he was grown by reading (whereunto he was much addicted) to the Theory
of a Soldier, so was he strongly invited by his Genius to the Acquaintance of
the Practick of the War, which were the causes of his excursions; for he had a
Company in the Low-Countrys, from whence he came over with a noble acceptance
of the Queen, but somewhat restless: in honorable thoughts he exposed himself
again and again, and would press the Queen with the pretenses of visiting his
Company so often, that at length he had a flat denial, and yet he stole over
with Sir John Norris, into the action of Britain; but at last the Queen began
to take his Decessions for contempts, and confined his residence to the Court,
and her own presence. She was so confident in her own Princely judgment and
opinion that she had conceived of his worth and conduct, that she would have
this noble Gentleman, and none other, to finish, and bring the Irish War to a
propitious end; which (not deceiving her good conceit of him) he nobly
achieved, though with much pains and carefulness.

Among the greatest things laid to Queen Elizabeth her charge ( says the
Censurer) as cast behind the door of neglect, was the conduct of the Affairs
of Ireland; a place lying all her Halcyon days under so great a contempt, that
wise Walsingham thought it no Treason to wish it bu^ied in the Sea, considering
the charge it brought: yet she kept the Pale in good order, not suffering the
Spanish party to grow more potent in the North, than was convenient to consume
his forces, and divert him from nearer and more dangerous attempts. It being
impossible for her without being grievous to her people (a Rock she chiefly
studied to avoid) at one time to maintain so dreadful a Navy at Sea, and foment
the Du^ch and French, to whose assistance she was called by a louder necessity,
than to render a Nation quite desolate: none being willing during her life to
exchange the present government of a natural Princess, for the less happy
tyranny of a Viceroy; of which the most did study more their respective
Grandeur by extending the War, than the ease of the Inhabitants, and lessening
the Queens expense, till the noble Lord Mount-joy, was employed, who had no
other design than the conclusion of the Work; which he had not yet brought
about, but that the Spaniards found themselves betrayed through the
covetousness and cowardice of the Natives, that for small sums would sell not
only such Foreigners as ^ame to help them, but their nearest Relations. Nor
was it possible to reduce them to civility, but by curing the Bogs and
Fastnesses, and building castles and Garrisons, which he did; nor easy to
subdue them without that severity to the Priests, which he used; whom he found
exercising such an implicit power over the Peoples consciences^ that they
could not resolve themselves of their Sovereigns right or Religion. -- This for
his Irish government: touching his Domestic relaetion; When Queen Elizabeth's
favor to Essex ( like a bone by breaches made more firm) swelled him to such a
degree of confidence as frowned on them as enemies that acknowledged not his
friendship, or depended not on his favor, to balance him and my Lord Cecil,
this gallant Gentleman, and of honorable extraction, was placed in her eye;
many hoping by his application to draw from her heart the affection they
thought mortal to them and their design, the whole result concluding in a Duel
that raised both in their Mistress affections, as Champions for her beauty now,
and like to be so for her Government.

There are some Letters of this noble persons to be seen, I am told, of a plain
and equal style becoming a Statesman and business; not seldom yet admitting
of several constructions, if of any interpretation at all, where the business
related to a thing whose consequence could not easily be seen into.

Observations on the Life of Edward Earl of Rutland.
A Nobleman, eminent for those several Endowments which single, do exact an
entire man. For a person of his quality to be an accurate Critic in, he
learned Tongues, and then as a Rhetorician to make all their Graces serve his
Eloquence; to have traversed Ancient, and yet be no Stranger in Modern Writers:
to be well versed in the more crabbed Philosophy, and accurate in Politer
classick Authors^ to be learned in History and Policy, and Master in the Law of
the Land, and of Nations. For such a man to have devoured so much and yet
digested it, is a rarity in nature, and in diligence, which has but few
examples: yet his speculative knowledge that gave light to the most dark and
difficult proposals, became eclipsed by the more dazzling luster of his more
practick and experimental prudence; which together with his alliance to my Lord
Burleigh, had voted him to Bromley's place, but that they both sickned in one
day, and died in one week; he leaving these four Advisoes behind him, 1. Be
always employed. 2. Look to the Issue. 3. Be furnished with a Friend. And 4.
Reflect upon thy self -- Vita est in se Reflexio.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Smith.
HIS Relation to Edward the sixth his Cousin German, was enough to countenance
his parts, and his parts ripe and large enough to advance his person. -- His
gravity could be no where better employed than in Spain, nor his reservedness
any where more su^table than in Italy. In Spain his carriage had a great
impression upon the King, and his spirit upon the whole Court. For Gasper
Quiroga Archbishop of Toledo, inveighing bitterly against the Queen's person,
and more against her Title ( Defender of the Faith) was answered by him with
that Wisdom and Prudence, that his Majesty of Spain checked the Archbishop as
an Impertinado, as he called him, and hugged Sir John Smith, as a man who had
made himself dread^ul, and his Mistress therefore much more to that Court --
(They who least consider hazard in the doing of their duty, fare best still.)
The surest way to safety, is to have one interest espoused so firmly, as never
to be changed. Nor did he this out of a vainer bottom than an observation he
made of his Mistrisses resolution, already in despair of procuring good from
any milder endeavors than those of power: A signal testimony of the commanding
worth this Gentleman had, which extorted a reverence to his person in that very
place where his business contracted an Odium. An excellent person he was, in
whom honesty of manners strived with Nobi^ity of Birth, and merit with honor;
of a composed and stayed temper, that would say under all temptations to
disquiet, Either the thing before us is in our power, or it is not: If it be,
why do we not manage it to our content? If not, why are we discontented,
especially since every thing has two bandles? If the one prove hot, and not to
be touched, we may take the other that is more temperate. Upon which
consideration, all private concernments he passed over with a perfect
indifference: the world and its Appendages hanging so loose about him, that he
never took notice when any part dropped off, or sat uneasily.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Rawleigh.
SIr Walter Rawleigh was well descended, and of good Alliance, but poor in his
beginning. He was one so tosted by fortune to and fro, that he was sometimes
high, sometimes low, sometimes in a middle condition. He was brought up in the
University and Innes of Cour^, but he stayed not long in a place: and being the
youngest Brother, and the House diminished in Patrimony, he foresaw his own
destiny, that he was first to ^oul (through want and disability) before he
could come to a repose. He first exposed himself to the Land-service of Ireland
(a Militia) which then did not yield him food and raiment; nor had he patience
to stay there, (though shortly after he came thither again) under the command
of the Lord Gray. As for his Native parts, and those of his own acquiring, he
had in the outward man a good presence, in a handsome and well-compacted
person, a strong natural wit, and a better judgment, with a bold and plausible
tongue, whereby he could set out his parts to the best advantage; and to these
he had the adjuncts of some general learning, which by diligence he enforced to
a great Augmentation^ and Perfection; for he was an indefatigable Reader,
whether by Sea or Land, and none of the least observers both of Men and the
Times. Falling from that sudden grace, which he by his parts had gained of the
Queen, he went aside for a while, but at his return he came in with the greater
strength, and so continued to her last, great in her favor, and Captain of the
Guard. His prudence understood his capacity, and his industry served it;
raising his fortune as high as his parts, and his parts as high as his mind.
His Motto was, Either dye nobly, or live honorably. Never man prospered, but
the resolute, and he that has awaked an easy, soft, sleepy, or indifferent
temper, to the noble adventure of being Caesar, or being none: a disposition
meeting a large and capacious soul in this Gentleman, taught him the exact
discipline of War in Ireland and the Low Countries, the great skill of a
Seaman between Europe and America, and a patience as severe in enduring
hardship, as his necessity in requiring it. Five hours he slep^, four he read,
two he discoursed; allowing the rest to his business and his necessities: no
Soldier fared or lay harder, none ventured further: what is not extraordinary
(he would say) is nothing: It being the end of all Arts and Sciencies to direct
men by certain rules unto the most compendious way in their knowledge and
practice: those things of which in our selves we have only some imperfect
confused notions, being herein fully and clearly represented to our view from
the discoveries that other men have made, after much study and long experience;
and there is nothing of greater consequence for the advancement of Learning,
than to find out those particular advantages which there are for the shortest
way of knowing and teaching things in every profession. There was not an expert
Soldier or Seaman, but he consulted; not a printed or manuscript, discourse
of Navigation or War but he perused; nor were there exacter rules or principles
for both services, than he drew: so contemplative he was; that you would think
he was not active; so active, that you would say he was not prudent -- A great
Soldier, and yet an excellent Courtier: an accomplished Gallant, and yet a
bookish man; a man that seemed born for any thing he undertook: his wit brought
him to Court, and kept him there; for there happening a d^fference between him
and my Lord Gray, under whom he served in Ireland, which was heard before the
Council Table, Rawleigh stated his case with that clearness, urged his
arguments with that ^vidence and reason, offered his Apologies with those
pertinent and taking allegations, and his Replies with that smartness;
expressed himself with that flueney and eloquence, and managed his carriage and
c^untenance with that discretion, that he was first the States-mens
observation, next her Majesty's Favorite, and at last her Oracle; as who was
equally happy in his comprehensive discourses to her of her private interest in
every part of her government, and in his effectual Speeches ^o her Subjects in
Parliament touching theirs in every part of their duty.

Two things he observed in his Mistress; 1. That she was penurious in her
largesses. 2. That she was choice in her Favorites.


Whence he concluded, that there was no good to be done unless he got an estate
first, and then a reputation.

To the first, we owe his Sea-voyages, when his whole fortune was often put up
in one ship^ And to the last, his Land-services, when all his expectation
depended on one action. Two Rivals he observed, Essex for action, Cecil for
counsel: The one he went under abroad, to outvy him; the other he complied with
at home, to undermine him: but wanting strength, though not parts to be both
their Corrivals, he perished, because not thought to own humility enough to be
their servants. Cecill indeed was his friend, because Essex was his enemy: but
he taught him, That it was more safe at Court to have many enemies of equal
power, than one false and ambitious friend, that has attained to the
absoluteness of command: But this he was often heard to say, he did not
apprehend, before his Genius had dictated it to him, as he came in a Boat from
the execution of the Earl of Essex, which was done at the Tower. -- Yet two
ways I find him getting up: 1. By uncouth projects in Parliament beyond
expectation; which (though they might oblige his Mistress) together with an
opinion of his irreligion, lost him with the People. 2. By extraordinary
undertakings in War beyond his Commission; which (though performed to outdo
his Generals) had forfeited his head to their severity and justice, had not his
wit complied with their easiness and goodness. It Is a question among the
Curiosoes, whether his often absence from Court was his prudence, or his
weakness, it being a quodlibet, whether that distance was a greater allay to
his enemies malice, or his Sovereigns love; while his foreign actions were not
so close at her ear to his advantage, as his Adversaries applications to his
disparagemtnt.

Two things I must needs say are wonderful in him. 1. The dispatch and industry
of the former part of his life. 2. The weakness of the latter.

Touching the first, he that shall consider his laborious way of study,
immersed in almost infinite reading and observation, to which the running over
of innumerable books, and a vast multitude of men was necessary: His
Obligations to read not only common Authors, but all Records, Schemes, and
Paper that he could come by: His correspondence with F^iends and Strangers; his
review of his own Papers (which he sat close to by Sea and Land) that never
passed him without three transcriptions; his reception of visits, whether of
civility, or business, or discourse, which were numerous, and great devourers
of his time; his agency for all sort^ of person^ (his interest with his thrifty
Mistress being most part of his pension) in which capacity he set up a kind of
Office of Address -- his Letters, which cost him one day in the week: The time
lost upon his misfortunes, which made it necessary for him often to break his
great series and method of undertaking. He, I say, that shall compute, and sum
up this, the particulars whereof are nakedly told without any straining of the
truth, or flourish of expression, must be much to seek how a man of so many
actions should write any thing, and one of so many writings should do any
thing; and more, how one of so many fatal diversions could keep up a steady
mind for those great, but exact argumen^s that it has left in the world;
especially when there was one very difficult particular in all his comp^sures,
viz. that none of his Discourses with which his H^story or other Books are
embellished, passed hi^ ^xact hand before the most knowing and most learned men
in that faculty to which those discou^^^s belonged, had debated them before
him^ who after their departure s^mmed up all into those excellent pieces now
abroad under his name, which I blame not King James for envying, being the
nearest his own: though I think not that learned Prince of so low a spirit, as
out of an impertinent emulation to affect Sir Walter Rawleigh the less, for the
great repute that followed him because of his pen; which being more dangerous
than his Sword, I wonder that wise Prince indulged him, especially since that
Master H^mpden a little before the Wars was at the charge of transcribing 3452
sheets of his Manuscripts, as the Amanuensis himself told me, who had his cl^se
chamber, his fire and candle, with an Attendant to deliver him the Originals,
and take his Copies as fast as he could w^ite them.

2. To the second, viz. the weakness of the last part of his life: 1. T^ere was
no^ a greater reach in that advice of his to the Queen (when some were for
attacq^ing Spain one way, and some another) to cut off its commerce with the
Indies, than there was sho^tness of spirit in tru^^ing the most hopeful part of
that expedition to Sir John Buroughs, when he su^k under the m^st disastrous
himself. Yet 2. That he, when Cap^^in of the Guard, Warden of the Cinq^e-ports,
Gov^rnour of Virginia (a place of his own discovery) prefe^ments enough to
satisfy a regular spirit, should stand on term^s with King James against the
Law of the Land, the Genius of the Nation, the resolution of the Nobility, and
Reason i^ ^elf (that knows there is no cautions that hold Princes, but their
interest and nature) was a greater infirmity But 3. That he upon the Kings
frown for his fo^mer indiscretion upon him, and Cobham, should engage upon so
shallow a Treason (so improbable to hurt others, or benefit themselves, that if
ever folly was capable of the title, or pity due to innocence, theirs might
claim so large a share as not possible to be too severely condemned, or
flightly enough punished) and that with such week and inconsiderable men, as
were rather against the government, than for one another (Gray being a Puritan,
and Cobham a Protestant) were the g^eatest: but there is one particular more
behind; That he could employ his restraint so well, should ^ye under the
justice as well as jealousy of K. James: And knowing that Princes must not
pardon any able man that either they have wronged, or that has wronged them,
be so intent upon a foolish liber^y, wherein he lost himself and his in that
unhappy voyage of Guiana; a voyage, that considering King James his inclination
to the M^tch, his own obnoxiousness to tha^ King abroad, and Cecil here for
o^structing the Peace with Spain, and Gondamor's vigilance, must needs be as
unsuccessful, as it was disgu^^^ul.

Methinks he that was of so incomparable a dex^eri^y in his judgment, as the
Treasurer grew jealous of his excellent parts, lest he should supplant him; of
so quick and ready apprehension and conduct, that he puzzled the Judges at
Wincheste^: of so good a Headpiece, that it was wished then on the Secretary
of State's shoulders: of so considerable an interest, that notwithstan^ng his
fourteen years impr^sonme^t, Princes interceded ^or him, the whole Na^ion
pitied him, and King James would not execute him without an Apology. And to say
no more, of so much magnanimity, that he managed his death with so high and so
religious a resolution, as if a Christian had acted a Roman, or rather a Roman
a Christian; might have gone off the world at a higher rate, but that there is
an higher power governs wisdom, as invisibly, yet as really as wisdom does
the world; which when I look back upon my Lord of Essex, I call fate; but when
from him I look forward to Sir ^alter Rawleigh, I believe a providence.

He had a good presence in a handsome and well-compacted person, a strong
natural wit, a better judgment, with a bold and pla^sible tongue, which set
off his parts to the best advantage: to these he had the adjuncts of a general
Learning; which by diligence and experience (those two great Tutors) was
augmented to a great perfection^ being an indefatigable Reader, and having a
very retentive memory: before his Judges at Winchester humble, but not
prostrate; dutiful, yet not deject: to the Jury aff^ble, but not fawning;
hoping, but not trusting in them, carefully persuading them with reason, not
distemperat^ly importuning them with conjurations; rather showing love of life,
t^^n fear of death: patient, but not careless; civil, but not stupid.

Observations on the Life of Thomas Sackvil, Lord Buckhurst.
HE was bred in the University of Oxford; where he became an excellent Poet,
leaving both Latin and English Poems of his to posterity. Then studied he Law
in the Temple, and took the degree of Barrister; afterward he traveled into
Foreign parts, was detained for a time a Prisoner in Rome, which he revenged
afterward in the Liberty of his speech at the Powder-Trayto^s Trial. When his
liberty was procured for his return into England, he possessed the vast
inheritance left him by his Father, whereof in short time by his magnificent
prodigality he spent the greatest part, till he seasonably began to spare,
growing near to the bottom of his Estate.

The story goes, that this young Gentleman coming to an Alderman of London, who
had g^ined great penny worths by his former Purchases of him, was made (being
now in the wane of his we^l^h) to wait the coming down of the Alderman so long,
that his generous humor being sensible of the incivility of such Attendance,
resolved to be no more beholding to VVealthy Pride; and presently turned a
thrifty improver of the remainder of his Estate. But others make him, as
abovesaid, the Convert of Queen Elizabeth, (his Co^sin^German once removed) who
by her frequent Admonitions, diverted the tor^ent of his profusion. Indeed she
would not know him, till he began to know himself, and then heaped places of
H^nour and Trust upon him, creating him 1^ B^ron of B^ck^urst in Suss^x, Anno
Dom. 1566. 2. Sending him Amabssador into France, Anno 1571. Into the
Law-Countries, Anno Dom. 1576. 3. Making him Knight of the Order of the Garter,
Anno 1589. 4. Appointing him Treasurer of England, 1599.


He was Chancellor of the University of Oxford, where he entertained Queen
Elizabeth with a most sumptuous Feast. He was called the Star-Chamber-^^ll, so
very flowing his invention; and therefore no wonder if his Secretaries could
not please him, being a person of so quick dispa^ch, (faculties which yet run
in the blood.) He took ^ Roll of the names of all Suitors, with the Date of
their first Addresses, and these in order had their hearing, so that a
Fresh-man could not leap over the head of his Senior, except in urgent Affairs
of State. Thus having made (...) ^nds to his house for his misspent time, both
in i^^^ease of Estate and Honor, being created Earl of Dorset by King James,
he died on the 19 th of April, 1608.

The Lord Buckhurst was of the noble house of the Sackvils, and of the Queens
consanguinity; his Father was that provident and wise man Sir Richard Sackvil,
or as the people then called him, Fillsack, by reason of his great wealth, and
the vas^ Patrimony which he left to this his son, whereof he spent in his youth
the best part, until the Queen by her frequent admonitions diverted the
torrent of his profusion; he was a very fine Gentleman of person and endowments
both of Art and Nature. His elocution is much commended, but the excellency of
his Pen more; for he was a Scholar, and a person of quick faculties, very
facete and choice in his phrase and style. He was wise and stout, nor was he
any ways ensnared in (...) factions of the Court, which were all his time very
strong. He stood still in grace, and was wholly intentive to the Queens
service; and such were his abilities, that she received assiduous proofs of his
s^fficiency. As 1. In his Embassy to F^ance, whereas the Queen Mother
complemented him, he behaved himself very worthy of his Mistresses Majesty, and
his own Peerage: there he had an experienced Tuscan, Calacan^i by ^^me, to deal
wi^h that Florentine Queen ^ Montmorancy's brother to undermins the Guises; and
his own great parts, to grapple with old Hospital: He began that subtle piece
the French Match, under pretense whereof we ^alanced, and understood Europe^;
nd Walsingham finished it. 2. In his Negotiations in the Low Countries, where
he watched Leicester and the Commanders; he obs^^^^d the States, and their
changeable and various Interests, accommodating the present emergencies, and
suiting their occasions.


They that censure this Nobleman's death, consider not besides the black worm
and the white (day and night, as the Ridddle is) that are gnawing constantly at
the root of the Tree of Life, There a^e many infensible diseases, as
Apoplexies, whose vapors suddenly extinguish the animal spirits; and
Aposthumes both in the upper and middle Region of man, that often drown and
suffocate both the animal and vital, who are like embodied Twins, the one
cannot subsist without the other: If the animal wits fail, the vital cannot
subsist: if the vitals perish, the animals give over their operation: and he
that judges ill of such an act of Providence, may have the same hand at the
same time writing within the Palace-walls of his own body, the same period to
his lives Earthly ^^pire, His posterity refused an Apology offered in his
behalf, upon this ground, that the things objected to him, were of the number
of those little Cavils, which come with that rule not holding in great
accusations.

Spreta exolescunt, s^ irascare, agnita videntur.
The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
THE STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King James.
Observations on the Lives of the Cliffords, Earls of Cumberland.
THE name has been for three Ages ancient and Noble, and in this last Age
Warlike and serviceable: They had the government of the N^rth in their own
right for an hundred years, and the Hereditary Sheriff-dom of Westmo^land in
right of the Vip^nts their Relations for two. -- Henry the first Earl of
Cumberland, was raised by Henry the Eighth to that Honor, 1525, for his
service at Teurnay and Berwick. Henry his son was by Queen Mary honored with
the Garte^ for his conduct against Wyat; and by Queen E^iz. graced with
peculiar favors for his Industry, Integrity and Vigilance in the North. As
Nature, ^o Nobility subsists and grows by the same thing that it is made of:
Virtue that creates, supports it.

Observations on the Life of the Lord George Clifford.
GEorge Cliff^rd, Lord Clifford, Vescye, etc. Earl of Cumberland, was son to
Henry second Earl of that Family, by his second Lady; a person wholly composed
of true honor and valor, whereof he gave the world a large and clear
demonstration.

It was resolved by the judicious in that Age, The way to humble the Spanish
greatness, was not in pinching and pricking of him in the Low Countries, which
only emptied his veins of such blood as was quickly re-filled: But the way to
make it a Cripple for ever, was by cutting off the Spanish sinews of War, his
Moneys from the West Indies [the backdoor robs the house.] In order whereunto,
this Earl set forth a small Fleet on his own cost, and adventured his own
person therein, being the best born Englishman that ever hazarded himself in
that kind. His Fleet may be said to be bound for no other Harbor but the Port
of Honor, though touching at the Port of Profit in passage thereunto; I say,
touching, whose design was not to enrich himself, but impoverish the Enemy.

He was as merciful as valiant, (the best metal bends best) and left
impressions of both in all places where he came. Queen Eliz. Anno 1592.
honored him with the dignity of the Garter. When King James came first out of
Scotland to York, he attended him with such an equipage of Followers for number
and habit, that he seemed rather a King, than Earl of Cumberland. Here happened
a Contest between the Earl and the Lord President of the North, about carrying
the Sword before the King in York; which Office, upon due search and enquiry
was adjudged to the Earl, as belonging unto him: and whilst Clifford's Tower
is standing in York, that Family will never be therein forgotten. His Anagram
was as really as literally true: Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlandius.
Davidis regno clarus cum vi fulgebis.


He died Anno 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady Anne, married to
the Earl of Dorset.

This noble person taught the world, however others speak at pleasure, jussit
quod splendida bilis: That the Art of making War has not a positive form, and
that it ought to be diversified according to the state of Occurrences. They
that will commit nothing to Fortune, nor undertake any Enterprise whose event
appears not infallible, escape many dangers by their wary conduct, but fail
of as many successes by their unactive fearfulness. It Is useless to be too
wise, and spend that time in a grave gaze on business, that might serve the
speedy dispatch of it. Neither was our Peer great only in the achievements of
the Field to please higher spirits, but gaudy at Court to astonish and ravish
the lowest; making noble expenses when necessary, and appearing splendid on the
important occasions, whose principal quality resided in Magnificence. Yet was
he not transported with these appearances, or to make them the greatest
ornament of his conduct: the choicest expressions of his life, fixing neither
his greatness upon a transitory Pageant, nor his glory upon a fading Pomp. No
sullen opposer of the unavoidable occurrences of life; but a dexterous complier
with present exigencies, comparing those that swelled doggedly against
Providence, or the present state of affairs to King Canutus, who forbad the
unobservant waves of the Sea to flow no higher; and they that repined at and
spoke against it to Xerxes, who whipped the Hellespont.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho-Smith.
SIr Thomas Smith was born at Abington in Bark-shire, bred in the University of
Oxford: God and himself raised him to the Eminency he attained unto,
unbefriended with any extraction. He may seem to have had an ingenious
emulation of Sir Thomas Smith Senior, Secretary of State, whom he imitated in
many good qualities, and had no doubt equalled^in preferment, if not prevented
by death. He attained only to be Master of the Requests, and Secretary to King
James for his Latin Letters: higher places expecting him, when a period was
put at once to his life and to his hopes, November. 28. 1609. The generous piety
of the honorable Countess of Exeter having erected him one Monument at Fulham,
and his own worth another in History.

His Father died, when he was yet so young, that he knew not what a Father
meant: but his Mothers affection for her Husband dyed not with him; whereupon
she multiplied her cares on this Gentleman and her other Children so
abundantly, that a long while he little found the want of that dear name, her
transcendent love so well supplying the place of both relations: For no sooner
was he fit to learn, than she did by friends procure the best M^sters those
Times afforded, to render his education perfe^t in those exercises as well of
the mind as of the body, wherein they that flattered him not, would say he was
no ill Proficient: such majesty, such modesty in his carriage, that men would
admire how two such distant things could meet in one subject. His eye was quick
and piercing, his shape and motion charming; the air and lineaments of his
countenance lively arguments that his soul was not inferior to his body, --
but that the one promised no more pleasure to those that looked on it, than the
other did service to those that employed it: His mien deserving preferment from
the favor of a Sovereign, and his parts gaining it from his justice. Fortune
did him not so much wrong in his mean Birth, as he did himself right by great
merit, so worthy a Prince's service, and a Courts favor: He read and saw what
others did, but not with others apprehensions; his judgment of things being not
common, nor his observations low, flat, or vulgar, but such as became a breast
now furnishing it self for business and for government.

There was an ancient custom to celebrate the Anniversary of the King's
Coronation with all the Shows of Magnificence and joy which the Art or
Affections of the People could invent; and because we are esteemed the
Warlik'st Nation in the whole world, to continue that just regulation, we
declined all those effeminacies which are so predominant in other Courts, and
absolutely addicted our selves to such Martial exercises as are nothing less
pleasing and delightful than the other, and yet fit and prepare men more for
the real use of Arms, and acquisition of glory. Here our Knights praise came to
my Lord of Carlisle's notice, who first designed him a Commander; but finding
his Genius more courtly than Martial, more learned than active recommended him
to his Majesty's softer services, where none more obliging to the People by his
industry and interest at Court, none more serviceable to his Majesty by the
good name he gained in the Country: So careful was he of public content, that
from five to nine his Chamber was open to all Comers; where you would find him
with the one hand making himself ready, with the other receiving Letters; and
in all this hurry of Business, giving the most orderly, clear, and satisfactory
dispatches of any Statesman at that time. From nine to one he attended his
Master, to whom he had as easy access as he gave to his People. Two things set
him up; 1. A fair respect from his Master upon all occasions, and as fair a
treatment of the People: He had his distinct Classis of Affairs, and his
distinct Officers for those Classis: The order and method whereof incredibly
advanced his dispatch, and eased his burden; which took up his day so, that
there remained but some hours he stole from night and sleep, for his beloved
and dear Studies; and King James said, he was the hardest Student in White Hall
-- and therefore he did not always trouble his Master with business, but
sometimes please him with discourse. If Fortune had been as kind to him as
Nature, greater Employments had been at once his honor and his business: But
from all his services and performances, he derived no other advantage than the
acting of them; and at his death he left no other wealth behind him, but that
of a high reputation: never arriving at those enjoyments that enhance our
Cares, not having time to withdraw himself from those cares that take away the
relish of our enjoyments.

Observations on the Life of Sir Fulke Grevil.
SIr Fulk Grevil, Son to Sir Fulke Grevil the elder, of Becham Court in
Warwickshire, descended from Willoughby Lord Brook, and Admiral to Hen. 7.
was bred first in the University of Cambridge: He came to the Court, backed
with a full and fair Estate; and Queen Elizabeth loved such substantial
Courtiers as could plentifully subsist of themselves: He was a good Scholar,
loving much to employ (and sometimes to advance) learned men, to whom worthy
Bishop Ov^ral chiefly owed his Preferment; and Mr. Cam^den (by his own
confession) feasted largely of his Liberality. His studies were most in Poetry
and History, as his Works do witness: His style conceived by some to be
swelling, is allowed lofty and full by others. King James created him Baron
Brook of Beauchamp-Court, as descended from the sole Daughter and Heir of
Edward Willoughby, last Lord Brook, in the Reign of King Henry the 7th. His sad
death, or murder rather, happened on this occasion: His discontented servant
conceiving his deserts not soon, or well enough rewarded, wounded him mortally,
and then (to save the Law the labor) killed himself; verify^ng the
observation, that he may when he pleases be master of another man's life, who
contemns his own. He lies buried in Warwick Church under a Monument of black
and white Marble, whereon he is styled, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counselor
to King James, and Friend to Sir Philip Sidney.

Though a Favorite, he courts Ladies rather than Honor, and pursued his study
rather than his ambition, being more contemplative than active: Others
ministered to Queen Elizabeth's government, this Gentleman to her Recreation and
Pleasures: He came to Court when all men should, young, and stayed there until
he was old; his fortune being as smooth as his spirit, and the Queens favor as
lasting as his merit. He bred up Statesmen, but was none. Sir William Pickering
was like to have gained the Queens Bed by studying, Sir Philip Sidney had her
Heart for writing, and Sir Fulke Grevil had her favor for both: one great
argument for his worth, was his respect of the worth of others; desiring to be
known to posterity under no other notions than of Shakespeare's and Ben
Iohnson's Master, Chancellor Egerton's Patron, Bishop Overal's Lord, and Sir
Philip Sidney's Friend. His soul had the peace of a great fortune, joined to a
greater mind: His worth commended him to Majesty; his affableness indeared him
to the popularity: his mornings were devoted to his Books, his afternoons to
his knowing Friends, his nights to his debonair Acquaintance: He was the Queens
Counselor for persons, as others were for matters and things: Sweet was his
disposition, winning his converse, fluent his discourse, obliging his looks,
gestures, and expressions; public his spirit, and large his soul: his Genius
prompted him to prepare himself for Domestic services by Foreign employments,
but the great Mistress of her Subjects affections and duties forbad it, and his
own prudence checked it. So dear was he to the Queen, that when his horses were
shipped at Dover for the Netherlands, her Mandate by Sir Edward Dier stopped
him: When he went over with Walsingham, he was remanded; and when with
Leicester, he was checked: He was the exact image of action and quiet happily
united in him, seldom well divided in any. He would have acted his great
principles of Government, yet he could be confined only to write them. In his
book called, The Declination of Monarchs.
He could sit down with some Poetic and polite Characters of Virtue, when he
was debarred the real ^^ercises of it. He had kept Essex his head on, had not
that unhappy man's Parasites made the Earl deaf to his ^^^nsels, and his
Enemies removed him from his p^^^^nce, under a pretense of guarding the Seas
against his Enemies, while his Kinsman was betrayed by his Friends.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Cecil.
SIr Robert Cecil, since Earl of Salisbury, was the Heir of the Lord Burleigh's
prudence, the inheritour of his favor, and by degrees a Successor to his
places, though not to his Lands, for he was a younger Brother. He was first
Secretary of State, then Master of the Wards, and in the last of her Reign came
to be Lord Treasurer, all which were the steps of his Fathers greatness; and of
the honor he left to his house. For his person, he was not much beholding to
Nature, though somewhat for his face, which was the best part of his outside:
but for his inside, it may be said he was his Father's own son, and a pregnant
Proficient in all discipline of State. He was a Courtier from his Cradle, yet
at the age of twenty and upwards, he was much short of his after-proof; but
exposed, and by change of climate he showed what he was, and what he would be:
He lived in those times, wherein the Queen had most need and use of men of
weight; and amongst able ones, this was a chief, as having a sufficiency from
his instructions that begat him the Tutorship of the Times and Court, then the
Academy of Art and Cunning, ^ English prudence and Counsel was at the high^^^
as most exercised with Foreign dangers, and Domestic practices. Vast was his
apprehension, because so large his prospect; Sir Francis Walsingham having
opened the Conclave of Rome, and his Father the Cabals of Spain; insomuch that
he knew each design in both places, every Port, every Ship with the Burdens,
whither bound, what impediments, for diversion of Enterprises, Counsels, and
Resolutions, as appears by his private dispatches (as his manner was) with
those of the Council, one whereof to my Lord Mountjoy, since Earl of
Devonshire, with whom he seasonably closed, runs thus -- -- I must in private
put you out of doubt (for of fear I know you cannot be otherwise sensible than
in a way of honor) that the Spaniard will not come to you this year: Sir
Robert Naunton's Fragmenta.
for I have it from my own what preparations are in all Parts, and what he can
do: For be confident he bears up a reputation by seeming to embrace more than
he can gripe: but the next year be assured he will cast over unto you some
Forlorn-Hopes; which how they may be reinforced beyond his present ability,
and his first intention, I cannot as yet make any certain judgment: but I
believe out of my Intelligence, that you may expect their Landing at Munster;
and the more to distract you in several places, as at Kingsale, Beer-haven and
Baltimore, where you may be sure (coming from Sea) they will first fortify and
learn the strength of the Rebels before they dare take the Field.

This States man's character is engraven upon his honor, and his portraicture
drawn in his Patent for Earl of Salisbury; which to many formal words has
added these effectual expressions -- As also for his faithfulness,
circumspection, stoutness, wisdom, dexterity, providence and care not only in
the great and weighty Affairs of Counsel, but generally also in all other
Expeditions of the Realm.

And indeed not a man upon the Helm of this Commonwealth understood all points
of the Compass better than himself, who in a stayed and calm setledness looked
on the private designs that were promoted upon his Mistress declining, and
privately overthrowed them and their Masters, while in an uninterrupted course
of integrity toward his Mistress, and faithfulness to his Country, he kept
clear and succession, equally careful not to enjealous his present Mistress,
and not to obstruct his future Master, with whom he kept an honest
correspondence, although there goes this story of him, that a Post from
Scotland meeting her Majesty upon Greenwich-heath, Sir Robert Cecil in all have
would needs cut open the Packet, and pretending it stunk, had time to perfume
it [her Majesty being very curious in her smelling] and convey away his own
Letters: be this so or so, it is certain, that when assistant to the Earl of
Derby in his French Embassy, he promoted the young King of Scots interest
against his Mothers: when Sir Francis Walsingham's Colleague, he defeated her
Counsels against him; and when principal Secretary, he sounded, crossed, and
undid the little plot that was shrouded under the great name of Essex, turning
and winding, raising and ruining the Authors of it at his own pleasure. No
sooner was the Queen dead, than his Messenger was with the King at Edinburgh,
and he himself with his Favorite [Sir George Humes] at York; with whose
assistance, and honest Sir Roger Aston's mediation, King James makes him his
bosome-friend, his house [ Theobalds] his residence, and his account of the
English Laws, Government, and temper his rule: Finding him but Knight and
Secretary, he created him Baron of Essenden, Viscount Cranbourn, Knight of the
Garter, and Earl of Salisbury: He promoted him Master of the Wards and Lord
Treasurer; in all which capacities how vigilant he was against the Papists, and
their Plots, their Libels (which he answered in English and Adversus perduelles.
Latin very elegantly and wisely) demonstrate -- how careful of the public
Treasure, this Narrative shows.

King James had bestowed upon Sir Robert Carr twenty thousand pound: my Lord
apprehending the sum as more correspondent with his Master's goodness, than his
greatness, with the royalty of his heart, than the poverty of his Exchequer;
and observing his Majesty more careful of what money passed his own hands, than
what passed his servants, contrives that the good King should go through the
place where this great sum lay in silver to a treatment; where demanding whose
money it was, and being answered, that it was his own before he parted with it,
He understanding the design, protested he was cheated, and intended not above
five hundred pounds; and the Favorite was glad to make use of the Lord
Treasurers mediation for the moiety of that great sum. How industrious in the
improvement of his Masters Revenue, these particulars conel ^de, viz.

1. A survey of the Crown Lands, known before by report rather than by measure;
and let by chance, rather than knowledge. 2. A Revival of the Custody-lands
Revenue by Commissioners of Asserts. 3. A tarrier of Crown-wood-lands, their
growth and value; where he numbered, marked, and valued all the Timber hitherto
unknown. 4. The Commissioners he procured to look into Copy-hold-Lands, Wastes,
and Commons. 5. The Rules to forfeited Estates and extended Lands. 6. The
improvement of the Customs from 86000 to 135000 pounds per annum. 7. The
bargain about the London River-water. 8. The encouragement of all English
Inventions, Manufactures, and Trade, whereby the Subjects might be employed,
our Commodities enhanced, and our Treasure kept among our selves. 9. The
Plantations, and Transplantations in Ireland. And 10. The Reformation of the
Court of Wards in the point of disposing of Orphans.

These services advanced him to great honor, and to as great envy, the popular
effects whereof no man could have escaped but one whose soul was immovable,
temper, calm, thoughts deep, apprehensions large, and resolution great to
engage vulgar Errors rather by the greatness of his Actions, than the eminence
of his Interest -- And satisfy the world leisurely by his Virtues, and not awe
it rashly by his power; which got him even in that time St. Gregory's Encomium,
That he was the first bad, and the last good Treasurer since Queen Elizabeth's
Reign.

I shall never forget his, or his Fathers discourse with Claud Grollart primier
President of Roan, about the troubles in France, wherein he advis^d him to
stick fast to the King, though he saw difficulties: For it was his Maxim, That
Kings are like the Sun, and Usurpers like falling-Stars; For the Sun, though it
be ^ffuscated and eclipsed with Mists and clouds, at length they are dispersed;
where the others are but the figures of Stars in the eyes of view, and prove no
more but Exhalations, which suddenly dissolve, and fall to the earth, where
they are consumed: A discourse which events there and elsewhere made an Oracle.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham.
THe Lord Howard of Effingham, a man of most approved fidelity and invincible
courage, and Governor of Callice; though a Courtier betimes; yet seemed not to
be in favor before the Queen made him high Admiral of England. For his
extract, it may suffice that he was the son of a Howard, and of a Duke of
Norfolk. As for his person, he was as goodly a Gentleman as the times could
afford; he was one whom the Queen desired to honor, who at his return from
Cadiz accounts, was created Earl of N^ttingham. He was a good, honest, and a
brave man, and a faithful servant to his Mistress, and such a one as the Queen
out of her own Princely judgment knew to be a fit Instrument for the Admiral's
service, having a great opinion of his fidelity and ^onduct: And though his
death was not honored with much wealth, yet was it graced with the reputation
of honesty. Hs was ra^sed to check Essex his ambition, and Leicester^s
undermining, being equally popular, and honest, yet having those at his heels
that could lay a snare, and bring in the prize. Nature was a better friend to
him than Fortune, and his Integrity than both; which commended him to a
Mistress that understood Men as well as Books, and knew it was no less the
interest of Princes to take counsel concerning Persons, than concerning
matters: He had that goodness, without which man is a busy, mischievous, and
wretched thing; yet that wisdom whereby he was not so good (as the Italian
says) as to be good for nothing: He was gentle, but not easy; mild, but not
soft: obliging not the fancies of men, but their Interest: None more civil to
Strangers (his heart being not a narrow Island (as my Lord Bacon observes) but
a large Continent:) None more tender of Inferiors, none more humble to
Superiors; none more compassionate to the afflicted; none more loving to, or
more beloved of all. The Queen said, she trusted her Kingdom to his
faithfulness in 88. and her self to his conduct. His alliance to the Queen
brought him to Court, but his honesty kept him there (when jealousy had
overcast that great house of the Howards:) ancient Nobility was a good
recommendation to the Q^. first Favors; but modesty, submission, and integrity
were the Virtues that continued them: He had only so much Ambition as rendered
him active and serviceable, and not busy or dangerous: He knew a Nobleman
cannot be safely aspiring, nor smooth man securely popular, and a man of his
Retinue must not be busy. He lived in an age when all honor was perilous
that was not designed for service; when the State chose Ministers that were
more sensible of duty than of rising; that loved business rather upon
conscience than upon bravery, and when the Prince discerned a busy nature from
a willing mind: as the stone had need be rich that is set without foyl, so this
noble person, that was only real, had need of great parts of virtue. So valiant
he was, that he made the Spanish Fleet veil to him, though it carried the
Empress of Germany; so active, that he tugged at the Cabl^ himself in 88. and
did much by his own pains, and more by his example: so skilful, that he
contrived the Fireships that frighted and scattered the Spanish Navy. Two
eminent services he did the Protestant Religion when but twenty one years of
age: The first is, that he was so observant a witness of Archbishop Parker's
consecration, that with his bare word the tale of the Nags head came to
nothing. 2. That he was so close an Agent in the Court of France, that no
Design was brewed in Scotland, none seconded in France, but he with the
Emperor and the King of Spain's Ambassadors assistance [whom he had engaged
with the hope of a Match between the King of the Romans and his Mistriss]
discovered and defeated with that success, that the King of France courted his
Mistress to a Peace, and himself to Favor. None more careful in matter of
Business; none more splendid in business of Complement -- condoling King
Francis his death with a Majesty no less becoming the Personage he represented,
than the Prince he addressed himself to. 1. His providence in contriving the
English Ships nimble, and such as could tack about at pleasure. 2. His prudence
in not hazarding his weak Navy against the Spanish Army and Armado in an
Engagement wherein a victory would be but a little glory, and a defeat a ruin.
3. His activity in alarming the Spanish Navy day and night. 4. His wisdom in
honoring the most serviceable under him, as Hawkins, Forbisher, Sheffield,
etc. 5. His popularity that drew so many Volunteers to his service, as the
Earls of Oxford, Northumberland, Cumberland, the Cecils, etc. 6. His wariness
in dividing his fourteen Sail into four squadrons round about the Spanish Navy.
7. His excellent contrivance of eight Ships filled with pitch, wildfire,
rosin, etc. which sent down the wind in the dead of night so much to the
terror of the Spaniards, that fearing the Fire, together with some more deadly
Engines, they raised a pitiful cry, weighed Anchor, cut their Cables, and in a
terrible pannick Fear, with great have and confusion put to Sea. 8. His
admirable dexterity in disposing of the Navy, so as they met the Spanish Navy
upon their dispersion with such success, that the invincible Fleet never saw
again its own formidableness, ever since grown the most contemptible thing that
ever sailed upon these Seas. 9. His seasonable order to the Dutch Fleet to
watch the Duke of Parma in the Ports of Dunkirk and Newport. 10. His exact
intelligence, whereby he understood what a Controversy there was in the
Spanish Navy about this point, whether they should stick to their Commission in
staying for Parma, which was their duty, or follow the emergent advantages,
which had been their discretion, -- and dealt with them accordingly. These
grand particulars of this Noble-man's service were so eminent and signal, that
Queen Elizabeth, who was over-lavish neither of her honor nor her preferments,
would say commonly of him and those brave Heroes under him, That they were born
to save their Country.

This noble person was of greater experience than knowledge, and more beholding
to his years than to his Education, whence K. James took great pleasure in his
discourse, that was not morose, obstinate, narrow, unactive or formal, like a
Students harangues; but free, active, and ingenuous, like a States-man's
Maxims -- Whereof one was this; That never did Commander a noble Act that was
Commission-bound; it being a question, whether the Venetians and Spaniards lost
more at Sea and in the Netherlands before they discovered that Error, or gained
more since. For whilst we address our selves to the State, occasions are lost,
things take another countenance; and so many unexpected accidents happen, for
which sudden provision must be made, that opportunities escape before we dare
lay hold of them; and sometimes we perish for want of a Commission to save our
selves.

Great content did he give by his presence in the French Court 1605. and
greater in his carriage at the Prince Elector's Where he was Brid^ groom.
marriage, 1612. A prudent, care did he discover in providing for posterity by
the seasonable resignation of his Admiralty; a faithful friend he showed
himself in confirming Sir Robert Mansel's place when he parted with his own; a
great argument of his own worth and service, that he was so careful to reward
others.

Observations on the Life of Sir Geo. Hume, Earl of Dunbar.
NO wonder he is so great a Favorite of King James in his riper years, who was
so faithful a servant of his in his youth: trusted with his Royal secrets in
Scotland, and therefore in his Royal bosom in England. The natural
reservedness of all Scots-men, and the vast depth of this, are not more
necessary to all Princes, then they were pleasing to King James, who had no
secrecies that endangered his Privadoes, though many that tried them, and
particularly our Statesman, who had no hidden weakness to be overreached, nor
private Interest to be corrupted, but was a great Master of himself, owning a
reach not to be comprehended, and thoughts not to be fathomed, but by him whose
heart was as the sand of the Sea.

Exact was his correspondence with Sir Robert Cecil while in Scotland, and
intimate was their friendship in England; both extorting from each other those
observations touching their respective Countries, which they might both
communicate to His Majesty at their respective opportunities.

His Enterprises were well laid, but unsuccessful; rational, but unhappy: an
argument that Designs are only in our power, and Events in a higher. There was
not a man more noble and renowned, more com^ly and graceful, of more years and
experience [ Versatus, Versutus] of a greater estate or revenue; more liberal
and munificent, more accostable and courteous, more resolved and reserved (all
the qualities of a complete Ambassador) than the Earl of Dunbar when sent to
Germany; yet none more ineffectual, having gained no more by a tedious and
chargeable Negotiation, than as the Earl of Nottingham with his gallant Retinue
in Spain, that the Papists who were formerly persuaded by their Jesuits that
we were Monsters, do now believe we are Men; so useless was soft Courtship in
rough tumults, and so little heed was given to smooth complements in Arms an^
Uproars.

More happy was he in Scotland, where his prudence as Lord Treasurer, and his
Chaplain Doctor Abbots gravity as Preacher, reduced that Nation to so much
sobriety as to admit a regular Religion and Government; for which service he
had the Exchequer and the Wardrobe for himself, and the Archbishopric of
Canterbury for the Doctor; when the King was in a great straight between the
known merit of the incomparable Bishop Andrews, and the last request of dying
Sir George Hume; a great instance of King James his abilities in what Machiavel
calls a Princes Masterpiece, viz. the choice of Servants.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Somerset.
HIs extraction from Scotland put him in the way, his Education in England set
him in a capacity of Advancement. He was born seasonably when his Father served
him that should be a King of England; and brought up happily, when he might
please him that was so -- His beauty and comeliness took his Majesty; his parts
and prudence obliged him, who loved the Cabinet, but valued the Jewel: He was
admitted Page of honor to King James when of Scotland, and his Favorite when
of England: His Majesty's first observation of him was at a solemn Tilting;
where his delight in his person meeting with his pity of his mischance (I mean
the breaking of his leg there) first took him to his tuition, and then to his
Council. All King James his Favorites were of his own education, and so imbued
with his principles, and engaged to his interest. It was his Majesty's policy
to r^tain Scots Statesmen to balance the English; It was Somerset's prudence
to entertain English Favouries to endear the Scots; therefore Sir Tho. Overbury
was as much of his Council as he was of his Majesty's; too haughty a carriage
was the miscarriage of other Minions, too good a nature was ^is: His great
defect being that goodness and humanity that that knows no excess, but
error, which was rather a softness than a kindness: his heart was as large to
others, as his Masters was to him, and knew as little how to mistrust, as how
to do any thing for which he should be mistrusted. This is the Lesson he was
short in, That civilities should be common, but favors choice. The Whale is
steered at Sea by a far smaller Fish, and this Statesman at Court by far
meaner men than himself. I my self ( says an ingenious man) have known many so
far strangers to what was convenient, as they would scarce concede or deny any
thing out of the presence of their Secretary: and this proceeded not seldom
from a distrust there was no cause for; manifest in the Earl of Somerset, who
though himself owner of a competent sufficiency, was so enchanted with an
opinion of Sir Thomas Overbury's parts, that he preferred him from a Servant to
such an intimate friendship; as he could think nothing well educated for
employment in his Office, that had not passed his correction, nor secret laid
up but in his bosom; which swelled him (says he) to such a monstrosity in
pride, that I have heard (not being my self then near the English Court) how he
offered to rant at his servants, and did once beat his Coachman for putting his
commands under an inferior expostulation to his Master; and through this
intolerable arrogance in him, and remisness in the Earl, the sparks first
flew, that kindled the ruin of them both: Friendship being no more able to
maintain its interest against a feminine affection, than so great a pride was
to confine it self within the tedder of moderation. The greatest are not free,
but led in triumph by the affections of others, through the mediation of their
own. Sir Thomas Overbury would do what was most plausible, and the Earl must
perform what was less popular. The King trusted Carr with his Dispatches, and
Carr trusts Overbury a month together without examination, who had full
Commission to receive and answer any Letters or other Expresses that came to
his hands: Great opportunities offered themselves to Sir Robert Carr, and a
great Soul he had to observe them (Fortune being nothing else but an attentive
observation of the revolution of Affairs, and the occasions resulting
therefrom:) observant he was of his Master, who raised him not to eclipse
others, but like a brave Prince to ease himself. For Princes (to use my Lord
Bacon's words) being at too great a distance from their Subjects, to ease
themselves into their bosoms, raise some persons to be as it were participes
curam, or their Companions: but this Favorite understood as well the humor of
the People, as he did the disposition of his Prince, obliging the one no less,
than he pleased the other. Gay he was, as a Courtier, grave as a Counselor:
to Scholars none more civil, to Soldiers none more liberal; of Statesmen none
more respective: He had his extraordinary great Virtues upon occasions to show,
and his ordinary little ones always to oblige; a compleatness in all turns, and
upon all occasions was his nature. Familiar he was, yet not cheap; sociable
upon regard, and not upon facility: His behavior was his soul, free for any
exercise or motion; finding many, and making more opportunities to endear
himself: He broke his mind to small observations, yet he comprehended great
matters: His carriage was so exact, as if affected; and yet so graceful; as if
natural. That which overthrew the first, bewitched the wisest, and tired the
most patient man, undid this noble person: yet so regular were his affections,
that he did nothing publicly in the Countess of Essex, the Earl of Suffolk's
Daughters case, but by due course of Law, the approbation of the gravest and
wisest Divines and Counselors, and the Witness his entertainment at London.
applause of England: his failings were the faults of his years, rather than of
his person, of his sudden fortune, than of his constant temper; his counsels
were safe and moderate; his public actions honest and plain; his first years
of favor industrious and active; his mind noble and liberal. His soul
capacious and inquisitive; his temper yielding and modest. In a word, Sir
Robert Carr deserved to be a Favorite, if he had not been one. -- He fell
because he meddled too little with the Secretaries place while in it, and too
much when out of it; giving Overbury too much scop^ on the one hand to mate
him, and Sir Ralph Winwood too much offense to undermine him: who finding that
new Earls occasions growing with his advancements (I say his occasions, because
I think his miscarriages were not his nature, but his necessity) apt to
encroach upon his and other Court-Offices, gave ear to that Intelligence from
Flushing that might ruin him, and set free himself.

The first Intimation of his guilt was his earnestness for a general Pardon;
and the first argument of it was my Lord Chancellor's scruples in sealing it:
whence I date his first declining, attended with as much pity as his first
advancement was with envy. We and the Troglodites curse not the Sunrising more
heartily, than we worship it when it sets. The Gentleman was as to his stature
rather well compacted than tall; as to his features and favor, comely, rather
than beautiful. -- The hair of his head was flaxen, and that of his face
yellow: His nature was gentle, his disposition affable, ^^s affections public,
until a particular person and interest engrossed them: and the good Gentleman
being sensible of failers that might ruin him, was wholly intent upon a
treasure that might preserve him: -- His defect was, that he understood only
his own age; and that the experience of man's life cannot furnish examples and
presidents for the events of one man's life.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Abbot.
GEorge Abbot being one of that happy Ternion of Brothers, whereof two were
eminent Prelates, the third Lord Mayor of London, was bred in Oxford, wherein
he became Mr. of University-Colledge; a pious man, and most excellent Preacher,
as his Lectures on Jonah do declare. He did first creep, then run, then fly
into Preferment, or rather Preferment did fly upon him without his
expectation. He was never incumbent on any Living with cure of Souls, but was
mounted from a Lecturer to a Dignitary; so that he knew the Stipend and
Benevolence of the one, and the Dividend of the other, but was utterly
unacquainted with the taking of Tithes, with the many troubles attending it,
together with the causeless molestations which Parsons presented meet with in
their respective Parishes. And because it is hard for one to have a
Fellow-suffering of that, whereof he never had a suffering; this (say some) was
the cause that he was so harsh to Ministers when brought before him.

Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar, then omni-prevalent with King James, he
was unexpectedly preferred Archbishop of Canterbury, being of a more Fatherly
presence than those, who might almost have been his Fathers for age in the
Church of England. There are two things much charged upon his memory; First,
That in his house he respected his Secretary above his Chaplains; and out of
it, always honored Cloaks above Cassocks, Lay above Clergymen. Secondly, That
he connived at the spreading of Nonconformity, insomuch that a Modern Author
said, Had Bishop Laud succeeded Bancroft, and the project of Conformity been
followed without interruption, there is little question to be made, but that
our Jerusalem (by this time) might have been a City at unity within it self.


This Archbishop was much humbled with a casual Homicide of a Keeper of the
Lord Zouch's in Bramel-Park, though soon after he was solemnly quitted from any
irregularity thereby. In the Reign of King Charles he was sequestered from his
Jurisdictions, say some, on the old account of that Homicide, though others
say, for refusing to License a Sermon of Dr. Sirpthorps. Yet there is not an
Express of either in the Instrument of Sequestration, the Commission only
saying in the general, That the Archbishop could not at that present in his
own Person attend those Services which were otherwise proper for his Cognizance
and Jurisdiction.

To say the truth, he was a man of good intentions, and knew much, but failed
in what those ordinarily do that are devoted to our modern singularities, being
extremely obstinate in his opinions, which the King was more willing to
understand than follow, because most times he looked upon things according to
the rigor of Ecclesiastic maxims, and was either too curious and irresolute
by variety of reading, or too peremptory and positive from the strictness of
his Rules; or too zealous by reason of the seriousness of his Study; or wide
from the matter, by reason of his inexperience, and aptness to require in the
times he lived, the regularity of the times he read of heeding not the force of
Circumstances, the errors of Comparison, or the cautions of Application. I like
his Apology for his severity to the Clergy (that he was austere to prevent
others being cruel) as well as his zeal for the Protestant Religion; only his
Principles betrayed his profession, which he rendered too obnoxious, while he
supported it by those novel grounds which our Adversaries could make us confess
were Heterodox, and by those streight-laced foundations which we saw our selves
too narrow. As for instance, King James his vast capacity took him up once for
making the Scripture the only rule of Civil Affairs; owning the piety, but
observing to his face the imprudence of that assertion. Imprudence, I say, as
for many reasons, so for this, because to assert a truth upon a weak principle,
is to tempt the world to doubt of the strength of the first, when they see the
weakness of the other. Whether he went off in discontent, and said, He would
not attend at the Councel-Table, because he should not wait at the Altar:
Whether he had such malignant followers as called themselves Nicodemites, or
Night-Disciples: Whether he turned noonday into midnight; and midnight into
noonday, having a candle always burning in his Chamber; or if so, for what
reason, I would not have one of my years determine, but rather refer the
present age to his Contemporaries pen, which describes him thus;

A very learned man he was; his Erudition all of the old stamp, fitly
principled in the Doctrine of S. Augustine, pious, grave, and exemplary in his
Conversation: But some think him a better man than Archbishop, and that he was
better qualified with merit for the Dignity, than with a spirit answering the
Function; in the exercise whereof he was conceived too facile and yielding: his
extraordinary remisness in not exacting strict Conformity to the prescribed
Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to resolve those legal
Determinations to their first Principle of Indifference, and led in such an
habit of Inconformity, as the future reduction of those tender-conscienced men
to long discontinued obedience, was interpreted an innovation; as if he thought
it might fall out in Politics as it does sometimes in Physic, bina venena
juvant, that the two contrary poisons of Superstition and Innovation might
prove a Cordial to the Church --

Observations on the Life of Sir George Calvert.
SIr George Calvert was bred first in Trinity-Colledge in Oxford, and then
beyond the Seas. His Abilities commended him first to be Secretory to Robert
Cecil Earl of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterward he was made
Clerk of the Council, and at last principal Secretary of State to King James,
succeeding Sir T^o. Lake in that Office, Anno 1619.

H. Holland, p. 39.
Conceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental in his preferment, he
presented him with a Jewel of great value; which the Duke returned him again,
not owning any Activity in his Advancement, whom King James, ex mero motu,
reflecting on his Abilities, designed for the Place. This Place he discharged
five years, until he willingly resigned the same, 1624. on this occasion; He
freely confessed himself to the King, that he was then become a Roman
Catholic, so that he must either be wanting to his Trust, or violate his
conscience in discharging his Office. This his Ingenuity so highly affected
King James, that he continued him Privy-Councellor all his Reign, and soon
after created him Lord Baltemore of Baltemore in Ireland.

During his being Secretary, he had a Patent to him and his Heirs to be
Absolutus Dominus and Proprietarius, with the Royalties of a Count Palatine of
the Province of Avalon in the Newfound land, a place so named by him in
imitation of old Avalon in Somersetshire, wherein Glassenbury stands, the
first fruits of Christianity in Britain, as the other was in that part of
America. Here he built a fair house in Ferry-land, and spent twenty five
thousand pounds in advancing the Plantation thereof.

Indeed his public spirit consulted not his private profit, but the
enlargement of Christianity, and the Kings Dominions, in that his ancient,
primitive, and heroic work of planting the world. After the death of King
James he went twice in person to Newfound land. Here when Mounsieur de l'
Arade with three men of War sent from the King of France, had reduced our
English Fishermen to great extremity; this Lord with two Ships manned at his
own charge, chased away the Frenchmen, relieved the English, and took sixty of
the French Prisoners. He removed afterward to Virginia to view those parts,
and thence cam^ into England, and obtained of King Charles the first (who had
as great an esteem of, and affection for him, as King James) a Patent to him
and his Heirs for Maryland on the North of Virginia, with the same Title and
Royalties conferred on him, as in Avalon aforesaid, now a hopeful Plantation,
peopled with eight thousand English Souls; which in process of time may prove
more advantageous to our Nation.

Judge Popham and Sir George Calvert agreed not more unanimously in the public
design of Planting, than they differed in the private way of it: the first was
for extirpating Heathens, the second for converting them. -- He sent away the
lewdest, this the soberest people: the one was for present profit, the other
for a reasonable expectation (it being in the case of planting Countries, as in
that of planting Woods; you must account to lose almost twenty years profit,
and expect your recompense in the end; it being necessary the Province should
first find her self, and then enrich you.) The Judge was for many Governors,
the Secretary for few, and those not concerned Merchants, but unconcerned
Gentlemen: The one granted Liberties without any restraint, the other with
great caution: The first set up a common Stock, out of which the Island should
be provided for by proportions; the second left every one to provide for
himself.

Two things are eminent in this man: 1. That though he was a Catholic, yet
kept he himself sincere and disingaged from all Interests; and though a man of
great judgment, yet not obstinate in his sentiments, but taking as great
pleasure in hearing others opinions, as in delivering his own, which he heard
moderated and censured with more patience, than applauded. 2. That he carried a
digested and exact account of Affairs to his Master every night, and took to
himself the pains to examine the Letters which related to any Interest that
might be any ways considerable. He was the only Statesman, that being engaged
to a decryed party, yet managed his business with that huge respect for all
sides, that all who knew him, applauded him; and none that had any thing to do
with him, complained of him.


Observations on the Life of Sir Arthur Chichester.
SIr Arthur Chichester spent his youth, first in the University, then in the
French and Irish Wars, where by his valor he was effectually assistant^ First,
to plough and break up that barbarous Nation by Conquest, and then to sow it
with seeds of civility, when by King James made Lord Deputy of Ireland.

Indeed good Laws and Provisions had been made by his Predecessors to that
purpose: but alas, they were like good Lessons set for a Lute out of tune,
useless, until the Instrument was fitted for them. Wherefore in order to the
civilizing of the Irishry, in the first year of his government, he established
two new Circuits for Justices of Assize, the one in Connaught, the other in
M^nster. And whereas the Circuits in former times only encompassed the English
Pale (as the Cynosura does the Pol^) hence forwards like good Plane^s in their
several Spheres, they carried the influence of Justice round about the Kingdom.
Yea, in short time Ireland was so cleared of Thieves and capital Offenders,
that so many Malefactors have not been found in the 32 Shires of Ireland, as in
six English Shires in the Western Circuits. He reduced the Mountains and
Glinnes on the So^th of Dublin (formerly thorns in the side of the English
pale) into the County of Wicklow; and in conformity to the English (...)om,
many Irish began to cut their Mantles into Cloaks. So observant was his eye
over the actions of suspected persons, that Tyrone, was heard to complain, That
he could not drink a full carouse of Sack, but the S^ate within few hours was
advertised thereof.

After he had been continued many years in his Deputyship, and deservedly made
a Lord, King I^mes recalled him home, and (loath to leave his Abilities
unemployed) sent him Ambassador to the Emperor and other German Princes. Being
^e^ieged in the City of Mainchine (a place much indebted to his prudence for
seasonable victualling it) by Count Tilley, he sent him word, that it was
against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassador: Tilley returned that he
took no notice that he was an Embas^ad^t. The Lord Chichester replied to the
Messenger, Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he has sent me
on fruitless M^ss^ges, your General should have known, that I had ^^en ^
So^dier, ^as well as an Ambassador. King I^mes^ at his return entertained him
with great commendations, for so well discha^ging his Trust; and he died in as
great honor as any Englishman of our Age. Thus far the Historians. Whence I
observe him stout in his nature above any disorder upon Emergencies, Domanda
assai, chen^n Mancherapoi calare. Proverb. ^ip. apud Insi^. D. (...) de legat^^.
resolved in his temper above any impressions from other Princes, and high in
his Proposal beyond the expectation of his own. Alv^rgonzoto el Diablo le traxo
al Palacio, The Devil brought the Bashful to Court, where none succeeds but he
who can ask enough to be granted, and enough to be Domanda assai, chen^n
Mancherapoi calare. Proverb. ^ip. apud Insi^. D. (...) de legat^^.
abated. There is a memorable observation of Philip the second, King of Spain,
called El prudente; That when (...) had designed one for Ambassador, the man
came faintly and coldly to him to propose some things for the accommodation of
his Embassy; and he said, How can I expect that this man can promote and
effectuate my business, when he is so faint and fearful in the solicitation of
his own?

Yet was not my Lord Chichester more resolute in Germany, than wary in Ireland,
where his opinion was, that time must open and facilitate things for
Reformation of Religion, by the Protestant Plantations; by the care of good
Bishops and Divines, the amplification of the College, the education of Wards,
an insensible seizure of Popish liberties. etc. and that the Council there was
so numerous (fifty or sixty at least) that the authority of it was debated, and
its business divulged. In a word, this brave Gentleman had an equal mind, that
kept up it self between the discourses of Reason, and the examples of
Histories, in the enjoyment of a good fortune, and a conflict with a bad.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chancellor Egerton.
THe Lord Chancellor Egerton, extracted from the ancient Family of the
Egerton's of Kidley in Cheshire, was bred in the study of the Municipal Laws of
our Land, wherein he attained to such eminency, that Queen Elizabeth made him
her Solicitor, then Master of the Rolls, and at last Keeper of the Great Seal,
May 6. in the 38 year of her Reign, 1596.

Olaus Magnu^ reports, that the Emperor of Moscovia at the Audience of
Ambassadors, sende^h for the gravest and seemliest men in Mosco and the
Vicinage, whom he apparelleth in rich Vests; and placing them in his presence,
pretends to For^aigners, that these are of his Privy Council; who cannot but
be much affected with so many reverent Aspects. But surely all Christendom
afforded not a person which carried more gravity in his countenance and
behavior than Sir Thomas Egerton, insomuch that many have gone to the Chancery
on purpose only to see his venerable Garb (happy they who had no other
business) and were highly pleased at so acceptable a spectacle. Yet was his
outward Case nothing in comparison of his inward Abilities, quick Wit, solid
Judgment, ready Utterance. I confess Master Cambden says, he entered his
Office Magna expectatione and integritatis opinione, with a great expectation
and opinion of Integrity: But no doubt, had he revised his work in a second
Edition, he would have afforded him a full-faced commendation, when this Lord
had turned his expectation to performance. In the first of King James, of Lord
Keeper he was made Lord Chancellor, which is also another name for the same
Office: and on Thursday the seventh of November, 1616. of Lord Elismer he was
created Viscount Brackley. It is given to Courts whose Jurisdictions do border,
to fall out about their bounds; and the contest betwixt them is the hotter, the
higher the spirits and parts of the respective Judges. Great was the contention
for many years together betwixt this Lord of Equity, and Sir Edward C^^ke the
Oracle of Justice at Westminster Hall: I know not which of them got the better;
sure I am such another Contest would (if this did not) have undone the
Conqueror.

He was attended on with servants of most able parts, and was the sole
Chancellor since the Reformation, who had a Chaplain, which (though not
immediately) succeeded him in his place. H^ gave over his Office which ^he held
full twenty years, some few days before his death; and by his own appointment,
his body was brought down and buried at Duddleston in Cheshire, leaving a fair
estate to his Son, who was afterward created Earl of Bridgewater, as he did to
his excellent Son now living.

When he saw King James his munificence to some Courtiers, with the grave
Fidelity of a Statesman, he sticked not often to tell him, That as he held it
necessary for his Majesty amply to rem^nerate all those his Contrymen, so he
desired him carefully to preserve his Crown lands, for his own support, seeing
he or his Successors might meet with Parliaments which would not supply his
occasions, but on such conditions as would not be very acceptable unto him. It
was an ordinary speech in his mouth to say, Frost and Fraud both end in Foul.

His plain, but honest advice to my Lord of Essex was, 1. Not to trust himself,
because they that stand by, see more than they that play the game. 2. To yield
to Time and Fortune, and not do that for his Enemies, which they could never do
for themselves. 3. To have a careful eye upon those actions on which he knew
there were many envious ones. And for himself, his supplication to King James
was, That since his conceit and sense was grown so heavy, his Memory decayed,
his Judgment weak, his Hearing imperfect, and his Voice faltering, he might
desinere potius quam deficere, and retire from his Business to his Meditation,
as he did; while living, imparting many mysteries of the Chancery; and when
dying, bequeathing as many choice Books and Directions to his then Chaplain,
and his after-Successor Doctor Williams. -- Secretary Winwood having received
the Seal, and left this gracious Message with this good man, that his Majesty
would be his Under-keeper, and not dispose of it while he lived to bear the
name of Chancellor: nor did any receive the Seal out of the Kings sight, while
he lived to bear the name of Chancellor.


A company of Citizens got a Cause passed by keeping a Witness away in this
manner; one of them gets him to the Tavern, and there leaves him with a quart
of Sack before him, and the glass at his mouth, and swears in open Court, that
he left him in a condition, wherein if he continues but two hours, he is a
dead man. The other Party find out the cheat, and have their remedy in
Chancery: Sir Edward Cook brings the matter to the Star Chamber, and threatens
the Chancellor with a P^emu^nire. The business is debated, and sentence passed
for my Lord Chancellor; with the comfort whereof, and the Kings and Princes
Letter to him upon his Deathbed, he went to his Grave.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief-Iustice Popham.
SIr John Popham in his youthful days was a stout and skilful man at Sword and
Buckler as any in that Age, and wild enough in his Recreations. But oh! says
my Author, if Quicksilver could be really fixed, to what a treasure would it
amount? Such is wild youth seriously reduced to gravity, as by this young^ man
did appear, who applied himself to a more profitable Fencing, the study of the
Laws; therein attaining to such eminency, that he became the Queen^ Attorney,
afterward Lord Chief Justice of E^gland. Being sent Anno 1600. by the Queen
with some others to the Earl of Essex, to know the cause of the confluence of
so many Military men unto his house, the Soldiers therein detained him for a
time, which some made tantamount to an Imprisonment. This his violent detention
Sir John deposed upon his Oath at the Earl's Trial: which I note the rather,
for the rarity thereof, that a Lord Chief Justice should be produced as Witness
in open Court.

In the beginning of the Reign of King Iame^, his justice was exemplary on
Thieves and Robbers. The Land then swarmed with people which had been Soldiers,
who had never gotten (or e^se quite forgotten) any other Vocation. Hard it was
for Peace to feed all the idle mouths which a former War did breed, being too
proud to beg, too lazy to labor: Those infested the Highways with their
Fellonies; some presuming on their multitudes, as the Robber on the Northern
Rode, whose knot otherwise not to be untied) Sir John cut asunder with the
Sword of Justice. He possessed King James, how the frequent granting of Pardons
was prejudicial to Justice, rendering the Judges to the contempt of insolent
Malefactors; which made his Majesty more sparing afterward in that kind. In a
word, the deserved death of some scores, preserved the lives and livelihoods of
some thousands: Travelers owing their safety to this Judges severity, many
years after his death. Neither did he only punish Malefactors, but provide for
them; for observing that so many suffered and died for none other reason but
because they could not live in England, now grown too populous for it is self,
and breeding more Inhabitants than it could keep, he first set up the discovery
of New England, to maintain and employ those that could not live honestly in
the old; being of opinion, that banishment thither would be as well a more
lawful, as a more effectual remedy against those extravagancies; the Authors
whereof judge it more eligible to hang, than to work; to end their days in a
moment, than to continue them in pains: -- only a great Judgment observes, it
is a shameful and an unblessed thing, to take the scum of people and wicked
condemned men to be the people with whom to plant: And not only so, but it
spoyleth the Plantation, for they will ever live like Rogues, and not fall to
work, and do mischief, and spend Victuals, and be quickly weary, and then
certify over to the Country, to the disgrace of the Commonwealth.

Observations on the Life of Sir Robert Dudley.
SIr Robert Dudley, son to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, by Douglas Shefield
(whether his Mistress or his Wife, God knows) was born at Shene in Surrey, and
bred by his Mother (out of his Fathers reach) at Offington in Sussex, where he
became a most complete Gentleman in all suitable Accomplishments, endeavoring
in the Reign of King James to prove his Legitimacy; and meeting with much
opposition from the Court, in distaste, he left his Land, and went over into
Italy. But worth is ever at home, and carries its own welcome along with it.
Therefore he became a Favorite to the Duke of Florence, who highly reflected
on his Abilities, and used his Directions in all his Buildings. At this time
Legorn from a Child, started to a Man, without ever being a youth, and of a
small Town grew a great City on a sudden, and is much-beholding to this Sir
Robert for its Fairness and Firmness, as chief contriver of both. But by this
time his Adversaries in England had procured him to be called home by a special
Privy Seal; which he refused to obey, and thereupon all his Lands in England
were seized upon by the King, by the Statute of Fugitives. These losses doubled
the love of the Duke of Florence unto him. And indeed Sir Robert was a
much-meriting person on many Accounts, being an Excellent
1 Mathematician, especially for the Practical part thereof in Architecture. 2
Physician, his Catholic^n at this day finding good Esteem amongst those of that
Faculty. 3 Navigator, especially in the Western Seas.


Indeed long before his leaving of England, whilst as yet he was Rectus in
Curi^, well esteemed in Queen Elizabeth's Court, he sailed with three small
Ships to the Isle of Trinidad, in which voyage he sunk and took nine Spanish
Ships; whereo^ one an Armada of 600 Tun.

He was so acceptable to Ferdinand the second, Emperor of Germany, that by his
Letters Patents bearing date at Vienna, March 9^ 1620. he conferred on him and
his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the Sacred Empire. Understand it a Title at
large (as that of Count Arundel's) without the Assignation of any proper Place
unto him.

King James had heard s^ much of the Father, that he did not care for the Son,
who might have been near his Person, had not his Ancestors been so near ^his
Predecessors -- no other Considerations being likely to keep so extraordinary
parts at this distance from a King that valued them so highly, or a Kingdom
that needed them so much. -- That Prince being as jealous an observer of
Original sin in Policy, as he was an Orthodox Assertor of it in Religion, would
trust no tainted blo^d. He writ an excellent discourse of Religion as the blind
Senator in Juvenal made a large Encomium of the goodly Turbet which lay before
Caesar, but as ill luck would have it, turned himself quite the contrary way;
at illi d^xtra j^c^bat bellua, a man right of Chrysippus his temper, who
sometimes wanted Opinions; but never Arguments, which he managed all ways with
contempt of, and opposition to the School-way, which going the distinctest way
to state^ went the nearest way to end controversies, but was slighted by him as
unintelligible, because it had been passed by him as unstudied, as the old
Woman in Seneca, complained that the Room was dark, when only her Eyes were so,
and his new (...) wherein he made his private and crazy judgment the Standard
and Seal of common truth, took a little with men's first thoughts, but lost
themselves with their wiser, and second, like the Log in the Fable which
terrified the poor Frogs with the noise it made at the first falling of it into
the waters, but afterward they insulted over it, and took their turns to leap
upon it. When I consider Metiochus his carriage in Plutarc, and Sir Robert's
Character in Florence, haec a se non multum abludit imago: Metiochus is
Captain, Metiochus is Surveyor, Metiochus bakes the Bread, Metiochus grinds the
Corn, Metiochus does all; right one of AEsop's fellows, that could say and do
all things; so that others need say and do nothing, a very happy man if while
living he had deserved the Character idle Vaccia had when dead. Hic situs est
Vaccia, here lies Vaccia.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Bancroft.
DOctor Richard Bancroft, (whom his Adversaries character a better Statesman
than Divine, a better Divine than Preacher, though upon good occasion he showed
he was all these) was bred in Jesus College in Cambridge, where his parts in
discovering the bottom of Presbytery, and his sufficiency when his Patron
Hatton's Examiner commended him to Queen Eliz. to be Bishop of London, and to
King James to be Archbishop of Canterbury. Indeed he was in effect Archbishop
while Bishop, to whom Doctor Whitgift in his decrepit age remitted the managing
of matters, so that he was the soul of the High Commission. A great Statesman
he was, and grand Champion of Church Discipline; having well hardened the hands
of his Soul, which was no more than needed for him, who was to meddle with
Nettles and Briars, and met with much opposition.

No wonder if those who were silenced by him in the Church, were loud against
him in other places. Psa. 104.3.
David speaks of poison under men's lips; This Bishop tasted plentifully
thereof from the mouths of his Enemies, till at last (as Mithridates) he was so
habited to poisons, that they became food unto him. Once a Gentleman coming to
visit him, presented him a Libel, which he found pasted on his door; who being
nothing moved thereat, said, Cast it to an hundred more which lie here on a
h^ap in my Chamber. Many a Libel, ( Lie) (because false) ( Bell) because loud)
was made upon him. The aspersion of covetousness, though cast, does not stick
on his memory, being confuted by the Estate which he left, small in proportion
to his great preferment, being but 6000 l. after being above twelve years in
London and Canterbury.

He cancelled his first Will, wherein he had bequeathed much to the Church:
suspecting an impression of popular violence on Cathedrals, and fearing an
Alienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to cancel his own,
to prevent others cancelling his Testament. This partly appears by his second
Will, wherein he gave the Library at Lambeth (the result of his own, and three
Predecessors collections) to the University of Cambridge (which now they
possess) in case the Arch-Episcopal See should be extinct.

How came such a jealousy into his mind? what fear of a storm when the Sun
shined, the Sky clear, no appearance of Clouds? Surely his skill was more than
ordinary in the complexion of the Commonwealth, who did foresee what afterward
(for a time) came to pass. This clause providentially inserted, secured this
Library in Cambridge during the vacancy of the Archi-Episcopal see, and so
prevented the embezelling, at the least the dismembring thereof, in our late
civil distempers.

They that accuse this excellent Prelate of cruelty, never read this story: A
Ministe^ privately protested to him, that it went against his conscience to
conform. Which way said the good Archbishop (observing the man's ingenuity)
will you live, if you be put out of your Benefice? The other answered, He had
no other way but to g^ a begging. Not so (said the Archbishop) that you shall
not need to do, but come to me, and I will take order for your maintenance.

They that exclaimed against his unserviceableness, never observed this
passage: A company of young Courtiers appeared extraordinary gallant at a
Tilting, far above their Fortunes and Estates, giving for their Motto, Solvat
Ecclesia. Bishop Bancroft then of London hearing of it, finds on enquiry that
the Queen was passing a considerable parcel of Church Lands to them, and stops
the business with his own and his friends Interest, leaving these Gallants to
pay the shot of their pride and prodigality out of their own purses. -- And
this; that a prevalent Courtier had swallowed up the whole Bishopric of
Durham, had not this Archbishop seasonably interposed his power with King
James (ready enough to admit such Intercessions) and dashed the design. They
that traduce him for a Papist, forget that he fomented the difference between
the Seculars, and Regulars, to the weakening, and promoted the foundation of
Chelsey-Colledge, to the ruining of that cause.

But they that perform great actions, reserving as it is fit the reason of them
in their own bosoms, may sufficiently satisfy their Consciences toward God,
though they can hardly avoid the censures of men.

I shall add no more concerning this excellent Prelate, but that it was
observed as the Historian writes, That at Hampton-Court-Conference Archbishop
Whitgift spoke most gravely, Bishop Bilson most learnedly, but Bishop Bancroft
[when out of passi^n] most politickly.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Grandison.
SIr Oliver Saint-Iohn, Lord Grandison, etc. descended of an ancient and
honorable Family, whose prime Seat was at Lediard-Tregoze in Wiltshire, though
their first settlement was in South Wales. He was bred in the Wars from his
youth, and at last by King James was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
vigorously pursued the Principles of his Predecessors for the civilizing
thereof. Indeed the Lord Mountjoy reduced that Country to obedience, the Lord
Chichester to some civility, and this Lord Grandison first advanced it to
considerable profit to his Master. T. Walsingham In the life of Richard the
second.
writes, that Ireland afforded unto Edward the third thirty thousand pounds a
year paid into his Exchequer: but it appears by the Sir John Davies in Disc. of
I^eland, p. 39, etc.
Irish Records (which are rather to be believed) that it was rather a burden,
and the constant Revenue thereof beneath the third part of that proportion.

But now, the Kingdom being peaceably settled, the income thereof turned to good
Account, so that Ireland (called the Land of Ire for the constant broils
therein for four hundred years) was now become the Land of Concord.

This noble Person recalled into England, lived many years in great repute,
leaving his Honors to his Sisters son by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main of
his Estate to his Brothers son Sir John St. John Knight and Baronet. So sweet
and charming his Conversation, that he was beloved by all his Superiors, and
envied by no Inferior; being never advanced to any great Dignity, but he was
wished to a greater: So exact his vigilance, so constant his industry, so
plausible his actions, attended with no less civility to all men, than duty to
his Sovereign: So frank and ingenious his Integrity, that none feared him; so
discreet his management of Business, and so strong his judgment, that any
might confide in him. One he was that crossed the Italian Proverb, Di Dunaridi
senno, e di feed,
In e Mancho che non Creed:
having more money, more faith, yea and more wisdom too than was generally
esteemed. I mean wisdom of behavior, wisdom of business, and wisdom of State;
in the last whereof he aimed at a general settlement, which he observed would
bear particular errors, provided that Care, Labor, Vigilance, and prudent
inquiet^de attended, that forces Difficulties, constrains Fortune, assures
good Counsels, corrects bad, supports and overthrows designs, disposes of
accidents, abserveth time, manageth hazards, forgets nothing; seldom trusts
others, and improveth all Occurrents: and that first maxim of Policy he
observed, That who lays out most, lays out least, that petty frugalities
undo the main Interest.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Overbury.
SIr Thomas Overbury, son to Sir Nicholas Overbury, one of the Judges of the
Marches, was born at Burton on the Hill in Gloucestershire, bred in Oxford, and
attained to be a most accomplished Gentleman, partly at Grayes-Inn, and partly
in France; which the happiness of his Pen both in Poetry and Prose does
declare. In the later he is observed to be the first writer of Characters of
our Nation. But if the great parts of this Gentleman were guilty of Insolence
and Petulancy, which some since have charged on his memory; reporting of him,
that he should say, Somerset owed his advancement to him, and that he should
walk with his hat on before the queen; we may charitably presume, that his
reduced age would have corrected such Juvenile extravagancies. It is
questionable, whether Robert Carr Earl of Somerset were more in the favor of
King James, or this Sir Thomas Overbury in the favor of the Earl of Somerset,
until he lost it by dissuading that Lord from keeping company with a Lady (the
Wife of another person of honor) as neither for his credit here, or comfort
hereafter. Soon after Sir Thomas was by King James designed Ambassador for
Russia. His false friends persuaded him to decline the Employment, as no better
than an honorable Grave. Better lie some days in the Tower, than more months
in a worse Prison; A ship by Sea, and a barbarous cold Country by Land.
Besides, they possessed him, that within a small time, the King should be
wrought to a good opinion of him. But he that willingly goes into a Prison, out
of hope to come easily out of it, may stay therein so long, till he be too late
convinced of another Judgment. Whilst Sir Thomas was in the Tower, his
Refusal was presented to the K. as an Act of high Contempt, as if he valued
himself more than the Kings service. His strict restraint gave the greater
liberty to his enemies to practice his death, 1615. which was by poison
performed: Yet was his blood legally revenged, which cost some a violent, and
others a civil death, as deprived of their Offices. The Earl was soon abated in
King James his affection (Oh! the short distance betwixt the cooling and
quenching of a Favorite) being condemned, and banished the Court.

Exact are the remarks he drew up of Foreign Countries, and therefore no less
such his transactions for his own. In this most esteemed with King James and
his Master, that he suited both their Genius's in the easy and clear method,
wherein he expressed the most difficult and knotty Affairs; for they both being
perplexed with that variety of Affairs in general, that they could not readily
look into difficult Cases in particular, loved those that made things out easy
and clear to them, as well fitted for their apprehensions, as obvious to their
judgment -- owning a Soul so quiet, that abate its youthful extravagancies, it
knew not a motion but what was Duty and Interest; felt no agitation but what
was reason, and what Philosophy conveyed into the souls of the wisest, and
observation in^n^ated into the spirit of the closest: if he expect^d a
recompense suitable to his services, or an acknowledgment answerable to his
merit, he understood not the humor and nature of mankind, the interest of
F^vourites, or his o^n Parts, too guilty of rep^t^tion to be advanced, and of
power not to be suppressed. -- It Is M^chi^vel's rule; That they who rise very
high, should desce^d timely, and q^it the envy, lest they lose the honor of
their gre^tness. Although this Gentleman's skill in accommodating Factions, in
the Art of Negotiation, in the charm o^ Language, in the I^terest of Princes,
in maste^ing his o^n Resentments as well as his Enemies that provok^d him, h^d
preserved him, if he had known as well how to hold his Tong^e, as how to speak;
if he had understood othe^s humors as well as they did his; and if he had
skilled as well from whom to have refused kindness, as from whom he deserved
it. -- In a wo^d, he that considered so many other Maxims, was defective in
compliance with his own, viz. That virtue is there unprofit^^le, where too
great; and that many had lost the favor of their Masters by overmuch meriting
it.

Observations on the Life of Sir Clem. Edmonds.
SIr Clement Edmonds, that learned and judicious Remembrancer of the City of
London, was born at V^re's Comm^ntaries.
Shratvardine in Shropshire, and bred Fe^low of All Souls College in Oxford,
being generally skilled in all Arts and Sciences; witness his faithful
Translations of, and learned Illustrations on Caesar's Commentaries. Say not
that Comment on Commentary was false Heraldry, seeing it is so worthy a work,
that the Author thereof may pass for an eminent instance to what perfection of
Theory they may attain to in matter of War, who were not acquainted with the
Practick part thereof; being once employed by Queen Elizabeth, with a dispatch
to Sir Francis Vere, which occasioned his presence at the Battle at Newport:
For he does so smartly discuss, pro and con, and seriously decide many Martial
Controversies, that his judgment therein is praised by the best Military
Masters.

King James taking notice of his Abilities, made him Clerk of the Council, and
Knighted him; and he was at last preferred Secretary of State, in the vacancy
of that place; but prevented by death, he acted not therein. At this day his
goodness in his general carriage out-did his prudence, and his prudence in
particular, his goodness; but his industry loath in all things, and in nothing
more than in his Scotch Neg^tiation, where he overreached the slye French,
composed and settled the unsatisfied King, and sent those weekly Advertisements
to his Mistress, that Sir Robert Cecil confessed the Master-wheel of those
years revolutions.

When Charles the fifth presented Secretary Eraso to his Son Philip the second,
he said, He gave him somewhat greater than his Estate, and more royal than his
Empire. When Sir William Waad introduced Sir Clement Edmonds to Court, he
brought thither in that person more than he could carry away in his own: A
person much accomplished in the great precepts and rules he observed; more in
his experience and application of those he practiced; wherein he was wise, but
not presumptuous; exact, but not pedantick; allowing much to old Observations,
more to new Circumstances: He was not more beholding to his Nature, than his
Nature to his Study and Meditation; and that to time and experience, which
offered at once occasions of ininstruction, and matter of exercises, to his
great understanding, so well acquainted with the a^^airs of former Ages, that
he could not be surprised with those of his own, knowing how to command, before
he was called to obey, as who trusted not to his own, short and perplexed life,
that scarce holds out five or six important Negotiations, and ordinarily
cease to be, before it begins to know: but his policy may be guessed from
his morality; and his public carriage in the tumults of Affairs, from his
private conduct and command in the disorders of nature, these being as well
managed by his reason, as the former by his prudence: His lesser skill in
governing the little world being an earnest of that more large in ruling the
greater. -- The Government of others, says Philosophy, is not fit for him who
is a Slave to himself,

Observations on the Life of James Hay, Earl of Carlisle.
ONe Hay his Ancestor saved Sco^land from an Army of Danes at Longcarty with a
T^erefo^e the Yoke is their supporter.
Y^ak in his hand. James Hay 6^0 years after saved the King of that Country
from the Gowries at their house with a C^lter in his: the first had as much
ground assigned him by King Kenith as a Falcon could fly over at one flight,
and the other as much Land as he could ride round in two days. The whole
Family fell before Dub^in-Castle in former days, fave a child left in his
Mothers womb; and had decayed in ours, but that the heir of it was cut out from
his. He served his Master in Scotland by his Generosity; and in England with
his H^spitality; the decay whereof King James observed the defect of the
English Nobility; and the restoration of it, he designed the honor of the
Scots Gentry. Royal was his Masters munificence toward him, noble his toward
others; His Majesty being not more intent upon his advancement for public
service, than he was upon the advancement of others to h^s private assistance^:
His Majesty's gracious inclination being for a Reign of Peace, this servants
estate was spent upon the Arts of it, I mean upon Feasts, Masks, gay
Clothes, and such other Delicacies as might soften our har^her natures to
quietness, that Princes interest, who was first to understand, and then to
manage the ^trength of this Nation.

Although he failed in most of his Negotiations, because he carried his money
on his back, rather than in his pur^^^ rather to spend, than to bestow; and
amaze Foreigners, rather than oblige them: Yet was his Embassy more suitable
to the French vanity, than either the Dutch thrift, or the German plainness;
and his carriage more answerable to a gaudy Treaty of Marriage, than to a close
Agency for Interest, or the intricate consultations of War. So great the report
of his Hospitality, that an Host of Delph demanded sixty pounds for providing
him a Supper, though he never came that way; yet so displeasing to the Prince
of Orange, that when his Steward asked what he should provide extraordinarily
for the great Embassador's entertainment; the Prince looks on his Bill of Fare,
and whereas there was but one Pig, he bid them write two; tartly reflecting as
well on my Lords Nation, as his magnificence. -- One of his Entertainments I
understand not the reason of, I mean his Ante-Suppers; the manner of which was,
to have the Board covered at the first entrance of Guests, with dishes as high
as a tall man could well reach, filled with the choicest and dearest Viands Sea
or Land could afford: and all this once seen, and having feasted the eyes of
the invited, was removed, and fresh set on to the same height, having only
this advantage of the other, that it was hot; at one whereof, an Attendant eat
to his single share a whole Pie reckoned to my Lord at twenty pounds, being
composed of Ambergris, Magisterial of Pearl, Musk, etc. yet was so far from
being sweet in the morning, that he almost poisoned his whole Family, flying
himself like the Satyr from his own stink: and another went away with forty
pound of Sweetmeats in his Cloak-bag. Yet must I needs judg^ ^^m uncharitable
that writ of this noble person, that when the most able Physicians, and his own
weakness had passed a judgment he could not live ma^y days, he did not
forbear his Entertainments, bu^ made diverse brave Clothes, as he said, to
out^ace ^aked and despicable Death; adding withal, That nature wantted wisdom,
power or love, in making man m^rtal and subject to diseases: Forgetting (as
that censorio^s Pen goes on) that if every Individual his own lust had been
able to have produced, should have prosecuted an equal excess with his, they
would in a far less time than an age have br^^ght themselves or the world into
the same disease he died of, which was a Consumption.

For my part, I adhere to their Civility that represent his nature modest, his
demeanor fair and Court-like, his obligations general, his interest as great
with the Favorite as with the King, and so much the greater with the King, as
he studied him more, and understood him better than any man: though one
observes, he was rather in his favor, than in his bosom, and therefore he
took care, That as his Expedition and Civility made him the great Master of
Requests at Court so his Marriage with the Heir-general of the Dennies should
get him an Estate in the Country -- wherewith he completed his kindness with
bounty, and ado^ned his bounty with courtesy. -- Courtesy not affected, but
naturally made up of humility, that secured him from Envy, and a Civility that
kept him in esteem; he being happy in an expression that was high, and not
formal; and a Language that was Courtly, and yet real.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Lake.
SIr Thomas Lake was bred a Scholar under Saravia in Hampshire, a Statesman
under Sir Francis Walsingham at Court, where such his dexterity and dispatch,
that he would indite, write, and discourse at the same time, more exactly than
most men could severally perform them, being then called the Swift-sure; such
his celerity and solidity in all Affairs! From the Secretaries Amanuensis, he
was promoted the Queens Clerk of the Signet, to whom he read French and Latin
to her dying day; for he was reading to her, when the Countess of Warwick told
him that the Queen was departed. In which Tongues she often said he surpassed
her Secretaries. Such his sufficiency (especially in keeping secrets) that King
James employed him in some French Affairs at his first arrival without Cecil,
and afterward as Secretary of State above him.

For King James (that loved what ever was facile and fluent) being taken among
other his Abilities with his Latin pen, said, that he was a Minister of State
fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe; and that the Secretaries place
needed him more than he it. Of whom I have no more to add, but that he was one
of the three noble hands that first led Mr. George Villiers to King James his
Favor.

Observations on the Life of Lyonel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex.
SIr Lyonel was born in Basinghal-street, a Citizen, bred in the Custom House,
a Merchant-Adventurer; his own Tutor, and his own University; though his Family
was ancient in Gloucestershire, and his Arms in the Heralds Office. King James
was taken with him for his brief, clear, strong and pertinent discourses: The
Duke of Buckingham was displeased because he would stand without him, yea in
some things against him: many were as active as this stirring Lord, none more
exact; his presence was comely, his countenance cheerful and grave, his soul
witty and wise, his apprehension quick and solid, his thoughts settled and
resolved. When one asked him how a man might prevent death, he said, Get to be
Lord-Treasurer, for none died in that Office. Though no Scholar, yet was he
bountiful to Scholars; though a Courtier, yet was he hospitable in the
Country; though he suffered much, yet was he contented; and though he lost
much, yet was he charitable. Very serviceable he was to the State in the
business of Trade in general, but most in that of the Custom-house in
particular: His first preferment was the custody of the Wardrobe, his second
was the Mastership of the Count of Wards and Liveries, and his third the
Treasurer-ship of England. In the last whereof, his improvement of the Revenue,
gained him not more honor with the King, than it d^d him envy from the
Courtiers; While to piece out the Treasure with the expense, he husbanded the
one so thriftily, and retrenched the other so rigidly, that malice it self
after many attempts to that purpose, could find no fault with his exact account
in the boundless trust of the tempting Treasury.

When the Prince was in Spain, he was the Sta^esman of the Council Table, and
the chief Minister of the Cabal, managing all the Dispatches, and overlooking
all the Expenses: In the last of which services he ran counter to the Duke of
Buckingham's inclination, and his own Interest; which was to keep himself up by
that noble Person's favor, as he rose by his Alliance. The occasion of his
preferment might be some saving secrets of the Custome-house-men to improve the
Revenue; the reason of his decline, was some thrifty suggestion touching the
Courtiers to preserve it.

This is certain, he was a man fit for government, who quickly apprehended
where any evil was, and had capacity enough to apply the remedy; only he had a
little too stiff a nature that would not easily yield, when he found on which
side there was most reason; and too much of the City in his maxims, which
pretended to attain to that in a short time, which Politicians think not proper
to arrive at but by a leasurely fuccession of Ages and Generations.

Observations on the Life of Henry Howard Earl of Northampton.
THis Family had endeared it self to many Kings by its services, but to none
more than King James by its obligations. Thomas Duke of Norfolk being as it
were his Mothers Martyr [executed for a design to marry her] and all his
Relations his confessors [kept under for their inclinations to advance him:]
Reasonable therefore it was, that my Lord that Dukes brother should be made
Baron of Marnhill, Earl of Northampton, Knight of the Garter, Privy-Councellor,
Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. -- Learning in any man
had King James his affection, especially in a Nobleman, as our Statesman, who
was as serious a Student in Kings-Colledge and Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, as a
discerning observator in Rome and Florence in Italy. His Dispensative against
the suppased poison of Prophesies, dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham,
bespeaks him a great and a general Scholar: His Speeches at Cambridge and in
Star Chamber, argue him both witty and wise: His expenses showed him
publick-spirited, the unparalled port of his Family and dependants an Ancient
Nobleman: His designing of Audley-End, and building of Suffolk-house, an
Architect: His Hospital for tw^lve poor women, and a Governor at Rise in
Norfolk; for twelve poor men, and a Governor at Clin in Shropshire; for twenty
poor men, and a Governor at Greenwich in Kent [whereof eight to be chosen out
of Shose-Sham where he was born] a charitable man: his using of all his
interest to avoid the burden and weight of the Treasurer's place, and procure
it for the Earl of Suffolk his Nephew, his noble disposition, not to advance
himself by Court-flattery, or his fortune by State employment, being a
Batchellour and a Student; An instance of my Lord Bacon's observation; He that
has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune, for they are
Impediments to great Enterprises either to Virtue or Mischief. Certainly the
best works, and of greatest merit for the Public proceed from the unmarried
and the Childeless, which both in affection and means have married and endowed
the Public.

But to conclude this particular; this Lord told his intimate Secretary Mr.
George Penny (who related it to my Author) that his Nativity (at his Fathers
desire) was calculated by a skilful Italian Astrologer, who told him that this
his Infant-son should taste of much trouble in the midst of his life, even to
the want of a meals meat; but his old age should make amends for all, with a
plentiful estate: which came to pass accordingly. For his Father dying in his
infancy, no plentiful provision was made for him: and when his eldest Brother
Thomas Duke of Norfolk was executed, his condition was much impaired; insomuch
that being once in London (not overstocked with money (when his noble Nephews
the Earl of Arundel and the Lord Thomas Howard were out of Town) and loath to
pin himself on any Table uninvited) he was fain to dine with the Chair of Duke
Humphrey; but other (not to say better company) viz. reading of books in
Stationers Shops in St. Paul's Churchyard; though afterward he attained to
great wealth, honor and command: However that Lord gave little credit to, and
placed less confidence in such Predictions, as appeared by a learned Work he
has written on that subject.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Ramsey, Earl of Holderness, and Sir Tho.
Ereskin Earl of Kelley.
BOth their preferment^ began on the same occasion; both their natures were
eminent for the same innocence and goodness; both their services tend to the
same issue, and therefore both their Characters come under one observation;
which it is more proper to take in the word of their Countryman and
Contemporary that knew them, than in the expression of a stranger that only
heard of them. The whole story runs thus:

The name of Ruthen in Scotland was not notorious, until Anno 1568. when Ruthen
amongst others, Confederates, in those divided times of trouble, labored much
for the imprisoning Queen Mary Mother to King James. In 1582. his son William
was created Earl Goury, in the time of that King's minority, though the Father
bore deadly hatred to the King's prosperity. And in 1584. himself was in actual
Rebellion, in which he suffered at Dondee. His eldest son John, then in Travel
in Italy, returns home to inherit his lands and honors; but not one jot
changed in disposition from the traitorous ways of his Predecess^rs: For not
long after he falls into this Conspiracy; which is not so ancient, but that
many then and now living, can, and my self, have heard the repetition.

The house of Gowry were all of them much addicted to study Chemistry; and
these more to practice it, often publishing (as such Professors usually do)
more rare experiments then ever could be performed; wherein the King (a general
Scholar) had little faith. But to infuse more credit to the practice, Alexander
Ruthen the second brother takes this occasion, and withal conspires with Gowry
to assassinate the King; and taking opportunity in his hunting, not far from
his house St. Iohnstone, invites the King to be an eyewitness of his
productions. In their way Sir Thomas Erskin (after Lord Kelley) overtakes them
and others, Demanding of the Duke of Lenox, then present, why Alexander had
engrossed the King's ear, to carry him from his Sports? Peace man, said the
Duke, Wee's all be turned into gold. Not far they rid, but that the Earl Gowry
made good by protestation his Brother's story. And thus was the King brought to
be a Guest.

Near the end of Dinner, at his Fruit, and the Lords and Waiters gone to eat,
Alexander begs of the King, at this opportunity to withdraw, and to be partaker
of his Production, to the view of that which yet he could not believe.

And up h^ leads the King into by-lodgings locking each door behind them, till
they came into a Back-Room; where no sooner entered, but that A^exander claps
on his Bonnet, and with stern countenance, faces the Kin^, and says; Now Sir,
you must know, I had a Father, whose blood calls for revenge, shed for your
sake. The King amazed, deals gently with his fury, excuses the guilt of his
death, by his then- Infancy. Advising him not to lay violent hands on the
sacred Person of his Anointed Sovereign, Especially in a cause of his
Innocence: Pleading the Laws of God and Man; which so much wrought upon him,
that he said, Well, I will speak^ with my Brother; and so put the King into a
Lobby Room next the Chamber; where no sooner entered, but that there appeared a
fellow weaponed, ready for execution, to whose custody the King is committed
till his return.

Alexander gone down, the fellow trembles with Reverence, puts down his Sword,
and craves pardon; which gave the King occasion to work upon that passion, and
to ask him whether he resolved to murder him? Being assured to the contrary,
the King gets leave to open a window, that looked into a back Court. When
presently Alexander returns, and tells the King that he must dye: But much
affrighted at the Fellow's countenance, with his sword offers violence to the
King; Which the fellow seemingly opposes, and between them began a scuffle,
which gave advantage to the King to cry Treason at the Window, which looked
into a back-Court, where Sir Thomas Erskin, and one Herries, were come in
pursuit of the King, who was rumoured to be gone out the back-way to his
hunting.

At the cry of Treason, and known to be the King's voice, they both hastened up
a back-stair, called the Turn-pike, being directed by a servant of the house,
who saw Alexander ascend that way. And so forcing some doors, that found them
above, panting with the fray; and up comes also at heels of them, John Ramsey
(after Earl of Holderness:) by them Alexander was soon dispatched.

Not long after came the Earl Gowry (by his double key) the first way, with a
case of Rapiers, his usual weapons, and ready drawn. To whom Erski^ said, as to
divert his purpose; What do you mean, my Lord? the King is killed: (for the
King was shadowed, having cast himself upon a Re^ from his sight, and his Cloak
was thrown upon the Body of Alexander, bleeding upon the ground:) At which
Gowry stops, sinking the points of his weapons; when suddenly Herries strikes
at him with a hunting Falchion. And Ramsey having his Hawk on his fist, casts
her off, and steps in to Gowry, and stabs him to the heart; and forthwith more
Company came up.

Not long after this Conspiracy, Herries dies well rewarded. John Ramsey has
the Honor of Knighthood, with an additional bearing to his Coat of Arms, A
Hand holding forth a Dagger, reversed proper, piercing a bloody Heart, The
point crowned Emperial, with this Distick, Haec Dextra Vindex Principis and
Patriae. Afterward he was created Lord Haddington, and Earl of Holdern^ss.

Sir Thomas Erskin was afterward created Earl of Kelly, Knight of the Garter,
Captain of the King's Guard, and Groom of the Stool; and the Fellow designed
for the Murderer, had a large Pension confirmed by Act of their Parliam^nt.

And all these men (but Herries) were living, with other witnesses, at King
James his journey, when he went from hence to visit Scotland, and met together
by direction at the same house, with Ceremony; and all of them, with a number
of Courtiers, ascended into the same Room, the blood yet r^maining, where the
King related the Story, which was confirmed by them. And afterward kneeling
down, with tears of Contrition for his Sins to God, and thankfulness for this
Mercy, using mary pi^us Ejaculations, embraced all these Actors in the former
Tragedy; when the poor fellow also kissed the King's hand.

These circumstances gave occasion then, that this whole story was freshly
revived, to the common Satisfaction of the whole Country, and our English
Courtiers. And in especial, unto the very reverend Bishop, and nobly born,
James Mountague, then present, to whom the King addressed himself in this
Relati^n, and from whose Mouth says the Relator, I received these particulars,
at his return into England.

And thus much we have by word of mouth: somewhat I shall add out of writings,
for more satisfaction.

This Treason was attempted the fourth of Aug^st 1600. And though there
followed sundry Sus^itions and Examinations of several other Persons, supposed
Abettors and Contrivers; yet it lay undiscovered, tanquam e post liminio, until
eight years after, by the circumspection principally of the ^arl of Dunbar, a
man of as great wisdom as those t^mes and that Kingdom could boast of, upon the
^e^son of on^ Geo^ge S^ro^, Notary-publick of A^emouth in Scotland, from some
words which at first he sparingly or unawares expressed, and also by some
papers which were found in his house; whereof being examined, with a little ado
he confessed, and was condemned and executed at Edinburgh the 12th. of A^g.
1608.

A Relation I conceive not common, but in my hands to be produced, and written
by that learned Gentleman William Heart, then Lord Justice of Sco^land, and
Principal in all the Acts of Judicature herein.

Neither of these Lords professed any skil^ in Politics; yet neither wanted a
strong judgment, which they could make good use of in time and place
convenient, giving testimonies in those Employments they had, of a strict
secrecy, a great moderation, and a happy compliance with opportunity, Qualities
exceedingly well lodged in men of Interest and Command, especially in these
two, who neither too easily closed with others resolutions, nor too obstinately
adhered to their own; one of which was always to suspect men of new words, as
much as men of new opinions, because to fly from proper School terms to vulgar
conceptions, is a way seldom trodden but by false Prophets, and Seditious
Orators -- who have done this only good in the world, that from their
collition a considerable deal of light has proceeded toward the clearing of
several points in Philosophy and Religion -- in the speculations whereof the
men whose lives are so practical and involved in business, are not so distinct,
being not at leisure to quest at every Lark which men spring in either; though
otherwise the best q^alified for such undertakings, because men of most
judgment and experience; and of ^he least passion and prejudice, and by so
much the less impetuous and censorious, by how much the more judicious and
discreet; and by so much the more value in the Eyes of others, by how much the
less they are in their own; who have this a^vant^ge in controversies, that
their Religion is thoug^t as much better than their Adversaries, as their
Charity and moderation is greater.

Observations on the Fall of Sir Tho. Lake.
A Great Estate this Gentleman had honestly got, and a greater esteem, being
King James his right hand, and the Scots both hands; that with which they
begged, and that with which they bestowed; the instrument of the meaner sorts
relief, and the greaters bounty; until that Malice and Revenge, two violent
passions overruling the Weaker Sex, concerning his Wife and daughter, involved
him in their quarrel, the chief and only cause of his ruin. He had by his
Wife sons and daughters: His eldest married unto the Lord Baron Resse (in right
of a Grandmother) the son of Thomas Earl of Exeter by a fo^mer venture. And upon
the credit of Sir Thomas Lake, he was sent Ambassador Extraordinary into Spain,
in a very gallant Equipage, with some hopes of ^is own to continue Lieger, to
save charges of transmitting any other.

In his absence there fell out an extreme deadly fewd ('it is no matter for what)
between the Lady Lake, and the Countess of Exeter. A youthful Widow she had
been, and virtuous, and so became Bedfellow to this aged, gowty, diseased, but
noble Earl. And that preferment had made her subject to Envy and Malice.

Home comes the Lord Rosse from his Embassy, when being fallen into some
neglect of his W^fe and his kindred, I conceive upon refusal of an increase of
allowance to her settlement of Ioynture, which was promised to be completed at
his return; not long he stays in England, but away he gets into Italy, turns a
professed Roman Catholic, being cozened into that Religion by his public
Confident Gondamore.

In this his last absence ( never to return) the Mother and Daughter accuse the
Countess of former Incontinency with the Lord R^sse whilst he was here, and
that therefore upon his Wives discovery he was fled from hence, and from her
Marriage Bed; with other devised Calumnies, by several designs and
contrivements, to have poisoned the Mother and Daughter.

This quarrel was soon blazoned at Court, to the King's ear, who as privately
as could be, singly examines each party. The Countess with tears and
imprecations professes her Innocence; which to oppose, the Mother Lake and her
Daughter counterfeit her hand to a whole sheet of Paper; wherein they make the
Coun^ess with much contrition to ackno^ledge her self guilty, crave pardon for
attempting to poison them, and desire friendship with them all.

The King gets sight of this, as in favor to them, and demands the time,
place, and occasion when this should be writ. They tell him, that all the
parties met in a visit at Wimbleton (the house of the Lord of Exeter) where, in
dispute of their differences, she confesses her guilt of attempting their
poison. And being desirous of absolution and friendship (being required
thereto) consents to set down all Circumstances therein, under her own hand,
which presently she writ at the Window in the upper end of the great Chamber at
Wimbleton, in presence of the Mother and Daughter, the Lord Rosse, and one
Diego a Spaniard his confiding Servant. But now they being gone, and at Rome,
the King forthwith sends Mr. Dendy (one of his Sergeants at Arms, sometimes a
Domestic of the Earl of Exeters, an honest and worthy Gentleman) post to Rome,
who speedily returns with Rosse and Diego's hand, and other testimonials,
confirming, That all the said Accusation, and Confession, Suspicions and Papers
concerning the Countess, were notorious false and scandalous; and confirms it
by receiving the Host, in assurance of her Honor, and his Innocence. The King
well satisfied, sends to the Countesses Friends and Trustees for her Ioynture
and Estate; who comparing many of her letters with this Writing, do confess it
counterfeit.

Then he tells the Mother and Daughter, That this writing being denied by her,
and their testimonies, being parties, would not prevail with any belief, but
any other Additional witness would give it sufficient credit. To which they
assure him, That one Sarah Swarton, their Chamberesse, stood behind the
Hanging, at the entrance of the Room, and heard the Countess read over what she
had writ: and her also they procure to swear unto this before the King.

To make further trial, the King in a hunting journey at New-park near
Wimbleton, gallops thither, views the Roo^^, observing the great distance of
the Window from the lower end of the Room; and placing himself behind the
Hanging, and so other Lords in turn, they could not hear one speak loud from
the window.

Then the Housekeeper was called, who protested those Hangings had constantly
furnished that Room for thirty years; which the King observed to be two foot
short of the ground, and might discover the woman, if hidden behind them. I may
present also, the King saying, Oaths cannot confound my sight.

Besides all this, the Mother and Daughter connterfeit another Writing, a
Confession of one Luke Hutton, acknowledging for 40 pound annuity, the Countess
hired him to poison them; which Man, with wonderful providence was found out
privately, and denies it to the King.

And thus prepared, the King sends for Sir Thomas Lake, whom indeed he very
much valued; tells him the danger to imbarque himself in this Quarrel, advising
him to leave them to the Law, being now ready for the Star Chamber. He humbly
thanked his Majesty, but could not refuse to be a Father and a Husband; and so
puts his Name with theirs in a cross Bill, which at the hearing, took up five
several days, the King sitting in Judgment. But the former testimonies, and
some private confessions of the Lady Rosse, and Sarah Wharton, which the King
kept in private, from public proceedings, made the Cause for some of the days
of Trial, appear doubtful to the Court, until the Kings discovery, which
concluded the Sentence, and was pronounced in several Censures; Sir Thomas Lake
and his Lady fined ten thousand pounds to the King, five thousand pounds to the
Countess, fifty pounds to Hutton, Sarah Wharton to be whipped at a Carts tail
about the streets, and to do penance at St. Martin's Church. The Lady R^sse,
for confessing the truth and plot in the midst of the Trial, was pardoned by
the Major Voices from penal Sentence.

The King, I remember, compared their Crimes to the first plot of the first sin
in Paradise, the Lady Lake to the Serpent, her Daughter unto Eve, and Sir
Thomas to poor Adam, whom he thought in his conscience, that his love to his
Wife had beguiled him. I am sure, he paid for all, which, as he told me, cost
him thirty thousand pounds, and the loss of his Masters favor, and Offices of
gain and honor, but truly with much pity and compassion of the Court.

Obs^rvations on the Life of the Earl of Suffolk.
HIs Uncle Northampton negotiated his preferment, and his Father No^folke
deserved i^, (...) whose sake the eldest Son Philip Earl of Ar^^^^l was ^^de
Lord Mars^al, and this second first C^^mberlain, and then Treasurer: wherein as
the Earl of Middlesex understood well the privileges of the City, so my Lord
kenned well the Revenues of the Crown. But his fair Daughter, that gained him
most favor, did him most harm; he falling with his Son Somerset's
miscarriages, when he might have stood without his Relation: being as plain as
his brother Henry was subtle; as obliging, as he was insinuating; as knowing,
as he was cunning; the one conversing with Books, the other with Men. A
Gentleman from whom I requested his Character, returns me no more but this: He
was a man never endued with much patience, and one that much retarded the
progress of his fortune, by often speaking publicly with too much liberty:
Otherwise very true to the Maxims of his Age. 1. Linking himself to the Scots.
2. Buying Fee-Farm Rents to avoid envy, as my Lord of Salisbury before him in
the Scots Debenturers names. 3. Promoting Northern Suits. And 4. projecting for
money.

He was also Chancellor of Cambridge, loving and beloved of the University.
When at his first coming to Cambridge, Mr. Francis Nethersole Orator of the
University, made a Latin Speech unto him; the Lord returned, Though I
understand not Latin, I know the sense of your Oration is to tell me that I am
welcome to you; which I believe verily: I thank you for it heartily, and will
serve you faithfully in any thing within my power. Dr. Harsenet the Vice
Chancellor laying hold on the handle of so fair a Proffer, requested him to be
pleased to entertain the King at Cambridge; a favor which the University could
never compass from their former great and wealthy Chancellours; I will do it
(says the Lord) in the best manner I may, and with the speediest convenience.

Nor was he worse than his word, giving his Majesty such a Treatment in the
University, as cost him five thousand pounds and upwards. Hence it was, that
after his death, Thomas his second son Earl of Bark-shire (not suing for it,
nor knowing of it) was chosen to succeed him, losing the place (as some
suspected) not for lack of Voices, but fair counting them.

Observations on the Life of Sir Rob^ Carry.
HE was born an ingenious man, of good parts and breeding; but of so uncourtly
a temper, that in all likelihood we had not heard of him, had he not had the
luck to have been the first Messenger let out of the Court by the favor of his
Father the Lord Chamberlain, to bring King James news that Queen Elizabeth was
dead; when the Scots expectation was so tired, that they thought Queen Eliz.
would never dye, as long as there was an old woman that could either wear good
clothes, or eat good meat in England. Upon which good account he is a
Bed-chamber-man to King James, and a Tutor to Prince Charles; though he had
made better use of his Talent as a Soldier, than as a Courtier, having too much
of the Candor of that Family; that as the Historian observed, spoke of things
always as they deserved: And though he had wit enough, yet he had not the
judgment or way to make those stand in awe of him, who were m^st obliged to him.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Robert Naunton, and Sir Francis Nethersole.
SIr Robert Naunton is the Author of one Book of Observations upon the
Statesmen of Queen Eliz. times, and must be the subject of another of King
James's: He noted then in his youth, what he was to practice afterward in his
more reduced years. His University-Studies at Trinity-Colledge, whereof he was
Commoner; and at Trinity-Hall, whereof he was Fellow; His Speeches both while
Proctor and Orator of Cambridge, discovered him more inclined to public
Accomplishments, than private Studies: He improved the opportunity of the
speech he was to make before K. James at Hi^chinbrook so well, that as His
Majesty was highly affected with his Latin and Learning, so he exactly
observed his prudence and serviceableness; whereupon he came to Court as Sir
Thomas Overburies Assistant first, and then as Sir George Villiers friend, who
promoted him to be Secretary of State, Ian. 8. 1617. as his Majesty did a while
after to be Mr. of the Wards. The first place whereof he discharged with as
much ability and dexterity, as he did the second with integrity; only he was
observed close-handed, whether out of his natural inclination to Parsimony, or
some fixed design to regulate and reduce the great expenses of this Nation; or
from some hidden and refined politic consideration, that that might be done by
a wary observation of men's integrity and inclination, which was usually done
with money: and indeed, as a great man observes, to procure good information
of particulars touching persons, their natures, their desires and ends, their
customs and fashions, their helps and advantages, and whereby they chiefly
stand: So again, their weaknesses and disadvantages, and where they lie most
open and obnoxious; their friends, ^actions, and dependencies: and again, their
opposites, envyers, and Competitors; their moods and times, their principles;
rules, observations, etc. their actions how conducted, how favored, how
opposed, etc. is the only way of success in business, and of prevailing in
fortune, especially if attended with this Gentleman's two master-Qualities; 1.
Reservedness, the security; 2. Slowness of belief, the sinew of wisdom. Finding
his temper agreeable with the University, he allowed himself more scope and
liberty; but observing his particular constitution not suitable to the general
state of his times, the whole course of his life was more close, retired, and
reserved, opening it self but with an half-light, and a full advantage: and
what he was to others, he believed all others were to him, as hardly trusting
them, as he was understood himself, unless surprised in his countenance by the
motions of it, or in his actions by the suddenness of them, or in his temper by
his passion, but as far as can be guessed; from the Letters that passed between
them about the Palatinate. He was of the same make in the State, as Archbishop
Abbot was in the Church, zealous and sullen; if others had a better wit than he
in abusing him, he had a better memory than they to think of it; for one Mr.
Wiemark a wealthy man, a great N^vilant, and constant Paul's walker, hearing
the news that day of the beheading of Sir Walter Rawleigh; His head (said he)
would do well upon the shoulders of Sir Robert Naunton Secretary of State.
These words were complained of, and Wiemark summoned to the Privy Council,
where he pleaded for himself, that he intended no disrespect to Mr. Secretary,
whose known worth was above all detraction; only he spoke in reference to an
old proverb, Two heads are better than one; and for the present he was
dismissed. Not long after, when rich men were called on for a contribution to
St. Paul's, Wiemark at Council Table subscribed a hundred pounds; but Mr.
Secretary told him, Two hundred were better than one; which betwixt fear and
charity Wiemark was fain to subscribe.

Neither was he sooner up, than he gave his Colleague and Successor in the
Orators place, Sir Francis Nethersole, his hand to advance him too; whom after
his elegant Speech on Prince Henry, we find a prudent Agent with the Princes of
the Union, and a faithful Secretary to the Queen of Bohemia, for whom he did
much, and suffered more. Yet was he lately alive, and as charitable in his
elder years, as ever he was noble in his younger.

Observations on the Life of Sir Arthur Ingram.
SIr Arthur had wit in Italy, where he was a Factor, and wealth in London,
where he was a Merchant, to be first a Customer, and then a Cofferer to that
King, who had this happiness, that he understood so much of all his affairs, as
to make a judgment of what persons might be most serviceable to him in each of
them. So pragmatical a person as this Gentleman, was necessary among the
Custom-house-men, who were about to engross all the wealth of the Kingdom; and
as useful among the Green-cloath-men, who shared amongst themselves vast
Concealments. The activity of his head had undone him, had not the odium of it
been allayed by the discretion of his tongue; whatever he spoke, being
naturally accompanied with such a kind of modesty and affability as gained the
affection, and attracted the respect of all that conversed with him; only some
wary men were jealous of that watchful and serene habit he had attained to in
every conference and action, as well to observe as to act: though it was more
than they needed, he having not that good stay and hold of himself, his much
observing tempting him to much meddling; though never more need of it than at
that time, when ninety and odd thousand pounds were spent upon the Palsgrave;
to reimburse which money, he set up the improvement of Coin, the Farthings, the
borrowing of money of the Customers, and as many other Projects to get money,
as others had to spend it.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Yelverton.
THis Gentleman's relation to Sir Thomas Overbury brought him to the Earl of
Somerset's service, and my Lord of Somerset's service recommended him to the
Kings favor; whereby he was at first his Counsel learned, and afterward his
Attorney General; in which last place his duty enjoined him the impeachment of
that Earl, but his gratitude forbad him: Loath he was to refuse his Masters
command, more loath to have a hand in his Patrons ruin; his civility outweighed
his prudence, and his obligations his safety: for refusing to implead his Mr.
as a great Delinquent at the Bar, he was sent by the Council as a greater to
the Tower, where he continued until (as some say) the Duke of Buckingham came
to him at midnight; and hearing from him such mysteries of State as nearly
concerned his own safety, not only released, sed, but advanced him to a place
of Judicature; which his Integrity and Ability might deserve, but his niceness
and narrowness could not keep it: Law and Equity have two Courts, but Law and
Discretion should dwell in one breast. The truth is there is a great advantage
in the well-setting forth of a man's virtues, fortunes, merits; and again, in
the Artificial covering of a man's weaknesses, defects, disgraces; staying upon
the one, sliding from the other, making use of circumstances, etc. which this
good and plain man was a stranger to, being not so true to himself, or so
settled, but that either upon heat, or bravery, or kindness, or trouble of mind
and weakness, he would open himself to his Enemies satisfaction, and his own
hazard. -- Yet I must needs say, That his Letter of submission to the Duke was
ingenuous, if he was guilty; and Courtly, if he was innocent. Sir Francis Bacon
took a wiser course in my Lord of Essex his Case, than he in the Earl of
Somersets; for when that Lord entertained destructive, before displeasing
Counsel, the knowing Knight fairly forsook not his person, whom his pity
attended to his Grave, but his practices; and herein was not the worse friend,
for being the better Subject.

Observations on the Life of Bishop Mountague.
JAmes M^untague son to Sir Edward Mountague, was born at B^ughton in
Northamptonshire, bred in Christ^-C^lledge in Cambridge: He was afterward
Master, or rather nursing Father to Sidney-Colledge; For he found it in bonds
to pay twenty Marks per annum to Trinity-Colledge for the ground whereon it is
built, and left it free, assigning it a rent for the discharge thereof. When
the Kings Ditch in Cambridge made to defend it by its strength, did in his time
offend it with its stench, he expended a hundred Marks to bring running-water
into it, to the great convenience of the University. He was afterward Bishop
first of Bath and Wells, th^n of Winch^ster, being highly in favor with King
James, who did ken a man of merit, as well as any Prince in Christendom. He
translated the Works of King James into Latin, and improved his greatness to
do good Offices therewith. He dyed Anno Dom. 1618. AEtat. 49. and lies buried
within his fair Monument, within his fairer, I mean a goodly Tomb in the Church
of Bath, which owes its well-being and beauty to his Munificence. King James
cast his eye upon him at Hinchingbrook (where the University of Cambridge met
him as he came from Scotland) because he obse^ved him one of those he knew he
must oblige, I mean a Gentleman: He set his heart upon him at Court, because he
found him one he intended to employ, I mean a Scholar. He was the only man of
all the Doctors he conversed with there, and the only man of all the Bishops
he consulted with at White Hall. His nature inclined him to magnificence, and
his virtue to Thrift; sparing from lesser vanities, what he might expend upon
greater enterprises; never sparing when just designs called for great charge.
Grateful he was to his followers, though not prodigal: Good men choose rather
to be loved for their benefits to the Community, than those to private persons:
His understanding was as large as his heart was honest, comprehensive both of
men and things; even those things that were either below or besides his care,
going not besides his observation; he held a freedom of the will not from an
humble^ dependence upon the first cause, but from a fatal compulsion by the
second causes, nec truncos nec Sacrilegos, abhorring to make that noble
creature Man created by God after his own Image, to be the Governor of the
Universe, Lord and Master of the Creatures should be no more than the man in
the beginning of Almanacks, who is placed immovable in the midst of the 12
Signs, as so many second causes, if he offer to stir, Aries is over his head
ready to push him; and Taurus to goar him in the Neck, etc.

He anticipated his age with his worth, and died at fourscore in merit, when
not fifty in years; filling his time not with days but with virtues so early,
as seemed rather innate than acquired: For which he was so popular in the
Country, as well as favored at Court; that a corpulent Officer of Bath-Church
being appointed on the day of his Burial to keep the doors, entered on his
employment in the morning, but was buried himself before night, and before the
Bishop's body was put in the ground; because being bruised to death by the
pressing in of people, his Corpse required speedy interment. -- In those days
the Plebs concurred with the King in their affections to, because they
su^mit^ed to him in their choice of persons; for then wisdom was thought to
dwell in the Head, and good Folks thought their Sovereign wiser (...)
themselves.

Observations on the Life of Sir Edm. Anderson.
SIr Edmund Anderson was born a younger brother of a Gentile Extract at
Flixborough in Lincolnshire, and bred in the inner Temple. I have been informed
that his Father left him a thousand pounds for his portion, which this our Sir
Edmund multiplied into many, by his great proficiency in the Common Law, being
made the 24th of Queen Elizabeth Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. When
Secretary Davison was sentenced in the Star Chamber for the business of the
Queen of Scots, Judge Anderson said of him, that therein he had done Cambden
Eliz. An. 1587.
justum non just; and so acquitting him of all malice, censured him with the
rest of his indiscretion. When H. Cuffe was arraigned about the rising of the
Earl of Essex, and when Sir Edward Coke the Queens Solicitor opposed him, and
the other answered Syllogistically, our Anderson (sitting there as a Judge of
Law, not Logic) checked both Pleader and Prisoner, ob stolido^ syllogismos,
for their foolish Syllogismes, appointing the former to press the Statute of
Edward the third. Idem, Anno 1600.
He died in the third of King James, leaving great Estates to several sons. He
was a pure Legist, that had little skill in the affairs of the world, always
alleging a decisive Case or Statute on any matter or question, without any
regard to the decency, or respect to be had toward a State, or Government, and
without that account of a moderate interpretation some circumstances of things
require, being so much the less useful as he was incompliant, and one whom none
addre^sed to, because, as one observes of Cardinal Corrado; Such think they do
in same manner sacrifice themselves, when they do but in the ^e st^^ct against
their own opinions, to do a man a little p^e^sure. There are a kind of honest
men of good conscience, whose capacities being narrow, uncertain private
resolutions, inconsistent with public interest; who may for me pass for good
men, but shall never be censed or registered for good Cit^ze^s; because when
streight-laced and short apprehensions are resolved into conscience and
m^ximes, those men are obliged to be so obstinate as ^o change or remit nothing
of their first resolutions, how unreasonable soever in themselves, or dangerous
in the consequence. State Policy is wholly involved in matter and circumstances
of time, place, and persons; not capable of such exact rules as Geometry,
Arithmetic, and other Sciences, whose subject is abstracted from matter; he
who ^^ss^^geth State Affairs by general rules, will quickly ruin both himself
and those who a^e committed to his government; the quintessence of policy does
consist in the dexterous and skilful application of general rules to the
subject matter: co^ of the great ends of policy and government, is the creating
a mutual confidence amongst men; and to ^llay those distracting jealousies
grounded ^n an universal suspicion of humane nature, much like the good Woman's
fear that the Log would ^^^p out o^ the fire, and knock out the brains of her
Child) which have no other use, than the beget^^g (...)rp^tu^l v^xatio^s, the
discouragement of free Trade and Converse; a teaching of them who are suspected
often to do worse than they imagined, and the creating of sedition and troubles.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Bodley, by himself.
1. I Was born at Exiter in Devonshire, March 2. 1544. descended both by Father
and Mother of worshipful Parents. My Father in the time of Queen Mary, being
noted and known to be an enemy to Popery, wa^ so cruelly threatened and so
narrowly observed, by those that maliced his Religion, that for the safeguard
of himself and my Mother, who was wholly affected as my Father, he knew no way
so secure as so fly into Ge^many.

2. My Father fixed his abode in the City of Geneva; where, as far as I
remember, the English Church consisted of some hundred persons. I was at that
time of twelve years of age, but through my Fathers cost and care, sufficiently
instructed to become an Auditor of Cheval^erius in Hebrew, of Bernaldus in
Greek, of Calvin and Bez^ in Divinity, and of some other Professors in that
Univ^rsity (which was newly then erected) besides my domestic Teachers in the
house of Phili^erius S^raceaus, a famous^ Physician in that City, wi^h whom I
was boarded, w^ere Rober^us Constantinus, that made the Greek Lexicon, read
Homer to me.

3. In the first of Queen Elizabeth, my Father returned, and settled his
dwelling in the City of London. It was not long after, that I was sent away
from thence to the University of Oxford, recommended to the teaching and
tuition of Doctor Humphrey. In the year 1563. I took the degree of Batchellor
of Arts; within which year I was chosen Probationer of Merton College, and the
next year ens^ing admitted Fellow. Afterward, in the year 1565, by special
perswa^sion of some of my Fellow^, and for my private exercise, I undertook the
public reading of a Greek Lecture in the same Colledge-Hall, without requiring
or expecting any stipend for it: Nevertheless it pleased the Fellowship of
their own accord to allow me soon after four marks by the year, and ever since
to continue the Lecture to that College.

4. In the year 1566, I proceeded Master of Arts, and read for that year in the
School-streets natural Philosophy. After which time, within less than three
years space, I was won by entreaty of my best affected friends to stand for the
Proc^orship, to which I and my Colleague were quietly elected in the year 1569,
without any competition or counter-suit of any other. After this for a long
time, I supplied the Office of University-Oratour, and bestowed my time in the
study of sundry faculties, without any inclination to profess any one above the
rest; insomuch as at last I waxed desirous to travel beyond the Seas, for
attaining to the knowledge of some special modern Tongues, and for the increase
of my experience in the managing of affairs; being wholly then addicted to
employ my self and all my cares in the public service of the State.

5. After my return, in the year 1585, I was employed by the Queen to the King
of Denmark, and to the German Princes: Next, to Henry the third, King of
France: After this, in 88, for the better conduct of her Highness Affairs in
the Provinces United, I was thought a fit person to reside in those parts, and
was sent thereupon to the Hague in Holland; where, according to the Contract
that had formerly passed between her Highness and the States, I was admitted
for one of their Council of Estate, taking place in their Assemblies next to
Count Maurice, and yielding my suffrage in all that was proposed. During all
that time, what approbation was given of my painful endeavors by the Queen, by
the Lords in England, by the States of the Country there, and by all the
English Soldiery, I refer it to be notified by some others Relation.

6. I received from her Majesty many comfortable Letters of her gracious
acceptance of my diligence and care: and among the Lords of the Council had no
man more to friend, then was the Lord Treasurer Burleigh. For when occasion had
been offered of declaring his conceit as touching my service, he would always
tell the Queen (which I received from her self and some other Ear-witnesses)
that there was not any man in England so meet as my self to undergo the Office
of the Secretary. And sithence his son, the present Lord Treasurer has
signified unto me in private conference, that when his Father first intended to
advance him to that place, his purpose was withal to make me his Colleague: But
that the daily provocations of the Earl of Essex were so bitter and sharp
against him, and his comparisons so odious when he put us in a balance, as he
thought thereupon he had very great reason to use his best means, to put any
man out of hope of raising his fortune, whom the Earl with such violence, to
his extreme prejudice, had endeavored to dignifie.

7. When I had well considered, how ill it did concur with my natural
disposition, to become or to be counted either a stickler or partaker in any
public faction; how well I was able, by Gods good blessing, to live of my
self, if I could be contented with a competent livelihood; I resolved thereupon
to possess my soul in peace all the residue of my days, to take my farewell of
State-employments, and so to retire me from the Court.

8. Now although after this, by her Majesty's direction, I was often called to
the Court, by the now Lord Treasurer, then Secretary, and required by him, and
also diverse times since, by order from the King, to serve as Ambassador in
France, and to ^egotiate in other very honorable employments, yet I would not
be removed from my former final resolution; but have continued at home my
retired course of ^^fe, which is now meth^nks to me as the greatest preferment
the State can afford.

9. This I must confess of my self, that though I did never repent me yet of my
often refusals of honorable offer^, in respect of en^iching my private Estate;
yet somewhat more of late I have blamed my sel^ and my nice^y that way, for the
love that I bear to my Reverend Mother the University of Oxford, and to the
advancement of her good by such kind of means as I have since undertaken.

10. Having examined what course I might take, I concluded at the last to set
up my staff at the Library door; being thoroughly persuaded, that in my
solitude and surcease from the Commonwealth affairs, I could not busy my self
to better purpose then by reducing that place (which then in every part lay
ruined and waste) to the public use of Students:

11. For the effecting whereof, I found my self furnished in a competent
proportion, of such four kinds of aids, as unless I had them all, there was no
hope of good success. For without some kind of knowledge, as well in the
learned modern Tongues, as in sundry other sorts of Scholastical literature;
without some purse-ability to go through with the charge; without very great
store of honorable friends to further the design, and without special good
leisure to follow such a work, it could but have proved a vain attempt, and
inconsiderate.

12. But how well I have sped in all my endeavors, and how full provision I
have made for the benefit and ease of all frequenters of the Library; that
which I have already performed in sight; that besides, which I have given for
the maintenance of it; and that which hereafter I purpose to add, by way of
enlargement to that place (for the project is cast, and whether I live or dye,
it shall be, God ^illing, put in full execution) will testify so truly and
abundantly for me, as I need not to be the publisher of the dignity and worth
of mine own institution. Written with mine own band, Anno 1609. December. 15.

Observations on the Life of Henry Vere Earl of Oxford.
HEnry Vere was son of Edward Vere, the seventeenth Earl of Oxford, and Anne
Trentham his Lady; whose principal habitation (the rest of his patrimony being
then wasted) was at Heningham-Castle in Essex: A vigorous Gentleman, full of
courage and resolution, and the last Lord Chamberlain of England of this
Family. His sturdy nature would not bow to Court-compliants, who would maintain
what he spoke, speak what he thought, think what he apprehended true and just,
though sometimes dangerous, and distastful. Once he came into Court with a
great milk white feather about his hat, which then was somewhat unusual, save
that a person of his merit might make a fashion. The Reader may guess the Lord
who said to him in some jeer, My Lord, you wear a very fair Feather: It Is true
(said the Earl) and if you mark it, there is never a Taint in it. Indeed his
Family was ever loyal unto the crown, deserving their Motto, Vero nil Verius.


His predecessors had not been more implacable enemies to Spain in the
Low Countries, than he was at Whi^e-Hall, backing those arguments against the
Match stoutly in the Presence Chamber, that Doctor Hackwel had urged zealously
in the Pulpit; and as resolutely suffering imprisonment for the one, as the
Doctor did suspension for the other; declaring himself as freely against the
Agent Gondomar, as against his business, the Marriage: For chancing to meet
Gon^omar at an Entertainment, the Don accosted him with high Complements,
vowing; That amongst all the Nobility of England, there was none he had
tendered his service to with more sincerity than to his Lordship, though
hitherto such his unhappiness, that his affections were not accepted according
to his integrity that tendered them. It seems (replied the Earl of Oxford) that
your Lordship has good leisure, when stooping in your thoughts to one so
inconsiderable as my self, whose whole life has afforded but two things
memorable therein. It is your Lordships modesty (returned the Spaniard) to
undervalue your self, whilst we the spectators of your Honors deserts, make a
true and impartial estimate thereof; hundreds of memorables have met in your
Lordships life: But, good my Lord, what are those two signal things more
conspicu^us than all the rest? They are these two (said the Earl) I was born in
the year 88, and christened on the fifth of November.

Neither was he a more inveterate enemy to the Church of Rome, than a cordial
friend to that of England; for presenting one Mr. Copinger to Laneham, he
added, to try him, He would pay no t^thes of his Park: Mr. Copinger desired
again to resign it to his Lordship, rather than by such sinful gratitude to
betray the rights of the Church. -- Well, if you be of that mind (said the
Earl) than take the tithes; I scorn that my Estate should swell with
Church-goods.

Going over one of the four English Colonels into the Low Countries, and
endeavoring to raise the siege of Breda, he so overheated himself with
Marching, Fighting and vexing (the Design not succeeding) that ^e dyed after,
Anno Dom. 16 -- He married Diana, one of the Coheirs of William Earl of
Exeter, (afterward to Edward Earl of Elgin) by whom he left no Issue.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Vere.
SIr Francis Vere ( Governor of B^il and Portsmouth) was of the ancient, and
of the m^st noble extract of the Earls of Oxford; and it may be a question,
w^ether the Nobility of his house, or the honor of his Achievements might most
commend him, who brought as much glory to his name, as he received honor from
it: He was amongst his Queens Swordmen inferior to none, but superior to
many: He lived oftener in the Camp, than Court: but when his pleasure drew him
thither, no man had m^re of the Queens favor, and none less envied. He was a
Sol^ier of great w^rth, and commanded thirty years in the service of the
States, and twenty years over the English in Chief as the Queens General; and
he that had seen the Bat^el of Newport, might there best have taken him and his
nob^e Brother the Lord of Tilb^ry to the life. They report that the Queen as
she loved Martial men, would court this Gentleman as soon as he appeared in her
presence; for he seldom troubled it with the noise and alarms of supplication;
his way was another sort of undermining, as resolved in the Court as in the
Camp, as well to justify his The Earl of Essex.
Patron, as to serve her Majesty, telling her the plain truth more sincerely
than any man; choosing (as he said) rather to fall by the malice of his
enemies, than be guilty of Ingratitude to his friends: Yea, and when he sued
for the government of Portsmouth, and some Grandees The Lord Norris.
objected, that that place was always bestowed on Noblemen, he answered; There
were none ennobled but by their Princes favor, and the same way he took.

The Veres compared. Very scipiadae, Duo fulmina belli.
SIr Francis and Sir Horace Ver^, sons of Ieffery Vere Esquire, who was son of
John Vere, the fifteenth Earl of Oxford; We will first consider severally, and
then compare jointly, to see how their Actions and Arms performed, what their
birth and blood promised.

SIr Fran. was of a fiery spirit and rigid nature, undaunted in all danger, not
overvaluing the price of men's lives to purchase a victory therewith. He served
on the Scene of all Christendom where War was acted. One Masterpiece of his
valor was at the Battle of Newport, when his ragged Regiment (so were the
Englishmen called, from their ragged Clothes) helped to make all whole, or
else all had been lost.

Another was, when for three years he defended Ostend against a strong and
numerous Army, surrendering it at last a bare Skeleton to the King of Spain, who
paid more years purchase for it, than probably the World would endure. He dyed
in the beginning of the Reign of K. James, about the year of our Lord, 16 --

SIr Horace had more meekness, and as much valor as his brother; so pious that
he first made peace with God, before he went to war with man One of an
excellent temper; it being true of him what is said of the Caspian Sea, that it
does never ebb nor flow; observing a constant tenor, neither elated nor
depressed with sucess. Had one seen him returning from a victory, he would by
his silence have suspected that he had lost the day; and had he beheld him in a
retreat, he would have collected him a Conqueror, by the cheerfulness of his
spirit. He was the first Baron of K. Charles his Creation. Some years after,
coming to Court, he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so that he died before
night, Anno Dom. 163... No doubt he was well prepared for death, seeing such
his vigilance, that never any enemy surprised him in his Quarters.

Now to compare them together (such their Eminency, that they would hardly be
paralleled by any but themselves:) Sir Francis was the elder Brother, Sir
Horace lived to be the elder man. Sir Francis was more feared, Sir Horace more
loved by the Soldiery: The former in Martial Discipline was oftentimes Rigidus
ad ruinam, the latter seldom exceeded ad terrorem. Sir Francis left none, Sir
Horace no Male-Issue, whose four Coheirs are since Matched into honorable
Families. Both lived in War, much honored; dyed in peace, much lamented.

What is a great question among all Martial men, was so between these Brethren;
whether to repair a reputation ruined by some infamous disgrace, and the honor
abused by some notorious loss, the General ought to oppose the fortune that
oppresses him, and hazard what remains, to recover what is lost? Sir Francis
was of opinion, That though it is not the interest of a supreme Prince, yet it
is the concern of a subordinate Commander to support his credit at the rate of
his Army. But Sir Horace was never for sacrificing the whole for the advancing
of any part, or of many for the humouring of one; but chose rather to break the
impetuosity of his misfortunes by yielding to them, and rather recover both
himself and his success by a prudent retreat, than lose both in an obstinate
misadventure. -- It being far more eligible to suffer in the imaginary interest
of repute^ than that real one of strength; though appearances are yet so
useful, that dexterously to manage the reputation of Affairs, is to imprint in
men a great opinion of virtue and fortune, to enhance successes, and raise that
respect and confidence that seldom fall to the share of reservation and fear.
But apart from that too much caution that betrayeth, and overmuch rashness that
hazardeth our fortunes, both these Heroes were very choice in the places of
their Engagements; for when all the Generals before the Battle of Newport were
for quitting the upper Downs, Sir Francis Vere well knowing how much it
imported the business of the day to hold a place of such advantage, persuaded
Count Maurice rather to expect the Enemy in that ground, than attaque him in a
worse; wherein as his opinion prevailed, so all that were present, were
Eyewitnesses both of the truth of his conjecture, and the soundness of his
judgment: For the Enemy, as he said, did not long gaze upon them; but charging
up the hills, were beaten back so effectually, that our men had the excution of
them for half a mile; which was no small advantage to the fortune of that day.

Neither were they less observant of their time, that Mother of Action, than
their place; neither hasty nor slow to manage an opportunity that is neither
often or long the same; -- or of the order of their Army than both, whereof
each part assisted the other at Newport, and elsewhere so read^ly, that their
shouts and charges equally amazed their Friends and Enemies.

The Reliefs of Rhingbergh were actions of great resolution, ready dispatch, a
watchful circumspection, and good pursuit: The succor of Lithenhooven was a
performance of great and mature deliberation; the surprise of Zutphen by young
Soldiers in women's apparel, was a piece of service of many particular
stratagems; and the Siege of Daventer of as much sage advice. -- All instances
of the wonders that courage can do when wise, valor when sober, a passion when
rational, and a great spirit when advised.

Observations on the Life of Richard Cousin, LL. D.
RIchard Cousin, LL. D. (one of the greatest Civilians our Nation bred, the
grand Champion of Episcopacy, was (amongst all the Countries of England) born
in the Bishopri^k of Durham. His Father was a person of Quality; a Captain of a
Company at Muscleborough-Field, whence his valor returned with victory and
wealth; when crossing the River Tweed [O the uncertainty of all earthly
happiness!] he was drowned therein, to the great loss of his son Richard; and
greater, because he was not sensible thereof, as left an Infant in the Cradle.
His Mother afterward married one Mr. Meadow, a Yorkshire Gentleman, who bred
this his Son-in-law at a School at Skipton upon Cr^ven; wherein such was his
proficiency, that before he was twelve years old (little less then a wonder to
me, in that age, from so far a Country) he was admitted into Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge. Some of his friends in Queens-Colledge in that University had a
design to fetch him thence, had not Doctor Beaumont prevented the plot, in
making him Scholar and Fellow as soon as by his Age, Degree, and the Statutes
he was capable thereof.

He was a general Scholar, Geometrician, Musician, Physician, Divine, but
chiefly, Civil and Canon Lawyer. By Archbishop Whitgift he was preferred to be
first Chancellor of Worceste^, [in that age a place non tam gratiosus quam
negotiosu^] and afterward Dean of the Arches, wherein he carried himself
without giving (though many took) offense at him.

Of these one wrote a Book against him called the Abstract [abstracted, says
my Author, from all Wit, Learning, and Charity] to whom he returned such an
answer in defense of the High-Comm^ssion, and Oath Ex Officio, that he put his
Adversary to silence.

Others lay to his charge, that he gave many blanck Licenses, the common
occasion of unlawful Mar^iages; and the procurer is as bad as the thief,
robbing many a Parent of his dear Child thereby. But always malice looks
through a multiplying-glasse. Euclio complained, Intromisis^i sexcentos Coquos,
Plau. in Aularia.
Thou have let in six hundred Cooks, when there was but two truly told [
Antrax and Congrio] so here was but one, which a Fugitive servant stole from a
Register to make his private profit thereby. GOD in his sickness granted him
his desire which he made in his health; that he might be freed from Torture,
which his corpulency did much suspect, bestowing (...) upon him, a sweet and
quiet departure. Pious his dying expressions; I de^^re to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, Phil. 1. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, Revel. 12. And his last words were these; F^re^el my surviving
friends; remember your Mortality, and Eternal life.

He gave forty pounds to the building of a Chamber in Trinity-Colledge, and
fifteen pounds per annum for the maintenance of two Scholarships therein: a
good gift out of his estate, who left not above fifty pounds a year clear to
his Heir: a great argument of his integrity, that he got no more in so gainful
a place. Dying at Doctors Commons, he was buried by his own appointment in
Lambeth Church, and Doctor Andrews preached his Funeral-Sermon. Amongst the
many Verses made by the University of Cambridge, this (with the allowance of
Poetical License) came from no bad Fancy.

Magna Deos inter lis est exorta: creatas
Horum qui lites dirimit, ille deest
Co^inum potiere dii componere tantas
Lites, quod vero jure peritus erat.
A most moderate man he was in his own nature, but more earnest in the business
of the Church, in the behalf of which he writ many Books of validity, etc.

It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Barlow (afterward Bishop of Lincoln)
was bred by Doctor Cousin at his charge in his own Family; who in expression of
his Thankfulness, wrote this Dr. Cosin's Life, out of which most of the
aforesaid Character has been taken.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief-Iustice Cook.
THis accomplished person was well born at Mileham in Norfolk, of Robert Cook
Esquire, and Wini^red Knigh^ly his Wife, and as well bred. 1. When ten years of
age at Norwich School. 2. At Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge. 3. After four years
University-study, first in Cliffords Inn, and then in the Inner Temple. The
first occasion of his Rice, was his stating of the Cooks Case of the Temple so
exactly, that all the House who were puzzled with it, admired him; and his
pleading it so, that the whole Bench took notice of him. Such his proficiency,
that at the end of six years (exceeding early in that strict age) he was called
to the Bar, and soon after, for three years, chosen Reader in Lions Inn. Here
his learned Lecture so spread forth his fame, that crowds of Clients sued to
him for his Counsel; and his own suit was the sooner granted, when tendering
his Affections in order to Marriage, unto Bridget daughter and Coheir of John
Paston Esquire, whose portion moderately estimated, Viis and medis, amounted
unto thirty thousand pounds, her virtues not falling under valuation, and she
enriched her Husband with ten Children.

Then began preferment to press upon him; the City of Norwich choosing him
Recorder, the County of Norfolk their Knight for Parliament, the Queen her
Speaker therein, as also her Solicitor and Attorney. King James honored him
with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice, first of the Common Pleas, then of
the King's Bench. Thus beginning on a good bottom left him by his Father,
marrying a Wife of extraordinary wealth; having at the first great and gainful
practice, afterward many and profitable Offices, being provident to choose
^y^^d penny worths in Purchases, leading a thrifty e^d^, living to a great age
during flourishing and peac^^ble times (born as much after the persecution
under Q. Mary, as dying before our Civil Wars) no wonder if he advanced to a
fair estate, so that all his sons might seem elder brethren, by the large
possessions left unto them.

Some falsely character him a back-friend to the Church and Clergy, being a
grand Benefactor to the Church of Norwich, who gratefully under their public
Seal honored him with this ensuing Testimony.

Edwardus Coke Armiger, saepius and in multis difficillimis Negotiis Ecclesiae
nostrae auxiliatus est, and Nuper eandem contra Templorum Helluones, qui
Dominia, Maneria and Haereditamenta nostra devorare sub Titulo obscuro (
Concelatum dicunt) sponte sua nobis insciis, and sine mercede ulla legitime
tutatus est; atque eandem suam nostri Defensionem in perpetuam tantae rei
memoriam, and posterorum gratia, (si opus fuerit) magna cum industria and
scriptis redegit, and Nostrae Ecclesiae donavit. As for the many Benefices in
his own Patronage, he freely gave them to worthy men, being wont to say in his
Law-language, That he would have Church Livings pass by Livery and Seisin, not
Bargain and Sale.

He was our English Trebonianus, very famous for his Comments on Littleton and
our Common Law. 1638. A Parliament was call'^^ ^^nd the Court party was jealous
of Sir Edwar^ ^e^ctivity against them, as who had not digested (...)
discontentments as he had done the Law. Hereupon to prevent his Election as a
Member, he was confined to Buckinghamshire as a Sheriff.

He scrupled to take the Oath, pretending many things against it, and
particularly that the Sheriff is bound thereby to prosecute Lollards, wherein
the best Christians may be included.

It was answered; That he had often seen the Oath given to others without any
regret, and knew full well that Lollard in the modern sense imported the
opposers of the present Religion, as established by Law in the Land.

No excuses would serve his turn, but he must undertake that O^f^ce: However
his friends beheld it as an injurious degradation of him, who had been Lord
Chief Justice, to attend on the Judges at the Assizes.

Five sorts of people he used to fore^design to misery and poverty; Chemists,
Monopolizers, Concealers, Promoters, and Rhyming Poets. For three things he
would give God solemn thanks; That he never gave his body to Physic, nor his
heart to cruelty, ^or his hand to corruption. In three things he did much
applaud his own success; In his fair fortune with his Wife, in his happy study
of the Laws, and in his free coming by all his Offices, nec prece, nec pretio,
neither begging nor bribing for Preferment.

His parts were admirable: he had a deep Judgment, faithful Memory, active
Fancy, and the Jewel of his mind was put into a fair Case, a beautiful body
with a comely countenance: A case, which he did wipe and keep clean, delighting
in good Clothes, well worn, and being wont to say, That the outward neatness of
our bodies, might be a Monitor of purity to our souls.

In his Pleadings, Discourse, and Judgments, he declined all Circumlocutions,
usually saying, The matter lies in a little Room Though some observe that his
digressions marred his repute, and had broke his neck, had he lived in any
Kings reign but K. James's.
. In all Places, Callings, and Jurisdictions, he commended Modesty and Sobriety
within their boundaries, saying, If a River swells beyond the banks, it
loses its own Channel.

If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another
punishes me, I will not punish my self. In the highest Term of Business he
made Vacation to himself at his Table; and would never be persuaded privately
to retract what he had publicly adjudged, professing, He was ^ Judge in a
Court, not in a Chamber. He was wont to say, No wise man would do that in
prosperity, whereof he should repent in adversity. His Motto was, Prudens qui
Patiens; and his practice was accordingly, especially after he fell into the
disfavour of King James, when he did Frui suo Infortunio, and improved his loss
to his advantage. He triumphed in his own Innocence, that he had done nothing
illegally; calling to mind the Motto which he gave in his Rings when made
Sergeant, Lex est tutissima Classis, The Law is the safest Helmet. And now he
had leisure to peruse what formerly he had written, even thirty Books with his
own hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called VADE MECUM, from
whence at one view he took a prospect of his Life past, having noted therein
most Remarkables. His most learned and laborious Works on the Laws will last to
be admired by the Judicious Posterity, whilst Fame has a Trumpet left her,
and any breath to blow therein. His judgment lately passed for an Oracle in
Law; and since the credit thereof has causelessly been questioned, the wonder
is not great. If the Prophet himself, living in an incredulous Age, found cause
to complain, Who has believed our report? it need not seem strange that our
licentious Times have afforded some to shake the Authenticalness of the Reports
of any earthly Judge.

He constantly had Prayers said in his own house, and charitably relieved the
Poor with his constant Alms. The Foundation of Sutton's Hospital (when indeed
but a Foundation) had been ruined before it was raised, and crushed by some
Courtiers in the hatching thereof, had not his great care preserved the same.
The Free School at The^ford was supported in its being, by his assistance; and
he founded a School on his cost at Godrick in Norfolk.

It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Whitgift afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, sent unto his Pupil when the Queen's Attorney, a fair new
Testament, with this Message: He had long enough studied Common Law, now let
him study the Law of God.

When he was under a cloud at Court, and outed of his Judges place, the lands
belonging to the Church of Norwich, which formerly he had so industriously
recovered and settled thereon, were again called into question, being begged by
a Peer. Sir Edward desired him to desist, telling him, that otherwise he would
put on his Gown and Cap, and come into Westminster Hall once again, and plead
there in any Court in justification of what he had done. He died at Stoke-Poges
in Buckingham-shire, on Wednesday the third of September, being the 83 of age,
whose last words were these, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done.

The infirmities of this Judge, as my Lord BACON recited them in a Letter to
him, were these: 1. That he delighted to speak more than hear. 2. That he would
run out of his Profession; and as he observed of Divines, so it was observed of
him, none erred worse out of his element. 3. That he conversed with Books
rather than Men, and only with such men that he spoke to as Scholars, rather
than treated as friends. 4. That he obtruded those things as Novelties that
were stale. 5. That he would jest on men in place, and insult on men in misery.
6. That he made the Law lean too much to his opinion. 7. That his Tenants in
Norfolk were hardly used; and that though he had ten thousand pounds per an. he
relieved not the poor. 8. That in his last proceedings against Somerset, he was
too open and dilatory, giving too much advantage, and breaking out to some
unadvised expressions. 9. That he stood out against Power; for which, and other
failures, he was dismissed the Council Board with this expression from King
James, That he was the fittest instrument to serve a Tyrant.


Indeed he had some projects for the Revenue, and looked for the Treasury, when
he was absolutely cast off; though he made such shift, that throw him where you
would (as King James said) he fell upon his legs.

Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Winwood.
SIr Ralph Winwood was a Gentleman well seen in most Affairs, but most expert
in matters of Trade and War; for he was first a Soldier, and then an Agent in
the Netherlands, where he remonstrated against Vorstius learnedly and
resolutely, representing as well his Masters parts as his power: It was the
very guize of that time to be learned; the wits of it were so excellent, the
helps and assistants of it were so great; Printing was so common; the world (by
Navigation) so open; great experiments so disclosed; the leisure of men so
much, the age was so peaceable; and his Majesty, after whom all writ, so
knowing.

When the Earl of Somerset was made Chamberlain by his Majesty in his Fathers
place, Sir Ralph Winwood was by the Queen made Secretary in his; succeeding him
in his Office, but exceeding him in his success ( Fortune may begin any man's
greatness, but Virtue must continue it) for this Favorite taking upon him to
overruled Winwood, Winwood makes it his business to overthrow him; to which
purpose his Agents discover some secrets abroad ( you may understand more of
England at Amsterdam, than at London) and he uses his Arts at home; for Mr.
Vil^iexs being now brought to Court, when others were for raising him by
interest, Sir Ralph was for advancing him with Compliance -- a Compliance, as
he said, that must either supple or break his Adversaries, and either way ruin
them. -- Accordingly Sir George is directed to offer his service to the Earl of
Somerset; that Earl fatally tells him, He would have none of his service, but
would break his Design. -- These words coming so cross to the Kings
inclination, and the Court's plot, provoked all persons to look further into
Sir Ralph Winwood's Intelligence concerning Sir Tho. Overbury's death. Now men's
weaknesses and faults are best known by their enemies, their virtues and
abilities from their friends; their customs and times from their servants;
their conceits and opinions from their familiars, to whom they are least
masked. To all these he applies himself, until he had discovered as much of
the practices concerning Overbury, as might humble the Earl; and as much
corruption in the conveyance of public money to the building of Audley-End, as
might displace his Father. An Apothecaries boy gives the first, and a servant
that carried the money, the second, both whom he surprised with the Spanish
proverb; Di mentura, y sacaras verdad: Tell a lie, and find a truth. Indeed the
natures and dispositions, the conditions and necessities, the factions and
combinations, the animosities and discontents; the ends and designs of most
people were clear and transparent to this watchful man's intelligence and
observation, who could do more with King James by working on his fear, than
others by gratifying his pleasure.

When I observe how close and silent he was at the Council Table, it puts me in
mind of the man that gave this reason why he was silent in a Treaty and
Conference: Because (said he) the Enemy might know, that as there are many here
that can speak, so here is one that can hold his peace.

Observations on the Life of Sir Francis Bacon.
SIr Francis was born where we are made men, bred where we are made Statesmen;
being equally happy in the quickness of the City, and politeness of the Court:
He had a large mind from his Father, and great abilities from his Mother; his
parts improved more than his years: his great, fixed, and methodical memory,
his solid judgment, his quick fancy, his ready expression, gave high assurance
of that profound and universal knowledge and comprehension of things which then
rendered him the observation of great and wise men, and afterward the wonder
of all. The great Queen was as much taken with his witty discourses when a
Schoolboy, as with his grave Oracles when her Counsel learned. He was a
Courtier from his Cradle to his Grave, sucking in experience with his milk,
being inured to policy as early as to his Grammar: Royal Maxims were his
Sententia Puerilis; and he never saw any thing that was not noble and becoming.
The Queen called him her young Lord Keeper, for his grave ingenuity at seven
years of age; and he could tell her Majesty he was two years He was born Jan.
22. 1560. at York-house in the Strand.
younger, than her happy Reign. At twelve, his industry was above the capacity,
and his mind above the reach of his Contemporaries: A prodigy of parts he must
be, who was begot by wise Sir Nicholas Bacon, born of the accomplished Mrs.
Anne Cook, daughter to Sir Anthony Cook, King Edward the 6^hs. Tutor, a good
Grecian and Latinist, and bred at Trinity-Colledge, under the wise, learned,
and pious Doctor Whitgift. His strong observations at Court, his steady course
of study in the University, must be improved for State-business, by a
well-contrived Travel abroad: where his conversation was so obliging, his way
so inquisitive, his prudence so eminent, that he was Sir Amie Paulet's Agent
between the Juncto of France and the Queen of England: He allayed the solidity
of England with the Air of France, until his own Affairs and the Kingdoms
service called him home at his Fathers death to enjoy a younger Brothers
estate, and act his part: Policy was his business, the Law was only his
livelihood; yet he was so great a Statesman, that you would think he only
studied men: so great a Scholar, that you would say, he only studied Books.
Such insight he had in the Law, that he was at thirty her Majesty's Advocate,
and extraordinary Counsel; such his judgment, that he was the Student of
Grayes-Inn's Oracle; being well seen in the grounds and mysteries of the Law,
though not experienced in the Cases of the Common Law, while he made that
profession his accessory, and not his principal: so generous and affable his
disposition, that he was a^l men's love and wonder: He instilled wholesome
precepts of Prudence and Honor to Noblemen (particularly the Earl of Essex, to
whom he was more faithful, than he to himself:) Great principles of Arts and
Sciences to the learned; noble Maxims of government to Princes, excellent
rules of Life to the Populacy. When his great Patron Essex sunk, he was buoyed
up by his own steadiness, and native worth, that admitted him to the Qu. own
presence, not only to deliver matter of Law, which was his profession, but to
debate matters of State, which was his element: his judgment was so eminent,
that he could satisfy the greatest; his condescen^ion so humble, that he
instructed the meanest: his extraordinary parts, above the model of the age,
were feared in Queen Elizabeth's time, but employed in King James's. Favor he
had in her Reign; but Trust only in his. It Is dangerous in a factious Age to
have my Lord Bacon's parts, or my Lord of Essex his favor. Exact was his
correspondence abroad and at home; constant his Letters, frequent his Visits,
great his Obligations, moderate and temperate his Inclination; peaceable,
humble, and submissive his mind; complying and yielding, his temper: In Queen
Elizabeth's time, when he could not rise by the public way of service, he did
it by that more private of Marriage, with one Alice Barneham, an Alderman's
Heiress, and other commendable Improvements; whereby he showed a great soul
could be rich in spite of Fortune, (for his Father dying while he was in
France before he had purchased an estate, he designed for him his youngest Son
and Darling, he had but a Portion of the money divided among five Brethren,
whereby he was in streights till Gorambum fell to him by his dearest Brother
Mr. Anthony Bacon's death, a Gentleman of his parts, though not his learning,
having nothing either of honor or profit from that Queen, but a reversion of
the Register of the Star-Chambers place, worth 1500. a year, which he stayed
for 20 years, saying that it was like another man's ground, buttalling upon his
house; which might mend his prospect, but it did not fill his Barn) though it
scorned it in point of Honor. In the House of Commons none more popular,
(where he was allowed to sit as Member, when Attorney, which is allowed none in
that place) none more zealous, none so knowing a Patriot: In the house of
Lords, none more s^ccessfully serviceable to the Crown: the easy way of
Subsidies was his design in Queen Elizabeth's time; the union with Scotland was
his contrivance in King James's.

His make and port was stately, his speech flowing and grave, each word of his
falling in its place; the issue of great reason when conceived, and of great
prudence when expressed: so great skill he had in observing and contriving of
occasions and opportunities, in suiting of Humors, and hitting of Junctures
and Flexures of Affairs, that he was in his time the Master of speech and
action, carrying all before him.

The Earl of Salisbury says, Sir Walter Rawleigh, was a good Orator, but a bad
Writer; the Earl of Northampton was a good Writer, but a bad Orator; Sir
Francis Bacon excelled in both: Much he said he owed to his Books, more to his
innate Principles and Notions: When he thought, he said, he aimed more at
Connection than Variety: When he spoke, he designed rather the life and vigor
of expression, and perspicuity of words, (asking often if the meaning were
expressed plainly enough) than the elegancy or order of phrase. His axiom was;
Words should wait on things, rather than things on words; and his resolution
was, That all affected elegance was below the gravity and majesty of a public
discourse: He rather judged Books and Men, than either read or talked with them.

His Exercises were man-like and healthful, walking and riding; his Meditations
cohaerent, every minute of his time improved; his Table temperate and learned,
where his great Discourses were the entertainment, and he himself the treat;
resolving Cases most satisfactorily, it was observed that he would express
another man^ words with great advantage, speaking with liberty and respect to
all hearers, amend much the phrase of it though retaining the substance,
stating Questions most exactly, relating Histories most prudently, opening
great Secrets most clearly, answering Arguments and replying most familiarly,
and speaking what he had thoroughly weighed and considered most effectually. --
All matters and speeches came from him with advantage; so acute and ready his
wit, so faithful his memory, so penetrating his judgment, so searching his
head, so large and rational his soul. He drew out of every man he spoke with,
what he was best for.

My Lord of Salisbury said, he had the clearest prospect of things of any man
in his age; and King James, by whom he was never reproved in eighteen years,
said, That he knew the method of handling Matters, after a mild and gentle
manner: Not engaging his Master in any rash or grievous courses, insulting over
no offender, but carrying it decently and compassionately to the person of the
offender, when most severe against the offense. His Religion was rational and
sober, his spirit public, his love to Relations tender, to Friends faithful;
to the hopeful liberal, to men univerfal, to his very Enemies civil. He lest
the best pattern of Government in his actions under one King, and the best
principles of it in the Life of the other. His Essays and History made him the
admiration of polite Italy; his Accomplishments, the wonder of France; Monsieur
Fiat, the French Ambassador, who called him Father, saying to him, after an
earnest desire to see him, That he was an Angel to him, of whom he had heard
much, but never saw him. Solid, less dissipable and juicy Meat was his Diet,
and Rhubarb infused in Wine before meat his Physic: four hours in the morning
he made his own, not by any means to be interrupted: business was his fate,
retyrement his inclination. Socrates brought Morality from Discourse to
Practice; and my Lord Bacon brought Philosophy from Speculation to Experience,
Aristot^e whom he disliked at 16 years of age, not for his person, for he
valued him highly; but his way which bred disputations, but not useful things
for the benefit of the life of man, continuing in that judgment to his dying
day, he said, taught many to dispute, more to wrangle, few to find out Truth,
none to manage it according to his principles: -- My Lord Bacon was a man
singular in every faculty, and eminent in all: His Judgment was solid, yet his
memory was a wonder; his Wit was quick, yet his Reason slaid; His Invention was
happy, yet methodical: and one fault he had, that he was above the age he lived
in; above it in his bounties to such as brought him Presents (so remembering
that he had been Lord-Chancellor, that he forgot he was but Lord Verulam: Great
his understanding, his knowledge was not from Books, though he read much; but
from grounds and notions in himself, which he vented with great caution; Dr.
Rawley attesting that he saw twelve Copies of the Instauratio Magna revised and
amended year by year till it was published, and great his mind too) above it in
his kindness to servants, to whom he had been a better Master, if he had been a
worse; and more kind, if he had been less indulgent to them. Persons of Quality
courted his Service. For the first of his Excesses, K. James jeered him in his
progress to New Market, saying, when he heard he gave ten pounds to one that
brought him some Fruit, My Lord, my Lord, this is the way to Beggars-bush. For
the second, he reflected upon himself, when he said to his servants as they
rose to him in his Hall; Your rise has been my fall. Though indeed he rather
trusted to their honesty, than connived at their falsehood; for he did impartial
Justice commonly to both parties, when one servant was in fee with the
Plaintiff, and the other with the Defendant. -- How well he understood his own
time, his Letters, and complyances evidence; than whom none higher in spirit,
yet none humbler in his Addresses [ The proudest man is most servile.] How
little he valued wealth, appears, in that when his servants would take money
from his Closet, even while he was by, he would laugh, and say, I poor men,
that is their portion. How well he kenned the art of Converse, his Essays
discover, a piece (as he observed himself) that of all his Works was most
current, for that they come home to men's business and bosoms. How far skilled
in the Art of Government, the Felicities of Queen Elizabeth, written by him in
Latin, ordered by his last Will to be Printed so, but published in English in
his resuscitatio by his Amanuensis. Dr. Rawley, his H. 7. War with Spain, Holy
War, Elements of the Law, irrefragably demonstrate; and how well seen in all
Learning, his Natural History, and Advancement of Learning answerably argue. In
a word, how sufficient he was, may be conjectured from this instance, that he
had the contrivance of all King James his Designs, until the Match with Spain;
and that he gave those Directions to a great Statesman Vid. Duke of
Buckingham's Life.
, which may be his Character, and our conclusion. Only be it observed, that
though this peerless Lord is much admired by Englishmen, yet is he more valued
by Strangers; distance, as the Historian has it, diminishing his faults to
Foreigners, while we behold his perfections abated with his failings; which
set him as much below pity, as his Place did once above it; Sir Julius Caesar
(they say) looking upon him as a burden in his Family, and the Lord Brook
denying him a bottle of small beer. Though in a Letter to King James he thanks
him for being that Master to him that had raised and advanced him s^x times in
Office; i.e. Council learned extraordinary, Solicitor and Attorney General,
Lord Keeper, and Chancellor, Knight-Lord Verulam, Viscount St. A^ban's, with
1800 l. a y^ar out of the broad Zeal, and Alienation Off^ce to his dying day,
most of which he allowed to his Benedict ^^^unch^m, an Alderman of London's
Daughter and Coheir.
Wife, toward whom he was very bountiful in gifts, bestowing on her a Robe of
honor which she wore while she lived, which was above twenty years after his
death. His Religion was like a Philosophers, rational and well grounded as
appears by his confession of faith, composed many years before his death, an
instance of the truth of his own observation; that a little Philosophy makes
men ap^ to forget God, as attributing too much to second causes; but depth of
Philosophy brings a man back again to God; he being constant at the public
Prayers, frequent at the Sermons and Sacraments of the Church of England, in
whose Communion he dyed of a gentle Fever, accompanied with a choking
defluxion and cold, April 9. being Easter Day 1626. 66th. year of his age, in
the Earl of Arundel's house at High-gate near London, being Buried according to
his Will at St. Michael's Church in St. Alban's, the only Church in old
Verulam, near his Mother under a white Marble, ^et up by Sir Tho. Meauty,
Secretary to his Lordship, and Clerk of the Council to King James and King
Charles, whereon he is drawn in his full Stature studying; with an Inscription
by Sir Henry Wotton. He had one peculiar temper of body, that he fainted
always at an Eclipse of the Moon, though he knew not of it, and considered it
not. His Receipt for the Gout which eased him in two hours, is at the end of
his Natural History. His Rhubarb-draught before meat he liked, because it
carried away the gross humors, not less^ning the spirits as sweating does.

It was the great effect of his Religion, that as he said (notwithstanding the
opportunities he had to be revenged) he neither bred nor fed malice^ saying no
worse to the King (who enquired of him what he thought of a great man newly
dead, that had not been his friend) than that he would never have made his
Majesty's estate better, but he was sure he would have kept it from being worse.

And it was the consequence of his great worth, all men applauded him. Fulk
Lord Brook, after the perusal of his H. 7 th. returned it him with these words:
Commend me to my Lord, and bid him take care to get good Paper and Ink, for the
work is Incomparable. Dr. Collins the Kings Professor of Divinity at Cambridge,
said when he had read his advancement of Learning, that he found himself in a
case to begin his Studies again; as having lost all his former time.

Foreigners crossing the Seas to see him here, and carrying his Picture at
length that he might be seen abroad. An Italian writes to the Lord Cavendish,
since Earl of Devonshire, thus concerning the Lord Bacon; I will expect the new
Essays of my Lord Chancellor Bacon, as also his History with a great deal of
desire; and whatsoever else he shall compose; but in particular of his History;
I promise my self a thing perfect and singular; especially King Henry the 7 th.
where he may exercise the talent of his Divine understanding.

This Lord is more and more known; and his Books here, more and more delighted
in; and those men that have more than ordinary knowledge in humane affairs,
esteem him one of the most capable spirits of this age.

Observations on the Life of the Lord John Digby.
JOhn Lord Digby of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was a younger Son of an
ancient Family, long flourishing at Koleshull. To pass by his younger years,
(all Children being alike in their Coats) when he had only an Annuity of fifty
pounds per annum, only his youth gave pregnant hopes of that Eminency, which
his mature age did produce. He did ken the Embassador's craft, as well as any
in his age, employed by King James in several Services to Foreign Princes,
recited in his Patent, as the main motives of the Honors conferred upon him.
But his managing the matchless Match with Spain was his Masterpiece, wherein a
good (I mean a great) number of State-Traverses were used on both sides: Where
if he dealt in Generalities, and did not press Particulars, we may ghess the
reason of it from that expression o^ his; I will take care to have my
Instructions pers^^^, and will pursue them punctually: If he held Affairs in
suspense, that it might not come to a War on our part, it may be he did so with
more regard to his Mr. King James his inclination, than his own apprehension:
If he said; That howsoever the business went, he would make his fortune
thereby, it rather argued his weakness that he said so, his sufficiency that he
could do so, than his unfaithfulness that he did so. This is certain, that he
chose rather to come home, and suffer the utmost displeasure of the King of
England, than stay in Spain, and enjoy the highest favor of the King of Spain.
He did indeed intercede for some indulgence to the Papists; but it was, because
otherwise he could do no good for the Protestants. -- But whatever was at the
bottom of his Actions, there was resolution and nobleness a top, especially in
these actions. 1 Being carried from Village to Village after the King of Spain,
without that regard due to his person, or place; he expressed himself so
generously, that the Spanish Courtiers trembled; and the King declared, That he
would not interrupt his Pleasures with business at Lerma, for any Ambassador in
the world but the English; nor for any English Ambassador but Don Iuan. 2. When
impure Scioppius upon his Libel against K. James, and Sir Humphrey Bennet's
complaint to the Archduke against him, fled to Madrid; my Lord observing that
it was impossible to have Justice done against him from the Catholic King
because of the Jesuits, puts his Cousin George Digby upon cutting him; which
he did over his Nose and Mouth wherewith he offended, so that he carried the
mark of his Blasphemy to his Grave. 3. When he was extraordinary Ambassador in
Germany, upon his return by Heidelbergh, observing that Count Mansfield's Army,
upon whom depended the fortune of the Palsgrave, was like to disband for want
of money, he pawned all his Plate and Jewels to buoy up that sinking Cause for
that time. That his spirit was thus great abroad, was his honor; but that it
was too great at home, was his unhappiness: for he engaged in a fatal Contrast
with the Duke of Buckingham, that hazarded both their safeties, had not this
Lord feared the Duke's power (as the Duke this Lord's policy) and so at last it
became a drawn Battle betwixt them; yet so, that this Earl lost the love of
King Charles, living many years in his disfavour: But such as are in a
Court-cloud, have commonly the Countries Sunshine; and this Peer during his
Eclipse, was very popular with most of the Nation. It is seldom seen, if a
Favorite once broken at Court, sets up again for himself; the hap (rather than
happiness) of this Lord, the King graciously reflecting on him at the beginning
of the Long Parliament, as one best able to give him the safest Council in
those dangerous times. But how he incensed the Parliament so far, as to be
excepted pardon, I neither do know, nor dare enquire. Sure I am, that after the
surrender of Exeter, he went over into France, where he met with that due
respect in Foreign, which he missed in his Native Country. The worst I wish
such, who causelessly suspect him of Popish inclinations (says my Author) is,
that I may hear from them but half so many strong Arguments for the Protestant
Religion, as I heard from him, who was to his commendation a cordial Champion
for the Church of England. This Family has been much talked of this last forty
years; though all that I can say of it is this, that great spirits, large
parts, high honors, penned with narrow Estates, seldom bless their owners
within moderation, or the places they live in with peace.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Spencer.
He was the fifth Knight of his Family, in an immediate succession, well
allied and extracted, being descended from the Spencers, Earls of Gloucester
and Winchester. In the first year of the Reign of King James, being a moneyed
man, he was created Baron of Wormeleiton in the County of Warwick. He had such
a ready and quick Wit, that once speaking in Parliament of the valor of their
English Ancestors in defending the Liberty of the Nation, returned this Answer
to the Earl of Arundel, who said unto him, Your Ancestors were then keeping of
Sheep; If they kept Sheep, yours were then plotting of Treason. But both of
them were at present confined; but to the Lord Spencer the Upper-House ordered
Reparations, who was first and causelessly provoked. This Lord was also he, who
in the first of King James was sent (with Sir William Dithick, principal King
of Arms) to Frederick Duke of Wirtenbergh, elected into the Order of the
Garter, to present and invest him with the Robes and Ornaments thereof; which
were accordingly with great solemnity performed in the Cathedral of Studgard.
-- And this was the Lord, that when the Earl of Bristol charged the Duke of
Buckingham, started up, and demanded; Is this all you have to say against the
Duke? The Earl replied, Yes my Lord, and I am sorry it is so much. Then quoth
the Lord Spencer, If this be all, Ridiculus mus; and so sat down again.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of King James.
THE STATESMEN and FAVORITES OF ENGLAND, IN The Reign of King Charles. I.
Observations on the Life of the Duke of Buckingham.
NAture bestowed on him an exact comeliness, his Mother a noble education (not
so much to study, as converse:) His Travels to France, carriage and experience.
About which times, he falls into intrinsecal society with Sir Ioh. Greham, then
one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy-Chamber; who, I know not upon what
Luminaries, he espied in his face, dissuaded him from Marriage, and gave him
rather encouragement to woe Fortune at Court, than court it in the City: Which
advice sank well into his fancy, for within some while, the King had taken by
certain glances (whereof the first was at Apthorpe in a Progress) such liking
of his Person, that he was resolved to make him a Masterpiece, and to mould him
as it were Platonically to his own Idea. Neither was his Majesty content only
to be the Architect of his Fortune, without putting his gracious hand likewise
to some part of the work it self; insomuch that it pleased him to descend, and
to avale his goodness, even to the giving of his foresaid friend Sir John
Greham secret directions, how, by what degrees he should bring him into favor.
His own parts and observation gained him prudence and discretion; His Family
and Ancestors in Leichestershire, gentility and repute; so that there wanted
nothing but Interest to set him up a Courtier: Sir Thomas Compton, who had
married his Mother, supplied him with the one, and the Earls of Bedford,
Pembrook, and Hertford, who would eclipse Somerset, helped him to the other:
For those three Lords meeting one night at Baynards-Castle, and commanding
Somerset's picture should be abused in their way: next day Sir Thomas Lake
leads him into Court, buying him the Cup-bearers place: A while after the
Countess of Bedford ushereth him to the Presence Chamber, entering him a
Bed-chamber-man, -- and the Earl of Pembrook supports him, until he was a
Favorite. The Courtiers wished him well, because he was an Englishman: the
Nobility favored him, because a Gentleman; the Ladies have a kindness for him,
because the exactest Courtier in Christendom; the King observes him much, for
his complete body, more for his pregnant parts; and the Statesmen now
consulting Somerset's removal, and finding King James his good nature loath to
leave the bosom of one Minion, until he had reposed himself in another, made it
their plot to advance him. His carriage was free and debonair; his passions
even and smooth, and one says, carried in his pocket; his nature noble and
open; his temper industrious and inquisitive; his intellectuals clear and
capable; his mind tractable and docible; his spirit resolute and undaunted. --
The first month he comes to Court, he takes place above all his fellows; and
being removed with some affront by a creature of Somerset's, gives him a box on
the ear; an action that gave him and his friends a seasonable occasion of a
Contest with Somerset, and him a clear conquest over him: Somerset as
Chamberlain would have cut off his hand, and he as Favorite was like to have
cut off his head. This new Favorite rises; all are weary of Somerset the
first Minion, all welcome the second. The King is first his Tutor, and then his
Patron, instructing him before he employed him. Three sorts of studies he
engaged him in; the first was for delights in private Retyrements; the second
for ornament in Discourse; the third, for ability in Business. He had Princely
apprehensions of the principles and Maxims of Government, a distinct notion of
all his Affairs, an excellent way to make use of other men's Abilities; and
these incomparable Rules from my Lord Bacon, which were transcribed in his Life.

Sir, In the first place, Complete instructions for a statesman, given by L.
B. to D. B.
I shall be bold to put you in mind of the present condition you are in; You
are not only a Courtier, but a Bed-chamber-man, and so are in the eye and ear
of your Master; but you are also a Favorite; The Favorite of the time, and so
are in his bosom also; The world has so voted you, and does so esteem of you,
(for Kings and great Princes, even the wisest of them, have had their Friends,
their Favorites, their Privadoes, in all ages; for they have their affections
as well as other men) of these they make several uses: sometimes to communicate
and debate their thoughts with them, and to ripen their judgments thereby;
sometimes to ease their cares by imparting them; and sometimes to interpose
them between themselves and the envy or malice of their People (for Kings
cannot err, that must be discharged upon the shoulders of their Ministers; and
they who are nearest unto them must be content to bear the greatest load.)
Truly Sir, I do not believe or suspect that you are chosen to this eminency,
out of the last of these considerations; for you serve such a Master, who by
his wisdom and goodness, is as free from the malice or envy of his Subjects,
as, I think I may say truly, ever any King was, who has sat upon his Throne
before him: But I am confident, his Majesty has cast his eyes upon you, as
finding you to be such as you should be, or hoping to make you to be such as he
would have you to be; for this I may say without flattery, your outside
promises as much as can be expected from a Gentleman. But be it in the one
respect, or other, it belongs to you to take care of your self, and to know
well what the name of a Favorite signifies: If you be chosen upon the former
respects, you have reason to take care of your actions and deportment, out of
your gratitude, for the King's sake; but if out of the later, you ought to take
the greater care, for your own sake.

You are as a new risen Star, and the eyes of all men are upon you; let not
your own negligence make you fall like a Meteor.

The contemplation then of your present condition must necessarily prepare you
for action; what time can be well spared from your attendance on your Master,
will be taken up by suitors, whom you cannot avoid, nor decline, without
reproach; for if you do not already, you will soon find the throng of suitors
attend you; for no man, almost, who has to do with the King, will think
himself safe, unless you be his good Angel, and guide him, or, or least, that
you be not a Malus Genius against him; so that, in respect of the King your
Master, you must be very wary, that you give him true information; and if the
matter concern him in his Government, that you do not flatter him; if you do,
you are as great a Traitor to him in the Court of Heaven, as he that draws his
sword against him: and in respect of the Suitors which shall attend you, there
is nothing will bring you more honor and more ease, then to do them what right
in justice you may, and with as much speed as you may; for believe it, Sir,
next to the obtaining of the suit, a speedy and a gentle denial (when the case
will not bear it) is the most acceptable to suitors; they will gain by their
dispatch, whereas else they shall spend their time and money in attending; and
you will gain in the ease you will find in being rid of their importunity. But
if they obtain what they reasonably desired, they will be doubly bound to you
for your favor: Bis dat qui cito dat; it multiplies the courtesy, to do it
with good words, and speedily.

That you may be able to do this with the best advantage, my humble advice is
this; when suitors come unto you, set apart a certain hour in a day to give
them audience: If the business be light and easy, it may by word only be
delivered, and in a word be answered; but if it be either of weight, or of
difficulty, direct the suitor to commit it to writing, (if it be not so
already) and then direct him to attend for his answer at a set time to be
appointed, which would constantly be observed, unless some matter of great
moment do interrupt it: when you have received the Petitions (and it will
please the Petitioners well, to have access unto you to deliver them into your
own hand) let your Secretary first read them, and draw lines under the material
parts thereof (for the matter, for the most part, lies in a narrow room.) The
Petitions being thus prepared, do you constantly set apart an hour in a day to
peruse those Petit^ons; and after you have ranked them into several files,
according to the subject matter, make choice of two or three friends, whose
judgments and fidelities you believe you may trust in a business of that
nature, and recommend it to one or more of them, to inform you of their
opinions, and of their reasons for, or against the granting of it; and if the
matter be of great weight indeed, then it would not be amiss to send several
Copies of the same Petition to several of your friends, the one not knowing
what the other does, and desire them to return their answers to you by a
certain time, to be prefixxed in writing; so shall you receive an impartial
answer, and by comparing the one with the other, you shall both discern the
abilities and faithfulness of your friends, and be able to give a judgment
thereupon, as an Oracle. But by no means trust not to your own judgment alone,
for no man is omniscient; nor trust only to your servants, who may mislead
you, or mis-inform you; by which they may perhaps gain a few crowns, but the
reproach will lie upon your self, if it be not rightly carried.

For the facilitating of your dispatches, my advice is further, that you divide
all the Petitions, and the matters therein contained, under several heads;
which, I conceive, may be fitly ranked into these eight sorts.

1. Matters that concern Religion, and the Church and Churchmen. 2. Matters
concerning Justice, and the Laws, and the Professors thereof. 3. Counselors,
and the Council Table, and the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom. 4.
Foreign Negotiations and Embassies. 5. Peace and War, both foreign and civil,
and in that the Navy and Forts, and what belongs to them. 6. Trade at home and
abroad. 7. Colonies, or foreign Plantations. 8. The Court, and Curiality.
And whatsoever will not fall naturally under one of these heads, believe me,
Sir, will not be worthy of your thoughts, in this capacity we now speak of. And
of these sorts, I warrant you, you will find enough to keep you in b^siness.

I begin with the first, which concerns Religion.

1. In the first place, be you your self rightly persuaded and settled in the
true Protestant Religion, professed by the Church of England; which doubtless
is as sound and orthodox in the doctrine thereof, as any Christian Church in
the world.

2. In this you need not be a Monitor to your gracious Master the King; the
chiefest of his Imperial Titles, is, to be The Defender of the Faith; and his
learning is eminent, not only above other Princes, but above other men; be but
his scholar, and you are safe in that.

3. For the Discipline of the Church of England, by Bishops, etc. I will not
positively say, as some do, that it is Iure Divino; but this I say, and think,
ex animo, that it is the nearest to Apostolical truth; and confidently I shall
say, it is fittest for Monarchy of all others: I will use no other authority to
you, than that excellent Proclamation set out by the King himself in the first
year of his Reign, and annexed before the Book of Common Prayer; which I desire
you to read; and if at any time there shall be the least motion made for
Innovation, to put the King in mind to read it himself: It is most dangerous in
a State to give ear to the least alterations ^n Government.

4. Take heed, I beseech you, that you be not an instrument to countenance the
Romish Catholics: I cannot flatter; the world believes that some near in blood
to you are too much of that persuasion; you must use them with fit respects,
according to the bonds of ^atu^e; but you are of kin, and so a fri^nd to their
persons, not to their errors.

5. The Archbishops and Bishops, next under the King, have the government of
the Church and Ecclesiastical affairs; be not you the mean to pr^fer any to
those places, for any by-respects, but only for their learning, gravity and
worth: their lives and Doctrine ought to be exemplary.

6. For Deans, and Canons or Prebends of Cathedral Churches: In their first
institution they were of great use in the Church; they were not only to be of
Council with the Bishop for his revenue, but chiefly for his Government in
causes Ecclesiastical; use your best means to prefer such to those places who
are fit for that purpose, men eminent for their learning, piety, and
discretion, and put the King often in mind thereof; and let them be reduced
again to their first institution.

7. You will be often solicited, and perhaps importuned to prefer Scholars to
Church Livings; you may further your friends in that way, caeteris paribus;
otherwise, remember, I pray, that these are not places merely of favor, the
charge of souls lies upon them; the greatest account whereof will be required
at their own hands; but they will share deeply in their faults who are the
instruments of their preferment.

8. Besides the Romish Catholics, there is a generation of Sectaries, the
Anabaptists, Brownists, and others, of their kinds; they have been several
times very busy in this Kingdom, under the color of zeal for reformation of
Religion: The King your Mr. knows their disposition very well; a small touch
will put him in mind of them; he had experience of them in Scotland, I hope he
will beware of them in England; a little countenance or connivance sets them on
fire.

9. Order and decent ceremonies in the Church, are not only comely but
commendable; but there must be great care, not to introduce Innovations, they
will quickly prove scandalous: men are naturally over-prone to suspicion; the
true Protestant Religion is seated in the golden mean; the enemies unto her,
are the extremes on either hand.

10. The persons of Churchmen are to be had in due respect, for their words
sake, and protected from scorn: but if a Clergyman be loose and scandalous, he
must not be patronized nor wink't at; the example of a few such, corrupt many.

11. Great care must be taken, that the patrimony of the Church be not
sacrilegiously diverted to lay-uses: His Majesty in his time has religiously
stopped a leak that did much harm, and would else have done more. Be sure, as
much as in you lies, stop the like upon all occasions.

12. Colleges and Schools of Learning are to be cherished and encouraged,
there to breed up a new stock to furnish the Church and Commonwealth, when the
old store are transplanted. This Kingdom has in later ages be^n famous for
good literature; and if preferment shall attend the deservers, there will not
want supplies.

Next to Religion, let your care be to promote Justice. By justice and mercy is
the Kings throne established.

1. Let the rule of Justice be the Laws of the Land, an impartial arbiter
between the King and hi^ people, and between one Subject and another: I shall
not speak superlatively of them, lest I be suspected of p^^t^a^ity, in regard
of my own pro^^ssion; but this I may truly say, they are second to none in the
Christian world.

2. And, as far as it may lie in you, let no Arbitrary power be intruded: the
people of this Kingdom love the Laws thereof, and nothing will oblige them
more, than a confidence of the free enjoying of them. What the Nobles, upon an
occasion, once said in Parliament, Nolumus leges Angliae mutari, is imprinted
in the hearts of all the people.

3. But because the life of the Laws lies in the due execution and
administration of them, let your eye be in the first place, upon the choice of
good Judges: These properties had they need to be furnished with; To be learned
in their profession, patient in hearing, prudent in governing, powerful in
their elocution to persuade and satisfy both the parties and hearers, just in
their judgment; and, to sum up all, they must have these three Attributes; They
must be men of courage, fearing God, and hating covet^^sness; An ignorant man
cannot, a Coward dares not be a good Judge.

4. By no means be you persuaded to interpose your self, either by word or
letter, in any cause depending, or like to be depending in any Court of
Justice, nor suffer any other great man to do it where you can hinder it; and
by all means dissuade the King himself from it, upon the importunity of any for
themselves or their friends: If it should prevail, it perverts Justice; but if
the Judge be so just, and of so good courage (as he ought to be) as not to be
inclined thereby, yet it always leaves a taint of suspicion behind it. Judges
must be as chaste as Caesar's Wife, neither to be, nor to be suspected to be,
unjust; and Sir, the honor of the Judges in their judicature, is the Kings
honor whom they represent.

5. There is great use of the service of the Judges in their Circuits, which
are twice in the year held throughout the Ki^gdom; the trial of a few causes
between party and party, or delivering of the Gaols in several Counties, are of
great use for the expedition of justice; yet they are of much more use for the
government of the Counties through which they pass, if that were well thought
upon.

6. For if they had instr^ctions to that purpose, they might be the best
intelligencers to the King, of the true state of his whole Kingdom, of the
disposition of the people, of their inclinations, of their intentions and
mo^^^n^, which are necessary to be truly understood.

7. To this end, I could wish, that against every Circuit all the Judges
should, sometimes by the K. himself, and sometimes by the Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper, in the King's name, receive a charge of those things which the
present times did much require; and at their return should deliver a faithful
account thereof, and how they found and left the Counties through which they
passed, and in which they kept their Assizes.

8. And that shey might the better perform th^s work, which might be of great
importance, it will not be am^ss that sometimes this charge be public, as it
uses to be in the Star Chamber at the end of the Terms next before the Circuit
begins, where the K^ng's care of j^stice, and the good of his people, may be
published; and that sometimes also ^t may be private, to communicate to the
Judges some things not so fit to be publicly delivered.

9. I could wish also that the Judges were directed to make a little longer
stay in a place than usually they do; a day more in a County would be a very
good addition, (although their wages for their Circuits were increased in
proportion) it would stand better with the gravity of their employment; whereas
now they are sometimes enforced to rise over-early, and to sit over-late, for
the dispatch of their business, to the extraordinary trouble of themselves and
of the people, their times indeed not being horae juridicae; And, which is the
main, they would have the more leisure to inform themselves ( quasi aliud
agentes) of the true estate of the Country.

10. The attendance of the Sheriffs of the Counties, accompanied with the
principal Gentlemen, in a comely, not a costly equipage, upon the Judges of
Assize at their coming to the place of their sitting, and at their going out,
is not only a civility, but of use also: It raises a reverence to the persons
and places of the Judges, who coming from the King himself on so great an
errand, should not be neglected.

11. If any sue to be made a Judge, for my own part, I should suspect him; but
if either directly or indirectly he should bargain for a place of judicature,
let him be rejected with shame: vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.

12. When the place of a chief Judge of a Court becomes vacant, a puisne Judge
of that Court, or of another Court, who has approved himself fit and
deserving, would be sometimes preferred; it would be a good encouragement for
him, and for others, by his example.

13. Next to the Judge, there would be care used in the choice of such as are
called to the degree of Sergeants at Law (for such they must be first, before
they be made Judges) none should be made Sergeants, but such as probably might
be held fit to be Judges afterward^, when the experience at the Bar has
fitted them for the Bench: Therefore by all means cry down that unworthy course
of late times used, that they should pay moneys for it: It may satisfy some
Courtiers, but it is no honor to the person so preferred, nor to the King, who
thus pre^e^s ^im.

14. For the Kings Counsel at the Law, especially his Atto^ney and Solicito^
General, I need say ^oth^ng^ their continual use for the Kings service, not
only for his Revenue, but for all the parts of his Government, will put the
King, and all those who love his service, in mind to make choice of men every
way fit and able for that employment: they had need to be learned in their
profession, and not ignorant in other things; and to be dexterous in those
affairs whereof the dispatch is committed to them.

15. The Kings Attorney of the Court of Wards is in the true quality of the
Judges; therefore what has been observed already of Judges, which are intended
principally of the three great Courts of Law at Westminster, may be applied to
the choice of the Attorney of this Court.

16. The like for the Attorney of the Duchy of Lan^^ster, who partakes of both
qualities, partly of a Judge of that Co^rt, and partly of an Attorney General;
for so much as concerns the proper Revenue of the D^tchy.

17. I must not forget the Judges of the four Circuits in the twelve Shires of
Wales, who although they are not of the first magnitude, nor need be of the
degree of the Coyf (only the chief Justice of Chester, who is one of the
number, is so) yet are they considerable in the choice of them, by the same
rules as the other Judges are; and they sometimes are, and fitly may be,
transplanted into the higher Courts.

18. There are many Courts (as you see) some superior, some provincial, and
some of a lower orb; It were to be wished, and is fit to be so ordered, that
every of them keep themselves within their proper spheres. The harmony of
justice is th^n the sweetest, when th^re is no jarring about the jurisdiction
of the Courts; which methinks wisdom cannot much differ upon, their true
bounds being for the most part so clearly known.

19. Having said thus much of the Judges, somewhat will be fit to put you in
mind concerning the principal Ministers of Justice: and in the first, of the
High sheriffs of the Counties, which have been very ancient in this Kingdom, I
am sure before the Conquest; The choice of them I commend to your care, and
that at fit times you put the King in mind thereof; that as near as may be they
be such as are fit for those places, for they are of great trust and power: The
P^sse Comitatus, the power of the whole County, being legally committed unto
them.

20. Therefore it is agreeable with the intention of the Law, that the choice
of them should be by the commendation of the great Officers of the Kingdom, and
by the advice of the Judges, who are presumed to be well read in the condition
of the Gentry of the whole Kingdom: And although the King may do it of himself,
yet the old way is the good way.

21. But I utterly condemn the practice of the latter times, which has lately
crept into the Court (at the back-stairs) That some who are pricked for
Sheriffs, and were fit, should get out of the Bill; and others who were neither
thought upon, nor worthy to be, should be nominated, and both for money.

22. I must not omit to put you in mind of the Lords Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants of the Counties: their proper use is for ordering the
Military affairs, in order to an invasion from abroad, or a rebellion or
sedition at home; good choice should be made of them, and prudent instructions
given to them, and as little of the Arbitrary power as may be left unto them;
and that the Muster-Masters, and their Officers under them, incroach not upon
the Subject; that will detract much from the King's service.

23. The Justices of Peace are of great use; Anciently there were Conservators
of the Peace, these are the same, saving that several Acts of Parliament have
altered their denomination, and enlarged their jurisdiction in many
particulars; The fitter they are for the peace of the Kingdom, the more heed
ought to be taken in the choice of them.

24. But negatively, this I shall be bold to say, that none should be put into
either of those Commissions with an eye of favor to their persons, to give
them countenance of reputation in the places where they live, but for the
King's service sake; nor any put out for the disfavour of any great man^ It
has been too often used, and has been no good service to the King.

25. A word more, if you please to give me leave, for the true rules of the
moderation of Justice on the King's part. The execution of justice is committed
to his Judges, which seems to be the severer part: but the milder part, which
is mercy, is wholly left in the King's immediate hand: And Justice and Mercy
are the true supporters of his Royal Throne.

26. If the King shall be wholly intent upon Justice, it may appear with an
over-rigid aspect; but if he shall be over-remiss and easy, it draws upon
him contempt. Examples of Justice must be made sometimes for terror to some;
Examples of Mercy, sometimes, for comfort to others: the one procures fear, and
the other love. A King must be both feared and loved, else he is lost.

27. The ordinary Courts of Justice I have spoken of, and of their Judges and
judicature; I shall put you in mind of some things touching the High Court of
Parliament in England, which is superlative; and therefore it will behove me to
speak the more warily thereof.

28. For the institution of it, it is very ancient in this Kingdom: It
consists of the two Houses, of Peers and Commons, as the Members; and of the
King's Majesty, as the head of that great body: By the King's authority alone,
and by his Writs, they are assembled, and by him alone they are pror^gued and
dissolved; but each House may adjourn it self.

29. They being thus Assembled, are more properly a Council to the King, the
Council of the Kingdom, to advise his Majesty in those things of weight and
difficulty, which concern both the King and People, then a Court.

30. No new Laws can be made, nor old Laws abrogated or altered, but by common
consent in Parliament, where Bills are prepared and presented to the two
Houses, and then delivered: but nothing is concluded but by the King's Royal
assent; They are but Embroys, it is he gives life unto them.

31. Yet the House of Peers has a power of Judicature in some cases; properly,
to examine, and then to affirm, or if there be cause, to reverse the judgments
which have been given in the Court of King's Bench, (which is the Court of
highest jurisdiction in the Kingdom, for ordinary Judicature) but in these
cases it must be done by Writ of Error in Parliamento: And thus the rule of
their proceedings is not absoluta potestas, as in making new Laws (in that
conjuncture as before) but limitata potestas, according to the known Laws of
the Land.

32. But the House of Commons have only power to censure the Members of their
own House, in point of election or misdemeanors, in or toward that House; and
have not, nor ever had power, so much as to administer an Oath to prepare a
judgment.

33. The true use of Parliaments in this Kingdom is very excellent; and they
would be often called, as the affairs of the Kingdom shall require; and
continued so long as is necessary, and no longer, for then they be but burdens
to the people, by reason of the privileges justly due to the Members of the
two Houses and their Attendants; which their just rights and privileges are
religiously to be observed and maintained; but if they should be unjustly
enlarged beyond their true bounds, they might lessen the just power of the
Crown, it borders so near upon popularity.

34. All this while I have spoken concerning the Common Laws of England,
generally, and properly so called, because it is most general and common to
almost all cases and causes, both civil and criminal: But there is also another
Law, which is called the Civil or Ecclesiastical Law, which is confined to some
few heads; and that is not to be neglected: and although I am a professor of
the Common Law, yet am I so much a lover of Truth and of Learning, and of my
native Country, that I do heartily persuade that the Professors of that Law,
called Civilians (because the Civil Law is their guide) should not be
discountenanced nor discouraged; else whenever we shall have ought to do with
any foreign King or State, we shall be at a miserable loss, for want of Learned
men in that profession.

III. I come now to the consideration of those things which concern Counselors
of State, The Council Table, and the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom,
which are those who for the most part furnish out that honorable Board.

1. Of Counselors, there are two sorts: The first, Consiliarii nati, (as I may
term them) such are the Prince of Wales, and others of the King's Sons (when he
has more^) of these I speak not, for they are naturally born to be Counselors
to the KING, to learn the art of Governing betimes.

2. But the ordinary sort of Counselors are such as the King, out of a due
consideration of their worth and abilities, and withal, of their fidelities to
his Person and to his Crown, calls to be of Council with him in his ordinary
Government. And the Council Table is so called, from the place where they
ordinarily assemble and sit together; and their Oath is the only ceremony
used, to make them such, which is solemnly given unto them, at their first
admission: These honorable persons are from thenceforth of that Board and
Body: They cannot come until they be thus called, and the King at his pleasure
may spare their attendance; and he may dispense with their presence there,
which at their own pleasure they may not do.

3. This being the quality of their service, you will easily judge what care
the King should use, in his choice of them; It behooves that they be persons of
great trust and fidelity, and also of wisdom and judgment, who shall thus
assist in bearing up the King's Throne; and of known experience in public
affairs.

4. Yet it may not be unfit to call some of young years, to train them up in
that Trade, and so fit them for those weighty affairs, against the time of
greater maturity; and some also for the honor of their persons: But these two
sorts not to be tied to so strict attendance, as the others from whom the
present dispatch of business is expected.

5. I could wish that their number might not be so overgreat, the persons of
the Counselors would be the more venerable. And I know that Queen Elizabeth,
in whose time I had the happiness to be born, and to live many years, was not
so much observed, for having a numero^s, as a wise Council.

6. The duty of a Privy-Councellor to a King, I conceive, is, not only to
attend the Councel-board, at the times appointed, and there to consult of what
shall be propounded; But also to study those things which may advance the
King's honor and safety, and the good of the Kingdom, and to communicate the
same to the King, or to his fellow Counselors, as there shall be occasion. And
this, Sir, will concern you more then others, by how much you have a larger
share in his affections.

7. And one thing I shall be bold to desire you to recommend to his Majesty:
That when any new thing shall be propounded to be taken into consideration,
that no Counselor should suddenly deliver any positive opinion thereof; it is
not so easy with all men to retract their opinions, although there shall be
cause for it: But only to hear it, and at the most but to break it, at first,
that it may be the better understood against the next meeting.

8. When any matter of weight h^th been debated, and seems to be ready for a
resolution; I wish it may not be at that sitting concluded (unless the
necessity of the time press it) lest upon second cogitations there should be
cause to alter, which is not for the gravity and honor of that Board.

9. I wish also that the King would be pleased sometimes to be present at that
Board, it adds a Majesty to it: And yet not to be too frequently there, that
would render it less esteemed when it is become common; Besides, it may
sometimes make the Counselors not to be so free in their debates in his
presence, as they would be in his absence.

10. Besides the giving of Counsel, the Counselors are bound by their Duties
ex vi termini, as well as by their Oaths, to keep counsel; therefore are they
called de Privato Consilio Regis, and a secretioribus consiliis Regis.

11. One thing I add, in the negative, which is not fit for that Board, the
entertaining of private causes, of meum and tuum; those should be left to the
ordinary course and Courts of Justice.

12. As there is great care to be used for the Counselors themselves to be
chosen, so there is of the Clerks of the Council also, for the secreting of
their Consultations; and methinks, it were fit that his Majesty be speedily
moved, to give a strict charge, and to bind it with a solemn Order (if it be
not already so done) that no copies of the orders of that Table be delivered
out by the Clerks of the Council, but by the order of the Board; nor any not
being a Councellor, or a Clerk of the Council, or his Clerk, to have access to
the Councel-Books: and to that purpose, that the servants attending the Clerks
of the Council be bound to secrecy, as well as their Masters.

13. For the great Offices and Officers of the Kingdom, I shall say little: for
the most of them are such, as cannot well be severed from the Councellorship;
and therefore the same rule is to be observed for both, in the choice of them:
In the general, only, I advise this, let them be set in those places for which
they are probably the most fit.

14. But in the quality of the persons, I conceive it will be most convenient
to have some of every sort, (as in the time of Queen E^izabeth it was) one
Bishop at the least, in respect of questions touching Religion, or
Church Government; one or more skilled in the Laws; some for Martial affairs,
and some for Foreign affairs: By this mixture one will help another, in all
things that shall there happen to be moved: But if that would fail, it will be
a safe way, to consult with some other able persons well versed in that point
which is the subject of their Consultation, which yet may be done so warily, as
may not discover the main end therein.

IV. In the next place, I shall put you in mind of the Foreign Negotiations and
Em^assies, to or with Foreign Princes or States, wherein I shall be little able
to serve you.

1. Only I will tell you what was the course in the happy days of Queen
Elizabeth, whom it will be no dis-rep^tation to follow: She did vary, according
to the nature of the employment, the quality of the persons she employed; which
^s a good rule to go by.

2. If it were an Embassy of G^^tula^ion or Ceremony (which must not be
neglected) choice was made of some noble person, eminent in place, and able in
purse, and he would take ^t as a mark of favor, and discharge it without any
great burden to the Queen's Coffers, for his own honors sake.

3. But if it were an Embassy of weight, concerning affairs of State, choice
was made of some sad person of known judgment, wisdom and experience, and not
of a young man, not wayed in Statematters; nor of a mere formal man, whatsoever
his title or outside were.

4. Yet in company of such, some young towardly Noblemen or Gentlemen were
usually sent also, as Assistants or Attendants, according to the q^ality of the
persons, who might be thereby prepa^ed and fit^ed for the like employment, by
this means, at another turn.

5. In their company were always sent some grave and sad men, skilful in the
Civil Laws, and some in the Languages, and some who had been formerly
conversant in the Courts of those Princes, and knew their ways; these were
Assistants in private, but not trusted to manage the Affairs in public; that
would detract from the honor of the principal Ambassador.

6. If the Negotiation were about Merchants affairs, then were the persons
employed for the most part Doctors of the Civil Law, assisted with some other
discreet men; and in such the charge was ordinarily defrayed by the Company or
Society of Merchants, whom the Negotiation concerned.

7. If Legier Ambassadors or Agents were sent to re^ain in or near the Courts
of those Princes or States (as it was ever held fit, to observe the motions,
and to hold correspondency with them, upon all occasions) such were made choice
of, as were pre^^med to be vigilant, industrious, and discreet m^n, and had the
language of the place whither ^he^ w^r^ sent; and with these were sent such as
were hope^ul to be worthy of the like employment at another time.

8. Their care was, to give true and ti^ely Intelligence of all Occurrences,
either to the Queen her self, or the Secretaries of State, unto whom they had
their immediate relation.

9. Their charge was always born by the Queen, duly paid out of the Exchequer,
in such proportion, as, according to their qualities and places might give them
an honorable subsistence there: But for the reward of their service, they were
to expect it upon their return, by some such preferment as might be worthy of
them, and yet be little burden to the Q^eens Coffers or Revenues.

10. At their going forth, they had their general Instructions in writing,
which might be communicated to the Ministers of that State whither they were
sent; and they had also private Instructions, upon particular occasions; and at
their return, they did always render an account of some things to the Queen her
self, of some things to the body of the Council, and of some others to the
Secretaries of State, who made use of them, or communicated them, as there was
cause.

11. In those days there was a constant course held, that by the advice of the
Secretaries, or some principal Counselors, there were always sent forth into
several parts beyond the Seas some young men, of whom good hopes were conceived
of their towardliness, to be trained up, and made fit for such public
Employments, and to learn the Languages. This was at the charge of the Queen,
which was not much, for they traveled but as private Gentlemen; and as by
their industry their deserts did appear, so far were they f^rther employed or
rewarded. This course I shall recommend unto you, to breed up a Nursery of such
public Plants.

V. For Peace and War, and those things which appertain to either; I in my own
disposition and profession am wholly for peace, if please God to ^less the
Kingdom therewith, as for many years past he has done: and, 1. I presume I
shall not need to persuade you to the advancing of it; nor shall you need to
persuade the King your Master therein, ^or that he has hitherto been another
Solomon in this our Israel; and the Motto which he has chosen ( Beati
Pacifici) shows his own judgment: But he must use the means to preserve it,
else such a jewel may be lost. 2. God is the God of Peace (it is one of his
Attributes) therefore by him alone we must pray, and hope to continue it: there
is the foundation. 3. And the King must not neglect the just ways for it;
Justice is the best Protector of it at home, and providence for War is the best
prevention of it from abroad. 4. Wars are either Foreign or Civil; for the
Foreign War by the King upon some neighbor Nation, I ^ope we are secure; the
King, in his just and pious disposition, is not inclinable thereunto; his
Empire is long enough, bounded with the Ocean, as if the very situation thereof
had taught the King and People to set up their rests, and say, Ne plus ultra.
5. And for a war of invasion from abroad; only we must not be over-secure,
that is the way to invite it. 6. But if we be always prepared to receive an
Enemy, if the ambition or malice of any should incite him, (...) may be very
confident we shall long live in peace and quietness, without any attempt upon
us. 7. To make the preparations hereunto the more assured: In the first place,
I will recommend unto you the care of our out-work, the Navy Royal and Shipping
of our Kingdom, which are the walls thereof; and every great Ship is as an
impregnable fort; and our many safe and commodious Ports and Havens in every of
these Kingdoms, are as the redoubts to secure them. 8. For the body of the
Ships, no Nation of the world does equal England, for the Oaken Timber
wherewith to build them; and we need not borrow of any other, iron for Spikes,
or N^^ls to fasten them together: but there must be a great deal of providence
used, that our Ship-Timber be not unnecessarily wasted. 9. But for Tackling, as
Sails and Cordage, we are beholden to our neighbors for them, and do buy them
for our money; that must be foreseen and laid up in store against a time of
need, and not sought for when we are to use them: But we are much too blame,
that we make them not at home, only P^tch and Tar we have not of our own. 10.
For the true Art of building of Ships, for burden and service both, no Nation
in the world exceeds us: Ship-wrights and all other Artizans belonging to that
Trade must be cherished and encouraged. 11. Powder and Ammunition of all sorts
we can have at home, and in exchange for other home^ commodities we may be
plentifully supplied from our Neighbors, which must not be neglected. 12. With
Mariners and Seamen this Kingdom is plentifully ^urnished, the constant Trade
of Merchandising will furnish us at a need; and navigable Rivers will repair
the store, both to the Navy Royal, and to the Merchants, if they be set on
work, and well paid for their labor. 13. Sea-Captains and Commanders, and
other Officers must be encouraged, and rise by degrees, as their fidelity and
industry deserve it. 14. Our strict League of ami^y and alliance with our near
Neighbors the Hollanders is a mutual strength to both; the shipping of both,
in conjuncture, being so powerful, by Gods blessing, as no Foreigners will
venture upon; This League and Friendship must inviolably be observed. 15. From
Scotland we have had in former times some Alarms and Inrodes into the Northern
parts of this Kingdom; but that happy union of both Kingdoms under one
Sovereign, our gracious King, I hope, has taken away all occasions of breach
between the two Nations; let not the cause arise from England, and I hope the
Sc^ts will not adventure it; or if they do, I hope they will find, that
although to our King they were h^s first-^orn Subjects, yet to England belongs
the birthright: B^t this should not be any cause to offer any injury to them,
nor to suffer any from them. 16. There remains ^hen no danger, by the blessing
o^ God, but a C^vil War, from which God of his mercy defend us, as that which
is most desperate of all others. The King's wisdom and justice must prevent it,
if it may be; or if it should happen, quod absit, he must quench that wildfire
with all the diligence that possible can be. 17. Competition to the Crown,
there is none, nor can be; therefor it must be a fire within the bowels, or
nothing, the cures whereof are these; Remedium praevenieus, which is the best
physic either to a natural body, or to a State, by just and equal Government
to take away the occasion; and Remedium puniens, if the other prevail not: The
service and vigilance of the Deputy Lieutenants in every County, and of the
High Sheriff, will contribute much herein to our security. 18. But if that
should not prevail, by a wise and timous inquisition, the peccant humors and
humorists must be discovered, and purged, or cut off; mercy in such a case, in
a King, is truly cruelty. 19. Yet if the Heads of the Tribes can be taken off,
and the misled multitude will see their error, and return to their obedience,
such an extent of mercy is both honorable and profitable. 20. A King, against
a storm, must foresee, to have a convenient stock of treasure; and neither be
without money, which is the sinews of War, nor to depend upon the courtesy of
others, which may fail at a pinch. 21. He must also have a Magazine of all
sorts, which must be had from Foreign parts, or provided at home; and to commit
them to several places, under the custody of trusty and faithful Ministers and
Officers, if it be possible. 22. He must make choice of expert and able
Commanders to conduct and manage the War, either against a foreign invasion, or
a home-rebellion; which must not be young and giddy, which dare, not only to
fight, but to swear, and drink, and curse; neither fit to govern others, nor
able to govern themselves. 23. Let not such be discouraged, if they deserve
well, by misinformation, or for the satisfying the ^umou^s or ambition of
others, perhaps out of envy, perhaps out of treachery, or other sinister ends:
A st^^dy hand in governing of Military Affairs, is more requisite then in times
of peace, because an erro^r committed in war, may perhaps prove irremediable.
24. If God shall bless these endeavors, and the King return to his own house
in peace, when a Civil War shall be at an end, those who have been found
faithful in the Land must be regarded, yea, and rewarded also; the traitorous,
or treacherous, who have misled others, severely punished; and the neutrals,
and false-hearted friends and followers, who have started aside like a broken
bow, be noted, C^rlone nigro; and so I shall leave them, and this part of the
work.


VI. I come now to the six^h part, which is Trade, and that is either at home,
or abroad. And I begin with that which is at home; which enableth the Subjects
of the Kingdom to live, and lays a foundation to a foreign Trade by traffiq^e
with others, which enableth them to live plentifully and ^^p^^^.

1. For the Home-trade, I first commend unto your consideration the
encouragement of Tillage, which will enable the Kingdom for Corn for the
Natives, and to spare for exportation: And I my self have known, more than
once, when in times of dearth, in Queen Elizabeth's days, it drained much coin
of the Kingdom, to furnish us with Corn from foreign parts.

2. Good Husbands will find the means by good Husbandry, to improve their lands
by Lime, Chalk Marl, or Sea-sand, where it can be had: But it will not be
amiss, that they be put in mind thereof, and encouraged in their industries.

3. Planting of Orchards in a soil and air fit for them, is very profitable, as
well as pleasureable; S^der and Perry are notable Beverage in Sea-voyages.

4. Gardens are also very profitable, if planted with Artichokes, roots, and
such other things as are fit for food; whence they are called Kitchin-g^rdens,
and that very properly.

5. The planting of Hop-yards, sowing of Woad, and Rape-seed, are found very
profitable for the Planters, in places apt for them, and consequently
profitable for the Kingdom, which for diverse years was furnished with them from
beyond the Seas.

6. The planting and preserving of Woods, especi^lly of Timber, is not only
profitable, but commendable, therewith to furnish posterity, both for building
and shipping.

7. The Kingdom would be much improved, by draining of drowned lands, and
gaining that in from the overflowing of salt waters and the sea, and from
fresh waters also.

8. And many of those grounds would be exceeding fit for Dairies; which, being
well houswiv'd are exceeding commodious.

9. Much good land might be gained from Forests and Chases, more remote from
the King's access, and from other commonable places; so as always there be a
due care taken, that the poor Commoners have no injury by such improvement.

10. The making of navigable Rivers would be very profitable; they would be as
so many indraughts of wealth, by conveying of commodities with ease from place
to place.

11. The planting of Hemp and Flax would be an unknown advantage to the
Kingdom, many places therein being as apt for it, as any Foreign parts.

12. But add hereunto, that it be converted into Linen-cloath, or Cordage, the
commodity thereof will be multiplied.

13. So it is of the Wools and Leather of the Kingdom, if they be converted
into Manufactures.

14. Our English Dames are much given to the wearing of costly Laces; and, if
they be brought from Italy, or France, or Flanders, they are in great esteem;
whereas, if the like Laces were made by the English, so much thread as would
make a yard of Lace, being put into that Manufacture, would be five times, or
perhaps ten, or twenty times the value.

15. The breeding of Cattle is of much profit, especially the breed of Horses,
in many places, not only for travel, but for the great saddle; the English
Horse, for strength, and courage, and swiftness together, not being inferior
to the horses of any other Kingdom.

16. The Minerals of the Kingdom, of Lead, Iron, Copper, and Tynn especially,
are of great value, and set many able-bodied subjects on work; it were great
pity they should not be industriously followed.

17. But of all Minerals, there is none like to that of Fishing upon the coasts
of these Kingdoms, and the seas belonging to them: our Neighbors within half a
days sail of us, with a good wind, can show us the use and value thereof; and,
doubtless there is sea-room enough for both Nations, without offending one
another; and it would exceedingly support the Navy.

18. This Realm is much enriched, of late years, by the Trade of Merchandise
which the English drive in Foreign parts; and, if it be wisely managed, it must
of necessity very much increase the wealth thereof; care being taken, that the
exportation exceed in value the importation, for then the balance of Trade must
of necessity be returned in Corn, or Bullion.

19. This would easily be effected, if the Merchants were persuaded, or
compelled to make their returns in solid commodities, and not too much thereof
in vanity, tending to excess.

20. But especially care must be taken, that Monopolies, which are the Cankers
of all trading, be not admitted, under specious colors of public good.

21. To put all these into a regulation, if a constant Commission to men of
honesty and understanding were granted, and well pursued, to give order ^or the
managing of these things both at home and abroad, to the best advantage; and
that this Commission were subordinate to the Councel-board, it is conceived it
would prod^ce notable effects.

VII. The next thing is that of Colonies and Foreign Plantations, which are
very necessary, as outlets to a populous Nation, and may be profitable also, if
they be managed in a discreet way.

1. First, in the choice of the place; which requires many circumstances, as
the situation near the Sea, for the commodiousness of an intercourse with
England; the temper of the Air and climate, as may best agree with the bodies
of the English, rather inclining to cold, than heat; that it be stored with
Woods, Mines, and Fruits, which are naturally in the place; that the soil be
such as will probably be fruitful for Corn, and other conveniences, and for
breeding of Cattle; that it has Rivers, both for passage between place and
place, and for fishing also, if it may be; that the Natives be not so many, but
that there may be elbow-room enough for them, and ^or the Adventives also: All
which are likely to be found in the West Indies.

2. It would be also such as is not already planted by the Subjects of any
Christian Prince, or State, nor over-neerly neighboring to their Plantation.
And it would be more convenient, to be chosen by some of those Gentlemen or
Merchants which move first in the work, than to be designed unto them from the
King; for it must proceed from the option of the people, else it sounds like an
Exile: so the Colonies must be raised by the leave of the King, and not by his
command.

3. After the place is made choice of, the first step must be, to make choice
of a fit Governor, who although he have not the name, yet he must have the
power of a Viceroy; and if the person who principally moved in the work be not
fit for that trust, yet he must not be excluded from command; but then his
defect in the Governing part must be supplied by such Assistants as shall be
joined with him, or as he shall very well approve of.

4. As at their setting out they must have their Commission, or Letters Patents
from the King, that so they may acknowledge their dependency upon the Crown o^
England, and under his protection; so they must receive some general
instructions how to dispose of themselves when they come there, which must be
in nature of Laws unto them.

5. But the general Law, by which they must be guided and governed, must be the
Common Law of England; and to that end it will be fit, that some man,
reasonably studied in ^he Law, and otherwise qualified for such a purpose, be
persuaded (if not thereunto inclined of himself, which were the best) to go
thither as a Chancellor amongst them, at first; and when the Plantation were
more settled, then to have Courts of Justice, there, as in England.

6. At the first planting, or as soon after as they can, they must make
themselves defensible both against the Natives, and against Strangers; and to
that purpose, they must have the assistance of some able Military man, and
convenient Arms and Ammunition ^or their defense.

7. For the Discipline of the Church in those parts, it will be necessary, that
it agree with that which is settled in England; else it will make a Schism, and
a rent in C^ri^ts Coat, which must be seamless: and, to that purpose, it will
be fi^, that by the King's supreme power in Causes Ecclesiastical, within all
his Dominions, they be subordinate under some Bishop and Bishopric of this
Realm.

8. For the better defense against a common Enemy, I think it would be best,
that Foreign Plantations should be placed in one Continent, and near together;
whereas, if they be too remote the one from the other, they will be disunited,
and so the weaker.

9. They must provide themselves of houses, such as for the present, they can,
and, at more leisure, such as may be better; and they first must plant for Corn
and Cattle, etc. for food, and necessary sustenance; and after, they may
enlarge themselves for those things which may be for profit and pleasure, and
to traffic withal also.

10. Woods for shipping in the first place, may doubtless be there had, and
Minerals there found, perhaps, of the richest; howsoever, the Mines out of the
fruits of the earth, and seas, and waters adjoining, may be found in abundance.

11. In a short time they may build Vessels and Ships also for Traffic wit^
the parts near adjoining, and with England also, from whence they may be
furnished with such things as they may want, and in exchange, or barter, send
from thence other things, with which quickly, either by Nature, or Art, they
may abound.

12. B^t these things would, by all means be prevented; That no known Bankrupt,
for shelter; nor known Murderer, or other wicked person, to avoid the Law; nor
known Heretic, or Schismatic, be sussered to go into those Countries; or, if
they do creep in there, not to be harbored, or continued: else, the place
would receive them naught, and return them into England, upon all occasions,
worse.

13. That no Merchant, under color of driving a Trade thither, or from thence,
be suffered to work upon their necessities.

14. And that to regulate all these inconveniences, which will insensibly grow
upon them, that the King be pleased to erect a subordinate Council in England,
whose care and charge shall be, to advise, and put in execution, all things
which shall be found fit for the good of those new Plantations; who, upon all
occasions, shall give an account of their proceedings to the King, or to the
Councel-board, and from them receive such directions as may best agree with the
Government of that place.

15. That the King's reasonable profit be not neglected, partly, upon
reservation of moderate rents and services; and partly, upon Customs; and
partly, upon importation and exportation of Merchandise; which, for a
convenient time after the Plantation begin, would be very easy, to encourage
the work; but after it is well settled, may be raised to a considerable
proportion, worthy the acceptance.

VIII. I come to the last of those things which I propounded, which is, the
Court, and C^riality.

The other did properly co^cern ^he King, in his Royal capacity, as Pater
patriae; this more properly, as P^terfamilias: And herein, 1. I shall, in a
word, and but in a word only, put you in mind, That the King in his own
person, both in respect of his Household, or Court, and in respect of his whole
Kingdom; (for a little Kingdom is but as a great Household, and a great
Household, as a little Kingdom) must be exemplary, Regis ad exemplum, etc. But
for this, God be praised, our charge is easy; for your Gracious Master, for
his Learning and Piety, Justice and Bounty, may be, and is, not only a
president to his own Subjects, but to foreign Princes also; yet he is still but
a man, and seasonable Memento's may be useful; and being discreetly used,
cannot but take well with him. 2. But your greatest care must be, that the
great men of his Court (for you must give me leave to be plain with you, for so
is your injunction laid upon me) your self in the first place, who is first in
the eye of all men, give no just cause of scandal, either by light, or vain, or
by oppressive carriage. 3. The great Officers of the King's Household had need
be both discreet and provident persons, both for his Honor, and for his
Thrift: they must look bot^ ways, else they are but half-sighted: Yet in the
choice of them, there is more latitude left to affection, than in the choice of
Counselors, and of the great Officers of State, before touched, which must
always be made choice of merely out of judgment, for in them the Public has
a great interest. 4. For the other Ministerial Officers in Court (as, for
distinction sake, they may be termed) there must be also an eye unto them, and
upon them; they have usually risen in the H^ushold b^ degrees, and it is a
noble way, to encourage faith^ul service: But the King must not bind himself to
^ necessity herein, for then it will be held ex debito; neither must he alter
it, without an apparent cause for it: but to displace any who are in, upon
displeasure, which for the most part h^ppeneth upon the information of some
great man, is, by all mean^ to be avoided, unless there be a manifest cause for
it. 5. In these things you may sometimes interpose, to do just and good
offices: but for the general, I should rather advise, meddle little, but leave
the ordering of those Houshold-affairs to the White-staffs, which are those
honorable persons, to whom it properly belongs, to be answerable to the King
for it; and to those other Officers of the Green-cloth, who are subordinate to
them, as a kind of Council, and a Court of Justice also. 6. Yet for the
Green-cloth Law, (take it in the l^rgest sense) I have no opinion of it,
farther than it is regulated by the just Rules of the Common-Laws of England.
7. Toward the support of his Majesty's own Table, and of the Princes, and of
his necessary Of^icers, his Majesty has a good help by Purveyance, which
justly is due unto him; and, if justly used, is no great burden to the
Subject; but by the Purveyors, and other Underofficers, is many times abused.
In many parts of the Kingdom, I think it is already reduced to a certainty in
money; and if it be indifferently and discreetly managed, it would be no hard
matter to settle it so throughout the whole Kingdom; yet to be renewed from
time to time, for that will be the best, and ^afest, both for the King and
people. 8. The King must be put in mind, to preserve the Revenues of his Crown,
both certain, and casual, without diminution, and to lay up treasure in store
against a time of extremity; empty Coffers give an ill sound, and make the
people many times ^orget their Duty, thinking that the King must be beholden to
them for his supplies. 9. I shall by no means think it fit, that he reward any
of his serv^nts with the benefit of forfeitures, either by Fines in the Court
of S^ar-Chamber, or High Commission Courts, or other Courts of J^stice; or that
they should be farmed out, or bestowed upon any, so much as by promise^ before
judgment given; it would neither be profitable, nor h^nourable. 10. Besides
matters of serious consideration, in the C^urts of Princes, there must be times
for pastimes and d^sports: When there is a Queen^ and Ladies of Hon^ur
attending her, there must sometimes be Masks, and Revels, and Enterludes; and
when there is no Queen, or Princess, as now, yet at Festivals, and for
entertainment of Strangers, or upon such occasions, they may be fit also: Yet
care would be taken, that in such cases, they be set ^^f more with wit and
activity, than with costly and wasteful expence^. 11. But for the King and
Prince, and the Lords and Chivalry of the Court, I rather commend, in their
tu^ns and seas^ns, the riding of the great Horse, the Tilts, Barriers, Tennis,
and Hunting, which are more for the health and strength of those who exersi^e
them, than in an effeminate way to please themselves and others.

And now the Prince grow^th up fast to be a man, and is of a sweet and
excellent disposition; it would be an irreparable stain and dishonor upon you,
having that access unto him, if you should mis-lead him, or suffer him to be
misled by any flattering Parasites: The whole Kingdom has a deep interest in
his virtuous education; and if you, keeping that distance which is most fit, do
humbly interpose your self, in such a case, he will one day give you thanks for
it.

12. Yet Dice and Cards may sometimes be used for recreation, when field-sports
cannot be had; but not to use it as a mean to spend the time, much less to
mis-spend the thrift of the Gamesters.


SIR,
I shall trouble you no longer; I have run over these things as I first
propounded them; please you to make use of them, or any of them, as you shall
see occasion; or to lay them by, as you think best, and to add to them, as you
daily may, out of your experience.

I must be bold again, to put you in mind of your present condition; you are
in the quality of a Sentinel; if you sleep, and neglect your charge, you are an
undone man, and you may fa^l faster than you have risen.

I have but one thing more to mind you of, which nearly concerns your self; you
serve a great and gracious Master, and there is a most hopeful young Prince,
whom you must not desert; it behooves you to carry your self wisely and evenly
between them both: adore not so the rising Son, that you forget the Father, who
raised you to this height; nor be you so obsequious to the Father, that you
give just cause to the Son, to suspect that you neglect him: But carry your
self with that judgment, as, if it be possible, may please and content them
both, which, truly, I believe, will be no hard matter for you to do; so may you
live long beloved of both, which is the hearty prayer of

Your most obliged and devoted servant.

THese were his Rules, and this his practice: My Lord of Nottingham he bought
nobly from the Admiralty; his Assistant, Vice Admiral Maunsel, he entertained
civilly, and procured that place for life, which he had only during pleasure.
The Warden of the Cinque Ports resigned his place seasonably; ^he Master of the
Horse gave up his preferment and his life opportunely. -- He advanced his
Relations prudently, gratifying them, and fortifying himself: He made an
excellent choice of Servan^s and Confederates; entertained the ablest and most
faithful Assistants: Doctor Williams and Dr. Laud were of his Council for the
Church, Sir Francis Bacon for the State. From the first he received frequent
Schedules of Persons and Doctrines; from the other constant Transcripts of
Rules and Intelligence: Never any man more constant to his approved friend,
never any more fatal to his known Enemies: He was the instrument of all the
Subjects services to his Sovereign, and of his Sovereign's favors to his
Subjects: no place was bestowed without his knowledge; no action passed without
his approbation; not an eminent man but depended on him, and was subordinate to
him: His dispatches were many, and pregnant testimonies that he was a great
Master of his Time, and a greater of his Method and Affairs. Great he was
indeed, and humble too, not raised by his present fortune above the sense of
his former: envied he was, not hated; applauded in the same Parliament for his
services, and declaimed against for his preferments; ever studious of the
peoples Interest, which is the care of few Favorites; never happy in their
love, which is the fa^e of all. He approved himself both to the declining
Monarch, and the rising, as having won himself not so much to their affections,
which were alterable, as to their judgments, which were lasting; and made his
preferment rather a matter of Interest, which is real, than of favor, which is
personal: Looking on Somerset laid at his feet, Bristol and Williams brought on
their knees, Carlisle and Pembrook beneath him, and Holland behind him; and
every man that would not owe his preferment to his favor, must owe his ruin
to his frown. He was entrusted with the greatest service and secret in Spain,
when he dived to the bottom of that Countries policy, and the Intrigues of
Europes Counsels; and could come off in the Match wi^h Spain to the King and
Kingdoms mind dex^erously, when Sir Walter Aston and my Lord of Bristol were at
a loss about it, to both their displeasures, weakly, amidst the open
entertainment, and secret working of that place. -- In his attendance on the
King in Scotland as Counsel or of that Kingdom, he carried himself with
singular sweetness and temper, as it behoved him, being now in f^vour, and
succeeding one of their own. They th^^ censure his sudden advancements and
great preferments, consider not, that

Certainly the hearts of great Princes, if the^ be considered as it were in
Abstract, without the necessities of States, and circumstances of time, being
besides their natural Extent, moreover onc^ opened and dilated with affection,
can take n^ full and proportionable pleasure in the exerc^s^ of any narrow
bounty. And albeit at first the^ give only upon choice and love of the Person^
yet within a while themselves likewise begin t^ love their givings, and to
foment their deeds, n^ less than Parents do their children.

Besides that, by so long, and so private, an^ so various conso^iation with a
Prince of such excellent nature, he had now gotten as it were two lives in his
own Fortune and Greatness^ whereas otherwise the Estate of a Favorite is a^
the best but a Tenant at will, and rarely transmitted.

And the mo^e notable, because it had bee^ without any visible Eclipse or Wane
in himself amidst diverse variations in others. How general his care appears in
that amidst his more important Negotiations, he condescended to this noble act
o^ charity to a Scholar and to Learning; which I must, for my part, celebrate
above all his Expenses. There was a collection of certain rare Manuscrip^s
exquisitely written in Arabic, and sought in ^he m^^^ remote parts, by the
diligence of Erpe^^^^ the ^ost excellent Linguist. These had been left to the
Widow of the said Erpenius, and were upon sail to the Jesuits of Antwerp,
liquorish Chapmen of such Ware. Whereof the Duke getting knowledge by his
worthy and learned Secretary, Doctor Mason, in^erverted the bargain, and gave
the poor Widow for them fiv^ hundred pounds, a sum above their weight in
silver, and a mixed act both of bounty and charity; the more laudable, being
much out of his natural Element. These were they, which after his death were as
nobly pre^ented as they had been bought to Cambridge by his Duchess, as soon
as she understood by the foresaid Doctor her Lords intention to furnish the
said University with other choice Collections from all parts at his own charge.

The Duke's Answers to his Appeachments, in number thirteen, I find very
diligently and civilly couched: and though his heart was big, yet they all
savor of an humble spirit one way, and an equitable consideration another,
which could not but possess every vulgar conceit, and somewhat allay the whole
matter; that in the bolting and sifting of near fourteen years of such power
and favor, all that came out could not be expected to be pure, and white, and
fine Meal, but must needs have withal among it a certain mixture of Padar and
Bran in this lower age of humane fragility. Howsoever this tempest did only
shake, and not rent his Sails.

His defense against danger was noble, but his contempt of it nobler; for when
Sir George Goring advised him only to turn out of the ordinary road, He
resolved not to wave his way upon this reason, perhaps more generous than
provident; That if, as he said, he should but once by such a diversion make his
enemy believe he were afraid of danger, he should never live without. And when
his young Nephew the Lord Viscount Fielding offered him another time to put on
his Coat and ^lew Ribbon, while they passed through a Town where they
apprehended some design against the Duke; He would not (as he said) accept of
such an offer in that case from a Nephew, whose life he tendered as much as
himself: But after some short ^^rection to his company, he rode on without
^erturbation of mind, though a drunken fellow ^^id hold of his Bridle under
pretense of begging, (...) begin a tumult.

Neither (for ought I can Sir Hen. Wotton's life of the Duke of Bucking.
hear) was there any further enquiry into that practice, the Duke peradventure
thinking it wisdom not to reserve discontentments too deep.

But in the midst of these little dangers, his Grace was not unmindful of his
civil course, to cast an eye upon the ways to win unto him such as have been of
principal credit in the lower house of Parli^ment; applying lenitives, or
subducting from that part where he knew the Humors were sharpest; amidst which
thoughts, he was surprised by a fatal stroke, written in the black book of
Necessity. Whereof he was forewarned as well by his own as others
apprehensions, as appears by his last Addresses to the Archbishop of
Canterbury the Earl of Holland, and his sacred Majesty.

And certain it is, that some good while before, Sir Clement Throckmorton, a
Gentleman then living, of grave judgment, had in a private conference advised
him to wear a privy Coat; whose counsel the Duke received very kindly, but gave
him this answer; That against any popular fury, a shirt of male would be but a
silly defense; and as for any single man's assault, he took himself to be in no
danger -- So dark is Destiny. Since he is dead, he is charged;

1. For advancing his Relations; which yet was humanity in him, and not a
fault. 2. For enriching himself; though as it is said of that French Peer, he
was rich only in Obligations, his Estate being at the mercy of Suitors. To his
familiar Servants, so open-handed he was, though many of them so ungrateful as
to deny relation unto him, either about his person in ordinary attendance; or
about his affairs of State, as his Secretaries; or of Office, as his Steward;
or of Law, as that worthy Knight whom he long used to solicit his Causes: He
left all both in good Fortune; and which is more, in good Fame: Things very
seldom consociated in the instruments of great Personages.

3. He had many Offices, but committed himself a most willing Pupil to the
directions of such as were generally thought fit to manage affairs of that
nature, condescending to the meanest Arts, to adapt himself to his employments.
4. He was not bookish, it is true; his Affairs forbad him study, yet had he a
natural readiness to discourse of all subjects; which wanted nothing toward
applause, but the candor and benevolence of his hearers, whose dis-ingenuity
oft-times turned his most honest discourses to accusations; witness that
^bullition of his joy to his Majesty in behalf of his People, which Sir John
Eliot made Treason against them. 5. He was great indeed, but gentle and
affable; insomuch, that though his memory were a place so taken up with high
thoughts, and unlikely to have any room for matters of so small importance, he
was ever known to entertain his younger acquaintance with much familiarity, --
and all men with that civility, wherein was observed his peculiarity, happy
bravery of deriving favors, and conferring them with so many noble
Circumstances, as the manner was as obliging as the matter, and men's
understandings oft-times as much puzzled as their gratitude. 6. He would
intercede, it is confessed, for poor Malefactors, more out of his innate
compassion, than any design to obstruct the course of Justice; believing
doubtless (says my Author) that hanging was the worst use a man could be put
to.
In fine, a Gentleman he was of that choice and curious make for exterior
shape, as if Nature had not in his whole frame drawn one line amiss, nor was
his Fabric raised by soft and limber studs, but sturdy and virile. His
intellectuals gained him rather the opinion of a wise man, th^n of a wit. His
skill in Letters very mean; for finding Nature more indulgent to him in the
orn^ments of the body, than of the mind, the tendency of his youthful Genius
was rather to improve those excellencies wherein his choice felicity consisted,
than to addict himself to morose and sullen Bookishness; therefore his chief
exercises were, dancing, fencing, vaulting, and the like, as indications of
strenuous Agility; yet could he have foreseen where all the Climacteries and
motions of his Advance should have terminated, that from no more than a mere
Gentleman, it should be his luck to vault into the dignity of a Duke, and trust
of a Privy-Counsellor, we may presume his early studies would not have cast so
much neglect upon a thing so impor^ant to him as a Statesman, though not very
fashionable as a Courtier. The temperature of his mind was, as to moral habits,
rather disposed to good than bad; his deportment was most affable and debonair,
a rare example in one raised so high and so speedily: To his Relations liberal,
firm to his friend, formidable to his enemy. He was a Courtier, and a young
man, a profession and age prone to such desires, as when they tend to the
shedding of no man's blood, to the ruin of no Family, Humanity sometimes
connives at, though she never approves. So that take him in his public
capacity (wherein only he comes under our observation, which meddles not with
men's private converse or moralities any further than they are subservient to
their State-employments) we may say of him, as one does of his Master; That in
him the things we can wish, are fewer than those we praise.

But be it for ever remembered, That the villain, whose despair of advancement
made him careless of his own life, and Master of this Lords, talked in his
examination of a Sermon at St. Faiths, no^ his own Parish Church, where he
heard; That every man in a good cause might be I^dge and Executioner of sin;
which he applied to himself. Whence raw discoursers in Divinity should learn
how prudently they should pre^ch; and itching heare^^, how warily they should
hear^

Observations on the Life of William Noy, Attorney General.
WIlliam Noy, born in Cornwall, was bred in Lincolns-Inne, a most sedulous
Student, constantly conversant with ancient Writings, verifying his Anagram:
WILLIAM NOY,
I moyl in Law.


He was for many years the stoutest Champion for the Subjects Liberty, until
King Charles entertained him to be his Attorney. The dis-ingenuity of the
Parliament, and his impendent necessity, would have put another Sovereign on
extraordinary ways; but to King Charles it was enough, they were illegal. No
extremity, though never so fatal, could provoke him to irregularities; yet
whatever w^yes the Laws allowed, or Prerogative claimed, to secure a desperate
People, that would undo themselves, he was willing to hearken to; therefore for
a cunning man, the cunningst at such a project of any within his three
Dominions, he sends for his Attorney General Noy, and tells him what he had in
contemplation, bids him contrive the Mode, but a statutable one, for defraying
the expense: Away goes the subtle Engineer, and at length, -- from old Records
bolts out an ancient common P^ecedent of raising a Tax for setting out a Navy
in case of danger.

The King glad of the discovery, as Treasure-tr^ve, presently issued out Writs,
first to the Port-Towns within the Realm, declaring that the safety of the
Kingdom was in danger (and so it was indeed) and therefore that they should
provide against a day prefixed twenty seven Ships of so many Tun, with Guns,
Gunpowder, Tackle, and all other things necessary.

But this business is no sooner ripened, than the Author of it dies, Aug. 6.
1634. He was a man passing humorous, but very honest; clownish, but knowing; a
most indefatigable plotter, and searcher of ancient Records; whereby he became
an eminent instrument both of good and evil (and of which most, is a great
question) to the King's Prerogative: For during the times that Parliaments were
frequent, he appeared a stout Patriot for the Commonwealth; and in the last
was an active opponent in the differences concerning Tonnage and Poundage: But
when the dissolution of that was in some men's apprehensions, the end of all; No
sooner did the King show him the Lure of advancement, but quitting all his
former Inclinations, he wheeled about to the Prerogative, and made amends with
his future service for all his former dis-obligements. -- This is something
smart; more to his advantage is that character Archbishop Laud gives him; That
he was the best friend the Church ever had a of Layman, since it needed any
such (and indeed he was very vigilant over its Adversaries, witness his early
foresight of the danger, and industrious prosecution of the illegality of the
design of buying Impropriations set up by persons not well af^^^e^ to the
present constitution) and that of the ^^^^orian, that he loved to hear Dr.
Preston preach, because he spoke so solidly, as if he knew Gods will. -- To
which I add a passage from the mouth of one present thereat.

The Goldsmiths of London had (and in due time may have) a custom once a year
to weigh gold in the Star Chamber, in the presence of the Privy Council and the
King's Attorney. This solemn weighing by a word of Art they call the Pix, and
make use of so exact scales therein, that the Master of the Company affirmed,
that they would turn with the two hundredth part of a grain. I should be loath
(said the Attorney Noy, standing by) that all my Actions should be weighed in
those Scales; with whom all men concur that know themselves: And this was the
first evidence of his parts, and the occasion of his reputation. Three Grasiers
at a Fair had left their money with their Hostess while they went to Market; --
one of them calls for the money and runs away; -- the other two come upon the
woman, and sue her for delivering that which she had received from the three,
before the three came and demanded it. -- The Cause went against the Woman, and
Judgment was ready to be pronounced; when Mr. Noy being a stranger, wishes
her to give him a Fee, because he could not plead else; and then moves in
Arrest of Judgment, that he was retained by the Defendant, and that the case
was this: The Defendant had received the money of the three together, and
confesses, was not to deliver it until the same three demanded it; and
therefore the money is ready, Let the three men come, and it shall be paid: a
motion which altered the whole proceeding. Of which, when I hear some say it
was obvious, I remember that when Columbus had discovered America, every one
said it was easy: And he one day told a company at Table where he was, that he
could do a stranger thing than that discovery; he would make an Egg stand an
end on a plain Table: the speculatives were at a loss how it should be done; --
he knocks the Egg upon the end, and it stands: Oh! was that all, they cried;
Yes (says he) this is all! and you see how hard a thing it is to conceive a
thing in the Idea, which it is nothing to apprehend in the performance. I need
say no more of this Gentleman, but that Sergeant Maynard will say to this hour,
he rose mainly at first by being looked upon as Mr. Noy's Favorite.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Savil.
THe methods of this Gentleman's advancement exactly parallel those of his
Countryman Sir Thomas Wentworth: Both had the same foundation of wealth and
honor to build on; both had solid and strong parts to act by; both began with
Popularity in the Country, proceeded with activity in Parliaments; --
accomplished themselves with correspondence all over the Nation: both eminent
upon the Bench; both hospitable at home; both bountiful to Lecturers; both well
skilled in, and steadfast to the great points of Prerogative and Liberty. -- For
the last whereof; they were so bold (as sure either by carrying the Cause to
oblige the people to themselves, or by suffering for it to enrage them against
the Government) that Sir R. Weston made it his business to take off the one,
and my Lord of Canterbury the other; which they did with such success, that as
my Lord Wentworth became a great Favorite, so the Lord Savile was an eminent
Counselor; only finding that his young Neighbor had got the start of him, he
kept to one of his popular Principles always, viz. a restless impetuosity
toward Papists, against whom he made himself famous; 1. For a Disputation
procured by him in Drury Lane (whither he brought Bishop Usher under the notion
of a Countrey-Parson; when the Jesuits cried, There was more Learning in that
Parson, than in all the men in England.) 2. For a project offered by him in
Parliament. -- For when they taking advantage of King Charles his wants,
profe^ed to maintain five thousand men to serve his Majesty in Ireland, and a
proportion of Ships to secure him in England, on condition of the free exercise
of their Religion; Sir John interposed, That if the King were pleased but to
call on the Recusants to pay Thirds ( legally due to the Crown) it would prove
a way more effectual, and less offensive, to raise a mass of money: It being
but just that they who were so rich and free to purchase new Privileges,
should first pay their old Penalties. When I read of a Lord Savile going
privately to Scotland, 1639. subscribing to a Petition, with other moderate
Lords, as they called them, containing the very sense of the saction (insomuch
that it is observed, the City-Petition and theirs were couched in the same
words) yet going to Oxford, and after all, being so turbulent there, that his
Majesty was fain to send him beyond Sea, where his Majesty writes with his own
hand, He doubts he will rather exchange his villainy, than end it; I am almost
of that wise man's mind, that there were no less than 17 particular Designs set
on foot by the promotion of the late Troubles; whereof though most, yet not all
were carried on in Westminster: -- or to enforce something more solid; that a
King should say as the Italian does, If my Subject deceives me once, God
forgive him; If a second time, God forgive me; and the rather, because it is
fatal for Majesty to err twice.

Observations on the Life of Bishop Williams.
A Strong constitution made his p^rts, a strict education improved them;
unwearied was his industry, unexpressible his capacity: He never saw the book
of worth he read not, he never forgot what he read: he never lo^^ the use of
what he remembered: Every thing he heard or saw was his own; and what was his
own, he knew how to use to the utmost: His extraction being Gentile, his Soul
large and noble, his presence and carriage comely and stately; his learning
copious, his judgment stayed, his apprehension clear and searching, his
expression lively and effectual, his elocution flowing and majestic; his
Proctorship, when he gave the Lord Chancellor Egerton so much satisfaction in
treating the Spanish Ambassador at an Act in Cambridge, that thenceforward he
resolved on his preferment, 1612. discovered him a person above his place; and
his Lectures to his Pupils, above his preferment. Bishop Vaughan first
admits him to his Family, and then to his bosom; there his strong Sermons,
his exact government (under my Lord) his plentiful observation, his numerous
acquaintance, made him my Lord Chancellor Egerton's friend, rather than his
servant; his familiar, rather than his Chaplain. Never was there a more
communicative Master to instruct, than my Lord Elsem^re; never a more capable
Scholar to learn, than Dr. Williams, who had instilled to him all necessary
State-maxims while his old Master lived, and had bequeathed to him four
excellent 1. Of the Prerogative Royal. 2. Privileges of Parliament, 3. The
proceedings in Chancery. 4. The power of the S^ar^hamber.
Books when his Master was dead: These four books he presented to K. James the
very same time that he offered himself to the Duke of Buckingham. The excellent
Prince observed him as much for the first gift, as the noble Duke did for the
second: the King and Duke made him their own, who they saw had made that
excellent Book his. Willing was King James to advance Clergymen, and glad to
meet with men capable of Advanceme^t. His two Sermons at Court made him Dean of
Westminster; his exact state of the Earl of Somerset's Case made him capable
of, and the KING'S inclination to ^rust his Conscience in a Divines hand,
settled him in the Lord Keepers place actually, only for three years to please
the people (who were offended with his years, now but 34. and his calling a
Divine:) but designedly for ever to serve his Majesty. The Lawyers despised him
at first, but the Judges admired him at last: and one of them said, That never
any man apprehended a Case so clearly, took in all the Law, Reason, and other
Circumstances more punctually, recollected the various Debates more faithfully,
summed it up more compendiously, and concluded more judiciously and discreetly.
For many of them might have read more than he, but none digested what they had
read more solidly, none disposed of their reading more methodically, none
therefore commanded it more readily. He demurred several Orders, as that of my
Lord Chancellor's pardon, the Earl Marshal's Patent, etc. to let his Majesty
see his judgment; yet passed them, to let him see his obedience: He would
question the Dukes Order sometimes discreetly, to let him know he understood
himself; yet he would yield handsomely, to let him see he understood him: and
indeed he had the admirable faculty of making every one of his actions carry
prudence in the performance. Necessary it was, for one of his years and place
to keep his distance, and avoid contempt; yet fatal was it to him to do so, and
incur envy. -- Well understood he the interest of all his places, and
resolutely he maintained them. What? says he, shall the Liberties of
Westminster be infringed, when the chief Favorite is Steward, and the Lord
Keeper Dean, and I the contemptible man that must be trampled on? When he was
in trouble, what passion, what insinuation, what condescension has he at
command? when petitioned to how quickly he looked through men and business? how
exactly would he judge, and how resolutely conclude, without an immediate
intimation from his Majesty or the Duke! Many eyes were upon him, and as many
eyes were kept by him upon others; being very watchful on all occasions to
accommodate all Emergencies, and meet with all humors -- always keeping men in
dependence on the Duke, according to this intimation of his. -- Cabal 287. Let
him hold it, but by your Lordships favor, not his own power. A good way, had
he been constant to it, the neglect whereof undid him; for designing the
promotion of Doctor Price to the Archbishopric of Armagh, he moved it to the
Duke, who told him it was disposed of to Doctor Usher, Whereupon he went his
own way to advance that man, and overthrew himself: For then his Lord let him
feel what he had threatened my Lord Bacon when he advanced him; That if he did
not owe his preferment always to his favor, he should owe his fall to his
frown. The peremptoriness of his judgment ^endred him ^dious; his compliance
with Bristol, suspected; and his Sermon at King James his Funeral [his trial
rather than his preferment] obnoxi^us. His spirit was great to act, and too
great to suffer. It was prudence to execute his decrees against all opposition
while in power; it was not so, to bear up his miscarriages against all
Authority, while in disgrace. A sanguine complexion, with its resolutions, do
well in pursuit of success: Phlegm and its patience do better in a re^reat from
miscarriages. This he wanted, when [it may be, thinking ^ear was the passion of
King Charles his Government as well as King Iames] he seconded his easy ^all
with loud and open discontents, and those discontents with a chargeable defense
of his servants that were to justify them, and all with that unsafe
popularity, invidious pomp, and close irregularity, that laid him open to too
many active persons that watched him: Whether his standing out against
Authority, to the perplexing of the Government in the Star Chamber in those
troublesome times; his entertainment and favor for the Discontented and
Non-Conformists; his motions for Reformation and alteration in twelve things;
his hasty and unlucky Protestation in behalf of the Bishops, and following
actions in England and W^les, where it is all men's wonder to hear of his meruit
sub Parliamento, had those private grounds and reasons, that if the Bishop
could have spoke with the King but half an hour, he said, would have satisfied
him, the King of Kings only knows, to whom he has given, I hope, a better
account than any Historian of his time has given for him.

But I understa^d better his private inclination^ than his public actions; the
motions of his na^^^^^ than those of his power; the conduct of the o^^ being
not more reserved and suspicious, tha^ (...) effects of the other manifest, and
noble: for n^^ (...) mention his Libraries erected at Sr. John's (...)
Westminster, his Chapel in Lincoln-Colledge; (...) repairs of his Collegiate
Church: his pensions (...) Scholars more numerous than all the Bishops and
Noble-mens besides; his Rent-charges on all the Benefices in his Gift as Lord
Keeper, or Bishop of Lincoln, to maintain hopeful youth, according to the
Statute in that ^ase provided. Take this remarkable instance of his
munificence; that when Du Moulin came over, he calls his Chaplain, now the R.
R. Father in God, John Lord Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and tells him,
he doubted the good man was low, wishing him to repair to him with some money,
and his respects, with assurance that he would wait upon him himself at his
first liesure. -- The excellent Doctor rejoyneth, that he could carry him no
less than twenty pounds; the noble Bishop replyeth, he named not the sum, to
sound his Chaplains mind; -- adding, that twenty pounds was neither fit for him
to give, nor for the reverend Forreigner to receive. Carry him, said he an
hundred pounds.

He is libelled by common fame for unchaste, though those that understood the
privacies and casualties of his Infancy, report him but one degree removed from
a Misogonist, though to palliate his infirmities; he was most complete in
Courtly addresses: the conversableness of this Bishop with Women consisted
chiefly (if not only) in his treatments of great Ladies and Persons of honor,
wherein he did personate the compleatness of courtesy to that Sex; otherwise a
woman was seldom seen in his house, which therefore had always more of
Magnificence than Nearness, sometimes defective in the Punctilio's and Niceties
of Daintiness, lying lower than masculine Cognizance, and as level for a woman's
eye to espy, as easy for her hands to amend.

He suffers for conniving at Puritans, out of hatred to Bishop Laud; and for
favoring Papists, o^t of love to them: -- Yet whatever he offered King James
(when the Match went on in Spain) as a Cou^cellour, or whatever he did himself
as a Statesman; such kindness he had for our Liturgy, that he translated it at
his own cost into Spanish, and used it in the visitation of Melvin when sick,
to his own peril, in the Tower; and such resolution for Episcopacy, that his
late Majesty of blessed memory said once to him; My Lord, I commend you, that
you are no whit daunted with all disasters, but are zealous in defending your
Order. -- Please it your Majesty, replied the Archbishop, I am a true
Welsh-man, and they are observed never to run away till their General first
forsakes them -- No fear of my flinching, while your Majesty does countenance
our Cause.

His extraction was gentile and ancient, as appeared from his Ancestors Estate;
which was more than he could purchase without borrowing, when at once Lord
Keeper, Bishop of Lincoln, and Deau of Westminster. His mind great and
resolute, insomuch that he controuled all other advices to his last, to his
loss in Wales: -- and daunted Sir John Cook, as you may see in his character to
his honor in England.

His wariness has these arguments: 1. That he would not send the Seal to the
King but under lock and key. 2. That being to depute one to attend in his place
at the Coronation, he would not name his Adversary, Bishop Laud, to gratify
him; nor yet any other, to displease the King; but took a middle way, and
presented his Majesty a List of the Prebendaries, to avoid any exception,
referring the Election to his Majesty himself. 3. That he proposed a partial
Reformation of our Church to the Parliament, to prevent an utter extirpation by
it. 4. That he exposed others to the censure of the Parliament 1625. to save
himself. 5. That he answered to several Examinations without any the least
advantage taken by his Antagonist. This character of his I think very exact:
That his head was a well-fitted treasury, and his tongue the fair key to unl^ck
it: That he had as great a memory ^s could be reconciled with so good a
judgment: That so quick his parts, that others study went not beyond his
nature; and their designed and forelaid performances, went not beyond his
sudden and ready accommodations: Only he was very open, and too free in
discourse, disdaining to lie at a close guard, as confident of the length and
strength of his weapon.

Observations on the Life of Sir Isaac Wake.
THis honorable person whom I look upon at Oxford, in the same capacity and
fortune that Sir Robert Naun^on and Sir Francis Neth^rsole were in at
Cambridge. He was born in Northamptonshire, (his Father Arthur Wake being
Parson of Billing, Master of the Hospital of St. John's in Northampton, and
Canon of Christs-Church) bred Fellow of M^rton-Colledge in Oxford, Protector
and Orator of that University, whence he was admitted Secretary to Sir Dudly
Carleton Secretary of State, and afterward advanced into the King's service,
and by his Master and the Duke of Buckingham, employed Ambassador to Venice,
where he negle^ted his own interest to attend his Majesty's employment; the
reason that he dyed rich only in the just conscience of his worth, and the
repute of his merk. Coming from Venice, he was appointed Lieger of France, and
designed Secretary of State, had not Death prevented him at Paris; being
accomplished with all qualifications requisite for public Employment,
Learning, Languages, Experience, Abilities, and what not?

King CHARLES hearing of his death, commanded his Corpse to be decently brought
from Paris into England, allowing the expenses of his Funeral, and enjoining
his nearest Relations to attend the performance thereof. These accordingly met
his body at Bulloign in France, and saw it solemnly conveyed into England,
where it was interred in the Chapel of the Castle of Dover. His REX
PLATONICUS, or his Lati^e account of King James his six days stay at Oxford,
speaks his Learning; and his Instructions for Travel, his experience. -- He
observing his Predecessors failings, retrenching his expenses, satisfying
himself with a repute of nobleness, while in his way to preferment; and others
with the expectation of his bounty. When preferred, he seemed liberal, that he
might not be despised abroad; but he was near, that he might not be odious at
home. His prodigality it may be might have satisfied the curiosity of a few
Strangers, while he incurred the displeasure of all his friends. Besides, a
close and wary man may be bountiful at his pleasure, but the munificent cannot
be so easily sparing; for if his occasions or fortunes check his profuseness,
all his gallantry is in his first action of good husbandry. Caution in
expenses, if it be a vice, is one of those, says the Italian, that never
disinherited a man. Nay, of the two, says Machiavel, It Is more discretion to
hold the style of miserable, which begets an infamy without hatred, than to
desire that of Liberal; which being maintained by necessitous courses, procures
an infamy with hatred. As never did Statesman a brave action that seemed
illiberal, so never did he any such that was not so: -- Yet four things our
Knight spared no cost in: I. Intelligence; He could afford (he said) a golden
key for the Pope's Cabinet. 2. Books; -- his Study was his Estate. 3. In
watching the Spaniards, saying, The Indies will pay for this. And 4.
Entertaining knowing men often; applauding the Emperor's maxim, That had
rather go fifty miles to hear a wise man, than five to see a fair City. And
this he was eminent for; that he saw nothing remarkable in Foreign parts, that
he applied not to his own Country: Sir Henry Wotton being not more curious in
picking up small Rarities to pleasure particular persons, than Sir Isaac Wake
was industrious to observe any useful invention that might improve the public
good.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Cottington.
SIr Francis Co^tington being bred, when a youth, under Sir -- Stafford, lived
so long in Spain, till he made the garb and gravity of that Nation become his,
and become him too. He raised himself by his natural strength, without any
artificial advantage; having his parts above his learning, his Experience above
his Parts, his Industry above his Experience, and (some will say) his Success
above all: So that at last he became Chancellor of the Exchequer, Baron of
Hanworth in Middlesex, Constable of the Tower, 1640. and (upon the resignation
of Doctor Inxon) Lord Treasurer of England, gaining also a very great Estate.

Very reserved he was in his temper, and very slow in his proceedings; sticking
to some private Principles in both, and aiming at certain rules in all things:
-- a temper that indeared him as much to his Master, Prince Charles his person,
as his integrity did to his service; -- Nor to his service only, but to that of
the whole Nation; in the Merchandise whereof he was well versed; to the trade
whereof he was very serviceable many ways: but eminently, in that he
negotiated, that the Spanish Treasure which was used to be sent to Flanders by
the way of Genoa, might be sent in English Bottoms, which exceedingly enriched
England for the time; and had it continued, had made her the greatest Bank and
Mart for Gold and Silver of any Commonwealth in Europe.

Indeed the advantage of his Education, the different Nations and Factions that
he had to deal with, the direct opposition of Enemies, the treachery of
Friends, the contracts of Statesmen, the variety and force of Experience from
the distinct knowledge of the natures of the people of several Countries, of
their chief Ministers of State, with their Intrigues of government, made him so
expert, that the Earl of Bristol and Sir Walter Aston could do nothing without
him; and he only could finish that Treaty, which they had for many years spun
out.

Men take several ways to the ends they propose themselves. Some, that of
confidence; others, that of respect and cau^ion, etc. when indeed the main
business is, to suit our selves with our own times; which this Lord did, and no
man better, until looking into the depths of the late Faction, he declared at
the Council Table, 1639. that they aimed at the ruin of Church and State. And
viewing the state of the Kingdom, he advised; That Leagues might be made
abroad; and, that in this inevitable necessity, all ways to raise money should
be used that were lawful. Wherefore he was one of those few excluded the
Indemnity by the Faction, and had the honor to dye banished for the best
Cause and Master, in those foreign Countries; where he suffered as nobly for
the Crown of England in his later days, as he had acted honorably for it in
his former. When he never came off better than in satisfying the Spaniards
about toleration, reducing the whole of that affair to these two Maxims; 1.
That Consciences were not to be forced, but to be won and reduced by the
evidence of Truth, with the aid of Reason, and in the use of all good means of
Instruction and persuasion. 2. That the causes of Consciences, wherein they
exc^ed their bounds, and grow to matter of faction, lose their nature: and that
Sovereign Princes ought distinctly to punish those foul practices, though
overlaid with the fairer pre^ences of Conscience and Religion.


One of his Maxims for Treaty I think remarkable, viz. That Kingdoms are more
subject to fear than hope: And that it is safer working upom them by a power
that may awe the one, than by adva^tages that may excite the other. -- Since
it is another rule, that States have no affections but interest; and that all
kindness and civility in those cases are but oversight and weakness.

Another of his rules for Life I judge useful, viz. That since no man is
absolute in all points, and since men are more naturally inclined out of envy
to observe men's infirmities, than out of ingenuity to acknowledge their merit;
-- He discovers his abilities most, that least discovers himself. To which
I may add another, viz. That it is not only our known duty, but our visible
advantage, to ascribe our most eminent performances to providence, since it not
only takes off the edge of envy, but improves the reason of admiration. None
being less maliced, or more applauded than he, who is thought rather happy than
able; blessed, than active; and fortunate, than cunning.

Though yet all the caution of his life could not avoid the envy of ^is
advancement from so mean a beginning to so great honors, -- notwithstanding
that it is no disparagement to any to give place to fresh Nobility, who ascend
the same st^ps with those before them. New being only a term, says one, only
respecting us, not the world; for what is, was before us, and will be when we
are no more: And indeed ^his Personage considering the vanity and inconstancy
of common applause or affronts, impr^ved the one, and checked the other, by a
constant neglect of both^

Observations on the Life of Sir Dudly Careleton.
SIr Dudly Careleton was born in Oxfordshire, bred in Christs-Church in Oxford
under Dr. King, and afterward in relation of Secretary to Sir Ralph Winwood in
the Low Countries, where he was very active, when King James resigned the
cautionary Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his former
Learning, that afterward our King employed him for twenty years together
Ambassador in Venice, Savoy, and the United Provinces; Anne Gerard his Lady
(Coheir to George Gerard Esquire) accompanying him in all his Travels, as is
expressed in her Epitaph in Westminster-Abby. He was by K. Charles the first, to
balance the Duke of Buckingham's enemies in the House of Peers, with the Lord
Mandevil now Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Grandison, created Baron of
Imbercourt in Surrey, and afterward Viscount Dorchester, marrying for his
second Wife the Daughter of Sir Henry Glenham, the Relict of Paul, Viscount
Banning, who survived him. He succeeded the Lord Conway, (when preferred
President to the Council, in the Secretary-ship of State, being sworn at
White Hall, December 14. 1628. and dying without Issue, Anno Dom. 163 -- Much
ado he had to remove a State-jealousie that was upon him; That he insisted on
^he restitution of some Towns in Cleves and Iuliers, to gratify the Spaniards
at that time in Treaty with us: more to remove a Church-jealousie, that in
negotiating an accommodation in Religion, he designed the undermining of the
Remonstrants then in so much power there: In which matter he was at a loss,
whether his Majesty should interpose by Letter or Message: The former he said
was most effectual, but the later less subject to misconstruction, considering
Barnevel's interest in the State -- But he had a Chaplain, one Mr. Hales, that
kept this Controversy even on the one hand, while he balanced the
State-interest on the other; equally careful that the United Provinces should
not be overrun by the Armies of Spain, and that they should not be swallowed
up by the protecti^n of France.

Watchful was his eye there over the West India Company; Diligent his carriage
upon any accommodations from Spain; which he apprehended always as a design to
distract that people then in regard of their unsetledness, but too apt upon any
dispute to fall into faction: Great his industry in reconciling Sir Horace Vere
and Sir Edward Cecil for the honor of the English Nation, and the advancement
of the common service: Sincere his services ^o the Prince Elector, and his Lady.

Exa^t his rules of Traffic and Commerce, and dexterous his arts of keeping
the States from new alliances, notwithstanding our likely Marriage-treaty with
Spain, especially since the Prince of Orange bluntly (after his manner) asked,
Qui at' il vostre Marriage? -- And indeed he behaved himself in all Employments
so well becoming a man that understood so many Languages, that was so well
versed in Ancient and Modern History, that had composed so many choice pieces
of Politics, that was so well seen in the most practical Mathematics; and
added to these a graceful and charming look, a gentle and a sweet elocution;
that notwithstanding his, and his Brother Bishop Carleton's rigidness in some
points, kept him to his dying-day in great favor and most eminent service; and
failing in nothing but his French Embassy, because there he had to do with
Women. Leaving behind him this observation; That new Common-wealth^ are hardly
drawn to a certain resolution; as who knowing not how to determine, and
remaining only in suspense, take ordinarily that course rather which they are
forced ^o, than what they might choose for themselves. -- And this eminent
service when he assisted the Earl of Holland in France, viz. That he pacified
the high difference there, upon which the revolt of the Hugonots depended, and
put a real resolution in King Lewis to advance against the Valtoline and Spain
by the advantage of the League with England: proceeding upon this Maxim with
that King; They that have respect to few things, are easily misled.

I had almost forgot, how this Lord finding that want of Treasure at home, was
the ground of our unsuccessful and despicableness abroad; and that Principe
senza quatrius e come un muro senza crole da tulls scompis^iato; That a Prince
without money is like a wall without a Cross, for every one to draw upon; did
mention the Excise in the Parliament House, and in no ill meaning neither, and
was violently cried to the Bar: and though a person of that eminence, as being
then a Privy-Councellor, and principal Secretary of State, he hardly escaped
being committed to the Tower: -- So odious was that Dutch-Devil (as they called
it) in the excellent King Charles, which was raised by the beloved Parliament,
with many more that were conjured up in three or four years, but not likely to
be laid in three or fourscore.

Living in those times when weak men imagined to themselves some unknown bliss
from untried governments, and considering that alterations countervail not
their own dangers, and as they bring little good to any, so they bring least of
all to those that first promoted them; This Lord refused to be the mouth of the
Zealous multitude (whose rage could neither be well opposed, nor joined with)
whom a pardon or compliance might bring off, leaving their Demagogues to
compound for their folly with their ruin; choosing rather to be patient, than
active, and appear weak, than be troublesome; and once resolved upon an exact
survey of circumstances for power against the faults of it on the one hand, and
the affronts of it on the other, he gained the esteem of all parties by his
fidelity to his own. I am much taken with his plain saying, which I find of
late printed; There will be mistakes in Divinity while men preach, and errors
in Government while such govern: And more with his method of proceeding in his
affairs, whereof he laid first an Idea in his own mind, and then improved it by
debate; the result whereof was usually so complete, as showed the vast
difference between the shallow conceptions of one man, and the deep judgment of
many^

Observations on the Lives of Sir Richard, and Sir Jerome Weston, Earls of
Portland.
SIr Richard Weston in his youth impaired his estate, to improve himself with
public accomplishment, but came off both a saver and a gainer at the last,
when made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and^ afterward (upon the remove of the
Earl of Marlborough) July 15. in the fourth of King Charles, Lord Treasurer of
England.

His activity in Parliament made him considerable at Court, none fitter to
serve a Prince than he who commands the humor of the people. Indeed where ever
he was, he discovered himself able and faithful. 1. In his Foreign
Employments, his judgment was searching, and reach admirable, he being the
first that smelt out the intentions against the Palatinate; which were then in
brewing, and mashed with much art. In his Domestic charge, ^is Artifice was
singular, both in a faithful improvem^nt of the Incomes, and a discreet
moderation of the expenses in his Masters Revenues. -- In his Aspect, there was
a mixture of authority and modesty; in his apprehensions, quickness and
solidity; in his port and train, a suitable dignity and correspondence, with
little noise and outward form: An enemy to Complements, yet very cour^eous: no
flatterer, yet of great power: irreconcilable to frothy formality, yet
maintaining a due regard to his person and place. A great Scholar he was, and
yet a great Sta^es-man; of various erudition, and as large observation. -- He
secured himself much by Alliances with the best Nobility, more by the love, and
(what is more) the esteem of a constant King; it being one of the wonders of
that time, that my Lord of Canterbury and he, who were at so much distance from
one another, should be so inward with their Sovereign, but that that excellent
Prince measured not his affections to his Dependants so much by a particular
interest, as by a public serviceableness -- The necessity of the Exchequer put
him upon some ways of supply that displeased the rabble; though his three
particular cares, viz. The paying of the Navy, the satisfying of the City, and
the Queen of Bohemia's supply (three things he was very much intent upon while
Treasurer) obliged the wiser sort of men. I know nothing he was defective in,
being careful (to use his own words) to perform all duties, with obedience to
his Majesty, respect to the Duke, and justice to the particular parties
concerned; -- But that he had so much of his Master's love, and so little of
his patience, being grated (as all Statesmen are that have to do with various
interests and humors) between a strong inclination of satisfying every man,
and the impossibility of pleasing all: Considering the importunities of persons
and affairs, a little impatience must needs fall upon your Lordship (wri^es Sir
Henry Wotton to him) unless you had been cut out of a Rock of Diamonds,
especially having been before so conversant with liberal Studies, and with the
^reedom of your own mind.

In his time was the great Question agitated; Whether a Prince should aim at
the fear, or the love of his People? -- Although no Prince did more to oblige
his People, than the Excellent King Charles the I. Yet was there no Prince ever
more advised to awe them: For this Lord, and many more, who looked upon
overmuch indulgence as the greatest cruelty, considering that men love at
their own pleasure, and to serve their own turn, and that their fear depends
upon the Princes pleasure, were of opinion; That every wise Prince ought to
ground upon that which is of himself, and not upon that which is of another:
government being set up in the world, rather to trust its own power, than stand
upon others courtesy.

Besides, two things the vulgar are taken with: 1. Appearance. 2. The event of
things; which, if successful, gains both their love and reverence. Neither was
the Father more exact in his Maxims tha^ the Son in his, of whose many
infallible principles this was one; That it was the safest way for the King's
Majesty to proceed upon a Declaration, that the Faction at Westminster was no
Parliament, upon his own and his most loyal Lords and Commons removal to
Oxford. And this another; That provided the Gentry and Clergy were well
principled, and His Majesty that now is had a constant correspondence with the
most eminent of them, it was our Interest to promote his Majesty's grandeur
abroad, and sit still at home, until the Faction might be so secure as ^o
divide, -- and his Majesty's Interest became so conspicuous by the Principles
that were kept up at home, and the State that was born abroad, as to command
all. And really his little saying has much in it: -- He that will see what
shall be, let him consider what has been: For there are the same desires,
humors, and interest in every age, that were before it: So that as Machiavel
observes, It is very easy for him, that with diligence ^xamineth past
Occurrences, to serve himself of those remedies which were in use among the
Ancien^s; Or if they fail, to devise what is most like them.

Observations on the Life of William Earl of Pembrook.
HE was an ancient Gentleman of good repute, and therefore well esteemed; a
proper person, well set, and of graceful deportment, and therefore well beloved
of King James and Queen Anne: His inclination was as generous as his
extraction, and manners ancient as his Family. One of his Ancestors is
renowned, for that he would cond^scend to deliver his Embassies in no Language
but Welsh; and he is commended for that he would comply with no customs in his
converse but the old English, -- though his Contemporaries make that his defect
rather than his ornament; proceeding from his want of Travel, rather than his
observance of Antiquity: He having had only (says the Historian) the breeding
of England, which gave him a conceited dislike of Foreign men, their manners
and mode; or of such English as professed much advantage thereby: so that the
Scots and he were ever separate; and therefore he was the only old Courtier
that kept close to the Commonalty, and they to him, though never suspected by
either of his Sovereigns; not because he was not over-furnished with Abilities
(as that pen insinuates) to be more than Loyal, but because he had too much
integrity to be less. Being munificent and childless, the University of Oxford
hoped to be his Ex^cutor, and Pembrook-Colledge his Heir. Pembrook-Colledge, I
say, called so not only in respect to, but also in expectation from him, then
Chancellor of the University: and probably had not cut noble Lord died suddenly
soon after (according as a Fortune Tellers had informed him, whom he laughed at
that very night he departed, being his Birth-night) this College might have
received more than a bare name from him.

He was (says one of his own time) the very picture, and Vive Essigies of
Nobility; his person rather Majestic than Elegant; his presence, whether
quiet, or in motion, full of stately gravity; his mind generous, and purely
heroic; often stout, but never disl^^al: so vehement an opponent of the
Spaniard, as when that Match fell under consideration, he would sometimes rouse
to the trepidation of King James, yet kept in favor still; for that King knew
plain dealing, as a Jewel in all men, so was in a Privy-Councellor an
ornamental duty. An instance of his familiar converse with King James, was,
that the King observing that he naturally hated a Frog, threw one into his
neck; and he in requital, caused a Pig (of an equal disgust with the same
Prince) to be put under his Close-stool: where, though it produced no
extraordinary ill effect for the present, yet after the prank had been
descanted upon, and worst of Interpretations made by some (the title of Jews
being at that time bestowed on the Scots) the King was much affected with it;
and the more, because it was done at Wilton the Earls own house. -- Though
Kings when free and sociable, break out to sprightful and facetious
extravagancies with Courtiers, yet must they not presume, lest their words are
interpreted, not by their meaning, but others jealousy: free spirits cannot be
too circumspect. And the same true-heartedness commended him to King Charles,
with whom he kept a most admirable correspondence, and yet stood the firm
Confident of the Commonalty; and that not by a sneaking cunning, but by an
erect and generous prudence, such as rendered him as unsuspected of ambition on
the one side, as of faction on the other; being generally beloved and regarded.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Conway.
EDward Lord Conway succeeded to his Father's Martial skill and valor, who was
under the Earl of Leicester, Governor of Ostend, and twisted therewith
peaceable Policy in State Affairs, so that the Gown and the Sword met in him in
most eminent proportion, and thereupon King James advanced him one of the
principal Secretaries of State. For these his good services, he was by him
created Lord Conway of Ragleigh in this County, and afterward by King Charles
Viscount Killultagh in the County of Antrim; And lastly, in the third of King
Charles, Viscount Conway of Conway in Carnarvenshire^ England, Ireland, and
Wales mutually embracing themselves in his Honors; and not long after
President of the Council. Upon the bre^^^ with Spain, King James and the Duke
of Buckingham both judged it very convenient to have a Martial Secretary;
neither was there any man fitter ^or their turn than this Gentleman, who was as
able to direct them in the Affairs of War abroad, as he was ready to be
directed by them in those of Peace at home: Being one of those three remarkable
Servants that King James used to jest upon, viz^ a Lord Treasurer [meaning the
Earl of Suffol^^ that could not cast Account, a Chaplain [meanin^ Doctor
Preston] that could not read Being not used to the Common Prayer.
P^^^^^^ and a Secretary [meaning this Lord] that (...) not write his name. Sir
Rich^rd Weston beat the Bush in the Affair of the Palatinate, but Sir Edward
catched the Hare; his rough humor being more suit^ble to that business: Or
indeed it having been always more successful to be bold, than wary; to be free
for all occasions, than to be obstinate to some rule^. -- Fortune (says
Machiavel) is a Mi^triss, that is^ sooner won by those that ruffle and force
her, than by others that proceed coldly. Indeed he was charged with treachery
and cowardice in the action against the Scots, 1640. but he came off with his
honest animosity, saying, If he might but fight their whole Army, he would
settle Scotland in six months, or lose his head -- being in that, of my Lord of
Canterbury's opinion, who assured his Majesty they would not hold out four: a
motion! that if as easily entertained by that gracious King as it was
effectually pursued by the bloody Usurpers, a sad experience has taught us and
them, would have prevented much mischief there, more here; especially since it
was that wise Prince his judicious observation, That they and their
Confederates were a people lost by favor, and won by punishment.

Observations on the Lives of the Digges.
MAster Leonard Digges was one of excellent Learning and deep judgment. His
^i^d most inclined him to the Mathematics, and he was the best Architect in
that age for all manner of Buildings, for convenience, pleasure, state,
strength, being excellent at Fortifications. Lest his Learning should dye with
him, for the public profit, he printed his Tectonicon, Prognostic General,
Stratiotick, about the ordering of an Army, and other Works. He flourished Anno
Dom. 1556. and dyed I believe about the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when as in
most growing times Arts were drowned in action.

Nothing else have I to observe of his name, save that hereditary Learning may
seem to run in the vel^s of his Family; witness Sir Dudly Digs of
Chilham-Castle, made Master of the Rolls, in the year 1636. whose abilities
will not be forgotten, whilst our age has any remembrance. This Knight had a
younger son, of a most excellent wit, and a great judgment, Fellow of All Souls
in Oxford, who in the beginning of our Civil Wars wrote so subtle and solid a
Treatise of the difference between King and Parliament, that such Royalists who
have since handled that Controversy, have written plura non plus; yea aliter
rather than alia of that Subject. The Son writes down those Rebellions that the
Father countenanced: The Father, I say, who by a bold impeachment against his
Majesty's chief Minister of State, to his face, taught a discontented People to
draw a bolder against his Majesty himself: -- Wherefore it was, that (after his
undutiful Prologue Against his Majesty's Prerogative in favoring his Servants;
the Preface to more disloyal methods against his right, in governing his
people) he and Sir John Elliot were whispered out of the Lords House, when they
were hottest against the Duke, to speak with a Gentleman, and thence sent
immediately by two Pursevants that attended, to the Tower; where, and in the
Country, this Gentleman lay under just displeasure, until it was thought fit to
take off so dangerous a piece of boldness and eloquence upon the growing
distempers of the age by favor and preferment, to a Neutrality at least, if
not to the just measures of his duty. But our observation here is this; That
faction is one of those sins, whereof the Authors repent most commonly
themselves, and their posterities are always ashamed.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Ridly, Dr. LL.
THis Knight and Doctor was born at Ely in Cambridge-shire, bred first a
Scholar at Eaton in Buckingham-shire, then Fellow of Kings-Colledge in
Cambridge. He was a general Scholar in all kind of Learning, especially in that
which we call Melior Literatura. He afterward was Chancellor of Winchester,
and Vicar General to the Archbishop of Canterbury. His memory will never dye,
whilst his Book called The view of the Ecclesiastical Laws is living; a book of
so much merit, that the Common Lawyers (notwithstanding the difference betwixt
the professions) will ingenuously allow a due commendation to his learned
performance in that subject: Although it startled them to hear King James was
so affected with it, insomuch that Sir Edward Coke undertook from thence to
prophecy the decay of the Common Law: though in that prophecy of his, others
foresaw nothing but his fall. Never book came out more seasonably for the
Church than this; never Comment came out more suitably, than Mr. Gregory's
Notes upon it: H^ writ well, and advised better: being good to give, better to
manage Counsel; which he never offered till called, and never urged longer than
it pleased; answering no question of consequence unless upon emergent occasion,
without deliberation; observing the design of people, that ask most commonly to
try his sufficiency, as well as improve their own: However, being sure that
time is likelier to increase than abate the weight of a result, discovering as
well what may be returned suitably to the general temper, as what may be
answered fitly to the particular instance.

What alterations he designed for the Churches benefit, were not sudden, but
leisurely. To force men out of one extremity into another, is an attempt as
dangerous, as it is invidious; as awakening most opposition, and obnoxious to
most hazard. Wise In Tiberio.
Tacitus observes, that men have reformed inveterate habits more by yielding
to them, than engaging against them; though a man must so yield as not to
encourage, while he does so countermine, as not to exasperate: Although he was
always able, yet was he never willing to mend the Copy his Superiors had set
him, unless owned as from former instruction, lest they grew jealous, he valued
his own experience before theirs, who measure men's sufficiency from their
caution, and not from their parts; from what they can forbear, rather than from
what they can do.

To conclude, he was one of those able men that cannot be eminent, unless they
be great: men of great merit, behave themselves so negligently in small
affairs, as that you shall never understand their abilities, unless you advance
their persons. Men's capacities and sufficiencies have certain bounds prescribed
them; within the limits of which they are able to acquit themselves with credit
and applause: But if you advance them above, or depress them below their
spheres, they show nothing but debilities and miscarriages. Only this he was
always commended for; That having the management of Affairs entrusted to him,
he underwent all the miscarriages himself, ascribing all the honor and
sufficiency to his Patron; carrying his hand in all actions so, that his Master
had the applause of whatever was either conceded or denied in public, without
any other interruption from Mr. Ridly, than what became the bare instrument of
his commands, however he ordered the matter in private.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Martin.
HE would merrily say, That if his Father had left him fourscore pounds a year,
where he left him but forty, he would never have been a Scholar, but have lived
on his Lands: whereas his Inheritance being a large encouragement, but a small
maintenance, he made up in study what he wanted in Estate; first at Winchester,
and then at New-Colledge, where his inclination led him to Divinity, but Bishop
Andrews his advice persuaded him to the Civil Law, wherein he attained that
great proficiency he was eminent for, thus: --

He had weekly transmitted to him from some Proctors at Lambeth, the brief
heads of the most important Causes which were to be tried in the
High Commission. Then with some of his familiar friends in that faculty, he
privately pleaded those Causes; acting in their Chamber what was done in the
Court: But Mr. Martin making it his work, exceeded the rest in amplifying and
aggrava^ing any fault, to move anger and indignation against the guilt thereof;
or else in extenuating or excusing it, to procure pity, obtain pardon, or at
least prevail for a lighter punishment: -- Whence no Cause came amiss to him in
the High Commission: For, says my Author, he was not to make new Armor, but
only to put it on, and buckle it; not to invent, but apply arguments to his
Clients. -- As in decision of Controversies in his Courts, he had a moderate
and middle way: so in managing of affairs in Parliament, he had a healing
Method: Whence in most Debates with the Lords, where Mr. Noy's Law and Reason
could not convince, Sir Henry Martin's As about the Petition of Right, in
reference to which, he and Sergeant Glanvile satisfied the Lords.
Expedients could accommodate. For which services, and his other meri^s, he was
made Judge of the Prerogative-Court for probate of Wills, and of the Admiralty
for Foreign Trade. Whence King JAMES would say merrily, He was a mighty Monarch
by Sea and Land, over the Dead and the Living.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Bramstone.
SIr John Bramstone, Knight, was born at Maldon in Essex, bred up in the
Middle Temple in the study of the Common Law, wherein he attained to such
eminency, that he was by King Charles made Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench.

One of deep Learning, solid Judgment, integrity of Life, gravity of
behavior, above the envy of his own age, and the scandal of posterity. One
instance of his I must not forget, writes the Historian effectually, relating
to the foundation wherein I was bred: Sergeant Bruerton by Will bequeathed to
Sidney-Colledge well-nigh three thousand pounds, but (for ha^te, or some other
accident) it was so imperfectly done, that (as Dr. Sam. Ward informed me) the
gift was invalid in the rigor of the Law. Now Judge Bramstone, who married the
Sergeants Widow, gave himself much trouble (gave himself indeed, doing all
things gratis) for the speedy payment of the money to a farthing, and the legal
settling thereof on the College, according to the true intention of the dead.
He deserved to live in better times. The delivering his judgment on the King's
side in the case of Ship Money, cost him much trouble, and brought him much
honor, as who understood the consequence of that Max^me, Salus populi suprema
lex; and that Ship Money was thought legal by the best Lawyers, voted down
arbitrarily by the worst Parliament: they hearing no Counsel for it, though the
King heard all men willingly against it. Yea, that Parliament thought
themselves not secure from it, unless the King renounced his right to it by a
new Act of his own. Men have a touchstone to try Gold, and Gold is the
touchstone to try Men. Sir William Noy's gratuity showed, that this Judges
Inclination was as much above corruption as his Fortune; and that he would not,
as well as needed not, be base. Equally intent was he upon the Interest of the
State and the Maxims of Law, as which mutually supported each other. -- He
would never have a Witness interrupted, or helped, but have the patience to
hear a naked, though a tedious truth: the best Gold lies in the most Ore, and
the clearest truth in the most simple discourse. When he put on his Robes, he
put off Respects; his private affections being swallowed up in the public
service. This was the Judge whom Popularity could never flatter to any thing
unsafe, nor favor oblige to any thing unjust. Therefore he died in peace,
1645. when all others were engaged in a War, and shall have the reward of his
integrity of the Judge of Judges at the great A^^ize of the world.

Admin. Card. de Rich. p. 283.
Having lived as well as read Iustinian's maxim to the Praetor of Laconia; All
things which appertain to the well-government of a State, are ordered by the
constitutions of Kings, that give life and vigo^r to the Law: Whereupon, who so
would walk wisely, shall never fail, if he propose them both for the rule of
his actions; -- For a King is the living Law of his Country.

Nothing troubled him so much as (shall I call it?) the shame, or the fear of
the consequence of the unhappy contest between his Excellent Majesty and his
meaner Subjects in the foresaid case of Ship Money; no enemy being contemptible
enough to be despised, since the most despicable command greater strength,
wisdom, and interest than their own, to the designs of Malice or Mischief. -- A
great man m^naged a quarrel with Archee the King's Fool; but by endeavoring to
explode him the Court, rendered him at last so considerable, by calling the
enemies of that person (who were not a few) to his rescue, as the fellow was
not only able to continue the dispute for diverse years, but received such
encouragement from standers by (the instrument of whose malice he was) as he
often broke out in such reproaches, as neither the dignity of that excellent
person's calling, nor the greatness of his parts, could in reason or manners
admit: -- But that the wise man discerned, that all the fool did was but a
symptom of the strong and inveterate distemper raised long since in the hearts
of his Countrymen against the great man's Person and Function.

Observations on the Life of Sir Augustine Nicols.
SIr August. Nicols, son to Tho. Nicols, Sergeant at Law, was born at Ecton in
Northamptonshire. Now though according to the rigor of our Fundamental
Premises, he be not within our cognizance under this Ti^le, yet his merit will
justify us in presenting his Character. He was bred in the study of the Common
Law, wherein he attained to such knowledge, that Qu. Eliz. made him, and K.
James continued him his own Sergeant, whence he was freely preferred one of the
Judges of the Common Pleas. I say freely, King James commonly calling him the
Judge that would give no money. Not to speak of his moral qualifications; and
subordinate abilities; he was renowned for his special judiciary Endowments; of
very calm affections and moderate passions; of a grave and affable deportment;
of a great patience to hear both Parties all they could say; a happy memory; a
singular sag^city to search into the material circumstances; Exemplary
integrity, even to the rejection of Gratuities after Judgment given, and a
charge to his Followers, that they came to their Places clear-handed, and that
they should not meddle with any Motions to him, that he might be secured from
all appearance of corruption. His forbearing to travel on the Lords day,
wrought a Reformation on some of his own Order. Very pitiful and tender he was
in case of life, yet very exact in case of blood.

He loved plain and profitable Preaching, being wont to say, I know not what
you call Preaching, but I like them that come nearest to my Conscience. The
speech of Caesar is commonly known; Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori; which
Bishop Jewel altered and applied to himself, Decet Episcopum concionant^m mori:
of this man it may be said, Iudex mortuus est jura dans; dying in his Calling,
as he went the Northern Circuit, and has a fair Monument in Kendal-Church in
Westmerland. This I observe of this good man; that he was so good a man, that
in the ruffling times he could be but a bad Magistrate, Cum vel ^xeunda ^it
natura, vel minuenda dignitas: when he must either go out of his easy nature,
or forego his just authority.

Observations on the Life of Sir Nich. Hyde.
SIr Nicholas Hyde was born at Warder in WilTshire, where his Father in right
of his Wife had a long Lease of that Castle from the Family of the Arundels.
His Father, I say, (descended from an ancient Family in Cheshire) a fortunate
Gentleman in all his children, (and more in his Grandchildren) some of his
under-boughs outgrowing the top-branch, and younger children (among^t whom Sir
Nicholas) in wealth and honor exceeding the rest of his Family.

H^ was bred in the Middle Temple, and was made Sergeant at Law the first of
February, 1626. and on the eighth day following was sworn Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, succeeding in that Office, next save one unto his Countryman
Sir James Ley (than alive, and preferred Lord Treasurer, born within two miles
one of another) and next of all under Sir Francis Crew lately displaced. Now,
though he entered on his Place with some disadvantage (Sir Randal being
generally popular) and though in those days, it was hard for the same Person
to please Court and Country, yet he discharged his Office with laudable
integrity, until 1631. Prudence obliges Princes to refer the management of
affairs to persons who have the reputation of extraordinary honesty, especially
to the transacting of such things which notwithstanding their innate justice,
may provoke any evil spirits. -- The most part of mankind guessing only by
their own senses and apprehensions, judge of the affairs by the persons who
conduct them. Opinion guides the world, and the reputation of him that
negotiateth, sets a value and price upon his words and actions; and the opi^ion
which is conceived of him is so absolute an Umpire, that there is no appeal
from his judgment -- Opinion is the strongest thing in the world, Truth the
next.

Observations on the Life of Sir Walter Aston.
HE was a Gentleman of so much diligence in the Spanish Negotiations, that
there were no Orders, Cabals, Consultations in that intricate time, etc. he was
not acquainted with: Of so much resolution, that there was not a dangerous
Message in that great business he would not deliver: Of that excellent
converse, that there was not that Minister of State in that jealous Court he
was not familiar with. Very observant he was, by Don Iuan Taxardoes means, of
the Spanish proceedings, and as well skilled with the Duke of Buckingham's
direction in the English; though yet he confessed himself almost lost in those
Intrigues, had not the Duke stood between him and the Kings displeasure that
suspected him, and the Prince his j^alousie that feared him. [He had need have
a steady head, that looks into such depths:] But as he had an excellent faculty
of excusing others miscarriages, so he had a peculiar way of salving his own;
being advantaged with a great foresight, a deep reservedness, and a ready
spirit.

Few understood better the Importance of the English Trade with Spain: None
pursued more diligently its privileges and freedom: tracing most of the secret
Co^nsels and resolutions so closely, that he was able with his industry and
money to give an account of most proceedings. -- In the management whereof he
resigned himself to the Duke's disposal, professing to own no judgment or
affection but what was guided by his direction. -- His own words are these;
Until I know by your Graces favor by what compass to guide my course, I can
only follow his Majesty's revealed will: -- And the Duke's answer this; You
desire me to give you my opinion; My ancient acquaintance, long custom of
loving you, with constancy of friendship, invites me to do you this office of
good will.

My Lord of Bristol shu^fled the Cards well, but Sir Walter Aston played them
best. -- The first set a design, but the second pursued it, -- being happy in
an humble and respectful carriage; which opened the breast, and unlocked the
hearts of all men to him. He that looked downward saw the Stars in the water:
but he who looked only upward, could not see the waters in the Stars.

Indeed there was in his countenance such a throne of sweetness, and his words
had so powerful a charm, set off with so agreeable and taking gravity, that the
respect due to him was not lost in the love he had deserved; nor the love he
attained to, abated by the respect he commanded; being one that had and gave
infinite satisfaction in the Negotiations he engaged in: Wherein among other
things, he would urge how unpolitick, and unsuccessful it is for the Spaniard
to meditate a conquest of Europe, where all his Neighbors oppose him, rather
than Asia, where they would all join with him out of Interest and Conscience,
both to secure him from France, ^. O. 134.
and carry him toward Turkey, at whose doors his friend the Emperor was ready
to attaque them upon any Mutiny or Rebellion then frequent among them, whose
strength (says Machiav^l) lies more in Tradition than in any real Truth: --
Considering the cont^ary complexions of the people in point of In^erest and
Religion, that can admit of no considerable coalition upon the approach of a
Foreign impression.

Observations on the Life of Sir Julius Caesar.
SIr Julius Caesar's Father being Physician to Qu. Elizabeth, and descended of
the ancient Family of the Dalmarii in Italy, then living at Tottenham near
London; This his Son was bred in Oxford; and after other intermediate
preferments, was advanced Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancast^r, and sworn a
Privy-Councellor on Sunday the sixth of July, 1607. and afterward was
preferred Master of the Rolls. A Person of prodigious boun^y to all of worth or
want, so that he might seem to be Almoner-general of the Nation. The story is
well known, of a Gentleman who once borrowing his Coach (which was as well
known to poor people as any Hospital in England) was so rendevouz'd about with
Beggars in London, that it cost him all the money in his purse to satisfy
their importunity, so that he might have hired twenty Coaches on the same
terms. Sir Francis Bacon Lord Ver^lam was judicious in his Election, when
perceiving his Dissolution to approach, he made his last Bed in effect in the
house of Sir Julius.

He continued more than twenty years Mr. of the Rolls; and though heaved at by
some Expectants, sat still in his Place, well poysed therein, with his gravity
and integrity. Vir tantarum El^^mosynarum non movebitur; a man of so great Alms
and Prayers (made by him and for him) s^all not be removed. Nor was it without
a prosperous Omen, that his chief House in Hartfordshire was called Benington,
that is, Villa benigna, the bountiful Village, as one Author will have it; or
as another, Villa beneficii, the Town of good turns, from the River so named
running by it. His Arms were these, viz. Gules, three Roses Argent on a Chief
of the first, so many Roses of the second, embleming the fragrancy of the
Memory he has left behind him.

His Monument in great St. Hellens, London, being out of the road of ordinary
Fancies, was thus designed by himself in form of a Deed in ruffled Parchment,
in allusion to his Office as Master of the Rolls.

OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit; Sciatis me
Iulium Dalmare alias Caesarem Militem, utriusque legis Doctorem; Elizabethae
Reginae Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis judicem, and unum e Magistris libellorum;
Jacobo Regi a Privatis Conciliis, Cancellarium Scaccarii, Scriniorum Magistrum,
hac prae senti Charta mea Confirmasse me Anuuente Divino N^mine naturae debitum
libenter solviturum quam primum Deo placuerit. In cujus rei memoriam, Manum
meam, and Sigillum apposui. Datum 27 Februarii, 1635.

Julius Caesar.


Here his Seal or Coat of Arms is affixed, and beneath them is written
Irrotulatur Caelo.


He dyed the twenty eighth day of April, Anno Domini, 1636. in the seventy
ninth year of his Age. They say of Witches, that they are unable to hurt till
they have received an Alm^. It Is certain, none ever undermined this Gentleman's
insufficiency, but such as were advanced by his civility; a civility that
secured him, as well as it empowered them, making his Grants to all persons
double kindnesses by Expedition, and clothing his very Denials in such robes
of Courtship, as that it was not obviously discernable whether the Request or
Denial were most decent; having this peculiar to himself, That he was very
cautious of Promises, lest falling to an Incapacity of performance, he might
forfeit his Reputation, and multiply his certain Enemies, by his design of
creating uncertain Friends.

Besides, he observed a sure principle of rising, viz. That great persons
esteem better of such they have done great Courtesies to, than those they have
received great Civilities from; looking upon this as their disparagement, the
other as their glory.

Observations on the Lives of Sir Henry, Sir Lucius, Sir Henry Carry, Lords
Viseounts Faulkland.
A Race of accomplished men, the ornaments and supports of their Country,
which they served with no less faithfulness and prudence in their Negotiations
abroad, than honor and justice in their Places at home: Of such a Stock of
reputation, as might kindle a generous emulation in Strangers, and a noble
ambition in those of their own Family. Henry Carry Vi^count Falkland in
Scotland, son to Sir Edward Carry, was born at Aldnam in Her^fordshire; being a
most acplished Gentleman, and a complete Courtier. By King James he was
appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and well discharged his Trust therein: But an
unruly Colt will fu^^ and chafe (though neither switch nor spur) merely because
backed. The Rebellious Irish will complain, only because kept in subjection,
though with never so much lenity; the occasion why some hard speeches were
passed on his Government. Some beginning to counterfeit his hand, he used to
incorporate the year of his age in a knot flourished beneath his name,
concealing the day of his birth to himself. Thus by comparing the date of the
month, with his own Birthday (unknown to such Forgers) he not only discovered
many false Writings which were past, but also deterred dishonest Chearers from
attempting the like for the future. He made good use of Bishop Usher's Interest
while he was there, as appears by the excellent Speech that the Bishop made for
the King's supply.

Being recalled into England, he lived honorably in the County aforesaid,
until by a sad casualty he broke his Leg on a Stand in Theobald's Park, and
soon after dyed thereof. He married the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Lawrence
Tanfield, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair Estate in
Oxfordshire. His death happened Anno Dom. 1620. being Father to the most
accomplish-Statesman.

2. Lucius Lord Falkland, the wildness of whose youth was an argument of the
quickness of his riper years: He that has a spirit to be unruly before the use
of his reason, has mettle to be active afterward. Quicksilver if fixed, is
incomparable; besides that the adventures, contrivances, secrets, confidence,
trust, compliance with opportunity, and the other sallies of young Gallants,
prepare them more serious undertakings -- as they did this noble Lord; great in
his Gown, greater in his Buffe; able with his Sword, abler with his Pen: a
knowing Statesman, a learned Scholar, and a stout man: One instance of that
excess in learning and other great perfections, which portended ruin to this
Nation in their opinion, who write, that all Extremes, whether of Virtue or
Vice, are ominous, especially that unquiet thing called Learning, whose (...)
signifies its own period, and that of the Empire it flourishes in; a too
universally dilated Learning, being not faithful to the settlements either of
Policy or Religion; it being no less ready to discover blemishes in the one,
than Incongruities in the other: Sophisters (says my smart Author) like the
Country of the Switz, being as able upon the least advantage proposed, to
engage on the wrong side as on the right. As to go no further, this excellent
Personage being among the Demagogues that had been for twelve years silenced,
and were now to play the prize in Parliament, and show their little twit-twat,
but tedious faculties of speaking, makes the bitterest Invective against the
Governors and government of the Church, that ever was penned in English^ which
though designed by him, it is thought, only to allay the fury of the Faction, by
some compliance with it, carried things beyond the moderation and decency of
that Assembly, which he made too hot for himself, retyring in cooler thoughts,
as many more (that like Brutus could not lay the storm^ they had raised) to
Oxford, where his Pen was more honorably employed in de^ecting the fundamental
Error of Rome their infallibility, and countermining the main props of
Westminster their Hypocrisy; this as Secretary, the other as a Student -- in
both laying open the little pre^ensions, whereby poor people were ensnared in
their Civil and Religious Liberty. -- Much was the gall always in his Ink, and
very sharp his Pen; but even, flowing, and full his Style, such as became him,
whose Learning was not an unsettled mass of reading that whirled up and down in
his head, but fixed Observations, that tempered with solid prudence and
experience, were the steady Maxims of his Soul fitted for all times and
occasions; he having sat (as some Noble-mens sons used to do formerly in the
House of Lords) behind the Chair of State from his very childhood, and owning
a large heart capable of making that universal inspection into things that much
becomes a Gentleman, being a Master in any thing he discoursed of. -- Insomuch
that his general knowledge husbanded by his wit, and set off by his Meine and
Carriage, attracted many to come as far to see him, as he professed he would go
to see Mr. Daillee -- which rendered him no less necessary than admirable at
Court, until his Curiosity engaging him at Newbery, he was strangely slain
there, dying as he lived till then, between his Friends and Enemies, to the
King's great grief, who valued him, because he understood his parts and
services in the Treaty at Oxford, where he was eminent for two things; the
timing of Propositions, and concealing of Inclinations; though no man so
passionate for his dedesign, as never enduring that hope that holds resolution
so long in suspense, but ever allaying it with that fear that most commonly
advises the best by supposing the worst -- His usual saying was, I pity
unlearned Gentlemen in a rainy day.

3. He was Father first to Henry Lord Falkland, whose quick and extraordinary
parts and notable spirit performed much, and promised more, having a great
command in the Country where he was Lord Lieutenant, a general respect in the
house where he was Member, a great esteem at Court (with his Majesty and his
Royal Highness the Duke of York) where he was both wit, and wisdom -- When
there was the first opportunity offered to honest men to act, he laid hold of
it, and got in spite of all opposition, to a thing called a Parliament: By
same token, that when some urged he had not sowed his wild Oats, he is said to
reply; If I have not, I may sow them in the House, where there are Geese enough
to pick them up. And when Sir F. N. should tell him he was a little too wild
for so grave a service, he is reported to reply; Alas! I am wild, and my
Father was so before me, and I am no Bastard, -- as etc. In which Contention he
out-did the most active Demagogues at their own weapon, speaking. When Major
Huntington and his followers were for the long Parliament, Sir F. N. L. S. etc.
were for the secluded Members, My Lord carried all the County for an absolute
free Parliament: which he lived to see, and act in so successfully, that he was
voted generally higher in trusts and services, had he not been cut off in the
prime of his years; as much missed when dead, as beloved when living -- A great
instance of what a strict Education (for no man was harder bred) a general
Converse, and a noble Temper can arrive to; and what an Orator can do in a
Democracy, where the Affections of many is to be wrought upon, rather than the
judgment of few to be convinced. A golden tongue falling under a subtle head
under such a constitution, has great influence upon the whole Nation.

Observations on the Life of Sir James Ley, Earl of Marlborough.
SIr James Ley, son of Henry Ley Esquire (one of great Ancestry, who, says my
Author, on his own cost, with his men, valiantly served King Henry the Eighth,
at the siege of Boloin) being his Fathers sixth son, (and so in probability
barred of his inheritance) endeavored to make himself an Heir by his
Education, applying his Book in Braze^-Nose-Colledge, and afterward studying
the Laws of the Land in Lincolus-Inne, wherein such his proficiency, King James
made him Lord Chief Justice in Ireland. Here he practiced the charge King James
gave him at his going over, (yea, what his own tender Conscience gave himself)
namely, not to build his Estate upon the ruins of a miserable Nation, but
aiming by the unpartial execution of Justice, not to enrich himself, but
civilize the People. But the wise King would no longer loose him out of his own
Land, and therefore recalled him home about the time when his Fathers
Inheritance, by the death of his five elder brethren descended upon him. It was
not long before Offices and Honors flowed in fast upon him, being made by King
James
1. Attorney of the Court of Wards. 2. Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, the 18
of his Reign Ian. 29. 3. Lord Treasurer of England in the 22 of his Reign, Dec.
22. 4. Baron Ley of Ley in Devonshire, the last of the same month.
King Charles
1. Earl of Marlborough in Wiltshire, immediately after the King's Coronation.
2. Lord President of the Council, in which place he died^, Anno Dom. 1629.


He was a person of great Gravity, Ability, and Integrity: And as the Caspian
Sea is observed neither to ebb nor flow, so his mind did not rise or fall, but
continued the same constancy in all conditions; a good temper enough for a
Judge, but not for a Statesman, and for any Statesman, but a Lord Treasurer;
and for any Lord Treasurer but in King CHARLES his active time, who was put to
it to find out such stirring men as might recover him from the hazard and
defection he was fallen into in Purse and Power.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Cook.
SIr John Cook, younger Brother to Sir Francis Cook, born at Trusley (in the
Hundred of Apple Tree) in Derby^shire, of ancient and worshipful Parentage, and
allied to the best Family in that Country; was bred Fellow of Trinity-Colledge
in Cambridge, where his wit being designed his Estate, he was chosen
Rhetorick-Lecturer in the University, where he grew eminent for his ingenious
and critical reading in that School, where Rhetoric seemed to be not so much
an Art, as his Nature; being not only the subject, but the very frame of his
Discourse. Then traveled he beyond the Seas ^or some years (when his judgment
was fitted for foreign Observations by domestic experience) in the company. of
a Person of quality,^ returning thence rich in Languages, Remarks, and
Experience, waving all the dangers incident to him for his Religion, by a wary
Profes^ion, that he came to learn, and not to search; being first related to
Sir Fulke Grevil, Lord Brook, who did ^ll men's business but his own; ^he was
thence^ preferred to be Secretary to the Navy, their Master of the Requests;
^^od at last Secretary of State^ for twenty years together. Being a very
zealous Protestant, he did all good offices for the advancement of true
Religion: His Contemporaries character him a grave and a prudent man in ga^e^
apparel, and speech; one that h^d his Intellect^^^s very perfect in the
dispatch of business till he was eighty years old; when foreseeing those
Intrigues that might be too hard for his years, he with his Majesty's good
leave retired as Moses did, ^o ^ie when his eyes were not dim, etc. having kept
himself strictly to the Law of the Land: Insomuch, that being sent to command
Bi^hop Williams from Westminster^; and being asked by the stout Bishop, by what
authority he commanded a man out of his house and his freehold, he was so
tender of the point, that he never rested till he had his pardon for it. Mu^i^^
^^^o he had to keep the King's favor for his compliance with the Faction,
witness his third submission; and as much ado to retain ^he Factions good
opinion for his service to the King, w^tness his several Apologies in
Parliament to this purpose; That it was a hard thing, that they who should have
thanks for the good offices they did the People with the KING, had now nothing
but censures for the same offices they did the King with his people -- Never
was any man more put to it to reconcil^ the two readings of that Text (...) --
which he could never have done, but that his old rule safe-guarded him, viz.
That no man should let what is unjustifiable or dangerous appear under his
hand, to give Envy a steady aim at his place or person; nor mingle Interests
with great men made desperate by debts or Court-injuries, whose falls has been
ruinous to their wisest followers; nor pry any further into secrecy, than
rather to secure, than show himself; nor impart that to a friend, that may
empower him to be an enemy. Besides that his years excused in him that caution
some ob^tinate men want that are broken with viciss^udes, because they consider
not that the forwardest in turmoyls are least regarded when things return to a
calm.

He served the time out of Christian discretion, in finding out the seasons of
things commendably. He complied out of some infirmity in particular
accommoda^ions pardonably; but neither of ignorance or design, i^ pursuance of
his own, or any other man's plot unfaithfully. Indeed he must have wrenched and
sprained his grave soul with the short turning^ in those days, if it had been
true, that he should shuffle a Scots Paper (instead of the genuine Articles of
Pacificat^on at York) which the Earls of Holland, Pembrook, etc. disavowed to
the Northern Commissioners faces (my Lord of Pembrook saying, That indeed as he
took Horse, and his Friends being busy about him, such a Paper was put into
his hand, but he opened it not until he came to his Majesty) and his Majesty
burned in the face of both Kingdoms; whereby they say he was dismissed, which I
am not willing to believe, only I find him hereafter bring Propositions from
the Parliament (as they called it) to the King, as actively as formerly he had
carried Messages from the King to the Parliament: -- Indeed he had an happy
mixture of Dis^retion and Charity, whereby he could allow to things and persons
more than men of streighter apprehensions, or narrower affections were able to
do. Indeed, though as I told you otherwise wary, he broke an Affair to a
Partizan that kept him under all his days: and he that entertains a dangerous
design, puts his head into an halter, and the halter into his hand to whom he
first imparts it. -- Sir Francis Win^ebank and he fell into extremes; which
balanced, might have fupported the Government, if they had directed their
particular inclinations and indulgences by the measures of the general interest
and temper.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Danby.
ALl that I find of this plain Noble-ma^, is w^itten on his Tombstone at
Dantsey in Wil^shire. Here lies the Body of Henry Danvers, second son to Sir
John Danvers Knight, and Dame E^izabeth, Daughter and Coheir to Nevil Lord
Latim^^. He was born at Dantsey in the County of Wilts, Anno Dom. 1573. being
bred up partly in the Low Country Wats, under Maurice E^rl of Nassaw,
afterward Prince of Orange, and in many other Military actions of those ^imes,
both by Sea, and by Land. He was made a Captain in the Military Wars of France,
and there Knighted for his good service under Henry the fourth the then French
King. He was employed as Lieutenant of the Horse, and Serjeant-Major of his
whole Army in Ireland, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of
Mountjoy, in the Reign of Queen Eliz. By King James the first^ he was made
Baron of Dantsey, and Peer of this Realm; as also Lord President of Munster,
and Governor of Guernsey. By King Charles the first, he was created Earl of
Danby, made one of his Privy-Councel, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter. In his later time, by reason o^ imp^^fect health, ^o^siderately
declining more ^^ive Employments, full of honors, wounds, and days, he died
Anno Domini 1643.

LAVS DEO.

For many years before, St. George had not been more magnificently mounted (I
mean the solemnity of his Feast more sumptuously observed) than when this Earl,
with the Earl of Morton, were installed Knights of the Garter. One might have
there beheld the abridgment of England and Scotland in their Attendance. The
Scottish Earl (like Xeuxes his picture) adorned with all Art and costliness,
whilst our English Earl (like the plain sheet of Apelles) by the gravity of his
Habit, got the advantage of the gallantry of his Cortival with judicious
beholders. He died without Issue in the beginning of our Civil Wars, and by his
Will made 1639. se^led his large Estate on his hopeful Nephew Henry D' Anvers,
snatched away (before fully of age, to the great grief of all good men.

Observations on the Life of Sir George Crook.
SIr George Crook, son of Sir John Crook, and Elizabeth Unton his Wife, was
born at Chilton in Buckingham-shire, in the second year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner Temple,
Sergeant at Law, and the King's Sergeant; Justice first of the Common Bench,
22. Iac. and then of the Upper Bench, 4 Caroli. His ability in his Profession
is sufficiently attested by his own printed Reports; Eight eminent Judges of
the Law out of their knowledge of his great Wisdom, Learning, and Integrity,
approving and allowing them to be published for the common benefit. His only
defect was, that he was against the ancient Naval-aid called Ship Money, both
publicly in Westminster Hall, and privately in his judgment demanded by the
King, even at that time when our Neighbors not only incroached upon our Trade,
but disputed our right in the Narrow-seas, though concluded to subscribe
(according to the course of the Court) by plurality of Voices. The Countrymans
wit (levelled to his brain) will not for many years be forgotten; That
Ship Money may be gotten by Hook, and not by Crook; though since they have paid
Taxes (Loins to the little finger, and Scorpions to the rod of Ship Money) but
whether by Hook or Crook, let others enquire: Hampden's share for which he went
to Law, being but eighteen shillings, though it cost the Nation since eighteen
millions.

Considering his declining and decaying age, and desiring to examine his life,
and prepare an account to the supreme Judge, he petitioned King Charl^s for a
Writ of E^se; which though in some sort denied, (what wise Master would
willingly part with a good Servant?) was in effect granted unto him. For the
good King (exacting from his Subjects no services beyond their years and
abilities; and taking it better at his hands, that he confessed his
infirmities, than if he had concealed them) discharged him for the pains,
though he allowed him the fees and honor of Chief Justice while he lived. --
Wherefore in gratitude as well as conscience, however he was misled in ^he
foresaid matter of Syhip money, he abhor^ed the Faction heartily; for he would
say of Hampden, He is a dangerous person, take heed of him. -- and loved the
Church as heartily; for we are told by a person of great worth and credit, That
having read over the Book of Canons 1640 when it first came out, and was so
much spoken against, he lifted up his hands, and gave hearty thanks to Almighty
God, that he had lived to see such good effects of a Convocation. In a word, he
was no less in his Life, than he is in his Epitaph now dead, which runs thus;

Georgius Crook Eques Auratus, unus justiciariorum de Banco Regis, Iudicio
Linceato, and animo presenti insignis, v^ritatis haeres, quem nec mina nec
bonos allexit: Regis au horitatem and populi libertatem aequa lance Libravit;
Religione cordatus, vita innocuus, manu expans^, Cord humili pauperes
irrogavit: mundum vicit and deseruit, Anno AErat. Lxxxii, Annoque R. C. I.
xvii. Anno Domini MDCXLI.

Observations on the Life of Sir Rob. Armstroder.
HE was a great Soldier, a skilful Antiquary, and a good Fellow: In the first
capacity I find him bringing off five hundred English for three miles together
without the loss of a man, from six thousand Spaniards, along a plain Champion,
where the Enemy might have surrounded them at pleasure. -- Well he could handle
bright armor in the Field, better he understood that more rusty in the Tower;
therefore in his second capacity we have him picking up old Coin, valuing more
a Dollar which he might study, than a pound he might spend: Yet though his mind
was taken with the Curiosities of former Times, his inclination was very
compliant with the mode of his own; for he was excellent company, in which
capacity none more prevalent than he in Germany, where they talk much; none
more acceptable in Denmark, where they drink hard; none more taking in Sweden,
where they droll smartly. His humble prop^sition and submission in behalf of
the Elector, was accepted by the Emperor, 1630. He went to Denmark; and the
first night he arrived he pleased the King so well in drinking healths, that
his Majesty ordered that his business should be dispatched that very night, and
he shipped when asleep, as he was to his own amazement when awaked, and the
amazement of all England when returned; he being here before some thought he
had been there. -- Humor is the Misterss of the world.

Neither was he more inten^ upon the pleasing o^ Foreign Princes, than careful
in the honor of his own, especially in his faith, word, and impregnable
honesty; for he knew a faithless Prince is beloved of none; but suspected by
his friends, not trusted of his enemies, -- and forsaken of all men in his
grea^est necessities.

Yet he was not so taken with antique Medals abroad, but he promoted a new
invention at home: for to him and Sir H. Wotton we owe it, that F. Klein the
German, a very eminent Artist in working Tapestry, came over to serve K. Charles
the first, a Virtuoso, judicious in all Liberal mechanical Arts, and for 100
pounds per ann. pension, so improved that Manufacture, at this time very
complete at Mortlack, in a house built by Sir Franci^ Crane upon King James his
motion, who gave two thousand pounds toward it in that place. -- General Tilly
would say before Gustavus Adolphus came into Germany, that he was happy for
three things; That he heard Mass, daily; that he had never touched a woman; and
that he had never lost a battle. -- What ever Sir Robert could say to the
first, he was very prosperous for the last; that he never failed of success
either in fighting or treating; in the Field, or in the Chamber.

Observations on the Life of Philip Earl of Arundel.
HAd his Faith been as Orthodox as his Fathers Faithfulness was eminent, K.
James his gratitude, and his Uncle Northampton's policy had raised him as high
as his Father has been, and his son is. But since his opinion made him a
Separatist from the Church, and his temper a recluse from the Court, we have
him in a place of Honor only as Earl Marshal, while we find his Brother in a
place of Profit, as Lord Treasurer -- though both in a place of Trust as
Privy-Counsellors, -- where this Earl approved himself a confutation of his See
the Ea: of Northamptons Speech.
Uncles maxim; That a through-paced Papist could not be a true-hearted Subject;
being as good an Englishman in his heart, as he was a Catholic in his
conscience; only the greatness of his spirit would not suffer any affronts in
See Lord Spencer.
Parliament; whence he endured some discountenance from the Court, insomuch
that the House of Lords finding him a Prisoner, when they sat 1626. would not
act until after several of their Petitions he was released; when, his temper
yielding with years, he was very complying, only he presumed to marry his Son
to an Heiress the King had disposed of elsewhere; which yet he laid upon the
women that made the M^^ch. Indeed the politic Observator says; That women of
all creatures are the most dextrous in contriving their designs, their natural
sprightfulness of imagination, attended with their leisure, furnishing them
with a thousand Expedients, and proposing all kinds of Overtures with such
probability of happy success, that they easily desire, and as eagerly pursue
their design.

When he was sometimes barred the service of h^s own time, he studied those
before him, being a fond Patron of Antiquaries and Antiquity, of whose old
pieces he was the greatest Hoarder in Europ^, setting aside Ferdinand^ de
Medicis, grand Duke of T^sca^y, from whom by the mediation of Sir Henry Wotton,
he borrowed many an Antique Sculpture, which furnished his Archives so well,
(as we may guess by Mr. Selden's Marmora Arundeliana) that as my Lord
Burleigh's Library was the most complete one for a Politician, my Lord Bacon's
for a Philosopher, Mr. Selden's for an Historian, Bishop Usher's for a Divine,
my Lord of Northampton's for a Poet, Mr. Oughtred's for a Mathematician, Dr.
Hammond's for a Grammarian, or an universal Critic; so the Earl of Arundel's
was the best for an Herald and an Antiquary, a Nobly communicated to all inge
nious persons by the honorable H. Howard of Norfolk, greater in his own worth
than in any titles.
Library not for show, but use.

Neither was he more in his study, where h^ bestowed his melancholy hours, than
in Council, where he advised three things in reference to the Foreign troubles:
1. Correspondence abroad. 2, Frequent Parliaments. 3. Oftener progresses into
the Countries. Neither was he less in the Field than in Council, when General
against the Sco^s (the more shame!) that Protestants should at a time rebel
against their King, when Papists ventured their lives for him: After which
Expedition he was ordered beyond Sea with the Queen^Mother of France, 1639.
when they say he looked back on England with this wish, May it never have need
of me.

It Is true, some observe, that the Scots who cried upon him as a Papist, yet
writ underhand to him their Noble Lord, as they did to Essex and Holland so
effectually, that they had no heart to that War afterward; -- and it is as
true, that thereupon a schedule was now the second time given of the parties
that combined against the Government, viz. 1. The busy medlers that had got
the plausible trick of Haranguing since King James's time, not used in
Parliament from H. 6. time to his. 2. The covetous Landlords, Inclosers,
Justices of the Peace that ruled in the Country, and would do so in Parliament.
3. Needy men in debt, that durst not show their heads in time of Peace. 4.
Puritans, that were so troublesome against Hatton, etc. in Queen Eliz. days;
and under pretense of Religion, overthrew all Government. 5. Such Malcontents
as either lost the preferment they had, or had not what they were ambitious of,
with their Kindred and Dependants. 6. Lawyers, that second any attempt upon the
Prerogative, with their Cases, Records, and Antiquities. 7. London Merchants,
that had been discovered by Cranfield and Ingram, as to their cheats put upon
the King in his Customs and Plantations. 8. Common-wealths-men, that had
learned from Holland in Queen Eliz. days to pray for the Queen and the State.
And 9. (Because there cannot be a Treason without a P --) such Recusants as
were Hispanioliz'd, whereof this Earl was none: but though as a Church-Papist
he had most of the Catholic Peers votes devolved on him; he never bestowed
them undutifully, albeit sometimes stoutly and resolutely. A great friend he
was to all new Inventions, save those that tended to do that by few hands,
which had been usually done by many; because, said he, While private men busy
their heads to take off the Poors employment, the public Magistrate must
trouble his to find them maintenance. Either be or the Earl of Northampton used
to say (when asked what made a complete man?) To know how to cast Accounts: an
accomplishment though ordinary, yet might save many an Estate in England.

Observations on the Life of Esme Duke of Richmond.
GReat in his Ancestors honor, greater in his own virtue, and greatest of all,
in that ^ike the Star he wore, the higher he was, the ^ess he desired to seem,
affecting rather the worth, than the pomp of nobleness; -- therefore his
courtesy was his nature, not his craft; and his affableness not a base and
servile popularity, or an am^itious insi^uation; but the native gentleness of
his disposition, and his true value of himself: He was not ^ stranger to any
thing worth knowing, but best acquainted wi^h himself, and in himself, rather
with ^is weaknesses for Caution, than his abilities for A^tion. Hence he is not
so forward in the traverses of War, as in Treaties of Peace, where his honor
^nnobled his cause, and his moderation advanced ^t: He and my Lord of
Southampton managing the ^everal Overtures of Peace at London, Oxford, and
^xbridge with such honorable freedom and pru^ence, that they were not more
deservedly regard^d by their Friends, than importunately courted ^y their
Enemies; who seeing they were such, could ^ot be patient till they were theirs,
though in ^ain, their honors being impregnable as well against the Factions
kindness as against their power. At Conferences his conjectures were as solid
as others judgments; his strict observation of what was passed, furnishing him
for an happy guess of what was to come: Yet his opinion was neither v^riably
unconstant, nor obstinately immoveable^ but framed to present occasions,
wherein his m^thod was to begin a second advice from the failu^^ of his first
-- though he hated doubtful suspence^ when he might be resolute. This one great
defec^ was his good nature, that he could never distrust til^ it was dangerous
to suspect; and he gave his Enem^ so much advantage, that he durst but own him
for his friend. -- One thing he repented of, that he advised his Majesty to
trust Duke Hamilton his Adversary with the affairs of Scotland, in complianc^
with the general opinion, rather than the Marques^ Huntly his friend in
compliance with his own rea^ interest; an advice wherein his
publick-spiritednes^ superseded his particular concerns, and his goo^ nature
his prudence: -- So true is it, that the honest man's single uprightness works
in him that confidence, which oft-times wrongs him, and giv^^ advantage to the
subtle, while he rather pities ^h^i^ faithlessness, than repents of his
credulity: so great advantage have they that look only what they man do, over
them that consider what they should do^ and they that observe only what is
expedient, ove^ them that judge only what is lawful. -- Therefore when those
that thought themselves wise, le^^ their sinking Sovereign, he stuck to his
Person while he lived, to his body when dead, and to hi^ cause as long as he
lived himself: -- attending the first resolutely, burying the second
honourably^ and managing the third discreetly; undertaking without rashness,
and performing without fear^ never seeking dangers, never avoiding them.
Although when his Friends were conquered by the Rebels, he was conquered by
himself, retiring to that privacy, where he was g^essed at, not known; where he
saw the world unseen; where he made yielding a conquest; where cheerful and
unconcerned in expectation, he provided for the worst, and hoped the best, in
the constant exercise of that Religion, which he and his maintained more
effectually with their Examples, than with their Swords; doing as much good in
encouraging the Orthodox by his presence, as in relieving them by his bounty.
-- In a word, I may say of him, as Macariu^ does of Iustine; There was no Vice
but he thought below him; and no Virtue which he esteemed not either his duty
or ornamen^. Neither was his prudence narrower than his virtue, nor his virtue
streighter than his fortune. His main service was his inspection into the
Intrigues and Reserves of the Parliamentiers at Vxbridge, and his cajoling of
the Independants and Scots at London, where the issue of his Observations was;
That the King should as far as his conscience could allow, comply with the
unreasonable desires of an illimited ambition, to make i^ sensible of the evils
that would flow from its own Counsels: being confident, as events have assured
us, that the people would see the inconvenience of their own wishes; and that
they would return that power which they sought for, but could not m^nage, to
its proper place, before it became their ruin: -- for unbounded Liberty
overthrows its self. But alas! it was too late to grant them any thing, who
by having so much, were only encouraged more eagerly to desire what they knew
the King in honor could not give: -- For when a Prince is once rendered odious
or contemptible, his Indulgences do him no less hurt than injuries.

As his services were great, so were his Recreations useful S^e his late
Maje^^^^s re^omm^n^^^^n to him at his departure from Hamton-Court.
; Hunting, that manly Exercise being both his pleasure and his accomplishment:
his accomplishment, I say, since it is in the list of Machiavel's rules to his
Prince, as not only the wholsomest and cheapest diversion, both in relation to
himself, and his People, but the best Tutor to Horse-manship, Stratagems, and
Situations, by which he may afterward place an Army; whatever Sir Philip
Sidney's apprehension was, who used to say; Next hunting, he liked hawking
worst.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Chief-Iustice Banks.
SIr John Banks his Parents perceiving him judicious and industrious, bestowed
good breeding on him in Grayes-Inne, in hope he should attain to preferment;
wherein they were not deceived. For after he was called to the Bar for some
years, he solicited Suits for others, thereby attaining great practical
experience. He afterward might laugh at them, who then did smile at him,
leaving many behind him in Learning, whom he found before him in time, until at
last he was Knighted by King Charles, made first his Attorney, then
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, dying in the midst and heat of our Civil
Dissentions. He ordered by his Will, that his Body should be buried under some
plain Monument at the discretion of his Executors; and after an Epitaph
mentioning the several Places he had held, this Motto to be added; Non nobis
Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam.


By his said Will he gave to the value of thirty pound per ann. with other
Emoluments, to be bestowed in pious Uses, and chiefly to set up a Manufacture
of course Cottons in the Town of Keswick.

He was one whom the Collar of S.S.S. worn by Judges and other M^gistrates
became very well, if it had its name from Sanctus, Simon, Simplicius; no man
being more seriously pious, none more singly honest. -- When Sir Henry Savile
came to Sir Edward Cook then at bowls, in Archbishop Abbot's behalf, and told
him he had a Case to propose to him: Sir Edward answered; If it be a Case in
Common Law, I am unworthy to be a Judge, if I cannot presently satisfy you:
but if it be a point of Statute Law, I am unworthy to be a Judge, if I should
undertake to satisfy you without consulting my Books. -- Sir John Banks,
though ready without his Books on the Bench, -- yet always resolved Cases out
of them in his Chamber; answerable to his saying to Dr. Sibs, A good textuary
is a good Lawyer, as well as a good Divine.

His invention was prompt and ready; his apprehension sure and solid; his
memory capacious and retentive; his knowledge in the Law, and the inword
reasons of it, profound; his experience in affairs of State universal, and well
laid: patient he was in hearing; sparing, but pertinent in speaking: very glad
always to have things represented truly and clearly; and when it was otherwise,
able to discern through all pretenses the real merit of a C^use.

He was a man of singular modesty, of the ancient freedom, plain-heartedness,
and integrity of mind: Very grave and severe in his deportment, yet very
affable, in such sort, that, as Tacitus says of Agrippa; Ill^ quod est
rarissimum nec facilitas authoritatem, nec severitas amorem diminuit: And in a
word, so even and circumspect he was in the several turnings and occasions of
his life, that though he went himself, and brought over as many as he had any
interest in, to the King, I find him under no extraordinary displeasure from
the Rebels; and I observe but one unhappiness in his whole life, and that is,
that all men speak well of him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Edmonds.
THe Trophies of Miltiades would not let Themistocles sleep, nor the
Courts-advancements of his Relations this Gentleman to sit still; having both
Livis's qualifications, for an eminent man, a great spirit, and a gallant
conduct for actions; a sharp wit, and a fluent tongue for advice. -- Whence we
meet with him Comptroller of the Kings Household at home, and his Agent for In
(...) 1629.
Peace abroad, equally fit for business of courage and resolution, and for
affairs of Council and complement. -- I think it was this Gentleman, who
foreseeing a Contest likely to ensue between the English and the Spanish
Ambassadors, to the first whereof he belonged, went to Rome privately and
fetched a Certificate out of the book of Ceremonies (which according to the
Canon gives the rule in such cases) showing that the King of England was to
precede him of Castile; a good argument, because ad homines, wise men having
always thought fit to urge not what is most rational in its self, but what (all
circumstances considered) is most convincing. Sir^ Thomas Edmonds used to
puzzle the Catholics about six Records. 1. The original of Constantine's grant
of Rome to the Pope. 2. St. Mark's grant of the Adriatique Gulf to Venice. 3.
The Salique Law in France. 4. The Instrument whereby King John pas^ed away
England to the Pope. 5. The Letter of King Lucius. And 6. The Ordinal of the
Consecration at the Nagshead. -- Neither did he perplex them with these
Quaeries, more than he angered the Faction with his principles, Tertio Car. ^.
1. That the King was to be trusted. 2. That the Revenue was to be settled. 3.
That the Protestant cause was to be maintained. 4. That Jealousies were to be
removed, and things past were to be forgotten.

Observations on the Life of Sir Paul Pindar.
HE was first a Fac^or, then a Merchant, next a At Pe^ross and Aleppo.
Consul; and at last an Ambassador in Tu^key: Whence returning with a good
purse and a wary Headpiece, he cast about what he might do to gratify K.
James and the Archbishop of Canterbury most; and finding them much pleased
with acts of Charity and Piety, he repaired the Entry, Front, and Porches of
St. Paul's Cathedral to all the upper Church, Qui^e and Chancel, and enriched
them with Marble structures and figures of the Apostles, with carvings and
guildings far exceeding their former beauty, which cost above two thousand
pounds; the act of a good man, said K. James, who made him one of the great
Farmers of the Customs: in gratitude whereof, Sir Paul besides his former
expenses, took upon him to new build the South Isle, which cost him above 17000
l.

A Projector (such necessary Evils then countenanced) and be a Clergyman too,
informed K. James how he might speedily advance his Revenue by bringing in
Spiritual preferments (now forsooth under-rated in the Kings books) to a full
value, to the great increase of First Fruits and Tenths: the King demands the
Lord Treasurer Cranfield's judgment thereof: he said, Sir, You are esteeme^ a
great lov^r of Learning; you know Clergy-mens Education is chargeable, their
preferment slow, and small: Let it not be said you gain by grinding them; other
ways less obnoxious to just censure will be found out to furnish your
occasions. The King commended the Treasurer (as doing it only for trial) adding
moreover, I should have accounted thee a very Knave, if encouraging me herein
-- But he sends for Sir Paul Pindar, and tells him, he must either raise the
Customs, or take this course; who answered him nobly: That he would lay thirty
thousand pounds at his feet the morrow, rather than he should be put upon such
poor projects, as unsuitable to his honor, as to his inclination. Go thy way
(says the King) thou art a good man.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Vane Senior.
THree things Henry the fourth of France said would puzzle any man. 1. Whether
Queen Elizabeth was a Maid? 2. Whether the Prince of Orange was valiant? 3.
What Religion he himself was of? To which I may add a fourth, viz. what Sir
Henry Vane was? whom I know not what to call, but what Mr. Baxter calls his
son, a hider: the Fathers life being as mystical a^ the Sons faith, men as
little understanding the actions of the one, as they did the writing, of the
other: But the two powers that govern the world, the best, and the worst, are
both invisible. All Northern men are reserved to others, but this was too ^^e
for his own Contrymen; neither Sir John Savile that brought him to Court,
nor Sir Thomas Wentworth that advanced him the^e, understanding either his
temper, or his design. -- He betrayed any Council he was present at, and marred
all the Actions he was employed in. As 1. When he was sent to relate the
Emperor's overture to the Queen of Bohemia, of thirty thousand pounds per ann.
and a Marriage between her eldest Son and his Daughter, he did it with those
ackward ci^cumstances, that transported the good Lady to such unseasonable
expressions, as at that time blasted her cause and expectations. And thence
it is thought he brought Sir Robert Dudley's Rhapsody of Projects to disparage
the King's government, under pretense of supplying his necessi^ies: [it wa^ the
way of the late Underminers, to relieve their Masters present need upon future
inconveniences; hiding themselves under Proposals, plausible for the present,
and fatal in the consequence] which juggles of his were so long too little to
be considered, that at last they were too great to be remedied. 2. He is said
to have shuffled other Conditions into the Pacification at York, where he was a
Commissioner, than were avowed by the Lords Commissioners, much insisted on by
the Scots, and burned by the common Hangman, as false, and contrary to the
true Articles. 3. When sent to the House, 1640. to demand 12, or 8, or six
Subsidies, he requires without abatement twelve, with design (as it is judged)
to ask so much, as might enrage the Parliament to give nothing; -- and so to be
dissolved unhappily, or continued unsuccessfully. 4. He and his son together
betray the Votes passed in the select Council, taken by him privately under his
^at, for the reducing of Scotland to the ruin of the Earl of Strafford, and
the Archbishop of Canterbury -- The story is, Sir Henry Vane was trusted with
the Juncto^ where he took Notes of their several opinions; these Notes he puts
up in his Closet: A while after, he delivers to his son Sir H. Vane Junior, a
key to fetch some papers out of a Cabinet, in which he finds another key to an
inward shutter; which he opened, and lighted upon this Paper, and communicates
it to Mr. Pym for the end aforesaid; and upon this very Paper (do not
tremble Reader at this Treason?) alone, the House of Commons voted that brave
Earl out of his Life, the same day that twenty two years after the same Sir
Henry Vane Junior, lost his head. Abselvi numen.

Observations on the Life of Sir Richard Hutton.
SIr Richard Hutton was born at Perith, of a worshipful Family (his elder
brother was a Knight) and bred in Iesus-Colled^e in Cambridge. He intended his
Studies for Divinity, till dissuaded by the importunity of his friends (amongst
whom George Earl of Cumberland was most eminent) he became Barrister of
Grayes-Inne. But in expression of his former Affection to Divinity, he seldom
(if ever) took fee of a Clergyman. Afterward being Recorder of York, he was
Knighted, and made Judge of the Common Pleas. In the case of Ship Money, though
he was against the King, or rather for the So says the Historian: but I think
as much against them as against the K. not only because the wel^are of K. and
people are inseparable^ but also because there is not a more common saying
among the people, than defend me, and sp^nd me.
Commons, yet his Majesty manifested not the least distaste, continuing to call
him the honest judge. This person so pious to God, and cha^itable to ^he Poor,
was dissolved about the beginning of our National misery. Thus God, before he
ploweth up a Land with the furrows of a^ Civil War, first cutteth down his old
crop, and gathers them like ripe sheaves into his Barn. He died at Serg^ants
Inn, and was buried at his earnest desire with ^he Common Prayer, without any
Funeral-Sermon (save what his own Virtues preached to posterity) at St.
Dunstan's in the West, on the 27 day o^ February, Anno Dom. 1638. Here I learn
how circumspect our counsels must be in reference to things and persons above
us; which implying an overpo^zing of our own judgment, and a debating of
others, in all cases is obnoxious to jealousy, but in these to danger, under
which there are no Qualifications to patience and moderation, The virtues of
this happy Judge (if he had cast obstinacy overboard, and let his wisdom ^ack
about in things capable of expedience) whereby h^ knew well both how to allay
the asperities of a bad fortune, and check the excesses of a good one, packing
up his fears and hopes in so narrow a compass, as made the last less tedious,
and the first more portable; to which he added an unaffected plainness, the
argument of his worth and weight, a weakness and emptiness being as safely as
usually concluded from too much affectation, -- an overmuch care of the
outside being an argument of remisness in what is within, it remaining (s^ith
one) equally rar^, to find a starched and formal man wise, as a Woman valiant;
the most serious Endeavors of both being to take only the Eyes.

Observations on the Life of the Marquess of Hertford.
HE was none of those Malcontents who make the sins of their ^iper years make
good the follies of their youth, and maintain oversights with Treasons: as he
was patient under his Imprisonment for the one, so he was active in his
services against the other; not more dutifully submitting to the severity of K.
James for his Marriage, then loyally assisting the necessities of King Charles
in his Wars. It Is natural to return an Injury, it is heroical to overcome it;
and be above it, when we are below our selves. It is true, he was drawn in to
subscribe the untoward Proposals at York; but it is as true, he did of his own
accord declare against the unnatural War in London, where the King advanced him
to the tuition of the Prince, and he went himself to the defense of the King:
at what time such his popularity, that he raised an Army himself; such his
humility, that he yielded the command of it to another, as if he knew nothing
but others merit, and his own wants; being one of those choice men that admire
every thing in others, and see nothing in themselves. His face, his carriage,
his habit favored of Lowliness without affectation, and yet he was much under
what he seemed. His words were few and soft, never either peremptory or
censorious, because he thought both each man more wise, and none more obnoxious
than himself; being yet neither ignorant nor careless, but naturally me^k,
lying ever close within himself, armed with those two Masterpieces, Resolution
and Duty, wherewith he mated the blackest Events that did rather exercise than
dismay that spirit that was above them, and that mind that looked beyond them:
He was the easiest enemy, and the truest friend; whom extremities obliged,
while (as the Reverend Bishop speaks) he as a well-wrought Vault lay at home
the stronger, by how much the more weight he did bear. He offered his life for
his Prince's service in the Field, and his person for his ransom at the Court;
and when many wished they might die for that excellent King, he, the Earls of
Lindsey and Southampton offered, That since his Majesty was presumed by the Law
to do no harm himself, and since he did all by them his Ministers, as they had
the honor to act under, they might have the happiness to suffer for him.

Observations on the Life of Sir John Finch.
THis Family has had an hereditary eminence in the study of the Law. -- Sir
Henry Finch [the Author of (...)] a learned Sergeant at Law in King James his
time. Sir Heneage Finch Recorder of London in K. Charles's time, and this noble
person at the same time the Queen's Attorney, and Speaker of that curious,
knowing, and rich Parliament, wherein some have observed, though wide, I
suppose, that the House of Commons modestly estimated [consisting of 500] could
buy the House of Peers [consisting of 118] thrice over. -- Norimbergh in
Germany, and Florence in Italy, would not of old admit of any learned men in
their Council; because great learned men, says the Historian of those places,
are perplexed to resolve upon Affairs, making many doubts full of Respects and
Imaginations -- Semblably this Parliament was too rich and curious to do any
good, though this noble personage, even when the House-doors were shut, and he
violently detained in his Chair, refused to countenance their proceedings,
always abhorring Eliot's doctrine; That men should not be questioned for
offenses in Parliament: As if that reverend Assembly were called for no other
end, than that turbulent spirits might be at liberty to speak Treason once
every three years.

When he was questioned for his opinion about Ship Money, his judgment was;
That if the whole were in danger, the whole should contribute -- When he was
urged to read the Remonstrance against Sir R. W. 4 Car. in Parliament, his
opinion was; That at any rate (though at the highest that can be) Authority
must be vindicated and redeemed from contempt, since the Life of Government is
reputation.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Say.
WHether the first impressions of his * Tutor, (Schoolmasters, though the most
neglected, are not the most inconsiderable parts of a Commonwealth:) the
narrowness of his fortune (unequal to his honor; younger brothers of noble
houses had need in every State to be observed) the repulse, 1613. (other men
must look to whom they are kind, but Princes to whom they are unkind) inclined
this personage to popularity: This is certain, no man was better tempered for
that humor than himself; being in his nature severe and rigid; in his carriage
close and reserved; in his resolutions firm and immovable; in his
apprehension, provident and foreseeing; in his Sentiments nice and curious: --
in his Discourse (full of Fears and Jealousies) dissatisfied and bold; in his
followers irregular and pretending; in the Law well seen; in the Scripture very
ready; in the occurrences of his age very exact: at Lectures most constant; to
the liberty of the Subject (then the Diana of the age) most faithful, insomuch
that he made a motion 1628. That they who stood for the Liberties, forsooth!
(then called the Lower House Lords of the Upper-House) not fifty might make
their Protestation upon record, and that the other party should with
subscription of their names enter their reason upon Record, that posterity
might not be to seek (good lack) who they were that so ignobly betrayed the
Liberty of our Nation: And this being done, they should resolve themselves to a
Committee, and proceed to vote: -- Yet so well acquainted with the King's
temper, that he would take any occasion of his being pleased by the Parliament,
to insinuate himself into favor with all his Malcontents, as Bishop
Williams, Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Essex, the Earl of Warwick, etc.

As he wrought upon the peoples humor in that point of Liberty, so he did upon
the Nobilities temper in another of Ambition: For in a Petition to King James
against Foreign titles of Honor, we find him first in design, though last in
subscription, teaching Essex, Warwick, St. John (for they joined with him) to
tilt against their Sovereign's Prerogative with their Pe^s, as they did after
with their Swords.

And when this failed (the wise King awing the young Lords to renounce that
asunder, which they had subscribed together; none so bold as the factions in
company, none so fearful apart) the Champion of English honor and privilege,
becomes the Patron of Propriety too; for we read Ter. Hill. Anno 14. Car. 1. in
Banco Regis, the Lord Says Case. --

Action for Crover and Conversion of three Oxen taken (a great matter) for
three pounds five shillings, by the Sheriff of Lincoln, upon the Plaintiff,
toward the finding of a Ship -- A good reason, for going to Law first, and
then to war with his Sovereign, as he did afterward, when he had sent his son
Nathaniel, with Hampden and Lawrence, 1639. to settle the League with their
dear Brethren in Scotland, while he formed the grand Design in England, with so
much success, that when there were some Overtures made for saving the Earl of
Strafford, and securing the Kingdom by the Party, upon condition of preferment,
as that Master Hampden should be Tutor to the Prince, the Earl of Essex his
Governor, Mr. Pym Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Earl of Warwick
Vice Admiral, he was to be Master of the Court of Wards; which he compassed,
when the rest mist of their expectation. -- No more of him, but that the King
going to Scotland, he refusing a Protestation against the Scots, had these
questions proposed to him: 1. Whether he would go with the King at his own
charge. 2. Whether Rebellion was a just cause of War. 3. Whether the taking of
Castles, Towns, Magazines, etc. was not Rebellion.


To the first he answered; That though as a Peer and Subject, he could not be
forced out of his Country but upon extraordinary occasion; yet out of
affection to his Majesty, he would attend him, referring the matter of charge
to himself.

To the two last he said, he understood not the Law of Scotland, but that those
proceedings were Treason in England.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Lindsey.
HE and that whole Family (I know not whether more pious, or more valiant;
whether more renowned abroad, as Confessors for their Religion, or, as
Champions for their Country) have been in this last Age an ornament and a
defense to this Crown, equally reverenced by the Subjects of it, and honored
by the Sovereigns.

This Nobleman and the Earl of Essex did as Iugurtha and Manus, learn in one
School what they practiced in two: The one as a faithful Subject, for that
government that had obliged his Family; the other as a discontented Rebel,
against that that had disobliged his: Both Commanders for the Palatinate
against the Emperor, and for Rochel against the French.

When the Duke of Buckingham returned from the Isle of Rhee, his Majesty told
him; The neglect of his relief must l^dge on his Friend and Confident, Holland
-- To which he acknowledged; That indeed he had very affectionately entrusted
him in ordinary Affairs, but never in such an esteem, as to second him in arms,
that place being more proper for my Lord of Lindsey -- whose judgment of that
Expedition was; That it was friendship in earnest, and War in jest. He it was
that pursued twelve French Vessels in his own single one to their Haven, hea^ed
at once with anger and shame, he it was, who when all men were amazed at the
Duke's fall, was assigned his successor. Certainly, says one there present, He
was a person of no likely presence, but of considerable experience, by his
former Expeditions; and one that to the last of his life made good his faith
with Gallantry and Courage, notwithstanding his ill success (the times fate
rather than his fault) 1. In scouring the narrow Sea^, where he was Admiral,
and the Earl of Essex Vice Admiral. 2. In presiding in several great Courts on
many solemn occasions, the Earl of Strafford's unparellel'd Trial, etc. And 3.
In leading the King's Army at Edgehill with a Pike in his hand. Where what is
observed of Cataline and his followers, was true of this noble Earl and his
Countrymen, the Loyal Gentry of Lincolnshire, that they covered the same place
with their Corpse when dead, where they stood in the fight whilst living.

Observations on the Life of Judge Richardson.
Judge Richardson was born at Mulbarton in Norfolk, his Father being Minister
thereof; and he a friend to Ministers, though a foe of the Church. He was bred
in the study of our Municipal Law, and became the King's Sergeant therein.
Afterward, on the 28 of November, 1926. he was sworn Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, that Place having been void ten months before; wherein he was
humoursom, but honest; only unhappy, in that he raised the Sabbatarian
Controversy, by his orders aginst Wakes in Somersetshire. His Brass Monument
on the South Side of Westminster-Abby, thus entertaineth the Reader; Deo om.
Thom^^ Richardsoni Icaeni Equitis Aurati
Humduum D^positum.
Ille.
Iuris Municip. omnes gradus exantlavit
Conventus tertii ordinis ann. Jacobi Regis 21, and 22.
Prolocutor ex^itit;
Fori civilis (communium Placitorum vocant)
Supremum Magistratum quinquennium gessit;
Ad summum tandem primarii per Angliam Iudicis Tribunal
A Rege Carolo evectus: expiravit
Anno AEtatis 66. Salutis, MDCXXXIV.
Tho. Richardson fill. unicus Eques Aur. Baro Scotiae designatus
Patri incomparabili posuit.


As one reason of his advancement, you must know, this Judge married for his
second Wife the Lady Eliz. Beaumont, the Sister (as I take it) of Mary Countess
of Buckingham, and the Relict of -- Ashburnham Knight. She was by K. Charles
created Baroness of Croumont in Scotland; and (though Issuless by the Judge)
the Honor descended to his Grandchild. He died an enemy to Bishop Williams,
overruling all his Pleas in his Chamber in a quarter of an hour; and yet,
which was strange, at that time no friend to Archbishop Laud, for he said, The
Lawn-sleeves had choked him.

Observations on the Life of Sir Tho. Coventry.
A Competent Estate he had for his education, and excellent Abilities for
advancement: his ^ortune was not wanting to his parts, nor his parts to his
fortune; the one being as ready to support, as the other was to raise him: His
staid soul was well prepared for general learning in the Schools and
University, for his par^icular lea^ning at the I^^s of Court: his skill in the
study of Law called him no sooner to the Bar, than his prudence to Court: Take
we his character from his Honor. Why was he crea^ed Lord Coventry of Alisbury,
and Keeper of the great S^al? Why, says the Pa^ent, for his eminent fidelity;
for his most worthy service; for his exact circumspection; for his deep
prudence; for his constant resolution; for his skill and dexterity; for his
integrity and industry; for his immoveableness and fidelity: No man more
app^ehensive of the interest of England, none more faithful to it: His kindness
to the Church and Clergy argued his piety; his safe Counsels to his Majesty
argued his moderation; his dignity rather enjoyed him, than he it: A man he was
that filled up his great capacities, having digested a body of the most honest
Law, and a scheme of the most innocent policy that ever filled the head of an
able Statesman, or the heart of an upright Judge. What belonged to him, he
knew; and what he knew, he practiced. He was as constant to his rule, as he
knew his rule was to him: Reserved he was, as the King's Councellor, honest as
his conscience. We measure Pyramides by their shadows, and this great Lord by
his followers; every one whereof was The most pious, learned, wise, and
Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of Cant was his Domestic.
eminent in his way, and all advanced. Each Action of his, though never so
little, yet great as himself, so gravely did he manage it, so solemnly did he
perform it: His orders were seldom reversed, because mostly including the
consent of Parties, -- Few Attorney-Generals came off with less c^nsure, and
few Lord Keepers with less guilt; his Predecessors miscarriages being foils to
set off his exactness. -- Eminent as in most other Cafes, so particularly in
that of Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton; against whom, when after six weeks time
given them to put in an effectual Answer, they urged, that their Adversaries
the Bishops should not be their Judges: He replied smartly; That by that Plea
had they Libelled all the Mag^strates in the L^nd; none should pass Censure
upon them, because all were made parties.

He had fifteen years enjoyed his Place; not more proper to say, that Dignity
had enjoyed him so long, this latter age ^ffording not one every way of more
apt Qualifications for the place. His front and presence bespake a venerable
regard, not in^eriour to any of his Antecessors. His train and suit of
Followers was disposed agreeable, to shun both Envy and Contempt: Vain and
ambitious he was not; his port was state, though others ostentation. Of what
concerned his place, he knew enough, and which is the main, acted conformable
to his knowledge; For in the Administration of Justice, he was so erect, so
incorrupt, as captious malice stands mute in the blemish of his Fame. A miracle
the greater, when we consider he was also a Privy-Councellor: A trust, wherein
he served his Master the King most faithfully; and the more faithfully, because
of all^ those Councels which did disserve his Majesty, he was an earnest
disswader, and did much disaffect those sticklers who labored to make the
Prerogative rather tall than great; as knowing that such men loved the King
better than Charles Stuart. So that although he was a Courtier, and had had for
his Master a Passion most intense, yet had he always a passion reserved for the
public welfare; an argument of a free, noble, and right-principled mind: For
what both Court and Country have always held as inconsistent, is in truth
erroneous; And no man can be truly loyal, who is not also a good Patriot; nor
any a good Patriot, which is not truly loyal.

Observations on the Life of Sir Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford.
SIr Thomas Wentworth Earl of Strafford owes his birth to the best governed
City, London, his breeding to the best modelled School, York, and a most exact
College, St. John's in Cambridge; his accomplishments to the best Tutors,
Travel and Experience; and his prudence to the best School, a Parliament,
whither he came in the most active and knowing times, with a strong brain, and
a large heart: his activity was eminent in his Country, and his interest strong
in Parliament, where he observed much, and pertinently; spoke little, but home;
contrived effectually, but closely; carried his Designs successfully, but
reservedly: He apprehended the public temper as clearly, and managed it to his
purposes as orderly as any man: He spoke least, but last of all, with the
advantage of a clear view of others reasons, and the addition of his own: He
and his leading Confid^nts molded that in a private Conference, which was to
be managed in a public Assembly: He made himself so considerable a Patriot,
that he was bought over to be a Courtier: So great his Abilities, that he awed
a Monarchy when dis-obliged, and supported it when engaged, the balance turning
thither where this Lord stood. -- The North was reduced by his prudence, and
Ireland by his interest: He did more there in two years, than was done in two
hundred before.

1. Extinguishing the very relics of the War. 2. Setting up a standing Army.
3. Modelling the Revenue. 4. Removing the very roots and occasions of new
troubles. 5. Planting and building. 6. Settling Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts.
7. Recovering the hearts of the people by able Pastors and Bishops, by prudent
and sober Magistrates; by justice and protection; by obligations and rewards.
8. Recovering the Churches patrimony and discipline. 9. Employing most able and
faithful Ministers and Instruments. 10. Taking an exact view of all former
Precedents, Rules, and Proceedings. 11. An exact correspondence with his
Majesty, and the Favorites of England.
None was more conversant in the Factions, Intrigues, and Designs, than he when
a Commonwealths-man; none abler to meet with them than he when a Statesman: he
understood their methods, kenned their wiles, observed their designs, looked
into their combinations, comprehen^^d their interest: And as King Charles
understood best of any Monarch under heaven what he could do in point of
Conscience, so his Strafford apprehended best of any Counselor under the Sun
what he could do in point of power: He and my Lord of Canterbury having the
most particular account of the state of Great Britain and Ireland of any
persons living. Nature is often hidden, sometimes overcome, seldom
extinguished; yet Doctrine and Discourse had much allayed the severity of this
Earl's nature, and Custom more: None more austere to see to, none more obliging
to speak with: He observed pauses in his discourse to attend the motion, and
draw out the humor of other men; at once commanding his own thoughts, and
watching others: H^s passion was rather the vigor, than the disorder of his
well-weighed soul; which could dispense its ^nger with as much prudence, as it
managed any act of State. He gave his Majesty safe counsel in the prosperity of
his Affairs, and resolute advice in Extremity, as a true servant of his
interest rather ^han of his power.

So eminent was he and my Lord of Canterbury, that Rebellion despaired of
success as long as the first lived, and Schism of licentiousness as long as the
second stood. Take my Lord of Strafford as accused, and you will find his
Integrity and Ability, that he managed his whole Government either by the Law,
or the Interest of his Country. Take him as dying, and you will see his parts
and piety; his resolution for himself, his sel^-resignation for the Kingdoms
good; his devotion for the Church, whose patrimony he forbad his son upon his
blessing -- Take him as dead, you will find him glorious and renowned in these
three characters.

The first of the best King.
I looked upon my Lord of Strafford, (...), Meditar. 2.
as a Gentleman whose great abilities might make a Prince rather afraid, than
ashamed to employ him in the greatest Affairs of State: for those were prone to
create in him great confidence of undertakings, and this was like enough to
betray him to great Errors, and many Enemies; whereof he could not but contract
great store, while moving in so high a sphere, and with so v^gorus a luster, he
must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious exhalations; which condensed by a
popular Odium, were capable to cast a cloud upon the brightest merit and
integrity: though I cannot in my judgment approve all he did, driven (it may
be) by the necessities of Times, and the temper of that People, more than led
by his own disposition to any height and rigor of Action, etc.

The second, of the best Historian.
He was a person of a generous spirit, fitted for the noblest Exercises, and
the most difficult parts of Empire: His Counsels were bold, yet just; and he
had a vigor proper for the execution of them: Of an eloquence next that of his
Masters, masculine and excellent. He was no less affectionate to the Church,
than to the State; and not contented while living, to defend the government and
patrimony of it, he commended it also to his Son when he was about to dye, and
charged his abhorrency of sacrilege: His enemies called the Majesty of his
m^ene in his Lieutenancy, pride; and the undaunted execution of his Office on
the Contumacious, the insolency of his fortune. He was censured for that fatal
error of following the King to London, and to the Parliament, after the
Pacification at York: And it was thought, that if he had gone over to his
Charge in Ireland, he might have scoured both himself and that Kingdom for his
Majesty's service: But some attribute this Counsel to a necessity of fate,
whose first stroke is at the Brain of those whom it designs to ruin, and
brought him to feel the effects of popular rage, which himself in former
Parliaments had used against Government, and to find the experience of his own
devices upon the Du^e of Buckingham. Providence teaches us to abhor over fine
Councels, by the mischiefs they often bring upon their Authors.

The third, of common fame.
A Gentleman he was of rare, choice, and singular Endowments, I mean, of such
as modelled, fashioned, and accomplished him for State-conceraments; of a
searching and penetrating judgment, nimble apprehension, ready and fluent in
all results of Council. Most happy in the vein of speech, which was always
round, perspicuous, and express, much to the advantage of his s^nse, and so
full stocked with reason, that he might be rather said to demonstrate, than to
argue. As these abilities raised him to State-administration, so his
Addressing, his applying those abilities so faithfully in promotion of the
Royal Interest, soon rendered him a Favorite of the first admission: So that
never King had a more intelligent, and withal a firmer servant than he was to
his Master. But these qualities which rendered him so aimiable to his Majesty,
represented him formidable to the Scots, so that some who were not well
persuaded of the justness of his sentence, thought he suffered not so much for
what he had done already, as for what he was like to have done, had he lived,
to the disservice of that Nation: And that he was not sacrificed so much to the
Scots revenge, as to their fear. And certainly his fall was the first, so the
most fatal wound the King's Interest ever received: H^s three Kingdoms hardly
affording another Strafford, that is, one man his peer in parts and fidelity to
his Majesty. He had a singular passion for the Government and Patrimony of the
Church, both which he was studious to preserve safe and sound; either opening
them to be of sacred extraction; or at least prudent constitution, relating to
holy performances. And had he wanted these positive graces, yet in so great a
Person it may be commendable, that he was eminent for privative and negative
Excellencies, being not taxable with any Vice; those petty pleasures being
beneath the satisfaction of a soul so large as his. In short, says the
ingenious Gentleman, he was a man who might have passed under a better notion,
had he lived in better times.

This last period is a question, since this great Statesman, and his good
Masters goodness was so over-shadowed with their greatness, and their virtues
so lost in their power, as the Sun (the aptest parallel of their luster and
benificence) is hid in his own light, that they owe their great, but glorious
fame to their misfortunes, and their renown to their ruin, that levelled their
worth, otherwise as much out of their reach as their place, to vulgar
apprehensions. Eclipsed luster, like a veiled beauty, is most looked on, when
most covered. -- The setting Sun is more glorious than its self in its
Meridian, because more low: and the lowest Planet seems biggest to a common eye.

So faith^ul he was, and the Archbishop, that in the Juncto consisting of them
two and Duke Hamilton, they voted a Parliament, though they knew themselves the
first sufferers by it: and so confident of his integrity, that when he had
treason enough discovered at the late transactions in York (touching the Scots
conspiracy) to charge his enemies with, he waved the advantage; and secure in
his own innocence, fell an instance of that Maxim; That there is no danger
small, but what is thought so. This was his great principle; Usurped Royalty
was never laid down by persuasion from Royal clemency; for in armis jus omne
regni.

Observations on the Lives of Henry Earl of Holland, and Robert Earl of Warwick.
HEnry Earl of Holland, and Robert Earl of Warwick, both brothers, had the same
Education at home, and the same admittance to Court -- only the elder having an
Estate, brought not thither that compliance and observance that the younger did
that wanted it. -- The one therefore is serious in his carriage, harsh and
rough in his spirit, stubborn in his constitution, steady in his course, stern
in his comportments, sly and close in his conduct; choosing rather to improve
himself in America by Trade, than in England by Courtship; something inclined
to the faction by the principles of his Education, more by those of his
Interest. The other owned not a greater smoothness in his face, than in his
soul; being very taking in his countenance, more in his converse. The first
being not more lovely, than the last was obliging. -- While a Courtier, so much
was he in favor with King James, that one morning as he and Mr. Ramsey waited
on his Majesty, and two Porters come by with some money, he did but smile on
Ramsey, and tell his Majesty, who asked why he smiled, that it was to think
what good that money would do him, and he had it: his Royal Mr. whose heart was
as large as his Kingdom, adding, I Will warrant you, you are glad of this; Let me
tell you, I have more pleasure in bestowing this money, than you in possessing
it: so much a more blessed thing it is to give, than to receive.

While Ambassador in France (where he represented a King in his State and port,
as well as in his place) so great was he with the Queen Mother, that he was
admitted to all treatments; that he had the honor of all Entertainments; that
he commanded the Kings ears, understood the Spanish policies, dived into the
French humor and inclination. All the while he was in Paris, his observations
were minute and particular, his Addresses wary and reserved (never opening the
Marriage-treaty until he was sure of a good reception) his working upon Madams
affection close and artificial; his counter-plots to the Spanish insinuations
nimble and effectual; his correspondence with the Duke of Bucks. weekly and
constant; his contracts with Count Soisons, and Madam Blanvile, in behalf of
her Husband here in England, resolute and honorable (urging very nobly and
successfully, that the clamours of a turbulent Agent was not to o^t-weigh the
favor of a mighty Monarch.) The discovery he made of the Duke of Buckingham's
enemies, their Cabals and Oaths from the said Blanviles Letters, was seasonable
and complete; but his Masterpiece was his command over all affections and
tempers -- but his own so soft and smooth, that it endured not the roughness of
the following times, wherein he was very unsettled when Commissioner in
Scot-land, while he lived, and very fearful when he died: The fate of all
delicate and too fine Constitutions.

It has been the method of Grandees to endear themselves to power for a
present interest, and to learning for their future fame; to add the renown of
the one, to the greatness of the other. Neither was this Lord more careful to
succeed his great friend the Duke of Buckingham in his favor at Court, as
Captain of the Guard, and Groom of the Stool, than in his Place at the
University as Chancellor, of which he expresses himself thus to his Cambridge,
That his Master had raised his fortune beyond wishing in this world, that he
could desire no more than a fair name when he was gone out of it; which the
University contributed, to whom he devoted his Interest.

Though they answered not his expectation in their Contributions for St. Paul's,
and other particulars, wherein he was defeated and over-bor^ by the busy
faction, who thought it a vain thing to repair any Church, when they intended
to pull down all.

After all, this great man is a great instance of that obse^vation, viz. That
when able and prudent men are brought on the Stage to manage their own parts,
they are then (mostly) not of the clearest sight, and commonly commit such
errors as are both discernable and avoidable, even by men of mean abilities --
Although I find him subject to no great error before the War, save that when
Dr. Preston was by his party judged of so great parts as to make a fit Patron
for them, and thereupon directed to appear aloof [the way of Court-observers]
in his Addresses to the Duke of Buckingham by his Confident the Earl of
Holland, whose Family favored that side, though the Duke said he knew him, and
so would use him accordingly: Yet this Earl was so far over-reached by him,
that in the Apology the Doctor writ underhand to his Partiz^ns touching his
Court-compliance, he shows he overreached the Court-wits; as indeed he was a
great Politician, and used (Lap-wing-like) to flutter most on that place which
was farthe^^ from his Eggs: a copy of which Letter, with some satirical
stanzaes was found unsealed in the streets, and carried to the Duke; a noble
friend discovering to the Doctor, how witty he was in Rhyme, to the breaking of
his heart, he confessing then he was undone, especially when the Dukes Barber
could finger the Letter out of his Lords pocket, as he was directed. -- And now
I cannot but remember how this Earl at his death said, He had been a friend to
godly Ministers, as had his friends before him, by whom he had been instructed
when young. Whence I collect, that the members of those great Families, into
which the godly Ministers, i.e. peevish, factious, and discontented persons
which usurp that precious name, insinuate themselves, and their principles,
seldom come to their Grave in peace; they usually instilling into them such
imaginations as make their lives unquiet, and their deaths dis^onourable. --
Whence the good old Lord Willoughby would say, Carry the peevish man this
(speaking of one Chambers a Separatist) but tell him he must not come under my
Roof, for I will not meddle with them that are given to change, whose calamity
arises suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

To conclude, it is observed as the reason why he fell off from the Parliament,
that the wary Sirs would not trust two Brothers, him and the Earl of Warwick
with supreme commands; therefore when they voted the one Admiral, they denied
the other General of the Horse. Both are charactered by their Contemporaries
for natural Endowments excellent; for temper sweet and loving; for behavior,
affable and courteous; for spirit, meek and lowly; of the same inclinations
before and after their advancement: In honor si^^ tumore; lifted up with
honor, but not p^ffed^ up with pride.

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Laud.
THe pregnancy of his childhood promised the wisdom of his riper years, and
obliged his friends beyond their abilities to his support, and strangers beyond
expectation to his enencouragement: Some persons offering him great sums of
money for his maintenance in his younger years, upon the bare security of his
parts, which paid them well in his more reduced age. None more observant of
favor, none more mindful of kindnesses, and none more grateful for civilities:
He was so wise as seldom to forget an injury in the consequence of it, and so
noble as ever to remember love in the return of it. His honest Parents conveyed
him an excellent temper, and that temper a brave spirit; which had the
advantage of his b^rth, some say at Reading, some at Henley, at an equal
distance from the University, where he was to be a Scholar; and the Court,
where he was to be a Man: In the first of these, his indefatigable industry,
his methodical study, his quick apprehension, his faithful memory, his solid
judgment, his active fancy, his grave and quick countenance, his sharp and
piercing eye, raised him by discreet and wary steps to all the preferments, and
commended him to all the employments of the University, when Proctor whereof he
was admitted for his prudence to the Earl of Devonshire's service, which
hazarded; and when Divinity-Reader, observed by the Lords of Rochester and
Lincoln for his judgment, which advanced him. As his design was above the
level of modern Sciolists, so were his Studies not prepossessed with the
partial Systemes of Geneva, but freely conversant with the impartial volumes of
the Church-Catholick: he had an infallible apprehension of the Doctrine and
Discipline, and a deep insight into the interest of Christianity: This
capacious soul conversed with the most knowing of all Judgments, to find the
bottom of all Errors; and with the most judicious of his own, to discern the
grounds of all truth. He had his eye on the University to reduce it, when Head
of St. John's; on the lower Functions of the Church in his Pastoral charges, to
reform them; and upon the higher, when Dean of Gloucester, Prebend of
Westminster, and Bishop of St. David's, to settle them. He was a man of that
search and judgment, that he found out the principles of government that were
true to the Church; of that faithfulness and resolution, that amidst all
discouragements he was true to them: The Church Government he found by many
private-spirited men, accommodated to their ease and interest, he adjusted to
truth and settlement; consulting not humors which are uncertain as interest,
but truth which is certain as Eternity. Archbishop Abbot's Yield, and they
will be pleased at last, was a great miscarriage, Archbishop Laud's Resolve,
for there is no end of yielding, was great policy. His great reach in
Government suitable to that King's apprehensions, commended him to King James;
his vast ability and integrity, to K. Charles and the Duk^ of Buckingham; To
the first whereof he was a Privy-Councellor, to the other a Bosom-friend,
before both whom he laid the best Representations and Ideas of the English
government, as to things and persons in several abstracts, of any man under
heaven. I have heard a Statesman say, That none knew the joints, turnings,
flexures, and interests of all Parties in Church or State, that were either to
be encouraged or suppressed, with the seasons and opportunities to do it, so
well as Dr. Laud.

Discerning was his foresight, complete his intelligence, exact his
correspondence, quick his dispatches; seasonable and effectual his Sermons and
Discourses, inquisitive and observing his Converse. His Instruments were able
and knowing men, that were faithful to the Church, as he was in Man-war^ng and
Mountagu's case to them; Knowing well (as he wrote to my Lord of Buckingham)
that discouragements would deter men of parts, whom encouragements might make
serviceable. He knew no man better how to temper a Parliament, having a
Catalogue of all the Nobility and Gentry, with their Interest and Inclination
in his eye: He understood none more exactly what was to be discoursed and
proposed to them, having a clear apprehension of the several Junctures and
Tendencies of affairs. He entertained no thought but what was public in his
breast; no man, but what was nobly spirited in his familiarity: Ever watchful
he was of all opportunities to advance the Churches honor, 1. In her Sons, as
Bishop Iuxon, etc. 2. Her Discipline, as in his several Visitations, Articles,
Star Chamber, and High Commission matters. 3. In her Endowments, as the buying
of Impropriations in Ireland. 4. In her Privilege, as the Canons of England.
5. In her Ornaments, as the repairing and furnishing of St. Paul's and most
other Churches in his Province. 6. In her Universities, as the statutes of
Oxford, the privileges of Cambridge, and his vast gifts of Oriental Books and
Buildings, and his vaster design for both, -- and as watchful against all the
designs to undermine it. The Feof^ees for Impropriations he laid aside; the
Sabbatizing and Predestinarian controversies he silenced; the Licen^ious Press
he reduced; Dignities and Preferments h^ worthily filled up; bribes at Court he
retrenched: No interest, no alliance could ever advance an unworthy person
while he lived: Breed up your children well, and I will provide for them, was
his saying to all his Relations. Many a man would be disobliged by his
sternness at first view, for whom if deserving, he would afterward contrive
kindnesses by after and unexpected favors, No place of experience did he ever
miss, none of employment did he ever decline: He would never see Authority
h^ffled, but either wave all proceedings against offenders, or go through with
them; His prosecution^, as in Leighton's Case, were close: his observation of
all c^rc^mstances, as in Lincoln's, wary; his declarations of the Cases clear
and convincing, as in Pryn's, Bastwick's and Burion's; his sentence mild and
compassionate, as in Waller's; his resolution and justice ever making way to
his mercy, and his mercy crowning his justice: Often did he confer with the
ablest and most Orthodox Clergy, with the most experienced and knowing
Civilians, with the most observing and reserved Courtiers, with the profoundest
Lawyers, with the skilfullest and discreetest Mechanics; out of all whose
opinions the result was, his most exact judgment in any case that came before
him at Court, or at Lambeth.

The roughness of his nature sent most men discontented from him: but so, that
he would often of himself find ways and means to sweeten such as had any worth
again, when they least looked for it. -- Many were offended at his prudent zeal
against the Jewish Sabbatism in his government, who were very well satisfied
with the strictness of his observation of the Lords day in his person. -- But
let one great man express another; Bishop Gauden, Archbishop Laud; whose
thoughts lie so much the more levelled to his brave Sentiments, as his dignity
did to his high place.

As to his secret design of working up this Church by little and little to a
Romish conformity and captivity, I do not believe (says he) he had any such
purpose or approved thought; because, beside his declared judgment and
conscience, I find no secular Policy or Interest which he could thereby gain,
either private or public, but rather lose much of the greatness and freedom
which he and other Bishops, with the whol^ Church had: without which
tempt^tion, no man in charity may be suspected to act contrary to so clear
convictions, so deliberate and declared determinations of his Conscience and
Judgment in Religion, as the Archbishop expresses in his very excellent Book.
I am indeed prone to think, that p^ssibly he wished there could have been any
fair close or acc^mmodation between all Christian Churches, (the same which
many grave and learned men have much desired:) And it may be his Lordship
thought himself no unfit Instrument to make way to so great and good a work,
considering the eminencies of his Parts, Power, and Favor which he had. Happily
he judged (as many learned and moderate men have) that in some things between
Papists and Protestants, differences are made wider, and kept more open, raw
and sore than need be^ by the private pens and passions of some men, and the
Interests of some little parties, whose partial policies really neglect the
public and true Interest of the Cath^lick Church and Christian Religion; which
consists much in peace as w^ll as in purity, in charity, as in verity. He found
that where Papists were silenced and convinced in the more grand and pregnant
Disputes (that they are Novel, partial, and unconform to Catholic Churches in
ancient times) than he found they recovered spirits, and contested afresh
against the unreasonable transports, violences and immoderations of some
professing to be Protestants; who, to avoid Idol^try and Superstition, run to
Sacrilege and rudeness in Religion, denying many things that are just, honest,
safe, true and reasonable, merely out of an ((...)) excessive Antipathy to
Papists. Possibly the Archbishop and some other Bishops of his mind did
rightly judge, That the giving of an enemy fair play by just, safe, and
honorable concessions, was not to yield the conquest to him, but the most
ready way to convince him of his weakness; when no honest yieldings could help
him any more, then they did endanger the true cause or courage of his
Antagonist.

For my part, I think the Archbishop of Canterbury was neither Calvinist, nor
Lutheran, nor Papist, as to any side or party; but all, so far as he saw, they
agreed with the Reformed Church of England, either in Fundamentals, or innocent
and decent Superstructures: Yet I believe he was so far a Protestant, and of
the Reformed Religion, as he saw the Church of England did protest against the
Errors, Corruptions, Usurpations, and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, or
against the novel opinions and p^actices of any party whatsoever. And certainly
he did with as much honor as justice so far own the Authen^ick Authority,
Liberty and Majesty of the Church of England (in its reforming and settling of
its Religion) that he did not think fit any private new Master; whatsoever,
should obtrude any Foreign or Domestic Dictates to her, or force her to take
her copy of Religion from so petty a place as Geneva was, or Frankfort, or
Amsterdam, or Wittenbergh, or Edenborough; ^o nor from Augsburg, or Arnheim,
nor any foreign City or Town, any more than from Trent or Rome; none of which
had any Dic^atorian Authority over this great and famous Nation or Church of
England, further than they offered sober Counsels, or suggested good Reasons,
or cleared true Religion by Scripture, and confirmed it by good Antiquity, as
the best interpreter and decider of obscure places, and dubious cases.

Which high value, it is probable, as to his Mother the Church of England, and
her Constitutions, was so potent in the Archbishop of Canterbury, that, as he
thought it not fit to subject her to the insolency of the Church of Rome, so
not to the impertinencies of any other Church or Doctor, of far less repu^e in
the Christian world. No doubt his Lordship thought it not handsome in Mr.
Calvin to be ((...), rather than (...)) so censorious of the Church of England,
as to brand its D^votion or Liturgy with his tolerabiles ineptiae, who knew not
the temper of the Nation, requiring then not what was absolutely best, but most
conveniently good: and such not only the Liturgy was, but those things which he
calls tolerable toys. I having occasion to speak with him, he upon a time was
pleased to grant me access, and some freedom of speech with him; and withal
asked me the opinion of the people of him: I told him they reported his
Lordship endeavored to betray the Church of England to the Roman
correspondency and communion. He at length very calmly and gravely thus
replied; protesting with a serious attestation of his integrity before God's
Omnis^ience, that however he might mistake in the mean and method, yet he never
had other design than the glory of God, the service of his Majesty, the good
order, peace and decency of the Church of England: that ^e was so far from
complying with Papists, in order to confirm them in their Errors, that he
rather cho^e such Methods to advance the honor of the reformed Religion in
England, as he believed might soon silence the cavils of fiercer Papists,
induce the more moderate Re^usants to come in to us, as having less visible
occasion given them by needless D^stances and Disputes to separate from us;
which he thought arose much from that popular Variety, Inconstancy, Easiness,
Irreverence, and Uncomliness, which might easily grow among us in the outward
professi^n of Religion, for want of observing such uniformity and decency in
Religion, as were required by the Laws and Canons of this Church and State. He
added, that he had (further) a desire, as much as he could to relieve the poor
and depressed condition of many Ministers, which he had to his grief observed
in Wales and England, where their Discouragements were very great, by reason of
the tenuity and incompetency of their Livings; that in his Visitations he had
sometime seen it with grief, among twenty Ministers, not one man had so much as
a decent Garment to put on, nor did he believe their other treatment of Life
was better^ that he found the sordid and shameful Aspect of Religion and the
Clergy, gave great Advantages to those that were Popishly inclined, who would
hardly ever think it best for them to join with that Church which did not
maintain either its own Honor, or its Clergy to some competency and comeliness.

Much more discourses his Lordship was pleased to use at several times to this
purpose, which commands my charity to clear him, as far as I can judge, of any
tincture of Popery truly so called; or of any superstition, which places a
Religion in the nature and use of that thing which God has not either
particularly commanded, or in general permitted. I suppose he thought, that
where God has allowed to his Church, and to every private Christian (so far as
may consist with the Churches Order and Peace) a liberty of ceremonious and
circumstantial decency as to God's worship; there neither himself was to be
blamed, nor did he blame other men, if they kept within those discreet and
inoffensive bounds, which either the Churches public peace required, or its
indulgence to promote Christians permitted.

The Uniformity he pressed was not more advantageous to Religion, which must of
necessity have been propagated, when Controversies had been turned to devotion,
than it was necessary for the State; which cannot be secure, as long as there
is a mark of distinction, under which all Male contents may shroud themselves;
a note of separation, whereby the Factions may reckon their parties, and
estimate their strength, and a way open to popularity to the ambition of any
whose interest or desperateness shall adventure to make himself head of so
great a p^rty.

He was a person of so great abilities (which are the designations of nature to
dignity and command) that they raised him from low beginnings to the highest
Office the Protestant profession acknowledges in the Church, and he was equal
to it: His learning appeared eminent in his Book against Fisher, and his piety
illustrious in his Diary: He was of so public a spirit, that both the Church
and S^ate have lasting Monuments of the virtuous use he made of his Princes
favor; at his admittance into which, he dedicated all the future Emoluments of
it to the glory of God, and the good of men, by a projection of many noble
Works: most of which he accomplished, and had finished the rest, had not the
fate of the Nation checked the current of his Design, and cut off the course of
his Life. He was not contented by himself only to serve his Generation, (for so
he might appear more greedy of fame, than desirous of the universal benefit)
but he endeavored to render all others as heroic, if they aimed at a capacity
for his friendship: For (I have heard it from his E^emies) no great man was
admitted to a confidence and respect with him, unless ^he made Address by some
act that was for the common good, or for the ornament and glory of the
Protestant faith. Learned men had not a better Friend, nor Learning itself a
greater Advancer. He searched all the Libraries of Asia, and from several parts
of the world purchased all the Ornaments and helps of Literature ^e could, that
the English Church might have (if possible) by his care, as many advantages for
knowledge, as almost all Europe did contribute to the grandeur of that of Rome.
The outward splendor of the Clergy was not more his care, than their honor,
by a grave and pious conversation. He would put them into a power of doing more
good, but was sore against their Vices and Vanities. He scorned a private
Treasure, and his friends were rather relieved, than raised to any greatness by
him. In his election of friends, he was determined to the good and wise, and
such as had both parts and desires to profit. The Church had his closest
embraces; if otherwise it happened, their frauds, not his choice deserved the
blame. Both Papists and Sect^ries were equally his Enemies; one party feared,
and the other hated his Virtues. Some censured his zeal for Discipline above
the patience of the Times: but his greatest unhappiness was, that he lived in a
factious Age, and corrupt State, and under such a Prince, whose Ver^ues not
admitting an immediate approach for Accusations, was to be wounded with those
i^ did caress. But when Faction and Malice are worn out by time, Posterity
shall engrave him in the Alb^ of the most excellent Prelacy, the most indulgent
Fathers of the Church^ and the most injured Martyrs. His blood was accompanied
with some tears that fell from those Eyes that expected a pleasure at his
death; and it had been followed with Miseries, and the present Fears of Ruin
exacted all the stock of Grief for other objects.

His very enemy Sir Edward Deering would confess; That let him dye when he
would, St. Paul's would be his Monument, and his Book against Fishes his Epitaph.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Keeper Littleton.
SIr Edward Littleton, the eldest son of Sir Edward Littleton, of Mounslow in
Shropshire, one of the Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of
North Wales, was bred in Christ-Church in Oxford, where he proceeded Batchellor
of Arts, and afterward was one of the Justices of North Wales, Recorder of
London, and Solicitor to King Charles. From these places he was preferred to
be Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and made Privy-Councellor; thence
advanced to be Lord Keeper, and Baron of Mounslow, the place of his Nativity.
He died in Oxford, and was buried in Christs-Church where he was bred: -- Being
a Member of the Parliament 1628. he had the management of the high presumption
charged on the Duke of Buckingham about King James his death; wherein he
behaved himself so discreetly between the jealousi^ of the People, and the
honor of the Court, that Sir John Finch would say, He was the only man for
taking things by a Right handle. -- And Sir Edward Cook, that He was a
well-poized and weighed man. His very name carried an Hereditary credit with
it, much plaineth out the way to all great Actions: his virtue being
authorizing by his nobility, and his undertakings ennobled by his birth, gained
that esteem, which meaner men attain not without a large compass of time and
experience: worthless Nobility and ignoble worth lie under equal disadvantage.
Neither was his extract so great as his parts; his judgment being clear and
piercing; his Learning various and useful; his skill in the Maxims of our
Government, the fundamental Laws of his Monarchy with its Statutes and Customs,
singular; his experience long and observing; his integrity unblemished and
unbyassed; his Eloquence powerful and majestic, and all befitting a Statesman
and a Lord Keeper: -- set off with a resolved Loyalty that would perform the
harshest service his Master could enjoin him while he stayed at London, and
follow the hardest fortune he could be in when at York, whither he went with
the great Seal he knew made to stamp Royal Commissions, rather than authorize
Rebellious Ordinances. At Oxford he did good service during the Session of
Parliament by Accommodations there, and as good during their recess by his
interest in the Country.

Observations on the Life of the Marquess Hamilton.
A Preacher being at a loss what to say of a party deceased, conclu^^d his
Sermon with these words; There is one good quality in this man, viz. That he
was born, and that God made him: And another, viz. That he is dead, and we must
speak nothing but good of the dead.

I may say of this Nobleman, that I have two reasons to speak well of him^ 1.
That good King Charles honored him 3 and 2. That his wicked Subjects beheaded
him, -- otherwise I must leave these Queries as I find them.

Quaere 1. Why should Duke Hamilton post without leave into Scotland, when the
Parliament was discontented, and the Duke of Buckingham murdered in England?

Qu. 2. Why should Ramsey the Dukes Messenger to the King of Sweden, play the
Ambassador in Germany, and take place of all other persons there?

Qu. 3. What design was that which Elphyston, Borthrick, Meldrum, Uchiltry,
etc. discovered one to another?

Qu. 4. What did Ramsey with the Pedigree of Hamilton derived from James I.
King of Scots in Foreign parts?

Qu. 5. Why private Instructions had Meldrum to Scottish Officers in the
Swedish Army?

Qu. 6. What was Meldrum, Alexander Hamilton, and other his Dependants, so
preferred in the Scots Army?

Qu. 7. Why were there such Fears and Jealousies whispered in Germany of the
English Government?

Qu. 8. Why was not Ramsey able to give a positive Answer at the Trial by
combat? And why did the Marquess take him off before the Controversy was
decided?

Qu. 9. Why is Huntley put by, and Hamilton made high Comm^ssioner? Why is
discontented Balcanquel employed to pen Declarations? And why are the King's
Papers, Letters, etc. taken out of his pocket, and betrayed to the Scots? And
why did the Archbishop of Canterbury (writing to the King) wish him not to
trust his own pockets with the Letter?

Qu. 10. Why does his Mother ride with pistols at her Saddle-bow, leading all
her Kindred and Vassals for the Covenant?

Qu. 11. Why is that time spent in posting to and fro to patch up a base
Pacification with the Rebels, that might have been employed in suppressing them?

Q. 12. Why did the Bishops of Rosse and Bre^en, Sir Robert Spotswood, Sir John
Hay, the Earl of Sterling, ride post to England to entreat the King not to
trust the Marquess?

Qu. 13. Why was there so much granted to the Covenanters in Scotland -- yea
and time given them to do their business?

Q. 14. Why did he forbear the Common Prayer at Dalkieth, and neglect to
protest the Kings gracious Declaration; the justice and clemency whereof had
without doubt allayed the commotions?

Q. 15. Why did he not set out the King's last Declaration before the
Covenanters Protestation was our against it?

Qu. 16. Why was there nothing done with the Ships sent upon the coasts of
Scotland?

Qu. 17. Why did he so caress his covenanting Mother, that the Scots could say;
The son of so ge^d a Mother could do them no harm?

Qu. 18. Why had he a hand in most of the Monopolies and Projects of England?

Q. 19. Why did he refuse to contribute as others had done to the Scots Wars?

Q. 20. Why did he intercede for Lowndon's ^elease, notwithstanding the
trait^rous Letter to the French King was his hand?

Qu. 21. How comes Montross to be flighted by the gracious King at first? And
when he offered his service again, how came his Letters into the Covenanters
hands at Newcastle?

Qu. 22. Why did he and Argyle raise such Fears and Jealou^ies in Scotland and
England by withdrawing suddenly from the Court, under pre^ence forsooth of
danger to their persons?

Qu. 23. Why could not the King hear of the Scots design to invade England,
1643. before Montross posted first to Oxford, and then to Glo^cester to tell
him of it, though the Marquess was all the while in Scotland?

Qu. 24. And yet why was that noble person mistrusted till the Kings interest
was lost in that Country?

Qu. 25. Why was he and his brother imprisoned at Oxford? And why did the King
say, Nay, if Hamilton leads them, there is no good to be done for me?

Qu. 26. Why did the King say, That he must dispose of the Master of the Horse
place to the Earl of N. That my Lord Cottington was the fittest man for the
Treasury, and that Sir Edward Hyde was the only man he could trust with the
Secretaries affairs? Being loath that D. H. should return to an oppo^tu^ity of
recozening them: Questions these, that show, After-ages can scan great men's
lives with the same liberty that they live them.

Observations on the Life of Sir Ralph Hopton.
GEntile was this excellent person's extraction in the West of England, and
man-like his Education in the Low Countries, that School of War, where Sir
William Waller and he learned in one Camp, what they practiced in two: The one
being no less eminent for his service under his late Majesty of blessed memory,
than the other was for his against him. The one was the best Soldier the King
had; the other the most experienced that the pretended Parliament boasted of.
None fitter to balance Sir Ralph Hopton's success; none likelier to understand
his stratagems; none abler to undermine his designs, than his Fellow-soldier,
Sir William, who understood his method as well as he was acquainted with his
person. Both were equally active, E^umplified by his Chaplain Tho. Fritter.
both equally vigilant. But what better character of this Hero, than that
which his Master gave him in his Patent for Baron, which is his history as well
as his honor?

Carolus Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Cum and Nominis nostri and Posteritatis
interest, and ad clara Exempla propaganda utilissime compertum, palam fieri
omnibus praemia, apud nos virtuti sita, nec perire fidelium subditorum officia,
sed memori and benevolo pectore fixissime insi dear: His praesertim temporibus
cum plurim^m (quibus antehac nimium indulsimus) temerata, a^t suspecta fides,
pretium aliorum constantiae addidit. Cumque nobis certo constable at Radulphum
Hopton Militem de Balneo splendidis and Antiquis Natalibus; tum in c^tera sua
vita integritatis and mori^ eximium, tum in hac novissima tempestate, fatalique
Regni and rebel^i motu, rari animi fideique exemplum edidisse, Regiae
dignitatis in eaque publicae contra utriusque adversarios assertorem and
vindic^m acerrimum.

Quippe quia non solum nascenti huic Furori (nec dum omnibus manifesto) optimis
consiliis fortis in c^ria Senator restiterit; sed insinuante se latius veneno,
and crescente ferocia domum ad suos reversus fortior Miles in Agro suo
Somersetensi and vicinis partibus omni open and manu iniquissimam causam
oppugnaverit, in Arce praesertim Sherborniana, sub Auspiciis Marchionis
Hertfordiae egregiam operam navaverit. Mox ulterius progre^^us pollenti in
Devonia factionis Tyrannide, and munitissima civitate in foedus illecta, and
jam undique bonis subditis perniciem minante, ipse pene in illa Regione Hospes,
contracto e Cornubia Milite^ and primoribus statim impetum ^aru^ repressit
jacentesque and afflictas nostras partees mirifica virtute recreavit. Et licet
summis necessitatibus conflictanti exigua pars Negotii hosts erant, tantum
ab^uit ut vel illis, vel istis succumberet, ut contra copiis auctiores, and
bellico apparatu instructissimas, saepius signis Collatis in acie dimicans
semper superior excesserit: Testis Launcestonia, Saltash, Bradock, aliaque
obscura olim nomina and ^oca, nunc victoriis illius and perduellium cladibus
Nobilitat^ Vix etiam ab his respiraverit, cum novus belli furor Lassas jam fere
and continuis praeliis laxatas vires Numerocissimo execitu adortus, uberiorem
triumphandi dedit materiam. Cum ille in campis Stratto^iae, in difficillimas
licet Augustias redactus, inops militaris instrumenti, and consumpio jam
pulvere tormentario, armatos inermis, Vallo munito inter sola causa and virtute
animatus, ita re^udit, concidit, castris exuit, ut ^totum belli molem cum ipsis
Authoribus profligavit; Quicquid fugae illius residuum erat, inter urbis unius
Moenia eaqu^ arcta obsidione astricta concl^so. Qua quidem pugna memorabili,
praeter quod miserum popellum, jugo intolerabili levaverat, seeds suas
expulsis, Ecclesias Pastoribus, pacem omnibus, and Firmamentum pacis obsequium
pristinum restituerit. Et jam sequenti armorum nostrorum f^elicitate qua parts
Regni occidentales maturius ad officium and verum Dominum redierunt, and viam
apperuisse and momentum ingens extitisse libentissime profitemur; In hac opera
landabili cum praefatus Radulphus perstiterit adhuc in victo animo and
industria indefessa nullo ard^o quantumvi^ labor and periculo excusatus,
cumque mill argumentis testatum fecerit, Honorem salutemque nostram sibi omni
fortuna and capite potiorens, nos virum fortissimum optimeque affectum animum
benigno studio prosequi and amplius demereri volentes, hunc and praec^nio
merito ornandum, and propiori ad nos gradu extollendum censuimus. Sciatis
igitur nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia mero motu praefatum
Radulphum Hopton ad statum, gradum, stylum, Dignitatens, Titulum and Honorem
Baronis Hopton de Stratton in Comitatu nostro Cornubiae, etc. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas Nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Oxon. quarto die Sep^embris, Anno Regni Nostri Decimo nono.

His two great Actions, the one at Liscard, the other at Stratton, cannot be
better described than by an Eyewitness, whose words are these as he says, out
of a Manuscript corrected with Sir Ralph's own hand, communicated to him by his
Secretary Mr. Tredus.

At Liscard a little before the Fight began, the King's party took it into
seasonable consideration, that seeing by the Commission of the Lord Mohun
brought from Oxford, four persons ( viz. the said Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton,
Sir John Berkley, and Colonel Ashburnham) were equally empowered in the
managing of all Military ma^ters: And seeing such equality might prove
inconvenient (which hitherto had been prevented with the extraordinary
moderation of all parties) in ordering a Bat^el, it was fittest to fix the
power in one chief; and general consent settled it in Sir Ralph Hopton: He first
gave order that public Prayers should be read in the head of every Squadron,
and it was done accordingly; and the Enemy observing it, did style it saying of
Mass, as some of their Prisoners afterward did confess. Then he caused the
Fo^t to be drawn up in the best order they could, and placed a Fo^lorn of
Musketeers in the little I^closures, winging them with the few H^rse and
Dragoons he had. This done, two small Mynion Drakes speedily and secretly
fetched from the Lord Mohun's house, were planted on a little B^rrough within
random-shot of the Enemy; yet so, that they were covered out of their sight
with small parties of Horse about them. These concealed Mynions were twice
discharged with such success, that the Enemy quickly quitted their ground^: And
all their Army being put into a rout, the King's Forces had the exe^ution of
them; which they performed very sparingly, taking 1250 prisoners, all their
Cannon and Ammunition, and most of their C^lours, and Arms; and after public
Thanks, taking their repose at Liscard.

Stratton Fight succeeds on Tuesday the 16th of May, 1643.
The King's Army wants Ammun^tion, and has a steep hill to gain, with all
disadvantage and danger; the Horse and Dragoons being not above five hundred,
and the Foot two thousand four hundred.

The Parl. Forces were well furnished and barricado^d upon the top of the hill,
their Foot 3400. and their Horse not many indeed, having dispatched 12^0 to
surprise the Sheriff and Commissioners at Bodmin.

On the King's side, order was given to force the passage to the top of the
Hill by four several Avenues: the ascent was steep and difficult; resolutely
did his Majesty's Forces get up, and obstinately did the Enemy keep them down.
The Fight continued doubtful, with many countenances of various events (from
five in the Morning, till three in the Afternoon) amongst which most
remarkable, the smart charge made by M. G. Chudleigh, with a stand of Pikes on
Sir Bevil Greenvil, who fell nobly himself, and had lost his squadron, had not
Sir John (now Lord Berkley, who ^ed up the Musketeers on each side of Sir
Bevil) seasonably relieved it, so resolutely reinforcing the Charge, that
Major General Chudleigh was taken Prisoner^ Betwixt three and four of the Clock
the Commanders of the King's Forces, who embraced those four several ways of
ascent, met to their mutual joy almost at the top of the hill, which the routed
enemy confusedly forsook. In this service, though they were Assailants, they
lost very few men, and no considerable Officer, killing of the Enemy about
three hundred, and taking seventeen hundred prisoners, all their Cannon (being
thirteen pieces of brass Ordnance) and Ammunition (seventy barrels of powder)
with a Magazine of Biscuit and other provision proportionable. For this victory
public Prayer and Thanksgiving was made on the hill; then the Army was
disposed of to improve their success to the best advantage. -- Nothing had funk
this great spirit, but the fate of Kingdoms, with whose ruin only he was
contented to fall, and disband his brave Soldiers upon honorable terms. Five
things made my Lord Hopton so eminently serviceable. 1. His great insight into
the designs, and prudent foresight of the events of present Councels; which
when most doubted and wavered, gave him that resolution that undertook great
difficulties, and bore up against greater. 2. His experience of War in general,
and his acquaintance with that seat of it committed to him in particular. 3.
His renown all over the Kingdom for piety and moderation, and within his own
association for hospitality, civility, and charity. 4. His name among the
Enemies, as considerable for his generousness and justice, as for his valor
and conduct. 5. His Estate, that set him above mercenariness; and his care for
money, that set his Soldiers above need, the occ^sion of mutinying among
themselves, or of incivilities toward others.

Observations on the Life of the Earl of Carnarvan.
RObert Dormer Ar. was on the tenth of June 1615. made Baronet by King James,
and on the 30 day of the same month was by him created Baron Dormer of Wing in
Buckinghamshire. His Grandchild Robert Dormer was by K. Charles in the 4th of
his Reign created Viscount Ascot, and Ea^l of Carnarvan. He lost his life
fighting for him who gave him his honor, at the first Battle of Newbury. Being
sore wounded, he was desired by a Lord, to know of him what suit he would have
to his Majesty in his behalf, the said Lord promising to discharge his trust in
presenting his request, and assuring him, that his Majesty would be wi^ling to
gratify him to the utmost of his power. To whom the Earl replied, I will not
dye with a Suit in my mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven. By Anne
da^ghter to Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgom^ry, he had Charles, now Earl of
Carnarvan. From h^^ noble Extract, he received not more honor than he gave it:
For the blood that was conveyed to him through so many illustrious veins, he
derived to his Children more matured for renown, and by a constant practice of
goodness more habituated to virtue. His youth was prepared for action by study,
without which even the most eminent parts of Noblemen seem rough and
unple^sant, in despite of the splendour of their fortune: But his rip^r years
endured not those retirements, and therefore brake out into manlike exercises
at home, and travel abroad. None more noble, yet none more modest; none more
valiant, yet none more patient. -- A Physician at his Father-in-Law's Table
gave him the Lie; which put the company to admire on the one hand the man's
impudence, and on the other my Lord's mildness, until he said, I Will take the
Lie from him, but I Will never take Physic of him -- He may speak what does not
become him, I Will not do what is unworthy of me -- A virtue this! not usual in
Noblemen, to whom the limits of Equity seem a restraint, and therefore are
more restless in Injuries. In the mi^dest of horror and tumults his soul was
serene and calm. As humble he was as patient. Honor and nobility, to which
nothing can be added, has no better way to increase, than when secured of its
own greatness, it humbles it self, and so at once obliges love^ and avoideth
envy. His carriage was as condescending as heroic, and his speech as weighty
as free. He was too great to envy any man's parts and virtues, and too good not
to encour^ge them. Many a time would he stoop with his own spirit, to raise
other men's. -- He neglected the minute and little circumstances of compliance
with vulgar humors, aiming at what was more solid and more weighty: Moderate
men are appl^uded, but the Heroic are never understood.

Constant he was in all that was good: this was his heroic expression when
solici^ed by his Wives Father to desist from his engagement with the King,
Leave me to my Honor and Allegiance. No security to him worth a breach of
Trust; no interest worth being unworthy. His conduct was as eminent in War, as
his carriage in Peace; many did he oblige by the generosity of his mind, more
did he awe with the hardness of his body; which was no more softened to sloth
by the dalliances of a Court, than the other was debauched to a carelessness by
the greatness of his Fortune. His prudence was equal to his valor, and he
could entertain dangers as well as despise them; for he not only undeceived his
enemies surmises, but exceeded his own friends opinion in the conduct of his
soldiers, of whom he had two cares; the one to discipline, the other to
preserve them. Therefore they were as completely armed without, as they were
well appointed within; that surviving their first dangers; they might attain
that experience and resolution which is in vain expected from young and raw
soldiers. To this conduct of a General, he added the industry of a Soldier,
doing much by his performances, more by his example, that went as an active
soul to enliven each part, and the whole of his brave Squadron. But there is no
doubt but personal and private sins may oft-times over-balance the justice of
public eng^gements. Nor does God account every Gallant a fit instrument to
assert in the way of war a righteous cause; the event can never state the
justice of any cause, nor the peace of men's consciences, nor the e^ernal fate
of their souls.

They were no doubt Martyrs who neglected their lives, and all that was dear to
them in this world, having no advantageous design by any innovation, but were
religiously sensible of those ties to God, the Church, their King, their
Country; which lay upon their souls, both for obedience and just assist^nce.

God could, and I doubt not but he did through his mercy crown many of them
with eternal life, whose lives were lost in so good a cause: the destruction of
their bodies being sanctified as a means to save their souls.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Herbert of Cherbury.
EDward Herbert, son of Richard Herbert Esquire and Susan Newport his Wife, was
born at Montgomery-Castle, and brought to Court by the Earl of Pembrook, where
he was Knighted by K. James, who sent him over Ambassador into ^rance.
Afterward K. Charles the first created him Baron of Castle-Island in Ireland,
and some years after Baron of Cherbury in Montgomeryshire. He was a most
excellent Artist and rare Linguist, studied both in Books and Men, and himself
the Author of two Works most remarkable, viz. A Treatise of Truth, written in
French, so highly prized beyond the Seas, and (they say) it is ext^nt at this
day with great Honor in the Popes Vatican; and an History of King Henry the
Eighth; wherein his Collections are full and authentic; his observation
judicious; his connection strong and cohaerent, and the whole exact. He married
the Daughter and sole Heir of Sir William Herbert of St. Iulians in
Mo^mouth-shire, with whom he had a large Inheritance in England and Ireland;
and died in August, Anno Dom. 1648. having designed a fair Monument of his own
invention to be set up for him in the Church of Montgomery, according to the
model following; Upon the ground a Has pace of fourteen foot square, on the
midst of which is placed a Dorick Column, with its right of Pedestal Basis,
and Capitols fifteen foot in height; on the Capitol of the Column is mounted an
U^^ with a Heart Flamboul, supported by two Angels. The foot of this Column is
attended with four Angels, placed on Pedestals at each corner of the said
Hath-pace, two having Torches reverst, extinguishing, the Motto of Mortality;
the other two holding up Palms, the Emblems of Victory.

When this noble person was in France, he had private Instructions from England
to mediate a Peace for them of the Religion; and in case of refusal, to use
certain menaces. -- Accordingly being referred to Luynes the Constable and
Favorite of France, he delivers him the Message, reserving his threatenings
till he saw how the matter was relished. -- Luynes had hid behind the Curtain a
Gentleman of the Religion, who being an Ear-witness of what passed, might
relate to his friends what little expectations they ought to entertain from the
King of England's intercession.

Luynes was very haughty, and would needs know what our KING had to do with
their affairs: Sir Edward replied; It Is not you to whom the King my Master
owes an account of his actions: and for me, it is enough that I obey him. In
the mean time I must maintain, That my Master has more reason to do what he
does, than you to ask why he does it? Nevertheless, If you desire me in a
gentle fashion, I shall acquaint you further.

Whereupon Luynes bowing a little, said, Very well. The Ambassador answered;
That it was not on this occasion only, that the King of Great Britain had
desired the Peace and prosperity of France, but upon all other occasions, when
ever any War was raised in that Country; and this he said was his first
reason. The second was, That when a Peace was settled there, his Majesty of
France might be better disposed to assist the Pala^inate in the affairs of
Germany. Luynes said, We will have none of your advices. The Ambassador
replied, That he took that for an Answer, and was sorry only that the affection
and the good will of the King his Master was not sufficiently understood; and
that since it was rejected in that manner, he could do no less than say, That
the King his Master knew well enough what he had to do. Luynes answered; We are
not afraid of you. The Ambassador smiling a little, replied, If you had said
you had no^ loved us, I should have believed you, and made another answer: In
the mean time, all that I will tell you more is, That we know very well what we
have to do. Luynes hereupon rising from his Chair, with a fashion and
countenance a little discomposed, said, By God, If you were not Monsieur the
Ambassador, I know very well how I would use you. Sir Edw. Herbert rising also
from his Chair, said; That as he was his Majesty of Great-Britain's Ambassador,
so he was also a Gentleman, and that his Sword whereon he laid his hand, should
do him reason if he had taken any offense. After which Luynes replying nothing,
the Ambassador went on his way toward the door; and Luynes seeming to accompany
him, he told him there was no occasion to u^e such Ceremony after such
Language; and so departed, expecting to hear further from him: But no Message
being brought him from Luynes, he had in pursuance of his Instructions a more
civil Audience of the King at Coigna^, where the Marshal of St. Geran told him
he had offended the Constable, and he was not in a place of security here:
whereunto he answered; That he held himself to be in a place of security
wheresoever he had his Sword by him.

Luynes resenting the affront, got Cadenet his brother, Du. of Chaun, with a
ruffling train of Officers (whereof there was not one, as he told K. James, but
had killed his man) as an Ambassador extraordinary to mis-report their
Traverses so much to the disparagement of Sir Edw. that the Earl of Carlisle,
sent to accommodate Le Mal Entendu that might arise between the 2 Crowns, got
him called home; until the Gentleman behind the Curtains, out of his duty to
truth and honor, related all circumstances so, as that it appeared, that
though Luynes gave the first affront, yet Sir Edward kept himself within the
bounds of his Instructions and Honor, very discreetly and worthily. --
Insomuch that he fell on his knees to King James before the Duke of Buckingham,
to have a Trumpeter, if not an H^rald sent to Monsieur Luynes, to tell him,
that he had made a false Relation of the passages beforementioned, and that
Sir Edward Herbert would demand reason of him with Sword in hand on that point.
-- The King answered, he would take it into consideration: But Luynes a little
after died, and Sir Edward was sent Ambassador to France again, and otherwise
employed so, that if it had not been for Fears and Jealousies, the ba^e of
public services, he had been as great in his Actions, as in his Writings; and
as great a Statesman, as he is confessed a Scholar.

Observations on the Life of the Lord Capel.
HIs privacy before the War was passed with as much popularity in the Country,
as his more public appearance in it was with valor and fidelity in the Field:
In our too happy time of Peace none more pious, hospitable, charitab^e and
munificent: In those more unhappy of our Differences none more reserved, Loyal,
and active. The people loved him so well, that they chose him one of their
Representatives; and the King esteemed him so much, that he sent for him as one
of his Peers in that Parliament, wherein the King and people agreed in no one
thing, save a just kindne^s for my Lord Capel, who was one of those exce^lent
Gentlemen, whose gravity and discretion (the King says) he hoped would allay
and fix the Faction to a due temperament ( guiding some men's well-meaning Zeal
by such rules of moderation, as are best both to preserve and restore the
health of all States and Kingdoms) keeping to the dictates of his conscience,
rather than the importunities of the people; to what was just, that what was
safe, save only in the Earl of Strafford's case, wherein he yielded to the
public Necessity with his Royal Master, but repented with him too, sealing his
contrition for that miscarriage with his blood, when he was more troubled for
his forced consent to that brave person's death, than for losing his own life;
which he ventured throughout the first War, and lost by his Engagement in the
second. For after the surrender of Oxford, he re^ired to his own house, but
could no^ rest there, until the King was brought home to his; which all England
endeavoring as one man^ my Lord adventured himself at Colchester to extremity,
yielding himself upon condition of Quarter, which he urged by the Law of Arms,
that Law that (as he said on the Scaffold) governs the world, and against the
Laws of God and Man (they are his own words) for keeping the fifth Commandment,
dying on the Scaffold at West^^nster, with a courage that became a clear
conscience, and a resolution befitting a good Christian; expressing that
judicious piety in the Chamber of Meditation at his death, that he did in his a
Book of Meditation in his life: a piety that (as it appeared by his dismission
of his Chaplain, and the formalities of that time's devotion, before he came to
the Scaffold) was rather his inward frame and habit, than outward ostentation
or pomp; from the noble S^ntiments whereof (as the Poet (not unhappily alluding
to his Arms; A Lion rampant in a Field Gules between three crosses) expresses
it) Our Lyon-like Capel undaunted stood,
Beset with Crosses in a Field of blood.
as one that affrighted death, rather than was afrighted by it -- It being very
observable, that a learned Doctor of Physic present at the opening and
embalming of this noble Lord, and Duke Hamilton, delivering at a public
Lecture, that the Lord Capel's was the least heart, and the Duke's the greatest
that ever he saw; agreeable to the observation in Philosophy, that the spirits
contracted within the least compass, are the cause of the greater courage.
Three things are considerable in this incomparable person. 1. His uninterrupted
Loyalty keeping pace with his Life; for his last breath was spent in
proclaiming K. Charles the II. in the very face of his Enemies, as known to him
to be a virtuous, noble, gentle, just, and great Prince; a Perfect Englishman
in his inclination. 2. His great merits and modesty, whereof K. Charles I.
writes thus to his excellent Queen; There is one that does not yet pretend that
does deserve as well as any, I mean Capel; Therefore I desire thy assistance to
find out something for him before he ask. 3. The blessing of God upon his
noble, but suffering Family, who was a Husband to his excellent Widow, and a
Father to his hopeful Children, whom not so much their birth, beauty, and
portion (though they were eminent for these) as their Virtues, married to the
best Bloods and Estates in the Land, even when they and the Cause they suffered
for were at the lowest. It Is the happiness of good men, though themselves
miserable, that their seed shall be mighty, and their Generation blessed.

Observations on the Life of Bishop Andrews.
I Have much a-do to prevail with my own hand to write this excellent Prelate a
Statesman of England, though he was Privy-Councellor in both Kingdoms: For I
remember that he would say when he came to the Council Table; Is there any
thing to be done to day for the Church? If they answered Yea, then he said, I
will stay -- If No, he said, I will be gone. -- Though yet this be an instance
of as much prudence as any within the compass of our Observation: So safe is
every man within the circle of his own place, and so great an argument of
abilities has it been always confessed, to know as well what we ought, as what
we can, especially in Clergymen, whose over-doing does abate their reverence,
and increase their envy, by laying open those defects and miscarriages, which
are otherwise hallowed, or at least concealed in the mystic sacredness of
their own function. Not but that men of that gravity and exactness, of that
knowledge and experience, of that stayedness and moderation, of that sobriety
and temperance, of that observation and diligence as Bishops are presumed to
be, were in all Governments judged as fit to manage public affairs, as men of
any other professions whatever, without any prejudice to the Church; which must
be governed as well as taught, -- and managed as well as a society dwelling in
the world, as under the notion of a peculiar people taken out of it. -- His
successful skill in dea^ing with the Papists under my Lord of Huntington
President of the North; and with the Puritans under Doctor Cousin, an
Ecclesiastical Officer in the South, recommended him to Sir Francis
Walsingham's notice, as a person too useful to be buried in a Country-Living;
who thereupon intended to set up his Learning in a Lecture at Cambridge, to
confute the Doctrine of Rome; unti^ Queen Eliz. resolved to set up his prudence
in other Employments at Court, to countermine its policy: where I know not
whether the acuteness of his Sermons took most with the most Learned; the
devotion of them with the most pious; or the prudence of them with the most
Wise -- (it has been one thin^ always to Preach learnedly, and another thing
to preach wisely) for to the Immensity of his Learning, he added excellent
Principles of politic prudence, as a governor of the Church, and a Councellor
of State, wherein he was conspicuous; not for the crafty projects and practices
of policy, or for those finister ways of Artifice and subtlery, or the admired
depths of Hypocrisy called reason of State; no^ the measures and rules of his
Politics and Prudentials were taken from the great experience he had gotten,
and many excellent observations he had made out of all Histories, as well
Humane as Divine: though he always laid the greatest weight upon the grounds
and instances of holy Scripture, which gives the truest judgment of wisdom or
folly; considering the mixture of State Affairs, with those of the Church in
Christian Commonwealths, and the fitness of sober and discreet Clergymen for
those of the State in all. It Is a wonder how Clergymen come to be excluded
public Councils at any time: but observing Bishop Andrews his insight into the
Fundamental constitution of our State, as appears from his Speech in the
Countess of Shrewsbury's Case: His distinct foresight o^ the consequences of
Affairs, evident in his speech against Thraske: His circumspect care of the
Public, visible in his Petition to King James then sick at New Market; that
the Prince then under Scotch Tutors be educated by well-principled men, the
occasion that King James took to bring him up himself so exactly in the
Doctrine and Discipline of o^r Church, that it is a question whether he was more
by his Pen or Sword, his Scepter or his Style, The Defender of the Faith: --
His wond^rful skill in the government of this Church, discerned by ^he
excellent King Charles, in that he sent so many Bishops to consult with him,
1625. what was to be done for the Church in that Parliament: His caution and
moderation, in that he never, unless upon great considerations, innovated in
his Church, b^t left things in the same decency and order he ^ound them
(knowing that all alterations have their dangers) I am astonished to think,
that Bishops should be forbidden secular employment in our time. -- Who has
more ampleness and compleatness (says Bishop Gauden) for a good man, a good
Bishop, a good Christian, a good Scholar, a good Preacher, and a good
Counselor, than Bishop Andrews, a man of an astonishing excellency both at
home and abroad?

Observations on the Life of Henry Mountague Earl of Manchester.
HEnry Earl of Manchester, third son to Sir Edward Mountague, Grandchild to
Sir Edward Mountague Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in King Edward the
sixth's time, was born at Boughton in Northamptonshire. One skilful in
mysterious Arts, beholding him when a Schoolboy, foretold that by the
pregnancy of his parts, he would raise himself above the rest of his Family;
which came to pass accordingly: He being bred first in Christs-Colledge in
Cambridge, then in the Middle Temple, where he attained to great Learning in
the Laws; passed through many preferments, as they are reckoned up, viz. 1.
Sergeant at L^w. 2. Knighted by K. James, July 22. 1603. 3. Recorder of London.
4. Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, November. 18. 1616. 5. Lord Treasurer
of England, December. 16. 1620. 6. B^ron of Kimbolton. 7. Viscount Mandevile. 8.
President of the Council, Sept. 29. 1631. 9. E^rl of Manchester. 10. Lord
Privy Seal.


He wisely perceiving that Courtiers were but as Counters in the hands of
Princes, raised and depressed in valuation at pleasure, was contented rather to
be set for a smaller sum, than to be quite put up into the box. Thus in point
of place and preferment, being pleased to be what the King would have him
(according to his Motto, Movendo non mutando me) he became almost what he would
be himself, finally advanced to an Office of great Honor. When Lord
Privy Seal, he brought the Court of Requests into such repute, that what
formerly was called the Alms-Basket of the Chancery, had in his time well-nigh
as much meat in, and guests about it (I mean Suits and Clients) as the Chancery
it self. His Meditations of Life and Death, called Manchester Almondo, written
in the time of his health, may be presumed to have left good impressions on his
own soul, preparatory for his dissolution, which happened 164 --

The Office of Lord Treasurer was ever beheld as a place of great charge and
profit. My Lord being demanded what it might be worth per ann. made this
answer; That it might be some thousands of pounds to him (who after death would
go instantly to heaven) twice as much to him who would go to Purgatory, and a
Nemo scit to him who would adventure to a worse place. But indeed, he that will
be a bad husband for himself in so advantageous a place, will never b^ a good
one for his Sovereign.

Observations on the Life of Sir Henry Wotton, with some Account of his
Relations.
SIr Henry Wotton first having re^^ of his Ancestor Sir Robert Wotton, the
noble Lieutenant of Guisnes, and Comptroller of Callais, in King Edward the
fourth's days, His Grandfather Sir Edward Wotton, that refused to be
Chancellor of England in King Henry the Eighth's time. 2. Having known his
Father Sir Thomas Wotton, one of the most Ingenuous modesty, the most Ancient
freedom, plainness, single-heartedness, and integrity in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign: His Brothers Sir Edward Wotton, the famous Comptroller of Queen Eliz.
and K. James his Court, since Lord Wotton, and Baron Morley in Kent; Sir James
Wotton (with R. Earl of Essex, Count Lodowick of Nassaw, Don Christophoro, son
of Antonio King of Portugal, etc.) Knighted as an excellent Soldier at Cadiz:
Sir John Wotton the ^ccomplished Traveller and Scholar, for whom Queen Eliz.
designed a special favor: -- His Uncle Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury and
York, nine times Ambassador ^or the Crown of England (^e that was one of King
Henry's Execu^ors, King Edward's Secretary of State, Queen Mary's right hand^
and (that refused the Archbishopric of Ca^t^rbury in Queen Eliz. days.) 3.
Being bred 1. In Winchester, that eminent School for Discipline and Order. 2.
In New-Colledge and Queens, those famous Colleges for the method of Living by
rule, could promise no less than he did in his solidl^ se^tentic^^, and
discreetly humoured Play at Queens, called Tancredo, in his elega^t Lecture of
the nobleness, manner, and use of Seeing, at the Schools (for which the learned
Albericus Gentilis called him, Henrice Mi Ocelle, and communicated to him his
Mathemati^^ his Law, and his Italian learning) in his more particular converse
with Doctor Done and Sir Richard Baker in the University, and his more general
conversation with Mankind in travels for one year to France and Geneva, (where
he was acquainted with Theodore Beza, and Isaac Casa^bon, at whose Fathers he
lodged) for eight years in Germany, for five in Italy, whence returning
balanced with Learning and Experience, with the Arts of Rome, Venice, and
Florence ( Picture, Sculpture, Chimistry, Architecture) the S^crets, Lang^ages,
Dispositions, Customs, and Laws of most Nations, set off with his choice shape,
obliging behavior, sweet discourse, and sha^p wit, he could perform no less
^han he did, 1. In the unhappy relation he had to the Earl of Essex, first of
Friend, and afterward of Secretary. 2. In his more happy Interest by his
Sec^etary Vietta (upon his flight out of England after the Earl's apprehension)
with the Duke of Tuscany, then the greatest pa^ron of Learning and Arts in the
world; who having discovered a design to poison King James, as the known
successor of Queen Elizabeth, sent Sir Henry Wotton with notice of the plo^,
and preservatives against the poison, by the way of Norway into Scotland, under
the borrowed name of Octavio Baldi; where after some suspicion of the Italian
message, discovering himself to the King by David Lindsey's means, he was
treated with much honor, complacency, and secrecy for three months. Afte^
which time he returned to Florence, staying the^e till King James enquiring
concerning him of my Lo^d Wotton the Comptroller; the great Duke advised his
return to congratulate his Majesty, as he did; the King embracing him in his
arms, and calling him the best, because the honest est Dissembler that he met
with: and Knighting him by his own name. Adding withal; That since he knew^he
wanted neither Learning nor Experience; neither Ab^lities nor Faithfulness, he
would employ him to others, as he was employed to him; which accordingly he did
to Venice, the place he chose as most suitable to his retired Genius, and
narrow Estate; where, 1. Studying the dispositions of the several Dukes and
Senators. 2. Sor^ing of fit Presents, curious, and not costly Entertainments,
sweetened with various and pleasant discourse, particularly his elegant
application of Stories: He had such interest, that he was never denied any
request; whereby he did many services to the Protestant interest (with his
Chaplain Bishop Biddle, and Padre Pauloe's assistance) during the Controversy
between the Pope and the Venetians, especially in transmitting the History of
the Council of Trent, sheet by sheet to the King and the Archbishop of
Canterbury as it was written: And in his three Embassies thither, gained many
Privileges for the English along all those Coasts. In the second of which
Embassies, calling upon the Emperor, he had brought Affairs to a Treaty, had
not the Emperors success interposed; whereupon he took his leave, wishing that
Prince to use his Victory soberly; an advice his carriage indeared to his
Majesty, together with his person, so far, that he gave him a Diamond worth
above a thousand pounds, which he bestowed on his Hostess, saying, He would not
be the better by a man that was an open Enemy to his Mistress, so the Queen of
Bohemia wa^ pleased he ^should call her: -- Only while abroad, and writing in
the Album that friends have this sentence, Legate usest vir bonus peregre missus
ad mentiendum reipublicae causa, whereof Scioppius made a malicious use in his
Books against King James. He lo^t himself a while for using more freedom abroad
than became his Employment, until his ingenuous, clear, and choicely eloquent
Apologies recovered him to more respect and cautiousness, until he writ
Invidiae Remedium over his Lodgings at Eaton-Colledge, the Provostship whereof
he obtained in exchange for the reversion of the Mastership of the Rolls, and
other places promised him; Where looking upon himself in his Surplice, as
Charles 5. or Philip 2. in Cloisters, his Study was divine Meditations, History
and Characters: His recreation Philosophical conclusions, and Angling; which he
called his idle time not idly spent, saying, he would rather live five May
months, than forty Decembers: His Table was exquisite, where two youths
attended, upon whom he made the observations that were to furnish his designed
discourse of Education: His Histories and Observations remarkable, his
Apophthegms sage and quick.

1. Being in a Popish Chapel, a merry Priest that knew him, sent a Paper to
him, with this question; Where was your Religion before Luther? Under which he
writ; Where yours is not, in the written word of God.

2. Being asked, whether a Papist could be saved? He replied; You may be saved
without knowing that: look to your self.

3. Hearing one ^ail against Arminius and Popery, he answered, Sir, he that
understands amiss, concludes worse: -- If you had studied Popery so much as I
have, and knew Arminius so well as I did; how learned, how strict, and how rare
a man he was, you would not fall so foul on his person, nor think that the
further you go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to God.

4. One pitched upon for Ambassador, came to Eaton, and requested from him some
Experimental rule for his prudent and safe carriage in his Negotiation; to whom
he smilingly gave this for an infallible Aphorism: That to be in safety
himself, and serviceable to his Country, he should always, and upon all
occasions speak the truth; For (said he) you shall never be believed; and by
this means your truth will secure your self, if you shall ever be called to any
account: and it will also put your Adversaries (who will still h^nt counter) to
a loss in all their disquisitions and undertakings.

5. And when he made his Will two years before he died, out of policy to let
the King understand his Debts and Arrears (to which end he bestowed in that
Will on his Majesty, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton's Papers of Negotiation in Queen
Elizabeth's days: on the Queen, Dioscorides in Tuscany, with the Herbs
naturally colored: on the Prince, the Queen of Bohemia's picture: on my Lord
of Canterbury, the picture of Divine love: to my Lord of London, high
Treasurer, Heraclitus and Democritus; and to Secretary Windebanke old Bastano's
four Seasons) he directed that this only should be written on his plain
Marble: Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus auctor;
Disputandi Pruritus fit Ecclesiarum Scabies:
Nomen alias quaere:


7. Going yearly to Bocton for the connaturalness of that Air, and to
Winchester or Oxford for Recreation, he would say to his friends; How useful
was that advice of a holy Monk, who persuaded his friend to perform his
customary devotion in a constant place, where his former thoughts might meet
him; for (said he) at my being at that School, seeing the place where I sat
when I was a boy, occasioned me to remember my youthful thoughts; sweet
thoughts indeed, that promised my growing years numerous pleasures, without
mixture of cares, and those to be enjoyed when time (which I thought
slow-paced) changed my youth to manhood; and now there are a succession of
Boys using the same recreation, and questionless possessed with the same
thoughts. Thus one generation succeeds another both in their Lives,
Recreations, Hopes, Fears, and Deaths.

8. There are four things that recommend Sir Henry Wotton to posterity: 1. That
King Charles took great pleasure in corresponding with him in Letters. 2. That
my Lord Bacon took great pains in collecting his Apophthegmes. 3. That Sir
Richard Baker, who submitted most of his Writings to his Censure, said of him;
That the Kingdom yielded not a fitter man to match the Capriciousness of the
Italian wits. And 4. That his work of Architecture is translated into Latin,
printed with Vitruvius, and this Elogy prefixed:

Henricus Wottonus Anglo-Cantianus Tho. optimi viri Filius Natu minimus a
serenissimo Jacobo I. Magnae Britanniae, etc. Rege in Equestrem titu^um
ascitus, ejusdemque ter ad Remp. Venetam Logatus Ordinarius, semel ad
Confaederatarum Provinciarum Ordines in Iuliensi Negotio; bis ad Carolum
Emanuelem Subaudiae ducem: Semel ad unitos superioris Germaniae Principes in
Conventu Heilbronnensi. Postremo ad Archducem Leopoldum, Ducem Wittenbergensem,
Civitates Imperiales Argentinam, Vlmamque, and ipsum Romanorum Imperatorem
Ferdinandum II. Legatus Extraordina^ius Tandem hoc Dedicit.

Animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo.
Observations on ^^e Lives of the Lord Wilmot, and Sir Tho. Roe.
THese honorable persons are united not so much in their own relation or
character, as in my unhappiness, who was promised Observations on the life of
the first^ but never had them; and had some on the life of the second, but lost
them.

1. My Lord Wilmot I find acting like a Statesman, when Commissary in the
expedition against the Scots; and speaking like a Soldier, when a Member of the
Parliament that was for them: in the first capacity speaking with my Lord
Conway, he saw the King would be overcome by the English at home, if he
overcame not the Scots abroad. In the second, whispering with some
Army Officers, he said; If the Scots Army were paid in the North, the King's
Army would be paid in the South. -- A wise and brave speech, that had almost
rallied all the Army against the Parliament, as soon as that Parliament had
rallied their multitude against the King; but that treachery got easily into
the bosom of that brave Prince, that had nothing but honesty in his heart.

Yet since he could not awe the counsels of the faction in the City, he went to
suppress their Rebellion in the Field; being voted a Traitor by the Rebels,
because he endeavored they should not be so. What he performed in the Wars,
all the Kingdom knows; what he did at Oxford, the King's Letters intimate; what
he negotiated in Germany, acted in Scotland, endeavored at Worcester, and
other places for the King's Majesty's escape and restaura^^^n, posterity shall
celebrate while he lives, as renownedly in History, as he does nobly in his son
the most hopeful Earl of Rochester.

2. Sir Thomas Roe -- understood the dispositions of men so exactly, could suit
their humors so fitly, observe opportunities and seasons of actions so
punctually, keep correspondence so warily, wade through difficulties so
handsomely, wave the pinch of a business so dexterously, contrive Interests so
suitably, that he was advised with concerning the most important Affairs of the
Kingdoms he resided in abroad, and admitted of the Privy Council while he lived
at home -- Where his speech against the debasing of the Coin at the
Council Table will last as long as there is reason of State in the world; His
settlement of Trade as long as this is an Island; and his Eastern M^S S. as
long as there are Books to furnish Libraries, or Libraries to preserve Books.
Three of the noblest English actions beyond Sea are these. 1. That Sir Thomas
Roe pardoned the Dutch Merchants thrice in Persia and Turkey at his mercy. 2.
That my Lord Wilmot, when Ambassador in Germany, refused the assistance of the
Popes Nuncio, or Turkish Aga; judging his great Master, when at lowest, above
those suspected Auxiliaries. 3. That my Lord Culpeper having offered him in
Muscovy all the English goods there, refused them, declaring his Royal Master a
Father of his Country, though kept out of it by Traitors; and a merciful Prince
to his People, when cast off by the Rebels,

Observations on the Life of Archbishop Juxon.
WIlliam ^Iuxon, born at Chichester in Sussex, was bred Fellow in St. John's
College in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelor of Law; very young, but very
able for that Degree: afterward becoming Doctor in the same Faculty, and
President of the College, was one in whom Nature had not omitted, but Grace
had ordered the Te^rarch of humors, being admirably Ma^ter of his Pen and
Passion. For his Abilities, he was successively preferred by King Charles the
first, Bishop of H^reford and London, and for some years Lord Treasurer of
England: wherein he had Religion to be honest, and no self-interest to be
corrupt. A troublesome place in those times, being expected he should make much
Brick (though not altogether without, yet) with very little straw allowed unto
him: Large then the Expenses, low the Revenues of the Exchequer. Yet those
Coffers he found empty, he left filling, and had left full, had Peace been
preserved in the Land, and he continued in his Place. Such the mildness of his
temper, that Petitioners for money (when it was not to be had) departed well
pleased with his Denials, they were so civilly languaged. It may justly seem a
wonder, that whereas few spoke well of Bishops at that time, and Lord
T^^asu^ers at all Times are liable to the complaints of discontented people;
though both Offices met in this man, yet with Demetrius he was well reported of
all men, and of the truth it self. He lived to see much shame and contempt
undeservedly poured on his Function, and all the while possessed his own soul
in patience.

Nor was it the least part of this Prelate's honor, that amongst the many
worthy Bishops of our Land, King Charles the first selected him for his
Confessor at his Martyrdom, when he honored him with this testimony; That good
man. He formerly had had experience [in the case of the Earl of Strafford] that
this Bishop's Conscience was bottomed on piety, not policy, ^he reason that
from him ^e received the Sacrament, good comfort and counsel just before he was
mu^dered. I say, just before the Royal Martyr was murdered; a Fact so foul,
that it alone may confu^e the Error of the Pelagians, maintaining that all sin
comes by imitation, the Universe not formerly affording such a Precedent, as
if those Regicides had purposely designed to disprove the observation of
Sol^mon, that there is no new thing under the Sun.

King Charles the second preferred him Archbishop of Canterbury 1660. He died
in the year of our Lord, 1663. and with great solemnity was buried in St.
John's College in Oxford, -- to which he was a great Benefactor, though a
greater to Paul's and Lambeth; and greatest of all to the Church which his
eminence adorned, and his temper secured in those times, wherein roughness
enraged that humor, which delay and moderation broke: a discreet yielding to
the multitude is the securest way of Conquest: They that hold together by
opposition, languish and moulder away by indulgence: In his duty, this good man
went along with Conscience, in Government, with Time and Law. He had the
happiness, that K. James admired in a Statesman of his time, to do all things
suavibus modis: He referred his Master in the Earl of Strafford's case, as he
did himself in all cases, to his own Conscience for matter of fact, and to the
Judges for matter of Law; who according to their Oath ought to carry themselv^s
indifferently between the King and his Subjects. -- The King was not more happy
in this fai^hful servant, than he was in his followers, among whom there was no
uncivil Austerity to disoblige the Subjects, nor base Corruption to incense
them. They need not keep state, they had so much real power; nor extort, they
had so much allowed advantage. His care was his servants, and their care his
business: His preferments were his burden rather than his honor; advanced by
him, rather than advancing him -- and therefore he was more ready to lay them
down, than others to take them up: Witness his Treasurers Place; which when he
parted with (like those that scatter their Jewels in the way, that they may
debar the violence of greedy pursuers) no less than four durst undertake; when
his single self sufficed for the two greatest troubles of this Nation, the
Treasureship of England, and the Bishopric of London.

Religion was the inclination and composure as well as care of his soul; which
he used not as the artifice of pretense or power, but as the ornament and
comfort of a private breast, never affecting a pompous piety, nor a magnificent
virtue, but approving himself in secret to that God who would reward him
openly. His devotion was as much obove other men's, as his Calling; his
meditations equal with his cares; and his thoughts even and free between his
Affairs and his Contemplations, which were his pleasures, as well as his duty,
the uniform temper and pulse of his Christian soul. Neither was his Religion
that of a man only, but that of a Bishop too, that made his Piety as universal
as his Province, by such assistances of power, as brought carnel men, if not to
an obedience, yet to such a degree of reverence, that if they did not honor,
they might not despise it. His justice was as his Religion, clear and uniform;
First, the ornament of his heart, then the honor of his action. Neither was
Justice leavened with rigor or severity, but sweetened with clemency and
goodness; that was never angry but for the pub^ick, and not then so much at the
person, as the offense: So ambitious of that great glory of Moderation, that he
kept it up in spite of the times malignity, wherein he saw all change without
himself, while he remained the self-same still within the Idea of sobriety and
temperance, virtues that he put off only with his life: Neither was this a
defect of spirit, but the temper of it; that though it never provoked troubles,
yet it never feared them: His mind was always great, though his fortune not
so: Great to suffer, though not always able to act: so good his temper, and so
admirable his humility, that none ever went discontented from him: -- Never
courting, but always winning people, having a passage to their hearts through
their brain; and making them first admire, and then love him. He was slow, not
of speech, as a defect; but to speak, out of discretion: because when speaking,
he plentifully paid the Principal and Interest of his Auditors expectation.

In a word, his government as a Bishop was gentle, benign, and paternal: His
management of the Treasury was such, that he served his Prince faithfully,
satisfied all his friends, and silenced all his enemies; of which he had enough
as a Bishop, Greatness is so invidious and suspected; though none as a man,
goodness is so meek and inoffensive. The most thought the worse of Dr. Iuxon
for the Bishops sake, the best thought the better of the Bishop for Dr. Iuxon's
sake.

Observations on the Life of John Lord Culpeper.
I Find nothing promoting him to his first preferment of Chancellor of the
Exchequer, but his pure merit; nor any thing advancing him to his
after-honours, but his steady Loyalty; -- which when others stuck to London (in
compliance with that Maxim; In all Divisions keep your self to the Metropolis,
the chief City being for the most part preserved, who-ever prevails, in a
Civil Commotion, abounding in Money and Friends, the readiest Commodities to
purchase Quiet) carried him after a persecuted Sovereign for twenty years
together, by the strong obligation of a well-principled Conscience, and the
well-weighed observation of the natural Affection of all Englishmen to their
lawful Sovereign; from whom, though the Arts and Impulses of seditious
Demagogues may a while estrange and divorce their minds, yet their Genius will
irresistibly at last force them to their first love.

It was the resolution of a great Statesman; That if the Crown of England were
placed but on an Hedge-stake, he would be on that side the Crown was. His first
service was to discover his Sovereign to his deluded People, worthy not only of
their obedience, but their lives and fortunes. His next was, to lay open his
Enemies in all their Intrigues and Reserves, being most happy in all the
Treaties he was engaged in, in discerning the bottom of his own Parties
Interest, and their Adversaries pretensions discoveries! that prevailed on all
that was either noble or but ingenuous in the Nation, especially whith^r my
Lord came with his indefatigable Industry, his obliging Converse, and potent
Eloquence, excepting London its self, whither he was sent from Nottingham, with
the Earls of Southampton and Dorset, and Sir William Wedale Knight, the very
day the King set up his Standard there. The Principle he went upon was, That
the Faction at Westminster was no Parliament; A Principle most safe on all
hands: For which and the rest of his judicious Sentiments, he has the honor
to be enrolled among those that Traitors durst not pardon; which he could not
choose but smile at, knowing (as he used to say) That Treason is always within
five years weary of its self, the People being more impatient of their own
Libertinism, than of the strictest and most heavy government. His way of
Intelligence from London by Mistress E. P. friend to I. M. puts me in mind of
a passage in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; who being presented with an Overture out
of Spain, so recretly managed by the Council there, as the first news of its
approach came with its self: the Messengers (out of fear of a surprizal)
dispensing the Ceremonies commonly used in the behalf of Ambassadors (something
strange, considering the haughtiness of that Nation) did much insl^me the Lord
Treasurer's desire to know the farthest extent of the Negotiation, as conducing
to a present advantage, that such an Answer might be made as should in some
proportion quadrate with the demand of the Catholic King, at that time
standing upon Terms little different from those of an Enemy. And being informed
from the ordinary Espials he kept about his Person, that the attempt was
something difficult, if not impossible; the Don out of distrust still carrying
his Instructions in his bosom: Burleigh caused such a Jesuit to be
apprehended, as by reason of former miscarriages could not expect mercy; and
imparts his desires to him under as large promises if he brought them about, as
threats to be revenged on him and his Associates, if he ^ound himself abused.
All which, though with some reluctance he undertook: and performed, through the
meditation o^ a fair Lady that first took away his Commission, and then again
laid it under his Pillow whilst he slept.

His early endeavors for Peace by Addresses to London, Scotl^nd^ Cornwall,
speak his integrity, and his prudence. Every inconsiderable person may be
powerful at disturbances: but to form Peace, requires much wisdom and great
virtues) and his observations upon the division of the great^ Faction to two
parties, Independent and Presbyterian. His care and watchfulness; none of their
clashes escaping his reach, which was ready to accommodate as occasion served
their respective Interests, in their New-models and alterations; making as good
use of Fears and Jealousies between them, as they had done between the King and
his People; being one of those brave spirits that made much of good Soldiers
and Subjects, notwithstanding their ill success if they continued their good
affections [ ^areat successibus opto quisquis ab eventus exitus acta probat] as
the Romans gave thanks to Terentius Varro after he had lost the great battle of
Ca^nae by his own default, because he did not despair of the Commonwealth,
always valuing his estate in England, during the usurpation, as much as he did
during the King's just possession: As the Romans would not sell the ground that
Hannibal encamped upon, cheaper than if it had been in time of peace, which was
one thing that discouraged that great Captain from continuing the siege of
Rome. These and other his services recommended him to the at^endance of his
most excellent Majesty when Prince, in the perfecting of the Western
Association, when it was thought fit to put the happiness and hope of the
Kingdom in two bottoms, with whom he continued with a constant fidelity in all
difficulties, performing several Embassies during their banishment with honor
(particularly one to the Emperor, who had great respects for his Master, and
an awful regard of his Cause) till it pleased God to bring his Majesty by his
and others counsel to his Father's Throne; which he just saw, and dyed Master
of the Rolls, June 1660. From one of whose Relations I have these Notes and
Postils, containing some of the policy of the late Times, from 1642. to 1659.
-- which I set down nakedly, as I find them; not supposing they are his, but
that they were among his Papers.

1. It is against the experience of the wisest Princes of France and England,
^o leave their chief Ci^y in times of tumult; -- yet it was necessary for the
King to do ^o, as well to break the fury of the worst people there by distance
and time, as to dis-abuse the best abroad by his presence and time: -- and
indeed it had been a shame for him to have perished in a tumult.

2. It was urged, that the King should not del^y any longer the War -- but
besides that nothing could persuade his gracious Majesty to a War, but pure
necessity. It Is usually observed, that if B^u^efeu's make not the feud
irreconcilable by a desperate action, Rebels cool, consider, break, suspect,
fear, and fall off to nothing.

3. The repulse of Hotham did the King excellent service, by alarming all the
Loyal in the Kingdom with their designed plot.

4. Especially when the Country saw the King so unwilling to engage, that he
discharged their guards several times.

5. It was thought unfit to send to the Faction from Nottingham, until it was
rejoyned that men of understanding and fidelity are usually employed to those
persons against whom a War is to be managed, to discover their design, humor,
forces, succou^s, and what ever might succor or strengthen them; which none
but they who were secured with the privilege of Agents might do; and none were
judged fitter than they that were best acquainted with the knowing Ladies, and
the talkative Lords.

6. It was offered that Intelligence should be written to satisfy the people,
and make the vulgar pretenses ridiculous: But quaere, whether it is possible
for the Arcana Imperii to remain always under so exact a discipline as may
admit a thorow-inspection of the multitude without danger.

7. When it was urged as the fundamental Principle the King should proceed
upon, that the Faction at Westminster was no Parliament, the King being firm to
his promise (as there was not a juster man alive) not to dissolve them without
their leave -- it was judged that self-preservation being the first principle
in nature, that concession which wisdom saw then, and experience since, so
contrary to that principle, was rather to be repented of, than performed.

8. It is a very great advantage to the King's Cause, that his Messages of
Peace were sent always after his Victories; and his Enemies after their
defeats: And that his Declarations were natural, easy, as grounded upon
obvious principles of Scripture, Law, and Reason; and theirs harsh, forced, and
wild, as grounded only upon Pretenses and Fancies.

9. It Is a probable opinion, that it is in vain to treat with the Rebels, who
can never trust the King with their guilty heads.

10. It is in vain to yield them any thing, since all Concessions have no other
issue than either or both of these two inconveniences. 1. That they make the
Faction so insolent, that the King should not be able to deny nor grant them
any thing. 2. That they justified former proceedings, and laid the blame upon
the King for not granting that sooner, which he thinks fit to grant now.
Besides, it is more fit Propositions come to the King, than from him.

11. It may be wondered that the King does not cut off the chief of the Rebels,
as they fall into his hands, according to the usual Maxim in that case; but
that his inclination to clemency is inexpressible -- and that the principle he
goes upon is sure, though deep, viz. That so much are Mankind in general,
and the English in particular obliged by fair usages, that the generality of
this Nation returned nine times in 1300 years after long intervals of
Usurpation, out of gratitude as well as duty unto their Allegiance to the
posterity of good, pious, merciful, but unhappy Princes.

12. When it was urged against the King's going to London upon the success in
the West, that the City would pour out fresh men upon him, as at Brainford, It
was replied, that the City and Country were not under such strong delusions as
then, but were more sensible of the miseries they had been trepanned into.
Besides, there was a more miraculous power of conversion went along with the
King's presence wherever he came, convincing all he conversed with.

13. Whether the King being so wise and able, it were not convenient to
contrive it so, that the people might see how well he acted by himself, --
provided he had sufficient security?

14. Whether it being dangerous that the Rebels should seize (as God forbid
they should) on the whole Court at once, it were not convenient that his
Majesty and the Prince did part, that the Kingdom might know its hope as well
as its happiness; and that their interest when separated, might be more
spreading than when together?

15. It was judged prudence to let the success wherein their souls were
unequal, overthrow the Fa^tion by mutual Jealousies and Animosities, till it
dissipated all pretenses, and the people saw none oppressed them in their
Estates, Liberties, Consciences, more than the pretended Patrons of them all.
An Indemnity without regard to any Faction, being most likely to render the
misled as jealous for the King, as they had been against him.

16. It were to be wished that the Parliament did draw into entire Propositions
their design, that his Majesty and his People might make a clearer judgment of
it in order to an accommodation.

17. His Majesty must be secured of the Militia, and against tumults, and all
persons invested in their first right without any controversy -- As to other
matters, ^ full bebate may settle them, with such explanations and
qualifications as may satisfy all parties.

18. It Is thought his Majesty may concur with the Parliament about the
Presbyterian Government for three years, the time allowed by themselves; and
that at the three years end the very Kingdom will throw it off as inconsistent
with the English temper, and unsuitable with the British Monarchy: -- And so
likewise in other things which look plausible in the general, but are
unpracticable in the particular.

19. Though many things are necessary to avoid jealousies, which are
inconvenient, yet they may be allowed, upon the respect of the likelihood that
all things will in time return to their proper chanel -- only a general Act of
indemnity is the best bond of Peace, whereby the numerous discontents of many
persons and families otherwise exposed to ruin, might not become Fuel to new
disorders, or Seeds to future troubles, with particular regards to the
privileges of the City, notwithstanding non-user, mis-user, abuser, and the
interest of the Army -- an indulgence that would help the world to see clearly
the Kings intentions in matter of future government.

20. No Act to pass till the Peace be concluded, lest what his Majesty grants,
may be an argument to urge what he must deny; so that he cannot treat in
Honour^ Freedom, or Safety.

21. Time is the best cure of Faction.

22. When the Treaty is broken off, so that neither side could reassume it
without a seeming yielding, it should be renewed upon the Queens motion,
provided always that her name was not used or intimated till the Rebels
willingness to compliance were preassured.

But stay, I am fallen upon mine own knowing time, wherein I am fitter to read
others Observations, than to write my own: and it becomes me rather to be
instructed, than to instruct. Industry and Curiosity bid me begin this
Collection where Sir W. F. Sir R. N. Sir I. H. Characters end: and modesty
enjoins m^ to finish it, where my Contemporaries own knowledge begins, -- with
whom I shall quietly pass my time, observing how far the affairs I ^ee or hear
of agree with those I have read of. Having gained thus much (if no more) by
this Essay; That by looking into the Intrigues of former times, I have learned
a great deal of reason to bless GOD I was born in these: being assured, that
murmurs, discontents, complaints, whisperings, speaking evil of Dignities; the
common, but unreasonable faults of this Age, are kept up only because men are
ignorant of the Ages foregoing: And as my Lord Bacon says of the Schoolmen in
the Church, (...) of troubl^som persons in ^he S^^^e; that they are so, because
they know nothing beyond their own time: whereas if the most discontented
person did but compare his own days with those before, he must co^fe^s, that
there wants nothing in the general frame of our Government (particular persons
miscarriages must be always allowed) to make us most happy, but thankfulness,
content, and the continuance of these blessings under our dread Sovereign, for
whom it is as much our interest as our duty to pray according to St. Chrysostoms
Liturgy, that God would give him strength, victory, health, safety, length and
tranquillity of days: or in Tertullian's form; Long life, a secure government,
safe Court, valiant Army, faithful Senate, good People, quiet world, and
whatever he can desire as a King, or as a man. Or once more, in Lactantius his
words, That God will keep him, who is the keeper of all things in his
Dominions, to his Felicity, and our Tranquillity.

The End of the Observations upon the Lives of the Statesmen and Favorites of
England, in the Reign of K. Charles I.

