IMPRIMATVR,

Guil. Jane. R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Nov. the 9th 1678.
A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Sr EDMVND-BVRY GODFREY, One of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, Who was Barbarously Murdered.

Preached on Thursday the last day of October 1678. In the Parish Church of St.
MARTIN in the Fields.

By William Lloyd D. D. Dean of Bangor, One of His Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary. Vicar of the said Parish of St. Martin.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for Henry Brom at the Gun, at the West End
of St. Paul's. MDCLXXVIII.

A Funeral Sermon, ON
2 SAMUEL iii. 33, 34. 33. And the King lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner
as a fool dies?

34. Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters: as a man falls
before wicked men, so fellest thou. And all the people wept again over him.


IF I could at any time allow my self to transgress the rules of this place, to
Preach without a Text, it should be now, having this subject before me. Here Is
a subject that makes it is own Sermon and its own Prayer. Heb. xi. 4.
The Blood of Abel speaks, says the Apostle. This Innocent Blood speaks and
cries in the Ears of God, (the All-knowing God that hears matter without
words;) it speaks and cries aloud to him for Vengeance: How long, O Lord, Rev.
vi. 10.
holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge?

It speaks to you, to your eyes, and to your hearts, many sad and astonishing
things. I judge of others by my self; I do not hear, but I feel what this
speaks to me: It speaks in such Language as this,

Oh my Friends! I spent my life in serving you. It was my business to do
Justice and show Mercy. See what I had for it, Ensnared and Butchered by wicked
Men against Justice and without Mercy. How many things did I endure e're they
brought me to this? How many Lies were you told the mean while, to hide it from
you? How many deaths have I suffered before Death came to relieve me? And if
that would have satisfied them, if they would but have Buried me, you should
have heard none of all this. But their Malice went farther; My poor mangled
macerated Body must be thrown out to Birds and Beasts, and my Name to the
obloquy of worse men. Then it was time for me to speak for my self, and God
brought a number of you to hear me: then I said, see, see, O my Friends, how
they have used me! Behold the Spectacle they have given you.

I saw it among the rest: It was a most dismal fight, such as that which we
read of. Judge. xix. 30.
It was so, that all that saw it, said, There was no such deed done nor seen
from the time that we first came to be a Nation, till this day.

It Is possible I might find something like it among other Nations; but I shall
confine my self to what we find among the people of God. And of all that God
delivers to us in Scripture, among them, I think there is no example like that
of the Murder of Abner, which occasioned those words which I have chosen for
my Text. And because I do not intend to dwell upon that, I shall show you (but
briefly) these three particulars in it,

First, the Person; secondly, his Sufferings; and thirdly, the Consequences of
it.

First, the Person; that was Abner, an eminent man, both in dignity, and also
in usefulness among his people.

Secondly, His Sufferings; a bloody violent death. And herein I have three
things to consider.

First, the kind of Fact: He died, he fell by wicked men: He was Murdered by
Ioab and Abishai.

Secondly, the manner of it; Perfidiously and cruelly, with show of the
greatest Friendship they inhumanly killed him.

Thirdly, the Authors of it; Such as can pretend Friendship to destroy; such no
doubt are wicked men, the most dangerous sort of wicked men. By such a Wise man
may be caught, and die like a Fool; a mighty man may be deprived of the use of
his hands; a wary man may be deprived of the use of his feet: There is no
fighting with such, nor no running away from such an Enemy.

This David expressed in his Lamentation, which moved the People to theirs, and
that was the consequence of it, which comes last to be considered.

I shall repeat you my Text, that you may see how all these parts lie together.

The King Lamented over ABNER, and said, Died Abner as a Fool dies? Could he
make no shift for himself? Why could thou not fight? Thy hands were not
bound. nor thy feet put in Fetters, why could thou not run away? The reason
is plain, thou could do nothing to help thy self. Thou were caught in a trap.
As a man falls before wicked men, so fellest thou. This the King having said,
all the People, who wept before, now wept again over Abner.

For the Person here spoken of; He was a 1 Samuel xiv. 50.
Prince of the Blood, Iosepho (...)
Cousin German to King Saul, and General of his Armies all his Reign. He was an
excellent person (as Ios. Ant. Iud. lib. 7. c. 1.
Josephus describes him) for Counsel, and Courage, and Diligence, and
Experience in affairs. There is ground to believe this from Scripture, which
makes him after Readiness Death, to have been the only support of his Son and
Successor Ishbosheth. It Is said 2 Samuel 2. 8, 9. That Abner took Ishbosheth, and
made him King over all Israel. He might, in all probability, considering the
others weakness, as easily have made himself King if he pleased. But he was
true to his Relation and his Trust. In this Chapter, at the sixth verse, He set
himself with all his might for the House of Saul.

Amidst his cares and concerns for the State, he was not forgetful of the
Church, as appears by his Dedications, 1 Chronicles. xxvi. 28.

I find nothing that can any way blemish his Memory, unless it was something
contained in this Chapter; where it is said, that he was charged by Ishbosheth,
with dishonouring the Bed of his late Master, ver. 7. He asks him, Wherefore
have thou gone in unto my Fathers Concubines? Joseph. Ib.
Josephus believes the information was not true; and it seems not so likely of
one of his age, being then above sixty years old when the King charged him with
it.

The more cause he had to lay this to heart. it made that great man think his
Service misplaced, and that God was not pleased with what he did for Saul's
Family, in opposition to David, 2 Samuel iii. 9, 10.
who had a better title to the Crown. He knew that the Government was not yet
made Hereditary, but that it was conferred immediately by God, who had decreed
that he would take away Saul and set up David in his stead. And reflecting upon
this, Abner swore he would now make amends for his Error, he would bring over
the Kingdom to David.

This Ishbosheth heard; 2 Samuel iil. 11.
and durst not gainsay, nay, it seems he consented to it, by what follows:
For when Abner sent to David for Terms, and he required this preliminary point,
that his Wife Michal should be sent home to him; Verse 13, 14, 15.
we read that Ishbosheth used his Authority in the matter: He sent for his
Sister Michal, and delivered her to Abner, to take her with him when he went to
perfect his agreement with David.

This being supposed, that he had Ishbosheths consent, I do not see what can be
blamed in the conduct of Abner; I see much to be commended in him, especially
considering the greatness of his Birth, and how near he was to the Crown, and
in what probability he stood for it; that notwithstanding all these
temptations, he still adhered to just and right, he kept his Loyalty to his
Prince, he did all possible Service to his Country.

He was about the greatest work, to secure both the peace and the Religion of
God's people, in uniting them under the government of David; when unexpectedly
he was taken off by Death, which is the second thing I am to consider.

His Death was Untimely, and Bloody, and Treacherous.

First, Untimely; for he was then in the midst of his Business. He had been at
Hebron with David. 2 Samuel iii. 20, 21.
He had made his terms with him; such as would have united all Israel without a
stroke; such as would have saved Ishbosheth's life, as appears by what follows,
2 Samuel iv. 1. (which confirms me in what I said, that he had his consent along
with him; For there it is said) When Saul' s Son heard that Abner was dead, his
hands were feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled. Then, and not before,
the reins of Government fell out of his hands. He could hold them no longer,
when his friend Abner was dead, both his and all Israel's hopes, depended upon
Abner's safe return.

And he was so far toward it. He was then upon the way, when he was fetched
back to Hebron by a Messenger in David's name. So Josephus understands those
words in the 26th verse, Joseph. Ib.
But David knew not of it; It was in David's name, but he knew it not.

And when Abner was come back, 2 Samuel 3. 27.
even at the Gate of the Royal City, he was met and received by some friends
whom he did not suspect. They had him apart from his company, they brought him
into a lone place, (...) says Josephus, Joseph. Ib.
to tell him something which the King had forgot. And there he soon had his
Message; it was a Stab, that put an end to his life.

The Authors of this fact were as soon known as the fact it self. They were
Ioab and Abishai, the Sons of Zerviah; men that had a pretense to do this, 2 Samuel iii. 27, 30.
in revenge of their Brother whom Abner had slain some years since in defense
of his own life. Revenge was an ill reason; but the Scripture mentions that, as
the only one they had to give. The true reason was (says the Jewish Historian,
who is herein followed by most Christians, Joseph. Ib.
) because they feared that among Abner's Terms, this was one, to keep his
place, to be General of the Armies of Israel. That interfered with the Ambition
of these men, who were resolved to have all the power to themselves, to admit
of no sharer. They would scarce take in the King himself; Even He complained,
they were too hard for him, in the last verse of this Chapter. I am weak this
day, though anointed King, and these men the Sons of Zerviah are too hard for
me. It appeared they were so, by this, that he durst not call them to account
for it.

But he did all that he could. He disclaimed, 2 Samuel iii. 28* etc.
he detested the wicked fact; He cursed the Authors of it most bitterly. He
exposed them to the people; requiring them all to mourn for Abner, and to show
all possible signs of it, by renting their clothes; and putting on Sackcloth,
which the people did most willingly, and Ioab durst not but do it among the
rest. In this mournful array they attended him to his grave. The King followed
him weeping, and all the people wept with him, says the Text.

When they had buried him, the King pronounced the (...), the funeral Song, for
so the word (...) signifies, which being in Ioab's and Abishai's presence, it
was a fresh mortification to them, as well as a just honor to Abner. The King
lamented over ABNER, saying, etc.

I intended all this but to show you in Scripture a Record which God has given
us of his peoples behavior in such a case as we have before us. Such as that
in diverse respects, though very different in many other. And yet whereinsoever
they differ, if their case exceed our's in some respects, it is exceeded by
our's in so many more, as may sufficiently justify us, and oblige us to the
like Lamentation.

Only bating this one Circumstance, Abner's high birth and quality, being a
Prince of the blood, and so nearly allied to King David; (which, together with
some other public considerations, might well oblige David himself to be present
at his Funeral. This we have no reason to expect of our King, who has done in
other respects more than David could or durst do for Abner. But waving this,)
we have all other Considerations, some greater than what God's people had in my
Text, to weep and weep again, in our private and in our public Lamentations.

First, the Person, and his Personal Accomplishments, were such, as, though I
would not compare them with Abners; yet I would not lessen him by declining the
Comparison. They were very considerable in his rank. He was a great blessing to
this place, and will be so understood, as all God's Blessings are, by the loss
of them.

But secondly, for the Kind of our loss, for the things that he endured, for
the manner in which he was brought to it, for the Treachery and Barbarity of
it; These things are so far above all that were in Abner's case, that we cannot
admit them into the comparison.

Thirdly, For the Authors of Abner's Murder, they were known, by this, and one
more, that of Amasai whom they killed in like manner. But for our's, they are
unknown. We are yet to inquire for them, and we have reason to fear we may find
them too late, and yet too soon.

Lastly, For the Consequences, I shall show you how the King has lamented it;
and how, besides all that we have done, we are yet to do it so as to make the
best of our loss; To sow in Tears that we may reap in Joy. That is the End and
Benefit of our Lamentation.

First of the Person, I must crave leave to say so much as may justify the
public sorrow upon the account of an Extraordinary loss. And being my self
particularly concerned in it, I may be allowed to speak with the more freedom.
It Is all the way I have to show my Gratitude for the many good offices that I
among many others received from him, while he was living. And what I am to say,
I have so well considered, that I do not fear to be suspected of Flattery by
any that knew him so well as most of you did in this place.

As to those things which belong to a private Christian, I ought to know him
better than most others; and I did know that by him which gives me abundant
comfort in his Death. I knew him to be a Just and Charitable man, a Devout, a
Zealous and Conscientious Christian. His Religion was more for use than for
show. And yet he was constant in all the acts of Gods Worship. He loved the
Communion of the Church, as well out of Judgment as Affection. And though the
compassion that he had for all men that did amiss, extended it self to
allmanner of Dissenters; and among them he had a kindness for the Persons of
many Roman Catholics: Yet he always declared a particular Hatred and
Detestation of Popery. I say this on purpose to be remembered, (because some
would have him a Papist, or inclined that way,) I never pleased him with any
duty I performed, at least he never thanked me for any, so much, as he did for
those Sermons which I preached here against Popery.

But these things are less considerable in our loss, we are more concerned for
what he was in his Public capacity. And for that he seemed made and fitted up
with more than ordinary care: God seemed to have singled him forth, and
designed him to be the Useful man that he was in this place.

He was composed for it, both by Nature, and Education, and Choice, and Study,
and Practice: I know not what could be added to make him fitter than he was.

He was (as it were) Born to be a Justice of Peace; his Grandfather, his
Father, his elder Brother were so before him. The two last were also Members of
Parliament. His great Grandfather was a Captain, which was considerable in
those days.

His Education was suitable to his Birth; being brought up at Westminster
School, from whence he was sent to the University, thence to Travel in foreign
parts; then he came to live in the Inns of Court, where wanting health, he
retired for a time into the Country: And now all our hopes of him might seem
to have been defeated at once. But that God, who by his Providence, designed
him for this place, brought him back with an intimate Friend and Relation; who
having suffered much for the late King, whose Servant he was, turned what he
had left into Money, and to make the most of that, employed it in a Wood-yard
in this Parish.

Our Friend could have no great Estate, being the tenth Son of his Father, who
had four Sons younger than he was: and his Father was a younger Son of his
Grandfather: So that though his Father had a plentiful Estate, and his
Grandfather one of the fairest in his Country, yet but a small portion of
these could fall to his share.

But what he had, he laid it out as Partner with his Friend, and so improved
it, till he had wherewith to live like himself. And then, he that was never
bred to a Trade, needed not be persuaded to ease himself of it. He found other
business more equal to his Soul: Which having practiced at first, with his
other emploiment, afterward he withdrew from all other business to this. He
dedicated himself wholly to it; made his Country his Family, this Parish his
Wife and Children; attended wholly to their good; to keep up Law, and Justice,
and Safety, and Liberty; to save others from violence and wrong, to reduce them
from disorder and idleness.

He was perhaps the Man of our Age, that did the most good in that Station: I
should not doubt of it, having so great an Author. He that ought to know best,
has often said, Sir Edmund Godfrey he took to be the best Justice of Peace in
this Kingdom.

He knew what he had reason to expect would come of this, the emulation even of
good Men, for they are but men. And he showed his own infirmity in this, that
sometimes he was troubled at it. But for others, he despised whatsoever they
thought or said. He knew before hand the price of doing his duty, how many ill
men he must displease, what Scoffs and Censures he must endure, what hazards he
must run. And this was all he expected for his labor.

He thought it worth the while, to suffer this for God's Glory and the Public
Good. It Is vulgar Virtue that puts men only upon safe good things. It Is Virtue
in its Perfection, when one dares do well, and suffer for it. And of this
degree, he showed some as great proofs, as perhaps have been given in our days.

In the Plague-time, who would have done as he did? not only to stay here, but
to expose himself upon every Occasion. It was much to endure the very Air;
that, besides its own Putrefaction, was filled with the steams of so many
thousands of dying-breaths. It was fearful to see and hear the mournful Objects
and Cries that went hourly everywhere about the street. It was a desperate
thing to Flesh and Blood, to converse with them, and to be in the midst of
them. God knows, when I am called to this, how I shall perform it; But he did,
what I have even trembled to hear; He fed so many poor with his own hands,
distributed as well Physic as food, exposing himself to be pulled and haled by
them sometimes. And that which exceeds all the rest, where the Officers durst
not, he went himself into the Pesthouse to seize on a Malefactor.

These are instances of so high a Courage, so undaunted a Zeal to Public Good,
that if we should have the like occasion again, (which God forbid) we could
scarce hope to find the like Instances. He could not show the like himself at
other times.

And therefore I shall the more easily pass over those things which in
themselves were very considerable; those Watchings, and Hazards, and Toils,
which would have been great matters to others; But they were less to him,
because he had inured himself to them. They were by long and constant practice
become so natural to him, that he seemed to have left himself, no sense of any
Labor, no Weariness of watching, no Apprehension of Danger, in any thing by
which he might do service to God, the King, and his Country. There are but few
such men living, the greater is our loss by his Death.

A great loss, if he had died a Natural Death. Then we should have submitted to
the will of God. And so we must now. But we could easier have done it, if he
had lived out his time, and done all the good we could have hoped from him. If
he had lived the Age of a man, as his Grandfather did; or as his Father, Psalm.
xc. 10.
to that which Moses calls Labor and Sorrow; or as his Mother, who is eighty
six years old, and yet living. How much good might one do so qualified as he
was, so disposed, so resolved, so verst in Business? How much more good might
he have done, if he had lived to those Years? But to be taken off at six and
fifty, as he was, when he might have lived much longer, to go on doing still as
he did; the thought of this has much uneasiness in it.

But then farther, to think how he was taken away; by a violent Death; He was
Murdered; The very mention of this strikes horror into one that considers it.
Human Nature abhors it. Much more, Grace in Christians; whom God has strictly
forbidden it, by all the Laws that are given to Christians.

But then, to murder a Magistrate, that should be the Keeper of those Laws;
This is so much beyond Common Horror, I know not how to express it. If it were
an Assault, if it were a false Imprisonment, much more if the Murder, of any
other person, the Magistrate is he that should punish it. But that he should be
murdered himself! To murder Him, it cannot be without the highest Affront, to
Authority, and Laws, to the King, to the whole Nation, to God himself. Alas!
that such wickedness should be done in our Nation, in this (...) in this Place.

But especially upon such a Magistrate, that was the blessing of this place.
They could not hurt him, but they must hurt us all, for whom he lived, and
cared, more than for himself; for whom he also died, as we have too much reason
to believe. Considering this, it concerns us all to know how he died.

There are ways, that a Wise man may die like a Fool; that he can neither fight
nor run away (as my Text shows us). Thus died Abner, and thus died our Friend;
and this heightens our horror above measure. Had he died by sudden chance, or
by open Malicious design, it had happened to him as it has done to many
others: But perhaps never any was Murdered as he was, so treacherously and
basely, and with such bloody and barbarous Cruelty.

For the Treacherousness of it, if Abner were caught so, it is no wonder. It Is
no hard thing for any one that has made himself base enongh; that will violate
his Faith, and break the bonds of human society; to call another aside, and
secretly to cut his Throat. The pretense of common Friendship is enough to
enable any one that is wicked enough, to do this.

But in our case, there was no need of so much as that pretense or color of
Friendship. Any Stranger might do it to a person of so easy access; one that
never denied himself to any one that had need of him; one that neither feared
force, nor affected show; and therefore never took so much as a Servant along
with him. He was at every ones call, to do that which was his daily business;
to make Peace, to do Justice, to do any good to any Person. Was it not a worthy
Prize to get such a one into their hands? Oh Cowards! that could go such a low
mean way to take him. Oh Monsters! that having taken him, could find in their
hearts to do him hurt.

Well, he is now in their hands, as he thinks, to do them Service in his place.
What business have they for him? What they said, we are not able to guess: But
what they did, appeared by woeful tokens in this poor body.

God knows where they kept him. We know only it was under restraint; and 'twas
not altogether in darkness, by the Wax-candle-drops upon his Clothes; and
therefore it was not altogether Hell upon Earth; though it was like it in his
usage, that Hellish usage that he endured.

Ah poor Soul! How many comfortless hours did he reckon in that merciless Trap
where they kept him? How many insulting words, how many reproaches did he hear?
What Racks, what Bodily tortures might he probably suffer? And what Cordial,
what Refection to support him under all this? We know nothing but what appeared
in his Body; his sunk Belly, his empty Stomach, his blancht Tongue, were all
witnesses of his Cheer. My Tears are my Meat day and night, while I call upon
my God.

Yet we cannot say they starved him. God knows what they would have done, had
they had time; but in all likelihood, it was the fear of Search that hastened
his Death.

And the same death it was, that they deserved ten thousand times over. They
can suffer no worse (if they are taken) than this, to be Strangled, and then
the Law has done with them. But when they had Strangled him, they had not done
with him so, he must be cast forth to the Birds and Beasts: and that with the
formality of a Sword thrust through his body, that if men came to find him,
they might judge that he had killed himself; Whether it were to save themselves
from Suspicion, or whether out of malice to him, or whether both these
together, God knows.

Sure enough, it was the worst they could do to him; It was that which being
believed, would ruin all that they had left. All that they could not reach, the
Law would, if he had Murdered himself. It must have ruined his Name, it had
forfeited his Estate, it had brought a blot upon his Family. Nothing could be
done more to show their Malice, if that were their meaning.

If they rather sought to hide their own Guilt, it was surely an Infatuation
from God: He took away their understandings, that they could not consider those
things which every Child could not but observe. What, would none miss his Band,
or take notice of his clean Shoes? Would none look for the effusion of Blood,
or take notice of that which hindered it, that so manifest Coagulation? Twenty
things more that have been considered elsewhere, and are not to be repeated in
this place.

It was surely an Infatuation from God. Who having suffered them to run on in
their sin to the utmost to make that scarlet sin of Murder, even blush at it
self (if it were possible); having suffered the Devil to teach them every thing
else that he could think of, to consummate the Ruin of this good man; yet was
pleased so to take away their understandings, that they could not see so many
evident proofs as would be made to all the world; of his Innocence, and of
their horrible wickedness.

But now I speak of Discovery, methinks I see you all stirred up, as it were,
expecting that I should name you the Persons that did this bloody Fact. I would
I could, for sundry reasons. But I cannot pretend to that. I can only say with
David, they were Wicked men. He was the common Enemy of all such, and it
pleased God to let him fall into their hands. He fell by the hands of Wicked
men, that is certain.

But if you would know more, I will endeavor to show you how possibly You may
discover them. Perhaps some that are wiser, would be afraid to go so far. But
why so? I speak for him that feared nothing, but to lose an Opportunity of
doing good. And in hopes to do good by it, I will be so far like him; I will
not fear to go on with what I offered, as to the discovery.

There are three things to be chiefly considered in this matter. First, Men's
Actions: Secondly, Their Interests: and Thirdly, their Principles. We shall
consider each of these,

First, their Actions and Practices. Since we know not who they are that were
the Authors of this Wickedness, at least can we find who they are that are not
willing we should know it? They that have practiced, and intrigued to this
purpose, to endeavor to hinder the Search, or the Discovery; if they knew what
they did, we have reason to judge they were concerned, for themselves, or for
their Friends.

You cannot but remember the dust that was raised in the week when the Search
should have been made; those Calumnies, and those various reports that went
about, as it were, on purpose to hinder the discovery. One while he had
withdrawn himself for Debt; Another while he was Married, and that not very
decently; Another while he was run away with a Harlot; even what the Father of
Lies put into their heads.

At last, when they knew what they intended to do with him; they prepared you
to expect it, by giving out that he had killed himself. You know how impatient
they were to have this believed. I was told it some hours before the discovery,
that he was found with his own Sword through his Body. Others could tell that
he had two wounds about him. These things were found to be True some hours
after.

But then they devised sundry Untruths to color it.

It was suggested that it might be done* in Distraction, which (they said) was
an Hereditary Disease in his Family, that his Father and his Grandfather had
it before him; that this Disease being stirred up by some mis-apprehensions,
wrought that direful effect upon him, to make him kill himself.

These things (from whatsoever Author they came) being confidently said, were
as easily believed by them that knew nothing to the contrary. I confess I knew
not what to think my self, till I saw the contrary with my eyes. When I saw he
was strangled as well as thrust through, I soon considered, that no man could
kill himself both those ways.

And then for the Scandal that was raised of his Family, I found upon inquiry;
that all the color they had to say it, was only this: that his Father was
sometime afflicted with Melancholy, almost to Distraction; but it was before he
was fifty years old; he soon recovered of it, and lived till the eightieth year
of his Age. Besides, I am informed, that there never was any appearance of the
like Distemper in any one Person of all that numerous Family: Nor did any of
his Relations ever come to an untimely end, as has been falsely reported.

For the Melancholy that was observed in our Friend, I think none, that knew
him, ever thought it Distraction, or any thing tending that way; but a
thoughtfulness sometimes, that proceeded from the Intricacy and Multiplicity of
Business. I believe the weightiest business that ever he had, was that which
made him say some Days before his Death, I am told I shall be knocked in the
Head. He said this in my hearing, without any great visible Concern. He
continued the same he ever was, in his daily Conversation; Serious in Business,
but Cheerful and Pleasant at other times. Thus he used to be always. He was so
the last day of his living life; that is, till the hour that we lost him. And
how he was afterward, I suppose they best know, that were the Authors of these
Rumors. That Is one way to try men, I think, by their Actions and Practices.

A Second way to find out the Authors of any Fact, is to consider who they were
that were concerned to have it done. It was Cassius's word, Cui bono? For whose
Interest was it? Now consider for whose Interest it was to kill this Person.

They must be some that were not safe while he lived; or some that might be the
better for his Death; And that in some considerable measure, such as would
requite all the danger they were to incur by it.

If you know of any that could not think themselves safe while he lived, you
have great reason to believe you know the Authors of his Death. I have not so
far been Privy to his doings, as that I could be able to enter into this Secret.

Much less to know of any Personal Malice against him. He that was so tender
hearted, even to those whom he punished, could not provoke any one to this
height of Revenge.

Much less were they Robbers, or any such Poor Rogues, that kill men for what
they have. These did their work Gratis. They left him all his Money. They took
nothing but his Band, except Papers.

It Is therefore very credible, that the Authors had some other Interest that
moved them to it. And that seems rather to have been, against the Government
and the Laws. They knew how firm he was in his Duty to both; and perhaps they
had tried it in something else than we know of. If so, they could not but think
it worth their while to send him out of the World. One that durst do his duty,
when he knew, whom, and what, he should provoke by it; One that would give so
ill an Example to other Magistrates, which if followed, might be the Ruin of
their Cause; What could they think of such a man? We cannot scare him, We
cannot bribe him, but we can kill him. They could not have thought of a more
Compendious way than this.

Especially, if the killing of him would dishearten others, and so be a means
to weaken Authority and Laws. Such men cannot but know, that Publick-Spirited
men are not so many; and they that are, are but Men, They may be daunted, they
may be discouraged. And what can do that, more, than the Terror of such an
Example?

I doubt not, they that did this, would rather have done it Publicly for that
reason. As we hang up Thieves, for Example to others; so to hang up Justices
for doing their Duty; Oh that would be a pleasant thing indeed!

No, Gentlemen, we are not come to that yet. God knows, what we may come to for
our Sins, and by your Means. But it will be the longer first, if the Laws can
find You out. And toward that, we have some guess at you by this Token; They
that are against the Established Laws, it was their Interest to do this, That
is the Second thing.

The Third Token is, by their Principles. And so, whosoever did this, they
should be either such as hold nothing Unlawful, or at least such as hold it
Lawful to do such things.

For the First, that is, Men of Atheistical Principles; they follow only their
Lust, or their Interest; Which will scarce unite any number of men to carry on
such a formed design as this was. Or if it had, they would scarce have held
together so long, they would have impeached one another, and so saved us the
Labor of Discovering them by this Token. I do not therefore charge it upon
them that hold nothing Unlawful.

But how shall we excuse them, that hold it Lawful to do such things? If there
are such Men in the World, and if the other Tokens agree to them, they surely
are the likeliest that can be thought of for this Matter.

But such a sort of men there is, even here in England, we have them among us.
I could not but think of them when I named the other Tokens, and so must any
one that has been conversant in their Books.

We need not put them upon the Rack, to make them Confess. They offer
themselves, they tell us such things which we scarce dare tell you again. It Is
scarce credible, how openly, and how grossly, they teach men these things They
are the Jesuits I speak of. And whosoever reads their Books cannot but know I
do not wrong them in what I say.

I say, First, They teach men to raise such Reports as we heard of this Person.

And Secondly, It Is their Interest to discourage the Execution of the Law.

And Thirdly, They hold it Lawful to kill Men that would prejudice them or
their Religion.

If I prove these Three things, we have all the Tokens together, which I think
are not to be found so in any other Persons or Society. Let them clear
themselves as they can of the Fact. I will prove the Tokens. And First for
their teaching of Calumny.

In plain Terms, Temburin. lib. 9. cap. 2. Sect. 2. n. 4. doubts whether it be
any Sin. Lovan. Theses, Anno* 1645. make it but a Venial Sin.
to slander another man in Defense of ones own Right or Honor, and especially
one of the Fathers to do it in Defense of the Society; some hold it plainly
Lawful. Some say, it is a Venial Sin. For the Proofs you may find them together
in the Fifteenth of the Provincial Letters. If so, what should hinder these men
from r^ising all those Reports of this Person? Since it was in Defense of
themselves, and of their Sect, if they killed him.

Secondly, That it was their Interest to kill him, it is manifest; if they have
any design against the Government; And if either his Life would have hindered or
discovered them in it, or if his Death would discourage others from being
Active in their Place. But that it is the Interest of their Sect, and of their
Church, to subvert the Government; and that they for their Parts design it now
at this Present; I think this is so palpable, that I should but lose time in
proving it.

Thirdly, That they hold it Lawful to kill in such cases. For this, it is as
plainly delivered in their Writings, as any Article of Faith is in the Creed.

They say First in General, To kill another, is Murder indeed, if you do it
for Revenge, or any such Sinister End. And therefore you must be careful to
direct your Intention aright. And so by directing the Intention, though you do
the same Act, it is not Murder.

For Example (says Amicus, Franc. Amicus, in Curs. Theol. Tom. 5. disp. 36.
Sect. 7. n. 118.
one of their Professors) if one threatens to publish grievous crimes of my
Self or of my Order; When I have no other way to escape this, I may lawfully
kill him. And (says he) it is plain that I have no other way, if he be ready to
charge me or my Order Publicly, Coram gravissimis viris, before men in
Authority.

Says Tannerus in like manner, Adam. Tanner. Theol. Schol. tom. 3. disp. 4. q.
8. n. 83.
One may kill him, if it be in Defense of his own Goods, or of the Goods of his
Society.

Says Lessius, Lessius de Jure and Just. lib. 2. c. 9. dub. 8. Sect. 47. Si
nomini meo, etc.
If one endeavors to take away my life, by revealing a secret crime, I may
kill him. Nay, if he endeavors to take away but my good name, by revealing a
secret crime, I may kill him, Moralium Quaest. tom. 2. Tract. 29. c. 3. Sect.
52. Si quis detrahat falsis criminationibus apud viros honoratos -- possit
occidi, quando aliter famae damnum averti non potest.
says Lessius, and the same says Filliucius. Filliuc.
Now who that knows what Informations our Friend had against them, can doubt
but they might lawfully kill him by these Doctrines?

I name but one for each. Whosoever would see more, may find them collected in
the seventh and the thirteenth of the Provincial Letters. Though if we had but
one Author for each of these Doctrines, that is enough to make a probable
Doctrine, as they tell us. And then, if it is probable, Lessius de Jure and
Just. lib. 2. c. 9. dub. 12. Sect 1 81.
we may practice it safely without sin.

I know what any Jesuit would answer to this. They would say that these
Doctrines, are some of them delivered as being only Speculatively true; that
is, they are true in their own Nature: But they are not Practice sequendae,
that is, in respect of the Consequences, they are not to be reduced to
Practice. And why so? If they are speculatively true, Filliuc. Ib. majora mala
in Rep. sequerentur.
why then are they not to be practiced? They themselves tell you why, They
would cause disorders in the Commonwealth.

Lessius has a better Reason, Lessius de Jure and Just. lib. 2. c. 9. dub. 8.
Sect. 47. -- talis in Rep. been constituta ut homicida plecteretur.
for one of them, He says, one ought not to practice it, because if one does,
he may be hanged for it. The mean while, if one can do it so secretly, as not
to disturb the Commonwealth, (and then to be sure he shall not hang for it) in
that case it is Practice sequenda, It Is to be practiced according to their
Doctrine. Or if not, while it is speculatively true, that the thing it self is
no sin; Who that knows this, and has a mind to kill another, and sees his
Occasion, will make any Scruple of the Practice?

Yes, (they will tell you) the Pope has forbidden it, in that Decree of the
Year 1665. which is set down in the end of the last Roman Index To their shame
be it said, These Doctrines are forbidden indeed; But not as being Untrue, not
as Contrary to God's word, or having any Immorality in them: How then? He
says, they are ad minimum scandalosae, At least they are apt to give Offense,
(no doubt they are, if we Heretics come to know them:) And therefore he
charges them upon their Obedience to himself, that they must not Practice these
Doctrines.

Had he said upon their Obedience to God, that had been a dangerous word. It
would have made them afraid to Practice them, even in his own Service. He would
take heed of that, not to spoil that which may be a Useful Doctrine. But he
forbade it, forsooth, upon Obedience to himself, which is such a Restraint as
the Pope may take off when he pleases.

And how can we tell, when he does, or does not, that which is in his Power
secretly to do or not to do? We have only this measure by which to judge: He
will do whatsoever he sees best for the Catholic Cause. If he sees it best for
the Cause, we shall live. If not, you see it is no sin to kill us; even the
Pope being Judge. So that now we hold our Lives at his Courtesy.

But thanks be to God, that gives us better security than that; gives us
Government and Laws to protect us: Or else, no man here knows how soon he might
be laid as our Friend is before us.

And we thank you, Reverend Fathers of the Society, if you were the men that
killed him, as you are the likeliest if we may believe yourselves; We thank
you, that you did not begin with the Government first. That you killed him, not
the King. There had been a Blow indeed. We thank you for not beginning with
That. Though we have the less cause, if your Plot was against the King, and you
only took this man away, that you might the better cover it. We thank you at
least, though we pay too dear for it, that you have made the People know your
Religion; that you have Alarmed the State with your Practices; We may live the
longer for that, to thank you for it.

But then we must remember, we ow this to God, not to you. He it is that has
crossed your Design. It is he that has taken away your Covering, and spread
reproach on your faces in the stead. We see what you would be at; if not by
this, by some thing else.

And if we saw it by nothing else, we know it sufficiently in your Writings.
When your Doctrines are so plain, we have no Reason to doubt of your Practices.
God still deliver us from your Bloody hands. God keep England from your Bloody
Religion.

This being at present as far as we can go in the Discovery; all that remains
is, to return, and to consider our loss, and to lament over it. It was the
Consequence of Abner's Death. The King Lamented over Abner, and the People wept
over him again.

King David mourned for Abner. That was all that he could do. Our King has
done more. He has not only lamented, but proclaimed his sense of it, to the
whole Nation. He has done it, once, and again, with all possible
Demonstrations of his Care, and of his Concernedness, for the Discovery, and
for the Punishment of this wickedness.

Where the King has begun to us, we ought to follow him, as Israel did David.
We have wept already, we are here to weep over him again. And because I would
not keep you long in pain, nor stir you up to fruitless Tears, I will endeavor
to show you how it may be a useful Lamentation.

There is no fruit to Godward, but is to be brought forth with Patience. And
therefore first. I must caution you to that, in this and all other Trials. If
this Horrible Fact were committed by those hands, (which of all other we have
reason by all Tokens to suspect) yet have Patience, and deal not violently even
with them. What by Law may be done, I would not preclude, I pray for it. But
otherwise, it is Murder in you to kill a Jesuit, that thinks it none in such
Cases as this to kill You. God be thanked, you are no Disciples of theirs, but
of him whose sacred name they abuse; that Holy Jesus; He has taught us other
Rules, he has showed us other Practices. Love your Enemies, Mat. 5. 44.
Bless them that curse you, Pray for them that despightfully use you and
persecute you. These Rules, and the like, are the Soul of the Christian
Religion. It Is that which softens the Heart, and makes it gentle, and tender,
and pitiful. And so conforms us to the Image of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
Who being reviled, reviled not again; When he suffered, he threatened not; but
committed himself to him that judges Righteously.

Indeed, when I consider the temper that is required of all Christians; I
cannot but bless God for what I find in the Protestant Religion. I cannot but
reflect on the incredible Patience that was found in you at the Fire of London.
Though so many believed, and few very much doubted whence it came; that it was
from the same hands which we justly suspect for this Wickedness; yet there was
no Tumult rose upon it; no Violence done that extended to the Life of any
Person.

You then bore patiently that great loss both of your Houses and of your Goods.
And now it comes to your Persons and Lives, still your Patience continues. Is
not this a fair proof of your Religion? I bless God for it; and pray for the
like in other things; Though this one is a great Testimony to us, even our
Adversaries themselves being Judges, if they would but consider it.

Had either of these things been done or happened in any Popish Country; had
the Protestants been suspected to have had any the least Finger in them; there
had not been one of them suffered to live in that Country. Alas! without that,
What have those poor men suffered? What have they not suffered, who have had
their Lot in Popish Countries? In France a hundred thousand Massacred in a few
days. How many more thousands in Ireland in our Memory? not to speak of the
like Slaughters, in Piedmont, and elsewhere.

Where can they show the like in Countries of our Religion? They might have
found it now here, if we had been like them. But blessed be God, we are not so,
and I hope shall never be.

I beseech you to continue the same Patience still; not lose it for any, even
the highest Provocation. Commit your wrongs to him that judges righteously;
and under him to the Magistrate, that bears not the Sword in vain. Romans 13. 4.
The King has already showed his care in this Matter. Follow it with yours, in
lawful ways. And if neither of these will do, leave the Matter to God. Psalm.
9. 12.
When he makes Inquisition for Blood, he will remember them. Psalm. 58. 11.
We shall see it in his time, which is best; And that by such Tokens, that all
men that see it shall say, Verily there is a God that judges in the Earth.

Next, Since we ought to Imitate those whom we praise; let us follow our
Friend, in those things which were praise worthy in him. I might enlarge this
in sundry Particulars, for he had not a few Exemplary Virtues. But I must not
enlarge beyond those that are of present Consideration.

Let us first endeavor to right him in the Injuries that he has suffered, and
then not shrink from our Duties for fear of suffering the like our selves.

For the First, He was ready to do all right to others, especially if they had
been so handled as he was. If any other, If his Murderers themselves, had been
used thus, he had been the man to have righted them; by all lawful means to
clear the Innocent, to discover and to punish the Guilty. This Duty is now
Yours, every one in his Place, to do all that possibly he can, to right his
Memory, to discover his Murderers, and to bring them to due Punishment.

I need not much exhort You to this; and therefore next, for that which may be
more needful; I beseech you to follow him in this, not to shrink so far from
your Duty as to fear them, He feared them not for Your sakes.

It Is true, he suffered for it, he lost his life. But let the Devil get nothing
more by that. He hopes, and it seems to have been his design, to deter You from
Your Duties, for fear if you be too forward, he may stir up others to serve You
in like manner.

Well, but that will not certainly follow. They will not always find men
unprovided, nor always ready to be drawn into Traps. You see they have
awakened the Government, I hope this will also awaken You. Oh how happy should
we be, (though we paid so dear for it,) if we could gain this by what we have
lost; If all would be so vigilant, so resolved, that they might not know which
to take next; If for one Sir Edmund Godfrey, whom they have taken away, we
might see twenty, yea a hundred such Justices in this City.

And why not? The English Spirit is Generous and Bold, as well as it is
Compassionate and Gentle. They may be persuaded or misled, but they are not to
be frighted, or threatened; not easily into their Duties, I hope, much less out
of them. That, I trust, will never be.

Especially, if we remember the good Providence of God, which is the third
thing. If we look up to him, that has secured us against so great and so many
Dangers. 1 Samuel 17. 37.
He that delivered me from the Bear, and the Lion, (says David) he will
deliver me from the hand of this Philistin.

We may argue likewise; He that saved us in Eighty Eight, he that saved us from
the Gunpowder Plot, he will deliver us from this cursed Conspiracy. He will
give us this fruit of our Loss, and of all their Machinations against us.

Who knows, but, in the end, it may prove a fatal blow to themselves? This,
together with other things, which are now under Consideration, may occasion a
fair riddance of all that Faction out of England. It may so happen to them, as
the Apostle foretold it would to the Jews, when they persecuted the Christians
at Thessalonica, That they would but fill up the measure of their Sins, 1 These.
2. 16.
that Wrath might come upon them to the uttermost.

I pray rather for their Conversion. But whether that will ever be; Whether the
one, or the other, we must leave that to God.

And Lastly, Look to our Selves, that all our ways be pleasing in his sight. If
so, he is able to secure us against all others: But otherwise there is nothing
can secure us against Him. Psalm. 127. 1* 118. 6.
Except he keep the City, the Watchman wakes but in vain. But if he be on our
side, we need not fear what man can do unto us.

Therefore cleave we to him, with all our Hearts, and Souls. Hold fast that
which he has committed to our Charge, the Gospel of Christ. When God sees
Truth on our Side, nothing can make Him against us, but Sin.

Therefore Watch also against Sin, Show the Truth of your Faith by your Works,
Adorn your Holy Profession with a Holy Life. So living, Death can be no
Surprise to us, even such a Death, or worse, if worse can be, Let them kill our
Bodies, abuse them, mangle them, as this is, or worse; Let them burn them, and
throw our Ashes whither they please; We lose nothing by it. At last, all shall
meet again in a happy and blessed Resurrection.

FINIS.

