Mr. Locke's Reply To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Answer
to his Second Letter: Wherein, besides other incident Matters, what his
Lordship has said Concerning Certainty by Reason, Certainty by Ideas, and
Certainty of Faith. The Resurrection of the same Body. The Immateriality of the
Soul. The Inconsistency of Mr. Locke's Notions with the Articles of the
Christian Faith, and their Tendency to Sceptism, is examined.


LONDON: Printed by H. C. for A. and I. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row; and E. Castle, next Scotland-yard by Whitehall, MDCXCIX.

My Lord,
YOUR Lordship, in the beginning of the last Letter you honored me with, seems
so uneasy and displeased at my having said too much already in the Question
between us, that I think I may conclude, you would be well enough pleased if I
should say no more; and you would dispense with me for not keeping my Promise I
made you 2d Letter, p. 167.
to answer the other parts of your first Letter. If this proceeds from any
tenderness in your Lordship for my Reputation, that you would not have me
expose my self by an overflow of Words, in many places void of Clearness,
Coherence and Argument, and that therefore might have been spared; I must
acknowledge it is a piece of great Charity, and such wherein you will have a
lasting Advantage over me, since good Manners will not permit me to return you
the like. Or should I in the Ebullition of Thoughts, which in me your Lordship
finds as impetuous as the Springs of Modena mentioned by Ramazzini, be in
danger to forget my self, and to think, I had some right to return the general
Complaint of length and intricacy without Force, yet you have secured your self
from the Suspicion of any such Trash on your side, by making p 4.
Cobwebs the easy Product of those who write out of their own Thoughts, which
it might be a Crime in me to impute to your Lordship.

If this Complaint of yours be not a Charitable Warning to me, I cannot well
guess at the design of it; for I would not think that in a Controversy, which
you, my Lord, have dragged me into, you would assume it as a Privilege due to
your self to be as copious as you please, and say what you think fit, and
expect I should reply only so, and so much, as would just suit your good
liking, and serve to set the Cause right on that side which your Lordship
contends for.

My Lord, I shall always acknowledge the great distance that is between your
Lordship and my self, and pay that Deference that is due to your Dignity and
Person. But Controversy, though it excludes not good Manners, will not be
managed with all that Submission which one is ready to pay in other Cases.
Truth, which is inflexible, has here its Interest, which must not be given up
in a Complement. Plato and Aristotle, and other great Names must give way,
rather than make us renounce Truth, or the Friendship we have for her.

This possibly your Lordship will allow, for it is not spun out of my own
Thoughts; I have the Authority of others for it: And I think it was in Print
before I was born. But you will say however, I am too long in my Replies. It is
not impossible but it may be so. But with all due Respect to your Lordship's
Authority (the greatness whereof I shall always readily acknowledge) I must
crave leave to say, That in this Case you are by no means a proper Judge. We
are now, as well your Lordship as my self, before a Tribunal to which you have
appealed, and before which you have brought me: It Is the Public must be judge,
whether your Lordship has enlarged too far in accusing me, or I in defending my
self. Common Justice makes great allowance to a Man pleading in his own
Defense, and a little length (if he should be guilty of it) finds excuse in the
Compassion of bystanders, when they see a Man causelessly attacked, after a new
way, by a potent Adversary; and under various Pretenses, Occasions sought, and
Words wrested to his disadvantage.

This, my Lord, you must give me leave to think to be my Case, whilst this
strange way your Lordship has brought me into this Controversy; your gradual
Accusations of my Book, and the different Causes your Lordship has assigned of
them; together with Quotations out of it, which I cannot find there, and other
Things I have complained of (to some of which your Lordship has not vouchsafed
any Answer) shall remain unaccounted for, as I humbly conceive they do.

I confess my Answers are long, and I wish they could have been shorter. But
the Difficulty I have to find out, and set before others your Lordship's
meaning, that they may see what I am answering to; and so be able to judge of
the Pertinency of what I say, has unavoidably enlarged them. Whether this be
wholly owing to my dullness, or whether a little perplexedness both as to
Grammar and Coherence, caused by those numbers of Thoughts, whether of your own
or others, that crowd from all parts to be set down, when you write, may not be
allowed to have some share in it, I shall not presume to say. I am at the Mercy
of your Lordship and my other Readers in the Point, and know not how to avoid a
Fault that has no Remedy.

Your Lordship says, p. 4.
The World soon grows weary of Controversies, especially when they are about
Personal Matters, which made your Lordship wonder that one who understands the
World so well, should spend above 50. Pages in renewing and enlarging a
Complaint wholly concerning himself.

To which give me leave to say, That if your Lordship had so much considered
the World, and what it is not much pleased with, when you published your
Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity, perhaps your Lordship had not so
personally concerned me in that Controversy, as it appears now you have, and
continue still to do.

Your Lordship wonders p. 4.
that I spend above 50 Pages in renewing and enlarging my Complaint concerning
my self. Your Wonder, I humbly conceive, will not be so great, when you
recollect, That your Answer to my Complaint, and the Satisfaction you proposed
to give me and others in that Personal Matter, began the first Letter you
honored me with, and ended in the 47th Page of it, where you said, You suppose
the Reason of your mentioning my Words so often was now no longer a Riddle to
me; and so you proceeded to other Particulars of my Vindication. If therefore I
have spent 50 Pages of my Answer in showing that what you offered in 47 Pages
for my Satisfaction was none, but that the Riddle was a Riddle still; the
disproportion in the number of Pages is not so great as to be the Subject of
much wonder; especially to those who consider that in what you call Personal
Matter I was showing, that my Essay, having in it nothing contrary to the
Doctrine of the Trinity, was yet brought into that Dispute; and that therefore I
had reason to complain of it, and of the manner of its being brought in: And if
you had pleased not to have moved other Questions, nor brought other Charges
against my Book till this, which was the Occasion and Subject of my First
Letter, had been cleared, by making out that the Passages, you had in your
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity quoted out of my Book, had something
in them against the Doctrine of the Trinity, and so were with just reason
brought by you, as they were, into that Dispute: there had been no other but
that Personal Matter, as you call it, between us.

In the Examination of those Pages meant, as you said, for my Satisfaction, and
of other parts of your Letter, I found (contrary to what I expected) Matter of
renewing and enlarging my complaint, and this I took notice of and set down in
my Reply, which it seems I should not have done; The knowledge of the World
should have taught me better: And I should have taken that for Satisfaction,
which you were pleased to give, in which I could not find any, nor, as I
believe, any intelligent or impartial Reader. So that your Lordship's care of
the World, that it should not grow weary of this Controversy, and the Fault
you find of my mis-imploying Fifty Pages of my Letter, reduces it self at last
in effect to no more but this, That your Lordship should have a liberty to say
what you please, pay me in what Coin you think fit; my part should be to be
satisfied with it, rest content and say nothing. This indeed might be a way not
to weary the World, and to save 50 Pages of clean Paper; and put such an end to
the Controversy, as your Lordship would not dislike.

I learn from your Lordship, p. 178.
that it is the first part of Wisdom, in some Men's Opinions, not to begin in
such Disputes: What the knowledge of the World (which is a sort of Wisdom)
should in your Lordship's Opinion make a Man do, when one of your Lordship's
Character begins with him, is very plain: He is not to reply, so far as he
judges his Defense and the Matter requires, but as your Lordship is pleased to
allow; which some may think no better than if one might not reply at all.

After having thus rebuked me for having been too copious in my Reply, in the
next Words your Lordship instructs me what I should have answered, p. 4.
That I should have cleared my self by declaring to the World, that I owned the
Doctrine of the Trinity as it has been received in the Christian Church.

This, as I take it, is a mere Personal Matter of the same Woof with a Spanish
Sant Benito, and, as it seems to me, designed to sit close to me. What must I
do now, my Lord? Must I silently put on and wear this Badge of your Lordship's
Favor, and as one well understanding the World say not a Word of it, because
the World soon grows weary of Personal Matters? If in Gratitude for this
Personal Favor I ought to be silent, yet I am forced to tell you, That in what
you require of me here, you possibly have cut out too much Work for a poor
ordinary Layman, for whom it is too hard to know, how a Doctrine so disputed has
been received in the Christian Church, and who might have thought it enough to
own it as delivered in the Scriptures. Your Lordship herein lays upon me what I
cannot do, without owning to know what I am sure I do not know. For how the
Doctrine of the Trinity has been always received in the Christian Church, I
confess my self ignorant. I have not had time to examine the History of it, and
to read those Controversies that have been writ about it: And to own a Doctrine
as received by others, when I do not know how those others received it, is
perhaps a short way to Orthodoxy, that may satisfy some Men: But he that takes
this way to give Satisfaction, in my Opinion makes a little bold with Truth;
and it may be questioned whether such a Profession be pleasing to that God who
requires Truth in the inward Parts, however acceptable it may in any Man be to
his Diocesan.

I presume your Lordship, in your Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of
the Trinity, intends to give it us as it has been received in the Christian
Church. And I think your Words, p. 87.
viz. It is the Sense of the Christian Church which you are bound to defend,
and no particular Opinions of your own, authorize one to think so. But if I am
to own it as your Lordship has there delivered it, I must own what I do not
understand: For I confess your Exposition of the Sense of the Church, wholly
transcends my Capacity.

If you require me to own it with an implicit Faith, I shall pay that Deference
as soon to your Lordship's Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church, as any
ones. But if I must understand and know what I own, it is my Misfortune, and I
cannot deny it, that I am as far from owning what you in that Discourse
deliver, as I can be from professing the most unintelligible thing that ever I
read, to be the Doctrine that I own.

Whether I make more use of my poor Understanding in the Case, than you are
willing to allow every one of your Readers, I cannot tell; but such an
Understanding as God has given me is the best I have, and that which I must use
in the apprehending what others say, before I can own the Truth of it; and for
this there is no help that I know.

That which keeps me a little in countenance, is, That, if I mistake not, Men
of no mean Parts, even Divines of the Church of England, and those of neither
the lowest Reputation nor Rank, find their Understandings fail them on this
occasion; and stick not to own, That they understand not your Lordship in that
Discourse, and particularly that your 6th Chapter is unintelligible to them as
well as me; whether the fault be in their and my Understandings, the World must
be judge. But this is only by the by, for this is not the Answer I here intend
your Lordship.

Your Lordship tells me, That to clear my self I should have owned to the World
the Doctrine of the Trinity as it has been received, etc. Answer, I know not
whether in a Dispute managed after a new way, wherein one Man is argued
against, and another Man's words all along quoted, it may not also be a good as
well as a new Rule for the Answerer to reply to what was never objected, and
clear himself from what was never laid to his Charge. If this be not so, and
that this new way of Attacking requires not this new way of Defense, your
Lordship's Prescription to me here, what I should have done, will, amongst the
most intelligent and impartial Readers, pass for a strange Rule in
Controversy, and such as the learned of them will not be able to find in all
Antiquity; and therefore must be imputed to something else than your Lordship's
great Learning.

Did your Lordship in the Discourse of the Vindication of the Trinity, wherein
you first fell upon my Book, or in your Letter; (my Answer to which, you are
here Correcting) did your Lordship, I say, any where object to me, that I did
not own the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it has been received in the Christian
Church, etc? If you did, the Objection was so secret, so hidden, so artificial,
that your words declared quite the contrary. In the Vindication of the Doctrine
of the Trinity, your Lordship says, Vindic. p. 239.
That my Notions were borrowed to serve other purposes [whereby, if I
understand you right, you meant against the Doctrine of the Trinity] than I
intended them; which you repeat again 1 Ans. p. 35.
for my Satisfaction, and insist 1b. p. 36, 37, 40, 42, 46.
upon for my Vindication.

You having so solemnly more than once professed to clear me and my Intentions
from all suspicion of having any part in that Controversy, as appears farther
in the close of your first Letter, 1 Ans. p. 132, 133.
where all you charge on me, is the ill use, that others had, or might make of
my Notions, how could I suppose such an Objection made by your Lordship, which
you declare against, without accusing your Lordship of manifest Prevarication?

If your Lordship had any thing upon your Mind, any secret Aims, which you did
not think fit to own, but yet would have me divine and answer to, as if I knew
them, this I confess is too much for me, who look no farther into Men's
Thoughts, than as they appear in their Books. Where you have given your
Thoughts vent in your Words, I have not, I think, omitted to take notice of
them, not wholly passing by those Insinuations, which have been dropped from
your Lordship's Pen; which from another, who had not professed so much personal
Respect, would have shown no exceeding good disposition of Mind toward me.

When your Lordship shall go on to accuse me of not believing the Doctrine of
the Trinity, as received in the Christian Church, or any other Doctrine you
shall think fit, I shall answer as I would to an Inquisitor. for tho your
Lordship tells me, p. 5.
That I need not he afraid of the Inquisition, or that you intended to charge
me with Heresy in denying the Trinity; yet he that shall consider your
Lordship's proceeding with me from the beginning, as far as it is hitherto
gone, may have reason to think, that the Methods and Management of that Holy
Office are not wholly unknown to your Lordship, nor have escaped your great
reading. Your Proceedings with me have had these steps,

1. Several Passages of my Essay of Humane Understanding, and some of them
relating barely to the Being of a God, and other Matters wholly remote from any
Question about the Trinity, were brought into the Vindication of the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and there argued against as containing the Errors of Those and
Them, which Those and Them are not known to this day.

2. In your Lordship's Answer to my first Letter, when that was given as the
great reason why my Essay was brought into that Controversy, ( viz.) because
in it Certainty was founded upon clear and distinct Ideas, was found to fail,
and was only a supposition of your own; other Accusations were sought out
against it in relation to the Doctrine of the Trinity. viz. That 1 Ans. p. 133.
it might be of dangerous consequence, to that Doctrine, to introduce the new
term of Ideas, and to place Certainty in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of our Ideas. What are become of these Charges, we shall see in
the progress of this Letter, when we come to consider what your Lordship has
replied to my Answer upon these Points.

3. These Accusations not having, it seems, weight enough to effect what you
intended, my Book has been rumaged again to find new and more important Faults
in it; and now at last at the third Effort 2 Ans. Title. page.
my Notions of Ideas are found inconsistent with the Articles of the Christian
Faith. This indeed, carries some sound in it, and may be thought worthy the
Name and Pains of so great a Man and zealous a Father of the Church as your
Lordship.

That I may not be too bold in affirming a thing I was not privy to, give me
leave, my Lord, to tell your Lordship why I presume my Book has upon this
occasion been looked over again, to see what could be found in it capable to
bear a deeper Accusation, that might look like something in a Title Page. Your
Lordship, by your Station in the Church, and the Zeal you have shown in
defending its Articles, could not be supposed, when you first brought my Book
into this Controversy, to have omitted these great Enormities, that it now
stands accused of, and to have cited it for smaller Mistakes, some whereof were
not found, but only imagined to be, in it; if you had then known these great
Faults, which you now charge it with, to have been in it. If your Lordship had
been apprised of its being guilty of such dangerous Errors, you would not
certainly have passed them by: And therefore I think one may reasonably
conclude, that my Essay was new looked into on purpose.

Your Lordship says, p. 177.
That what you have done herein you thought it your Duty to do, not with
respect to your Self, but to some of the Mysteries of our Faith, which you do
not charge me with opposing, but by laying such Foundations as do tend to the
overthrow of them. It cannot be doubted but your Duty would have made you at
the first warn the World, that my Notions were inconsistent with the Articles
of the Christian Faith, if your Lordship had then known it. Though the
excessive Respect and Tenderness you express toward me Personally in the
immediately preceding Words, would be enough utterly to confound me, were I not
a little acquainted with your Lordship's Civilities in this kind. For you tell
me, p. 177.
That these things laid together made your Lordship think it necessary to do
that which you was unwilling to do till I had driven you to it, which was to
show the Reason you had, why you looked on my Notion of Ideas and of Certainty
by them, as inconsistent with it self, and with some important Articles of the
Christian Faith.

What must I think now, my Lord, of these Words? Must I take them as a mere
Complement, which is never to be interpreted rigorously, according to the
precise meaning of the Words? Or must I believe that your unwillingness, to do
so hard a thing to me, restrained your Duty, and you could not prevail on your
self (how much soever the Mysteries of Faith were in danger to be overthrown)
to get out these harsh Words, viz. That my Notions were inconsistent with the
Articles of the Christian Faith, till your third Onset, after I had forced you
to your Duty by two Replies of mine?

It will not become me, my Lord, to make my self a Complement from your Words,
which you did not intend me in them. But on the other side, I would not
willingly neglect to acknowledge any Civility from your Lordship in the full
extent of it. The Business is a little nice, because what is contained in those
two Passages, p. 177.
cannot by a less skilful Hand than yours be well put together, though they
immediately follow one another. This, I am sure, falls out very untowardly,
that your Lordship should drive me, (who had much rather have been otherwise
employed) to drive your Lordship to do that which you were unwilling to do. The
World sees how much I was driven: For what Censures, what Imputations must my
Book have lain under, if I had not cleared it from those Accusations your
Lordship brought against it; when I am charged now with Evasions, for not
clearing my self from an Accusation which you never brought against me? But if
it be an Evasion, not to answer to an Objection that has not been made, what is
it I beseech you, my Lord, to make no reply to Objections that have been made?
Of which I promise to give your Lordship a List, whenever you shall please to
call for it.

I forbear it now for fear that if I should say all that I might upon this new
Accusation, it would be more than would suit with your Lordship's liking; and
you should complain again that you have opened a Passage which brings to your
mind Ramazzini and his Springs of Modena. But your Lordship need not be afraid
of being overwhelmed with the Ebullition of my Thoughts, nor much trouble your
self to find a way to give check to it: Mere Ebullition of Thoughts never
overwhelms or sinks any one but the Author himself; but if it carries Truth
with it, that I confess has force, and it may be troublesome to those that
stand in its way.

Your Lordship says, p. 3.
You see how dangerous it is to give occasion to one of such a fruitful
Invention as I am, to write.

I am obliged to your Lordship, that you think my Invention worth concerning
your self about, though it be so unlucky as to have your Lordship and me always
differ about the measure of its Fertility. In your first Answer p. 80.
you thought I too much extended the Fertility of my Invention, and ascribed to
it what it had no Title to: And here I think you make the Fertility of my
Invention greater than it is. For in what I have answered to your Lordship,
there seems to me no need at all of a Fertile Invention. It Is true it has been
hard for me to find out whom you writ against, or what you meant in many
places. As soon as that was found the Answer lay always so obvious, and so
easy, that there needed no labor of Invention to discover what one should
reply. The Things themselves (where there were any) stripped of the Ornaments of
Scholastic Language, and the less obvious ways of learned Writings, seemed to
me to carry their Answers visibly with them. This permit me, my Lord, to say,
That however fertile my Invention is, it has not in all this Controversy
produced one Fiction or wrong Quotation.

But before I leave the Answer you dictate, permit me to observe that I am so
unfortunate to be blamed 1st Answ. p. 8.
for owning what I was not accused to disown; and here for not owning what I
was never charged to disown. The like Misfortune have my poor Writings. They
offend your Lordship in some places, because they are new, and in others,
because they are not new.

Your next Words which are a new Charge, I shall pass over till I come to your
Proof of them, and proceed to the next Paragraph. Your Lordship tells me, p. 5.
You shall wave all unnecessary Repetitions, and come immediately to the matter
of my Complaint, as it is renewed in my Second Letter.

What your Lordship means by unnecessary Repetitions here, seems to be of a
piece with your blaming me in the foregoing Page, for having said too much in
my own defense; and this taken altogether, confirms my Opinion, That, in your
Thoughts, it would have been better I should have replied nothing at all. For
you having set down here near twenty Lines as a necessary Repetition out of
your former Letter, your Lordship omits my answer to them as wholly unnecessary
to be seen; and consequently you must think was at first unnecessary to have
been said. For when the same Words are necessary to be repeated again, if the
same reply which was made to them be not thought fit to be repeated too, it is
plainly judged to be nothing to the purpose, and should have been spared at
first.

It Is true, your Lordship has set down some few Expressions taken out of
several parts of my Reply; but in what manner the Reader cannot clearly see,
without going back to the Original of this Matter. He must therefore pardon me
the trouble of a deduction, which cannot be avoided, where Controversy is
managed at this rate; which necessitates, and so excuses length of the Answer.

My Book was brought into the Trinitarian Controversy by these steps. Your
Lordship says, That

1. The Unitarians Vindic. p. 231.
have not explained the Nature and Bounds of Reason.

2. The Author Of Christianity not Mysterious, ibid.
to make amends for this, has offered an account of Reason.

3. His Doctrine concerning Reason, ib. p. 232.
supposes that we must have clear and distinct Ideas of whatever we pretend to
any Certainty of in our Mind.

4. Your Lordship calls this a new way of Reasoning. ib. p 233.


5. This Gentleman of this new way of Reasoning in his First Chapter says
something, which has a conformity with some of the Notions in my Book. But it
is to be observed he speaks them as his own Thoughts and not upon my Authority,
nor with taking any notice of me.

6. By virtue of this he is presently entitled to I know not how much of my
Book; Vindic. p. 234.
and diverse Passages of my Essay are quoted, and attributed to him under the
Title of The Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning, (for he is by this time
turned into a Troop) and certain unknown (if they are not all contained in this
one Author's Doublet) They and These are made by your Lordship to lay about
them shrewdly for several Pages together in your Lordship's Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, etc. with Passages taken out of my Book, which your
Lordship was at the pains to quote as Theirs, i. e. certain unknown
Anti-trinitarians.

Of this your Lordship's way, strange and new to me, of dealing with my Book I
took notice. 1 Letter p. 59.


To which your Lordship tells me here p. 5.
you replied in these following words which your Lordship has set down as no
unnecessary Repetition. Your Words are: It was because the Person who opposed
the Mysteries of Christianity went upon my Grounds, and made use of my Words;
although your Lordship declared withal, That they were used to other purposes
than I intended them; and your Lordship confessed that the Reason why you
quoted my Words so much, was, because your Lordship found my Notions as to
Certainty by Ideas, was the main Foundation on which the Author of Christianity
not Mysterious went; and that he had nothing that looked like Reason if that
Principle were removed, which made your Lordship so much endeavor to show,
that it would not hold; and so you supposed the Reason why your Lordship so
often mentioned my Words, was no longer a Riddle to me. And to this Repetition
your Lordship subjoins, p. 6.
That I set down these Passages in my Second Letter, but with these Words
annexed, That all this seems to me to do nothing to the clearing of this Matter.

Answer. I say so indeed in the place quoted by your Lordship, and if I had
said no more, your Lordship had done me Justice in setting down barely these
Words as my Reply, which being set down when your Lordship was in the way of
Repeating your own Words with no sparing Hand, as we shall see by and by, these
few of mine set down thus without the least intimation, that I had said any
thing more, cannot but leave the Reader under an Opinion, that this was my
whole Reply.

But if your Lordship will please to turn to that place of my Second Letter, 2
Letter p. 48. etc.
out of which you take these Words, I presume you will find that I not only
said, but proved, That what you had said in the Words above repeated, to clear
the Riddle in your Lordship's way of writing, did nothing toward it.

That which was the Riddle to me, was, That your Lordship writ against others,
and yet quoted only my Words, and that you pinned my Words, which you argued
against, upon a certain sort of These and Them that no where appeared or were
to be found; and by this way brought my Book into the Controversy.

To this your Lordship says, You told me it was because the Person who opposed
the Mysteries of Christianity, went upon my Grounds and made use of my Words.

Answer. He that will be at the pains to compare this, which you call a
Repetition here, with the place you quote for it, viz.

1. Answ. p. 46. will, I humbly conceive, find it a new sort of Repetition;
unless the setting down of Words and Expressions not to be found in it, be the
Repetition of any Passage. But for a Repetition, let us take it of what your
Lordship had said before.

The Reason, and the only Reason there 1 Answ. p. 46.
given why you quoted my Words after the manner you did, was, Because you found
my Notions as to Certainty by Ideas, was the main Foundation which the Author
of Christianity not Mysterious went upon. These are the Words in your
Lordship's first Letter, and this the only Reason there given, though it has
grown a little by Repetition. And to this my Reply 2 Let. p. 49.
was. That I thought your Lordship had found, that that which the Author of
Christianity not Mysterious went upon, and for which he was made one of the
Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning, opposite to the Doctrine of the Trinity
was, that he made or supposed clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty:
But that was not my Notion as to Certainty by Ideas, etc. Which Reply, my Lord,
did not barely say, but showed the Reason why I said, That what your Lordship
had offered as the Reason of your manner of Proceeding, did nothing toward the
clearing of it: Unless it could clear the Matter to say you joined me with the
Author of Christianity not Mysterious, who goes upon a different Notion of
Certainty from mine; because he goes upon the same with me. For he (as your
Lordship supposes) making Certainty to consist in the perception of the
Agreement or Disagreement of clear and distinct Ideas; and I on the contrary
making it consist in the perception of the Agreement of Disagreement of such
Ideas as we have, whether they be perfectly in all their Parts clear and
distinct or no. It is impossible he should go upon my Grounds, whilst they are
so different, or that his going upon my Grounds should be the Reason of your
Lordship's joining me with him. And now I leave your Lordship to Judge, how you
had cleared this Matter, and whether, what I had answered did not prove, that
what you said did nothing toward the clearing of it?

This one Thing methinks your Lordship has made very clear, that you Thought it
necessary to find some way to bring in my Book, where you were arguing against
that Author, that he might be the Person, and mine the Words you would Argue
against together. But it is as clear that the particular matter which your
Lordship made use of to this purpose, happened to be somewhat unluckily chosen.
For your Lordship having Vindic. p. 232.
Accused him of supposing clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty,
which you declared 1 Answ. p. 14.
to be the Opinion you opposed, and for that Opinion having made him a
Gentleman of a new way of Reasoning, your Lordship imagined that was the Notion
of Certainty I went on. But it falling out otherwise, and I denying it to be
mine, the imaginary tie between that Author and me, was unexpectedly dissolved;
and there was no appearance of Reason for bringing Passages out of my Book, and
arguing against them as your Lordship did, as if they were that Author's.

To justify this, (since my Notion of Certainty could not be brought to agree
with what he was charged with, as opposite to the Doctrine of the Trinity) he at
any rate must be brought to agree with me, and to go upon my Notion of
Certainty. Pardon me my Lord, that I say at any rate. The Reason I have to
think so, is this. Either that Author does make clear and distinct Ideas
necessary to Certainty, and so does not go upon my Notion of Certainty: And
then your assigning his going upon my Notion of Certainty, as the Reason for
your joining us as you did, shows no more but a willingness in your Lordship to
have us joined. Or he does not lay all Certainty only in clear and distinct
Ideas, and so possibly for ought I know may go upon my Notion of Certainty. But
then my Lord, the Reason of your first bringing him and me into this Dispute,
will appear to have been none. All your arguing against the Gentlemen of this
new way of Reasoning, will be found to be against no Body, since there is no
Body to be found that lays all Foundation of Certainty only in clear and
distinct Ideas; no Body to be found that holds the Opinion that your Lordship
opposes.

Having thus given you an Account of some part of my Reply (to what your
Lordship really answered in that 46th Page of your first Letter) to show that
my Reply contained something more than these Words here.p 6.
set down by your Lordship. viz. That all this seems to me to do nothing to the
clearing this Matter. I come now to those parts of your Repetition, as your
Lordship is pleased to call it, wherein there is nothing Repeated.

Your Lordship says, p. 5.
That you told me the Reason why I was brought into the Controversy after the
manner I had complained of, was because the Person who opposed the Mysteries of
Christianity, went upon my Grounds; and for this you quote the 46th Page of
your first Letter. But having turned to that place, and finding there these
Words. That you found my Notions as to Certainty by Ideas, was the main
Foundation which that Author went upon: Which are far from being repeated in
the Words set down here, unless Grounds in general be the same with Notions as
to Certainty by Ideas. I beg leave to consider what you here say as new to me,
and not Repeated.

Your Lordship says, That you brought me into the Controversy as you did,
because that Author went upon my Grounds. It Is possible he did, or did not: But
it cannot appear that he did go upon my Grounds, till those Grounds are
assigned, and the places both out of him and me produced to show, that we agree
in the same Grounds and go both upon them; when this is done there will be room
to consider whether it be so or no.

In the mean time you having brought me into the Controversy, for his going
upon this particular Ground, supposed to be mine, That clear and distinct Ideas
are necessary to Certainty. It can do nothing toward the clearing this, to say
in general, as your Lordship does, page 6.
That he went upon my Grounds, because though he should agree with me in
several other Things, but differ from me in this one Notion of Certainty, there
could be no reason for your dealing with me as you have done. That Notion of
Certainty, being your very exception against his Account of Reason; and the
sole occasion you took of bringing in Passages out of my Book; and the very
Foundation of arguing against them.

Your Lordship farther says here, page 6.
in this Repetition which you did not say before in the place referred to as
Repeated, That he made use of my Words. I think he did of Words something like
mine. But as I humbly conceive also, he made use of them, as his own, and not
as my Words; for I do not remember that he quotes me for them. This I am sure,
That in the Words quoted out of him by your Lordship, upon which my Book is
brought in, there is not one Syllable of Certainty by Ideas.

No doubt whatever he or I or any one have said, if your Lordship disapproves
of it, you have a right to Question him that said it. But I do not see how this
gives your Lordship any Right to entitle any Body to what he does not say,
whoever else says it.

The Author of Christianity not Mysterious, says in his Book something suitable
to what I had said in mine; borrowed or not borrowed from mine, I leave your
Lordship to determine for him. But I do not see what ground that gives your
Lordship to concern me in the Controversy you have with him, for things I say
which he does not; and which I say to a different purpose from his. Let that
Author and I agree in this one Notion of Certainty as much as you please, what
Reason I beseech your Lordship could this be, to quote my Words as his, who
never used them; and to purposes, as you say more than once, to which I never
intended them? This was that which I complained was a Riddle to me. And since
your Lordship can give no other Reason for it, than those we have hitherto
seen, I think it is sufficiently unridled, and you are in the right when you
say, you think it is no longer a Riddle to me.

I easily grant my little Reading may not have instructed me, what has been, or
what may be done, in the several ways of writing and managing of Controversy,
which like War always produces new Stratagems: Only I beg my Ignorance may be
my Apology, for saying, that this appears a new way of writing to me, and this
is the first time I ever met with it.

But let the ten Lines which your Lordship has set down out of him Vindic. p.
234.
be if you please, supposed to be precisely my Words, and that he quoted my
Book for them. I not see how even this entitles him to any more of my Book than
he has quoted. Or how any Words of mine in other parts of my Book, can be
ascribed to him, or argued against as his, or rather, as I know not whose,
which was the Thing I complained of; for the These and They, those Passages of
my Book were ascribed to, could not be that Author, for he used them not: Nor
the Author of The Essay of Humane Understanding for he was not argued against,
but was discharged from the Controversy under Debate. So that neither he nor I
being the They and Those, that so often occur, and deserved so much Pains from
your Lordship, I could not but complain of this to me incomprehensible way of
bringing my Book into that Controversy.

Another part of your Lordship's Repetition, p. 6.
which I humbly conceive, is no Repetition; because this also I find not in
that Passage quoted for it, is this, That your Lordship confessed that the
Reason why you quoted my Words so much.

My Lord, I do not remember any need your Lordship had to give a Reason why you
quoted my Words so much, because I do not remember, that I made that the matter
of my Complaint. That which I complained of, was not the quantity of what was
quoted out of my Book, but the manner of quoting it, 2 Let. p. 49.
viz. That I was so every where joined with others, under the comprehensive
words They and Them, though my Book alone were every where quoted, that the
World would be apt to think, I was the Person who argued against the Trinity:
And again, ib. p. 51.
That which I complained of, was, That I was made one of the Gentlemen of the
new way of Reasoning, without being guilty of what made them so, and so was
brought into a Chapter wherein I thought my self not concerned; which was
managed so, that my Book was all along quoted, and others argued against;
others were entitled to what I said, and I to what others said, without knowing
why or how: Nay, I told your Lordship in that very Reply, 2 Let. p. 50
That if your Lordship had directly questioned any of my Opinions, I should not
have complained. Thus your Lordship sees my Complaint was not of the largeness,
but of the manner of your Quotations. But of that in all these many Pages
employed by your Lordship for my Satisfaction, you, as I remember, have not
been pleased to offer any reason, nor can I hither to find it any way cleared:
When I do, I shall readily acknowledge your great Mastery in this as in all
other ways of writing.

I have in the foregoing Pages, for the clearing this Matter, been obliged to
take notice of Them and Those, as directly signifying no body. Whether your
Lordship will excuse me for so doing I know not, since I perceive such slight
words as Them and Those are not to be minded in your Lordship's Writings: Your
Lordship has a privilege to use such trifling Particles without taking any
great care what or whom they refer to.

To show the Reader that I do not talk without Book in the Case, I shall set
down your Lordship's own Words, p. 90.
What a hard fate does that Man lie under, that falls into the Hands of a
severe Critic! He must have a care of his But, and For, and Them, and It. For
the least ambiguity in any of these, will fill up Pages in an Answer, and make
a Book look considerable for the bulk of it. And what must a Man do, who is to
answer all such Objections about the use of Particles? I humbly conceive it is
not without reason, that your Lordship here claims an exemption from having a
care of your But, and your For, and your Them, and other Particles. The sequel
of your Letter will show, That it is a privilege your Lordship makes great use
of, and therefore have reason to be tender of it, and to cry out against those
unmannerly Critics, who question it. Upon this consideration, I cannot but
look on it as a misfortune to me, that it should fall in my way to displease
your Lordship, by disturbing you in the quiet, and perhaps ancient Possession
of so convenient a Privilege. But how great soever the advantages of it may be
to a Writer, I upon experience find it is very troublesome and perplexing to a
Reader, who is concerned to understand what is written, that he may answer to
it. But to return to the place we were upon.

Your Lordship goes on and says, p. 6.
Whether it does or no, i. e. Whether what your Lordship had said does clear
this Matter or no, you are content to leave it to any indifferent Reader; and
there it must rest at last although I should write Volumes about it.

Upon the reading of these last Words of your Lordship's, I thought you had
quite done with this personal Matter, so apt, as you say, to weary the World.
But whether it be that your Lordship is not much satisfied in the handling of
it, or in the letting it alone; whether your Lordship meant by these last
words, that what I write about it is Volumes, i. e. too much, as your Lordship
has told me in the first Page; but what your Lordship says about it is but
necessary; whether these or any other be the cause of it, Personal Matter, as
it seems, is very importunate, and troublesome to your Lordship, as it is to
the World: You turn it going in the end of one Paragraph, and personal Matter
thrusts it self in again in the beginning of the next, whether of it self,
without your Lordship's notice or consent, I examine not. But thus stand the
immediate following words wherein you Lordship asks me, p. 6.
But for what cause do I continue so unsatisfied? To which you make me give
this answer, That the cause why I continue so unsatisfied, is, That the Author
mentioned, went upon this Ground, That clear and distinct Ideas are necessary
to Certainty, but that is not my Notion as to Certainty by Ideas; which is,
That Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
Ideas, such as we have, whether they be in all their parts perfectly clear and
distinct or no; and that I have no Notions of Certainty more than this one.

These Words which your Lordship has set down for mine, I have printed in a
distinct Character, that the Reader may take particular notice of them; not
that there is any thing very remarkable in this Passage it self, but because it
makes the business of the Fourscore following Pages. For the three several
Answers that your Lordship says you have given to it, and that which you call
your Defense of them, reach, as I take it, to the 87 Page. But another
particular Reason why this Answer which your Lordship has made for me to a
Question of your own putting, is distinguished by a particular Character, is to
save frequent Repetitions of it, that the Reader by having recourse to it, may
see whether those things, which your Lordship says of it, be so or no, and
judge whether I am in the wrong, when I assure him, that I cannot find them to
be as you say.

Only before I come to what your Lordship positively says of this which you
call my Answer, I crave leave to observe that it supposes I continue
unsatisfied: To which I reply, That I no where say that I continue unsatisfied:
I may say, That what is offered for Satisfaction, gives none to me or any body
else; and yet I as well as other People, may be satisfied concerning the matter.

I now come to what your Lordship says positively of it.

1. You say that I tell you, That the cause why I continued unsatisfied, is,
That the Author mentioned, went upon this Ground, That clear and distinct Ideas
are necessary to Certainty; but that is not my Notion of Certainty by Ideas,
etc.

To which I crave leave to reply, That neither in the 50th Page of my Second
Letter which your Lordship quotes for it, nor any where else did I tell your
Lordship any such thing. Neither could I assign, That Authors going upon that
Ground, there mentioned as any cause of dissatisfaction to me, because I know
not that he went upon this Ground, That clear and distinct Ideas are necessary
to Certainty; for I have met with nothing produced by your Lordship out of him,
to prove that he did so. And if it be true, that he goes upon Grounds of
Certainty that are not mine, I know no Body that ought to be dissatisfied with
it but your Lordship, who have taken so much pains to make his Grounds mine,
and my Grounds his, and to entitle us both to what each has said apart.

2. Your Lordship says, This is no more than what I had said before in my
former Letter. Answ. For this I appeal to the 57th, or rather (as I think you
writ) 87th page quoted for it by your Lordship; where any one must have very
good Eyes, to find all that is set down here in this Answer, (as you a little
lower call it) which you have been pleased to put into my Mouth. For neither in
the one nor the other of those Pages, is there any such Answer of mine. Indeed,
in the 87th Page there are these Words, That Certainty, in my Opinion, lies in
the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, such as they are, and
not always in having perfectly clear and distinct Ideas. But these Words there,
are not given as Answer to this Question, Why do I continue so unsatisfied? And
the remarkable Answer above set down, is as I take it, more than these Words,
as much more in proportion as your Lordship's whole Letter is, more than the
half of it.

3. Your Lordship says of the remarkable Answer above set down, That you took
particular notice of it.

To which I crave leave to reply, That your Lordship no where before took
notice of this Answer, as you call it: For it was no where before extant,
though it be true, some part of the Words of it were. But some part of the
Words of this Answer (which too were never given as an Answer to the Question
proposed) can never be this Answer, it self.

4. Your Lordship farther says, That you gave three several Answers to it.

To which I must crave leave further to reply, That never an one of the three
Answers which you here say you gave to this my Answer, were given to this
Answer which in the Words above set down, you made me give to your Question,
Why I continued so unsatisfied?

To justify this my Reply, there needs no more but to set down these your
Lordship's three Answers, and to turn to the places where you say you gave them.

The first of your three Answers is this, p. 7.
That those who offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for
Certainty than I do, (according to this Answer) and speak more agreeably to my
original Grounds of Certainty. The place you quote for this, is 1 Ans. p. 80.
but in that place it is not given as an Answer to my saying, That the cause why
I continue unsatisfied, is, That the Author mentioned, went upon this Ground,
That clear and distinct Ideas are necessary to Certainty, but, etc. And if it
be given for Answer to it here, it seems a very strange one. For I am supposed
to say, That the cause why I continue unsatisfied, is, That the Author
mentioned, went upon a Ground different from mine; and to satisfy me I am
told, his way is better than mine, which cannot but be thought an Answer very
likely to satisfy me.

Your second Answer, which you say you gave to that remarkable Passage above
set down is this, p. 15.
That it is very possible the Author of Christianity not Mysterious, might
mistake or misapply my Notions; but there is too much reason to believe he
thought them the same, and we have no reason to be sorry that he has given me
this occasion for the explaining my meaning, and for the Vindication of my self
in the matters I apprehend he had charged me with; and for this you quote your
first Letter, p. 36. But neither are these Words in that place an Answer to my
saying, That the cause why I continued dissatisfied, is, That that Author went
upon this Ground, That clear and distinct Ideas are necessary to certainty,
but, etc.

Your third Answer, which you say you gave to that Passage above set down, is,
p. 20.
That my own Grounds of Certainty tend to Skepticism; and that in an Age
wherein the Mysteries of Faith are too much exposed by the Promoters of
Skepticism and Infidelity, it is a thing of dangerous consequence to start such
new methods of Certainty, as are apt to leave Men's Minds more doubtful than
before: For this you refer the Reader to your first Letter. p. 36.
But I must crave leave also to observe, That these Words are not all to be
found in that place; and those of them which are there, are by no means an
Answer to my saying, That the cause why I continue unsatisfied, is, etc.

What the Words which your Lordship has here set down as your three Answers,
are brought in for in those three places quoted by your Lordship, any one that
will consult them may see, it would hold me too long in Personal Matter to
explain that here; and therefore for your Lordship's satisfaction I pass by
those particulars. But this I crave leave to be positive in, That in neither of
them, they are given in reply to that, which is above set down, as my Answer to
your Lordship's Question, For what cause do I continue so unsatisfied? Though
your Lordship here says, p. 7.
That to This Answer they were given as a Reply, and it was it you had taken
notice of, and given these three several Replies to. As Answers therefore to
what you make me say here, viz. That the cause of my continuing unsatisfied,
is, That the Author mentioned, went upon a Ground of Certainty that is none of
mine; I cannot consider them. For to this neither of them is given as an
Answer, though this and it in ordinary construction, make them have that
reference. But these are some of your privileged Particles, and may be applied
how and to what you please.

But though neither of these Passages be any manner of Answer to what your
Lordship calls them Answers to, yet your laying such stress on them, that well
nigh half your Letter, as I take it, is spent in the defense of them; it is fit
I consider what you say under each of them.

I say, as I take it, near half your Letter is in defense of these three
Passages.

One reason why I speak so doubtfully, is, that though you say here, p. 7.
That you will lay them together and defend them, and that in effect all that
is said to the 87th Page is ranged under these three Heads; yet they being
brought in as Answers to what I am made to say is the cause why I continued
unsatisfied; I should scarce think your Lordship should spend so many Pages in
this Personal Matter, after you had but two or three Pages before so openly
blamed me for spending a less number of Pages in my Answer concerning Personal
Matters, what your Lordship had in your Letter concerning them.

Another reason why I speak so doubtfully, is because I do not see how these
three Passages need so long or any Defenses where they are not attacked; or if
they be attacked, methinks the Defenses of them should have been applied to the
Answers I had made to them; or if I have made none, and they be of such moment
that they require Answers, your Lordship's minding me that they did so, would
either by my continued silence have left to your Lordship all that you can
pretend to for my granting them, or else my Answers to them have given your
Lordship an occasion to defend them, and perhaps to have defended them
otherwise than you have done. This is certain, that these defenses had come
time enough when they had been attacked, and then it would have been seen
whether what was said, did defend them or no. The truth is, my Lord, if you
will give me leave to speak my Thoughts freely, when I consider these three, as
you call them, Answers, how they themselves are brought in, and what Relation
that which is brought under each of them has to them, and to the Matter in
Question; methinks they look rather like Texts chosen to be discoursed on, than
as Answers to be defended in a Controversy. For the connection of that which
in Train is tacked on to them, is such that makes me see I am wholly mistaken
in what I thought the established rule of Controversy. This was also another
Reason why I said you spent, as I take it, near half of your Letter in defense
of them. For when I consider how one thing hangs on to another, under the 3d
Answer, from Page 20, where it is brought in to p. 87. where I think that which
you call your defending it ends, it is a hard matter by the relation and
dependency of the parts of that Discourse (contained in those Pages) one on
another, to tell where it ends.

But to consider the Passages themselves, and the Defense of them.

That which you call your first Answer, and which you say you will defend, is
in these Words, p. 7.
Those who offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty
than I do, (according to this Answer) and speak more agreeably to my original
Grounds of Certainty. These Words being brought in at first as a reply to what
was called my Answer, but was not my Answer, as may be seen, Let. 1. p. 87. I
took no notice of them in my second Letter, as being nothing at all to the
Point in Hand, and therefore what need they have of a farther defense, when
nothing is objected to them, I do not see. To what purpose is it to spend seven
or eight Pages to show, that another Notion about Certainty, is better than
mine; when that tends not to show how your saying, That the Certainty of my
proof of a God, is not placed upon any clear and distinct Ideas, but upon the
force of Reason distinct from it, concerns me, which was the thing there to be
shown; as is visible to any one who will vouchsafe to look into that 87th Page
of my first Letter. And indeed, why should your Lordship trouble your self to
prove, which of Two different ways of Certainty by Ideas is the best, when you
have so ill an Opinion of the whole way of Certainty by Ideas, that you accuse
it of tendency to Skepticism? But it seems your Lordship is resolved to have
all the Faults in my Book cleared or corrected, and so you go on to defend
these Words. That those who offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer
for Certainty than I do. I could have wished that your Lordship had pleased a
little to explain them, before you had defended them; for they are not, to me,
without some Obscurity. However, to guess as well as I can, I think the
Proposition that you intend here, is this, That those who place Certainty in
the perception of the agreement or Disagreement of only clear and distinct
Ideas, are more in the right than I am, who place it in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, such as we have though they be not in all
their parts perfectly clear and distinct.

Whether your Lordship has proved this, or no, will be seen when we come to
consider what you have said in the defense of it. In the mean time, I have no
reason to be sorry, to hear your Lordship say so; because this supposes, That
Certainty can be attained by the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
clear and distinct Ideas. For if Certainty cannot be attained by the perception
of the agreement or disagreement of clear and distinct Ideas: How can they be
more in the right, who place Certainty in one sort of Ideas, that it cannot be
had in; than those who place it in another sort of Ideas, that it cannot be had
in?

I shall proceed now to examine what your Lordship has said in defense of the
Proposition you have here set down, to defend: which, you may be sure I shall
do, with all the favourableness that Truth will allow, since if your Lordship
makes it out to be true, it puts an end to the Dispute you have had with me.
For it confutes that main Proposition, which you have so much contended for,
That to lay all Foundation of Certainty, as to matters of Faith, upon clear and
distinct Ideas, does certainly overthrow all Mysteries of Faith: Unless you
will say, that Mysteries of Faith cannot consist with what you have proved to
be true.

To prove that they are more in the right than I, who place Certainty in the
Perception of the agreement or disagreement of clear and distinct Ideas only,
your Lordship says, p. 7.
That it is a wonderful thing, in point of Reason, for me to pretend to
Certainty by Ideas, and not allow these Ideas to be clear and distinct. This my
Lord looks as if I placed Certainty only in obscure and confused Ideas, and did
not allow it might be had by clear and distinct ones. But I have declared my
self so clearly and so fully to the contrary, that I doubt not, but your
Lordship would think I deserved to be asked, whether this were fair and
ingenuous dealing, to represent this matter, as this Expression does: But the
instances are so many, how apt my unlearned way of Writing is to mislead your
Lordship, and that always on the side least favorable to my Sense, that if I
should cry out as often as I think I meet with occasion for it; your Lordship
would have reason to be uneasy at the Ebullition and Enlarging of my
Complaints.

Your Lordship farther asks, p. 7 and 8.
How can I clearly perceive the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, if I have
not clear and distinct Ideas? For how is it possible for a Man's Mind to know
whether they agree or disagree, if there be some parts of those Ideas, we have
only general and confused Ideas of. I would rather Read these later Words, if
your Lordship please if there be some parts of those Ideas that are only
general and confused, for parts of Ideas that we have only general and confused
Ideas of, is not very clear and intelligible to me.

Taking then your Lordship's Question as cleared of this Obscurity, it will
stand thus. How is it possible for a Man's Mind to know, whether Ideas agree or
disagree, if there be some parts of those Ideas obscure and confused? In answer
to which, I crave leave to ask. Is it possible for a Man's Mind to perceive,
whether Ideas agree or disagree, if no parts of those Ideas be obscure and
confused, and by that Perception to attain Certainty? If your Lordship says,
No. How do you hereby prove, that they who place Certainty in the perception of
the agreement or disagreement of only clear and distinct Ideas, are more in the
right than I? For they who place Certainty, where it is impossible to be had,
can in that be no more in the right, than he who places it in any other
impossibility. If you say, Yes, Certainty may be attained by the perception of
the agreement or disagreement of clear and distinct Ideas, you give up the main
Question: You grant the Proposition, which you declare you chiefly oppose; and
so all this great Dispute with me is at an end. Your Lordship may take which of
these Two you please, if the former, the Proposition here to be proved, is
given up, if the latter, the whole Controversy is given up, one of them it is
plain you must say.

This and what your Lordship says farther on this Point, seems to me, to prove
nothing, but that you suppose, that either there are no such thing as obscure
and confused Ideas; and then, with submission, the distinction between clear
and obscure, distinct and confused is useless, and it is in vain to talk of
clear and obscure, distinct and confused Ideas, in opposition to one another:
Or else your Lordship supposes, that an obscure and confused Idea, is wholly
undistinguishable from all other Ideas, and so in effect is all other Ideas:
For if an obscure and confused Idea, be not one and the same with all other
Ideas, as it is impossible for it to be, then the obscure and confused Idea may
and will be so far different from some other Ideas, that it may be perceived
whether it agrees or disagrees with them or no. For every Idea in the Mind,
clear or obscure, distinct or confused, is but that one Idea, that it is, and
not another Idea, that it is not; and the Mind perceives it to be the Idea,
that it is, and not another Idea that it is different from.

What therefore I mean by obscure and confused Ideas, I have at large shown
Essay B. 2. C. 29.
and shall not trouble your Lordship with a Repetition of here. For that there
are such obscure and confused Ideas, I suppose the instances your Lordship
gives here p. 24.
Evince; to which I shall add this one more. Suppose you should in the
Twilight, or in a thick Mist, see two Things standing upright, near the size
and shape of an ordinary Man; but in so dim a Light, or at such a distance,
that they appeared very much alike, and you could not perceive them to be what
they really were, the one a Statue, the other a Man, would not these Two be
obscure and confused Ideas? And yet could not your Lordship be certain of the
Truth of this Proposition concerning either of them, that it was something, or
did exist, and that by perceiving the agreement of that Idea (as obscure and
confused as it was) with that of Existence as expressed in that Proposition?

This my Lord, is just the case of Substance, upon which you raised this
Argument, concerning obscure and confused Ideas; which this instance shows may
have Propositions made about them, of whose Truth we may be certain.

Hence I crave liberty to conclude, That I am nearer the Truth than those who
say, That Certainty is founded only in clear and distinct Ideas, if any Body
does say so. For no such Saying of any one of those, with whom your Lordship
joined me, for so saying, is, that I remember, yet produced; though this be
that for which They and Those, whoever they be, had from your Lordship Vindic.
p. 233. 234.
the Title of the Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning: And this be the
Opinion which your Lordship declares 1 Answ. p. 14.
you Oppose, as certainly overthrowing all Mysteries of Faith, and excluding
the Notion of Substance out of rational Discourse; which terrible Tarmagant
Proposition, viz. That Certainty is founded only in clear and distinct Ideas,
which has made such a Noise, and been the cause of the spending above Ten times
Fifty Pages, and given occasion to very large Ebullition of Thoughts; appears
not by any thing that has been yet produced, to be any where in their Writings,
with whom upon this Score you have had so warm a Controversy, but only in your
Lordship's Imagination, and what you have at least for this once, writ out of
your own Thoughts.

But if this Paragraph contain so little in defense of the Proposition, which
your Lordship in the beginning of it, set down on purpose to defend; what
follows is visibly more remote from it. But since your Lordship has been
pleased to tack it on here, though without applying of it any way, that I see,
to the defense of the Proposition to be defended, which is already got clean
out of Sight, I am taught, that it is fit I consider it here in this, which your
Lordship has thought the proper place for it.

In the next Paragraph, p. 9.
your Lordship is pleased to take notice of this part of my Complaint, viz.
That I say more than twice or ten times, That you blame those who place
Certainty in clear and distinct Ideas; but I do not, and yet you bring me in
amongst them. And for this, your Lordship quotes Seventeen several Pages of my
second Letter. Whoever will give himself the trouble to turn to those Pages,
will see how far I am in those places, from barely saying, That you blame those
who place Certainty, etc. And what reason you had to point to so many Places
for my so saying, as a repetition of my Complaint. And I believe they will find
the Proposition about placing Certainty only in clear and distinct Ideas, is
mentioned in them upon several occasions, and to different purposes as the
Argument required.

Be that as it will, this is a part of my Complaint, and you do me a Favor,
that after having, as you say, met with it in so many Places, you are pleased
at last to take notice of it, and promise me a full answer to it. The first
part of which full answer, is in these Words page 9.
That you do not deny but the first occasion of your Lordship's Charge, was in
the Supposition, that clear and distinct Ideas were necessary, in order to any
Certainty in our Minds. And that the only way to attain this Certainty, was by
comparing these Ideas together.

My Lord, though I have faithfully set down these Words out of your 2d Answer,
p. 9.
yet I must own I have Printed them in something a different Character from
that which they stand in your Letter. For your Lordship has published this
Sentence so, as if the supposition that clear and distinct Ideas, were
necessary in order to any Certainty in our Minds, were my Supposition; whereas
I must crave Leave to let my Reader know, That that Supposition is purely your
Lordship's, for you neither in your Defense of the Trinity, nor in your first
Answer, produce any thing to prove, That that was either an Assertion or
Supposition of mine: But your Lordship was pleased to suppose it for me. As to
the latter Words, and that the only way to attain this Certainty, was by
comparing these Ideas together. If your Lordship means by these Ideas, Ideas in
general; then I acknowledge these to be my Words, or to my Sense; but then they
are not any Supposition in my Book, though they are made part of the
Supposition here; but their Sense is expressed in my Essay at large in more
places than one. But if by these Ideas, your Lordship means only clear and
distinct Ideas, I crave leave to deny, that to be my Sense or any Supposition
of mine.

Your Lordship goes on, p. 9.
But to prove this. Prove what, I beseech you my Lord? That Certainty was to be
attained by comparing Ideas, was a Supposition of mine? To prove that there
needed no Words or Principles of mine to be produced, unless your Lordship
would prove that which was never denied.

But if it were to prove this, viz. That it was a Supposition of mine, That
clear and distinct Ideas were necessary to Certainty, and that to prove this to
be a Supposition of mine, p. 9.
My Words were produced, and my Principles of Certainty laid down and none
else; I answer, I do not remember any Words or Principles of mine produced to
show any ground for such a Supposition, that I placed Certainty only in clear
and distinct Ideas; and if there had been any such produced, your Lordship
would have done Me and the Reader a favor, to have marked the Pages wherein
one might have found them produced, unless your Lordship thinks you make amends
for quoting so many Pages of my second Letter, which might have been spared, by
neglecting wholly to quote any of your own where it needed. When your Lordship
shall please to direct me to those places where such Words and Principles of
mine were produced to prove such a Supposition, I shall readily turn to them,
to see how far they do really give ground for it. But my bad Memory not
suggesting to me any thing like it, your Lordship, I hope, will pardon me if I
do not turn over your Defense of the Trinity and your First Letter, to see
whether you have any such Proofs which you your self seem so much to doubt or
think so meanly of, that you do not so much as point out the places where they
are to be found; though we have in this very Page so eminent an Example, that
you are not sparing of your Pains in this kind, where you have the least
thought that it might serve your Lordship to the meanest purpose.

But though you produced no Words or Principles of mine to prove this a
Supposition of mine, yet in your next Words, here your Lordship produces a
Reason why you your self supposed it. For you say, p. 9.
You could not imagine that I could place Certainty in the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, and not suppose those Ideas to be clear and distinct; so
that at last the Satisfaction you give me, why my Book was brought into a
Controversy, wherein it was not concerned, is that your Lordship imagined I
supposed in it, what I did not suppose in it. And here I crave leave to ask,
Whether the Reader may not well suppose that you had a great mind to bring my
Book into that Controversy, when the only handle you could find for it, was an
imagination of a Supposition to be in it, which in truth was not there.

Your Lordship adds, p. 9.
That I finding my self joined in such Company which I did not desire to be
seen in, I rather chose to distinguish my self from them, by denying clear and
distinct Ideas to be necessary to Certainty.

If it might be permitted to another to guess at your Thoughts, as well as you
do at mine, he perhaps would turn it thus, That your Lordship finding no
readier way, as you thought, to set a mark upon my Book, than by bringing
several Passages of it into a Controversy concerning the Trinity wherein they
had nothing to do; and speaking of them under the name of Those and Them, as if
your Adversaries in that Dispute had made use of those Passages against the
Trinity, when no one Opposer of the Doctrine of the Trinity, that I know, or
that you have produced, ever made use of one of them; you thought fit to jumble
my Book with other Peoples Opinions after a new way never used by any other
writer that I ever heard of. If any one will consider what your Lordship has
said for my Satisfaction, (wherein you have, as I humbly conceive I have shown,
produced nothing but Imaginations of Imaginations, and Suppositions of
Suppositions) he will, I conclude, without straining of his Thoughts, be
carried to this Conjecture.

But Conjectures apart, your Lordship says, p. 9.
That I finding my self joined in such Company which I did not desire to be
seen in, I rather chose to distinguish my self. If keeping to my Book can be
called distinguishing my self. You say, I rather chose. Rather! than what, my
Lord, I beseech you? Your learned way of Writing, I find is every where beyond
my Capacity; and unless I will guess at your meaning (which is not very safe)
beyond what I can certainly understand by your Words, I often know not what to
answer to. It Is certain, you mean here, that I preferred distinguishing my self
from them I found my self joined with to something; but to what you do not say.
If you mean to owning that for my Notion of Certainty, which is not my Notion
of Certainty; this is true, I did and shall always rather choose to distinguish
my self from any them, than own that for my Notion which is not my Notion: If
you mean that I preferred my distinguishing my self from them to my being joined
with them, you make me choose where there neither is nor can be any Choice. For
what is wholly out of one's Power, leaves no room for Choice: And I think, I
should be laughed at, if I should say, I rather choose to distinguish my self
from the Papists, than that it should Rain. For it is no more in my Choice not
to be joined, as your Lordship has been pleased to join me, with the unknown
They and Them, than it is in my Power that it should not Rain.

It Is like you will say here again, this is a nice Criticism; I grant, my Lord,
it is about Words and Expressions: But since I cannot know your meaning but by
your Words and Expressions, if this defect in my Understanding very frequently
overtake me in your Writings to and concerning me, it is troublesome, I confess;
but what must I do? Must I play at blind Man's-buff? Catch at what I do not
see? Answer to I know not what; to no meaning, i. e. to nothing? Or must I
presume to know your meaning when I do not?

For Example, suppose I should presume it to be your meaning here, That I found
my self joined in Company by your Lordship, with the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious, by your Lordship's imputing the same Notions of Certainty to us
both; That I did not desire to be seen in his Company, i. e. to be thought to
be of his Opinion in other things: And therefore I choose rather to distinguish
my self from him, by denying clear and distinct Ideas to be necessary to
Certainty, than to be so joined with him. If I should presume this to be the
Sense of these your Words here, and that by the doubtful signification of the
Expression of being joined in Company and seen in Comany, used equivocally,
your Lordship should mean, that because I was said to be of his Opinion in one
thing, I was to be thought to be of his Opinion in all things, and therefore
disowned to be of his Opinion in that, wherein I was of his Opinion; because I
would not be thought of his Opinion all through, would not your Lordship be
displeased with me for supposing you to have such a meaning as this, and ask me
again, Whether I could think you a Man of so little Sense to talk thus? And yet
my Lord, this is the best I can make of these Words, which seem to me rather to
discover a secret in your way of dealing with me, than any thing in me, that I
am ashamed of.

For I am not, nor ever shall be ashamed to own any Opinion I have, because
another Man holds the same; and so far as that brings me into his Company, I
shall not be troubled to be seen in it. But I shall never think, That that
entitles me to any other of his Opinions, or makes me of his Company in any
other sense, how much soever that be the design: For your Lordship has used no
small Art and Pains to make me of his and the Unitarians Company in all that
they say, only because that Author has ten lines in the beginning of his Book,
which agrees with something I have said in mine, from whence we become
Companions, so universally united in Opinion, that They must be entitled to all
that I say, and I to all that They say.

My Lord, when I writ my Book, I could not design to distinguish my self from
the Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning, who were not then in being, nor are,
that I see, yet: Since I find nothing produced out of the Unitarians, nor the
Author of Christianity not Mysterious, to show, That they make clear and
distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty. And all that I have done since, has been
to show, That you had no Reason to join my Book with Men (let them be what they
or those you please) who founded Certainty only upon clear and distinct Ideas,
when my Book did not found it only upon clear and distinct Ideas. And I cannot
tell why the appealing to my Book now should be called a choosing rather to
distinguish my self.

My Reader must pardon me here for this uncouth Phrase of joining my Book with
Men. For as your Lordship ordered the matter (pardon me if I say in your new
way of writing) so it was, if your own word may be taken in the Case: For, to
give me Satisfaction, you insist upon this, That you did not join me with those
Gentlemen in their Opinions, but tell me they used my Notions to other purposes
than I intended them; and so thee was no need for me to distinguish my self
from them, when your Lordship had done it for me, as you plead all along.
Though here you are pleased to tell me, That I was joined with them, and That I
found my self joined in such Company as I did not desire to be seen in.

My Lord, I could find my self joined in no Company upon this occasion, but
what you joined me in. And therefore I beg leave to ask your Lordship, Did you
join me in Company with those, in whose Company you here say, I do not desire
to be seen? If you own that you did, how must I understand that Passage where
you say, Vindic. p. 239.
That you must do that Right to the ingenious Author of the Essay of Humane
Understanding, from whence these Notions were borrowed, to serve other Purposes
than he intended them; which you repeat again 1 Ans. p. 35.
as matter of Satisfaction to me, and as a Proof of the care you took not to be
misunderstood. If you did join me with them, what is become of all the
Satisfaction in the Point, which your Lordship has been at so much Pains about?
And if you did not join me with them, you could not think I found my self
joined with them, or chose to distinguish my self from Men I was never joined
with. For my Book was innocent of what made them Gentlemen of the new way of
Reasoning.

There seems to me something very delicate in this matter. I should be supposed
joined to them, and your Lordship should not be supposed to have joined me to
them, upon so slight or no occasion; and yet all this comes solely from your
Lordship. How to do this to your satisfaction, I confess my self to be too
dull: And therefore I have been at the Pains to examine how far I have this
Obligation to your Lordship; and how far you would be pleased to own it, that
the World might understand your Lordship's, to me, incomprehensible way of
writing on this occasion.

For if you had a Mind by a new and very dexterous way, becoming the learning
and caution of a great Man, to bring me into such Company, which you think I
did not desire to be seen in: I thought such a Pattern set by such an Hand as
your Lordship's, ought not to be lost by being passed over too slightly.
Besides, I hope, that you will not take it amiss, that I was willing to see,
what Obligation I had to your Lordship in the favor your designed me. But I
crave leave to assure your Lordship, I shall never be ashamed to own any
Opinion I have, because another Man (of whom perhaps your Lordship or others
have no very good Thoughts) is of it, nor be unwilling to be so far seen in his
Company: Though I shall always think I have a right to demand, and shall desire
to be satisfied, why any one makes to himself, or takes an occasion from
thence, in manner that favors not too much of Charity to extend this Society
to those Opinions of that Man, with which I have nothing to do, That the World
may see the Justice and good Will of such endeavors, and judge whether such
arts savor not a little of the Spirit of the Inquisition.

For if I mistake not, it is the method of that holy Office, and the way of
those revered Guardians of what they call the Christian Faith, to raise Reports
or start occasions of Suspicion concerning the Orthodoxy of any one they have
no very good Will toward; and require him to clear himself, guilding all this
with the care of Religion, and the Profession of respect and tenderness to the
Person himself, even when they deliver him up to be Burnt by the secular Power.

I shall not my Lord say, That you have had any ill Will to me, for I never
deserved any from you. But I shall be better able to answer those, who are apt
to think the Method you have taken, has some Conformity, so far as it has gone;
with what Protestants complain of in the Inquisition, when you shall have
cleared this matter a little otherwise, and assigned a more sufficient Reason,
for bringing me into the Party of those that oppose the Doctrine of the Trinity,
than only because, The Author of Christianity not Mysterious, has in the
beginning of his Book, half a Score Lines which you guess he borrowed out of
mine. For that in Truth is all the matter of fact, upon which all this Dust is
raised; and the matter so advanced by degrees, that now I am told, I should
have cleared my self, by owning the Doctrine of the Trinity: As if I had been
ever accused of disowning it. But that which shows no small skill in this
management, is, That I am called upon to clear my self, by the very same Person
who raising the whole Dispute, has himself over and over again cleared me; and
upon that grounds the Satisfaction he pretends to give to me and others, in
answer to my Complaint of his having without any Reason at all, brought my Book
into the Controversy concerning the Trinity. But to go on.

If the preceding part of this Paragraph, had nothing in it of Defense of this
Proposition, That those who offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer
for Certainty than I do, etc. It is certain, That what follows, is altogether
as remote from any such Defense.

Your Lordship says, p. 10.
That Certainty by Sense, Certainty by Reason, and Certainty by Remembrance,
are to be distinguished from the Certainty under debate, and to be shut out
from it: And upon this you spend the 11th, 12th and 13th Pages. Supposing it
so, how does this at all tend to the defense of this Proposition, That those
who offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty than I do?
For whether Certainty by Sense, by Reason and by Remembrance, be or be not
comprehended in the Certainty under debate, this Proposition, That those who
offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty than I do,
will not at all be confirmed, or invalidated thereby.

The proving therefore, That Certainty by Sense, by Reason, and by Remembrance,
is to be excluded from the Certainty under debate, serving nothing to the
defense of the Proposition to be defended, and so having nothing to do here,
let us now consider it as a Proposition, that your Lordship has a Mind to
prove, as serving to some other great purpose of your own, or perhaps, in some
other View against my Book; for you seem to lay no small stress upon it, by
your way of introducing it. For you very solemnly set your self to prove, p. 9.
and 10.
That the Certainty under debate, is the Certainty of Knowledge, and that a
Proposition whose Ideas are to be compared as to their agreement or
disagreement, is the proper object of this Certainty. From whence your Lordship
infers, p* 10. 11, 12.
That therefore this Certainty is to be distinguished from a Certainty by
Sense, by Reason and by Remembrance. But by what Logic this is inferred, is not
easy to me to discover. For if a Proposition, whose Ideas are to be compared as
to their agreement or disagreement, be the proper object of the Certainty under
debate; If Propositions whose Certainty we arrive at by Sense, Reason or
Remembrance be of Ideas, which may be compared, as to their agreement or
disagreement, then they cannot be excluded from that Certainty, which is to be
had by so comparing those Ideas: Unless they must be shut out for the very same
Reason, that others are taken in.

1. Then as to Certainty by Sense or Propositions of that kind.

The Object of the Certainty under debate, your Lordship owns, is a Proposition
whose Ideas are to be compared as to their agreement or disagreement. The
agreement or disagreement of the Ideas of a Proposition to be compared, may be
examined and perceived by Sense, and is Certainty by Sense: And therefore how
this Certainty is to be distinguished and shut out from that, which consists in
the perceiving the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas of any Proposition,
will not be easy to show; unless one Certainty is distinguished from another,
by having that, which makes the other to be Certainty, viz. The perception of
the agreement or disagreement of two Ideas, as expressed in that Proposition,
v. g. May I not be certain, that a Ball of Ivory that lies before my Eyes is
not square? And is it not my Sense of Seeing, that makes me perceive the
disagreement of that square Figure, to that round Matter, which are the Ideas
expressed in that Proposition? How then is Certainty by Sense excluded or
distinguished from, that knowledge which consists in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas?

2. Your Lordship distinguishes the Certainty which consists in the perceiving
the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in any Proposition from
Certainty by Reason. p. 11.
To have made good this distinction, I humbly conceive, you would have done
well to have showed that the agreement or disagreement of two Ideas could not
be perceived by the intervention of a third, which I, and as I guess other
People call Reasoning, or knowing by Reason. As for example, cannot the sides
of a given Triangle, be known to be equal by the Intervention of two Circles,
whereof one of these sides is a common Radius?

To which it is like your Lordship will answer, what I find you do here, p. 12.
about the knowledge of the existence of Substance, by the intervention of the
existence of Modes, That you grant one may come to Certainty of Knowledge in
the case; but not a Certainty by Ideas, but by a Consequence of Reason deduced
from the Ideas we have by our Senses. This, my Lord, you have said, and thus
you have more than once opposed Reason and Ideas as inconsistent, which I
should be very glad to see proved once, after these several occasions I have
given your Lordship, by excepting against that Supposition. But since the word
Idea has the ill luck to be so constantly opposed by your Lordship to Reason,
Permit me if you please instead of it, to put what I mean by it, viz. the
immediate objects of the Mind in thinking (for that is it which I would
signify by the word Ideas) and then let us see how your answer will run. You
grant that from the sensible Modes of Bodies, we may come to a certain
Knowledge, that there are Bodily Substances; but this you say is not a
Certainty by the immediate objects of the Mind in thinking, but by a
consequence of Reason deduced from the immediate objects of the Mind in
thinking, which we have by our Senses. When you can prove that we can have a
Certainty, by a consequence of Reason; which Certainty shall not also be by the
immediate objects of the Mind in using its Reason, you may say such Certainty
is not by Ideas but by Consequence of Reason. But that I believe will not be,
till you can show, That the Mind can think, or reason, or know, without
immediate objects of thinking, reasoning, or knowing, all which Objects, as
your Lordship knows, I call Ideas.

You subjoin, p. 12.
And this can never prove that we have Certainty by Ideas, where the Ideas
themselves are not clear and distinct. The Question is not, whether we can have
Certainty by Ideas that are not clear and distinct? Or whether my Words (if by
the Particle This, you mean my Words set down in the foregoing Page) prove any
such thing, which I humbly conceive they do not. But whether Certainty by
Reason, be excluded from the Certainty under debate, which I humbly conceive
you have not from my Words or any other way proved.

3. The third sort of Propositions that your Lordship excludes, p. 12.
are those whose Certainty we know by Remembrance, but in these two the
agreement or disagreement of the Ideas contained in them is perceived; not
always indeed, as it was at first by an actual view of the Connection of all
the intermediate Ideas, whereby the agreement or disagreement of those in the
Proposition was at first perceived, but by other intermediate Ideas, that show
the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas contained in the Proposition, whose
Certainty we remember.

As in the instance you here make use of, viz. That the three Angles of a
Triangle are equal to two right ones. The Certainty of which Proposition we
know by Remembrance, though the Demonstration has sliped out of our Minds; but
we know it in a different way from what your Lordship supposes. The agreement
of the two Ideas, as joined in that Proposition is perceived, but it is by the
intervention of other Ideas than those which at first produced that Perception.
I remember, i. e. I know (for Remembrance is but the reviving of some past
Knowledge) that I was once certain of the truth of this Proposition, That the
three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones. The immutability of the
same Relations between the same immutable things, is now the Idea that shows
me, that if the three Angles of a Triangle were once equal to two right ones,
they will always be equal to two right ones; and hence I come to be certain,
that what was once true in the Case is always true; what Ideas once agreed,
will always agree; and consequently what I once knew to be true, I shall always
know to be true as long as I can remember that I once knew it.

Your Lordship says, p. 9.
That the Debate between us is about Certainty of Knowledge, with regard to
some Proposition whose Ideas are to be compared as to their agreement or
disagreement: Out of this Debate you say, Certainty by Sense, by Reason and by
Remembrance, is to be excluded. I desire you then, my Lord, to tell what sort
of Propositions will be within the Debate, and to name me one of them; if
Propositions, whose Certainty we know by Sense, Reason, or Remembrance, are
excluded?

However, from what you have said concerning them, your Lordship in the next
Paragraph concludes them out of the Question; your Words are, These things then
being out of the Question.

Out of what Question, I beseech you, my Lord? The Question here, and that of
your own proposing to be defended in the Affirmative is this, Whether those who
offer at clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty than I do? And
how Certainty by Sense, by Reason, and by Remembrance comes to have any
particular Exception in reference to this Question, it is my misfortune not to
be able to find.

But your Lordship leaving the examination of the Question under debate, by a
new state of the Question, would pin upon me what I never said. Your Words are,
p. 13.
These things then being put out of the Question which belong not to it. The
Question truly stated is, Whether we can attain to any Certainty of Knowledge
as to the truth of a Proposition in the way of Ideas, where the Ideas
themselves, by which we came to that Certainty, be not clear and distinct? With
Submission, my Lord, that which I say in the Point, is, That we may be certain
of the truth of a Proposition concerning an Idea which is not in all its parts
clear and distinct; and therefore if your Lordship will have any Question with
me concerning this matter, the Question truly stated is, Whether we can frame
any Proposition concerning a thing whereof we have but an obscure and confused
Idea, of whose Truth we can be certain?

That this is the Question, you will easily agree, when you will give your self
the trouble to look back to the Rise of it.

Your Lordship having found out a strange sort of Men Vindic. p. 232.
who had broached a Doctrine which supposed that we must have clear and distinct
Ideas of what ever we pretend to a Certainty of in our Minds, was pleased for
this to call them the Gentlemen of a new way of Reasoning, and to make me one
of them. I answered, that I placed not Certainty only in clear and distinct
Ideas, and so ought not to have been made one of them, being not guilty of what
made a Gentleman of this new way of Reasoning. It Is pretended still, that I am
guilty; and endeavored to be proved. To know now whether I am or no, it must
be considered what you lay to their Charge, as the consequence of that Opinion;
and that is, That upon this Ground we cannot come to any Certainty that there
is such a thing as Substance. This appears by more places than one. Your
Lordship asks, Vindic. p. 240.
How is it possible that we may be certain that there are both bodily and
spiritual Substances, if our Reason depend upon clear and distinct Ideas? And
again, ib.
How come we to be certain that there are spiritual Substances in the World,
since we can have no clear and distinct Ideas concerning them? And your
Lordship having set down some Words out of my Book, as if they were
inconsistent with my Principle of Certainty founded only in clear and distinct
Ideas, You say, Vindic. p. 244.
From whence it follows that we may be certain of the Being of a spiritual
Substance, though we have no clear and distinct Ideas of it.

Other places might be produced, but these are enough to show, That those who
held clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty, were accused to extend it
thus far, that where any Idea was obscure and confused, there no Proposition
could be made concerning it, of whose truth we could be certain, v. g. we could
not be certain that there was in the World such a thing as Substance, because
we had but an obscure and confused Idea of it.

In this sense therefore I denied that clear and distinct Ideas were necessary
to Certainty, v. g. I denied it to be my Doctrine, That where an Idea was
obscure and confused, there no Proposition could be made concerning it, of
whose Truth we could be certain. For I held we might be certain of the truth of
this Proposition, That there was Substance in the World, though we have but an
obscure and confused Idea of Substance: And your Lordship endeavored to prove
we could not, as may be seen at large in that 10th Chapter of your Vindication,
etc.

From all which it is evident, that the Question between us truly stated is
this, Whether we can attain Certainty of the truth of a Proposition concerning
any thing whereof we have but an obscure and confused Idea?

This being the Question, the first thing you say, p. 13.
is, That Des Carts was of your Opinion against me. Answ. If the Question were
to be decided by Authority, I had rather it should be by your Lordship's than
Des Cartes's: And therefore I should excuse my self to you, as not having
needed, that you should have added his Authority to yours, to shame me into a
Submission; or that you should have been at the Pains to have transcribed so
much out of him, for my sake, were it fit for me to hinder the display of the
Riches of your Lordship's universal reading; wherein, I doubt not, but I should
take pleasure my self, if I had it to show.

I come therefore to what I think your Lordship principally aimed at; which, as
I humbly conceive, was to show out of my Book, That I founded Certainty only on
clear and distinct Ideas. And yet, as you say, p. 15.
I have complained of your Lordship in near twenty places of my Second Letter,
for charging this upon me. By this the World will judge of the Justice of my
Complaints, and the Consistency of my Notion of Ideas.

Answ. What Consistency of my Notion of Ideas has to do here, I know not; for I
do not remember, that I made any Complaint concerning that. But supposing my
Complaints were ill grounded in this one case concerning Certainty; yet, they
might be reasonable in other Points; and therefore, with Submission, I humbly
conceive the inference was a little too large, to conclude from this particular
against my Complaints in general.

In the next place I answer, That supposing the places which your Lordship
brings out of my Book did prove what they do not, viz. That I founded Certainty
only in clear and distinct Ideas, yet my Complaints in the Case are very just.
For your Lordship at first brought me into the Controversy, and made me one of
the Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning, for founding all Certainty on clear
and distinct Ideas, only upon a bare Supposition that I did so, which I think
your Lordship confesses in these Words; p. 9.
where you say, That you do not deny but the first occasion of your Charge, was
the Supposition that clear and distinct Ideas were necessary in order to any
Certainty in our Minds; and that the only way to attain this Certainty, was the
comparing these, i. e. clear and distinct Ideas together; but to prove this, my
Words, your Lordship says, were produced, and my Principles of Certainty laid
down and none else. Answer. It Is strange, that when my Principles of Certainty
were laid down, this (if I held it) was not found amongst them: Having looked
therefore, I do not find in that place, that any Words or Principles of mine
were produced to prove that I held, That the only way to attain Certainty, was
by comparing only clear and distinct Ideas; so that all that then made me one
of the Gentlemen of the new way of Reasoning, was only your supposing that I
supposed that clear and distinct Ideas are necessary to Certainty. And
therefore I had then and have still, reason to complain, That your Lordship
brought me into this Controversy upon so slight Grounds, which I humbly
conceive will always show it to have proceeded not so much from any thing you
had then found in my Book, as from a great willingness in your Lordship at any
rate to do it; and of this the Passages which you have here now produced out of
my Essay are an evident Proof.

For if your Lordship had then known any thing that seemed so much to your
purpose, when you produced, as you say, my Words and my Principles to prove,
That I held clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty, it cannot be
believed that you would have omitted these Passages, either then or in your
Answer to my first Letter, and deferred them to this your Answer to my second.
These Passages therefore now quoted here by your Lordship, give me leave, my
Lord, to suppose have been by a new and diligent search found out, and are now
at last brought post factum to give some color to your way of proceeding with
me, though these Passages being, as I suppose, then unknown to you; they could
not be the Ground of making me one of those who place Certainty only in clear
and distinct Ideas.

Let us come to the Passages themselves, and see what help they afford you.

The first Words you set down out of my Essay B. 4. C. 18.. 8.
are these, The Mind not being certain of the truth of that it does not
evidently know. From these Words, that which I infer in that place, is, that
Therefore the Mind is bound in such Cases, to give up its Assent to an unerring
Testimony. But your Lordship from them infers here, p. 15.
Therefore I make clear Ideas necessary to Certainty; or therefore by
considering the immediate Objects of the Mind in thinking, we cannot be certain
that Substance (whereof we have an obscure and confused Idea) does exist. I
shall leave your Lordship to make good this Consequence when you think fit, and
proceed to the next Passage you allege, which you say p. 15.
proves it more plainly. I believe it will be thought it should be proved more
plainly, or else it will not be proved at all.

This plainer Proof is out of B. 4. Chapter 4. Sect. 8. in these words, That which
is requisite to make our Knowledge certain, is the clearness of our Ideas. Ans.
The Certainty here spoken of, is the Certainty of general Propositions in
Morality, and not of the particular Existence of any thing; and therefore tends
not at all to any such Position as this, That we cannot be certain of the
existence of any particular sort of Being, though we have but an obscure and
confused Idea of it. Though it does affirm, That we cannot have any certain
Perception of the Relations of general Moral Ideas (wherein consists the
Certainty of general Moral Propositions) any farther than those Ideas are clear
in our Minds. And that this is so, I refer my Reader to that Chapter for
Satisfaction.

The third place produced p. 15.
by your Lordship, out of B. 4. Chapter 12. Sect. 14. is, For it being evident that
our Knowledge cannot exceed our Ideas, where they are only imperfect, confused
or obscure; we cannot expect to have certain perfect or clear Knowledge. To
understand these Words aright, we must see in what place they stand, and that
is in a Chapter of the improvement of our Knowledge, and therein are brought as
a reason to show how necessary it is for the enlarging of our Knowledge, to get
and setle in our Minds as far as we can, clear distinct and constant Ideas of
those things we would consider and know. The Reason whereof there given, is
this, That as far as they are only imperfect, confused and obscure; we cannot
expect to have certain, perfect or clear Knowledge, i. e. that our Knowledge
will not be clear and certain so far as the Idea is imperfect and obscure.
Which will not at all reach your Lordship's purpose, who would argue, that
because I say our Idea of Substance is obscure and confused, therefore upon my
Grounds, we cannot know that such a thing as Substance exists; because I placed
Certainty only in clear and distinct Ideas. Now to this I answered, that I did
not place all Certainty only on clear and distinct Ideas, in such a Sense as
that, and therefore to avoid being mistaken, I said, 2 Answ. p. 50.
That my Notion of Certainty by Ideas, is, that Certainty consists in the
perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas; such as we have, whether
they be in all their parts perfectly clear and distinct or no, viz. if they are
clear and distinct enough to be capable of having their agreement or
disagreement with any other Idea perceived, so far they are capable of
affording us Knowledge, though at the same time they are so obscure and
confused, as that there are other Ideas, with which we can by no means so
compare them, as to perceive their agreement or disagreement with them. This
was the clearness and distinctness which I denied to be necessary to Certainty.

If your Lordship would have done me the honor to have considered what I
understood by obscure and confused Ideas, and what every one must understand by
them, who thinks clearly and distinctly concerning them, I am apt to imagine
you would have spared your self the trouble of raising this Question, and
omitted these Quotations out of my Book, as not serving to your Lordship's
purpose.

The fourth Passage which you seem to lay most stress on, proves as little to
your purpose as either of the former Three. The Words Essay B. 4. C. 2.. 15.
are these. But obscure and confused Ideas, can never produce any clear and
certain Knowledge. Because as far as any Ideas are confused or obscure, the
Mind can never perceive clearly whether they agree or no. The latter part of
these Words, are a plain interpretation of the former, and show their meaning
to be this, viz. Our obscure and confused Ideas, as they stand in
contra-distinction to clear and distinct, have all of them something in them,
whereby they are kept from being wholly imperceptible and perfectly confounded
with all other Ideas, and so their agreement or disagreement with at least some
other Ideas, may be perceived, and thereby produce Certainty, though they are
obscure and confused Ideas. But so far as they are obscure and confused, so
that their agreement or disagreement cannot be perceived, so far they cannot
produce Certainty, v. g. the Idea of Substance is clear and distinct enough to
have its agreement with that of actual Existence perceived: But yet it is so
far obscure and confused, that there be a great many other Ideas, with which,
by reason of its obscurity and confusedness, we cannot compare it so, as to
produce such a Perception: And in all those Cases we necessarily come short of
Certainty. And that this was so, and that I meant so, I humbly conceive, you
could not but have seen, if you had given your self the trouble to reflect on
that Passage which you quoted, viz. p. 7.
That Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
Ideas, such as we have, whether they be in all their parts perfectly clear and
distinct or no. To which, what your Lordship has here brought out of the second
Book of my Essay, is no manner of Contradiction; unless it be a Contradiction
to say, that an Idea which cannot be well compared with some Ideas, from which
it is not clearly and sufficiently distinguishable, is yet capable of having
its agreement or disagreement perceived with some other Idea, with which it is
not so confounded, but that it may be compared. And therefore I had, and have
still reason to complain of your Lordship, for charging that upon me, which I
never said nor meant.

To make this yet more visible, give me leave to make use of an Instance in the
object of the Eyes in Seeing, from whence the Metaphor of obscure and confused
is transferred to Ideas the objects of the Mind in Thinking. There is no object
which the Eye sees, that can be said to be perfectly obscure, for then it would
not be seen at all; nor perfectly confused; for then it could not be
distinguished from any other, no not from a clearer. For Example, one sees in
the Dusk something of that shape and size, that a Man in that degree of Light
and distance would appear. This is not so obscure that he sees nothing, nor so
confused that he cannot distinguish it from a Steeple or a Star; But is so
obscure, that he cannot thought it be a Statue distinguish it from a Man, and
therefore in regard of a Man, it can produce no clear and distinct Knowledge;
But yet as obscure and confused an Idea as it is, this hinders not, but there
may many propositions be made concerning it, as particularly that it exists, of
the Truth of which we may be certain. And that without any Contradiction to
what I say in my Essay, viz. That obscure and confused Ideas can never produce
any clear and certain Knowledge. Because as far as they are confused or
obscure, the Mind cannot perceive clearly whether they agree or no. This reason
that I there give, plainly limiting it only to Knowledge, where the obscurity
and confusion is such, that it hinders the perception of agreement or
disagreement, which is not so great in any obscure and confused Idea, but that
there is some other Ideas, with which it may be perceived to agree or disagree,
and there it is capable to produce Certainty in us.

And thus I am come to the end of your Defense of your first Answer, as you
call it, and desire the Reader to consider, how much in the eight Pages
employed in it, is said to defend this Proposition, that Those who offer at
clear and distinct Ideas, bid much fairer for Certainty than I do?

But your Lordship having under this Head taken occasion to examine my making
clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty; I crave leave to consider
here, what you say of it in another place. I find one Argument more to prove,
That I place Certainty only in clear and distinct Ideas. Your Lordship tells
me, p. 63.
and bids me observe my own Words, that I positively say, That the Mind not
being certain of the Truth of that it does not evidently know. So that, says
your Lordship, it is plain here, that I place Certainty in evident Knowledge,
or in clear and distinct Ideas, and yet my great complaint of your Lordship
was, that you charged this upon me, and now you find it in my own Words.
Answer, I do observe my own Words, but do not find in them, or in clear and
distinct Ideas, though your Lordship has set these down as my Words. I there
indeed say, The Mind is not certain of what it does not evidently know. Whereby
I place Certainty, as your Lordship says, only in evident Knowledge, but
evident Knowledge may be had in the clear and evident perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas; though some of them should not be in all
their parts perfectly clear and distinct, as is evident in this Proposition,
that Substance does Exist.

But you give not off this Matter so. For these Words of mine above quoted p.
15.
by your Lordship, viz. It being evident that our Knowledge cannot exceed our
Ideas, where they are imperfect, confused or obscure, we cannot expect to have
certain, perfect or clear Knowledge your Lordship has here p. 63.
up again: And thereupon charge it on me as a contradiction, that confessing
our Ideas to be imperfect, confused and obscure, I say, I do not yet place
Certainty in clear and distinct Ideas. Answer, The Reason is plain, for I do
not say that all our Ideas are imperfect, confused and obscure; nor that
obscure and confused Ideas are in all their parts so obscure and confused, that
no agreement or disagreement between them and any other Idea can be perceived,
and therefore my confession of imperfect, obscure and confused Ideas, takes not
away all Knowledge, even concerning those very Ideas.

But, says your Lordship, Can Certainty be had with imperfect and obscure
Ideas, and yet no Certainty be had by them? Add if you please, my Lord, [by
those parts of them which are obscure and confused.] And then the Question will
be right put, and have this easy Answer. Yes, my Lords, and that without any
contradiction, because an Idea that is not in all its parts perfectly clear and
distinct, and is therefore an obscure and confused Idea; may yet with those
Ideas, with which, by any obscurity it has, it is not confounded, be capable to
produce Knowledge by the perception of its agreement or disagreement with them.
And yet it will hold true, that in that part wherein it is imperfect, obscure
and confused, we cannot expect to have certain, perfect or clear Knowledge.

For Example, he that has the Idea of a Leopard, as only of a spotted Animal,
must be confessed to have but a very imperfect, obscure and confused Idea of
that Species of Animals; and yet this obscure and confused Idea, is capable by
a perception of the agreement or disagreement of the clear part of it, viz.
that of Animal, with several other Ideas to produce Certainty: Though as far as
the obscure part of it confounds it with the Idea of a Lynx, or other spotted
Animal it can, joined with them, in many Propositions, produce no Knowledge.

This might easily be understood to be my meaning by these Words, which your
Lordship quotes p. 122.
out of my Essay, viz. That our Knowledge consisting in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of any two Ideas, its clearness or obscurity consists
in the clearness or obscurity of that Perception, and not in the clearness or
obscurity of the Ideas themselves. Upon which your Lordship asks, p. 122.
How is it possible for the Mind to have a clear perception of the agreement of
Ideas, if the Ideas themselves be not clear and distinct? Answer, Just as the
Eyes can have a clear perception of the agreement or disagreement of the clear
and distinct parts of a Writing, with the clear parts of another; though one,
or both of them, be so obscure and blur'd in other parts, that the Eye cannot
perceive any agreement or disagreement they have one with another. And I am
sorry that these Words of mine 2 Let. p. 50.
My Notion of Certainty by Ideas, is, that Certainty consists in the perception
of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, such as we have, whether they be in
all their parts perfectly clear and distinct or no, were not plain enough to
make your Lordship understand my meaning, and save you all this new, and as it
seems to me, needless trouble.

In your 15th Page, your Lordship comes to your second of the three Answers
which you say p. 7.
you had given and would lay together and defend.

You say p. 15.
(2) you answered, That it is very possible the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious, might mistake or misapply my Notions; but there is too much reason
to believe, he thought them the same; and we have no reason to be sorry that he
has given me this occasion for the explaining my meaning, and for the
Vindication of my self in the matters I apprehend he had charged me with. These
words your Lordship quotes out of the 36th Page of your first Letter. But as I
have already observed they are not there given as an answer to this that you
make me here say; and therefore to what purpose you repeat them here is not
easy to discern, unless it can be thought that an unsatisfactory answer in one
place can become satisfactory by being repeated in another, where it is, as I
humbly conceive, less to the purpose, and no answer at all. It was there indeed
given as an answer to my saying, That I did not place Certainty in clear and
distinct Ideas, which I said to show that you had no reason to bring me into
the Controversy, because the Author of Christianity not Mysterious placed
Certainty in clear and distinct Ideas. To satisfy me for your doing so, your
Lordship answers, That it was very possible that Author might mistake or
misapply my Notions. A reason indeed, that will equally justify your bringing
my Book into any Controversy: For there is no Author so infallible, write he
in what Controversy he pleases, but it is possible he may mistake, or misapply
my Notions.

That was the force of this your Lordship's Answer in that place of your first
Letter, but what it serves for in this place of your second Letter I have not
Wit enough to see. The remainder of it I have answered in the 37th and 38th
Pages of my second Letter, and therefore cannot but wonder to see it repeated
here again without any notice taken of what I said in answer to it, though you
set it down here again, as you say, p. 7. on purpose to defend.

But all the defense made, is only to that part of my Reply which you set down
p. 16.
as a fresh Complaint that I make in these Words, This can be no reason why I
should be joined with a Man that had misapplied my Notions, and that no Man
has so much mistaken and misapplied my Notions as your Lordship; and therefore
I ought rather to be joined with your Lordship. And then you, with some warmth,
subjoin; But is this fair and ingenuous dealing, to represent this Matter so,
as if your Lordship had joined us together, because he had misunderstood and
misapplied my Notions? Can I think your Lordship a Man of so little Sense to
make that the reason of it? No; Sir, says your Lordship, it was because he
assigned no other Grounds but mine, and that in my own Words; however, now I
would divert the meaning of them another way.

My Lord, I did set down your Words at large in my second Letter, and therefore
do not see how I could be liable to any Charge of unfair or disingenuous
dealing in representing the Matter; which I am sure you will allow as a Proof
of my not misrepresenting, since I find you use it your self p. 133.
as a sure Fence against any such Accusation; where you tell me, That you have
set down my own Words at large, that I may not complain that your Lordship
misrepresents my Sense. The same Answer I must desire my Reader to apply for me
to your 73d and 90th Pages, where your Lordship makes Complaints of the like
kind with this here.

The Reasons you give for joining me with the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious, are put down verbatim as you gave them; and if they did not give me
that Satisfaction they were designed for, am I to be blamed that I did not find
them better than they were? You joined me with that Author because he placed
Certainty only in clear and distinct Ideas. I told your Lordship I did not do
so, and therefore that could be no reason for your joining me with him. You
answer, 'Twas possible he might mistake or misapply my Notions. So that our
agreeing in the Notion of Certainty (the pretended Reason for which we were
joined) failing, all the reason which is left and which you offer in this
Answer for your joining of us, is the possibility of his mistaking my Notions.
And I think it a very natural Inference, that if the mere possibility of any
ones mistaking me, be a reason for my being joined with him: Any ones actual
mistaking me, is a stronger reason why I should be joined with him. But if such
an Inference shows (more than you would have it) the satisfactoriness and force
of your Answer, I hope you will not be angry with me, if I cannot change the
Nature of things.

Your Lordship indeed adds in that place, 1 Answ. p. 36.
That there is too much reason to believe that the Author thought his Notions
and mine the same.

Answ. When your Lordship shall produce that Reason, it will be seen whether it
were too much or too little. Till it is produced, there appears no Reason, at
all; and such concealed Reason, though it may be too much, can be supposed, I
think, to give very little Satisfaction to me or any body else in the Case.

But to make good what you have said in your Answer, your Lordship here p. 16.
replies, That you did not join us together, because he had misunderstood and
misapplied my Notions. Answ. Neither did I say, That therefore you did join us.
But this I crave leave to say, That all the reason you there gave for your
joining us together, was the possibility of his mistaking and misapplying my
Notions.

But your Lordship now tells p. 16.
me, No, Sir, this was not the reason of your joining us; but it was because he
assigned no other Grounds but mine, and in my own Words. Answ. My Lord, I do
not remember that in that place you give this as a reason for your joining of
us; and I could not answer in that place to what you did not there say, but to
what you there did say. Now your Lordship does say it it here, here I shall
take the liberty to answer it.

The Reason you now give for your joining me with that Author, is because he
assigned no other Grounds but mine, which however tenderly expressed, is to be
understood, I suppose, that he did assign my Grounds. Of what, I beseech your
Lordship, did he assign my Grounds and in my Words? If it were not my Grounds
of Certainty, it could be no manner of reason for your joining me with him;
because the only reason why at first you made him (and me with him) a Gentleman
of the new way of Reasoning, was his supposing clear and distinct Ideas
necessary to Certainty, which was the Opinion that you declared you opposed.
Now my Lord, if you can show where that Author has in my Words assigned my
Grounds of Certainty, there will be some Grounds for what you say here. But
till your Lordship does that, it will be pretty hard to believe that to be the
ground of your joining us together; which being no where to be found can scarce
be thought the true reason of your doing it.

Your Lordship adds, p. 16.
However, now I would divert the meaning of Them [i. e. those my Words] an
other way.

Answ. When ever you are pleased to set down those Words of mine wherein that
Author assigns my Grounds of Certainty, it will be seen how I now divert their
meaning another way; till then they must remain with several other of your
Lordship's invisible Them, which are no where to be found.

But to your asking me, p. 17.
Whether I can think your Lordship a Man of that little Sense? I crave leave to
reply, That I hope it must not be concluded, that as often as in your way of
writing I meet with any thing that does not seem to me satisfactory, and I
endeavor to show that it does not prove, what it is made use of for, that I
presently think your Lordship a Man of little Sense. This would be a very hard
Rule in defending ones self; especially for me against so great and learned a
Man, whose reasons and meaning it is not, I find, always easy for so mean a
Capacity as mine to reach; and therefore I have taken great care to set down
your Words in most places, to secure my self from the imputation of
misrepresenting your Sense, and to leave it fairly before the Reader to judge,
whether I mistake it, and how far I am to be blamed if I do. And I would have
set down your whole Letter page by page as I answered it, would not that have
made my Book too big.

If I must write under this fear, that you apprehend I think meanly of you, as
often as I think any reason you make use of is not satisfactory in the Point it
is brought for, the causes of uneasiness would return too often; and it would
be better once for all, to conclude your Lordship infallible, and acquiesce in
whatever you say, than in every page to be so rude as to tell your Lordship, I
think you have little Sense, if that be the interpretation of my endeavoring
to show, that your reasons come short any where.

My Lord, when you did me the honor to answer my first Letter (which I thought
might have passed for a submissive Complaint of what I did not well understand,
rather than a Dispute with your Lordship) you were pleased to insert into it
direct Accusations against my Book, which looked as if you had a mind to enter
into a direct Controversy with me. This condescension in your Lordship, has
made me think my self under the protection of the Laws of Controversy, which
allow a free examining and showing the weakness of the Reasons brought by the
other side, without any offense. If this be not permitted me, I must confess, I
have been mistaken, and have been guilty in answering you any thing at all: For
how to answer without answering, I confess, I do not know.

I wish you had never writ any thing that I was particularly concerned to
examine; And what I have been concerned to examine, I wish it had given me no
occasion for any other answer, but an admiration of the manner and justness of
your Corrections, and an acknowledgment of an increase of that great Opinion,
which I had of your Lordship before. But I hope it is not expected from me in
this Debate, that I should admit as good and conclusive all that drops from
your Pen, for fear of causing so much displeasure as you seem here to have upon
this occasion, or for fear you should object to me the presumption of thinking
you had but little Sense, as often as I endeavored to show, that what you say
is of little force.

When those Words and Grounds of mine are produced, that the Author of
Christianity not Mysterious, assigned, which your Lordship thinks a sufficient
reason for your joining me with him, in opposing the Doctrine of the Trinity; I
shall consider them, and endeavor to give you Satisfaction about them as well
I have already concerning those ten Lines, which you have more than once quoted
out of him, as taken out of my Book, and which is all that your Lordship has
produced out of him of that kind; in all which there is not one Syllable of
clear and distinct Ideas, or of Certainty founded in them. In the mean time, in
answer to your other Question, p. 16.
But is this fair and ingenuous dealing? I refer my Reader to p. 35-38 of my
second Letter, where he may see at large all this whole matter, and all the
unfairness and disingenuity of it, which I submit to him, to judge whether for
any fault of that kind, it ought to have drawn on me the marks of so much
displeasure.

Your Lordship goes on here, p. 16.
and tells me, That although you were willing to allow me all reasonable
occasions for my own Vindication, as appears by your Words; yet you were
sensible enough that I had given too just an occasion to apply them in that
manner as appears by the next Page.

What was it, I beseech you my Lord, that I was to vindicate my self from, and
what was those Them I had given too just an occasion to apply in that manner,
and what was that manner they were applied in, and what was the occasion they
were so applied? For I can find none of all these in that next page to which
your Lordship refers me; when those are set down, the World will be the better
able to judge of the Reason you had to join me after the manner you did:
However, saying, my Lord, without proveing, I humbly conceive, is but saying,
and in such Personal Matter so turned, shows more the disposition of the
speaker, than any ground for what is said. Your Lordship as a proof of your
great care of me, tells me 1 Ans. p. 36.
at the top of that Page, That you had said so much that nothing could be said
more for my Vindication: And before you come to the bottom of it, you labor to
persuade the World, That I have need to vindicate my self. Another possibly,
who could find in his Heart to say two such things, would have taken care they
should not have stood in the same Page, where the Juxta-position might
enlighten them too much, and surprise the Sight. But possibly your Lordship is
so well satisfied of the Worlds readiness to believe your Professions of good
Will to me, as a mark whereof you tell me here of your willingness to allow me
all reasonable occasions to vindicate my self, p. 16.
that no body can see any thing but Kindness in whatever you say, though it
appears in so different Shapes.

In the following Words, p. 16.
your Lordship accuses me of too nice a piece of Criticism; and tells me it
looks like Chicaning. Answ. I did not expect in a Controversy begun and
managed as this which your Lordship has been pleased to have with me, to be
accused of Chicaning without great provocation; because the mentioning that
Word might perhaps raise in the Reader's Minds some odd Thoughts which were
better spared. But this Accusation made me look back into the places you quoted
in the Margent, and there find the Matter to stand thus:

To a pretty large quotation set down out of the Postscript to my first Letter,
you subjoin, 1 Ans. p. 37.
Which Words seem to express so much of a Christian Spirit and Temper, that
your Lordship cannot believe I intended to give any advantage to the Enemies of
the Christian Faith; but whether there has not been too just occasion for them
to apply them in that manner, is a thing very fit for me to consider.

In my answer 2 Let. p. 45.
I take notice that the Term Them, in this Passage of your Lordship's can in
the ordinary construction of our Language be applied to nothing but which Words
in the beginning of that Passage, i. e. to my Words immediately preceding. This
your Lordship calls Chicaning; and gives this reason for it, page 17.
viz. Because any one that reads without a design to Cavil, would easily
interpret Ihem of my Words and Notions about which the Debate was. Answ. That
any one that reads that Passage with or without design to Cavil, could hardly
make it intelligible without interpreting Them so, I readily grant; but that it
is easy for me or any body, to interpret any ones meaning contrary to the
necessary construction and plain import of the Words, that I crave leave to
deny. I am sure it is not Chicaning to presume, that so great an Author as your
Lordship, writes according to the Rules of Grammar, and as an other Man writes,
who understands our Language and would be understood; to do the contrary, would
be a presumption liable to blame, and might deserve the name of Chicaning and
Cavil. And that in this case it was not easy to avoid the interpreting the
term Them as I did; the reason you give why I should have done it, is a farther
Proof. Your Lordship, to show it was easy, says the Postscript, comes in but
as a Parenthesis: Now I challenge any one living, to show me where in that
place the Parenthesis must begin, and where end, which can make Them applicable
to any thing, but the words of my Postscript. I have tried with more care and
pains than is usually required of a Reader in such cases, and cannot I must own
find where to make a breach in the Thread of your Discourse, with the imaginary
Parenthesis, which your Lordship mentions, and was not I suppose omitted by the
Printer for want of Marks to Print it. And if this, which you give as the Key,
that opens to the interpretation that I should have made, be so hard to be
found, the interpretation it self could not be so very easy as you speak of.

But to avoid all blame for understanding that Passage as I did, and to secure
my self from being suspected to seek a subterfuge in the natural import of your
Words, against what might be conjectured to be your Sense, I added. Letter 2 p.
45.
But if by any new way of Construction, unintelligible to me, the word Them
here shall be applied to any Passages of my Essay of Humane Understanding; I
must humbly crave leave to observe this one Thing, in the whole course of what
your Lordship had designed for my Satisfaction, That though my Complaint be of
your Lordship's manner of applying, what I had published in my Essay, so as to
interest me in a Controversy, wherein I meddled not; yet your Lordship all
along tells me of others, that have misapplied I know not what Words in my
Book, after I know not what manner. Now as to this Matter, I beseech your
Lordship to believe that when any one, in such a manner applies my Words
contrary to what I intended them, so as to make them opposite to the Doctrine of
the Trinity; and me a Party in that Controversy against the Trinity, as your
Lordship knows I complain your Lordship has done, I shall complain of them too;
and consider, as well as I can, what Satisfaction they give me and others in
it. This Passage of mine your Lordship here p. 17.
represents thus, viz. That I say, That if by an unintelligible new way of
Construction, the word Them be applied to any Passages in my Book: What then?
Why then, whoever they are, I intend to Complain of them too. But, says your
Lordship, the Words just before tell me who they are, viz. The Enemies of the
Christian Faith. And then your Lordship Asks, whether this be all that I
intend, viz. only to Complain of them for making me a Party in the Controversy
against the Trinity?

My Lord, were I given to Chicaning, as you call my being stopped by Faults of
Grammar that disturb the Sense, and make the Discourse incoherent and
unintelligible, if we are to take it from the Words as they are, I should not
want Matter enough for such an Exercise of my Pen: As for Example here again p.
17.
, where your Lordship makes me say, That if the word Them be applied to any
Passages in my Book, then whoever They are, I intend to Complain, etc. These
being set down for my Words, I would be very glad to be able to put them into a
Grammatical construction, and make to my self an intelligible Sense of them.
But They being not a Word that I have an absolute Power over, to place where
and for what I will, I confess I cannot do it. For the term They in the Words
here, as your Lordship has set them down, having nothing that it can refer to
but Passages, or them which stands for Words, it must be a very sudden
metamorphosis that must change them into Persons, for it is for Persons that the
word They stands here; and yet I crave leave to say, that as far as I
understand English, They is a Word cannot be used without reference to
something mentioned before. Your Lordship tells me the Words just before tell
me who they are. The Words just mentioned before are these, if by an
unintelligible new way of Construction the word Them be applied to any Passage
of my Book, for it is to some words before indeed, but before in the same
contexture of Discourse, that the word They must refer to make it any where
intelligible. But here are no Persons mentioned in the Words just before,
though your Lordship tells me the Words just before show who they are, but this
just before, where the Persons are mentioned whom your Lordship intends by They
here, is so far off that 16 Pages of your Lordships second Letter, 174 Pages of
my second Letter, and above 100 Pages of your Lordships first Letter come
between: So that one must read above 280 Pages from the Enemies of the
Christian Faith, in the 37th Page of your first Letter, before one can come to
the They which refers to them here in the 17th Page of your Lordship's second
Letter.

My Lord, it is my misfortune that I cannot pretend to any Figure amongst the
Men of Learning; but I would not for that reason be rendered so despicable,
that I could not write ordinary Sense in my own Language: I must beg leave
therefore to inform my Reader, that what your Lordship has set down here as
mine, is neither my Words, nor my Sense. For,

1. I say not, if by any unintelligible new way of Construction; But I say, If
by any new way of Construction unintelligible to me: Which are far different
Expressions. For that may be very intelligible to others, which may be
unintelligible to me. And indeed my Lord, there are so many Passages in your
Writings in this Controversy with me, which for their Construction, as well as
otherwise, are so unintelligible to me, that if I should be so unmannerly, as
to measure your Understanding by mine, I should not know what to think of them.
In those cases therefore, I presume not to go beyond my own Capacity: I tell
your Lordship often (which I hope Modesty will permit) what my weak
Understanding will not reach; but I am far from saying it is therefore
absolutely unintelligible. I leave to others the benefit of their better
Judgments, to be enlightened by your Lordship, where I am not.

2. The use your Lordship here makes of these Words, But if by any new way of
Construction unintelligible to me, the word Them be applied to any Passages in
my Book: Is not the principal nor the only (as your Lordship makes it) use for
which I said them. But this; That if your Lordship by Them in that place, were
to be understood to mean, that there were others that misapplied Passages of my
Book; this was no satisfaction for what your Lordship had done in that kind.
Though this I observed was your way of defense; That when I complained of what
your Lordship had done, you told me, that others had done so too: As if that
could be any manner of Satisfaction. I added in the close, 2 Letter p. 46.
That when any one, in such a manner applies my Words contrary to what I
intended them, so as to make them opposite to the Doctrine of the Trinity, and
me a Party in that Controversy against the Trinity, as your Lordship knows I
complain your Lordship has done, I shall complain of them too; and consider as
well as I can, what Satisfaction they give me and others in it. Of this any one
of mine, your Lordship makes your forementioned They, whether with any
advantage of Sense or clearness to my Words, the Reader must judge. However
this latter part of that Passage, with the particular turn your Lordship gives
to it, is what your Words would persuade your Reader is all that I say here:
Would not your Lordship upon such an occasion from me, cry out again, Is this
fair and ingenuous Dealing? And would not you think you had reason to do so?
But let us see what we must guess your Lordship makes me say, and your
exceptions to it.

Your Lordship makes me say, whoever they are, who misapply my Words, as I
complain your Lordship has done (for these Words must be supplied to make the
Sentence to me intelligible) I intend to complain of them too: And then you
find fault with me for using the indefinite word whoever, and as a Reproof for
the unreasonableness of it, you say; But the Words just before tell me who they
are. But my Words are not whoever they are. But my Words are, When any one in
such a manner applies my Words contrary to what I intended them, etc. Your
Lordship would here have me understand, that there are those that have done it,
and Rebukes me that I speak as if I knew not any one, that had done it, and
that I may not plead Ignorance, you say your Words just before, told me who
they were, viz. The Enemies of the Christian Faith.

What must I do now, to keep my Word and satisfy your Lordship? Must I
complain of the Enemies of the Christian Faith in general, that they have
applied my Words as aforesaid, and then consider as well as I can, what
Satisfaction they give me and others in it? For that was all I promised to do.
But this would be strange to complain of the Enemies of the Christian Faith,
for doing, what it is very likely they never all did, and what I do not know
that any one of them has done. Or must I to content your Lordship, read over
all the writings of the Enemies of the Christian Faith, to see whether any one
of them has applied my Words, i. e. in such a manner as I complained your
Lordship has done, that if they have, I may complain of them too? This truly my
Lord, is more than I have time for; and if it were worth while, when it is
done, I perceive I should not content your Lordship in it. For you ask me here,
Is this all I intend, only to complain of them for making me a Party in the
Controversy against the Trinity? No my Lord, this is not all. I promised too,
To consider as well as I can what Satisfaction (if they offer any) they give me
and others for so doing. And why should not this content your Lordship in
reference to others as well as it does in reference to your self? I have but
one measure for your Lordship and others. When others treat me after the manner
you have done, why should it not be enough to answer them after the same manner
I have done your Lordship? But perhaps your Lordship has some dextrous meaning
under this, which I am not quick sighted enough to perceive, and so do not
reply right, as you would have me.

I must beg my Readers Pardon as well as your Lordships, for using so many
Words about Passages, that seem not in themselves of that importance. I
confess, that in themselves they are not: But yet it is my misfortune, that in
this Controversy, your way of writing and representing my Sense forces me to
it.

Your Lordship's name in writing is established above control, and therefore
'twould be ill breeding in one, who barely reads what you write, not to take
every thing for perfect in its kind, which your Lordship says. Clearness and
Force and Consistence are to be presumed always, whatever your Lordship's Words
be: And there is no other Remedy for an Answerer, who finds it difficult any
where to come at your Meaning or Argument, but to make his Excuse for it, in
laying the particulars before the Reader, that he may be Judge where the Fault
lies; especially where any matter of Fact is contested, deductions from the
first rise, are often necessary, which cannot be made in few Words, nor without
several Repetitions: An inconvenience possibly fitter to be endured, than that
your Lordship, in the run of your Learned Notions, should be Shackled with the
ordinary and strict Rules of Language, and in the delivery of your sublimer
Speculations, be tied down to the mean and contemptible rudiments of Grammar:
Though your being above these and freed from a servile observance in the use of
trivial Particles, whereon the connection of Discourse chiefly depends, cannot
but cause great difficulties to the Reader. And however it may be an ease to
any great Man, to find himself above the ordinary rules of Writing, he who is
bound to follow the connection and find out his Meaning, will have his Task
much increased by it.

I am very sensible how much this has swelled these Papers already, and yet I
do not see, how any thing less than what I have said could clear those
Passages, which we have hitherto examined; and set them in their due Light.

Your next Words are these, p. 17.
But whether I have not made my self too much a Party in it, [ i. e. the
Controversy against the Trinity] will appear before we have done. This is an
Item for me, which your Lordship seems so very fond of, and so careful to
inculcate, wherever you bring in any Words it can be tacked to, that if one can
avoid thinking it to be the main end of your writing, one cannot yet but see,
that it could not be so much in the Thoughts and Words of a great Man, who is
above such personal Matters, and which he knows the World soon grows weary of,
unless it had some very particular business there. Whether it be the Author
that has prejudiced you against his Book, or the Book prejudiced you against
the Author, so it is I perceive, that both I, and my Essay are fallen under
your displeasure.

I am not unacquainted what great stress is often laid upon invidious Names by
skilful Disputants to supply the want of better Arguments. But give me leave,
my Lord, to say, That it is too late for me now to begin to value those marks of
good Will, or a good Cause; and therefore I shall say nothing more to them, as
fitter to be left to the examination of the Thoughts within your own breast,
from what sourse such reasonings spring, and whither they tend.

I am going, my Lord, to a Tribunal that has a right to judge of Thoughts, and
being secure that I there shall be found of no Party but that of Truth (for
which there is required nothing but the receiving Truth in the Love of it) I
matter not much of what Party any one shall, as may best serve his turn,
denominate me here. Your Lordship's is not the first Pen from which I have
received such strokes as these without any great harm: I never found freedom of
Style did me any hurt with those who knew me, and if those who know me not will
take up borrowed Prejudices, it will be more to their own harm than mine: So
that in this, I shall give your Lordship little other Trouble, but my Thanks
sometimes, where I find you skilfully and industriously recommending me to the
World under the Character you have chosen for me. Only give me leave to say.
That if the Essay I shall leave behind me has no other fault to sink it but
Heresy and inconsistency with the Articles of the Christian Faith, I am apt to
think it will last in the World, and do service to Truth, even the Truths of
Religion, notwithstanding that imputation laid on it by so mighty a hand as
your Lordships's.

In your two next Paragraphs p. 18, 19,
your Lordship accuses me of Cavilling in the 43d and 44th Pages of my second
Letter, whither for shortness I refer my Reader. I shall only add, That though
in the Debate about Mysteries of Faith, your Adversaries as you say are not
Heathens; yet any one among us, whom your Lordship should speak of as not
owning the Scripture to be the Foundation and Rule of Faith, would I presume be
thought to receive from you a Character very little different from that of a
Heathen. Which being a part of your Complement to me, will I humbly conceive
excuse what I there said, from being a Cavilling exception.

Hitherto your Lordship, notwithstanding that you understood the World so well,
has employed your Pen in Personal Matters, how unacceptable soever to the World
you declare it to be; How must I behave my self in the Case? If I answer
nothing, my silence is so apt to be interpreted guilt or concession, that even
the deferring my answer to some Points, or not giving it in the proper place is
reflected on as no small Trangression; whereof there are two Examples in the
two following Pages. 20, 21.
And if I do answer so at large, as your way of writing requires, and as the
matter deserves, I recall to your memory the Springs of Modena, by the
Ebullition of my Thoughts. It Is hard, my Lord, between these two to manage ones
self to your good likeing: However, I shall endeavor to collect the force of
your reasonings, wherever I can find it, as short as I can, and apply my
answers to that, though with the omission of a great many incidents deserving
to be taken notice of: If my flowness, not able to keep pace every where with
your uncommon Flights, shall have missed any Argument, whereon you lay any
stress; if you please to point it out to me, I shall not fail to endeavor to
give you satisfaction therein.

In the next Paragraph p. 19.
your Lordship says, Those who are not sparing of writing about Articles of
Faith, and among them take great care to avoid some which have been always
esteemed Fundamental, etc. This seems also to contain something Personal in it.
But how far I am concerned in it I shall know, when you shall be pleased to
tell me who those are, and then it will be time enough for me to answer.

This is what your Lordship has brought in under your second Answer in these
four Pages as a defense of it, and how much of it is a defense of that second
Answer, let the Reader judge.

I am now come p. 20.
to the (3d) of those Answers, which you said, p. 7. you would lay together and
defend. And it is this:

That my Grounds of Certainty tend to Skepticism, and that in an Age wherein
the Mysteries of Faith are too much exposed by the promoters of Skepticism and
Infidelity; it is a thing of dangerous consequence to start such new methods of
Certainty as are apt to leave Men's Minds more doubtful than before.

This is what you set down here to be defended, the defense follows, wherein
your Lordship tells me that I say, These Words contain a farther Accusation of
my Book, which shall be considered in its due place. But this is the proper
place of considering it: For your Lordship said, That hereby I have given too
just occasion to the Enemies of the Christian Faith, to make use of my Words
and Notions, as was evidently proved from my own Concessions. And if this be
so, however you were willing to have had me explained my self to the general
Satisfaction; yet, since I decline it, you do insist upon it, That I cannot
clear my self from laying that Foundation, which the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious built upon.

In which I crave leave to acquaint your Lordship with what I do not understand.

First, I do not understand what is meant by this is the proper place; for in
ordinary construction, these Words seem to denote this 20th Page of your
Lordship's second Letter, which you were then writing, though the sense would
make me think the 46th Page of my second Letter which you were then answering
should be meant. This perhaps your Lordship may think a nice piece of
Criticism; but till it be cleared, I cannot tell what to say in my excuse. For
it is likely your Lordship would again ask me, whether I could think you a Man
of so little Sense, If I should understand these Words to mean the 20th Page of
your second Letter, which no body can conceive your Lordship should think a
proper place for me to consider and answer what you had writ in your first?
'Twould be as hard to understand this is, to mean a place in my former Letter,
which was past and done; but it is no wonder for me to be mistaken in your
privilege word this. Besides, there is this farther difficulty to understand
this is the proper place, of the 46th Page of my former Letter, because I do
not see why the 82d Page of that Letter, where I did consider and answer it,
was not as proper place of considering it as the 46th, where I give a reason
why I defend it. Farther, if I understood what you meant here by this is the
proper place, I should possibly apprehend better the force of your Argument
subjoined to prove this whatever it be, to be the proper place; the causal
Particle For, which introduces the following Words, making them a reason of
those preceding. But in the present obscurity of this matter, I confess I do
not see how your having said that I gave occasion to the Enemies of the
Christian Faith, etc. proves any thing concerning the proper place at all.

Another thing that I do not understand in this Defense, is your inference in
the next Period, where you tell me, If this be so, you insist upon it that I
should clear my self. For I do not see how your having said what you there said
(for that is it which this here, if it be not within Privilege, must signify)
can be a reason for your insisting on my clearing my self of any thing, though
I allow this to be your Lordship's ordinary way of proceeding to insist upon
your suggestions and suppositions in one place, as if they were Foundations to
build what you pleased on in another.

Thus then stands your defense, My Grounds of Certainty tend to Skepticism, and
to start new Methods of Certainty is of dangerous consequence. Because I did
not consider this your Accusation in the proper place of considering it. This
is the proper place of considering it. Because your Lordship said I had given
too just occasion to the Enemies of the Christian Faith to make use of my Words
and Notions; and because your Lordship said so, therefore you insist upon it
that I clear my self, etc. This appears to me, to be the connection and force
of your defense hitherto. If I am mistaken in it, your Lordship's Words are set
down, the Reader must judge whether the construction of the Words do not make
it so.

But before I leave them, there are some things that I crave permission to
represent to your Lordship more particularly.

1. That to the Accusation of Skepticism, I have answered in another, and as I
think, a proper place.

2. That the Accusation of dangerous consequence I have considered and answered
in my former Letter 2 Let. p. 82-95. 109.
; but that being it seems not the proper place of considering it, you have not
in this your Defense thought fit to take any notice of it.

3. That your Lordship has not any where proved, That my placing of Certainty
in the perception of the Agreement or disagreement of Ideas is apt to leave
Men's Minds more doubtful than they were before, which is what your Accusation
supposes.

4. That you set down those Words of mine, These Words contain a farther
Accusation of my Book, which shall be considered in its due place, as all the
answer which I gave to that new Accusation, except what you take notice of out
of my 95th Page; and take no notice of what I say from Page 82 to 95. where I
considered it as I promised, and as I thought fully answered it.

5. That the too just occasion, you say, I have given to the Enemies of the
Christian Faith to make use of my Words and Notions, wants to be proved.

6. That what use the Enemies of the Christian Faith have made of my Words and
Notions, is no where shown though often talked of.

7. That if the Enemies of the Christian Faith have made use of my Words and
Notions, yet that, as I have shown 2d Letter p. 69 and 85.
, is no proof, That they are of dangerous consequence. Much less is it a proof,
that this Proposition, Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, is of dangerous consequence. For some Words or Notions
in a Book, that are of dangerous consequence, do not make all the Propositions
of that Book to be of dangerous consequence.

8. That your Lordship tells me, You were willing to have had me explained my
self to the general satisfaction, which is what in the place 1st Ans. p. 37.
from which the former words are taken, you expressed thus, That my Answer did
not come fully up in all things to that which you could wish. To which I have
given an answer; 2d Let. p. 38-41.
and methinks your defense here should have been applied to that, and not the
same thing (which has been answered) set down again as part of your Defense.
But pray, my Lord, give me leave to ask, is not this meant for a Personal
Matter, which though the World, as you say, is soon weary of, your Lordship, it
seems is not?

9. That you say, You insist upon it that I cannot clear my self from laying
that Foundation which the Author of Christianity not Mysterious built upon.
Certainly this Personal Matter is of some very great consequence, that your
Lordship, who understands the World so well, insists so much upon it. But if it
be true, That he built upon my Foundation; and it be of such moment to your
Lordships business in the present Controversy, methinks without so much
intricacy it should not be hard to show it: It is but proving what Foundation
of Certainty (for it is of that all this dispute is) he went upon, which, as I
humbly conceive, your Lordship has not done; and then showing that to be my
Foundation of Certainty, and the business is ended. But instead of this your
Lordship says, Vindic. p. 232.
That his account of Reason supposes clear and distinct Ideas necessary to
Certainty; That he imagined he built upon my Grounds; 1 Answ. p. 36.
That he thought his and my Notions of Certainty to be the same; That there has
been too just occasion given, for the Enemies of the Christian Faith to apply
my Words in I know not what manner. ib. p. 37.
These and the like Arguments to prove that he goes upon my Grounds your
Lordship has used; but they are, I confess, too subtle and too fine for me to
feel the force of them, in a Matter of Fact wherein it was so easy to produce
both his and my Grounds out of our Books (without all this talk about
Suppositions and Imaginations, and Occasions so far remote from any direct
Proof) if it were a matter of that consequence to be so insisted upon as your
Lordship professedly does.

Your Lordship has spent a great many Pages to tie me to that Author; and you
still insist upon it, that I cannot clear my self from laying that Foundation
which the Author of Christianity not Mysterious built upon. What this great
concern in a matter of so little moment means, I leave the Reader to guess:
For, I beseech your Lordship, of what great consequence is it to the World?
What great interest has any Truth of Religion in this, That I and another Man
(be he who he will) make use of the same Grounds to different purposes? This I
am sure, it tends not to the clearing, or confirming any one material Truth in
the World. If the Foundation I have laid be true, I shall neither disown nor
dislike it, whatever this or any other Author shall build upon it; because, as
your Lordship knows, ill things may be built upon a good Foundation, and yet
the Foundation never the worse for it. And therefore if that, or any other
Author has built upon my Foundation, I see nothing in it, that I ought to be
concerned to clear my self from.

If you can show that my Foundation is false, or show me a better Foundation of
Certainty than mine, I promise you immediately to renounce and relinquish mine
with thanks to your Lordship: But till you can prove, That he that first
invented Syllogism as a Rule of right Reasoning, or first laid down this
Principle, That it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be, is
answerable for all those Opinions, which have been endeavored to be proved by
Mode and Figure; or have been built upon that Maxim, I shall not think my self
concerned, whatever any one shall build upon this Foundation of mine, That
Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of any
two Ideas as they are expressed in any Proposition; much less shall I think my
self concerned, for what you shall please to suppose (for that, with
submission, is all you have done hitherto) any one has built upon it, though he
were never so opposite to your Lordship in any of the Opinions he should build
on it.

In that case, if he should prove troublesome to your Lordship with any
Argument pretended to be built upon my Foundation, I humbly conceive you have
no other Remedy, but to show either the Foundation false, and in that case I
confess my self concerned; or his deduction from it wrong, and that I shall not
be at all concerned in. But if instead of this, your Lordship shall find no
other way to subvert this Foundation of Certainty, but by saying, The Enemies
of the Christian Faith build on it, because you suppose one Author builds on
it; this I fear, my Lords, will very little advantage the Cause you defend,
whilst it so visibly strengthens, and gives credit to your Adversaries, rather
than weakens any Foundation they go upon. For the Unitarians I imagine, will be
apt to smile, at such a way of arguing, viz. That they go on this Ground,
because the Author of Christianity not Mysterious goes upon it, or is supposed
by your Lordship to go upon it; and Bystanders will do little less than Smile,
to find my Book brought into the Socinian Controversy, and the ground of
Certainty laid down in my Essay condemned, only because that Author is supposed
by your Lordship to build upon it. For this in short is the Case, and this the
way your Lordship has used in answering Objections against the Trinity in point
of Reason. I know your Lordship cannot be suspected of writing booty: But I
fear, such a way of arguing in so great a Man as your Lordship, will in an Age
wherein the Mysteries of Faith are too much exposed, give too just an occasion
to the Enemies, and also to the Friends of the Christian Faith, to suspect that
there is a great failure some where.

But to pass by that. This I am sure is personal Matter, which the World
perhaps will think it need not have been troubled with.

Your Defense of your third Answer goes on, and to prove, that the Author of
Christianity not Mysterious built upon my Foundation, you tell me, p. 20. 21.
That my ground of Certainty is the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas, as
expressed in any Proposition. Which are my own Words. From hence you urged,
That let the Proposition come to us any way, either by humane or divine
Authority, if our Certainty depend upon this, we can be no more certain, than
we have clear perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas contained in
it. And from hence the Author of Christianity not Mysterious, thought he had
Reason to reject all Mysteries of Faith, which are contained in Propositions,
upon my grounds of Certainty.

Since this personal Matter appears of such weight to your Lordship, that it
needs to be farther Prosecuted; and you think this your Argument to prove, That
that Author built upon my Foundation, worth the repeating here again; I am
obliged to enter again, so far into this personal Matter, as to examine this
Passage which I formerly passed by as of no Moment. For it is easy to show,
that what you say, visibly proves not, that he built upon my Foundation; and
next it is evident, that if it were proved, that he did so, yet this is no
Proof, that my Method of Certainty is of dangerous Consequence, which is what
was to be defended.

As to the first of these, your Lordship would prove, that the Author of
Christianity not Mysterious built upon my Ground, and how do you prove it? viz.
because he thought he had Reason to reject all Mysteries of Faith, which are
contained in Propositions upon my Ground. How does it appear, that he rejected
them upon my Grounds? Does he any where say so? No! That is not offered, there
is no need of such an Evidence of matter of Fact, in a case which is only of
matter of Fact. But he thought he had Reason to reject them upon my Grounds of
Certainty. How does it appear that he thought so? Very plainly. Because, let
the Proposition come to us by humane or Divine Authority, if our Certainty
depend upon the perception of the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas
contained in it, we can be no more certain than we have clear perception of
that agreement. The consequence I grant is good, that if Certainty, i. e.
Knowledge, consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
Ideas, then we can certainly know the Truth of no Proposition further than we
perceive that agreement or disagreement. But how does it follow from thence,
that he Thought he had Reason upon my Grounds to reject any Proposition, that
contained a Mystery of Faith: Or, as your Lordship expresses it, all Mysteries
of Faith which are contained in Propositions?

Whether your Lordship by the word Rejecting accuses him of not knowing, or of
not believing some Proposition, that contains an Article of Faith; or what he
has done or not done I concern not my self; that which I deny is the
consequence above mentioned, which I submit to your Lordship to be proved. And
when you have proved it, and shown your self to be so familiar with the
Thoughts of that Author, as to be able to be positive, what he Thought, without
his telling you, it will remain farther to be proved, that because he thought
so, therefore he built right upon my Foundation, for otherwise no prejudice
will come to my Foundation by any ill use he made of it; nor will it be made
good, that my method or way of Certainty, is of dangerous Consequence, which is
what your Lordship is here to defend. Methinks your Lordship's Argument here is
all one with this. Aristotle's ground of Certainty (except of first Principles)
lies in this, That those things which agree in a Third agree themselves. We can
be certain of no Proposition (excepting first Principles) coming to us either
by divine or humane Authority, if our Certainty depend upon this, farther than
there is such an agreement. Therefore the Author of Christianity not Mysterious
thought he had reason to reject all Mysteries of Faith, which are contained in
Propositions upon Aristotle's Grounds. This consequence as strange as it is, is
just the same with what is in your Lordship's repeated Argument against me. For
let Aristotle's ground of Certainty be this, that I have named, or what it
will, How does it follow, that because my ground of Certainty is placed in the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, therefore the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious rejected any Proposition more upon my Grounds than Aristotle's? And
will not Aristotle by your Lordship's way of Arguing here, from the use any one
may make or think he makes of it, be guilty also of starting a method of
Certainty of dangerous consequence, whether his method be True or False, if
that or any other Author whose writings you dislike, thought he built upon it,
or be supposed by your Lordship to think so. But, as I humbly conceive,
Propositions, speculative Propositions such as mine is, about which all this
stir is made, are to be judged of by their Truth or Falsehood, and not by the
use any one shall make of them; much less by the Persons who are supposed to
build on them. And therefore it may be justly wondered, since you say it is
dangerous, why you never proved or attempted to prove it to be false.

But you complain here again, that I answered not a Word to this in the proper
Place. My Lord, if I offended your Lordship, by passing it by, because I
thought there was no Argument in it: I hope I have now given you some sort of
Satisfaction, by showing there is no Argument in it; and letting you see, that
your consequence here could not be inferred from your antecedent. If you think
it may, I desire you to try it in a Syllogism. For whatever you are pleased to
say in another place p. 120.
my way of Certainty by Ideas will admit of Antecedents and Consequents and of
Syllogism as the proper form to try whether the Inference be right or no. I
shall set down your following Words, that the Reader may see your Lordship's
manner of Reasoning concerning this matter in its full force and consistency,
and try it in a Syllogism if he pleases. Your Words are p. 21.
,

By this it evidently appears, that although your Lordship was willing to allow
me all fair ways of interpreting my own Sense; yet you by no means Thought,
that my Words were wholly misunderstood or misapplied by that Author: But rather
that he saw into the true consequence of them, as they lie in my Book. And what
answer do I give to this? Not a Word in the proper place for it.

You tell me, you were willing to allow me all fair ways of interpreting my own
Sense. If your Lordship had been conscious to your self, that you had herein
meant me any kindness, I think I may presume, you would not have minded me here
again of a Favor, which you had told me of but in the preceding Page, and to
make it an Obligation, need not have been more than once talked of; unless your
Lordship thought the Obligation was such, that it would hardly be seen, unless
I were told of it in words at length, and in more places than one. For what
Favor I beseech you, my Lord, is it, to allow me to do that, which needed not
your allowance to be done, and I could have done (if it had been necessary) of
my self without being blamed for taking that liberty? Whatsoever therefore your
meaning was in these Words, I cannot think you took this way to make me
sensible of your Kindness.

Your Lordship says, you were willing to allow me to interpret my own Sense.
What you were willing to allow me to do, I have done. My Sense is, that
Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas;
and my Sense therein I have interpreted to be the agreement or disagreement,
not only of perfectly clear and distinct Ideas, but such Ideas, as we have,
whether they be in all their parts perfectly clear and distinct or no. Farther
in answer to your Objection, that it might be of dangerous Consequence: I so
explained my Sense, as to show, that Certainty in that Sense was not, nor could
be of dangerous Consequence. This, which was the Point in question between us,
your Lordship might have found at large explained in 82d and ten or twelve
following Pages of my second Letter, if you had been pleased to have taken
notice of them.

But it seems you were more willing to tell me, That though you were willing to
allow me all ways of interpreting my own Sense, yet you by no means thought,
that my Words were wholly misunderstood or misapplied by that Author, but rather
that he saw into the true consequence of them as they lie in my Book. I shall
here set down your Lordship's Words 1 Answ. p. 35.
where to give me and others Satisfaction) you say, you took care to prevent
being misunderstood, which will best appear by your own Words, viz. That you
must do that right to the ingenious Author of the Essay of Humane
Understanding, from whom these Notions are borrowed to serve other purposes
than he intended them. It was too plain, that the bold Writer against the
Mysteries of our Faith took his Notions and Expressions from thence, and what
could be said more for my Vindication, than that he turned them to other
purposes than the Author intended them? This you endeavor to prove, p. 43-46
and then conclude 1 Answ. p. 46.
By which it is sufficiently proved, that you had Reason to say, that my Notion
was carried beyond my Intention. These Words out of your first Letter, I shall
leave here, set by those out of your Second, that you may at your leisure, if
you think fit (for it will not become me to tell your Lordship that I am
willing to allow it) explain your self to the general Satisfaction, that it may
be known which of them is now your Sense; for they are, I suppose, too much to
be together any ones Sense at the same time.

My Intention being thus so well vindicated by your Lordship, that you think 1
Ans. p. 36.
nothing could be said more for my Vindication, the misunderstanding or not
misunderstanding of my Book, by that or any other Author, is what I shall not
wast my time about. If your Lordship thinks he saw into the true Consequence of
this Position of mine, that Certainty consists in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas (for it is from the inference, that you
suppose he makes from that my definition of Knowledge, that you are here
proving it to be of dangerous Consequence) he is beholding to your Lordship for
your good Opinion of his quick Sight: I take no part in that, one way or other.
What consequences your Lordship's quick Sight (which must be allowed to have
outdone, what you suppose of that Gentleman's) has found and charged on that
Notion as dangerous, I shall endeavor to give you Satisfaction in.

You farther add, p. 21.
that though I answered not a Word in the proper Place, yet afterward, Let. 2.
p. 95. (for you would omit nothing, that may seem to help my Cause) I offer
something toward an Answer.

I shall be at a loss hereafter, what to do with the 82d and following Pages to
the 95th, since what is said in those Pages of my second Letter, goes for
nothing, because it is not in its proper Place. Though if any one will give
himself the trouble to look into my second Letter, he will find, that the
Argument I was upon in the 46th Page, obliged me to defer, what I had farther
to say to your new Accusation. But that I reassumed it in the 82d, and
answered it in that and the following Pages.

But supposing every Writer had not that exactness of Method, which showed, by
the natural and visible connection of the parts of his Discourse, that every
thing was laid in its proper place, is it a sufficient Answer not to take any
notice of it? The Reason why I put this Question is, because if this be a Rule
in Controversy, I humbly conceive, I might have passed over the greatest part
of what your Lordship has said to me, because the Disposition it has under
numerical Figures, is so far from giving me a view of the orderly connection of
the parts of your Discourse, that I have often been tempted to suspect the
negligence of the Printer for misplacing your Lordship's Numbers, since so
ranked as they are, they do to me, who am confounded by them, lose all Order
and Connection quite.

The next thing in the Defense, which you go on with, is an exception to my use
of the word Certainty. In the close of the Answer I had made in the Pages you
pass over 2 Letter p. 95.
I add, that, Though the Laws of Disputation allow bare denial, as a sufficient
Answer to Sayings without any offer of a Proof; yet my Lord, to show how
willing I am to give your Lordship all Satisfaction, in what you apprehend may
be of dangerous Consequence in my Book, as to that Article, I shall not stand
still sullenly, and put your Lordship upon the difficulty of showing wherein
that Danger lies; but shall on the other side endeavor to show your Lordship,
That that Definition of mine, whether True or False, Right or Wrong, can be of
no dangerous Consequence to that Article of Faith. The Reason which I shall
offer for it is this; because it can be of no Consequence to it at all..And the
Reason of it was clear from what I had said before 2 Letter p. 90.
That Knowing and Believing were Two different Acts of the Mind. And that my
placing of Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
Ideas, i. e. that my Definition of Knowledge, one of those Acts of the Mind,
would not at all alter or shake the Definition of Faith, which was another Act
of the Mind distinct from it. And therefore I added, 2 Letter p. 95.
That the Certainty of Faith (if your Lordship thinks fit to call it so) has
nothing to do with the Certainty of Knowledge. And to talk of the Certainty of
Faith, seems all one to me, as to talk of the Knowledge of Believing; a way of
Speaking not easy to me to understand.

These and other Words to this purpose in the following Paragraphs, your
Lordship lays hold on, and sets down, as liable to no small exception: Though
as you tell p. 23.
me the main strength of my Defense lies in it. Let what Strength you please
lie in it, my Defense was strong enough without it. For to your bare Saying, my
method of Certainty might be of dangerous Consequence to any Article of the
Christian Faith, without proving it, it was a defense strong enough barely to
deny, and put you upon showing wherein that danger lies, which therefore, this
main strength of my Defense, as you call it, apart, I insist on.

But as to your exception to what I said on this occasion, it consists in this,
that there is a Certainty of Faith, and therefore you set down my saying. That
to talk of the Certainty of Faith, seems all one as to talk of the Knowledge of
believing.As that which shows the inconsistency of my Notion of Ideas, with the
Articles of the Christian Faith. These are your Words here, p. 23.
and yet you tell me, p. 74.
That it is not my way of Ideas, but my way of Certainty by Ideas, that your
Lordship is unsatisfied about. What must I do now in the Case, when your Words
are expressly, that my Notion of Ideas have an inconsistency with the Articles
of the Christian Faith: Must I presume that your Lordship means my Notion of
Certainty? All that I can do, is to search out your meaning the best I can, and
then show where I apprehend it not conclusive. But this uncertainty in most
places, what you mean, makes me so much work, that a great deal is omitted, and
yet my Answer is too long.

Your Lordship asks in the next Paragraph, p. 23.
How comes the Certainty of Faith so hard a Point with me? Answ. I suppose you
ask this Question more to give others hard thoughts of my Opinion of Faith,
than to be informed your self. For you cannot be ignorant that all along in my
Essay I use Certainty for Knowledge; so that for you to ask me, How comes the
Certainty of Faith to become so hard a Point with me? is the same thing, as for
you to ask, How comes the knowledge of Faith, or if you please, the knowledge
of Believing to be so hard a Point with me? A Question which I suppose you will
think needs no Answer, let your meaning in that doubtful Phrase be what it will.

I used in my Book the term Certainty for Knowledge so generally, that no body
that has read my Book, though much less attentively than your Lordship, can
doubt of it. That I used it in that sense there, I shall refer my Reader but to
two places L* 4. C. 1. 1. and C. 11. 9.
amongst many to convince him. This I am sure, your Lordship could not be
ignorant, that by Certainty I mean Knowledge, since I have so used it in my
Letters to you, Instances whereof are not a few; some of them may be found in
the places marked in the Margent 1 Let p. 81, 82, 107, 111, 115, 118, 131, 138,
158, 171, 185.
: And in my second Letter, what I say in the leaf immediately preceding that
which you quote upon this occasion, would have put it past a possibility for
any one to make show of a doubt of it, had not that been amongst those Pages of
my Answer, which for its being out of its proper place, it seems you were
resolved not to take notice of; and therefore I hope it will not be besides my
purpose here to mind you of it again.

After having said something to show why I used Certainty and Knowledge for the
same thing, I added, 2d Let. p. 93.
that Your Lordship could not but take notice of this in the 18th. of Chapter 4. of
my 4th Book, it being a Passage you had quoted, and runs thus; Wherever we
perceive the agreement or disagreement of any of our Idaas, there is certain
Knowledge; And wherever we are sure those Ideas agree with the reality of
things, there is certain real Knowledge; of which having given the marks, I
think I have shown wherein Certainty, real Certainty consists. And I farther
add in the immediately following Words, p. 94.
That my definition of Knowledge in the beginning of the 4th Book of my Essay
stands thus, Knowledge seems to be nothing but the perception of the connection
and agreement, or disagreement and repugnancy of any of our Ideas. Which is the
very definition of Certainty, that your Lordship is here contesting.

Since then you could not but know that in this discourse, Certainty with me
stood for, or was the same thing with Knowledge, may not one justly wonder how
you come to ask me such a Question as this, How comes the Knowledge of
Believing to become so hard a Point with me? For that was in effect the
Question that you asked, when you put in the term Certainty, since you knew as
undoubtedly, that I meant Knowledge by Certainty, as that I meant Believing by
Faith, i. e. you could doubt of neither. And that you did not doubt of it, is
plain from what you say in the next Page, where you endeavor to prove this an
improper way of speaking.

Whether it be a proper way of speaking, I allow to be a fair Question. But
when you knew what I meant, though I expressed it improperly, to put Questions
in a Word of mine, used in a sense different from mine, which could not but be
apt to insinuate to the Reader, that my Notion of Certainty derogated from the
(...) or full assurance of Faith, as the Scripture calls it, is what I guess in
another, would make your Lordship ask again, Is this fair and ingenuous dealing?

My Lord, my Bible expresses Heb. 10. 22.
the highest degree of Faith, which the Apostle recommended to Believers in his
time by full assurance. But assurance of Faith, though it be what assurance
soever, will by no means down with your Lordship in my writing. You say p. 26.
I allow assurance of Faith, God forbid I should do otherwise; but then you
ask, Why not Certainty as well as Assurance? My Lord, I think it may be a
Reason not misbecoming a poor Layman, and such as he might presume would
satisfy a Bishop of the Church of England, that he found his Bible to speak
so. I find my Bible speaks of the Assurance of Faith, but no ^here, that I can
remember, of the Certainty of Faith, though in many places it speaks of the
Certainty of Knowledge, and therefore I speak so too; and shall not I think be
condemned for keeping close to the Expressions of our Bible, though the
Scripture Language, as it is, does not so well serve your Lordship's turn in
the present Case. When I shall see in an authentic Translation of our Bible,
the Phrase changed, it will then be time enough for me to change it too, and
call it not the Assurance but Certainty of Faith: But till then I shall not be
ashamed of it, notwithstanding you reproach me with it, by terming it p. 31.
The Assurance of Faith as I call it; when you might as well have termed it The
Assurance of Faith, as our Bibles call it.

It being plain, that by Certainty I meant Knowledge, and by Faith the act of
Believing, that these Words p. 23.
where you ask, How comes the Certainty of Faith so hard a Point with me? And
where you tell me, p. 26.
I will allow no Certainty of Faith, may make no wrong impression in Men's
Minds, who may be apt to understand them of the Object, and not merely of the
act of Believing. I crave leave to say with Mr. Chillingworth, C. 6 3.
That I do heartily acknowledge and believe the Articles of our Faith to be in
themselves Truths as certain and infallible as the very common Principles of
Geometry or Metaphysics. But that there is not required of us a Knowledge of
them and an adherence to them as certain, as that of Sense or Science; and that
for this Reason, (amongst others given both by Mr. Chillingworth and Mr.
Hooker) viz. That Faith is not Knowledge, no more than three is four, but
eminently contained in it: So that he that knows, believes and something more;
but he that believes many times does not; nay, if he does barely and merely
believe, he does never know. These are Mr. Chillingworth's own Words. C. 6. 2.


That this Assurance of Faith may approach very near to Certainty, and not come
short of it in a sure and steady influence on the Mind, I have so plainly
declared, Essay B. 4. C. 17. 16.
that no body, I think, can question it. In my Chapter of Reason, which has
received the honor of your Lordship's Animadversions, I say of some
Propositions wherein Knowledge [ i. e. in my Sense] Certainty fails us, That
their probability is so clear and strong, that Assent as necessarily follows
it, as Knowledge does Demonstration. Does your Lordship ascribe any greater
Certainty than this to an Article of mere Faith? if you do not? we are it seems
agreed in the thing; and so all, that you have so emphatically said about it,
is but to correct a mistake of mine in the English Tongue, if it prove to be
one: A weighty Point, and well worth your Lordship's bestowing so many Pages
upon. I say mere Faith, because though a Man may be a Christian, who merely
believes that there is a God, yet that is not an Article of mere Faith, because
it may be demonstrated that there is a God, and so may certainly be known.

Your Lordship goes on to ask, p. 23.
Have not all Mankind who have talked of Matters of Faith, allowed a Certainty
of Faith as well as a Certainty of Knowledge? To answer a question concerning
what all Mankind who have talked of Faith have done, may be within the reach of
your great Learning: As for me, my reading reaches not so far. The Apostles and
the Evangelists, I can answer, have talked of Matters of Faith, but I do not
find in my Bible, that they have any where spoke (for it is of speaking here the
Question is) of the Certainty of Faith; and what they allow, which they do not
speak of, I cannot tell. I say in my Bible, meaning the English Translation
used in our Church; though what all Mankind, who speak not of Faith in English,
can do toward the deciding of this Question I do not see, it being about the
signification of an English word. And whether in propriety of speech it can be
applied to Faith, can only be decided by those who understand English, which
all Mankind who have talked of of Matters of Faith, I humbly conceive did not.

To prove that Certainty in English, may be applied to Faith, you say, p. 24.
That among the Romans it was opposed to doubting, and for that you bring this
Latin Sentence, Nil tam certum est quam quod de dubio certum. Answ. Certum,
among the Romans, might be opposed to doubting, and yet not be applied to
Faith, because Knowledge, as well as Believing, is opposed to doubting; and
therefore unless it had pleased your Lordship to have quoted the Author out of
which this Latin Sentence is taken, one cannot tell whether Certum be not in it
spoken of a thing known, and not of a thing believed; though if it were so, I
humbly conceive it would not prove what you say, viz. That it, i. e. the word
Certainty (for to that it must refer here, or to nothing that I understand) was
among the Romans applied to Faith; for as I take it, they never used the
English word Certainty; and though it be true, that the English word Certainty
be taken from the Latin word Certus, yet that therefore Certainty in English is
used exactly in the same sense, that Certus is in Latin, that I think you will
not say; for then Certainty in English must signify Purpose and Resolution of
Mind, for to that Certus is applied in Latin.

You are pleased here p. 24.
to tell me, That in my former Letter I said, That if we knew the Original of
Words, we should be much helped to the Ideas they were first applied to, and
made to stand for. I grant it true, nor shall I unsay it here. For I said not,
that a Word, that had its Original in one Language, kept always exactly the
same Signification in another Language, into which it was from thence
transplanted. But if you will give me leave to remind you of it, I remember
that you, my Lord, say Vindic. p. 237.
in the same place, That little weight is to be laid upon a bare Grammatical
Etymology, when a Word is used in another sense by the best Authors. And I
think you could not have brought a more proper instance to verify that saying,
than that which you produce here.

But pray, my Lord, why so far about? Why are we sent to the ancient Romans?
Why must we consult (which is no easy task) all Mankind, who have talked of
Faith, to know whether Certainty be properly used for Faith or no, when to
determine it between your Lordship and Me, there is so sure a Remedy, and so
near at hand? It is but for you to say wherein Certainty consists. This, when I
gently offered to your Lordship in my first Letter, you interpreted it 1st Ans.
p. 69.
to be a design to draw you out of your way.

I am sorry, my Lord, you should think it out of your way to put an end, a
short end to a Controversy, which you think of such moment: Methinks it should
not be out of your way, with one blow, finally to overthrow an Assertion, which
you think to be of dangerous consequence to that Article of Faith, which your
Lordship has endeavored to defend. I proposed the same again 2d Let. p. 94.
where I say, For this there is a very easy Remedy: It is but for your
Lordship to set aside this Definition of Knowledge, by giving us a better, and
this danger is over. But you choose rather to have a Controversy with my Book,
for having it in it, and to put me upon the Defense of it. This is so express,
that your taking no notice of it, puts me at a loss what to think. To say that
a Man so great in Letters, does not know wherein Certainty consists, is a
greater presumption than I will be guilty of; and yet to think that you do know
and will not tell, is yet harder. Who can think, or will dare to say, That your
Lordship so much concerned for the Articles of Faith, and engaged in this
dispute with me, by your duty, for the preservation of them, should choose to
keep up a Controversy with me rather than remove that danger, which my wrong
Notion of Certainty threatens to the Articles of Faith? For, my Lord, since the
Question is moved, and it is brought by your Lordship to a public Dispute,
wherein Certainty consists, a great many knowing no better, may take up with
what I have said; and rather than have no Notion of Certainty at all, will
stick by mine, till a better be showed them. And if mine tends to Skepticism,
as you say, and you will not furnish them with one that does not, what is it
but to give way to Skepticism, and let it quietly prevail on Men as either
having my Notion of Certainty, or none at all? Your Lordship indeed says
something in excuse in your 75th Page, which that my Answer may be in the
proper place, shall be considered when we come there.

Your Lordship declares, p. 25.
That you are utterly against any private Mints of Words. I know not what the
Public may do for your particular Satisfaction in the Case; but till public
Mints of Words are erected, I know no Remedy for it, but that you must
patiently suffer this matter to go on in the same course, that I think it has
gone in ever since Language has been in use. Here in this Island, as far as my
knowledge reaches, I do not find, that ever since the Saxons time, in all the
alterations that have been made in our Language, that any one Word or Phrase
has had its Authority from the Great Seal, or passed by Act of Parliament.

When the dazzling Metaphor of the Mint and new milled Words, etc. (which
mightily, as it seems, delighted your Lordship when you were writing that
Paragraph) will give you leave to consider this matter plainly as it is, you
will find, that the Coining of Money in publicly authorized Mints, affords no
manner of Argument against private Men's meddling in the introducing new, or
changing the signification of old Words; every one of which alterations always
has its rise from some private Mint. The Case in short is this, Money by virtue
of the Stamp, received in the public Mint, which vouches its intrinsic Worth,
has authority to pass. This use of the public Stamp would be lost, if private
Men were suffered to offer Money stamped by themselves: On the contrary, Words
are offered to the Public by every private Man, Coined in his private Mint, as
he pleases; but it is the receiving of them by others, their very passing, that
gives them their Authority and Currancy, and not the Mint they come out of.
Horace, I think, has given a true account of this matter, de Art Poet.
in a Country very jealous of any Usurpation upon the public Authority. Multa
renascentur quae jam cecidere cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus,
Quem penes arbitrium and jus and norma loquendi.
But yet whatever change is made in the signification or credit of any word by
public use, this change has always its beginning in some private Mint; so
Horace tells us it was in the Roman Language quite down to his time.

-- Ego cur acquirere pauca
Si possum invideor? quum lingua Catonis and Enni
Sermonem patrium ditaverit, and nova rerum
Nomina protulerit? Licuit semperque licebit
Signatum praesente nota procudere nomen.
Here we see Horace expressly says, That private Mints of Words were always
Licensed, and, with Horace I humbly conceive so they will always continue, how
utterly soever your Lordship may be against them. And therefore he that offers
to the Public new milled Words from his own private Mint, is not always in
that so bold an Invader of the public Authority, as you would make him.

This I say not to excuse my self in the present Case, for I deny, that I have
at all changed the signification of the word Certainty. And therefore if you
had pleased you might, my Lord, have spared your saying on this Occasion, p.
24, and 25.
That it seems our old Words must not now pass in the current Sense. And those
Persons assume too much Authority to themselves, who will not suffer common
Words to pass in their general acceptance, and other things to the same
purpose in this Paragraph, till you had proved, that in strict propriety of
speech it could be said, That a Man was certain of that which he did not know
but only believed.

If you had had time in the heat of Dispute to have made a little Reflection on
the use of the English word Certainty in strict Speaking, perhaps your Lordship
would not have been so forward to have made my using it, only for precise
Knowledge, so enormous an impropriety; at least you would not have accused it
of weakening the Credibility of any Article of Faith.

It Is true indeed, People commonly say, they are certain of what they barely
Believe, without doubting. But it is as true, that they as commonly say, that
they Know it too. But no Body from thence concludes, that Believing is Knowing.
As little can they conclude from the like vulgar way of Speaking, that
Believing is Certainty. All that is meant thereby is no more but this, that the
full assurance of their Faith, as steadily determins their assent to the
embracing of that Truth, as if they actually knew it.

But however, such Phrases as these are used to show the steadiness and
assurance of their Faith, who thus Speak; yet they alter not the propriety of
our Language, which I think appropriates Certainty only to Knowledge, when in
strict and philosophical Discourse it is, upon that account,
contradistinguished to Faith, as in this case here your Lordship knows it is,
whereof there is an express Evidence in my first Letter, p. 115.
where I say, That I speak of Belief, and your Lordship of Certainty, and that
I meant Belief and not Certainty.

Your Lordship says, p. 25.
Certainty is common to both Knowledge and Faith, unless I think it impossible
to be certain upon any Testimony whatsoever. I think it is possible to be
certain upon the Testimony of God (for that I suppose you mean) where I know
that it is the Testimony of God, because in such a Case, that Testimony is
capable not only to make me believe, but if I consider it right, to make me
know the thing to be so; and so I may be certain. For the veracity of God is as
capable of making me know a Proposition to be true, as any other way of Proof
can be, and therefore I do not in such a case, barely Believe, but know such a
Proposition to be true, and attain Certainty.

The sum of your Accusation is drawn up p. 26.
thus, That I have appropriated Certainty to the perception of the agreement of
disagreement of Ideas in any Proposition; and now I find this will not hold as
to Articles of Faith; and therefore I will allow no Certainty of Faith; which
you think is not for the advantage of my Cause. The truth of matter of Fact is
in short this. That I have placed Knowledge in the perception of the agreement
or disagreement of Ideas. This definition of Knowledge your Lordship said might
be of dangerous Consequence to that Article of Faith, which you have
endeavored to defend. This I denied, and gave this Reason for it, 2 Let. p.
94-98.
viz. That a Definition of Knowledge, whether a good or bad, true or false
Definition, could not be of ill or any Consequence to an Article of Faith.
Because a definition of Knowledge, which was one Act of the Mind, did not at
all concern Faith, which was another Act of the Mind quite distinct from it. To
this then, which was the Proposition in Question between us, your Lordship, I
humbly conceive should have answered. But instead of that, your Lordship by the
use of the word Certainty in a Sense, that I used it not (for you knew I used
it only for Knowledge) would represent me as having strange Notions of Faith.
Whether this be for the Advantage of your Cause, your Lordship will do well to
consider.

Upon such a use of the word Certainty in a different Sense from what I use it
in, the force of all your Lordship says, p. 27. -- 31.
under your first Head contained in the two or three next Paragraphs, depends,
as I think, for I must own (Pardon my Dullness) that I do not clearly comprehend
the force of what your Lordship there says: And it will take up too many Pages,
to examine it Period by Period. In short therefore, I take your Lordship's
meaning p. 27, 28.
to be this,

That there are some Articles of Faith, viz. the fundamental Principles of
natural Religion, which Mankind may attain to a Certainty in by Reason without
Revelation; which because a Man that proceeds upon my Grounds, cannot attain to
Certainty in by Reason, their credibility to him, when they are considered as
purely matters of Faith will be weakened. Those which your Lordship instances
in are the Being of a God, Providence, and the Rewards and Punishments of a
future State.

This is the way, as I humbly conceive, your Lordship takes here to prove my
Grounds of Certainty (for so you call my definition of Knowledge) to be of
dangerous Consequence to the Articles of Faith.

To avoid Ambiguity and Confusion in the examining this Argument of your
Lordship's, the best way, I humbly conceive will be, to lay by the term
Certainty, which your Lordship and I using in different Senses, is the less fit
to make what we say to one another clearly understood; and instead thereof, to
use the term Knowledge, which with me, your Lordship knows, is equivalent.

Your Lordship's Proposition then as far as it has any opposition to me, is
this, That if Knowledge be supposed to consist in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, a Man cannot attain to the Knowledge, that
these Propositions, viz. That there is a God, a Providence, and Rewards and
Punishments in a future State, are true; and therefore the credibility of these
Articles, considered purely as matters of Faith, will be weakened to him.
Wherein there are these Things to be proved by your Lordship.

1. That upon my grounds of Knowledge i. e. upon a supposition, that Knowledge
consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, we cannot
attain to the Knowledge of the Truth of either of those Propositions, viz. That
there is a God, Providence, and Rewards and Punishments in a future State.

2. Your Lordship is to prove, That the not knowing the Truth of any
Proposition, lessens the credibility of it; which in short, amounts to this,
that want of Knowledge lessens Faith in any Proposition proposed. This is the
Proposition to be proved, if your Lordship uses Certainty in the Sense I use
it, i. e. for Knowledge, in which only use of it will it here bear upon me.

But since I find your Lordship in these two or three Paragraphs, to use the
word Certainty in so uncertain a Sense, as sometimes to signify Knowledge by
it, and sometimes Believing in general, i. e. any degree of believing, give me
leave to add that if your Lordship means by these Words, p. 27.
Let us suppose a Person by natural Reason to attain to a Certainty as to the
being of a God, etc. i. e. attain to a belief that there is a God, etc. or the
Souls Immortality. I say if you take Certainty in such a Sense, then it will be
incumbent upon your Lordship to prove, That if a Man finds the natural Reason
whereupon he entertained the belief of a God or of the immortality of the Soul
uncertain, that will weaken the credibility of those fundamental Articles, as
matters of Faith, or which is in effect the same. That the weakness of the
credibility of any article of Faith from Reason, weakens the credibility of it
from Revelation. For it is this which these following Words of yours p. 28.
import. For before there was a natural credibility in them on the account of
Reason, but by going on wrong grounds of Certainty all that is lost.

To prove the first of these Propositions, viz. That upon the supposition that
Knowledge consists in the perception of the agreement of Ideas, we cannot
attain to the knowledge of the truth of this Proposition, that there is a God.
Your Lordship urges, that I have said, That no Idea proves the existence of the
Thing without it self, which Argument reduced to form, will stand thus. If it
be true, as I say, that no Idea proves the existence of the thing without it
self, then upon the supposition that Knowledge consists in the perception of
the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, we cannot attain to the knowledge of
the truth of this Proposition, that there is a God: Which Argument so
manifestly proves not, that there needs no more to be said to it, than to
desire, that consequence to be proved.

Again, as to the immortality of the Soul your Lordship urges p. 28.
, that I have said, that I cannot know but that matter may think; therefore
upon my ground of Knowledge, i. e. upon a supposition that Knowledge consists
in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, there is an end of
the Souls Immortality. This consequence I must also desire your Lordship to
prove. Only I crave leave by the by to point out some things in these
Paragraphs too remarkable to be passed over without any Notice.

One is, That you suppose p. 28.
a Man is made certain upon my general grounds of Certainty, i. e. knows by the
perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, that there is a God, and
yet upon a farther examination of my method he finds that the way of Ideas will
not do. Here my Lord, if by my grounds of Certainty, my Method, and my way of
Ideas, you mean one and the same thing, then your Words will have a consistency
and tend to the same point. But then I must beg your Lordship to consider, that
your Supposition carries a Contradiction in it, viz. That your Lordship
supposes, that by my Grounds, my Method, and my way of Certainty, a Man is made
Certain and not made Certain, that there is a God. If your Lordship means here
by my grounds of Certainty, my Method, and my way of Ideas different things (as
it seems to me you do) then, whatever your Lordship may suppose here, it makes
nothing to the Point in Hand, which is to show, that by this my ground of
Certainty, viz. That Knowledge consists in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, a Man first attains to a Knowledge, that there is a God,
and afterward by the same grounds of Certainty he comes to lose the Knowledge,
that there is a God; which to me seems little less than a Contradiction.

It Is likely your Lordship will say you mean no such thing, for you allege
this Proposition, that no Idea proves the existence of any thing without it
self, and give that as an Instance, that my way of Ideas will not do, i. e.
will not prove the being of a God. It Is true your Lordship does so. But withal
my Lord, it is as true, that this Proposition, supposing it to be mine (for it
is not here set down in my Words) contains not my method, or way, or notion of
Certainty; though it is in that Sense alone, that it can here be useful to your
Lordship to call it my method, or the way by Ideas.

Your Lordship undertakes to show, That my defining Knowledge to consist in the
perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, weakens the credibility
of this fundamental Article of Faith, that there is a God, what is your
Lordship's Proof of it? Just this. The saying that no Idea proves the existence
of the thing without it self, will not do: Ergo, the saying, that Knowledge
consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, weakens
the credibility of this fundamental Article. This my Lord, seems to me no
Proof, and all that I can find, that is offered to make it a Proof, is only
your calling these Propositions my general grounds of Certainty, my method of
Proceeding, the way of Ideas, and my own Principles in point of Reason, as if
that made these two Propositions the same thing, and whatsoever were a
consequence of one, may be charged as a consequence of the other; though it be
visible, that though the latter of these be never so false, or never so far
from being a Proof of a God, yet it will by no means thence follow, that the
former of them, viz. That Knowledge consists in the perception of the agreement
or disagreement of Ideas, weakens the credibility of that fundamental Article.
But it is but for your Lordship to call them both the way of Ideas, and that is
enough.

That I may not be accused by your Lordship for unfair or disingenuous dealing
for representing this Matter so, I shall here set down your Lordship's Words at
large. p. 27.
Let us now suppose a Person by natural Reason to attain to a Certainty, as to
the Being of God, and Immortality of the Soul; and he proceeds upon J. L's
general grounds of Certainty, from the agreement or disagreement of Ideas; and
so from the Ideas of God and the Soul, he is made certain of these two Points
before mentioned. But let us again suppose that such a Person upon a farther
Examination of J. L's method of proceeding finds, that the way of Ideas in
these Cases will not do; for no Idea proves the existence of the thing without
it self, no more than the Picture of a Man proves his Being, or the Visions of
a Dream make a true History, (which are J. L's. own Expressions) And for the
Soul he cannot be certain, but that Matter may think, (as J. L. affirms) and
then what becomes of the Soul's Immateriality. (and consequently Immortality)
from its Operations? But for all this, says J. L. his assurance of Faith
remains firm on its own Basis. Now you appeal to any Man of Sense, whether the
finding of Uncertainty of his own Principles, which he went upon in point of
Reason, does not weaken the Credibility of these fundamental Articles when they
are considered purely as matters of Faith? For before there was a natural
Credibility in them on the account of Reason; but by going on wrong grounds of
Certainty, all that is lost; and instead of being certain, he is more doubtful
than ever. These are your Lordship's own Words; and now I appeal to any Man of
Sense, whether they contain any other Argument against my placing of Certainty
as I do, but this, viz. A Man mistakes and thinks that this Proposition, no
Idea, proves the existence of the thing without it self, shows, That in the way
of Ideas one cannot prove a God, Ergo, this Proposition, Certainty consists in
the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, weakens the
credibility of this fundament Article, that there is a God. And so of the
immortality of the Soul, because I say, I know not but Matter may think: Your
Lordship would infer, Ergo, my definition of Certainty weakens the credibility
of the Revelation of the Souls immortality.

Your Lordship is pleased here, to call this Proposition, That Knowledge or
Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas,
My general grounds of Certainty, as if I had some more particular grounds of
Certainty. Whereas I have no other Ground or Notion of Certainty, but this one
alone; all my Notion of Certainty is contained in that one particular
Proposition; but perhaps your Lordship did it, that you might make the
Proposition, above quoted, viz. No Idea proves the existence of the thing
without it self under the Title you give it of the way of Ideas, pass for one
of my particular Grounds of Certainty; whereas it is no more any Ground of
Certainty of mine, or definition of Knowledge, than any other Proposition in my
Book.

Another thing very remarkable in what your Lordship here says, is, That you
make the failing to attain Knowledge by any way of Certainty in some particular
Instances, to be the finding the uncertainty of the way it self, which is all
one as to say, That if a Man misses by Algebra, the certain Knowledge of some
Propositions in Mathematics, therefore he finds the way or principles of
Algebra to be uncertain or false. This is your Lordship's way of reasoning
here: Your Lordship quotes out of me, That I say no Idea proves the existence
of the thing without it self. And that I say, That one cannot be certain that
Matter cannot think; from whence your Lordship argues, That he who says so,
cannot attain to Certainty that there is a God, or that the Soul is immortal;
and thereupon your Lordship concludes, p. 28.
he finds the uncertainty of the Principles he went upon, in Point of Reason,
i. e. that he finds this Principle or Ground of Certainty he went upon in
reasoning, viz. That Certainty or Knowledge consists in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, to be uncertain. For if your Lordship means
here by Principles he went upon in Point of Reason any thing else, but that
definition of Knowledge, which your Lordship calls my Way, Method, Grounds,
etc. of Certainty, which I and others, to the endangering some Articles of
Faith, go upon; I crave leave to say, it concerns nothing at all the Argument
your Lordship is upon, which is to prove, That the placing of Certainty in the
perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas may be of dangerous
consequence to any Article of Faith.

Your Lordship in the next place p: 29, 30.
says, Before we can believe any thing upon the account of Revelation, we must
suppose there is a God. What use does your Lordship make of this? Your Lordship
thus argues; But by my way of Certainty, a Man is made uncertain whether there
be a God or no. For that to me is the meaning of those Words, p. 29.
How can his Faith stand firm as to Divine Revelation, when he is made
uncertain by his own way, whether there be a God or no? Or they can to me mean
nothing to the Question in hand. What is the conclusion from hence? This it
must be, or nothing to the purpose, Ergo, my defininition of Knowledge, or
which is the same thing, my placing of Certainty in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, leaves not the Articles of Faith the same
credibility they had before.

To excuse my dullness in not being able to comprehend this consequence, pray,
my Lord, consider, that your Lordship says, Ibid.
Before we can believe any thing upon the account of Revelation, it must be
supposed that there is a God. But cannot he who places Certainty in the
perception of the agreement and disagreement of Ideas, supposes there is a God?

But your Lordship means by suppose, that one must be certain that there is a
God. Let it be so, and let it be your Lordship's privilege in Controversy to
use one word for another, though of a different signification, as I think to
suppose and be certain are. Cannot one that places Certainty in the perception
of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, be certain there is a God? I can
assure you, my Lord, I am certain there is a God; and yet I own, That I place
Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas: Nay, I
dare venture to say to your Lordship, That I have proved there is a God, and
see no inconsistency at all between these two Propositions, That Certainty
consists in the perception of the agreement of disagreement of Ideas; and that
it is certain there is a God. So that this my Notion of Certainty, this
definition of Knowledge, for any thing your Lordship has said to the contrary,
leaves to this Fundamental Article the same Credibility, and the same Certainty
it had before.

Your Lordship says farther, p. 29.
To suppose Divine Revelation, we must be certain that there is a principle
above Matter and Motion in the World. Here again, my Lord, your way of writing
makes work for my Ignorance, and before I can either admit or deny this
Proposition, or judge what force it has to prove the Proposition in question, I
must distinguish it into these different Senses, which I think your Lordship's
way of speaking may comprehend. For your Lordship may mean it thus; To suppose
Divine Revelation, we must be certain, i. e. we must believe that there is a
principle above Matter and Motion in the World. Or your Lordship may mean thus;
We must be certain, i. e. we must know that there is something above Matter or
Motion in the World. In the next place your Lordship may mean by something
above Matter and Motion, either simply an intelligent Being; for Knowledge,
without determining what Being it is in, is a principle above Matter and
Motion. Or your Lordship may mean an immaterial intelligent Being; so that this
undetermined way of expressing, includes at least four distinct Propositions,
whereof some are true, and others not so. For

1. My Lord, if your Lordship means, That to suppose a Divine Revelation, a Man
must be certain, i. e. must certainly know that there is an intelligent Being
in the World, and that that intelligent Being is immaterial from whence that
Revelation comes; I deny it. For a Man may suppose Revelation upon the belief
of an intelligent Being, from whence it comes, without being able to make out
to himself, by a Scientifical Reasoning, that there is such a Being. A proof
whereof I humbly conceive are the Anthropomorphites among the Christians
heretofore, who nevertheless rejected not the Revelation of the New Testament;
and he that will talk with illiterate People in this Age, will, I doubt not,
find many who believe the Bible to be the Word of God, though they imagine God
himself in the shape of an Old Man sitting in Heaven, which they could not do,
if they knew, i. e. had examined and understood any demonstration whereby he is
proved to be immaterial, without which they cannot know it.

2. If your Lordship means, That to suppose a Divine Revelation, it is
necessary to know, that there is simply an intelligent Being; this also I deny.
For to suppose a Divine Revelation, is not necessary that a Man should know
that there is such an intelligent Being in the World: I say, know, i. e. from
things, that he does know, demonstratively deduce the proof of such a Being; it
is enough for the receiving Divine Revelation to believe, that there is such a
Being, without having by demonstration attained to the Knowledge, that there is
a God. Every one that believes right, does not always reason exactly,
especially in abstract Metaphysical Speculations; and if no body can believe
the Bible to be of Divine Revelation, but he that clearly comprehends the whole
deduction, and sees the evidence of the demonstration wherein the existence of
an intelligent Being, on whose Will all other Beings depend, is Scientifically
proved, there are I fear but few Christians among illiterate People, to look no
farther. He that believes there is a God, though he does no more than believe
it, and has not attained to the Certainty of Knowledge, i. e. does not see the
evident demonstration of it, has Ground enough to admit of Divine Revelation.
The Apostle tells us, That he that will come to God, must believe that he is;
But I do not remember the Scripture any where says, That he must know that he
is.

3. In the next place, if your Lordship means, That to suppose Divine
Revelation, a Man must be certain, i. e. explicitly believe, that there is a
perfectly immaterial Being, I shall leave it to your Lordship's consideration,
whether it may not be Ground enough for the Supposition of a Revelation to
believe, that there is an all-knowing, unerring Being, who can neither deceive
nor be deceived, without a Man's precisely determining in his Thoughts, whether
that unerring, omniscient Being be immaterial or no. It Is past all doubt, that
every one that examins and reasons right, may come to a Certainty, that God is
perfectly immaterial. But it may be a question, whether every one who believes
a Revelation to be from God, may have entered into the disquisition of the
immateriality of his Being? Whether, I say, every ignorant day Labourer, who
believes the Bible to be the Word of God, has in his mind considered
materiality and immateriality, and does explicitly believe God to be
immaterial, I shall leave to your Lordship to determine, if you think fit more
expressly than your Words do here.

4. If your Lordship means, That to suppose a Divine Revelation, a Man must
becertain, i. e. believe that there is a supreme intelligent Being, from whom
it comes, who can neither deceive nor be deceived. I grant it to be true.

These being the several Propositions, either of which may be meant in your
Lordship's so general, and to me doubtful, way of expressing* your self to
avoid the length, which a particular Answer to each of them would run me into,
I will venture (and it is a venture to answer to an ambiguous Proposition in
one Sense, when the Author has the liberty of saying he meant it in another, a
great convenience of general loose and doubtful Expressions) I will, I say,
venture to answer to it in the Sense I guess most suited to your Lordship's
purpose; and see what your Lordship proves by it. I will therefore suppose your
Lordship's Reasoning to be this; That

To suppose Divine Revelation, a Man must be certain, i. e. believe that there
is a Principle above Matter and Motion, i. e. an immaterial intelligent Being
in the World. Let it be so; what does your Lordship infer? Therefore upon the
Principles of Certainty by Ideas, he [ i. e. p. 29.
he that places Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of
Ideas,] cannot be certain of [i. e. believe] this]. This consequence seems a
little strange, but your Lordship proves it thus; Because he does not know but
Matter may think: Which Argument put into form, will stand thus;

If one who places Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement
of Idea, does not know but Matter may think; then whoever places Certainty so,
cannot believe there is an immaterial intelligent Being in the World.

But there is one who placing Certainty in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, does not know but Matter may think:

Ergo, whoever places Certainty in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, cannot believe that there is an intelligent immaterial
Being.

This Argumentation is so defective in every part of it, that for fear I should
be thought to make an Argument for your Lordship in requital for the Answer
your Lordship made for me, I must desire the Reader to consider; your Lordship
says, We must be certain: He cannot be certain, because he does not know, p. 29.
which in short, is We cannot because he cannot, and he cannot because he does
not. This considered, will justify the Syllogism I have made to contain your
Lordship's Argument in its full force.

I come therefore to the Syllogism it self, and there first I deny the Minor
which is this:

There is one who placing Certainty in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, does not know but Matter may think.

I begin with this, because this is the Foundation of all your Lordship's
Argument; and therefore I desire your Lordship would produce any one who
placing Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas,
does not know but Matter may think.

The Reason why I press this, is because I suppose your Lordship means me here,
and would have it thought that I say, I do not know but that Matter may think:
But that I do not say so; nor any thing else from whence may be inferred what
your Lordship adds in the annexed Words, p. 29.
if they can be inferred from it, And consequently all Revelation may be nothing
but the effects of an exalted Fancy, or the heats of a disordered Imagination,
as Spinosa affirmed. On the contrary, I do say, B. 4. C. 10. 10.
It is impossible to conceive that matter, either with or without motion, could
have originally in and from it self Perception and knowledge. And having in
that Chapter established this Truth, That there is an eternal immaterial
knowing Being, I think no body but your Lordship could have imputed to me the
doubting, that there was such a Being, because I say in another place, B. 4. C.
3. 6.
and to another purpose, It is impossible for us by the contemplation of our
own Ideas, without Revelation, to discover, whether Omnipotency has not given
to some Systems of Matter fitly disposed, a power to perceive and think, or
else joined and fixed to Matter so disposed, a thinking immaterial Substance:
It being in respect of our Notions, not much more remote from our
Comprehensions to conceive, that God can, if he pleases, superadd to our Idea
of Matter a Faculty of Thinking, than that he should superadd to it another
Substance, with a faculty of Thinking. From my saying thus, That God (whom I
have proved to be an immaterial Being) by his Omnipotency, may, for ought we
know, superadd to some parts of Matter a faculty of Thinking, it requires some
skill for any one to represent me as your Lordship does here, as one ignorant
or doubtful whether Matter may not think; to that degree, that I am not
certain, or I do not believe that there is a Principle above Matter and Motion
in the World and consequently all Revelation may be nothing but the effects of
an exalted Fancy or the heats of a disordered Imagination, as Spinosa affirmed.
For thus I, or some Body else (whom I desire your Lordship to produce) stands
painted in this your Lordship's Argument from the supposition of a Divine
Revelation, which your Lordship brings here to prove, That the defining of
Knowledge, as I do, to consist in the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas, weakens the Credibility of the Articles of the Christian
Faith.

But if your Lordship thinks it so dangerous a Position to say, It is not much
harder for us to conceive, that God can, if he pleases, superadd to Matter a
faculty of Thinking, than that he should superadd to it another Substance with
a faculty of Thinking. (which is the utmost I have said concerning the faculty
of Thinking in Matter.) I humbly conceive it would be more to your purpose to
prove, That the infinite, omnipotent Creator of all Things, out of nothing,
cannot, if he pleases, superadd to some parcels of Matter, disposed as he sees
fit, a faculty of Thinking, which the rest of Matter has not; rather than to
represent me, with that Candor your Lordship does, as one, who so far makes
Matter a Thinking thing, as thereby to question the being of a Principle above
Matter and Motion in the World, and consequently to take away all Revelation,
which how natural and genuine a Representation it is of my Sense, expressed in
the Passages of my Essay, which I have above set down, I humbly submit to the
Reader's Judgment and your Lordship's Zeal for Truth to determine; and shall
not stay to examine whether Man may not have an exalted Fancy* and the heats of
a disordered Imagination, equally overthrowing Divine Revelation, though the
power of Thinking be placed only in an immaterial Substance:

I come now to the sequel of your Major, which is this:

If one who places Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement
of Ideas, does not know but Matter may Think; then whoever places Certainty so,
cannot believe there is an immaterial intelligent Being in the World.

The consequence here, is from does not to cannot, which I cannot but wonder to
find in an Argument of your Lordships. For he that does not to Day believe or
know, that Matter cannot be so ordered by God's Omnipotency as to think (if
that subverts the belief of an immaterial intelligent Being in the World) may
know or believe it to Morrow, or if he should never know or believe it, yet
others who define Knowledge as he does, may know or believe it. Unless your
Lordship can prove, that it is impossible for any one, who defines Knowledge,
to consist in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, to know
or believe, that Matter cannot Think. But this, as I remember, your Lordship
has not any where attempted to prove. And yet without this, your Lordship's way
of Reasoning is no more, than to argue, that one cannot do a thing because
another does not do it. And yet upon this strange consequence is built all that
your Lordship brings here to prove, that my definition of Knowledge, weakens
the credibility of Articles of Faith, v. g.

It weakens the credibility of this fundamental Article of Faith, that there is
a God! How so? Because I who have so defined Knowledge, say in my Essay, B. 4.
C. 11. 1.
That the Knowledge of the Existence of any other thing [but of God] we can
have only by Sensation. For there being no necessary connection of real
Existence with any Idea a Man has in his Memory, nor of any other Existence
but that of God, with the Existence of any particular Man; no particular Man
can know the Existence of any other Being, but only when by actual operating
upon him, it makes it self perceived by him. For the having the Idea of any
thing in our Mind, no more proves the Existence of that thing, than the Picture
of a Man evidences his Being in the World, or the Visions of a Dream, make
thereby a true History. For so are the Words of my Book, and not as your
Lordship has been pleased to set them down here; p. 28.
and they were well chosen by your Lordship, to show, that the way of Ideas
would not do. i. e. In my way by Ideas, I cannot prove there is a God.

But supposing I had said in that place, or any other, that which would hinder
the proof of a God, as I have not, might I not see my Error, and alter or
renounce that Opinion without changing my definition of Knowledge? Or could not
another Man who defined Knowledge, as I do, avoid Thinking as your Lordship
says, I say, That no Idea proves the Existence of the thing without it self,
and so able, notwithstanding my saying so, to prove that there is a God?

Again, your Lordship argues that my definition of Knowledge, weakens the
credibility of the Articles of Faith: Because it takes away Revelation; and
your Proof of that is, because I do not know whether Matter may not Think.

The same sort of Argumentation your Lordship goes on with in the next Page, p.
30.
where you say, Again, before there can be any such thing as assurance of Faith
upon divine Revelation, there must be a Certainty as to Sense and Tradition;
for there can be no Revelation pretended now, without immediate Inspiration;
and the Basis of our Faith is a Revelation contained in an ancient Book,
whereof the parts were delivered at distant times, but conveyed down to us by
an universal Tradition. But now, what if my grounds of Certainty can give us no
assurance as to these Things? Your Lordship says you do not mean, That they
cannot demonstrate matters of Fact, which it were most unreasonable to expect,
but that these Grounds of Certainty make all things uncertain; for your
Lordship thinks you have proved, That this way of Ideas cannot give a
satisfactory Account, as to the Existence of the plainest Objects of the Sense;
because Reason cannot perceive the connection between the Objects and the
Ideas. How then can we arrive to any Certainty in perceiving those Objects by
their Ideas?

All the force of which Argument lies in this, that I have said (or am supposed
to have said, or to hold, for that I ever said so, I do not remember) That
Reason cannot perceive the connection between the Objects and the Ideas: Ergo,
whoever holds that Knowledge consists in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, cannot have any assurance of Faith upon divine
Revelation.

My Lord, let that Proposition, viz. That Reason cannot perceive the connection
between the Objects and the Ideas, be mine as much as your Lordship pleases,
and let it be as inconsistent as you please, with the assurance of Faith upon
divine Revelation; How will it follow from thence, that the placing of
Certainty in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, is the
Cause, that there cannot be any such thing as the assurance of Faith upon
divine Revelation to any Body? Though I who hold Knowledge to consist in the
perception of the agreement and disagreement of Ideas, have the Misfortune to
run into this Error, viz. That Reason cannot perceive the connection between
the Objects and the Ideas, which is inconsistent with the assurance of Faith
upon divine Revelation, yet it is not necessary that all others who with me
hold, that Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, should also hold, That Reason cannot perceive the
connection between the Objects and the Ideas, or that I my self should always
hold it: Unless your Lordship will say, that whoever places Certainty, as I do,
in the perception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, must necessarily
hold all the Errors that I do, which are inconsistent with or weaken the belief
of any Article of Faith; and hold them incorrigibly. Which has as much
consequence as if I should argue, that because your Lordship who lives at
Worcester does sometime mistake in quoting me, therefore no Body who lives at
Worcester can quote my Words right, or your Lordship can never mend your wrong
Quotations. For, my Lord, the holding Certainty to consist in the perception of
the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, is no more a necessary cause of holding
those erroneous Propositions, which your Lordship imputes to me, as weakening
the credibility of the mentioned Articles of Faith, than the place of your
Lordship's dwelling is a necessary cause of wrong Quoting.

I shall not here go about to trouble your Lordship with Divining again, what
may be your Lordship's precise Meaning in several of the Propositions contained
in the Passage above set down, especially that remarkably ambiguous and to me
obscure one, viz. There must be a Certainty as to Sense and Tradition. I fear I
have wasted too much of your Lordship's, and my Reader's time in that
employment already, and there would be no end, if I should endeavor to explain
whatever I am at a loss about, the determined Sense of, in any of your
Lordship's Expressions.

Only I will crave leave to beg my Reader to observe, That in this first Head,
p. 27-31.
which we are upon, your Lordship has used the Terms Certain and Certainty near
Twenty times, but without determining in any of them, whether you mean
Knowledge, or the full assurance of Faith, or any degree of Believing; though
it be evident, that in these Pages your Lordship uses Certainty for all these
Three. Which ambiguous use of the main Word in that Discourse, cannot but
render your Lordship's Sense clear and perspicuous, and your Argument very
cogent; and no doubt will do so to any one, who will be but at the pains to
reduce that one Word to a clear determined Sense all through these few
Paragraphs.

Your Lordship says, p. 23.
Have not all Mankind who have talked of matters of Faith allowed a Certainty
of Faith, as well as a Certainty of Knowledge? Answ. But did ever any one of
all that Mankind allow it as a tolerable way of speaking, that believing in
general (for which your Lordship has used it) which contains in it the lowest
degree of Faith, should be called Certainty? Could he who said, I Believe Lord,
help my Unbelief, or any one who is weak in Faith, or of little Faith, be
properly be said to be certain, or de dubio certus of what he believes, but
with a weak degree of Assent? I shall not question what your Lordship's great
Learning may Authorize: But I imagine every one has not skill, or will not
assume the liberty to speak so.

If a Witness before a Judge asked upon his Oath, whether he were certain of
such a thing, should answer yes, he was certain; and upon farther demand,
should give this account of his Certainty, That he believed it; would he not
make the Court and Auditors believe strangely of him? For to say that a Man is
certain, when he barely believes, and that perhaps with no great Assurance of
Faith, is to say that he is certain, where he owns an Uncertainty. For he that
says he barely believes, acknowledges that he Assents to a Proposition as true,
upon bare probability. And where any one Assents thus to any Proposition, his
Assent excludes not a possibility that it may be otherwise; and wherein any
one's Judgment there is a possibility to be otherwise, there one cannot deny
but there is some Uncertainty; and the less cogent the Probabilities appear,
upon which he Assents, the greater the Uncertainty. So that all barely probable
Proofs, which procure Assent, always containing some visible possibility that
it may be otherwise (or else it would be demonstration) and consequently the
weaker the Probability appears, the weaker the Assent, and the more the
Uncertainty: It thence follows, that where there is such a mixture of
Uncertainty, there a Man is so far uncertain; and therefore to say, That a Man
is certain where he barely believes or assents but weakly, though he does
believe, seems to me to say, That he is certain and uncertain together. But
though bare Belief always include some degrees of Uncertainty, yet it does not
therefore necessarily include any degree of wavering, the evidently strong
probability may as steadily determine the Man to Assent to the Truth, or make
him take the Proposition for true, and act accordingly, as Knowledge makes him
see or be certain that it is true. And he that does so, as to Truths revealed
in the Scripture, will show his Faith by his Works; and has, for ought I can
see, all the Faith necessary to a Christian, and required to Salvation.

My Lord, when I consider the length of my Answer here, to these few Pages of
your Lordship's, I cannot but bemoan my own dullness, and own my unfitness to
deal with so learned an Adversary as your Lordship in Controversy: For I know
not how to answer but to a Proposition of a determined Sense. Whilst it is
vague and uncertain in a general or equivocal use of any of the Terms, I cannot
tell what to say to it. I know not but such comprehensive ways of expressing
ones self, may do well enough in declamation; but in reasoning, there can be no
judgment made till one can get to some positive determined Sense of the
Speaker. If your Lordship had pleased to have condescended so far to my low
Capacity, as to have delivered your meaning, here determined, to any one of the
Senses above set down, or any other, that you may have in these Words, I
gathered them from; it would have saved me a great deal of writing, and your
Lordship loss of time in reading. I should not say this here to your Lordship,
were it only in this one place that I find this inconvenience. It is every
where in all your Lordship's Reasonings, that my want of Understanding causes
me this difficulty, and against my Will multiplies the words of my Answer. For
notwithstanding all that great deal that I have already said to these few Pages
of your Lordship's; yet my defense is not clear, and set in its due light,
unless I show in particular of every one of those Propositions (some whereof I
admit as true, others I deny as not so) that it will not prove what is to be
proved, viz. That my placing of Knowledge in the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas, lessens the credibility of any Article of Faith, which
it had before.

Your Lordship having done with the Fundamental Articles of Natural Religion,
you come in the next place to those of Revelation, to enquire, as your Lordship
says, p. 31.
Whether those who embrace the Articles of Faith, in the way of Ideas, can
retain their Certainty of those Articles, when these Ideas are quitted. What
this Enquiry is I know not very well, because I neither understand what it is
to embrace Articles of Faith in the way of Ideas, nor know what your Lordship
means by retaining their Certainty of those Articles, when these Ideas are
quitted. But it is no strange thing for my short Sight, not always distinctly to
discern your Lordship's meaning: Yet here I presume to know that this is the
thing to be proved, viz. That my definition of Knowledge does not leave to the
Articles of the Christian Faith, the same credibility they had before. The
Articles your Lordship instances in are,

1. The Resurrection of the dead. And here your Lordship proceeds just in the
same method of arguing, as you did in the former; your Lordship brings several
Passages concerning Identity out of my Essay, which you suppose inconsistent
with the belief of the Resurrection of the same Body; and this is your Argument
to prove that my defining of Knowledge to consist in the Perception of the
Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, alters the Foundations of this Article of
Faith, and leaves it not the same credibility it had before. Now, my Lord,
granting all that your Lordship has here p. 32.
quoted out of my Chapter of Identity and diversity, to be as false as your
Lordship pleases, and as inconsistent as your Lordship would have it, with the
Article of the Resurrection from the dead; nay, granting all the rest of my
whole Essay to be false, how will it follow from thence, that the placing
Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, weakens
the credibility of this Article of Faith, That the dead shall rise? Let it be,
that I who place Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement
of Ideas am guilty of Errors, that weaken the credibility of this Article of
Faith, others who place Certainty in the same Perception, may not run into
those Errors, and so not have their belief of this Article at all shaken.

Your Lordship therefore, by all the long discourse you have made here against
my Notion of Personal Identity, to prove that it weakens the credibility of the
Resurrection of the dead; should you have proved it never so clearly, has not,
I humbly conceive, said therein any one word toward the proving, That my
definition of Knowledge weakens the credibility of this Article of Faith. For
this, my Lord, is the Proposition to be proved, as your Lordship cannot but
remember, if you please to recollect, what is said in your 21st and following
Pages, and what in the 95th Page of my second Letter, quoted by your Lordship,
it was designed as an answer to. And so I proceed to the next Articles of Faith
your Lordship instances in. Your Lordship says, p. 44.


2. The next Articles of Faith which my Notion of Ideas is inconsistent with,
are no less than those of the Trinity and the Incarnation of our Savior. Where
I must humbly crave leave to observe to your Lordship, that in this second Head
here, your Lordship has changed the Question from my Notion of Certainty, to my
Notion of Ideas. For the Question, as I have often had occasion to observe to
your Lordship, is, Whether my Notion of Certainty, i. e. my placing of
Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, alters
the Foundation, and lessens the credibility of any Article of Faith? This being
the Question between your Lordship and me, ought I humbly conceive, most
especially to have been kept close to in this Article of the Trinity; because
'twas upon the account of my Notion of Certainty as prejudicial to the Doctrine
of the Trinity, that my Book was first brought into this Dispute. But your
Lordship offers nothing, that I can find, to prove, That my definition of
Knowledge or Certainty, does any way lessen the credibility of either of the
Articles here mentioned, unless your insisting upon some supposed Errors of
mine about Nature and Person, must be taken for proofs of this Proposition,
That my definition of Certainty lessens the credibility of the Articles of the
Trinity, and our Savior's Incarnation. And then the Answer I have already
given to the same way of Argumentation used by your Lordship, concerning the
Articles of a God, Revelation, and the Resurrection, I think may suffice.

Having, as I beg leave to think, shown that your Lordship has not in the least
proved this Proposition, That the placing of Certainty in the Perception of the
Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, weakens the credibility of any one Article
of Faith, which was your former Accusation against this (as your Lordship is
pleased to call it) new Method of Certainty, of so dangerous consequence to
that Article of Faith which your Lordship has endeavored to defend; and all
that your terrible Representation of it being, as I humbly conceive, come to
just nothing. I come now to vindicate my Book from your new Accusation in your
last Letter, and to show that you no more prove the Passages you allege out of
my Essay to have any inconsistency with the Articles of Christian Faith you
oppose them to, than you have proved by them, That my definition of Knowledge
weakens the credibility of any of those Articles.

1. The Article of Christian Faith your Lordship begins with, is that of the
Resurrection of the dead; and concerning that you say, p. 32.
The Reason of believing the Resurrection of the same Body upon my Grounds, is
from the Idea of Identity. Answ. Give me leave, my Lord, to say that the Reason
of believing any Article of the Christian Faith (such as your Lordship is here
speaking of) to me and upon my Grounds, is its being a part of Divine
Revelation: Upon this Ground I believed it before I either writ that Chapter of
Identity and Diversity, and before I ever thought of those Propositions which
your Lordship quotes out of that Chapter, and upon the same Ground I believe it
still; and not from my Idea of Identity. This saying of your Lordship's
therefore, being a Proposition neither self-evident, nor allowed by me to be
true, remains to be proved. So that your Foundation failing all your large
Superstructure built thereon, comes to nothing.

But my Lord, before we go any farther, I crave leave humbly to represent to
your Lordship, That I thought you undertook to make out that my Notion of Ideas
was inconsistent with the Articles of the Christian Faith. But that which your
Lordship instances in here is not, that I yet know, an Article of the Christian
Faith. The Resurrection of the dead, I acknowledge to be an Article of the
Christian Faith: But that the Resurrection of the Same Body, in your Lordship's
Sense of the same Body, is an Article of the Christian Faith, is what I
confess, I do not yet know.

In the New Testament (wherein, I think, are contained all the Articles of the
Christian Faith) I find our Savior and the Apostles to preach the Resurrection
of the Dead, and the Resurrection from the dead in many places: But I do not
remember any place, where the Resurrection of the same Body, is so much as
mentioned. Nay, which is very remarkable in the Case, I do not remember in any
place of the New Testament (where the general Resurrection at the last Day is
spoken of) any such Expression as the Resurrection of the Body, much less of
the same Body.

I say the general Resurrection at the last Day: Because where the Resurrection
of some particular Persons presently upon our Savior's Resurrection is
mentioned, the Words are, 27 Mat. 52, 53.
The Graves were opened and many Bodies of Saints, which slept, arose and came
out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the Holy City, and
appeared to many: Of which peculiar way of speaking of this Resurrection, the
Passage it self gives a Reason in these Words, appeared to many, i. e. Those
who slept, appeared, so as to be known to be risen. But this could not be
known, unless they brought with them the Evidence, that they were those who had
been dead, whereof there were these two Proofs, their Graves were opened, and
their Bodies not only gone out of them, but appeared to be the same to those
who had known them formerly alive, and knew them to be dead and buried. For if
they had been those who had been dead so long, that all who knew them once
alive, were now gone, those to whom they appeared might have known them to be
Men; but could not have known they were risen from the dead: Because they never
knew they had been dead. All that by their appearing they could have known, was
that they were so many living Strangers, of whose Resurrection they knew
nothing. 'Twas necessary therefore, that they should come in such Bodies, as
might in make and size, etc. appear to be the same they had before, that they
might be known to those of their Acquaintance, whom they appeared to. And it is
probable they were such as were newly dead, whose Bodies were not yet dissolved
and dissipated, and therefore it is particularly said here (differently from
what is said of the general Resurrection) that their Bodies arose: Because they
were the same, that were then lying in their Graves, the Moment before they
rose.

But your Lordship endeavors to prove it must be the same Body: And let us
grant, that your Lordship, nay and others too, think you have proved it must be
the same Body, will you therefore say, that he holds what is inconsistent with
an Article of Faith, who having never seen this your Lordship's interpretation
of the Scripture, nor your Reasons for the same Body, in your sense of same
Body; or, if he has seen them, yet not understanding them, or not perceiving
the force of them, believes what the Scripture proposes to him, viz. That at
the last Day, the dead shall be raised, without determining whether it shall be
with the very same Bodies or no?

I know your Lordship pretends not to erect your particular interpretations of
Scripture, into Articles of Faith; and if you do not, He that believes the dead
shall be raised, believes that Article of Faith, which the Scripture proposes:
And cannot be accused of holding any thing inconsistent with it, if it should
happen, that what he holds is inconsistent with another Proposition, viz. That
the dead shall be raised with the same Bodies, in you Lordship's Sense, which I
do not find proposed in Holy Writ as an Article of Faith.

But your Lordship argues, it must be the same Body which as you explain same
Body p. 34. 35.
is not the same individual particles of Matter, which were united at the point
of Death. Nor the same particles of Matter, that the Sinner had at the time of
the Commission of his Sins. But that it must be the same material Substance
which was vitally united to the Soul here, i. e. as I understand it, the same
individual particles of Matter, which were, sometime or other during his Life
here, vitally united to his Soul.

Your first Argument to prove, that it must be the same Body in this Sense of
the same Body, is taken p. 37.
from these Words of our Savior. 5 John 28. 29.
All that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth. From
whence your Lordship argues, That these Words, all that are in their Graves,
relates to no other Substance, than what was united to the Soul in Life;
because a different Substance cannot be said to be in the Graves, and to come
out of them. Which Words of your Lordships, if they prove any thing, prove,
that the Soul too is lodged in the Grave, and raised out of it at the last Day.
For your Lordship says, Can a different Substance be said to be in their Graves
and come out of them? So that according to this interpretation of these Words
of our Savior; No other Substance being raised, but what hears his Voice, and
no other Substance hearing his Voice, but what being called comes out of the
Grave, and no other Substance coming out of the Grave, but what was in the
Grave, any one must conclude, that the Soul, unless it be in the Grave, will
make no part of the Person that is raised, unless, as your Lordship argues
against me, p. 37.
You can make it out, that a Substance which never was in the Grave may come
out of it, or that the Soul is no Substance.

But setting aside the Substance of the Soul, another thing that will make any
one doubt, whether this your Interpretation of our Savior's Words be
necessarily to be received as their true Sense, is, That it will not be very
easily reconciled to your saying, p. 34.
you do not mean by the same Body, The same individual Particles which were
united at the point of Death. And yet by this Interpretation of our Savior's
Words, you can mean no other Particles, but such as were united at the Point of
Death: Because you mean no other Substance, but what comes out of the Grave,
and no Substance, no particles come out you say, but what were in the Grave,
and I think your Lordship will not say that the Particles that were separate
from the Body by perspiration, before the point of Death, were laid up in the
Grave.

But your Lordship, I find, has an Answer to this, p. 37.
viz. That by comparing this with other places you find, that the Words, [of
our Savior above quoted] are to be understood of the Substance of the Body, to
which the Soul was united, and not to (I suppose your Lordship writ of) those
individual Particles, i. e. those individual Particles that are in the Grave,
at the Resurrection. For so they must be read to make your Lordship's Sense
entire, and to the purpose of your Answer here: And then methinks this last
Sense of our Savior's Words given by your Lordship, wholly overturns the Sense
which you have given of them above, where from those Words you press the belief
of the Resurrection of the same Body, by this strong Argument, that a Substance
could not upon hearing the Voice of Christ, come out of the Grave, which was
never in the Grave. There (as far as I can understand your Words) your Lordship
argues, that our Savior's Words must be understood of the Particles in the
Grave, unless, as your Lordship says, one can make it out that a Substance
which never was in the Grave, may come out of it. And here your Lordship
expressly says, That our Savior's Words are to be understood of the Substance
of that Body, to which the Soul was [at any time] united, and not to those
individual Particles that are in the Grave. Which put together seems to me to
say, That our Savior's Words are to be understood of those Particles only that
are in the Grave, and not of those Particles only which are in the Grave, but
of others also which have at any time been vitally united to the Soul, but
never were in the Grave.

The next Text your Lordship brings to make the Resurrection of the same Body,
in your Sense, an Article of Faith, are these Words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. To which your Lordship subjoins p. 38.
this Question. Can these Words be understood of any other material Substance,
but that Body in which these things were done? Answ. A Man may suspend his
determining the meaning of the Apostle to be, that a Sinner shall suffer for
his Sins in the very same Body, wherein he committed them: Because St. Paul
does not say he shall have the very same Body, when he suffers, that he had
when he sinned. The Apostle says, indeed done in his Body. The Body he had, and
did things in at Five or Fifteen, was no doubt his Body, as much as that, which
he did things in at Fifty was his Body, though his Body were not the very same
Body at those different Ages: And so will the Body, which he shall have after
the Resurrection, be his Body, though it be not the very same with that, which
he had at Five or Fifteen or Fifty. He that at Threescore is broke on the
Wheel, for a Murder he committed at Twenty, is punished for what he did in his
Body, though the Body he has, i. e. his Body at Threescore, be not the same, i.
e. made up of the same individual Particles of Matter, that that Body was,
which he had Forty Years before. When your Lordship has resolved with your
self, what that same immutable he is, which at the last Judgment shall receive
the things done in his Body, your Lordship will easily see, that the Body he
had, when an Embryo in the Womb, when a Child playing in Coats, when a Man
marrying a Wife, and when Bedridden dying of a Consumption, and at last, which he
shall have after the Resurrection, are each of them his Body, though neither of
them be the same Body, the one with the other.

But farther to your Lordship's Question, Can these Words be understood of any
other material Substance, but that Body in which these things were done? I
Answer, these Words of St. Paul may be understood of another material
Substance, than that Body in which these things were done, because your
Lordship teaches me, and gives me a strong Reason so to understand them. Your
Lordship says, p. 34.
That you do not say the same Particles of Matter, which the Sinner had at the
very time of the Commission of his Sins, shall be raised at the last Day. And
your Lordship gives this Reason for it. p. 35.
For then a long Sinner must have a vast Body, considering the continual
spending of Particles by Perspiration. Now, my Lord, if the Apostle's Words, as
your Lordship would argue, cannot be understood of any other material
Substance, but that Body, in which these things were done, and no Body upon the
removal or change of some of the Particles, that at any time makes it up is the
same material Substance, or the same Body; it will, I think, thence follow,
that either the Sinner must have all the same individual Particles vitally
united to his Soul, when he is raised, that he had vitally united to his Soul,
when he sinned: Or else St. Paul's Words here cannot be understood to mean the
same Body in which the things were done. For if there were other Particles of
Matter in the Body, wherein the thing was done, than in that which is raised,
that which is raised cannot be the same Body in which they were done: Unless
that alone, which has just all the same individual Particles when any action is
done, being the same Body wherein it was done, that also, which has not the
same individual Particles wherein that Action was done, can be the same Body
wherein it was done, which is in effect to make the same Body sometimes to be
the same, and sometimes not the same.

Your Lordship thinks it suffices to make the same Body to have not all; but no
other Particles of Matter, but such as were sometime or other vitally united to
the Soul before: But such a Body made up of part of the Particles sometime or
other vitally united to the Soul, is no more the same Body wherein the Actions
were done in the distant parts of the long Sinner's life, than that is the same
Body in which a quarter or half or three quarters, of the same Particles, that
made it up, are wanting. For example, A Sinner has acted here in his Body an
hundred Years; he is raised at the last day, but with what Body? The same says
your Lordship, That he acted in, because St. Paul says he must receive the
things done in his Body? What therefore must his Body at the Resurrection
consist of? Must it consist of all the Particles of Matter, that have ever been
vitally united to his Soul? For they, in Succession, have all of them made up
his Body, wherein he did these things: No, says your Lordship, p. 35.
That would make his Body too vast; it suffices to make the same Body in which
the things were done, that it consists of some of the Particles, and no other
but such as were sometime during his life, vitally united to his Soul. But
according to this account, his Body at the Resurrection, being, as your
Lordship seems to limit it, near the same size it was in some part of his life,
it will be no more the same Body in which the things were done in the distant
parts of his life, than that is the same Body, in which half or three quarters
or more of the individual Matter that made it then up, is now wanting. For
example, let his Body at 50 Years old consist of a Million of parts; five
hundred thousand at least of those parts will be different from those which
made up his Body at 10 Years, and at an hundred. So that to take the numerical
Particles, that made up his Body at 50, or any other season of his life; or to
gather them promiscuously out of those which at different times have
successively been vitally united to his Soul, they will no more make the same
Body, which was his, wherein some of his Actions were done, than that is the
same Body, which has but half the same Particles: And yet all your Lordship's
Argument here for the same Body, is because St. Paul says it must be his Body
in which these things were done; which it could not be, if any other Substance
were joined to it, i. e. if any other Particles of Matter made up the Body,
which were not vitally united to the Soul, when the Action was done.

Again, your Lordship says, p. 34.
That you do not say the same individual Particles [shall make up the Body at
the Resurrection] which were united at the point of death, for there must be a
great alteration in them of a lingering Disease, as if a fat Man falls into a
Consumption. Because it is likely your Lordship thinks these Particles of a
decrepit, wasted, withered Body would be too few, or unfit to make such a
plump, strong, vigorous, well-siz'd Body, as it has pleased your Lordship to
proportion out in your Thoughts to Men at the Resurrection; and therefore some
small portion of the Particles formerly united vitally to that Man's Soul,
shall be reassumed to make up his Body to the bulk your Lordship judges
convenient; but the greatest part of them shall be left out to avoid the making
his Body more vast than your Lordship thinks will be fit, as appears by these
your Lordship's words immediately following, viz. p. 35.
That you do not say the same Particles the Sinner had at the very time of
Commission of his Sins, for then a long Sinner must have a vast Body.

But then pray, my Lord, what must an Embryo do, who dying within a few hours
after his Body was vitally united to his Soul, has no Particles of Matter,
which were formerly vitally united to it, to make up his Body of that size and
proportion which your Lordship seems to require in Bodies at the Resurrection?
Or must we believe he shall remain content with that small Pittance of Matter,
and that yet imperfect Body to Eternity; because it is an Article of Faith to
believe the Resurrection of the very same Body? i. e. made up of only such
Particles, as have been vitally united to the Soul. For if it be so, as your
Lordship says, p. 43.
That life is the result of the Union of Soul and Body, it will follow That the
Body of an Embryo dying in the Womb may be very little, not the thousandth part
of any ordinary Man. For since from the first conception and beginning of
formation it has life, and life is the result of the Union of the Soul with the
Body; an Embryo, that shall die either by the untimely death of the Mother, or
by any other accident presently after it has Life, must according to your
Lordship's Doctrine remain a Man not an inch long to Eternity; because there are
not Particles of Matter, formerly united to his Soul, to make him bigger; and
no other can be made use of to that purpose: Though what greater congruity the
Soul has with any Particles of Matter, which were once vitally united to it,
but are now so no longer; than it has with Particles of Matter, which it was
never united to, would be hard to determine, if that should be demanded.

By these, and not a few other the like consequences, one may see what service
they do to Religion, and the Christian Doctrine, who raise Questions, and make
Articles of Faith about the Resurrection of the same Body, where the Scripture
says nothing of the same Body; or if it does, it is with no small reprimand 1
Cor. 15, 35 etc.
to those who make such an enquiry. But some Man will say, How are the dead
raised up? And with what Body do they come? Thou Fool, that which thou sowest
is not quickened except it die And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that
Body that shall be, but bare Grain, it may chance of Wheat or of some other
Grain. But God gives it a Body as it has pleased him. Words I should think
sufficient to deterr us from determining any thing for or against the same Body
being raised at the last day. It suffices, that all the dead shall be raised,
and every one appear and answer for the things done in this life, and receive
according to the things he has done in his Body, whether good or bad. He that
believes this, and has said nothing inconsistent herewith, I presume may, and
must be acquitted from being guilty of any thing inconsistent with the Article
of the Resurrection of the dead.

But your Lordship to prove the Resurrection of the same Body to be an Article
of Faith, farther asks, p. 38.
How could it be said, if any other Substance be joined to the Soul at the
Resurrection, as its Body, that they were the things done in or by the Body?
Answ. Just as it may be said of a Man at an hundred Years old, that has then
an other Substance joined to his Soul, than he had at twenty, that the Murder
or Drunkenness he was guilty of at twenty, were things done in the Body: How by
the Body comes in here, I do not see.

Your Lordship adds, And St. Paul 's dispute about the manner of raising the
Body might soon have ended, if there were no necessity of the same Body. Answ.
When I understand what Argument there is in these Words to prove the
Resurrection of the same Body, without the mixture of one new Atom of Matter, I
shall know what to say to it. In the mean time this I understand, That St. Paul
would have put as short an end to all disputes about this Matter, if he had
said, That there was a necessity of the same Body, or that it should be the
same Body.

The next Text of Scripture you bring for the same Body, is, 2 Cor. 15. 16.
If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ raised. From which
your Lordship argues, p. 38.
It seems then other Bodies are to be raised as his was. I grant other dead, as
certainly raised as Christ was; for else his Resurrection would be of no use to
Mankind. But I do not see how it follows, that they shall be raised with the
same Body, as Christ was raised with the same Body, as your Lordship infers in
these Words annexed; And can there be any doubt, whether his Body was the same
material Substance, which was united to his Soul before? I answer, none at all;
nor that it had just the same undistinguished Lineaments and Marks, yea, and
the same Wounds that it had at the time of his death. If therefore your
Lordship will argue from others Bodies being raised as his was, That they must
keep proportion with his in sameness; then we must believe, that every Man
shall be raised with the same Lineaments and other Notes of distinction he had
at the time of his death, even with his Wounds yet open, if he had any, because
our Savior was so raised, which seems to me scarce reconcilable with what your
Lordship says p. 34.
of a fat Man falling into a Consumption, and dying.

But whether it will consist or no with your Lordship's meaning in that Place,
this to me seems a consequence that will need to be better proved, viz. That
our Bodies must be raised the same just as our Saviors was: Because St. Paul
says, If there be no Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen. For it
may be a good consequence Christ is risen, and therefore there shall be a
Resurrection of the dead, and yet this may not be a good consequence, Christ
was raised with the same Body he had at his Death, therefore all Men shall be
raised with the same Body they had at their Death, contrary to what your
Lordship says concerning a fat Man dying of a Consumption. But the Case I think
far different betwixt our Savior, and those to be raised at the last Day.

1. His Body saw not Corruption, and therefore to give him another Body, new
molded mixed with other Particles, which were not contained in it as it lay in
the Grave, whole and entire as it was laid there, had been to destroy his Body
to frame him a new one without any need. But why with the remaining Particles
of a Man's Body long since dissolved and molder'd into Dust and Atoms (whereof
possibly a great part may have undergone variety of changes, and entered into
other concretions even in the Bodies of other Men) other new Particles of
Matter mixed with them, may not serve to make his Body again, as well as the
mixture of new and different Particles of Matter with the Old, did in the
compass of his Life make his Body, I think no Reason can be given.

This may serve to show, why though the Materials of our Savior's Body, were
not changed at his Resurrection: Yet it does not follow, but that the Body of a
Man dead and rotten in his Grave, or burnt, may at the last Day have several
new Particles in it, and that without any inconvenience. Since whatever Matter
is vitally united to his Soul, is his Body, as much as is that, which was
united to it when he was born, or in any other part of his Life.

2. In the next place, the size, shape, figure and lineaments of our Savior's
Body, even to his Wounds into which doubting Thomas put his Fingers and his
Hand, were to be kept in the raised Body of our Savior, the same they were at
his Death, to be a conviction to his Disciples, to whom he showed himself, and
who were to be Witnesses of his Resurrection, that their Master, the very same
Man, was crucified, dead and buried, and raised again; and therefore he was
handled by them, and Eat before them after he was risen, to give them in all
points full Satisfaction, that it was really he, the same, and not another, nor
a Specter or Apparition of him: Though I do not think your Lordship will thence
argue, that because others are to be raised as he was, therefore it is
necessary to believe, that because he Eat after his Resurrection, others at the
last Day, shall Eat and Drink after they are raised from the dead, which seems
to me as good an Argument, as because his undissolved Body was raised out of
the Grave, just as it there lay entire, without the mixture of any new
Particles; therefore the corrupted and consumed Bodies of the dead at the
Resurrection, shall be new framed only out of those scattered Particles, which
were once vitally united to their Souls, without the least mixture of any one
single Atom of new Matter. But at the last Day, when all Men are raised, there
will be no need to be assured of any one particular Man's Resurrection. It Is
enough that every one shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to
receive according to what he had done in his former Life; but in what sort of
Body he shall appear, or of what Particles made up the Scripture, having said
nothing, but that it shall be a spiritual Body raised in incorruption, it is
not for me to determine.

Your Lordship asks, p. 39.
were they [who saw our Savior after his Resurrection] witnesses only of some
material Substance then united to his Soul? In Answer, I beg your Lordship to
consider, whether you suppose our Savior was to be known to be the same Man
(to the Witnesses that were to see him, and testify his Resurrection) by his
Soul, that could neither be seen, nor known to be the same; or by his Body,
that could be seen, and by the discernible structure and marks of it, be known
to be the same? When your Lordship has resolved that; all that you say in that
Page, will answer it self. But because one Man cannot know another to be the
same, but by the outward visible lineaments, and sensible marks he has been
wont to be known and distinguished by; will your Lordship therefore argue, That
the great Judge, at the last Day, who gives to each Man, whom he raises, his
new Body, shall not be able to know, who is who, unless he give to every one of
them a Body, just of the same figure, size and features, and made up of the
very same individual Particles he had in his former Life? Whether such a way of
arguing for the Resurrection of the same Body, to be an Article of Faith,
contributes much to the strengthening the credibility of the Article of the
Resurrection of the dead, I shall leave to the Judgment of others.

Farther, for the proving the Resurrection of the same Body, to be an Article
of Faith, your Lordship says, p. 40.
But the Apostle insists upon the Resurrection of Christ, not merely as an
Argument of the possibility of ours, but of the Certainty of it; 1 Cor: 15. 20,
23.
because he rose, as the First Fruits; Christ the First fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming. Answ. No doubt the Resurrection of Christ, is a
Proof of the certainty of our Resurrection. But is it therefore a Proof of the
Resurrection of the same Body, consisting of the same individual Particles
which concurred to the making up of our Body here, without the mixture of any
one other Particle of Matter? I confess I see no such consequence.

But your Lordship goes on, p. 40.
St. Paul was aware of the Objections in Men's Minds, about the Resurrection of
the same Body; and it is of great consequence as to this Article, to show upon
what Grounds he proceeds. But some Man will say, How are the dead raised up,
and with what Body do they come? First he shows, That the seminal parts of
Plants are wonderfully improved by the ordinary Providence of God, in the
manner of their Vegetation. Answ. I do not perfectly understand, what it is for
the seminal parts of Plants to be wonderfully improved by the ordinary
Providence of God, in the manner of their Vegetation: Or else perhaps I should
better see, how this here tends to the proof of the Resurrection of the same
Body, in your Lordship's Sense.

It continues, p. 40.
They Sow bare Grain of Wheat, or of some other Grain, but God gives it a
Body, as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. Here, says your
Lordship, is an Identity of the material Substance supposed. It may be so. But
to me a diversity of the material Substance, i. e. of the component Particles
is here supposed, or in direct Words said. For the Words of St. Paul taken all
together, run thus, v. 37.
That which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body which shall be, but bare
Grain, and so on, as your Lordship has set down the remainder of them. From
which Words of St. Paul, the natural Argument seems to me to stand thus. If the
Body that is put in the Earth in sowing, is not that Body which shall be, then
the Body that is put in the Grave, is not that, i. e. the same, Body that shall
be.

But your Lordship proves it to be the same Body, by these three Greek Words of
the Text, (...) which your Lordship interprets thus, p. 40.
That proper Body which belongs to it. Answ. Indeed by those Greek Words, (...)
whether our Translators have rightly rendered them his own Body, or your
Lordship more rightly, that proper Body which belongs to it, I formerly
understood no more but this, that in the production of Wheat and other Grain
from Seed, God continued every Species distinct, so that from Grains of Wheat
sown, root, stalk, blade, ear and grains of Wheat were produced, and not those
of Barley; and so of the rest, which I took to be the meaning of to every Seed
his own Body. No says your Lordship, these Words prove, That to every Plant of
Wheat, and to every Grain of Wheat produced in it is given, the proper Body
that belongs to it, is* the same Body, with the Grain that was sown. Answ.
This, I confess, I do not understand: Because I do not understand how one
individual Grain can be the same, with Twenty, Fifty, or an Hundred individual
Grains, for such sometimes is the increase.

But your Lordship proves it. For says your Lordship, p. 40.
Every Seed having that Body in little, which is afterward so much enlarged;
and in Grain the Seed is corrupted before its Germination; but it has its
proper organical Parts, which make it the same Body, with that which it grows
up to. For although Grain be not divided into Lobes as other Seeds are, yet it
has been found, by the most accurate Observations, that upon separating the
membranes these seminal parts are discerned in them; which afterward grow up
to that Body which we call Corn. In which Words I crave leave to observe, that
your Lordship supposes, that a Body may be enlarged by the addition of a
Hundred or a Thousand times as much in bulk as its own matter, and yet continue
the same Body, which I confess, I cannot understand.

But in the next place, if that could be so; and that the Plant in its full
growth at Harvest, increased by a Thousand or a Million of times as much new
Matter added to it, as it had, when it lay in little concealed in the Grain
that was sown, was the very same Body: Yet I do not think, that your Lordship
will say, that every minute insensible and inconceivably small Grain of the
hundred Grains, contained in that little organized senimal Plant, is every one
of them the very same, with that Grain which contains that whole little senimal
Plant, and all those invisible Grains in it. For then it will follow, that One
Grain is the same with an Hundred, and an Hundred distinct Grains the same with
one: Which I shall be able to assent to, when I can conceive, that all the
Wheat in the World is but one Grain.

For I beseech you, my Lord, consider what it is St. Paul here speaks of! It is
plain he speaks of that which is sown and dies, i. e. the Grain, that the
Husbandman takes out of his Barn to sow in his Field. And of this Grain, St.
Paul says, that it is not that Body that shall be. These Two, viz. That which
is sown, and that Body that shall be, are all the Bodies that St. Paul here
speaks of, to represent the agreement or difference of Men's Bodies after the
Resurrection, with those they had before they died. Now I crave leave to ask
your Lordship, which of these Two is that little invisible seminal Plant, which
your Lordship here speaks of? Does your Lordship mean by it the Grain that is
sown? But that is not what St. Paul speaks of, he could not mean this
embryonated little Plant, for he could not denote it by these Words, that which
thou sowest, for that he says must die: But this little embryonated Plant,
contained in the Seed that is sown, dies not: Or does your Lordship mean by it,
the Body that shall be? But neither by these Words, the Body that shall be, can
St. Paul be supposed to denote this insensible little embryonated Plant; for
that is already in being contained in the Seed that is sown, and therefore
could not be spoke of, under the name of the Body that shall be, And therefore,
I confess, I cannot see of what use it is to your Lordship to introduce here
this third Body, which St. Paul mentions not; and to make that the same or not
the same with any other, when those which St. Paul speaks of, are, as I humbly
conceive, these two visible sensible Bodies, the Grain sown, and the Corn grown
up to Ear, with neither of which this insensible embryonated Plant can be the
same Body, unless an insensible Body can be the same Body with a sensible Body,
and a little Body can be the same Body with one ten thousand or an hundred
thousand times as big as its self. So that yet I confess I see not the
Resurrection of the same Body proved from these words of St. Paul, to be an
Article of Faith.

Your Lordship goes on, p. 41.
St. Paul indeed says, That we sow not that Body that shall be; but he speaks
not of the Identity but the Perfection of it. Here my Understanding fails me
again. For I cannot understand St. Paul to say, That the same Identical
sensible grain of Wheat, which was sown at seed-time, is the very same with
every grain of Wheat in the Ear at Harvest, that sprang from it: Yet so I must
understand it to make it prove, That the same sensible Body, that is laid in
the Grave, shall be the very same with that, which shall be raised at the
Resurrection. For I do not know of any seminal Body in little, contained in the
dead Carcass of any Man or Woman, which, as your Lordship says, in Seeds,
having its proper Organical parts, shall afterward be enlarged, and at the
Resurrection grow up into the same Man. For I never thought of any Seed or
Seminal parts, either of Plant or Animal so wonderfully improved by the
Providence of God, whereby the same Plant or Animal should beget it self; nor
ever heard, that it was by Divine Providence designed to produce the same
individual, but for the producing of future and distinct individuals, for the
continuation of the same Species.

Your Lordship's next Words are, p. 41.
And although there be such a difference from the Grain it self, when it comes
up to be perfect Corn, with Root, Stalk, Blade, and Ear, that it may be said to
outward appearance not to be the same Body; yet with regard to the Seminal and
Organical parts, it is as much the same as a Man grown up, is the same with the
Embryo in the Womb. Answ. It does not appear by any thing I can find in the
Text, That St. Paul here compared the Body, produced with the Seminal and
Organical parts, contained in the Grain it sprang from, but with the whole
sensible Grain that was sown. Microscopes had not then discovered the little
Embryo plant in the Seed, and supposing it should have been reavealed to St.
Paul (though in the Scripture we find little Revelation of natural Philosophy)
yet an Argument taken from a thing perfectly unknown to the Corinthians, whom
he writ to, could be of no manner of use to them; nor serve at all either to
instruct or convince them. But granting that those St. Paul writ to, knew it as
well as Mr. Lewenhooke; yet your Lordship thereby proves not the raising of the
same Body: Your Lordship says it is as much the same [I crave leave to add
Body] as a Man grown up is the same. ( Same, what I beseech your Lordship?)
with the Embryo in the Womb. For that the Body of the Embryo in the Womb, and
Body of the Man grown up, is the same Body, I think no one will say; unless he
can persuade himself that a Body that is not the hundredth part of an other, is
the same with that other, which I think no one will do, till having renounced
this dangerous way by Ideas of Thinking and Reasoning, he has learnt to say
that a part and the whole are the same.

Your Lordship goes on, p. 41.
And although many Arguments may be used to prove, that a Man is not the same,
because Life which depends upon the course of the Blood, and the manner of
Respiration, and Nutrition is so different in both States; yet that Man would
be thought ridiculous that should seriously affirm, That it was not the same
Man. And your Lordship says, I grant that the variation of great Parcels of
Matter in Plants, alters not the Identity: And that the Organization of the
parts in one coherent Body, partaking of one common Life, makes the Identity of
a Plant. Answ. My Lord, I think the Question is not about the same Man but the
same Body. For though I do say, Essay B. 2. C. 27. 4.
(somewhat differently from what your Lordship sets down as my words here) That
that which has such an Organization, as is fit to receive and distribute
Nourishment, so as to continue and frame the Wood, Bark and Leaves, etc. of a
Plant, in which consists the vegetable Life, continues to be the same Plant, as
long as it partakes of the same Life, though that Life be communicated to new
Particles of Matter, vitally united to the living Plant. Yet I do not remember,
that I any where say, That a Plant, which was once no bigger than an Oaten
straw, and afterward grows to be above a Fathom about, is the same Body,
though it be still the same Plant.

The well known Tree in Epping Forest called the King's Oak, which, from not
weighing an Ounce at first, grew to have many Tuns of Timber in it, was all
along the fame Oak, the very same Plant; but no body, I think, will say it was
the same Body when it weighed a Tun, as it was when it weighed but an Ounce,
unless he has a mind to signalize himself by saying, That that is the same
Body, which has a thousand Particles of different Matter in it, for one
Particle that is the same; which is no better than to say, That a thousand
different Particles are but one and the same Particle, and one and the same
Particle is a thousand different Particles; a thousand times a greater
absurdity, than to say half is the whole, or the whole is the same with the
half, which will be improved ten thousand times yet farther, if a Man shall say
(as your Lordship seems to me to argue here) That that great Oak is the very
same Body, with the Acorn it sprang from, because there was in that Acorn an
Oak in little, which was afterward (as your Lordship expresses it) so much
enlarged, as to make that mighty Tree. For this Embryo, if I may so call it, or
Oak in little, being not the hundredth, or perhaps the thousandth part of the
Acorn, and the Acorn being not the thousandth part of the grown Oak, 'twill be
very extraordinary to prove the Acorn and the grown Oak to be the same Body, by
a way wherein it cannot be pretended, that above one Particle of an hundred
Thousand or a Million, is the same in the one Body, that was in the other. From
which way of Reasoning, it will follow that a Nurse and her Sucking-child have
the same Body; and be past doubt, that a Mother and her Infant have the same
Body. But this is a way of Certainty found out to establish the Articles of
Faith, and to overturn the new Method of Certainty that your Lordship says I
have started, which is apt to leave Men's Minds more doubtful than before.

And now I desire your Lordship to consider of what use it is to you in the
present Case to quote out of my Essay these Words, That partaking of one common
Life, makes the Identity of a Plant, since the Question is not about the
Identity of a Plant, but about the Identity of a Body. It being a very
different thing to be the same Plant, and to be the same Body. For that which
makes the same Plant, does not make the same Body; the one being the partaking
in the same continued vegetable life, the other the consisting of the same
numerical Particles of Matter. And therefore your Lordship's inference from my
Words above quoted, in these which you subjoin, p. 42.
seems to me a very strange one, viz. So that in things capable of any sort of
Life, the Identity is consistent with a continued succession of Parts; and so
the Wheat grown up is the same Body with the Grain that was sown. For I believe
if my Words, from which you infer, and so the Wheat grown up is the same Body
with the Grain that was sown, were put into a Syllogism, this would hardly be
brought to be the Conclusion.

But your Lordship goes on with consequence upon consequence, though I have not
Eyes acute enough every where to see the connection, till you bring it to the
Resurrection of the same Body. The connection of your Lordship's Words p. 41.
are as follows; And thus the alteration of the parts of the Body at the
Resurrection is consistent with its Identity, if its Organization and Life be
the same; and this is a real Identity of the Body which depends not upon
consciousness. From whence it follows, that to make the same Body, no more is
required but restoring life to the organized parts of it. If the Question were
about raising the same Plant, I do not say but there might be some appearance
for making such inference from my Words as this, Whence it follows, that to
make the same Plant, no more is required, but to restore life to the organized
parts of it. But this deduction wherein from those Words of mine that speak
only of the Identity of a Plant, your Lordship infers there is no more required
to make the the same Body than to make the same Plant, being too subtle for me,
I leave to my Reader to find out.

Your Lordship goes on and says, p. 42.
That I grant likewise, That the Identity of the same Man consists in a
participation of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles of
Matter in succession, vitally united to the same organized Body. Answ. I speak
in these Words of the Identity of the same Man, and your Lordship thence
roundly concludes; so that there is no difficulty of the sameness of the Body.
But your Lordship knows that I do not take these two sounds Man and Body, to
stand for the same thing; nor the Identity of the Man to be the same with the
Identity of the Body.

But let us read out your Lordship's Words, p. 42.
So that there is no difficulty as to the sameness of the Body, if life were
continued; and if by divine Power life be restored to that material Substance
which was before united by a Reunion of the Soul to it, there is no Reason to
deny the Identity of the Body. Not from the Consciousness of the Soul, but from
that Life which is the Result of the Union of the Soul and Body.

If I understand your Lordship right, you in these Words from the Passages
above quoted out of my Book argue, that from those Words of mine it will
follow, That it is or may be the same Body, that is raised at the Resurrection.
If so, my Lord, your Lordship has then proved, That my Book is not inconsistent
with, but conformable to this Article of the Resurrection of the same Body,
which your Lordship contends for, and will have to be an Article of Faith: For
though I do by no means deny that the same Bodies shall be raised at the last
day, yet I see nothing your Lordship has said to prove it to be an Article of
Faith.

But your Lordship goes on with your proofs and says, p. 43.
But St. Paul still supposes that it must be that material Substance to which
the Soul was before united. For says he, It is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in Incorruption; It is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; It is
sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; It is sown a Natural Body, it is
raised a Spiritual Body. Can such a material Substance which was never united
to the Body, be said to be sown in Corruption, and Weakness, and Dishonor?
Either therefore he must speak of the same Body, or his meaning cannot be
comprehended. I answer, Can such a material Substance which was never laid in
the Grave, be said to be sown, etc? For your Lordship says, p. 34.
You do not say the same individual Particles, which were united at the point
of death, shall be raised at the last day; and no other Particles are laid in
the Grave, but such as are united at the point of death, either therefore your
Lordship must speak of an other Body different from that which was sown, which
shall be raised, or else your meaning, I think, cannot be comprehended.

But whatever be your meaning, your Lordship proves it to be St. Paul's
meaning, That the same Body shall be raised which was sown, in these following
Words, p. 43.
For what does all this relate to a conscious Principle? Answ. The Scripture
being express, That the same Persons should be raised and appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to what he had
done in his Body; it was very well suited to common Apprehensions, (which
refined not about Particles that had been vitally united to the Soul) to speak
of the Body which each one was to have after the Resurrection, as he would be
apt to speak of it himself. For it being his Body both before and after the
Resurrection, every one ordinarily speaks of his Body as the same, though in a
strict and philosophical sense, as your Lordship speaks, it be not the very
same. Thus it is no impropriety of Speech to say, This Body of mine, which was
formerly strong and plump, is now weak and wasted, though in such a Sense a you
are speaking in here, it be not the same Body, Revelation declares nothing any
where concerning the same Body, in your Lordship's Sense of the same Body,
which appears not to have been then thought of. The Apostle directly proposes
nothing for or against the same Body, as necessary to be believed: That which
he is plain and direct in, is his opposing and condemning such curious
Questions about the Body, which could serve only to perplex, not to confirm
what was material and necessary for them to believe, viz. a Day of Judgment and
Retribution to Men in a future state, and therefore it is no wonder that
mentioning their Bodies he should use a way of speaking suited to vulgar
Notions, from which it would be hard positively to conclude any thing for the
determining of this Question (especially against Expressions in the same
Discourse that plainly incline to the other side) in a matter, which as it
appears, the Apostle thought not necessary to determine. And the Spirit of God
thought not fit to gratify any ones curiosity in.

But your Lordship says, p. 43.
The Apostle speaks plainly of that Body which was once quickened, and
afterward falls to Corruption, and is to be restored with more noble
Qualities. I wish your Lordship had quoted the Words of St. Paul, wherein he
speaks plainly of that numerical Body that was once quickened, they would
presently decide this Question. But your Lordship proves it by these following
Words of St. Paul. For this Corruption must put on Incorruption, and this
Mortal must put on Immortality, to which your Lordship adds, That you do not
see how he could more expressly affirm the identity of this corruptible Body,
with that after the Resurrection. How expressly it is affirmed by the Apostle,
shall be considered by and by. In the mean time it is past doubt that your
Lordship best knows what you do or do not see. But this I will be bold to say,
that if St. Paul had any where in this Chapter (where there are so many
occasions for it, if it had been necessary to have been believed) but said in
express Words, that the same Bodies should be raised, every one else who thinks
of it, will see he had more expressly affirmed the Identity of the Bodies which
Men now have, with those they shall have after the Resurrection

The remainder of your Lordship's Period p. 44.
is. And that without any respect to the principle of Self-consciousness. Answ.
These Words, I doubt not, have some meaning, but I must own, I know not what;
either toward the Proof of the Resurrection of the same Body, or to show, that
any thing I have said concerning Self-consciousness, is inconsistent: For I do
not remember that I have any where said, That the Identity of Body consisted in
Self-consciousness.

From your preceding Words, your Lordship concludes thus. p. 44.
And so if the Scripture be the sole Foundation of our Faith, this is an
Article of it. My Lord, to make the conclusion unquestionable, I humbly
conceive, the Words must run thus. And so if the Scripture and your Lordship's
interpretation of it, be the sole Foundation of our Faith; the Resurrection of
the same Body is an Article of it. For with submission, your Lordship has
neither produced express Words of Scripture for it, nor so proved, that to be
the meaning of any of those Words of Scripture which you have produced for it,
that a Man who reads and sincerely endeavors to understand the Scripture,
cannot but find himself obliged to believe, as expressly that the same Bodies of
the dead, in your Lordship's Sense, shall be raised, as that the dead shall be
raised. And I crave leave to give your Lordship this one Reason for it.

He who reads with attention this Discourse of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
where he discourses of the Resurrection, will see, that he plainly
distinguishes between the dead that shall be raised, and the Bodies of the
dead. For it is (...) are the nominative Cases to v. 15. 22, 23, 29. 32, 35, 52.
(...) all along, and not (...) Bodies, which one may with Reason think would
somewhere or other have been expressed, if all this had been said, to propose
it as an Article of Faith, that the very same Bodies should be raised. The same
manner of speaking the Spirit of God observes all through the New Testament,
where it is said, Mat. 22. 3. Mark 12. 26. John 5. 21. Acts 26. Romans 4. 17 2
Cor. 1. 9 1 These. 4. 14, 16.
raise the dead, quicken or make alive the dead, the Resurrection of the deads
Nay, these very Words of our Savior John 5. 28, 29.
, urged by your Lordship, for the Resurrection of the same Body, run thus.
(...) Would a well-meaning Searcher of the Scriptures be apt to think, that if
the thing here intended by our Savior were to teach, and propose it as an
Article of Faith, necessary to be believed by every one, that the very same
Bodies of the dead should be raised, would not, I say, any one be apt to think,
that if our Savior meant so, the Words should rather have been, (...), i. e.
all the Bodies that are in the Graves, rather than all who are in the Graves;
which must denote Persons, and not precisely Bodies?

Another Evidence, that St. Paul makes a distinction between the dead and the
Bodies of the dead, so that the dead cannot be taken in this, 1 Cor. Chapter 15. to
stand precisely for the Bodies of the dead, are these Words of the Apostle, v.
35.
But some Men will say, How are the dead raised, and with what Bodies do they
come? Which words dead and they, if supposed to stand precisely for the Bodies
of the dead, the Question will run thus. How are the dead Bodies raised, and
with what Bodies do the dead Bodies come? Which seems to have no very agreeable
Sense.

This therefore being so, that the Spirit of God keeps so expressly to this
Phrase, or form of Speaking in the New Testament, of raising, quickening,
rising, resurrection, etc. of the dead, where the Resurrection at the last Day
is spoken of; and that the Body is not mentioned, but in Answer to this
Question, with what Bodies shall those dead, who are raised come? so that by
the dead cannot precisely be meant the dead Bodies: I do not see but a good
Christian, who reads the Scripture, with an intention to believe all, that is
there revealed to him concerning the Resurrection, may acquit himself of his
Duty therein, without entering into the enquiry whether the dead shall have the
very same Bodies or no, which sort of enquiry the Apostle, by the Appellation
he bestows here on him that makes it, seems not much to encourage. Nor, if he
shall think himself bound to determine concerning the Identity of the Bodies of
the dead raised at the last Day, will he, by the remainder of St. Paul's
Answer, find the determination of the Apostle, to be much in favor of the very
same Body, unless the being told, that the Body sown is not that Body that
shall be? That the Body raised is as different from that which was laid down,
as the Flesh of Man is from the Flesh of Beasts, Fishes and Birds, or as the
Sun, Moon and Stars are different one from another, or as different as a
corruptible, weak, natural, mortal Body, is from an incorruptible, powerful,
spiritual, immortal Body; and lastly, as different as a Body, that is Flesh and
Blood is from a Body, that is not Flesh and Blood. For Flesh and Blood cannot,
says St. Paul, in this very place v. 50.
inherit the Kingdom of God; unless, I say, all this, which is contained in St.
Paul's Words, can be supposed to be the way to deliver this as an Article of
Faith, which is required to be believed by every one, viz. That the dead should
be raised with the very same Bodies, that they had before in this Life; which
Article proposed in these or the like plain and express Words could have left
no room for doubt, in the meanest Capacities; nor for contest in the most
perverse Minds.

Your Lordship adds, in the next Words. p. 44.
And so it has been always understood by the Christian Church, viz. That the
Resurrection of the same Body, in your Lordship's Sense of same Body, is an
Article of Faith. Answ. What the Christian Church has always understood is
beyond my Knowledge. But for those who coming short of your Lordship's great
Learning, cannot gather their Articles of Faith from the understanding of all
the whole Christian Church, ever since the Preaching of the Gospel (who make
the far greater part of Christians, I think I may say, Nine hundred ninety and
nine of a Thousand) but are forced to have recourse to the Scripture to find
them there, I do not see, that they will easily find there this proposed as an
Article of Faith, that there shall be a Resurrection of the same Body; but that
there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, without explicitly determining, That
they shall be raised with Bodies made up wholly of the same Particles which
were once vitally united to their Souls, in their former Life; without the
mixture of any one other Particle of Matter, which is that which your Lordship
means by the same Body.

But supposing your Lordship to have demonstrated this to be an Article of
Faith, though I crave leave to own, that I do not see, that all that your
Lordship has said here, makes it so much as probable; What is all this to me?
Yes says your Lordship in the following Words, p. 44.
My Idea of personal Identity is inconsistent with it, for it makes the same
Body which was here united to the Soul, not to be necessary to the Doctrine of
the Resurrection. But any material Substance united to the same Principle of
consciousness makes the same Body.

This is an Argument of your Lordship's, which I am obliged to Answer to. But
is it not fit I should first understand it, before I Answer it? Now here I do
not well know, what it is to make a thing not to be necessary to the Doctrine of
the Resurrection. But to help my self out the best I can, with a guess, I will
conjecture (which in disputing with learned Men, is not very safe) your
Lordship's meaning is, That my Idea of perpersonal Identity makes it not
necessary, that for the raising the same Person the Body should be the same.

Your Lordship's next Word is But, to which I am ready to reply, But what? What
does my Idea of personal Identity do? For* something of that kind the
adversative Particle But should in the ordinary construction of our Language,
introduce to make the Proposition clear and intelligible: But here is no such
thing, But is one of your Lordship's privileged Particles, which I must not
meddle with, for fear your Lordship complain of me again, as so severe a
Critic, that for the least Ambiguity in any Particle, fill up Pages in my
Answer, to make my Book look considerable for the bulk of it. But since this
Proposition here, my Idea of personal Identity makes the same Body which was
here united to the Soul, not necessary to the Doctrine of the Resurrection. But
any material Substance being united to the same Principle of Consciousness
makes the same Body, is brought to prove my Idea of personal Identity
inconsistent with the Article of the Resurrection; I must make it out in some
direct Sense or other, that I may see whether it be both true and conclusive. I
therefore venture to read it thus, my Idea of personal Identity makes the same
Body which was here united to the Soul, not to be necessary at the
Resurrection; but allows, That any material Substance being united to the same
principle of Consciousness, makes the same Body, Ergo, my Idea of personal
Identity, is inconsistent with the Article of the Resurrection of the same Body.

If this be your Lordship's Sense in this Passage, as I here have guessed it to
be, or else I know not what it is. I answer,

1. That my Idea of Personal Identity does not allow that any material
Substance being united to the same Principle of consciousness makes the same
Body. I say no such thing in my Book, nor any thing from whence it may be
inferred; and your Lordship would have done me a favor to have set down the
Words where I say so, or those from which you infer so, and showed how it
follows from any thing I have said.

2. Granting that it were a consequence from my Idea of Personal Identity, that
any material Substance being united to the same Principle of consciousness
makes the same Body; this would not prove that my Idea of Personal Identity was
inconsistent with this Proposition, That the same Body shall be raised; but on
the contrary, affirms it: Since if I affirm, as I do, That the same Persons
shall be raised, and it be a consequence of my Idea of Personal Identity, that
any material Substance being united to the same Principle of consciousness
makes the same Body; it follows, that if the same Person be raised, the same
Body must be raised; and so I have herein not only said nothing inconsistent
with the Resurrection of the same Body, but have said more for it than your
Lordship. For there can be nothing plainer, than that in the Scripture it is
reaveled, That the same Persons shall be raised, and appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, to answer for what they have done in their Bodies. If therefore
whatever Matter be joined to the same Principle of Consciousness make the same
Body; it is demonstration, That if the same Persons are raised, they have the
same Bodies.

How then your Lordship makes this an inconsistency with the Resurrection, is
beyond my conception. Yes, says your Lordship, p. 44.
it is inconsistent with it, for it makes the same Body which was here united
to the Soul, not to be necessary.

3. I answer therefore Thirdly, That this is the first time I ever learnt, That
not necessary was the same with inconsistent. I say that a Body made up of the
same numerical parts of Matter, is not necessary to the making of the same
Person; from whence it will indeed follow, that to the Resurrection of the same
Person, the same numerical Particles of Matter are not required. What does your
Lordship infer from hence? to wit, this. Therefore he who thinks that the same
Particles of Matter are not necessary to the making of the same Person, cannot
believe, that the same Persons shall be raised with Bodies made of the very
same Particles of Matter, if God should reveal, that it shall be so, viz. That
the same Persons shall be raised with the same Bodies they had before. Which is
all one as to say, That he who thought the blowing of Rams Horns, was not
necessary in it self to the falling down of the Walls of Jericho, could not
believe, that they should fall upon the blowing of Rams Horns, when God had
declared it should be so.

Your Lordship says, My Idea of Personal Identity, is inconsistent with the
Article of the Resurrection; the Reason you ground it on is this, because it
makes not the same Body necessary to the making the same Person. Let us grant
your Lordship's consequence to be good, what will follow from it? No less than
this, That your Lordship's Notion (for I dare not say your Lordship has any so
dangerous things as Ideas) of Personal Identity, is inconsistent with the
Article of the Resurrection. The demonstration of it is thus; your Lordship
says, p. 34 -- 35.
It is not necessary that the Body, to be raised at the last day, should
consist of the same Particles of Matter, which were united at the point of
death; for there must be a great alteration in them in a lingering Disease, as
if a fat Man falls into a Consumption: You do not say the same Particles which
the Sinner had at the very time of Commission of his Sins; for then a long
Sinner must have a vast Body, considering the continual spending of Particles
by Perspiration. And again, here your Lordship says, p. 44.
You allow the Notion of Personal Identity to belong to the same Man under
several changes of Matter. From which words it is evident, That your Lordship
supposes a Person in this World may be continued and preserved the same in a
Body not consisting of the same individual Particles of Matter; and hence it
demonstratively follows, That let your Lordship's Notion of Personal Identity
be what it will, it makes the same Body not to be necessary to the same Person;
and therefore it is by your Lordship's Rule inconsistent with the Article of
the Resurrection. When your Lordship shall think fit to clear your own Notion
of Personal Identity from this inconsistency with the Article of the
Resurrection, I do not doubt but my Idea of Personal Identity, will be thereby
cleared too. Till then, all inconsistency with that Article which your Lordship
has here charged on mine, will unavoidably fall upon your Lordship's too.

But for the clearing of both, give me leave to say, my Lord, That whatsoever
is not necessary, does not thereby become inconsistent. It is not necessary to
the same Person, that his Body should always consist of the same numerical
Particles; this is demonstration, because the Particles of the Bodies of the
same Persons in this life change every moment, and your Lordship cannot deny
it; and yet this makes it not inconsistent with God's preserving, if he thinks
fit, to the same Persons, Bodies consisting of the same numerical Particles
always from the Resurrection to Eternity. And so likewise though I say any
thing that supposes it not necessary, that the same numerical Particles, which
were vitally united to the Soul in this life, should be reunited to it at the
Resurrection, and constitute the Body it shall then have; yet it is not
inconsistent with this, That God may, if he pleases, give to every one a Body
consisting only of such Particles as were before vitally united to his Soul.
And thus I think, I have cleared my Book from all that inconsistency which your
Lordship charges on it, and would persuade the World it has with the Article of
the Resurrection of the dead.

Only before I leave it, I will set down the remainder of what your Lordship
says upon this Head, that though I see not the coherence nor tendency of it,
nor the force of any Argument in it against me; yet nothing may be omitted that
your Lordship has thought fit to entertain your Reader with on this new Point,
nor any one have Reason to suspect, that I have passed by any word of your
Lordship's (on this now first introduced Subject) wherein he might find your
Lordship had proved what you had promised in your Title Page. Your remaining
Words are these; p. 44.
The Dispute is not how far Personal Identity in it self may consist in the
very same material Substance; for we allow the Notion of Personal Identity to
belong to the same Man under several changes of Matter; but whether it does not
depend upon a vital Union between the Soul and Body and the Life which is
consequent upon it; and therefore in the Resurrection, the same material
Substance must be reunited, or else it cannot be called a Resurrection, but a
Renovation, i. e. it may be a new Life, but not a raising the Body from the
dead. I confess, I do not see how what is here ushered in by the words and
therefore, is a consequence from the preceding words; but as to the propriety
of the Name, I think it will not be much questioned, that if the same Man rise
who was dead, it may very properly be called the Resurrection of the dead;
which is the Language of the Scripture.

I must not part with this Article of the Resurrection, without returning my
thanks to your Lordship for making me p. 62.
take notice of a Fault in my Essay. When I write that Book, I took it for
granted, as I doubt not but many others have done, that the Scripture had
mentioned in express terms, the Resurrection of the Body. But upon the Occasion
your Lordship has given me in your last Letter to look a little more narrowly
into what Revelation has declared concerning the Resurrection, and finding no
such express words in the Scripture, as that the Body shall rise or be raised,
or the Resurrection of the Body. I shall in the next Edition of it change these
words of my Book, Essay B. 4. C. 18. 7.
The dead Bodies of Men shall rise. into these of the Scripture, The dead shall
rise. Not that I question, that the dead shall be raised with Bodies: But in
Matters of Revelation, I think it not only safest, but our Duty, as far as any
one delivers it for Revelation, to keep close to the words of the Scripture;
unless he will assume to himself the Authority of one inspired, or make himself
wiser than the holy Spirit himself. If I had spoke of the Resurrection in
precisely Scripture terms, I had avoided giving your Lordship the occasion of
making here p. 63.
such a verbal Reflection on my Words; What not if there be an Idea of Identity
as to the Body?

I come now to your Lordship's second Head of Accusation; your Lordship says,
p. 44.


2. The next Articles of Faith which my Notion of Ideas is inconsistent with,
are no less than those of the Trinity and the Incarnation of our Savior. But
all the proof of inconsistency your Lordship here brings, being drawn from my
Notions of Nature and Person, whereof so much has been said already, the
swelling my Answer into too great a Volume, will excuse me from setting down at
large all that you have said hereupon, so particularly, as I have done in the
precedent Article of the Resurrection which is wholly new.

Your Lordship's way of proving, p. 45, 46.
That my Ideas of Nature and Person cannot consist, with the Articles of the
Trinity and Incarnation, is, as far as I can understand it, this, That, I say,
we have no simple Ideas, but by Sensation and Reflection. But, says your
Lordship, p. 45.
we cannot have any simple Ideas of Nature and Person, by Sensation and
Reflection, Ergo, we can come to no Certainty about the distinction of Nature
and Person in my way of Ideas. Answ. If your Lordship had concluded from
thence, That therefore in my way of Ideas, we can have no Ideas at all of
Nature and Person, it would have had some appearance of a Consequence: But as
it is, it seems to me such an Argument as this; No simple Colors in Sir Godfry
Kneller's way of Painting come into his exact and lively Pictures but by his
Pencil, but no simple Colors of a Ship and a Man come into his Pictures by his
Pencil, Ergo, we can come to no Certainty about the distinction of a Ship and a
Man in Sir Godfry Kneller's way of Painting.

Your Lordship says, p. 45.
It is not possible for us to have any simple Ideas of Nature and Person by
Sensation and Reflection, and I say so too; as impossible as it is to have a
true Picture of a Rainbow in one simple Color, which consists in the
arangement of many Colors. The Ideas signified by the sounds Nature and
Person, are each of them complex Ideas; and therefore it is as impossible to
have a simple Idea of either of them, as to have a multitude in one, or a
Composition in a Simple. But if your Lordship means, that by Sensation and
Reflection we cannot have the simple Ideas of which the complex ones of Nature
and Person are compounded; that I must crave leave to dissent from, till your
Lordship can produce a definition (in intelligible Words) of either of Nature
or Person, in which all that is contained cannot ultimately be resolved into
simple Ideas of Sensation and Reflection.

Your Lordship's definition of Person, Vindic. p. 261.
is, That it is a complete intelligent Substance with a peculiar manner of
Subsistence. And my definition of Person, which your Lordship p. 59.
quotes out of my Essay, is, That Person stands for a thinking intelligent
Being, that has Reason and Reflection, and can consider it self as it self, the
same thinking thing in different times and places. When your Lordship shall
show any repugnancy in this my Idea (which I denote by the sound Person) to the
Incarnation of our Savior, with which your Lordship's Notion of Person may not
be equally charged; I shall give your Lordship an answer to it. This I say in
answer to these Words, p. 46.
Which is repugnant to the Article of the Incarnation of our Savior: For the
preceding reasoning to which they refer, I must own I do not understand.

The word Person naturally signifies nothing, that you allow; your Lordship, in
your definition of it, makes it stand for a General abstract Idea. Person then
in your Lordship, is liable to the same default which you lay on it in me, p.
52.
viz. That it is no more than a Notion in the Mind. The same will be so of the
word Nature, whenever your Lordship pleases to define it; without which you can
have no Notion of it. And then the Consequence which you there ibid.
draw from their being no more than Notions of the Mind, will hold as much in
respect of your Lordship's Notion of Nature and Person as of mine, viz. That
one Nature and three Persons can be no more. This I crave leave to say in
answer to all that your Lordship has been pleased to urge from Page 46 to these
Words of your Lordship's, p. 52.

General terms (as Nature and Person are in their ordinary use in our Language)
are the signs of general Ideas, and general Ideas exist only in the Mind; but
particular Things (which are the Foundations of these general Ideas, if they
are abstracted as they should be) do, or may exist conformable to those general
Ideas, and so fall under those general Names; as he that writes this Paper is a
Person to him, i. e. may be denominated a Person by him to whose abstract Idea
of Person he bears a conformity; just as what I here write, is to him a Book or
a Letter, to whose abstract Idea of a Book or a Letter it agrees. This is what
I have said concerning this Matter all along, and what, I humbly conceive, will
serve for an answer to those Words of your Lordship, where you say, p. 54.
You affirm that those who make Nature and Person to be only abstract and
complex Ideas, can neither defend nor reasonably believe the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and to all that you say, p. 52 -- 58. Only give me leave to wish, that
what your Lordship, out of a mistake of what I say concerning the Ideas of
Nature and Person, has urged, as you pretend, against them, do not furnish your
Adversaries in that dispute, with such Arguments against you as your Lordship
will not easily answer.

Your Lordship p. 58.
sets down these Words of mine, Person in it self signifies nothing; but as
soon as the common use of any Language has appropriated it to any Idea, then
that is the true Idea of a Person; which Words your Lordship interprets thus:
i. e. Men may call a Person what they please, for there is nothing but common
use required to it: They may call a Horse or a Tree, or a Stone, a Person if
they think fit. Answ. Men, before common use had appropriated this name to that
complex Idea which they now signify by the sound Person, might have denoted it
by the sound Stone, and Vice versa: But can your Lordship thence argue, as you
do here, Men are at the same liberty in a Country where those words are already
in common use? There he that will speak properly, and so as to be understood,
must appropriate each sound used in that Language to an Idea in his mind (which
to himself is defining the Word) which is in some degree conformable to the
Idea that others apply it to.

Your Lordship in the next Paragraph p. 59.
sets down my definition of the word Person, viz. That Person stands for a
thinking intelligent Being that has Reason and Reflection, and can consider it
self as it self, the same thinking Being in different times and places; and
then asks many Questions upon it. I shall set down your Lordship's definition
of Person; which is this, Vindic. p. 261.
A Person is a complete intelligent Substance with a peculiar manner of
Subsistence, and then crave leave to ask your Lordship the same Questions
concerning it, which your Lordship here asks me p. 59.
concerning mine; How comes Person to stand for this and nothing else? From
whence comes complete Substance, or peculiar manner of Subsistence to make up
the Idea of a Person? Whether it be true or false, I am not now to enquire; but
how it comes into this Idea of a Person? Has common use of our Language
appropriated it to this Sense? If not, this seems to be a mere Arbitrary Idea;
and may as well be denied as affirmed. And what a fine pass are we come to, in
your Lordship's way, if a mere Arbitrary Idea must be taken into the only true
Method of Certainty? -- But if this be the true Idea of a Person, then there
can be no Union of two Natures in one Person. For if a complete intelligent
Substance be the Idea of a Person; and the divine and humane Natures be
complete intelligent Substances, then the Doctrine of the Union of two Natures
and one Person is quite sunk; for here must be two Persons in this way of your
Lordship's. Again, if this be the Idea of a Person, then where there are three
Persons there must be three distinct complete intelligent Substances; and so
there cannot be three Persons in the same individual Essence. And thus both
these Doctrins of the Trinity and Incarnation are past recovery gone, if this
way of your Lordship's hold. These, my Lord, are your Lordship's very Words;
what force there is in them I will not enquire, but I must beseech your
Lordship to take them as Objections I make against your Notion of Person, to
show the danger of it, and the inconsistency it has with the Doctrine of the
Trinity and Incarnation of our Savior; and when your Lordship has removed the
Objections that are in them, against your own definition of Person, mine also
by the very same Answers will be cleared.

Your Lordship's Argument in the following Words p. 61 -- 65.
to page 65. seems to me (as far as I can collect) to lie thus: Your Lordship
tells me, p. 61.
that I say, That in Propositions whose Certainty is built on clear and perfect
Ideas and evident deductions of Reason, there no Proposition can be received
for divine Revelation which contradicts them. This Proposition not serving your
Lordship's turn so well, for the conclusion you designed to draw from it, your
Lordship is pleased to enlarge it. For you ask, p. 62.
But suppose I have Ideas sufficient for Certainty, what is to be done then?
From which Words and your following Discourse, if I can understand it, it seems
to me, that your Lordship supposes it reasonable for me to hold, That
wherever we are any how certain of any Propositions, whether their Certainty
be built on clear and perfect Ideas or no, there no Proposition can be received
for divine Revelation, which contradicts them. And thence your Lordship
concludes, p. 64.
That because I say we may make some Propositions, of whose Truth we may be
certain concerning things, whereof we have not Ideas in all their parts
perfectly clear and distinct; therefore my Notion of Certainty by Ideas must
overthrow the credibility of a Matter of Faith in all such Propositions, which
are offered to be believed on the account of divine Revelation. A Conclusion
which I am so unfortunate as not to find how it follows from your Lordship's
Premises, because I cannot any way bring them into Mode and Figure with such a
Conclusion. But this being no strange thing to me in my want of skill in your
Lordship's way of writing, I in the mean time crave leave to ask, Whether there
be any Propositons your Lordship can be certain of, that are not divinely
revealed? And here I will presume that your Lordship is not so Skeptical, but
that you can allow Certainty attainable in many things by your natural
Faculties. Give me leave then to ask your Lordship, Whether, where there be
Propositions of whose Truth you have certain Knowledge, you can receive any
Proposition for divine Revelation which contradicts that Certainty? Whether
that Certainty be built upon the Agreement of Ideas, such as we have, or on
whatever else your Lordship builds it? If you cannot, as I presume your
Lordship will say you cannot, I make bold to return you your Lordship's
Questions here to me, in your own Words; p. 64.
Let us now suppose that you are to judge of a Proposition delivered as a
Matter of Faith, where you have a Certainty by Reason from your Grounds such as
they are? Can you, my Lord, assent to this as a Matter of Faith, when you are
already certain of the contrary by your way? How is this possible? Can you
believe that to be true, which you are certain is not true? Suppose it be, That
there are two Natures in one Person, the Question is, Whether you can assent to
this as a Matter of Faith? hf you should say, where there are only
Probabilities on the other side, I grant that you then allow Revelation is to
prevail. But when you say you have Certainty by Ideas, or without Ideas to the
contrary, I do not see how it is possible for you to assent to a Matter of
Faith as true, when you are certain from your method that it is not true. For
how can you believe against Certainty -- because the Mind is actually
determined by Certainty. And so your Lordship's Notion of Certainty by Ideas,
or without Ideas, be it what it will, must overthrow the credibility of a
matter of Faith in all such Propositions, which are offered to be believed on
the account of Divine Revelation. This Argumentation and Conclusion is good
against your Lordship, if it be good against me. For Certainty is Certainty,
and he that is certain is certain, and cannot assent to that as true, which he
is certain is not true, whether he supposes Certainty to consist in the
preception of the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, such as a Man has, or in
any thing else. For whether those who have attained Certainty, not by the way
of Ideas, can believe against Certainty any more than those who have attained
Certainty by Ideas, we shall then see, when your Lordship shall be pleased to
show the World your way to Certainty without Ideas.

Indeed if what your Lordship insinuates in the beginning of this Passage,
which we are now upon be true, your Lordship is safer (in your way without
Ideas, i. e. without immediate objects of the Mind in Thinking, if there be any
such way) as to the understanding divine Revelation right, than those who make
use of Ideas: But yet you are still as far as they, from assenting to that as
true, which you are certain is not true. Your Lordship's Words are: p. 60.
So great a difference is there between forming Ideas first, and then judging
of Revelation by them, and the believing of Revelation on its proper Grounds,
and the interpreting the Sense of it by the due measures of Reason. If it be
the privilege of those alone who renounce Ideas, i. e. the immediate objects
of the Mind in Thinking, to believe Revelation on its proper Grounds, and the
interpreting the Sense of it, by the due measures of Reason; I shall not think
it strange, that any one who undertakes to interpret the Sense of Revelation,
should renounce Ideas, i. e. That he who would think right of the meaning of
any Text of Scripture should renounce, and lay by all immediate objects of the
Mind in Thinking.

But perhaps your Lordship does not here extend this difference of believing
Revelation on its proper Grounds, and not on its proper Grounds to all those,
who are not, and all those who are for Ideas. But your Lordship makes this
comparison here, only between your Lordship and me, who you think am guilty of
forming Ideas first, and then judging of Revelation by them. Answ. If so, then
this lays the blame not on my Doctrine of Ideas, but on my particular ill use of
them. That then which your Lordship would insinuate of me here, as a dangerous
way to mistaking the Sense of the Scripture, is, That I form Ideas first, and
then judge of Revelation by them, i. e. In plain English, that I get to my
self, the best I can, the signification of the Words, wherein the Revelation is
delivered; and so endeavor to understand the Sense of the Revelation delivered
in them. And pray, my Lord, does your Lordship do otherwise? Does the believing
of Revelation upon its proper Grounds, and the due measures of Reason, teach
you to judge of Revelation, before you understand the Words it is delivered in?
i. e. before you have formed the Ideas in your Mind, as well as you can, which
those Words stand for? If the due measures of Reason teach your Lordship this,
I beg the favor of your Lordship to tell me those due measures of Reason, that
I may leave those undue measures of Reason, which I have hitherto followed in
the interpreting the Sense of the Scripture, whose Sense it seems I should have
interpreted first, and understood the signification of the Words afterward.

My Lord, I read the Revelation of the Holy Scripture with a full assurance,
that all it delivers is true: And though this be a submission to the Writings
of those Inspired Authors, which I neither have, nor can have, for those of any
other Men: Yet I use (and know not how to help it, till your Lordship show me a
better method in those due measures of Reason, which you mention) the same way
to interpret to my self the Sense of that Book, that I do of any other. First I
endeavor to understand the Words and Phrases of the Language I read it in, i.
e. to form Ideas they stand for. If your Lordship means any thing else by
forming Ideas first, I confess, I understand it not. And if there be any Word
or Expression, which in that Author, or in that place of that Author, seems to
have a peculiar meaning, i. e. to stand for an Idea, which is different from
that, which the common use of that Language has made it a Sign of, that Idea
also, I endeavor to form in my Mind, by comparing this Author with himself,
and observing the design of his Discourse, that so, as far as I can, by a
sincere endeavor, I may have the same Ideas, in every place when I read the
Words, which the Author had when he writ them. But here, my Lord, I take care
not to take those for Words of Divine Revelation, which are not the Words of
Inspired Writers: Nor think my self concerned with that Submission to receive
the Expressions of Fallible Men, and to Labor to find out their Meaning, or as
your Lordship Phrases it, interpret their Sense, as if they were the
Expressions of the Spirit of God, by the Mouths or Pens of Men Inspired and
Guided by that infallible Spirit. This, my Lord, is the method I use in
interpreting the Sense of the Revelation of the Scriptures; if your Lordship
knows that I do otherwise, I desire you to convince me of it: And if your
Lordship does otherwise, I desire you to show me wherein your method differs
from mine, that I may reform upon so good a Pattern: For as for what you accuse
me of, in the following Words, it is that, which either has no Fault in it, or
if it have, your Lordship, I humbly conceive, is as guilty as I. Your Words p.
60.
are,

I may pretend what I please, That I hold the assurance of Faith, and the
Certainty by Ideas, to go upon very different Grounds; but when a Proposition
is offered me out of Scripture to be believed, and I doubt about the Sense of
it, is not Recourse to be made to my Ideas? Give me leave my Lord, with all
submission, to return your Lordship the same Words. Your Lordship may pretend
what you please, that you hold the assurance of Faith, and the Certainty of
Knowledge to stand upon different Grounds (for I presume your Lordship will not
say, that Believing and Knowing stand upon the same Grounds, for that would I
think be to say, That probability and demonstration are the same thing) But
when a Proposition is offered you out of Scripture, to be believed, and you
doubt about the Sense of it, is not recourse to be made to your Notions? What,
my Lord, is the difference here between your Lordship's and my way in the Case?
I must have recourse to my Ideas, and your Lordship must have recourse to your
Notions. For I think you cannot believe a Proposition contrary to your own
Notions; for then you would have the same and different Notions, at the same
time. So that all the difference between your Lordship and me, is, That we do
both the same thing, only your Lordship shows a great dislike to my using the
term Idea.

But the instance your Lordship here gives, is beyond my comprehension. Your
say, p. 60.
a Proposition is offered me out of Scripture to be believed, and I doubt about
the Sense of it -- As in the present Case, whether there can be three Persons
in one Nature, or two Natures and one Person. My Lord, my Bible is faulty
again, for I do not remember, that I ever read in it either of these
Propositions, in these precise Words, There are three Persons in one Nature,
or, There are two Natures and one Person. When your Lordship shall show me a
Bible wherein they are so set down, I shall then think them a good instance of
Propositions offered me out of Scripture, till then, whoever shall say, that
they are Propositions in the Scripture, when there are no such Words so put
together, to be found in Holy Writ, seems to me to make a new Scripture in
Words and Propositions, that the Holy Ghost dictated not. I do not here
question their Truth, nor deny that they may be drawn from the Scripture: But I
deny, that these very Propositions are in express Words in my Bible. For that
is the only thing I deny here, if your Lordship can show them me in yours, I
beg you to do it.

In the mean time, taking them to be as true as if they were the very Words of
Divine Revelation; the Question then is, how must we interpret the Sense of
them? For supposing them to be Divine Revelation, to ask as your Lordship here
does, what Resolution I, or any one can come to about their possibility, seems
to me to involve a Contradiction in it. For, whoever admits a Proposition to be
of Divine Revelation, supposes it not only to be possible, but true. Your
Lordship's Question then can mean only this; What Sense can I upon my
Principles, come to of either of these Propositions, but in the way of Ideas?
And I crave leave to ask your Lordship, what Sense of them can your Lordship
upon your Principles come to, but in the way of Notions? Which in plain
English, amounts to no more than this, That your Lordship must understand them
according to the Sense you have of those Terms they are made up of; and I
according to the Sense I have of those Terms. Nor can it be otherwise, unless
your Lorship can take a Term in any Proposition to have one Sense, and yet
understand it in another: And thus we see, that in effect, Men have differently
understood and interpreted the Sense of these Propositions. Whether they used
the way of Ideas or not, i. e. whether they called what any Word stood for
Notion, or Sense, or Meaning, or Idea.

I think my self obliged to return your Lordship my Thanks, for the News you
write me here, p. 61.
of one who has found a secret way how the same Body may be in distant Places
at once. It making no part, that I can see, of the Reasoning your Lordship was
then upon, I can take it only for a piece of News: And the Favor was the
greater, that your Lordship was pleased to stop your self in the midst of so
serious an Argument as the Articles of the Trinity and Incarnation, to tell it
me. And methinks it is pity, that that Author had not used some of the Words of
my Book, which might have served to have tied him and me together. For his
Secret about a Body in two Places at once, which he does keep up; and my Secret
about Certainty, which your Lordship thinks had been better kept up too, being
all your Words, bring me into his Company but very untowardly. If your Lordship
would be pleased to show, That my Secret about Certainty (as you think fit to
call it) is false or erroneous, the World would see a good Reason, why you
should think it better kept up; till then perhaps they may be apt to suspect,
that the Fault is not so much in my published Secret about Certainty, as
somewhere else. But since your Lordship thinks it had been better kept up; I
promise that as soon as you shall do me the Favor to make public a better
Notion of Certainty than mine, I will by a public Retractation call in mine:
Which I hope your Lordship will do, for I dare say, no Body will think it good
or Friendly Advice to your Lordship, if you have such a Secret, that you should
keep it up.

Your Lordship with some Emphasis, p. 63.
bids me observe my own Words, that I here positively say, That the Mind not
being certain of the Truth of that it does not evidently know: So that it is
plain here, that I place Certainty only in evident Knowledge, or in clear and
distinct Ideas; and yet my great Complaint of your Lordship, was, That you
charged this upon me, and now your Lordship finds it in my own Words. Answ. My
own Words in that place, are, The Mind in not certain of what it does not
evidently know; but in them or that Passage as set down by your Lordship, there
is not the least mention of clear and distinct Ideas, and therefore I should
wonder to hear your Lordship so solemnly call them my own Words, when they are
but what your Lordship would have to be a Consequence of my Words, were it not,
as I humbly conceive, a way not unfrequent with your Lordship to speak of that,
which you think a Consequence from any thing said, as if it were the very thing
said. It rests therefore upon your Lordship to prove that evident Knowledge can
be only where the Ideas concerning which it is, are perfectly clear and
distinct. I am certain, that I have evident Knowledge, that the Substance of my
Body and Soul exists, though I am as certain that I have but a very obscure and
confused Idea of any Substance at all: So that my Complaint of your Lordship
upon that Account, remains very well Founded, notwithstanding any thing you
allege here.

Your Lordship summing up the force of what you have said add p. 65.
That you have pleaded (1.) That my method of Certainty shakes the belief of
Revelation in General (2.) That is shakes the belief of particular Propositions
or Articles of Faith, which depend upon the Sense of Words contained in
Scripture.

That your Lordship has pleaded, I grant, but with Submission I deny, that you
have proved.

(1.) That my definition of Knowledge, which is that which your Lordship calls
my method of Certainty, shakes the belief of Revelation in general. For all
that your Lordship offers for Proof of it, is only the alleging some other
Passages out of my Book quite different from that my definition of Knowledge,
which you endeavor to show do shake the belief of Revelation in General. But
Indeed have not, nor, I humbly conceive, cannot show, that they do any ways
shake the belief of Revelation in general. But if they did, it does not at all
follow from thence, that my definition of Knowledge, i. e. my method of
Certainty at all shakes the belief of Revelation in general, which was what
your Lordship undertook to prove.

(2.) As to the shaking the belief of particular Propositions or Articles of
Faith, which depend, as you here say, p. 65.
upon the Sense of Words; I think I have sufficiently cleared my self from that
Charge, as will yet be more evident from what your Lordship here farther urges.

Your Lordship says, my placing Certainty in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, shakes the Foundations of the Articles of Faith [above
mentioned] which depend upon the Sense of Words contained in the Scripture: And
the Reason your Lordship gives for it, is this; Because I do not say we are to
believe all that we find there expressed. My Lord, upon reading these Words, I
consulted the Errata, to see whether the Printer had injured you: For I could
not easily believe that your Lordship should Reason after a Fashon, that would
justify such a conclusion as this, viz. Your Lordship in your Letter to me,
does not say that we are to believe all that we find expressed in Scripture?
therefore your Notion of Certainty shakes the belief of this Article of Faith,
that Jesus Christ descended into Hell. This I think will scarce hold for a good
Consequence, till the not saying any Truth, be the denying of it, and then if
my not saying in my Book, That we are to believe all there expressed, be to
deny, That we are to believe all that we find there expressed; I fear many of
your Lordship's Books will be found to shake the belief of several or all the
Articles of our Faith. But supposing this Consequence to be good, viz. I do not
say therefore I deny, and thereby I shake the belief of some Articles of Faith;
how does this prove, That my placing of Certainty in the perception of the
agreement or disagreement of Ideas, shakes any Article of Faith, unless my
saying, that Certainty consists in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas, in the 301 page of my Essay, be a Proof, that I do not
say in any other part of that Book, That we are to believe all that we find
expressed in Scripture

But perhaps the remaining Words of the period will help us out in your
Lordship's Argument, which all together stands thus, p. 65.
Because I do not say we are to believe all that we find there expressed; but
[I do say] in case we have any clear and distinct Ideas, which limit the Sense
another way, than the Words seem to carry it, we are to judge that to be the
true Sense. My Lord, I do not remember where I say, what in the latter part of
this Period your Lordship makes me say: And your Lordship would have done me a
Favor to have quoted the place. Indeed I do say in the Chapter your Lordship
seems to be upon, That no Proposition can be received for divine Revelation, or
obtain the assent due to all such, if it be contradictory to our clear
intuitive Knowledge.This is what I there say, and all that I there say: Which
in effect is this, That no Proposition can be received for divine Revelation,
which is contradictory to a self-evident Proposition, and if that be it, which
your Lordship makes me say here in the foregoing Words, I agree to it, and
would be glad to know whether your Lordship differs in Opinion from me in it.
But this not answering your purpose, your Lordship would in the following Words
of this Paragraph, p. 65.
change selfevident Proposition into a Proposition we have attained Certainty
of, though by imperfect Ideas: In which Sense the Proposition your Lordship
argues from as mine, will stand thus, That no Proposition can be received for
Divine Revelation, or obtain the assent due to all such, if it be contradictory
to any Proposition, of whose Truth we are by any way certain. And then I desire
your Lordship to name the Two contradictory Propositions, the one of Divine
Revelation, I do not assent to; the other, That I have attained to a Certainty
of by my imperfect Ideas, which makes me reject or not assent to that of Divine
Revelation. The very setting down of these Two contradictory Propositions, will
be demonstration against me, and if your Lordship cannot (as I humbly conceive
you cannot) name any Two such Propositions, it is an evidence, that all this
Dust, that is raised, is only a great deal of Talk about what your Lordship
cannot prove. For that your Lordship has not yet proved any such thing, I am
humbly of Opinion, I have already shown.

Your Lordship's Discourse of Des Carts in the following Pages, p. 66-69.
is, I think, as far as I am concerned in it, to show, that Certainty cannot be
had by Ideas: Because Des Carts using the term Idea missed of it. Answ. The
Question between your Lordship and me not being about Des Cartes's but my
Notion of Certainty, your Lordship will put an end to my Notion of Certainty by
Ideas, whenever your Lordship shall prove, That Certainty cannot be attained
any way by the immediate Objects of the Mind in Thinking, i. e. by Ideas; or
that Certainty does not consist in the perception of the agreement or
disagreement of Ideas; or lastly, when your Lordship shall show us, what else
Certainty does consist in. When your Lordship shall do either of these Three, I
promise your Lordship to renounce my notion, or way, or method, or grounds (or
whatever else your Lordship has been pleased to call it) of Certainty by Ideas.

The next Paragraph p. 69-70.
is to show the Inclination your Lordship has to favor me in the Words it may
be. I shall be always sorry to have mistaken any ones, especially your
Lordship's Inclination to favor me: But since the Press has published this to
the World, the World must now be Judge of your Lordship's Inclination to favor
me.

The three or four following Pages p. 70-74.
are to show, That your Lordship's exception against Ideas was not against the
term Ideas, and that I mistook you in it. Answ. My Lord, I must own that there
are very few Pages of your Letters, when I come to examine what is the precise
meaning of your Words, either as making distinct Propositions, or a continued
Discourse, wherein I do not think my self in danger to be mistaken; but whether
in the present Case, one much more learned than I, would not have understood
your Lordship as I did, must be left to those who will be at the pains to
consider your Words 1 Answ. p. 133.
and my Reply to them. Your Lordship saying, As I have stated my Notion of
Ideas, it may be of dangerous consequence; seemed to me to say no more, but
that my Book in general might be of dangerous consequence. This seeming too
general an Accusation, I endeavored to find what it was more particularly in
it, which your Lordship thought might be of dangerous consequence: And the
first thing I thought you excepted against, was the use of the term Idea. But
your Lordship tells me here, p. 72.
I was mistaken, it was not the term Idea you excepted against, but the way of
Certainty by Ideas. To excuse my mistake, I have this to say for my self, That
reading in your first Letter 1 Answ. p. 23.
these express Words; When new Terms are made use of by ill Men to promote
Skepticism and Insidelity, and to overthrow the Mysteries of our Faith, we have
then Reason to enquire into them, and to examine the Foundation and Tendency of
them; it could not be very strange, if I understood them to refer to Terms; but
it seems I was mistaken, and should have understood by them my way of Certainty
by Ideas, and should have read your Lordship's Words thus; When new Terms are
made use of by ill Men to promote Skepticism and Infidelity and to overthrow
the Mysteries of Faith, we have then Reason to enquire into them, i. e. Mr.
L.'s definition of Knowledge (for that is my way of Certainty by Ideas) and
then to examine the Foundation and Tendency of them, i. e. this Proposition,
viz. That Knowledge or Certainty consists in the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas. Them, in your Lordship's Words, as I thought (for I am
scarce ever sure, what your Lordship means by them) necessarily refering to
what ill Men made use for the promoting of Skepticism and Infidelity, I thought
it had refered to Terms. Why so? says your Lordship, your Quarrel, you say, was
not with the term Ideas. But that which you insisted upon was the way of
Certainty by Ideas, and the new Terms as employed to that purpose; and
therefore it is that which your Lordship must be understood to mean by what ill
Men make use of, etc. Now I appeal to my Reader, whether I may not be excused,
if I took Them rather to refer to Terms, a word in the Plural Number preceding
in the same Period, than to way of Certainty by Ideas, which is of the Singular
Number, and neither preceding, no nor so much as expressed in the same
Sentence? And if by my Ignorance in the use of the Pronoun Them, it is my
misfortune to be often at a loss in the understanding of your Lordship's
Writings, I hope I shall be excused.

Another excuse for my understanding, that one of the things in my Book which
your Lordship thought might be of dangerous consequence, was the term Idea, may
be found in these Words of your Lordship, 1 Answ. p. 92, 93.
But what need all this great noise about Ideas and Certainty, true and real
Certainty by Ideas: If after all, it comes only to this, That our Ideas only
present to us such things from whence we bring Arguments to prove the Truth of
things? But the World has been strangely amuzed with Ideas of late; and we
have been told, That strange things might be done by the help of Ideas, and yet
these Ideas at last come to be common Notions of things, which we must make use
of in our Reasoning. I shall offer one Passage more 1 Answ. p. 93.
for my excuse, out of the same Page. I had said in my Chapter about the
Existence of God, I thought it most proper to express my self in the most usual
and familiar way, by common Words and Expressions. Your Lordship wishes I had
done so quite through my Book; for then I had never given that occasion to the
Enemies of our Faith, to take up my new way of Ideas, as an effectual Battery
(as they imagined) against the Mysteries of the Christian Faith. But I might
have enjoyed the Satisfaction of my Ideas long enough, before your Lordship had
taken notice of them, unless you had found them employed in doing Mischief.
Thus this Passage stands in your Lordship's former Letter, though here p. 72,
73.
your Lordship gives us but a part off it, and that part your Lordship breaks
of into two, and gives us inverted and in other words. Perhaps those who
observe this, and better understand the Arts of Controversy than I do, may
find some skill in it. But your Lordship p. 72.
breaks off the former Passage at these Words, strange things might be done by
the help of Ideas; and then adding these new ones, i. e. as to matter of
Certainty, leaves out those which contain your wish, That I had expressed my
self in the most usual way by common Words and Expressions quite through my
Book, as I had done in my Chapter of the Existence of a God; for then, says
your Lordship, 1 Answ. p. 93.
I had not given that occasion to the Enemies of our Faith to take up my new
way of Ideas as an effectual Battery, etc. which wish of your Lordship's is,
That I had all along left out the term Idea, as is plain from my Words, which
you refer to in your wish, as they stand in my first Letter, 1 Let. p. 127.
viz. I thought it most proper to express my self in the most usual and
familiar way -- by common Words, and known ways of Expression; and therefore,
as I think, I have scarce used the word Idea in that whole Chapter. Now I must
again appeal to my Reader, Whether your Lordship having so plainly wished that
I had used common Words and Expressions in opposition to the term Idea, I am
not excusable if I took you to mean that Term? Though your Lordship leaves out
the wish, and instead of it puts in, i. e. as a matter of Certainty; words
which were not in your former Letter, though it be for mistaking you in my
Answer to that Letter, that you here blame me. I must own, my Lord, my dullness
will be very apt to mistake you in Expressions seemingly so plain as these,
till I can presume my self quick-sighted enough to understand Men's meaning in
their Writings not by their Expressions; which I confess I am not, and is an
Art I find my self too old now to learn.

But bare mistake is not all; your Lordship p. 73.
accuses me also of Unfairness and Disingenuity in understanding these Words of
yours, The World has been strangely amuzed with Ideas, and yet these Ideas at
last come to be only common Notions of things, as if in them your Lordship
owned Ideas to be only common Notions of things. To this, my Lord, I must
humbly crave leave to answer, That there was no Vnfairness or Disingenuity in
my saying your Lordship owned Ideas for such, because I understood you to speak
in that place in your own Sense; and thereby to show that the new term Idea
need not be introduced, when it signified only the common Notions of things, i.
e. signified no more than Notion does, which is a more usual Word. This I took
to be your meaning in that place; and whether I or any one might not so
understand it, without deserving to be told, p. 73.
That this is a way of turning things upon your Lordship which you did not
expect from me, or such a solemn appeal as this, Judge now how fair and
ingenuous this Answer is, I leave to any one, who will but do me the favor to
cast his Eye on the Passage above quoted, as it stands in your Lordship's own
Words in your first Letter 1 Answ. p. 92, 93.
For I humbly beg leave to say, That I cannot but wonder to find, that when
your Lordship is charging me with want of Fairness and Ingenuity, you should
leave out in the quoting of your own Words, those which served most to justify
the Sense I had taken them in, and put others in the stead of them. In your
first Letter 1 Answ. p. 93.
they stand thus: But the World has been strangely amuzed with Ideas of late,
and we have been told that strange things might be done by the help of Ideas;
and yet these Ideas at last come to be only common Notions of things which we
must make use of in our Reasoning, and so on to the end of what is above set
down; all which I quoted 1 Let. p. 62.
to secure my self from being suspected to turn things upon your Lordship in a
Sense which your Words (that the Reader had before him) would not bear: And in
your second Letter, p. 73.
in the place now under consideration, they stand thus: But the World has been
strangely amuzed with Ideas of late, and we have been told that strange things
may be done with Ideas, i. e. as to matter of Certainty, and there your
Lordship ends. Will your Lordship give me leave now to use your own Words,
Judge now how fair and ingenuous this is: Words which I should not use, but
that I find them used by your Lordship in this very Passage, and upon this very
Occasion.

I grant my self a mortal Man very liable to Mistakes, especially in your
Writings: But that in my Mistakes, I am guilty of any Vnfairness or
Disingenuity, your Lordship will, I humbly conceive, pardon me, if I think it
will pass for want of Fairness and Ingenuity in any one, without clear Evidence
to accuse me: To avoid any such Suspicion in my first Letter, I set down every
Word contained in those Pages of your Book which I was concerned in; and in my
second, I set down most of the Passages of your Lordship's first Answer that I
replied to. But because the doing it all along in this, would, I find, too much
increase the bulk of my Book; I earnestly beg every one, who will think this my
Reply worth his Perusal, to lay your Lordship's Letter before him, that he may
see whether in these Pages, I direct my Answer to, without setting them down at
large, there be any thing material unanswered, or Vnfairly or Disingenuously
represented.

Your Lordship, in the next Words, p. 73.
gives a Reason why I ought to have understood your Words, as a consequence of
my Assertion, and not as your own Sense, viz. Because you all along distinguish
the way of Reason, by deducing one thing from another, from my way of Certainty
in the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas. Answer. I know your Lordship does
all along talk of Reason, and my way be Ideas, as distinct or opposite: But
this is the thing I have and do complain of, That your Lordship does speak of
them as distinct, without showing wherein they are different, since the
Perception of the Agreement of Disagreement of Ideas, which is my way of
Certainty, is also the way of Reason: For the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas, is either by an immediate Comparison of two Ideas, as in
self-evident Propositions; which way of Knowledge of Truth, is the way of
Reason, or by the Intervention of intermediate Ideas, i. e. by the Deduction of
one thing from another, which is also the way of Reason, as I have shown 1 Let.
p. 128.
; where I answer to your speaking of Certainty placed in good and sound Reason,
and not in Ideas; in which place, as in several others, your Lordship opposes
Ideas and Reason, which your Lordship calls here distinguishing them: But to
continue to speak frequently of two things as different, or of two ways as
opposite, without ever showing any Difference or Opposition in them, after it
has been pressed for, is a way of Ingenuity which your Lordship will pardon to
my Ignorance, if I have not formerly been acquainted with; and therefore, when
you shall have shown, that Reasoning about Ideas or by Ideas, is not the same
way of Reasoning, as that about or by Notions or Conceptions, and that what I
mean by Ideas is not the same that your Lordship means by Notions, you will
have some reason to blame me for mistaking you in the Passages above quoted. p.
73.


For if your Lordship, in those Words, does not except against the Term Ideas,
but allows it to have the same Signification with Notions, or Conceptions, or
Apprehensions; then your Lordship's Words will run thus, But what need all this
great noise about Notions or Conceptions, or Apprehensions? And the World has
been strangely amuzed with Notions, or Conceptions, or Apprehensions of late;
which, whether it be that which your Lordship will own to be your meaning, I
must leave to your Consideration.

Your Lordship proceeds p. 74.
to examine my new method of Certainty, as you are pleased to call it,

To my asking whether there be any other, or older Method of Certainty, Your
Lordship answers, p. 75.
That is not the point; but whether mine be any at all? Which your Lordship
denies. Answer. I grant, to him that barely denies it to be any at all, it is
not the point, whether there be any older; but to him that calls it a new
method, I humbly conceive it will not be thought wholly besides the point, to
show an older, at least, that it ought to have prevented these following Words
of your Lordship's, viz. That your Lordship did never pretend to inform the
World of new Methods; which being in Answer to my desire, that you would be
pleased to show me an older, or another Method, plainly imply, That your
Lordship supposes, that whoever will inform the World of another Method of
Certainty than mine, can do it only by informing them of a new one. But since
this is the Answer your Lordship pleases to make to my Request, I crave leave
to consider it a little.

Your Lordship having pronounced concerning my Definition of Knowledge, which
you call my Method of Certainty, That it might be of dangerous Consequence to
an Article of the Christian Faith, I desired 2 Let. p. 87, 88.
you to show in what Certainty lies; and desired it of your Lordship by these
pressing Considerations, That it would secure that Article of Faith against any
dangerous Consequence from my way, and be a great Service to Truth in general.
To which your Lordship replies here, p. 75.
That you did never pretend to inform the World of New Methods; and therefore,
are not bound to go any farther than what you found fault with, which was my
new Method.

Answer. My Lord, I did not desire any new Method of you. I observed your
Lordship, in more places than one, reflected on me for writing out of my own
Thoughts; and therefore I could not expect from your Lordship what you so much
condemn in another. Besides, one of the Faults you found with my Method, was,
That it was New: And therefore, if your Lordship will look again into that
Passage, 2 Let. P. 88.
where I desire you to set the World right in a thing of that great
Consequence, as it is to know wherein Certainty consists; you will not find,
that I mention any thing of a new Method of Certainty; my Words were another,
whether old or new was indifferent. In truth, all that I requested, was only
such a Method of Certainty, as your Lordship approved of, and was secure in;
and therefore I do not see how your not pretending to inform the World in any
new Methods, can be any way alleged as a Reason, for refusing so useful and so
charitable a thing.

Your Lordship farther adds, p. 75.
That you are not bound to go any farther, than what you found fauls with.
Answer. I suppose your Lordship means, That you are not bound by the Law of
Disputation; nor are you, as I humbly conceive, by this Law forbid: Or if you
were, the Law of the Schools could not dispense with the Eternal Divine Law of
Charity. The Law of Disputing, whence had it its so mighty a Sanction? It is at
best but the Law of Wrangling, if it shut out the great Ends of Information and
Instruction; and serves only to flatter a little guilty Vanity, in a Victory
over an Adversary less skilful in this Art of Fencing. Who can believe, that
upon so slight an account, your Lordship should neglect your Design of writing
against me? The great Motives of your Concern for an Article of the Christian
Faith, and of that Duty, which you profess has made you do what you have done,
will be believed to work more uniformly in your Lordship, than to let a Father
of the Church, and a Teacher in Israel, not tell one who asks him which is the
right and safe Way, if he knows it. No, no, my Lord, a Character so much to the
Prejudice of your Charity, nobody will receive of your Lordship, no, not from
your self: Whatever your Lordship may say, the World will believe, That you
would have given a better Method of Certainty, if you had had one; when
thereby, you would have secured Men from the danger of running into Errors in
Articles of Faith, and effectually have recalled them from my way of Certainty,
which leads, as your Lordship says, to Skepticism and Infidelity: For to turn
Men from a way they are in, the bare telling them it is dangerous, puts but a
short stop to their going on in it: There is nothing effectual to set them a
going right, but to show them which is the safe and sure way; a piece of
Humanity, which when asked, no body, as far as he knows, refuses another; and
this I have earnestly asked of your Lordship.

Your Lordship p. 75.
represents to me the Vnsatisfactoriness and Inconsistency of my way of
Certainty, by telling me, That it seems still a strange thing to you, that I
should talk so much of a new Method of Certainty by Ideas; and yet allow, as I
do, such a want of Ideas, so much Imperfection in them, and such a want of
Connection between our Ideas, and the things themselves. Answer. This Objection
being so visibly against the Extent of our Knowledge, and not the Certainty of
it by Ideas, would need no other Answer but this, that it proved nothing to the
point; which was to show, that my way by Ideas, was no way to Certainty at all;
not to True Certainty, which is a Term your Lordship uses here p. 76.
which I shall be able to conceive what you mean by, when you shall be pleased
to tell me what false Certainty is.

But because what you say here, is in short what you ground your Charge of
Skepticism on, in your former Letter, I Shall here, according to my Promise,
consider what your Lordship says there, and hope you will allow this to be no
unfit place.

Your Charge of Skepticism, in your former Letter, I Answ. p. 125. -- 131.
is as follows.

Your Lordship's first Argument consists in these Propositions, viz.

1. That I say, P. 125, That Knowledge is the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas.

2. That I go about to prove, That there are very many more Beings, of which we
have no Ideas, than those of which we have; from whence, your Lordship draws
this Conclusion, That we are excluded from attaining any Knowledge, as to the
far greatest part of the Universe. Which I agree to: But with Submission, this
is not the Proposition to be proved, but this, viz. That my way by Ideas, or my
way of Certainty by Ideas; for to that your Lordship reduces it, i. e. my
placing of Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of
Ideas, leads to Skepticism.

Farther, from my saying, that the Intellectual World is greater and more
beautiful certainly than the material, your Lordship argues, I Answ. p. 126.
That if Certainty may be had by general Reasons without particular Ideas in
one, it may also in other Cases. Answer. It may no doubt: But this is nothing
against any thing I have said; for I have neither said, nor suppose, That
Certainty by general Reasons, or any Reasons can be had without Ideas; no more
than I say, or suppose, that we can reason without thinking, or think without
immediate Objects of our Minds in thinking, i. e. think without Ideas. But your
Lordship asks, Whence comes this Certainty (for I say certainly) where there be
no particular Ideas, if Knowledge consists in the Perception of the Agreement
or Disagreement of Ideas? I answer, we have Ideas as far as we are certain, and
beyond that we have neither Certainty, no nor Probability; every thing which we
either know or believe, is some Proposition. Now no Proposition can be framed
as the Object of our Knowledge or Assent, wherein two Ideas are not joined to,
or separated from one another. As for Example, when I affirm that something
exists in the World, whereof I have no Idea, Existence is affirmed of
something, some Being: And I have as clear an Idea of Existence and something,
the two things joined in that Proposition, as I have of them in this
Proposition, something exists in the World, whereof I have an Idea. When
therefore I affirm, that the intellectual World is greater, and more beautiful,
than the material: Whether I should know the truth of this Proposition, either
by Divine Revelation, or should assert it as highly probable (which is all I do
in that Chapter, Essay B. 4. C. 3.
out of which this Instance is brought) it means no more but this, viz. That
there are more, and more beautiful Beings, whereof we have no Ideas, than there
are of which we have Ideas; of which Beings, whereof we have no Ideas, we can
for want of Ideas, have no farther Knowledge, but that such Beings do exist.

If your Lordship shall now ask me how I know there are such Beings; I answer,
that in that Chapter Essay B. 4. C. 3.
of the Extent of our Knowledge, I do not say I know, but I endeavor to show,
that it is most highly probable: But yet a Man is capable of knowing it to be
true, because he is capable of having it revealed to him by God, that this
Proposition is true, viz. That in the Works of God there are more and more
beautiful Beings, whereof we have no Ideas, than there are whereof we have
Ideas. If God instead of showing the very things to St. Paul, had only revealed
to him, that this Proposition was true, viz. That there were things in Heaven
which neither Eye had seen, nor Ear had heard, nor had entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive, would he not have known the Truth of that Proposition of whose
Terms he had Ideas, viz. of Beings, whereof he had no other Ideas, but barely
as something, and of Existence, though in the want of other Ideas of them he
could attain no other Knowledge of them, but barely that they existed? So that
in what I have there said, there is no Contradiction nor Shadow of a
Contradiction, to my placing Knowledge in the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas.

But if I should any where mistake, and say any thing inconsistent with that
way of Certainty of mine; how I beseech your Lordship, could you conclude from
thence, that the placing Knowledge in the Perception of the Agreement of
Disagreement of Ideas, tends to Skepticism? That which is the Proposition here
to be proved, would remain still unproved: For I might say things inconsistent
with this Proposition, That Knowledge consists in the Perception of the
Connection and Agreement, or Disagreement and Repugnancy of our Ideas; and yet
that Proposition be true, and very far from tending to Skepticism, unless your
Lordship will argue, that every Proposition that is inconsistent with what a
Man any where says, tends to Skepticism; and then I should be tempted to infer,
that many Propositions in the Letters your Lordship has honored me with, will
tend to Skepticism.

Your Lordship's second Argument is 1 Answ. p. 126, 127.
from my saying, We have no Ideas of the mechanical Affections, of the minute
Particles of Bodies, which hinders our certain Knowledge of universal Truths
concerning natural Bodies; from whence your Lordship concludes, That since we
can attain to no Science, as to Bodies or Spirits, our Knowledge must be
confined to a very narrow compass. I grant it; but I crave leave to mind your
Lordship again, That this is not the Proposition to be proved: A little
Knowledge is still Knowledge, and not Skepticism. But let me have affirmed our
Knowledge to be comparatively very little, How, I beseech your Lordship, does
that any way prove, that this Proposition, Knowledge consists in the Perception
of the Agreement or Disagreement of our Ideas, any way tends to Skepticism?
which was the Proposition to be proved. But the Inference your Lordship shuts
up this Head with 1 Answ. P. 127.
in these Words; So that all Certainty is given up in the way of Knowledge, as
to the visible and invisible World, or at least the greatest part of them;
showing in the first part of it what your Lordship should have inferred, and
was willing to infer, does at last by these Words in the Close, Or at least the
greatest part of them, I guess come just to nothing; I say, I guess; for what
them, by Grammatical Construction is to be referred to, seems not clear to me.

Your third Argument I Answ. p. 128.
being just of the same kind with the former, only to show, That I reduce our
Knowledge to a very narrow compass, in respect of the whole extent of Beings is
already answered.

In the fourth place, your Lordship sets down some Words of mine concerning
Reasoning and Demonstration; and then concludes, I Answ. p. 129.
But if there be no way of coming to Demonstration but this, I doubt we must be
content without it. Which being nothing but a Declaration of your doubt, is, I
grant, a very short way of proving any Proposition; and I shall leave to your
Lordship the Satisfaction you have in such a Proof, since I think it will
scarce convince others.

In the last place your Lordship argues, I Answ. p. 129-131.
that because I say, That the Idea in the Mind proves not the Existence of that
thing whereof it is an Idea; therefore we cannot know the actual Existence of
any thing by our Senses; because we know nothing, but by the perceived
Agreement of Ideas. But if you had been pleased to have considered my Answer
there to the Scepticks, whose Cause you here seem, with no small vigor, to
manage, you would, I humbly conceive, have found, that you mistake one thing
for another, viz. The Idea that has by a former Sensation been lodged in the
Mind, for actually receiving any Idea, i. e. actual Sensation, which I think I
need not go about to prove, are two distinct things, after what you have here
quoted out of my Book. Now the two Ideas, that in this Case are perceived to
agree, and do thereby produce Knowledge, are the Idea of actual Sensation
(which is an Action whereof I have a clear and distinct Idea) and the Idea of
actual Existence of something without me that causes that Sensation. And what
other Certainty your Lordship has by your Senses of the existing of any thing
without you, but the perceived Connection of those two Ideas, I would gladly
know. When you have destroyed this Certainty, which I conceive is the utmost,
as to this Matter, which our infinitely Wise and Bountiful Maker has made us
capable of in this State, your Lordship will have well assisted the Scepticks
in carrying their Arguments against Certainty by Sense, beyond what they could
have expected.

I cannot but fear, my Lord, that what you have said here in favor of
Skepticism, against Certainty by Sense, (for it is not at all against me, till
you show we can have no Idea of actual Sensation) without the Proper Antidote
annexed in showing wherein that Certainty consists (if the account I give be
not true) after you have so strenuously endeavored to destroy, what I have
said for it, will, by your Authority, have laid no small Foundation of
Skepticism, which they will not fail to lay hold of, with advantage to their
Cause, who have any Disposition that way. For I desire any one to read this
your fifth Argument, and then judge which of us two is a promoter of
Skepticism: I who have endeavored, and, as I think, proved Certainty by our
Senses; or your Lordship, who has (in your Thoughts at least) destroyed these
Proofs, without giving us any other to supply their place. All your other
Arguments amount to no more but this, That I have given Instances to show, that
the extent of our Knowledge, in comparison of the whole extent of Being is very
little and narrow; which when your Lordship writ your Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, Vindic P. 244.
were very fair and ingenuous Confessions of the shortness of Humane
Understanding, with respect to the Nature and Manner of such things, which we
are most certain of the Being of, by constant and undoubted Experience: Though
since you have showed your dislike of them in more places than one,
particularly, p. 33. I Answ. p. 33.
; and again more at large, p. 43. ib. p. 43-45.
; and at last you have thought fit to represent them as Arguments for
Skepticism. And thus I have acquitted my self, I hope to your Lordship's
Satisfaction, of my promise to answer your Accusation of a tendency to
Skepticism.

But to return to your second Letter where I left off. In the following Pages
p. 76-87.
you have another Argument to prove my way of Certainty to be none, but to lead
to Skepticism; which after a serious perusal of it, seems to me to amount to no
more but this, That Des Carts and I go both in the way of Ideas; and we
differ, Ergo, the placing of Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of Ideas, is no way of Certainty, but leads to Skepticism, which
is a Consequence I cannot admit: And I think is no better than this; Your
Lordship and I differ, and yet we go both in the way of Ideas, Ergo, the
placing of Knowledge in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of
Ideas, is no way of Certainty at all, but leads to Skepticism.

Your Lordship will perhaps think I say more than I can justify, when I say,
Your Lordship goes in the way of Ideas; for you will tell me, you do not place
Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas. Answer.
No more does Des Carts; and therefore in that Respect, he and I went no more
in the same way of Ideas, than your Lordship and I do: From whence it follows,
That how much soever he and I may differ in other Points, our Difference is no
more an Argument against this Proposition, That Knowledge or Certainty consists
in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, than your
Lordship's and my Difference in any other Point, is an Argument against the
Truth of that my definition of Knowledge; or that it tends to Skepticism.

But you will say, That Des Carts built his System of Philosophy upon Ideas;
and so I say does your Lordship too, and every one else as much as he, that has
any System of that or any other part of Knowledge. For Ideas are nothing but
the immediate Objects of our Minds in Thinking; and your Lordship, I conclude,
in building your System of any part of Knowledge thinks on something; and
therefore you can no more build, or have any System of Knowledge without Ideas,
than you can think without some immediate Objects of Thinking. Indeed, you do
not so often use the word Ideas as Des Carts or I have done; but using the
things signified by that Term as much as either of us (unless you can think
without an immediate Object of Thinking) yours also is the way of Ideas, as
much as his or mine. Your condemning the way of Ideas, in those general Terms,
which one meets with so often in your Writings on this Occasion, amounts at
last to no more, but an Exception against a poor Sound of three Syllables,
though your Lordship thinks fit not to own, that you have any Exception to it.

If besides this, these ten or twelve Pages have any other Argument in them,
which I have not seen, I humbly desire you would be pleased to put it into a
Syllogism to convince my Reader, That I have silently passed by an Argument of
importance; and then I promise an Answer to it: And the same Request and
Promise I make to your Lordship, in reference to all other Passages in your
Letter, wherein you think there is any thing of moment unanswered.

Your Lordship comes p. 87.
to answer what was in my former Letter, to show, that what you had said
concerning Nature and Person, was to me and several others, whom I had talked
with about it, hard to be understood. To this purpose, the 16 next Pages p.
87-103.
are chiefly employed to show, what Aristotle and others have said about (...),
and Natura, a Greek and a Latin Word, neither of which is the English Word
Nature, nor can concern it at all till it be proved, that Nature in English has
in the propriety of our Tongue, precisely the same signification that (...) had
among the Greeks, and Natura among the Romans. For would it not be pretty harsh
to an English Ear, to say with Aristotle, p. 92 and 96.
That Nature is a corporeal Substance, or a corporeal Substance is Nature? To
instance but in this one among those many various Senses, which your Lordship
proves he used the term (...) in: Or with Anaximander, p. 96.
That Nature is Matter, or Matter Nature: Or with Sextus Empericus, p. 98.
That Nature is a principle of Life, or a principle of Life is Nature. So that
though the Philosophers of old of all kinds, did understand the Sense of the
terms (...) and Natura, in the Languages of their Countries, yet it does not
follow, what you would here p. 99.
conclude from thence, that they understood the proper signification of the
Term Nature in English. Nor has an English Man any more need to consult those
Grecians in their use of the sound (...) to know what Nature signifies in
English; than those Grecians had need to consult our Writings, or bring
instances of the use of the word Nature in English Authors, to justify their
using of the term (...) in any Sense they had used it in in Greek. The like may
be said of what is brought p. 99. 100.
out of the Greek Christian Writers; for I think an English Man could be scarce
justified in saying in English, That the Angels were Natures, because Theodoret
and St. Basil calls them (...).

Indeed your Lordship p. 102.
brings a Proof from an Authority that is proper in the Case, and would go a
great way in it, for it is of an English Man, who writing of Nature, gives an
account of the signification of the word Nature in English. But the mischief
is, that among Eight significations of the word Nature, which he gives, that is
not to be found, which you quote him for, and had need of. For he says not that
Nature in English is used for Substance; which is the Sense your Lordship has
used it in and would justify by the Authority of that ingenious and honorable
Person; and to make it out you tell us, Mr. Boil says the word Essence is of
great affinity to Nature, if not of an adequate import, to which your Lordship
adds, But the real Essence of a thing is a Substance. So that in fine, the
Authority of this excellent Person and Philosopher amounts to thus much, that
he says that Nature and Essence are two Terms that have a great affinity, and
you say, that Nature and Substance are two Terms that have a great affinity.
For the learned Mr. Boil says no such thing, nor can it appear, that he ever
thought so, till it can be shown, that he has said that Essence and Substance
have the same signification.

I humbly conceive, it would have been a strange way in any Body but your
Lordship, to have quoted an Author for saying that Nature and Substance had the
same signification, when one of those Terms, viz. Substance, he does not upon
that occasion so much as Name. But your Lordship has this Privilege, it seems
to speak of your Inferences as if they were other Men's Words, whereof I think I
have given several Instances, I am sure I have given one; where you p. 63.
seem to speak of clear and distinct Ideas as my Words, when they are only your
Words there inferred from my words evident Knowledge; and other the like
Instances might be produced, were there any need.

Had your Lordship produced Mr. Boyle's Testimony, that Nature in our Tongue
had the same signification with Substance, I should presently have submitted to
so great an Authority, and taken it for proper English, and a clear way of
expressing ones self, to use Nature and Substance promiscuously one for
another. But since I think there is no Instance of any one who ever did so, and
therefore it must be a new, and consequently no very clear way of Speaking;
give me leave, my Lord, to wonder, why in all this Dispute about the term
Nature, upon the clear and right understanding whereof, you lay so much stress,
you have not been pleased to define it; which would put an end to all Disputes
about the meaning of it, and leave no doubtfulness, no obscurity in your use of
it, nor any room for any Dispute what you mean by it. This would have saved
many Pages of Paper, though perhaps it would have made us lose your learned
Account of what the Ancients have said concerning (...), and the several
acceptations they used it in.

All the other Authors Greek and Latin your Lordship has quoted, may, for ought
I know, have used the Terms (...) and Natura, properly in their Languages; and
have discoursed very clearly and intelligibly about what those Terms in their
Countries signified. But how that proves, there was no difficulties in the
Sense or Construction in that Discourse of yours, concerning Nature, which I,
and those I consulted upon it, did not understand, is hard to see. Your
Lordship's Discourse was obscure and too difficult then for me, and so I must
own it is still. Whether my Friend be any better enlightened by what you have
said to him here, out of so many ancient Authors, I am too remote from him at
the Writing of this to know, and so shall not trouble your Lordship with any
Conversation, which perhaps when we meet again we may have upon it.

The next Passage of your Vindication, which was complained of to be very hard
to be understood, was this, where you say, Vindic. p. 253.
That you grant that by Sensation and Reflection, we come to know the Powers
and Properties of Things; but our Reason is satisfied that there must be
something beyond these; because it is impossible they should subsist by
themselves. So that the nature of things properly belongs to our Reason, and
not to mere Ideas. To rectify the mistake had been made in my first Letter P.
157. in taking Reason here to mean the Faculty of Reason, you tell me I Answ:
p. 101.
I might easily have seen, that by Reason your Lordship understood Principles
of Reason allowed by Mankind. To which it was replied, 2 Let. p. 125. 126.
That then this Passage of yours, must be read thus, viz. That your Lordship
grants that by Sensation and Reflection we come to know the properties of
things; but our Reason, i. e. the Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind are
satisfied that there must be something beyond these; because it is impossible
they should subsist by themselves. So that the Nature of things properly
belongs to our Reason, i. e. to the Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind,
and not to mere. Ideas, which made it seem more unintelligible than it was
before.

To the complaint was made of the unintelligibleness of this Passage in this
last Sense given by your Lordship, you answer nothing. So that we [ i. e. my
Friends whom I consulted and I] are still excusable if not understanding what
is signified by these Expressions. The Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind
are satisfied, and, the Nature of Things properly belongs to the Principles of
Reason allowed by Mankind, we see not the connection of the Propositions here
tied together by the Words so that, which was the thing complained of in these
Words, viz. 2 Letter p. 121.
That the inference here, both for its Connection and Expression seemed hard to
be understood; and more to the same Purpose, which your Lordship takes no
notice of.

Indeed your Lordship repeats these Words of mine, That in both Senses of the
word Reason, either taken for a Faculty, or for the Principles of Reason
allowed by Mankind; Reason and Ideas may consist together; and then subjoins,
p. 105.
That this leads your Lordship to the Examination of that which may be of some
use, viz. To show the difference of my Method of Certainty by Ideas, and the
Method of Certainty by Reason. Which how it any way justifies your opposing
Ideas and Reason, as you here, and elsewhere often do; or shows, That Ideas are
inconsistent with the Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind, I leave to the
Reader to judge. Your Lordship for the clearing of what you had said, in your
Vindication, etc. from Obscurity and Unintelligibleness, which were complained
of in it; is to prove, That Ideas are inconsistent with the Principles of
Reason allowed by Mankind; and in Answer to this, you say, you will show the
difference of my Method of Certainty by Ideas, and the Method of Certainly by
Reason.

My Lord, as I remember, the Expression in Question, was not, That the Nature
of Things properly belongs to our Reason, and not to my Method of Certainty by
Ideas: But this, That the Nature of Things belongs to our Reason, and not to
mere Ideas. So that the thing you were here to show, was, That Reason, i. e.
the Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind, and Ideas, and not the Principles
of Reason, and my Method of Certainty by Ideas, cannot consist together: For
the Principles of Reason allowed by Mankind, and Ideas, may consist together;
though perhaps, my Method of Certainty by Ideas, should prove inconsistent with
those Principles: So that if all that you say, from this to the 153 Page, i. e.
forty eight Pages were as clear Demonstration, as I humbly conceive it is the
contrary; yet it does nothing to clear the Passage in hand, but leaves that
part of your Discourse, concerning Nature, lying still under the Objection was
made against it, as much, as if you had not said one Word.

But since, I am not unwilling that my Method of Certainty should be examined;
and I should be glad (if there be any Faults in it) to learn the Defects of
that my Definition of Knowledge, from so great a Master as your Lordship; I
will consider what you here say, to show the Difference of my Method of
Certainty by Ideas, and the Method of Certainty by Reason.

Your Lordship says, p. 105.
That the way of Certainty by Reason lies in two things.

1. The Certainty of Principles.

2. The Certainty of Deductions.

I grant, That a part of that which is called Certainty by Reason, lies in the
Certainty of Principles; which Principles, I presume, your Lordship and I are
agreed, are several Propositions.

If then these Principles are Propositions, to show the Difference between your
Lordship's way of Certainty by Reason, and my way of Certainty by Ideas; I
think it is visible, That you ought to show wherein the Certainty of those
Propositions consists in your way by Reason, different from that wherein I make
it consist in my way by Ideas. As for Example, your Lordship and I are agreed,
that this Proposition, whatsoever is is, is a Principle of Reason, or a Maxim.
Now my way of Certainty by Ideas, is, That the Certainty of this Proposition
consists in this, that there is a perceivable Connection or Agreement, between
the Idea of Being and the Idea of Being, or between the Idea of Existence and
the Idea of Existence, as is expressed in that Proposition. But now in your way
of Reason, pray, wherein does the Certainty of this Proposition consist? If it
be in any thing different from that perceivable Agreement of the Ideas,
affirmed of one another in it, I beseech your Lordship to tell it me; if not, I
beg leave to conclude, that your way of Certainty by Reason, and my way of
Certainty by Ideas, in this Case are just the same.

But instead of saying any thing, to show wherein the Certainty of Principles
is different in the way of Reason, from the Certainty of Principles in the way
of Ideas, upon my Friends showing, That you had no ground to say as you did;
That I had no Idea of Reason, as it stands for Principles of Reason, your
Lordship takes occasion (as what will not, in a skillful hand, serve to
introduce any thing one has a mind to) to tell me, p. 106.
What Ideas I have of them must appear from my Book; and you do there find a
Chapter of self-evident Propositions and Maxims, which you cannot but think
extraordinary for the Design of it, which is thus summed in the Conclusion, B.
4. C.. 20.
viz. That it was to show, That these Maxims as they are of little Use, where
we have clear and distinct Ideas, so they are of dangerous Use, where our Ideas
are not clear and distinct. And is not this a fair way to convince your
Lordship, that my way of Ideas is very consistent with the Certainty of Reason,
when the way of Reason bath been always supposed to proceed upon general
Principles, and I assert them to be useless and dangerous?

In which Words I crave leave to observe,

1. That the Pronoun them here, seems to have Reference to self-evident
Propositions, to Maxims, and to Principles, as Terms used by your Lordship and
me; though it be certain, That you and I use them in a far different Sense:
For, if I mistake not, you use them all three promiscuously one for another;
whereas it is plain, That in that Chapter, Essay B. 4. C. 7.
out of which you bring your Quotations here, I distinguish self-evident
Propositions from those, which I there mention under the Name of Maxims, which
are principally these two, Whatsoever is is, and it is impossible for the same
thing to be and not to be. Farther, it is plain, out of the same place, That by
Maxims I there mean general Propositions, which are so universally received
under the Name of Maxims or Axioms, that they are looked upon as innate; the
two chief whereof, principally there meant, are those abovementioned: But what
the Propositions are which you comprehend under Maxims, or Principles of
Reason, cannot be determined, since your Lordship neither defines, nor
enumerates them; and so it is impossible, precisely, to know what you mean by
them here: And that which makes me more at a loss, is, That in this Argument,
p. 108.
you set down for Principles or Maxims, Propositions that are not so much as
self-evident, viz. This, That the Essential Properties of a Man, are to reason
and discourse, etc.

2. I crave leave to observe, That you tell me, That in my Book you find a
Chapter of self-evident Propositions and Maxims, whereas I find no such Chapter
in my Book: I have in it indeed, a Chapter of Maxims, but never an one
entitled, Of self-evident Propositions and Maxims. This it is possible your
Lordship will call a nice Criticism; but yet it is such an one, as is very
necessary in the Cafe: For in that Chapter I, as is before observed, expressly
distinguish self-evident Propositions from the received Maxims or Axioms, which
I there speak of: Whereas it seems to me, to be your Design (in joining them in
a Title of a Chapter, contrary to what I had done) to have it thought, That I
treated of them as one and the same thing; and so all that I said there, of the
Uselessness of some few general Propositions, under the Title of received
Maxims, might be applied to all self-evident Propositions, the quite contrary
whereof was the Design of that Chapter. For that which I endeavor to show
there, is, That all our Knowledge is not built on those few received general
Propositions, which are ordinarily called Maxims or Axioms; but that there are
a great many Truths may be known without them: But that there is any Knowledge
without self-evident Propositions, I am so far from denying, that I am accused
by your Lordship for requiring in Demonstration, more such than you think are
necessary. This seems, I say, to be your Design; and I wish your Lordship, by
entitling my Chapter as I my self did, and not as it would best serve your
turn, had not made it necessary for me to make this nice Criticism. This is
certain, That without thus confounding Maxims and self-evident Propositions,
what you here say, would not so much, as in Appearance, concern me: For,

3. I crave leave to observe, That all the Argument your Lordship uses here
against me to prove, That my way of Certainty by Ideas, is inconsistent with
the way of Certainty by Reason, which lies in the Certainty of Principles, is
this, That the way of Reason has been always supposed to proceed upon general
Principles, and I assert them to be useless and dangerous. Be pleased, my Lord,
to define or enumerate your general Principles, and then we shall see whether I
assert them to be useless and dangerous, and whether they, who supposed the way
of Reason, was to proceed upon general Principles, differed from me; and if
they did differ, whether theirs was more the way of Reason than mine: But to
talk thus of General Principles, which have always been supposed the way of
Reason, without telling so much as which, or what they are, is not so much as
by Authority to show, That my way of Certainty by Ideas, is inconsistent with
the way of Certainty by Reason: Much less is it in reality to prove it. Because
admitting I had said any thing contrary to what, as you say, has been always
supposed, its being supposed, proves it not to be true; because we know that
several things have been for many Ages generally supposed, which at last, upon
Examination, have been found not to be true.

What has been always supposed, is fit only for your Lordship's great Reading
to declare: But such Arguments, I confess, are wholly lost upon me, who have
not Time or Occasion to examine what has always been supposed; especially in
those Questions which concern Truths, that are to be known from the Nature of
things. Because, I think, they cannot be established by Majority of Votes, not
easy to be collected, nor if they were collected, can convey Certainty till it
can be supposed, that the greater part of Mankind are always in the right. In
Matters of Fact, I own we must govern our selves by the Testimonies of others;
but in Matters of Speculation to suppose on, as others have supposed before us,
is supposed by many to be only a way to learned Ignorance, which enables to
talk much and know but little. The Truths, which the Penetration and Labors of
others before us have discovered and made out, I own, we are infinitely
indebted to them for; and some of them are of that Consequence, that we cannot
acknowledge too much, the advantages we receive from those great Masters in
Knowledge: But where they only supposed, they left it to us to search, and
advance farther. And in those things, I think, it becomes our Industry to
employ it self, for the Improvement of the Knowledge, and adding to the Stock
of Discoveries left us by our inquisitive and thinking Predecessors.

4. One thing more I crave leave to observe, viz. That to these Words, These
Maxims, as they are of little use where we have clear and distinct Ideas, so
they are of dangerous Use where our Ideas are not clear and distinct, quoted
out of my Essay, you subjoin, p. 106.
And is not this a fair way to convince your Lordship, that my way of Ideas is
very consistent with the Certainty of Reason? Answer. My Lord, my Essay and
those Words in it, were writ many Years before I dreamt, that you or any body
else would ever question the consistency of my way of Certainty by Ideas, with
the way of Certainty by Reason; and so could not be intended to convince your
Lordship in this Point: And since you first said, That these two ways are
inconsistent, I never brought those Words to convince you, That my way is
consistent with the Certainty of Reasons: And therefore why you ask, whether
that be a fair way to convince you, which was never made use of as any way to
convince you of any such thing, is hard to imagine.

But your Lordship goes on in the following Words, with the like kind of
Argument, p. 106-107.
where you tell me, that I say, Essay B. 4. C. 7. Sect. 4.
That my first design is to prove, That the consideration of those general
Maxims adds nothing to the Evidence or Certainty of Knowledge; which says your
Lordship, Overthrows all that which has been accounted Science and
Demonstration, and must lay the Foundation of Skepticism; because our true
Grounds of Certainty depend upon some general Principle of Reason. To make this
plain, you say, you will put a Case grounded upon my Words; which are, That I
have discoursed with very rational Men, who have actually denied that they are
Men. These Words J. S. understands as spoken of themselves, and charges them
with very ill Consequences; but you think they are capable of an other meaning:
However, says your Lordship, let us put the Case, That Men did in earnest
question, whether they were Men or not; and then you do not see, if I set aside
general Maxims, how I can convince them, that they are Men. For the way your
Lordship looks on as most apt to prevail upon such extraordinary Skeptical Men,
is by general Maxims and Principles of Reason.

Answer. I can neither in that Paragraph nor Chapter, find that I say, That my
first design is to prove, that these general Maxims [i. e. those which your
Lordship calls general Principles of Reason] add nothing to the Evidence and
Certainty of Knowledge in general: For so these Words must be understood to
make good the Consequence which your Lordship charges on them, viz. That they
overthrow all that has been accounted Science and Demonstration, and lay the
Foundations of Skepticism.

What my design in that place is, is evident from these Words in the foregoing
Paragraph, Sect. 3.
Let us consider whether this Self-evidence be peculiar only to those
Propositions, which are received for Maxims, and have the Dignity of Axioms
allowed; and here it is plain, that several other Truths, not allowed to be
Axioms, partake equally with them in this Self-evidence; which shows that my
design there was to evince, that there were Truths that are not called Maxims,
that are as Self-evident as those received Maxims. Pursuant to this design, I
say, Sect. 4.
That the consideration of these Axioms [ i. e. whatsoever is, is; and it is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be] can add nothing to the
Evidence and Certainty of its [ i. e. the Minds] Knowledge [ i. e. of the Truth
of more particular Propositions concerning Identity]. These are my Words in
that place, and that the Sense of them is according to the Limitation annexed
to them; between those Crotchets I refer my Reader to that fourth Section,
where he will find that all that I say amounts to no more but what is expressed
in these Words, in the close of it; I appeal to every one's own Mind, whether
this Proposition, A Circle is a Circle, be not as Self-evident a Proposition,
as that consisting of more general Terms, Whatsoever is, is: And again, whether
this Proposition, Blue is not Red, be not a Proposition that the Mind can no
more doubt of, as soon as it understands the Words, than it does of that Axiom,
It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be? and so of all the
like. And now I ask your Lordship, whether you do affirm of this, That it
overthrows all that which has been counted Science and Demonstration, and must
lay the Foundation of Skepticism? If you do, I shall desire you to prove it; if
you do not, I must desire you to consider how fairly my Sense has been
represented.

But supposing you had represented my Sense right, and that the little or
dangerous use which I there limit to certain Maxims, had been meant of all
Principles of Reason in general, in your Sense, what had this been, my Lord, to
the Question under debate? Your Lordship undertakes to show, That your way of
Certainty by Reason is different from my way of Certainty by Ideas. To do this,
you say in the preceding Page, p. 105.
That Certainty by Reason, lies 1. In Certainty of Principles, 2. In Certainty
of Deductions. The first of these you are upon here, and if in order to what
you had undertaken, your Lordship had shown, That in your way by Reason, those
Principles were certain; but in my way by Ideas, we could not attain to any
Certainty concerning them. This, indeed, had been to show a difference between
my way of Certainty, which you call the way by Ideas; and yours, which you call
the way by Reason, in this part of Certainty, that lies in the Certainty of
Principles. I have said in the Words quoted by your Lordship, That the
consideration of those two Maxims, What is, is; and it is impossible for the
same thing to be and not to be, are not of use to add any thing to the Evidence
or Certainty of our Knowledge of the Truth of Identical Predications; but I
never said those Maxims were in the least uncertain; I may perhaps think
otherwise of their use, than your Lordship does, but I think no otherwise of
their Truth and Certainty than you do; they are left in their full Force and
Certainty for your use, if you can make any better use of them, than what I
think can be made: So that in respect of the allowed Certainty of those
Principles, my way differs not at all from your Lordship's.

Pray, my Lord, look over that Chapter again, and see whether I bring their
Truth and Certainty any more into Question, than you your self do; and it is
about their Certainty, and not Use, that the Question here is between your
Lordship and me: We both agree, That they are both undoubtedly Certain; all
then that you bring in the following Pages about their Use, is nothing to the
present Question about the Certainty of Principles, which your Lordship is upon
in this place; and you will prove, That your way of Certainty by Reason, is
different from my way of Certainty by Ideas; when you can show, That you are
certain of the Truth of those, or any other Maxims any otherwise, than by the
Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas as expressed in them.

But your Lordship passing by that wholly, endeavors to prove, that my saying,
That the consideration of those two general Maxims can add nothing to the
Evidence and Certainty of Knowledge in Identical Predications (for that is all
that I there say) overthrows all that has been accounted Science and
Demonstration, and must lay the Foundation of Skepticism, and it is by a very
remarkable Proof, viz. Because our true Grounds of Certainty depend upon some
general Principles of Reason; which is the very thing I there not only deny,
but have disproved; and therefore should not, I humbly conceive, have been
rested on as a Proof of any thing else, till my Arguments against it had been
answered.

But instead of that, your Lordship says, p. 107.
You will put a Case that shall make it plain, which is the Business of the six
following Pages, which are spent in this Case.

The Case is founded upon a Supposition, which you seem willing to have thought
that you borrowed either from I. S. or from me: Whereas, truly that Supposition
is neither that Gentleman's nor mine, but purely your Lordship's own. For
however grossly Mr. I. S. has mistaken (which he has since acknowledged in
Print) the obvious Sense of those Words of my Essay B. 4. C. 7. Sect. 17.
on which you say you ground your Case; yet, I must do him Right herein, that
he himself supposed not, that any Man in his Wits, ever in earnest questioned
whether he himself were a Man or no; though by a mistake (which I cannot but
wonder at, in one so much exercised in Controversy as Mr. I. S.) he charged me
with saying it.

Your Lordship indeed says, p. 107.
That you think my Words there may have an other meaning: Would you thereby
insinuate, That you think it possible they should have that meaning which I. S.
once gave them? If you do not, my Lord, Mr. I. S. and his understanding them
so, is in vain brought in here to countenance your making such a Supposition.
If you do think those Words of my Essay capable of such a meaning as I. S. gave
them, there will appear a strange Harmony between your Lordship's and Mr. I.
S.'s Understanding, when he mistakes what is said in my Book: Whether it will
continue now Mr. I. S. takes me right, I know not; but let us come to the Case
as you put it. Your Words p. 107.
are,

Let us put the Case, That Men did in earnest question whether they were Men or
not. Your Lordship says, You do not then see, if I set aside general Maxims,
how I can convince them that they are Men. Answer. And do you, my Lord, see
that with Maxims, you can convince them of that or any thing else? I confess,
whatever you should do, I should think it scarce worth while to Reason with
them about any thing. I believe you are the first that ever supposed a Man so
much besides himself, as to question whether he were a Man or no, and yet so
rational, as to be thought capable of being convinced of that or any thing by
Discourse of Reason. This, methinks, is little different from supposing a Man
in and out of his Wits at the same time.

But let us suppose your Lordship so lucky with your Maxims, that you do
convince a Man (that doubts of it) that he is a Man; what Proof, I beseech you,
my Lord, is that of this Proposition, That our true Grounds of Certainty depend
upon some general Principles of Reason?

On the contrary, suppose it should happen, as is the more likely, that your
setting upon him with your Maxims cannot convince him; are we not by this your
Case to take this for a Proof, That general Principles of Reason are not the
Grounds of Certainty? For it is upon the success, or not success of your
Endeavors, to convince such a Man with Maxims, that your Lordship puts the
Proof of this Proposition, That our true Grounds of Certainty depend upon
general Principles of Reason: The Issue whereof must remain in suspense, till
you have found such a Man to bring it to Trial; and so the Proof is far enough
off, unless you think the Case so plain, that every one sees such a Man will be
presently convinced by your Maxims, though I should think it probable that most
People may think he will not.

Your Lordship adds, p. 107.
For the way you look on as most apt to prevail upon such extraordinary
Skeptical Men, is by general Maxims and Principles of Reason. Answer. This
indeed, is a Reason why your Lordship should use Maxims when you have to do
with such extraordinary Skeptical Men; because you look on it as the likeliest
way to prevail. But pray, my Lord, is your looking on it as the best way to
prevail on such extraordinary Skeptical Men, any Proof, That our true Grounds
of Certainty depend upon some general Principles of Reason; for 'twas to make
this plain that this Case was put?

Farther, my Lord, give me leave to ask, what have we here to do with the ways
of convincing others of what they do not know, or assent to? Your Lordship and
I are not as, I think, disputing of the Methods of persuading others of what
they are ignorant of, and do not yet assent to; but our debate here, is about
the Ground of Certainty in what they do know, and assent to.

However, you go on p. 107 and 108.
to set down several Maxims which you look on as most apt to prevail upon your
extraordinary Skeptical Man, to convince him that he Exists, and that he is a
Man. The Maxims are, p. 108.


That nothing can have no Operations.

That all different sorts of Being are distinguished by Essential Properties.

That the Essential Properties of a Man, are to Reason, Discourse, etc.

That these Properties cannot subsist by themselves, without a real Substance.

I will not question whether a Man cannot know, that he exists; or be certain
(for it is of Knowledge and Certainty the Question here is) that he is a Man,
without the help of these Maxims. I will only crave leave to ask, how you know
that these are Maxims? For methinks this, That the esential Properties of a Man
are Reason, Discourse, etc. an imperfect Proposition, with and so forth at the
end of it, is a pretty sort of Maxim. That therefore which I desire to be
informed here, is, how your Lordship knows these, or any other Propositions to
be Maxims; and how Propositions, that are Maxims, are to be distinguished from
Propositions that are not Maxims? And the Reason why I insist upon it, is this:
Because this, and this only, would show, whether what I have said in my Chapter
about Maxims, overthrows all that has been accounted Science and Demonstration,
and lays the Foundation of Skepticism. But I fear my Request, That you would be
pleased to tell me, what you mean by Maxims, that I may know, what
Propositions, according to your Lordship, are, and what are not Maxims, will
not easily be granted me: Because it would presently put an end to all that you
impute to me, as said, in that Chapter against Maxims, in a Sense, that I use
not the Word there.

Your Lordship p. 109.
makes me, out of my Book, answer to the use you make of the Four
abovementioned Propositions, which you call Maxims, as if I were declared of
an Opinion, That Maxims could not be of any use in Arguing with others: Which
methinks you should not have done, if you had considered my Chapter of Maxims,
which you so often quote, For I there say, Essay B. 4. C. 7. ^. 11.
Maxims are useful to stop the Mouths of Wranglers -- to show, That wrong
Opinions lead to Absurdities,etc.

Your Lordship nevertheless, p. 109.
goes on to prove, That without the help of these Principles or Maxims, I
cannot prove to any, that doubt it, that they are Men in my way of Ideas. Answ.
I beseech you, my Lord, to give me leave to mind you again, that the Question
is not, what I can prove; but whether in my way by Ideas, I cannot without the
help of these Principles know, that I am a Man; and be certain of the Truth of
that, and several other Propositions: I say of several other Propositions. For
I do not think you in your way of Certainty by Reason, pretend to be certain of
all Truths; or to be able to prove (to those who doubt) all Propositions, or so
much as be able to convince every one of the Truth of every Proposition, that
you your self are certain of. There be many Propositions in Mr. Newton's
excellent Book, which there are Thousands of people, and those a little more
Rational, than such as should deny themselves to be Men; whom Mr. Newton
himself would not be able, with or without the use of Maxims used in
Mathematics, to convince of the Truth of: And yet this would be no Argument
against his Method of Certainty, whereby he came to the Knowledge, that they
are True. What therefore you can conclude, as to my way of Certainty, from a
Supposition of my not being able in my way by Ideas, to convince those who
doubt of it, that they are Men, I do not see. But your Lordship is resolved to
prove that I cannot, and so you go on.

1. Your Lordship says, p. 110.
That I suppose that we must have a clear and distinct Idea of that we are
certain of; and this you prove out of my Chapter of Maxims, where I say, That
every one knows the Ideas that he has, and that distinctly and unconfusedly one
from another. Answ. I suspected all along, that you mistook what I meant by
confused Ideas. If your Lordship pleases to turn to my Chapter of distinct and
confused Ideas, Essay B. 2. C. 29. 4. 5, 6.
you will there find, that an Idea, which is distinguished in the Mind from all
others, may yet be confused: The Confusion being made by a careless Application
of distinct Names to Ideas, that are not sufficiently distinct. Which having
explained at large, in that Chapter, I shall not need here again to repeat.
Only permit me to set down an Instance. He that has the Idea of the Liquor that
Circulating through the Heart of a Sheep, keeps that Animal alive, and he that
has the Idea of the Liquor that Circulates through the Heart of a Lobster, has
two different Ideas; as distinct as an Idea of an aqueous pellucid cold Liquor,
is from the Idea of a red opaque hot Liquor, but yet these Two may be
confounded by giving the Name Blood to this vital circulating Liquor of a
Lobster.

This being considered will show, how what I have said there, may consist with
my saying, That to Certainty Ideas are not required, that are in all their
parts perfectly clear and distinct: Because Certainty being spoken there of the
Knowledge of the Truth of any Proposition, and Propositions being made in
Words, it may be true, That notwithstanding all the Ideas we have in our Minds,
are, as far as we have them there, clear and distinct; yet those which we would
suppose the Terms in the Proposition to stand for, may not be clear and
distinct either.

1. By making the Term stand for an uncertain Idea, which we have not yet
precisely determined in our Minds, whereby it comes to stand sometimes for one
Idea, sometimes for another. Which, though when we reflect on them, they are
distinct in our Minds, yet by this use of a Name undetermined in its
Signification, come to be confounded. Or,

2. By supposing the Name to stand for something more than really is in the
Idea in our Minds, which we make it a sign of, v. g. let us suppose, That a Man
many Years since, when he was Young, Eat a Fruit, whose shape, size,
consistency and color, he has a perfect Remembrance of; but the particular
Taste he has forgot, and only remembers, that it very much delighted him. This
complex Idea, as far as it is in his Mind, it is evident, is there; and as far
as he perceives it, when he reflects on it, is in all its parts clear and
distinct; but when he calls it a Pineapple, and will suppose, that Name stands
for the same precise complex Idea, for which another Man (who newly Eat of that
Fruit, and has the Idea of the Taste of it also fresh in his Mind) uses it, or
for which he himself used it, when he had the Taste fresh in his Memory, it is
plain his complex Idea in that part, which consists in the Taste, is very
obscure.

To apply this to what your Lordship here p. 110.
makes me suppose, I Answer,

1. I do not suppose, That to Certainty it is requisite, that an Idea should be
in all its parts clear and distinct. I can be certain, that a Pineapple is not
an Artichoak, though my Idea, which I suppose that Name to stand for, be in me
obscure and confused, in regard of its Taste.

2. I do not deny, but on the contrary, I affirm, That I can have a clear and
distinct Idea of a Man, ( i. e. the Idea I give the name Man to, may be clear
and distinct) though it should be true, That Men are not yet agreed on the
determined Idea, that the name Man shall stand for. Whatever Confusion there
may be in the Idea, to which that Name is indeterminately applied; I do allow
and affirm, That every one if he pleases, may have a clear and distinct Idea of
a Man to himself, i. e. which he makes the word Man stand for: Which, if he
makes known to others in his Discourse with them about Man, all verbal Dispute
will cease, and he cannot be mistaken, when he uses the term Man. And if this
were but done with most of the glittering Terms brandised in Disputes, it would
often be seen how little some Men have to say, who with equivocal Words and
Expressions, make no small noise in Controversy.

Your Lordship concludes this part, by saying, p. 114.
Thus you have showed how inconsistent my way of Ideas is with true Certainty,
and of what use and necessity these general Principles of Reason are. Answ. By
the Laws of Disputation, which in another place, you express such a regard to,
one is bound not to change the Terms of the Question. This I crave leave humbly
to offer to your Lordship, because, as far as I have looked into Controversy,
I do not remember to have met with any one so apt, shall I say, to forget or
change the question as your Lordship. This, my Lord, I should not venture to
say, but upon very good Grounds, which I shall be ready to give you an account
of, whenever you shall demand it of me. One Example of it we have here, p. 114.
you say, you have showed how inconsistent my way of Ideas is with true
Certainty; and of what use and necessity these general Principles of Reason
are. My Lord, if you please to look back to the 105th Page, you will see, what
you there promised, was, to show the difference of my method of Certainty by
Ideas, and the method of Certainty by Reason: And particularly in the Pages
between that and this, the Certainty of Principles, which you say, is one of
those two Things, wherein the way of Certainty by Reason lies. Instead of that,
your Lordship concludes here, that you have showed two Things.

1. How inconsistent my way of Ideas is with true Certainty. Whereas it should
be to show the inconsistency or difference of my method of Certainty by Ideas,
and the method of Certainty by Reason: Which are Two very different
Propositions. And before you undertake to show, That my method of Certainty, is
inconsistent with true Certainty; it will be necessary for you to define, and
tell us wherein true Certainty consists, which your Lordship hitherto has shown
no great forwardness to do.

2. Another thing which you say, you have done, is, That you have shown of what
use and necessity these general Principles of Reason are. Answ. Whether by
these General Principles you mean those Propositions, which you set down, p.
108. and call there Maxims, or any other Propositions, which you have not any
where set down, I cannot tell. But whatsoever they are, that you mean here by
these, I know not how the usefulness of these your General Principles, be they
what they will, came to be a Question, between your Lordship and me here. If
you have a Mind to show any mistakes of mine in my Chapter of Maxims, which you
say, you think extraordinary for the Design of it, I shall not be unwilling to
be rectified; but that the usefulness of Principles, is not what is here under
debate between us, I, with Submission, affirm. That which your Lordship is here
to prove, is, That the Certainty of Principles, which is the way of Certainty
by Reason, is different from my way of Certainty by Ideas. Upon the whole, I
crave leave to say in your Words, That thus I have, I humbly conceive, made it
appear, that you have not showed any difference, much less any inconsistency of
my method of Certainty by Ideas, and the method of Certainty by Reason, in that
first Part, which you assign of Certainty by Reason, viz. Certainty of
Principles.

I come now to the second Part, which you assign p. 105.
of Certainty by Reason, viz. Certainty of Deductions. I only crave leave first
to set down these Words in the latter end of your Discourse, which we have been
considering, where your Lordship says, you begin to think J. S. was in the
right, when he made me say, That I had discoursed with very rational Men who
denied themselves to be Men Answ. I do not know what may be done by those who
have such a Command over the Pronouns They and Them, as to put they themselves
for they. I shall therefore desire my Reader to turn to that Passage of my
Book, and see, whether he too can be so lucky as your Lordship, and can with
you begin to Think, that by these Words, Essay B. 4. C. 7. 17.
Who have actually denied, that they, i. e. Infants and Changelings are Men. I
meant, who actually denied, that they themselves were Men.

Your Lordship, to prove my method of Certainty by Ideas, to be different from,
and inconsistent with your second Part of the Certainty by Reason, which you
say, lies in the Certainty of Deductions, begins thus: p. 114.
That you come now to the Certainty of Reason, in making Deductions; and here
you shall briefly lay down the Grounds of Certainty, which the ancient
Philosophers went upon, and then compare my way of Ideas with them. To which,
give me leave, my Lord, to Reply. (1.) That, I humbly conceive, it should have
been Grounds of Certainty [in making Deductions] which the ancient Philosophers
went upon, or else they will be nothing to the Proposition, which your Lordship
has undertaken here to prove. Now of the Certainty in making Deductions, I see
none of the Ancients produced by your Lordship, who say any thing to show,
wherein it consists, but Aristotle. Who, as you say, p. 116.
in his Method of infering one thing from another, went upon this common
Principle of Reason, that what things agree in a Third, agree among themselves.
And it so falls out, That so far as he goes toward the showing, wherein the
Certainty of Deductions consists, he and I agree, as is evident by what I say
in my Essay B. 4. C. 2. 2. and C. 17. 15.
. And if Aristotle had gone any farther to show, how we are certain, that those
two Things agree with a Third, he would have placed that Certainty in the
Perception of that Agreement, as I have done, and then he and I should have
perfectly agreed. I presume to say, if Aristotle had gone farther in this
matter, he would have placed our Knowledge or Certainty of the Agreement of any
two Things in the Perception of their Agreement. And let not any one from hence
think, I attribute too much to my self, in saying, That that accute and
judicious Philosopher, if he had gone farther in that matter, would have done
as I have done. For if he omitted it, I imagine it was not, that he did not see
it, but that it was so Obvious and Evident, that it appeared superfluous to
name it. For who can doubt that the Knowledge or being Certain, that any two
Things agree, consists in the Perception of their Agreement? What else can it
possibly consist in? It is so obvious, that it would be a little extraordinary
to think, that he that went so far could miss it. And I should wonder, if any
one should allow the Certainty of Deduction, to consist in the Agreement of two
Things in a Third, and yet should deny that the Knowledge or Certainty of that
Agreement, consisted in the Perception of it.

(2.) In the next place, my Lord, supposing my Method of Certainty, in making
Deductions, were different from those of the Ancients; this, at best, would be
only, that which I call, Essay B. C. 17. 4. Sect. 19.
Argumentum ad Verecundiam; which proves not on which side Reason is, though I
in Modesty should answer nothing to their Authorities.

(3.) The Ancients, as it seems by your Lordship, not agreeing one among
another, about the Grounds of Certainty; what can their Authorities signify in
the Case? Or, how will it appear, that I differ from Reason, in differing from
any of them, more than that they differ from Reason, in differing one from
another? And therefore, after all the different Authorities, produced by you,
out of your great Treasure of Reading, the matter will at last reduce it self
to this Point, That your Lordship should tell us, wherein the Certainty of
Reason, in making Deductions consists; and then show, wherein my Method of
making Deductions, differs from it: Which whether you have done or no, we shall
see in what follows.

Your Lordship closes your very Learned, and to other Purposes very Useful,
Account of the Opinions of the Ancients, concerning Certainty, with these
Words; p. 120.
That thus you have, in as few Words as you could, laid together those old
Methods of Certainty, which have obtained greatest Reputation in the World.

Whereupon I must crave leave to mind you again, That the Proposition, you are
here upon, and have undertaken to prove in this place, is concerning the
Certainty of Deductions, and not concerning Certainty in general. I say not
this, that I am willing to decline the Examination of my Method of Certainty in
general, any way, or in any place: But I say it to observe, that in Discourses
of this Nature, the Laws of Disputation have wisely ordered the Proposition
under Debate, to be kept to, and that in the same Terms to avoid Wandering,
Obscurity and Confusion.

I therefore proceed now to consider what use your Lordship makes of the
Ancients, against my way of Certainty in General. Since you think fit to make
no use of them, as to the Certainty of Reason, in making Deductions, though it
is under this your second Branch of Certainty by Reason, that you bring them in.

Your first Objection here, p. 120.
is that old one again, That my way of Certainty by Ideas is new. Answer. Your
calling of it New. does not prove it to be different from that of Reason: But
your Lordship proves it to be New ib.


1. Because here [i. e. in my way] we have no General Principles. Answer. I do,
as your Lordship knows, own the Truth and Certainty of the received general
Maxim^* and I contend for the Usefulness and Necessity of self-evident
Propositions in all Certainty, whether of Intuition or Demonstration. What
therefore those General Principles are, which you have not in my way of
Certainty by Ideas, which your Lordship has in your way of Certainty by Reason,
I beseech you to tell, and thereby to make good this Assertion against me.

2. Your Lordship says, p. 120.
That here [i. e. in my way] we have no Antecedents and Consequents, no
syllogistical Methods of Demonstration. Answer. If your Lordship here means,
That there be no Antecedents and Consequents in my Book, or that I speak not,
or allow not of Syllogism as a Form of Argumentation, that has its use, I
humbly conceive the contrary is plain. But if by here we have no Antecedents
and Consequents, no syllogistical Methods of Demonstration, you mean, That I do
not place Certainty, in having Antecedents and Consequents, or in making of
Syllogisms, I grant I do not; I have said Syllogisms instead of your Words,
Syllogistical Methods of Demonstration; which examined, amount here to no more
than Syllogisms: For Syllogistical Methods are nothing but mode and figure, i.
e. Syllogisms; and the Rules of Syllogisms are the same, whether the Syllogisms
be used in Demonstration or in Probability. But 'twas convenient for you to
say, Syllogistical Methods of Demonstration, if you would have it thought, that
Certainty is placed in it: For to have named bare Syllogism, without annexing
Demonstration to it, would have spoiled all, since every one who knows what
Syllogism is, knows it may as well be used in Topical or Fallacious Arguments,
as in Demonstration.

Your Lordship charges me then, That in my way by Ideas, I do not place
Certainty, in having Antecedents and Consequents. And pray, my Lord, do you in
your way by Reason do so? If you do, this is certain, That every body has, or
may have Certainty in every thing he disourses about: For every one, in any
Discourse he makes has, or may, if he pleases, have Antecedents and Consequents.

Again, your Lordship charges me, That I do not place Certainty in Syllogism. I
crave leave to ask again; And does your Lordship? And is this the difference
between your way of Certainty by Reason, and my way of Certainty by Ideas? Why
else is it objected to me, That I do not, if your Lordship does not place
Certainty in Syllogism? And if you do, I know nothing so requisite, as that you
should advise all People, Women and all, to betake themselves immediately to
the Universities, and to the learning of Logic; to put themselves out of the
dangerous State of Skepticism: For there young Lads, by being taught Syllogism,
arrive at Certainty; whereas, without Mode and Figure, the World is in perfect
Ignorance and Uncertainty, and is sure of nothing. The Merchant cannot be
certain that his Account is right cast up, nor the Lady that her Coach is not a
Wheel-barrow, nor her Dairy-maid, that one and one Pound of Butter are two
Pounds of Butter, and two and two four; and all for want of Mode and Figure:
Nay, according to this Rule, whoever lived before Aristotle, or him, whoever it
was, that first introduced Syllogism, could not be certain of any thing; no,
not that there was a God, which will be the present State of the far greatest
part of Mankind (to pass by whole Nations of the East, as China, and Indostan,
etc.) even in the Christian World, who to this day have not the Syllogistical
Methods of Demonstration, and so cannot be certain of any thing.

3. Your Lordship farther says, That in my way of Certainty by Ideas we have no
Criterion. Answer. To perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of two Ideas, and
not to perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of two Ideas, is, I think, a
Criterion to distinguish what a Man is certain of, from what he is not certain
of. Has your Lordship any other or better Criterion to distinguish Certainty
from Uncertainty? If you have, I repeat again my earnest Request, That you
would be pleased to do that Right to your way of Certainty by Reason, as not to
conceal it. If your Lordship has not, why is the want of a Criterion, when I
have so plain a one, objected to my way of Certainty, and my way so often
accused of a tendency to Skepticism and Infidelity, when you your Self have not
a better? And I think I may take the liberty to say, if yours be not the same,
you have not one so good.

Perhaps your Lordship will censure me here, and think it is more than becomes
me, to press you so hard concerning your own way; and to ask, whether your way
of Certainty lies in having Antecedents and Consequents, and Syllogisms; And
whether it has any other or better Criterion, than what I have given: Your
Lordship will possibly think it enough, that you have laid down the Grounds of
Certainty which the ancient Grecians went upon. My Lord, if you think so, I
must be satisfied with it: Though perhaps others will think it strange, that in
a Dispute about a Method of Certainty, which for its supposed coming short of
Certainty, you charge with a Tendency to Skepticism and Infidelity; you should
produce only the different Opinions of other Men, concerning Certainty, to make
good this Charge, without declaring any of those different Opinions or Grounds
of Certainty to be true or false: And some may be apt to suspect that you your
self are not yet resolved wherein to place it.

But, my Lord, I know too well, what your distance above me requires of me, to
say any such thing to your Lordship. Your own Opinions are to your self, and
your not discovering them, must pass for a sufficient Reason for your not
discovering them; and if you think fit to Over-lay a poor Insant modern Notion
with the great and weighty Names of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, and
the like; and heaps of Quotations out of the Ancients, who is not presently to
think it dead, and that there is an end of it? Especially, when it will have
too much Envy for any one to open his Mouth in defense of a Notion, which is
declared by your Lordship to be different, from what those great Men, whose
Words are to be taken without any more ado, and who are not to be thought
Ignorant or Mistaken in any thing. Though I crave leave to say, That however
infallible Oracles they were, to take things barely upon their, or any Man's
Authority, is barely to believe, but not to know or be certain.

Thus your Lordship has sufficiently proved my way of Certainty by Ideas to be
inconsistent with the way of Certainty by Reason, by proving it New; which you
prove only by saying, That it is so wholly new, that here we have no general
Principles; no Criterion; no Antecedents and Consequents; no Syllogistical
Methods of Demonstration: And yet we are told of a better way of Certainty to
be attained merely by the help of Ideas; add if your Lordship pleases,
signified by words, which put into Propositions, whereof some are General
Principles, some are or may be Antecedents, and some Consequents, and some put
together in Mode and Figure, Syllogistical Methods of Demonstration: For, pray
my Lord, may not Words that stand for Ideas, be put into Propositions as well
as any other? And may not those Propositions, wherein the Terms stand for
Ideas, be as well put into Antecedents and Consequents, or Syllogisms, and make
Maxims as well as any other Propositions, whose Terms stand not for Ideas, if
your Lordship can find any such? And if thus Ideas can be brought into Maxims,
Antecedents and Consequents, and Syllogistical Methods of Demonstration, what
Inconsistency has the way of Certainty by Ideas, with those ways of Certainty
by Reason; if at last your Lordship will say, That Certainty consists in
Propositions put together as Antecedents and Consequents, and in Mode and
Figure? For as for Principles or Maxims, we shall know whether your Principles
or Maxims are a way to Certainty, when you shall please to tell us, what it is,
that to your Lordship, makes a Maxim or Principle, and distinguishes it from
other Propositions; and whether it be any thing but an immediate Perception of
the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas, as expressed in that Proposition.
To conclude, by all that your Lordship has alleged out of the Ancients, you
have not, as I humbly conceive, proved that my way of Certainty is new, or that
they had any way of Certainty different from mine; much less have you proved
that my way of Certainty by Ideas is inconsistent with the way of Certainty by
Reason, which was the Proposition to be proved.

Your Lordship having thought it enough against my way of Certainty by Ideas,
thus to prove its Newness, you betake your self presently to your old Topic of
obscure and confused Ideas: And asks, p. 120.
But how comes there to be such a way of Certainty by Ideas, and yet the Ideas
themselves are so uncertain and obscure? Answer. No Idea, as it is in the Mind,
is uncertain; though to those who use Names uncertainly, it may be uncertain
what Idea that Name stands for. And as to obscure and confused Ideas, no Idea
is so obscure in all its parts or so confounded with all other Ideas but that
one, who in a Proposition, joins it with another in that part which is clear
and distinct, may perceive its Agreement or Disagreement, as expressed in that
Proposition: Though when Names are used for Ideas, which are in some part
obscure or confounded with Ideas, there can be no Propositions made which can
produce Certainty concerning that, wherein the Idea is obscure and confused.
And therefore to your Lordship's Question, p. 122.
How is it possible for us to have a clear Perception of the Agreement of
Ideas, if the Ideas themselves be not clear and distinct? I answer, Very well;
because an obscure or confused Idea, i. e. that is not perfectly clear and
distinct in all its parts, may be compared with another in that part of it,
which is clear and distinct; which will, I humbly conceive, remove all those
Difficulties, Inconsistencies and Contradictions, which your Lordship seems to
be troubled with, from my Words quoted in those two Pages. p. 121, 122.


Your Lordship having, as it seems, quite forgot that you were to show wherein
the Certainty of Deductions, in the way of Ideas, was inconsistent with the
Certainty of Deductions, in the way of Reason, brings here p. 122.
a new Charge upon my way of Certainty, viz. That I have no Criterion to
distinguish false and doubtful Ideas, from true and certain. Your Lordship says
p. 123.
the Academicks went upon Ideas, or Representations of things to their Minds;
and pray, my Lord, does not your Lordship do so too? Or has Mr. I. S. so won
upon your Lordship, by his solid Philosophy against the Fancies of the Ideists,
that you begin to think him in the right in this too; Solid Philosophy, p. 24,
and 27.
where he says, That Notions are the Materials of our Knowledge; and that a
Notion is the very thing it self Existing in the Understanding? For since I
make no doubut, but that, in all your Lordship's Knowledge, you will allow,
that you have some immediate Objects of your Thoughts, which are the Materials
of that Knowledge, about which it is employed, those immediate Objects, if they
are not as Mr. I. S. says, the very things themselves, must be Ideas. Not
thinking your Lordship therefore yet so perfect a Convert of Mr. I. S.'s, that
you are persuaded, that as often as you think of your Cathedral Church, or of
Des Cartes's Vortices, that the very Cathedral Church at Worcester, or the
Motion of those Vortices, it self Exists in your Understanding, when one of
them never existed but in that one place at Worcester, and the other never
existed any where in rerum natura. I conclude, your Lordship has immediate
Objects of your Mind, which are not the very things themselves Existing in your
Understanding; which if with the Academicks you will please to call
Representations, as I suppose you will, rather than with me Ideas, it will make
no difference.

This being so, I must then make the same Objection against your way of
Certainty by Reason, that your Lordship does against my way of Certainty by
Ideas (for upon the comparison of these two we now are) and then I return your
Words here p. 122, 123.
again, viz. That you have no Criterion to distinguish false and doubtful
Representations, from true and certain; How then can any Man be secure, that he
is not imposed upon in your Lordship's way of Representations?

Your Lordship says, p. 124, 125.
I tell you of a way of Certainty by Ideas, and never offer any such Method for
examining them as the Academicks required for their Probability. Answer. I was
not, I confess, so well acquainted with what the Academicks went upon for the
Criterion of a greater Probability, as your Lordship is; or if I had, I
writing, as your Lordship knows, out of my own Thoughts, could not well
transcribe out of them. But that you should tell me, I never offer any
Criterion to distinguish false from true Ideas, I cannot but wonder; and
therefore crave leave to beg your Lordship to look again into B. 2. C. 32. of
my Essay; and there, I persuade my self, you will find a Criterion, whereby
true and false Ideas may be distinguished.

Your Lordship brings for Instance p. 125.
the Idea of Solidity; but what it is an Instance of, I confess, I do not see:
Your Lordship charges p. 122.
on my way of Certainty, that I have no Criterion to distinguish false and
doubtful Ideas from true and certain; which is followed p. 123 and 124.
by an account you give, how the Academicks examined their Ideas or
Representations; before they allowed them to prevail on them to give an Assent,
as to a greater Probability. And then you tell me, p. 125.
That I never offer any such Method for examining them, as the Academicks
required for their Probability; to which your Lordship subjoins these Words, As
for Instance my first Idea, which I go upon of Solidity. Would not one now
expect, that this should be an Instance to make good your Lordship's Charge,
That I had no Criterion to distinguish, whether my Idea of Solidity were false
and doubtful, or true and certain.

To show that I have no such Criterion, your Lordship asks me two Questions,
the first p. 125.
is, How my Idea of Solidity comes to be clear and distinct? I will suppose for
once, that I know not how it comes to be clear and distinct: How will this
prove, That I have no Criterion to know whether it be true or false? For the
Question here is not about knowing how an Idea comes to be clear and distinct;
but how I shall know whether it be true or false. But your Lordship's following
Words seem to aim at a farther Objection; your Words altogether are, How this
Idea [i. e. my Idea of Solidity, which consists in Repletion of Space, with an
exclusion of all other solid Substances] comes to be clear and distinct to me,
when others who go in the same way of Ideas, have quite an other Idea of it? My
Lord, I desire your Lordship to name who those Others are, who go in the same
way of Ideas with me, who have quite another Idea of this my Idea than I have;
for to this Idea I could be sure that It, in any other Writer but your Lordship
must here refer: But my Lord, it is one of your privileged Particles, and I
have nothing to say to it. But let it be so, that others have quite an other
Idea of it than I; How does that prove, That I have no Criterion to distinguish
whether my Idea of Solidity be true or no?

Your Lordship farther adds, p. 125.
That those Others think that they have as plain and distinct an Idea that
Extension and Body are the same: And then your Lordship asks, Now what
Criterion is there to come to a Certainty in this Matter? Answer. In what
Matter, I beseech your Lordship, if it be whether my Idea of Solidity be a true
Idea, which is the Matter here in Question? In this Matter I have given a
Criterion to know, in my Essay, B. 2. C. 32.
if it be to decide the Question, whether the Word Body more properly stands
for the simple Idea of Space or for the Complex Idea of Space and Solidity
together; that is not the Question here, nor can there be any other Criterion
to decide it by, but the Propriety of our Language.

But your Lordship adds, p. 126.
Ideas can have no way of Certainty in themselves, if it be possible for even
Philosophical and Rational Men to fall into such contrary Ideas about the same
thing; and both sides think their Ideas to be clear and distinct. If this were
so, I do not see how this would any way prove, That I had no Criterion whereby
it might be discerned, whether my Idea of Solidity were true or no, which was
to be proved.

But at last, this which your Lordship calls contrary Ideas about the same
thing, is nothing but a difference about a Name. For I think no body will say,
That the Idea of Extension, and the Idea of Solidity are the same Ideas: All
the difference then between those Philosophical and Rational Men, which your
Lordship mentions here, is no more but this, whether the Simple Idea of pure
Extension shall be called Body, or whether the Complex Ideas of Extension and
Solidity joined together, shall be called Body; which will be no more than a
bare verbal Dispute to any one, who does not take Sounds for Things, and make
the Word Body something more than a Sign of what the Speaker would signify by
it. But what the Speaker makes the Term Body stand for, cannot be precisely
known till he has determined it in his own Mind, and made it known to another;
and then there can between them be no longer a dispute about the Signification
of the Word, v. g. If one of those Philosophical Rational Men tells your
Lordship, That he makes the Term Body to stand precisely for the simple Idea of
pure Extension, your Lordship or he can be in no doubt or uncertainty
concerning this thing; but whenever he uses the Word Body, your Lordship must
suppose in his Mind the simple Idea of Extension, as the thing he means by
Body. If on the other side another of those Philosophical Rational Men shall
tell your Lordship, That he makes the Term Body to stand precisely for a
Complex Idea made up of the simple Ideas of Extension and Solidity joined
together; your Lordship or he, can be in no doubt or uncertainty concerning
this Thing: But whenever he uses the word Body, your Lordship must Think on,
and allow the Idea belonging to it, to be that Complex one.

As your Lordship can allow this different use of the term Body in these
different Men, without changing any Idea, or any thing in your own Mind, but
the application of the same Term to different Ideas, which changes neither the
Truth nor Certainty of any of your Lordship's Ideas, from what it was before:
So those Two Philosophical rational Men, may, in Discourse one with another,
agree to use that term Body, for either of those two Ideas, which they please,
without at all making their Ideas, on either side, false or uncertain. But if
they will contest which of these Ideas the sound Body ought to stand for, it is
visible their difference is not about any reality of Things; but the propriety
of Speech, and their Dispute pute and doubt is only about the signification of
a Word.

Your Lordship's second Question p. 126.
is, Whether by this Idea of Solidity, we may come to know, what it is. Answ. I
must ask you here again, what you mean by it? If your Lordship by it means
Solidity, then your Question runs thus: Whether by this [ i. e. my] Idea of
Solidity, we may come to know what Solidity is? Answ. Without doubt, if your
Lordship means by the term Solidity, what I mean by the term Solidity; for then
I have told you what it is in the Chapter above cited by your Lordship: B. 2.
C. 4.
If you mean any thing else by the term Solidity, when your Lordship will
please to tell me what you mean by it, I will tell your Lordship what Solidity
is. This, I humbly conceive, you will find your self obliged to do, if what I
have said of Solidity, does not satisfy you what it is. For you will not think
it reasonable, I should tell your Lordship what a thing is when expressed by
you in a Term, which I do not know what your Lordship means by, nor what you
make it stand for.

But your Lordship asks, p. 126.
wherein it consists; if you mean wherein the Idea of it consists, that I have
already told your Lordship, in the Chapter of my Essay abovementioned. If your
Lordship means what is the real internal Constitution, that physically makes
Solidity in Things. If I answer I do not know, that will no more make my Idea
of Solidity not to be true or certain (if your Lordship thinks Certainty may be
attributed to single Ideas) than the not knowing the physical Constitution,
whereby the parts of Bodies are so framed as to cohere, makes my Idea of
Cohesion not true or certain.

To my saying in my Essay, B. 2. C. 4. 6.
That if any one ask me what this Solidity is, I send him to his Senses to
inform him. Your Lordship replies, p. 126.
You thought the Design of my Book would have sent him to his Ideas for
Certainty; and are we, says your Lordship, sent back again from our Ideas to
our Senses? Answ. I cannot help it, if your Lordship mistakes the Design of my
Book: For what concerns Certainty, i. e. the Knowledge of the Truth of
Propositions, my Book sends every one to his Ideas: But for the getting of
simple Ideas of Sensation, my Book sends him only to his Senses. But your
Lordship uses Certainty here, in a Sense I never used it, nor do understand it
in; for what the Certainty of any simple Idea is, I confess I do not know; and
shall be glad you would tell me, what you mean by it.

However, in this Sense you ask me, p. 127.
and that as if your Question carried a Demonstration of my Contradicting my
self. And are we sent back again, from our Ideas to our Senses? Answ. My Lord,
every one is sent to his Senses to get the simple Ideas of Sensation, because
they are no other way to be got.

Your Lordship presses on with this farther Question, ibid.
What do these Ideas signify then? i. e. if a Man be sent to his Senses for the
Idea of Solidity? I Answer, to show him the Certainty of Propositions, wherein
the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas is perceived, which is the Certainty I
speak of, and no other: But what the Certainty is, which your Lordship speaks
of in this and the following Page, 127. 128.
I confess I do not understand. For,

Your Lordship adds, p. 127.
that I say farther, That if this be not a sufficient Explication of Solidity,
I promise to tell any one what it is, when he tells me, what Thinking is; or
explains to me, what Extension and Motion are. Are we not now in the true way
to Certainty, when such Things as these are given over, of which we have the
clearest Evidence by Sensation and Reflection? For here I make it as impossible
to come to certain, clear and distinct Notions of these Things, as to discourse
into a Blind Man, the Ideas of Light and Colors. Is not this a rare way of
Certainty? Answ. What Things, my Lord, I beseech you, are those which you here
tell me, are given over, of which we have the clearest Evidence by Sensation or
Reflection? It Is likely you will tell me they are Extension and Motion. But, my
Lord, I crave the liberty to say, That when you have considered again, you will
be satisfied, there are no Things given over in the Case, but only the Names
Extension and Motion; and concerning them too, nothing is given over, but a
power of defining them. When you will be pleased to lay by a little the Warmth
of those Questions of Triumph, which I meet with in this Passage, and tell me
what Things your Lordship makes these Names Extension and Motion to stand for,
you perhaps will not find, that I make it impossible for those, who have their
Senses, to get the simple Ideas, signified by these Names, very clear and
distinct by their Senses: Though I do say, that these, as well as all other
Names of simple Ideas, cannot be defined; nor any simple Ideas be brought into
our Minds by Words, any more, than the Ideas of Light and Colors can be
discoursed into a Blind Man, which is all I do say in those Words of mine,
which your Lordship quotes, as such, wherein I have given over Things, whereof
we have the clearest Evidence: And so from my being of Opinion, That the Names
of simple Ideas cannot be defined, nor those Ideas got by any Words whatsoever,
which is all that I there say. Your Lordship very pathetically expresses your
self, as if in my way, all were gone; Certainty were lost; and if my Method
should be allowed, there is an end of all Knowledge in the World.

The Reason your Lordship gives p. 127.
against my way of Certainty is, That I here make it as impossible to come to
certain clear and distinct Notions of these Things [i. e. Extension and Motion]
as to discourse into a Blind Man the Idea of Light and Colors. Answ. What
clear and distinct Notions or Ideas are, I do understand: But what your
Lordship means by certain Notions, speaking here, as you do, of simple Ideas, I
must own, I do not understand. That for the attaining those simple Ideas I send
Men to their Senses, I shall think I am in the right, till I hear from your
Lordship better Arguments to convince me of my Mistake, than these. p. 127.
Are we not now in the true way to Certainty? Is not this a rare way of
Certainty? And if your Lordship has a better way to get clear and distinct
simple Ideas, than by the Senses, you will oblige me, and I think the World
too, by a Discovery of it. Till then, I shall continue in the same Mind I was
of, when I writ that Passage, Essay B. 2. C. 4. 5 and 6.
viz. That Words can do nothing toward it, and that for the Reason, which I
there promised, and is to be found, Essay B. 3. C. 4. 7. etc. And therefore to
your Lordship's saying, p. 127.
That thus you have showed, that I have no security against false and uncertain
Ideas, no Criterion to judge them by, I think I may securely Reply, that with
Submission, thus showing it, is no showing it at all; nor will ever show, That
I have no such Criterion, even when we shall add your Lordship's farther
Inference, p. 128.
Now here again our Ideas deceive us. Which supposing it a good Inference from
these Words of mine, That most of our simple Ideas are not the likenesses of
Things without us, yet it seems to me, to come in here, a little out of Season:
Because the Proposition to be proved is, as I humbly conceive, not that our
Ideas deceive us, but that I have not a Criterion to distinguish true from
false Ideas.

If it be brought to prove, that I have no Criterion, I have this to say, That
I neither well understand, what it is for our Ideas to deceive us in the way of
Certainty: Nor, in the best Sense, that I can give it, do I see how it proves,
that I have no Criterion; nor lastly, how it follows from my saying, that most
of our simple Ideas are not Resemblances.

Your Lordship seems by the following Words p. 128.
to mean, That in this way by Ideas, which are confessed not to be
Resemblances, Men are hindered, and cannot go far in the Knowledge of what they
desire to know of the Nature of those Objects, of which we have the Ideas in
our Minds. If this should be so, what is this I beseech your Lordship to your
showing that I have no Criterion? But that this is a Fault in the way by Ideas,
I shall be convinced, when your Lordship shall be pleased to show me, how in
your way of Certainty by Reason, we can know more of the Nature of Things
without us; or of that which causes these Ideas or Perceptions in us? But, I
humbly conceive, it is no Objection to the way of Ideas, if any one will deceive
himself, and expect Certainty by Ideas, in things where Certainty is not to be
had; because he is told how Knowledge or Certainty is got by Ideas, as far as
Men attain to it. And since your Lordship is here comparing the ways of
Certainty by Ideas and by Reason, as two different and incosistent ways, I
humbly crave leave to add, That when you can show me any one Proposition, which
you have attained to a Certainty of, in your way of Certainty by Reason, which
I cannot attain to a Certainty of in my way of Certainty by Ideas, I will
acknowledge my Essay to be guilty of whatever your Lordship pleases.

Your Lordship concludes. p. 128.
So that these Ideas are really nothing but Names, if they be not
Representations. Answ. This does not yet show, that I have no Criterion to
distinguish true from false Ideas, the thing that your Lordship is thus
showing. For I may have a Criterion to distinguish true from false Ideas,
though that Criterion concern not Names at all. For your Lordship in this
Proposition, allowing none to be Ideas, but what are Representations; the
other, which you say, are nothing but Names, are not concerned in the
Criterion, that is, to distinguish true from false Ideas: Because it relates to
nothing but Ideas, and the distinguishing of them one from another: Unless true
and false Ideas can be any thing but Ideas, i. e. Ideas and not Ideas at the
same time.

But farther, I crave leave to Answer, That your Lordship's Proposition, viz.
That these Ideas are really nothing but Names, if they be not the
representations of Things: Seems to me no Consequence from my Words, to which
it is subjoyned, though introduced with so that: For methinks it carries
something like a Contradiction in it, I say, Most of our simple Ideas of
Sensation, are not the likeness of something without us. Your Lordship infers,
if so, these Ideas are really nothing but Names; which, as it seems to me, is
as much as to say, These Ideas, that are Ideas, are not Ideas, but Names only.
Methinks they might be allowed to be Ideas, and that is all they pretend to be,
though they do not resemble that which produces them. I cannot help thinking a
Son something really more than a bare Name, though he has not the luck to
resemble his Father, who begot him: And the Black and Blue which I see, I
cannot conclude but to be something besides the Words Black and Blue (wherever
your Lordship shall place that something, either in my Perception only, or in
my Skin) though it resemble not at all the Stone, that with a knock produced it.

Should your Lordship put your two Hands, whereof one is Hot and the other
Cold, into Lukewarm Water; It would be hard to think, That the Idea of Heat
produced in you by one of your Hands; and the Idea of Cold by the other, were
the likenesses and very resemblances of something in the same Water: Since the
same Water could not be capable of having at the same time such real
Contrarieties. Wherefore since, as it is evident, they cannot be representations
of any Thing in the Water, it follows by your Lordship's Doctrine here, That if
you should declare what you feel, viz. That you feel Heat and Cold in that
Water, viz. Heat by one Hand, and Cold by the other, you mean nothing by Heat
and Cold; Heat and Cold in the Case are nothing but Names; and your Lordship in
Truth, feels nothing but these two Names.

Your Lordship in the next place p. 129.
proceeds to examine my way of Demonstration. Whether you do this to show, That
I have no Criterion, whereby to distinguish true from false Ideas; or to show,
That my way of Certainty by Ideas, is inconsistent with the Certainty of
Deductions by Reason; for these were the Things you seemed to me to have
undertaken to show, and therefore to be upon in this place, does not appear:
But this appears by the Words wherewith you introduce p. 129.
this Examen, that it is to avoid doing me Wrong.

Your Lordship, as if you had been sensible, that your former Discourse had led
you toward doing me Wrong, breaks it off of a sudden, and begins this new one
of Demonstration, by telling me, you will do me no Wrong. Can it be thought
now, that you forget this Promise, before you get half through your Examen? Or
is a mis-citing my Words, and misrepresenting my Sense no Wrong? Your Lordship
in this very Examen, sets down a long Quotation out of my Essay, and in the
close you tell me. p. 133.
These are my own Words which your Lordship has set down at large, that I may
not complain that you misrepresent my Sense. This one would think Guaranty
enough in a less Man than your Lordship: And yet, my Lord, I must crave leave
to complain, that not only my Sense, but my very Words are in that Quotation
misrepresented.

To show that my Complaint is not groundless, give me leave, my Lord, to set
down my Words as I read them in that place of my Book Essay B. 4. C. 7. Sect.
10.
which your Lordship quotes for them; And as I find them here in your second
Letter. 2d Ans. p. 132.


If we add all the self-evident Propositions, may be made about all our
distinct Ideas, That it is true of our particular distinct Ideas. that they are
all known by their Native Evidence, are wholly independent, receive no Light,
nor are capable of any proof, one from another, etc.
Principles will be almost infinite, at least innumerable, which Men arrive to
the Knowledge of at different Ages; and a great many of these innate Principles
they never come to know all their lives. But whether they come in view of the
Mind earlier or later, this is true of them, that they are all known by their
Native Evidence, are wholly independent, receive no Light nor are capable of
any proof, one from another, etc.

By their standing thus together, the Reader will without any pains see whether
those your Lordship has set down in your Letter are my own Words; and whether
in that place, which speaks only of self-evident Propositions or Principles, I
have any thing in Words or in Sense like this, That our particular distinct
Ideas are known by their Native Evidence, etc. Though your Lordship closes the
Quotation with that solemn Declaration above mentioned, That they are my own
Words, which you have set down at large that I may not complain you
misrepresent my Sense. And yet nothing can more misrepresent my Sense than they
do, applying all that to particular Ideas, which I speak there only of
self-evident Propositions or Principles; and that so plainly, that I think, I
may venture any one's mistaking it in my own Words: And upon this
Misrepresentation of my Sense, your Lordship raises a Discourse, and manages a
Dispute for, I think, a dozen Pages 133-146.
following, against my placing Demonstration on self-evident Ideas; though
self-evident Ideas are things wholly unknown to me, and are no where in my
Book, nor were ever in my Thoughts.

But let us come to your Exceptions against my way of Demonstration, which your
Lordship is pleased to call p. 129.
Demonstration without Principles. Answer. If you mean by Principles
self-evident Propositions, then you know my Demonstration is not without
Principles, in that Sense of the Term Principles: For your Lordship in the next
Page p. 130.
blames my way, because I suppose every intermediate Idea in Demonstration to
have a self-evident Connection with the other Idea; for two such Ideas as have
a self-evident Connection, joined together in a Proposition, make a
self-evident Proposition. If your Lordship means by Principles, those which in
the place Essay B. 4. C. 2. Sect. 8.
there quoted by your Lordship; I mean, viz. Whatever is, is; and it is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be; and such other general
Propositions, as are received under the Name of Maxims; I grant, that I do say,
That they are not absolutely requisite in every Demonstration: And I think, I
have shown, That there be Demonstrations, which may be made without them;
though I do not, that I remember, say, That they are excluded, and cannot be
made use of in Demonstration.

Your Lordship's first Argument p. 129.
against my way of Demonstration is, That it must suppose self-evidence must be
in the Ideas of my Mind; and that every intermediate Idea, which I take to
demonstrate any thing by, must have a self-evident Connection with the others.
Answer. Taking self-evidence in the Ideas of the Mind, to mean in the perceived
Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas in the Mind; I grant, I do not only suppose,
but say so.

To prove it not to be so in Demonstration, your Lordship says, p. 130.
That it is such a way of Demonstration, as the old Philosophers never thought
of. Answer. No body, I think, will question, that your Lordship is very well
read in the old Philosophers: But he that will answer for what the old
Philosophers* ever did, or did not think of, must not only understand their
extant Writings better than any Man ever did; but must have ways to know their
Thoughts, that other Men have not. For all of them thought more than they writ;
some of them writ not at all, and others writ a great deal more than ever came
to us. But if it should happen that any of them placed the Proof of any
Proposition in the Agreement of two things in a third, as I think some of them
did, than it will, I humbly conceive appear, that they did think of my way of
Demonstration; unless your Lordship can show, that they could see that two
things agreed in a third, without perceiving their Agreement with that third;
and if they did in every Syllogism of a Demonstration perceive that Agreement,
then there was a self-evident Connection, which is that which your Lordship
says they never thought of.

But supposing they never thought of it, must we put out our Eyes, and not see
whatever they overlooked? Are all the Discoveries made by Galileo, my Lord
Bacon, Mr. Boil, and Mr. Newton, etc. to be rejected as false, because they
teach us what the old Philosophers never thought of? Mistake me not, my Lord,
in thinking that I have the vanity here to rank my self, on this Occasion, with
these great discoverers of Truth, and advancers of Knowledge. On the contrary,
I contend, that my way of Certainty, my way of Demonstration, which your
Lordship so often condemns for its newness, is not New; but is the very same
that has always been used, both by Ancients and Moderns: I am only considering
here your Lordship's Argument, of never having been thought of by the old
Philosophers; which is an Argument that will make nothing for or against the
Truth of any Proposition advanced by a Modern Writer, till your Lordship has
proved, that those old Philosophers (let the happy Age of old Philosophers
determine where your Lordship pleases) did discover all Truth, or that they had
the sole Privilege to search after it, and besides them no body was to study
Nature, no body was to Think or Reason for himself; but every one was to be
barely a reading Philosopher, with an implicit Faith.

Your Objection in the next Words, p. 130.
That then every Demonstration carries its own Light with it, shows that your
way by Reason is what I do not understand. For this I thought heretofore, was
the property of Demonstration, and not a Proof that it was not a Demonstration,
that it carried its own Light with it: But yet though in every Demonstration,
there is a self-evident Connection of the Ideas, by which it is made; yet that
it does not follow from thence, as your Lordship here objects, that then every
Demonstration would be as clear and unquestionable as that two and two make
four, your Lordship may see in the same Chapter, Essay B. 4. C. 2. 4, 5, 6.
and the reason of it.

You seem in the following Words to allow, that there is such a Connection of
the intermediate Ideas in Mathematical Demonstrations: But say, p. 130.
You should be glad to see any Demonstration (not about Figures and Numbers) of
this kind. And if that be a good Argument against it, I crave leave to use it
too on my side; and to say, That I would be glad to see any Demonstration (not
about Figures and Numbers) not of this kind, i. e. wherein there is not a
self-evident Connection of all the intermediate Ideas. If you have any such, I
earnestly beg your Lordship to favor me with it; for I crave liberty to say,
That the Reason, and Form, and Way of Evidence, in Demonstration, wherever
there is Demonstration, is always the same.

But you say, p. 130.
This is a quite different Case from mine: I suppose your Lordship means by
this, Mathematical Demonstration, the thing mentioned in the preceding Period.
And then your Sense will run thus, Mathematical Demonstrations, wherein
Certainty is to be had by the intuition of the self-evident Connection of all
the intermediate Ideas, are different from that Demonstration which I am there
treating of. If you mean not so, I must own, I know not what you mean by
saying, This is a quite different Case from mine. And if your Lordship does
mean so, I do not see how it can be so as you say, your Words taken all
together run thus, p. 130.
My principal Ground is from Mathematical Demonstrations, and my Examples are
brought from them. But this is quite a different Case from mine, i. e. I am
speaking in that Chapter of my Essay concerning Demonstration in general, and
the Certainty we have by it: The Examples I use are brought from Mathematics,
and yet you say, Mathematical Demonstrations are quite a different Case from
mine. If I here misunderstand your Lordship's This, I must beg your pardon for
it; it is one of your priviledg'd Particles, and I am not Master of it.
Misrepresent your Sense I cannot, for your very Words are set down, and let the
Reader judge.

But your Lordship gives a Reason for what you had said in these Words
subjoined, p. 130.
where you say, I grant that those Ideas on which Mathematical Demonstrations
proceed are wholly in the Mind, and do not relate to the Existence of things;
but our Debate goes upon a Certainty of Knowledge of things as really Existing.
In which Words there are these things remarkable.

1. That your Lordship's Exception here is against what I have said concerning
Demonstration in my Essay, and not against any thing I have said in either of
my Letters to your Lordship. If therefore your Lordship and I have, since in
our Letters, had any Debate about the Certainty of the Knowledge of things as
really Existing, that which was writ before that Debate, could have no relation
to it, nor be limited by it. If therefore your Lordship makes any Exception
(as you do) to my way of Demonstration, as proposed in my Essay, you must, as I
humbly conceive, take it as delivered there, comprehending Mathematical
Demonstrations, which cannot be excluded, because your Lordship says, our
Debate now goes upon a Certainty of the Knowledge of things as really Existing,
supposing Mathematical Demonstrations, did not afford a Certainty of Knowledge
of things as really Existing.

2. But in the next place, Mathematical Demonstrations do afford a Certainty of
the Knowledge of things as really Existing, as much as any other Demonstrations
whatsoever; and therefore they afford your Lordship no Ground upon that account
to separate them, as you do here, from Demonstrations in other Subjects.

Your Lordship indeed thinks I have given you sufficient Grounds to charge me
with the contrary: For you say, p. 130.
I grant that those Ideas on which Mathematical Demonstrations proceed are
wholly in the Mind; this indeed I grant, and do not relate to the Existence of
things; but these later Words I do not remember, that I any where say. And I
wish you had quoted the place where I grant any such thing; I am sure it is not
in that place, where it is likeliest to be found, I mean where I examine,
whether the Knowledge we have of Mathematical Truths, be the Knowledge of
Things as really Existing: There, Essay B. 4. C. 4. 6.
I say (and I think I have proved) that it is, though it consists in the
Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, that are only in the
Mind: Because it takes in all those things really existing, which answer those
Ideas. Upon which Ground it was, That I there 7.
affirmed moral Knowledge, also capable of Certainty. And pray, my Lord, What
other way can your Lordship proceed, in any Demonstration you would make, about
any other thing but Figures and Numbers, but the same that you do in
Demonstrations about Figures and Numbers? If you would demonstrate any thing
concerning Man or Murder, must you not first settle in your Mind the Idea or
Notion you have of that Animal or that Action, and then show what you would
demonstrate necessarily to belong to that Idea in your Mind, and to things
existing only as they correspond with, and answer that Idea in your Mind? How
else you can make any general Proposition, that shall contain the knowledge of
things as really existing, I that am Ignorant, should be glad to learn, when
your Lordship shall do me the Favor to show me any such.

In the mean time there is no reason why you should except Demonstrations about
Figures and Numbers, from Demonstrations about other Subjects, upon the account
that I grant, that those Ideas on which Mathematical Demonstrations proceed,
are wholly in the Mind, when I say the same of all other Demonstrations. For
the Ideas that other Demonstrations proceed on, are wholly in the Mind: And no
Demonstration whatsoever concerns Things as really existing any farther, than
as they correspond with, and answer those Ideas in the Mind, which the
Demonstration proceeds on. This distinction therefore here of your Lordship's,
between Mathematical and other Demonstrations, having no Foundation, your
Inference founded on it falls with it, viz. p. 131.
So that although we should grant all, that I say about the Intuition of Ideas
in Mathematical Demonstrations, yet it comes not at all to my Business, unless
I can prove, that we have as clear and distinct Ideas of Beings, as we have of
Numbers and Figures. Though how Beings here and Numbers and Figures come to be
opposed against one another, I shall not be able to conceive, till I am better
instructed, than hitherto I am, that Numbers and Figures are no Beings; And
that the Mathematicians and Philosophers, old ones and all, have, in all the
Pains taken about them; employed their Thoughts about nothing. And I would be
glad to know what those Things are, which your Lordship says our Debate goes
upon here as really existing, that are Beings more then Numbers and Figures.

Your Lordship's next exception against my way of Demonstration is, p. 131.
That in it I am inconsistent with my self. For Proof of it, you say I design
to prove Demonstrations without general Principles; and yet every one knows
that general Principles are supposed in Mathematics. Answ. Every one may know
that general Principles are supposed in Mathematics without knowing, or ever
being able to know, that I who say also that Mathematicians do often make use
of them, am inconsistent with my self, though I also say, That a demonstration
about Numbers and Figures may be made without them.

To prove me Inconsistent with my self, you add: p. 131.
And that Person would be thought Ridiculous, who should go about to prove,
That general Principles are of little, or of dangerous use in Mathematical
Demonstrations. Answ. A Man may make other Ridiculous Faults in Writing,
besides Inconsistency, and there are Instances enough of it: But by good luck I
am in this place clear of what would be thought Ridiculous, which yet is no
proof of Inconsistency. For I never went about to prove, That general
Principles are of little or dangerous use in Mathematical Demonstrations.

To prove me Inconsistent with my self, your Lordship uses p. 131.
one Argument more, and that is, That I confess that the way of Demonstration
in Morality, is from Principles, as those of Mathematics by necessary
Consequences. Answ. With Submission, my Lord, I do not say in the place quoted
by your Lordship, B. 4. C. 3. 18.
That the way of Demonstration in Morality is from Principles, as those of the
Mathematics by necessary Consequences. But this is that which I say. That I
doubt not but in Morality from Principles, as incontestable as those of the
Mathematics by necessary Consequences, the measures of right and wrong might
be made out. Which Words, I humbly conceive, have no Inconsistency with my
saying, there may be Demonstrations without the help of Maxims: Whatever
Inconsistency the Words which you here set down for mine, may have with it.

My Lord, the Words you bring out of my Book, are so often different, from
those I read in the places which you refer to, that I am sometimes ready to
think, you have got some strange Copy of it, whereof I know nothing, since it
so seldom agrees with mine. Pardon me, my Lord, if with some care I examine the
Objection of Inconsistency with my self, that if I find any, I may retract one
part or the other of it. Humane Frailty I grant, and variety of Thoughts in
long Discourses, may make a Man unwittingly advance Inconsistencies. This may
consist with Ingenuity, and deserve to be excused. But for any one to persist
in it, when it is showed him, is to give himself the Lie, which cannot but
stick closer to him in the Sense of all rational Men, than if he received it
from another.

I own, I have said, in my Essay, That there be Demonstrations, which may be
made without those general Maxims, that I there treated of. But I cannot
recollect, that I ever said, that those general Maxims could not be made use of
in Demonstration: For they are no more shut out of my way of Demonstration,
than any other self-evident Propositions. And therefore there is no
Inconsistency in those two Propositions, which are mine, viz. Some
Demonstrations may be made without the help of those general Maxims. And
Morality, I doubt not, may be demonstrated from Principles, whatever
Inconsistency may be in these two following Propositions, which are your
Lordship's, p. 131. and 132.
and not mine, viz. The way of Demonstration in Morality is from Principles,
and general Maxims are not the way to proceed on in Demonstration, as to other
parts of Knowledge. For to admit self-evident Propositions, which is what I
mean by Principles, in the place of my Essay, B. 4. C. 3. 18.
which your Lordship quotes for the first of my inconsistent Propositions, and
to say (as I do in the other place quoted by your Lordship) B. 4. C. 7. 10.
That those magnified Maxims are not the Principles and Foundations of all our
other Knowledge has no manner of Inconsistency. For though I think them not
necessary to every Demonstration, so neither do I exclude them any more, than
other self-evident Propositions out of any Demonstration, wherein any one
should make use of them.

The next Objection p. 133.
against my way of Demonstration, from my placing Demonstration on the self
evidence of Ideas, having been already answered, I shall need to say nothing in
defense of it; or in answer to any thing raised against it, in your Twelve or
Thirteen following Pages upon that Topic. But that your Lordship may not
think, I do not pay a due respect to all that you say, I shall not wholly pass
those Pages over in Silence.

1. Your Lordship says, p. 134.
That I confess that some of the most obvious Ideas are far from being
self-evident. Answ. Supposing I did say so, how, I beseech your Lordship, does
it prove, That it is impossible to come to a Demonstration about real Beings,
in this way of Intuition by Ideas? Which is the Proposition you Promise p. 134.
to make appear, and you bring this as the first Reason to make it appear. For
should I confess a Thousand times over, That some of the most obvious Ideas,
are far from being self-evident: And should I, which I do not, make
Self-evident Ideas necessary to Demonstration, how will it thence follow, That
it is impossible to come to a Demonstration, etc? Since though I should confess
some of the most obvious Ideas not to be Self-evident; yet my Confession being
but of some, it will not follow from my Confession, but that there may be also
some Self-evident; and so still it might be possible to come to Demonstration
by Intuition, because some in my use of the Word never signifies all.

In the next place, give me leave to ask, where it is that I confess, That some
Ideas are not self-evident? Nay, where it is, that I once mention any such
thing as a self-evident Idea? For self-evident is an Epithet, that I do not
remember I ever gave to any Idea; or thought belonged at all to Ideas. In all
the places you have produced out of my Essay, concerning Matter, Motion, Time,
Duration and Light; Which are those Ideas your Lordship is pleased to instance
in, to prove, That I have confessed it of some, I crave leave humbly to offer
it to your Lordship, that there is not any such Confession. However you go on
to prove it. The Proposition then to be proved, is, That I confess, that these
are far from being self-evident Ideas. It Is necessary to set it down and carry
it in our Minds, for the Proposition to be proved, is, I find, a very slippery
thing, and apt to slide out of the way.

Your Lordship's Proof is, p. 134.
That according to me, we can have no Intuition of these Things which are so
Obvious to us, and consequently we can have no self-evident Ideas of them. The
force of which Proof, I confess, I do not understand. We have no Intuition of
the obvious thing Matter, and the obvious thing Motion, Ergo, we have no
self-evident Ideas of them. Granting that they are obvious Things, and that
obvious as they are, we have as you express it, no Intuition of them, it will
not follow from thence, that we have no Intuition of the Ideas we signify by
the names Matter and Motion, and so have no self-evident Ideas of them. For
whoever has in his Mind an Idea, which he makes the name Matter or Motion stand
for, has no doubt that Idea there, and sees or has in your phrase an Intuition
of it there, and so has a self-evident Idea of it, if Intuition, according to
your Lordship, makes a self-evident Idea (for of self-evident Ideas, as I have
before remarked, I have said nothing nor made any such distinction as
self-evident and not self-evident Ideas) and if intuition of an Idea does not
make a self-evident Idea, the want of it is in vain brought here to prove the
Idea of Matter or Motion not self-evident.

But your Lordship proceeds to Instances, and your first Instance is in Matter;
and here for fear of mistaking, let us remember what the Proposition to be
proved is, viz. That according to me, we have no intuition, as you call it, of
the Idea of Matter. Your Lordship begins and tells me, p. 135.
that I give this account of the Idea of Matter, That it consists in a solid
Substance, every where the same. Whereupon you tell me, p. 135.
You would be glad to come to a certain Knowledge of these two things; First,
The manner of the Cohesion of the parts of Matter, and p. 137.
the Demonstration of the divisibility of it in the way of Ideas. Answer. It
happened just as I feared, the Proposition to be proved is slipped already quite
out of sight: You own that I say Matter is a solid Substance, every where the
same. This Idea, which is the Idea I signify by the Word Matter, I have in my
Mind, and have an intuition of it there: How then does this prove, That
according to me, there can be no intuition of the Idea of Matter? Leaving
therefore this Proposition, which was to be proved, you bring p. 135-137.
places out of my Book to show, That we do not know wherein the Union and
Cohesion of the parts of Matter consists; and that the divisibility of Matter
involves us in difficulties, neither of which either is, or proves, That,
according to me, we cannot have an intuition of the Idea of Matter, which was
the Proposition to be proved, and seems quite forgotten during the three
following Pages, wholly employed upon this Instance of Matter. You ask indeed,
p. 136.
whether I can imagine, That we have intuition into the Idea of Matter? But
those Words seem to me to signify quite another thing, than having an
intuition of the Idea of Matter, as appears by your Explication of them in
these Words subjoined, p. 136.
Or that it is possible to come to a Demonstration about it, by the help of any
intervening Ideas; whereby it seems to me plain, that by intuition into it,
your Lordship means Demonstration about it, i. e. some Knowledge concerning
Matter, and not a bare view or intuition of the Idea you have of it: And that
your Lordship speaks of Knowledge concerning some affection of Matter in this,
and the following Question; and not of the bare intuition of the Idea of
Matter, is farther evident from the Introduction of your two Questions, p. 135.
wherein you say, There are two things concerning Matter, that you would be
glad to come to a certain Knowledge of. So that all that can follow, or in your
Sense of them does follow from my Words quoted by you, is, that I own, That the
Cohesion of its parts is an affection of Matter, that is hard to be explained;
but from them it can neither be inferred, nor does your Lordship attempt to
infer, That any one cannot view or have an intuition of the Idea he has in his
own Mind, which he signifies to others by the Word Matter; and that you did not
make any such Inference from them is farther plain, by your asking, in the
place above quoted, not only whether I can imagine, That it is possible to come
to a Demonstration about it? But your Lordship also adds, By the help of any
intervening Ideas? For I do not think you demand a Demonstration by the help of
intervening Ideas, to make you to see, i. e. have an intuition of your own Idea
of Matter. It would mis-become me to understand your Lordship in so strange a
Sense; for then you might have just Occasion to ask me again, whether I could
think you a Man of so little Sense? I therefore suppose, as your Words import,
That you demand a Demonstration by the help of intervening Ideas to show you,
how the parts of that thing, which you represent to your self by that Idea, to
which you give the name Matter, Cohere together; which is nothing to the
question of the intuition of the Idea, though to cover the change of the
question, as dexterously as might be, intuition of the Idea, is changed into
intuition into the Idea; as if there were no difference between looking upon a
Watch, and looking into a Watch, i. e. between the Idea, that taken from an
obvious View, I signify by the name Watch, and have in my Mind when I use the
Word Watch; and the being able to resolve any Question that may be proposed to
me, concerning the inward Make and Contrivance of a Watch. The Idea which taken
from the outward visible parts, I give the name Watch to, the Idea I perceive
or have an intuition of, in my Mind equally, whether or no I know any thing
more of a Watch, than what is represented in that Idea.

Upon this change of the question, all that follows to the bottom of the next
Page p. 137.
being to show, that from what I say it follows, that there be many
Difficulties concerning Matter, which I cannot resolve; many questions
concerning it, which I think cannot be demonstratively decided; and not to
show, that any one cannot perceive, or have an intuition, as you call it, of
his own Idea of Matter: I think I need not trouble your Lordship with an Answer
to it.

In this one Instance of Matter, you have been pleased to ask me two hard
Questions. To shorten your Trouble concerning this Business of intuition of
Ideas, will you, my Lord, give me leave to ask you this one easy Question
concerning all your four Instances, Matter, Motion, Duration, and Light, viz.
what you mean by these four Words? That your Lordship may not suspect it to be
either Captious or Impertinent, I will tell you the Use I shall make of it: If
your Lordship tell me what you mean by these Names, I shall presently reply,
That there then are the Ideas that you have of them in your Mind; and it is
plain you see or have an intuition of them, as they are in your Mind, or as I
should have expressed it, perceive them as they are there; because you can tell
them to an other. And so it is with every one, who can tell what he means by
those Words; and therefore to all such (amongst which I crave leave to be one)
there can be no doubt of the intuition of those Ideas. But if your Lordship
will not tell me what you mean by these Terms, I fear you will be thought to
use very hard Measure in disputing, by demanding to be satisfied concerning
Questions put in Terms, which you your self cannot tell the meaning of.

This considered will perhaps serve to show, that all that you say in the
following Paragraphs, to N. 2. P. 141. contains nothing against intuition of
Ideas, which is what you are upon, though it be no Notion of mine; much less
does it contain any thing against my way of Demonstration by Ideas; which is
the Point under Proof. For

1. What your Lordship has said about the Idea of Matter, has been considered
already.

2. From Motion, which is your second Instance, your Argument stands thus, p.
138.
That because I say, the Definitions I meet with of Motion are insignificant,
therefore the Idea fails us. This seems to me a strange Consequence; and all
one, as to say, That a deaf and dumb Man, because he could not understand the
Words used in the Definitions, that are given of Motion, therefore he could not
have the Idea of Motion, or the Idea of Motion failed him. And yet this
Consequence, as Foreign as it is to that Antecedent, is forced from it, to no
purpose: The Proposition to be inser'd being this, That then we can have no
intuition of the Idea of Motion.

3. As to Time, though the intuition of the Idea of Time be not my way of
speaking, yet what your Lordship here infers from my Words, granting it to be a
right Inference, with Submission, proves nothing against the intuition of that
Idea. The Proposition to be proved, is, That we can have no intuition of the
Idea of Time; and the Proposition which from my Words you infer, p. 139.
is, That we have not the Knowledge of the Idea of Time by intuition, but by
rational Deduction; What can be more remote than these two Propositions? The
one of them signifying (if it signifies any thing) the View the Mind has of it;
the other, as I guess, the Original and Rise of it. For what it is to have the
Knowledge of an Idea, not by intuition, but by deduction of Reason, I confess,
I do not well understand; only I am sure, in Terms it is not the same with
having the intuition of an Idea: But if changing of Terms were not some Men's
Privilege, perhaps so much Controversy would not be written. The meaning of
either of these Propositions, I concern not my self about; for neither of them
is mine. I only here show, That you do not prove the Proposition, that you your
self framed, and undertook to prove.

Since, my Lord, you are so favorable to me, as to seem willing to Correct
whatever you can find any way amiss in my Essay: Therefore I shall endeavor to
satisfy you concerning the Rise of our Idea of Duration from the Succession of
Ideas in our Minds. Against this, though it be nothing to the Matter in Hand,
you object, That p. 139.
some People reckoned Succession of Time right by Knots, and Notches, and
Figures, without ever thinking of Ideas. Answer. It Is certain, that Men, who
wanted better ways, might by Knots or Notches, keep accounts of the Numbers of
certain stated lengths of Time, as well as of the Numbers of Men in their
Country, or of any other Numbers; and that too without ever considering the
immediate Objects of their Thoughts under the Name of Ideas: But that they
should count Time without ever thinking of something, is very hard to me to
conceive; and the things they thought on, or were present in their Minds, when
they thought, are what I call Ideas; thus much in answer to what your Lordship
says. But to any one, that shall put the Objection stronger, and say, Many have
had the Idea of Time, who never reflected on the constant Train of Ideas,
succeeding one another in their Minds, whilst waking, I grant it; but add, that
want of Reflection makes not any thing cease to be: If it did, many Men's
Actions would have no Cause, nor Rise, nor Manner; because many Men never
reflect so far on their own Actions, as to consider what they are bottomed on,
or how they are performed. A Man may measure Duration by Motion, of which he
has no other Idea, but of a constant Succession of Ideas in Train; and yet
never reflect on that Succession of Ideas in his Mind. A Man may guess at the
length of his stay by himself in the dark; here is no Succession to measure by,
but that of his own Thoughts; and without some Succession, I think there is no
measure of Duration. But though in this Case, he measures the length of the
Duration by the Train of his Ideas, yet he may never reflect on that, but
conclude he does it he knows not how.

You add, p. 140.
But besides, such Arbitrary Measures of Time, what need any recourse to Ideas,
when the returns of Days, and Months, and Years, by the Planetary Motions, are
so easy and so universal? p. 140.
Such here, as I suppose, refers to the Knots, and Notches, and Figures before
mentioned: If it does not, I know not what it refers to; and if it does, it
makes those Knots and Notches Measures of Time, which I humbly conceive they
were not, but only Arbitrary ways of Recording (as all other ways of Recording
are) certain Numbers of known lenghts of Time: For though any one sets down by
Arbitrary marks, as Notches on a Stick, or Strokes of Chalk on a Trenchard, or
Figures on Paper, the Number of Yards of Cloth, or Pints of Milk that are
delivered to a Customer; yet, I suppose, no Body thinks, that the Cloth or Milk
were measured by those Notches, strokes of Chalk or Figures, which therefore
are by no means the arbitrary Measures of those Things. But what this is
against, I confess I do not see: This I am sure, it is not against any thing I
have said. For, as I remember, I have said (though not the planetary Motions
yet) that the Motions of the Sun and the Moon, are the best Measures of Time.
But if you mean, That the Idea of Duration is rather taken from the planetary
Motions, than from the succession of Ideas in our Minds, I crave leave to doubt
of That: Because Motion no other way discovers it self to us, but by a
succession of Ideas.

Your next Argument against my thinking the Idea of Time to be derived from the
train of Ideas, succeeding one another in our Minds, is, That your Lordship p.
140.
thinks the contrary. This, I must own, is an Argument by way of Authority, and
I humbly submit to it, though I think such Arguments produce no Certainty,
either in my way of Certainty by Ideas, or in your way of Certainty by Reason.

4. As to your fourth Instance, you having set down p. 141.
my Exceptions to the Peripatetick and Cartesian Definitions of Light you
subjoin this Question. And is this a self-evident Idea of Light? I beg leave to
Answer in the same way by a Question, and whoever said or thought, that it was,
or meant that it should be? He must have a strange Notion of self-evident
Ideas, let them be what they will (for I know them not) who can think, that the
showing others definitions of Light to be unintelligible, is a self-evident
Idea of Light. But farther, my Lord, what I beseech you has a self-evident Idea
of Light to do here? I thought in this your instance of Light, you were making
good what you undertook p. 134.
to prove from my self that we can have no intuition of Light. But because that
perhaps would have sounded pretty odly, you thought fit (which I with all
Submission crave leave sometimes to take notice of) to change the Question; but
the Misfortune is, that put as it is, not concerning our intuition, but the
self-evidence of the Idea of Light, the one is no better proved than the other:
And yet your Lordship concludes this your first Head according to your usual
form. p. 141.
Thus we have seen what account the Author of the Essay himself has given of
these self-evident Ideas, which are the groundwork of Demonstration. With
Submission, my Lord, he must have good Eyes, who has seen an Account I have
given in my Essay of self-evident Ideas, when neither in all that your Lordship
has quoted out of it, no nor in my whole Essay, self-evident Ideas are so much
as once mentioned. And where the Account I have given of a thing, which I never
thought upon, is to be seen, I cannot imagine. What your Lordship farther tells
me concerning them, viz. That self-evident Ideas are the groundwork of
Demonstration, I also assure you is perfect News to me, which I never met with
any where, but in your Lordship. Though if I had made them the groundwork of
Demonstration, as you say, I think they might remain so, notwithstanding any
thing your Lordship has produced to the contrary.

We are now come to your second Head, p. 141.
where I expected to have found this Consequence made good. That there may be
contradictory Opinions about Ideas, which I account most clear and distinct,
Ergo, it is impossible to come to a Demonstration about real Beings in the way
of intuition of Ideas. For this you told me p. 134.
was your second Reason to prove this Proposition. This Consequence your
Lordship, it seems, looks upon as so clear, that it needs no Proof; I can find
none here p. 141.
where you take it up again. To prove something, you say, Suppose an Idea
happen to be thought by some to be clear and distinct, and others should think
the contrary to be so? In Obedience to your Lordship I do suppose it. But, when
it is supposed, will that make good the abovementioned Consequence? You your
self, my Lord, do not so much as pretend it; but in this Question subjoined,
ibid.
What hopes of Demonstration by clear and distinct Ideas then? infer a quite
different Proposition. For, It is impossible to come to a Demonstration about
real Beings in the way of intuition of Ideas. And, There is no hopes of
Demonstration by clear and distinct Ideas, appear to me Two very different
Propositions.

There appears something to me yet more incomprehensible in your way of
manageing this Argument here. Your Reason is, as we have seen in these Words,
There may be contradictory Opinions about some Ideas, that I account most clear
and distinct: And your Instance of it is in these Words, Suppose an Idea happen
to be thought by some to be clear and distinct, and others should think the
contrary to be so. Answ. So they may without having any contradictory Opinions
about any Idea, that I account most clear and distinct. A Man may think his
Idea of Heat to be clear and distinct, and another may think his Idea of Cold
(which I take to be the contrary Idea to that of Heat) to be clear and
distinct, and be both in the right, without the least appearance of any
contradictory Opinions. All therefore, that your Lordship says, in the
remaining part of this* Paragraph, having nothing in it of contradictory
Opinions about Ideas that I think most clear, serves not at all to make good
your second Reason. The Truth is, all that you say here concerning Des Cartes's
Idea of Space, and another Man's Idea of Space amounts to no more but this,
That different Men may signify different Ideas by the same Name; and will
never fix on me, what your Lordship would persuade the World I say, that both
parts of a Contradiction may be true. Though I do say, That in such a loose use
of the terms Body and Vacuum it may be demonstrated, both that there is, and is
not a Vacuum: Which is a Contradiction in Words, and is apt to impose, as if it
were so in Sense, on those who mistake Words for Things, who are a kind of
Reasoners, whereof I perceive there is a greater Number than I thought there
had been. All that I have said in that place quoted by your Lordship, Essay B.
4. C. 7. Sect. 12.
is nothing, but to show the danger of relying upon Maxims, without a careful
Guard upon the use of Words, without which they will serve to make
Demonstrations on both sides. That this is so, I dare appeal to any Reader,
should your Lordship press me again, as you do here, with all the force of
these Words, p. 143.
Say you so? What! Demonstrations on both sides? And in the way of Ideas too?
This is extraordinary indeed.

That all the Opposition between Des Carts and those Others, is only about the
naming of Ideas, I think may be made appear from these Words of your Lordship
in the next Paragraph, p. 143.
In the Ideas of Space and Body, the Question supposed is whether they be the
same or no. That this is a Question only about Names, and not about Ideas
themselves, is evident from hence, that no Body can doubt whether the single
Idea of pure Distance, and the two Ideas of Distance and Solidity are one and
the same Idea or different Ideas, any more than he can doubt, whether one and
two are different. The Question then in the Case, is not whether Extension
considered separately by it self, or Extension and Solidity together be the
same Idea or no; but whether the simple Idea of Extension alone shall be called
Body, or the complex Idea of Solidity and Extension together, shall be called
Body. For that these Ideas themselves are different, I think I need not go
about to prove to any one, who ever thought of Emptiness or Fullness; for
whether in the Fact, the Bottle in a Man's hand be empty or no, or can by him
be emptied or no, This, I think, is plain, That his Idea of Fullness, and his
Idea of Emptiness are not the same. This the very Dispute concerning a Vacuum
supposes; for if Men's Idea of pure Space were not different from their Idea of
Solidity and Space together, they could never so far separate them in their
Thoughts, as to make a Question, whether they did always Exist together, any
more than they could Question, whether the same thing existed with it self.
Motion cannot be separated in Existence from Space: And yet no body ever took
the Idea of Space and the Idea of Motion to be the same. Solidity likewise
cannot Exist without Space; but will any one from thence say, the Idea of
Solidity and the Idea of Space are one and the same?

Your Lordship's third Reason to prove, That it is impossible to come to a
Demonstration about real Beings in this way of intuition of Ideas, is, p. 134.
That granting the Ideas to be true, there is no self-evidence of the
Connection of them which is necessary to make a Demonstration. This, I must
own, is to me as incomprehensible a Consequence as the former: As also is that
which your Lordship says p. 143.
to make it out, which I shall set down in your own Words, that its force may
be left entire to the Reader; But granting the Ideas to be true, yet when their
Connection is not self-evident, then an intermediate Idea must complete the
Demonstration: But how does it appear, that this middle Idea is self-evidently
connected with them? For it is said, if that intermediate Idea be non known by
intuition, that must need a proof; and so there can be no Demonstration; which
your Lordship is very apt to believe in this way of Ideas; unless Ideas get
more Light by being put between two others. Whatever there be in these Words to
prove the Proposition in Question, I leave the Reader to find out; but that he
may not be led into a Mistake, that there is any thing in my Words, that may be
serviceable to it, I must crave leave to acquaint him, That these Words set
down by your Lordship, as out of my Essay, B. 4. C. 2. 7.
are not to be found in that place, nor any where in my Book, or any thing to
this purpose, That the intermediate Idea is to be known by intuition; but this,
That there must be an intuitive Knowledge or Perception of the Agreement or
Disagreement of the intermediate Idea with those, whose Agreement or
Disagreement by its intervention it demonstrates.

Leaving therefore all that your Lordship brings out of Gassendus, the
Cartesians, Morinus, and Bernier, in their Argument from Motion, for or against
a Vacuum, as not being at all concerned in it; I shall only crave leave to
observe, that you seem to make use here of the same way of Argumentation, which
I think I may call your main, if not only one, it occurs so often, viz. That
when I have said any thing to show, wherein Certainty or Demonstration, etc.
consists, you think it sufficiently overthrown, if you can produce any Instance
out of my Book, of any thing advanced by me, which comes short of Certainty or
Demonstration: Whereas, my Lord, I humbly conceive, it is no Proof against my
Notion of Certainty, or my way of Demonstration, that I cannot attain to them
in all Cases. I only tell wherein they consist, wherever they are; but if I
miss of either of them, either by reason of the Nature of the Subject, or by
inadvertency in my way of Proof, that is no Objection to the Truth of my
Notions of them: For I never undertook that my way of Certainty or
Demonstration, if it ought to be called my way, should make me or any one
Omniscient or Infallible.

That which makes it necessary for me here again to take notice of this your
way of Reasoning, is the Question wherewith you wind up the Account you have
given of the Dispute of the Parties above named about a Vacuum, p. 145.
And is it possible to imagine, that there should be a self-evident Connection
in the Case? Answer. It concerns not me to examine, whether, or on which side,
in that Dispute, such a self evident Connection is, or is not possible. But
this I take the liberty to say, That wherever it is not, there is no
Demonstration, whether it be the Cartesians or the Gassendists that failed in
this Point. And I humbly conceive, that to conclude from any one's failing in
this, or any other Case, of a self-evident Connection in each step of his
Proof, that therefore it is not necessary in Demonstration, is a Conclusion
without Grounds, and a way of Arguing that proves nothing.

In the next Paragraph p. 145.
you come to wind up the Argument, which you have been so long upon, viz. to
make good what you undertook, p. 105.
i e. To show the difference of my Method of Certainty by Ideas, and the Method
of Certainty by Reason. In answer to my saying, I can find no Opposition
between them; which Opposition, according to the account you give of it, after
forty Pages spent in it, amounts at last to this:

(1.) That p. 146.
I affirm, That general Principles and Maxims of Reason, are of little or no
use; and your Lordship says, they are of very great use, and the only proper
Foundations of Certainty. To which I crave leave to say, That if by Principles
and Maxims, your Lordship means all self-evident Propositions, our ways are
even in this part the same; for as you know, may Lord, I make self-evident
Propositions necessary to Certainty, and found all Certainty only in them. If
by Principles and Maxims, you mean a select number of self-evident
Propositions, distinguished from the rest by the name Maxims, which is the
Sense in which I use the term Maxims in my Essay; then to bring it to a
Decision, which of us Two, in this Point, is in the right, it will be necessary
for your Lordship to give a List of those Maxims; and then to show, That a Man
can be certain of no Truth, without the help of those Maxims. For to affirm
Maxims to be the only Foundations of Certainty, and yet not to tell, which are
those Maxims; or how they may be known, is, I humbly conceive, so far from
laying any sure grounds of Certainty, that it leaves even the very Foundations
of it uncertain. When your Lordship has thus settled the grounds of your way of
Certainty by Reason, one may be able to examine, whether it be truly the way of
Reason, and how far my way of Certainty by Ideas differs from it.

The second Difference that you assign p. 146.
between my way of Certainty by Ideas, and yours by Reason, is, that I say,
That Demonstration is by way of intuition of Ideas, and that Reason is only the
Faculty employed in discovering and comparing Ideas with themselves, or with
others intervening; and that this is the only way of Certainty. Whereas your
Lordship affirms, and, as you say, have proved, That there can be no
Demonstration by intuition of Ideas; but that all the Certainty we can attain
to, is from general Principles of Reason, and necessary Deductions made from
them. Answ. I have said, That Demonstration consists in the Perception of the
Agreement or Disagreement of the Intermediate Idea with those, whose Agreement
or Disagreement it is to show, in each step of the Demonstration: And if you
will say this is different from the way of Demonstration by Reason, it will
then be to the Point abovementioned, which you have been so long upon. If this
be your Meaning here, it seems pretty strangely expressed, and remains to be
proved: But if any thing else be your Meaning, that Meaning not being the
Proposition to be proved, it matters not whether you have proved it or no.

Your Lordship farther says here, p. 146.
That all the Certainty we can attain to, is from general Principles of Reason,
and necessary Deductions made from them. This, you say, you have proved. What
has been proved; is to be seen in what has been already considered. But if your
Proof, That all the Certainty we can attain to, is from general Principles of
Reason, and necessary Deductions made from them, were as clear and cogent, as
it seems to me the contrary, this will not reach to the Point in Debate, till
your Lordship has proved, That this is opposite to my way of Certainty by
Ideas. It Is strange (and perhaps to some-may be matter of thought) that in an
Argument, wherein you lay so much stress on Maxims, general Principles of
Reason, and necessary Deductions from them, you should never once tell us,
what, in your account, a Maxim or general Principle of Reason is, nor the Marks
it is to be known by; nor offer to show what a necessary Deduction, is, nor how
it is to be made, or may be known. For I have seen Men please themselves with
Deductions upon Deductions; and spin Consequences, it mattered not whether out
of their own or other Men's Thoughts, which, when looked into, were visibly
nothing but mere Ropes of Sand.

It Is true, your Lordship says, p. 114.
you now come to Certainty of Reason by Deductions. But when all that truly
learned Discourse, which follows, is read over and over again, I would be glad
to be told, what it is your Lordship calls a necessary Deduction; and by what
Criterion you distinguish it from such Deductions, as come short of Certainty,
or even of Truth it self. I confess I have read over those Pages more than
once, and can find no such Criterion laid down in them, by your Lordship;
though a Criterion be there much talked of. But whether it be my want of
Capacity for your way of Writing, that makes me not find any Light given by
your Lordship into this Matter: Or whether in Truth you have not showed,
wherein, what you call a necessary Deduction consists, and how it may be known
from what is not so* the Reader must judge. This I crave leave to say, That
when you have shown what general Principles of Reason and necessary Deductions
are, the World will then see, and not till then, whether this your way of
Certainty by Reason, from general Principles and necessary Deductions made from
them, be opposite to, or so much as different from, my way of Certainty by
Ideas, which was the thing to be shown.

In the Paragraph p. 145.
under Consideration, you blame me, that in my Chapter concerning Reason, I
have treated it only as a Faculty, and not in the other Senses, which I there
give of that Word. This Exception to my Book, is, I suppose, only from your
Lordship's general Care of letting nothing pass in my Essay, which you think
needs an amendment. For any particular Reason, that brings it in here, or ties
it on to this part of your Discourse, I confess I do not see. However, to this
I Answer.

1. The Understanding as a Faculty, being the Subject of my Essay, it carried
me to treat directly of Reason no otherwise than as a Faculty. But yet Reason
as standing for true and clear Principles, and also as standing for clear and
fair Deductions, from those Principles I have not wholly omitted; as is
manifest from what I have said of self-evident Propositions, intuitive
Knowledge and Demonstration, in other parts of my Essay. So that your Question,
p. 145.
Why in a Chapter of Reason are the other two Senses of the word Neglected?
Blaming me for no other Fault, that I am really guilty of, but want of Order,
and not putting every thing in its proper Place; does not appear to be of so
mighty weight, but that I should have thought it might have been left to the
little Niblers in Controversy, without being made use of by so great a Man as
your Lordship. But the putting things out of their proper Place, being that,
which your Lordship thinks fit to except against in my Writings, it so falls
out, that to this too, I can plead not guilty. For in that very Chapter 2. 3,
4, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
of Reason, I have not omitted to treat of Principles and Deductions; and what
I have said there, I presume is enough to let others see, That I have not
neglected to declare my poor Sense about self-evident Propositions; and the
cogency and evidence of demonstrative or probable Deductions of Reason. Though
what I have said there, not being backed with Authorities, nor warranted by the
Names of ancient Philosophers, was not worth your Lordship's taking notice of.

I have, I confess, been so unwary to write out of my own Thoughts, which your
Lordship has, more than once, with some sort of Reprimand taken notice of. I
own it, your Lordship is much in the right: The safer way is, never to declare
ones own Sense in any material Point. If I had filled my Book with Quotations
and Collections, of other Men's Opinions, it had shown much more Learning, and
had much more security in it; and I my self had been safe from the Attacks of
the Men of Arms, in the Commonwealth of Letters: But in writing my Book, I had
no Thoughts of War, my Eye was fixed only on Truth, and that with so sincere
and unbiassed an Endeavor, that I thought, I should not have incurred much
Blame, even where I had missed it. This I perceive, too late, was the wrong
way: I should have kept my self still safe upon the reserve. Had I learnt this
Wisdom of Thrase in Terence, and resolved with my self, Hic ego ero post
Principia, perhaps I might have deserved the Commendation was given him: Illuc
est Sapere ut hos instruxit ipsus sibi cavit loco: But I deserved to be soundly
Corrected, for not having profited by Reading, so much as this comes to.

But to return to your Accusation here, which altogether stands thus: p. 145.
Why in a Chapter of Reason are the other two Senses neglected? We might have
expected here full, Satisfaction as to the Principles of Reason, as distinct
from the Faculty, but the Author of the Essay wholly avoids it. What I guess
these Words accuse me to have avoided, I think I have shown already, that I did
not avoid.

Before you conclude, you say, p. 146.
you must observe that I prove, That Demonstration must be by Intuition, in an
extraordinary manner from the Sense of the Word. He that will be at the Pains
to read that Paragraph, Essay B. 4. C. 2. 3.
which you quote for it, will see, that I do not prove that it must be by
Intuition, because, it is called Demonstration; but that it is called
Demonstration, because it is by Intuition, And as to the Propriety of it, what
your Lordship says in the following Words, p. 147.
It would be most proper for ocular Demonstration or by the Finger, will not
hinder it from being proper also in mental Demonstration, as long as the
Perception of the Mind, is properly expressed by seeing.

Against my observing that the Notation of the word Imported showing or making
to see, your Lordship farther says, p. 152.
Demonstration among some Philosophers, signified only the conclusion of an
Argument, whereby we are brought from something we did perceive, to something
we did not; which seems to me to agree, with what I say in the Case, viz. That
by the agreement of Ideas, which we do perceive, we are brought to perceive the
agreement of Ideas, which before we did not perceive. To which no doubt will be
answered, as in a like Case, * Not by a way of Intuition, but by a Deduction of
Reason, i. e. we perceive not in a way that affords us Intuition or a Sight,
but by Deductions of Reason, wherein we see nothing. Whereas, my Lord, I humbly
conceive, That the force of a Deduction of Reason consists in this, That in
each step of it, we see, what a Connection it has,, i. e. have an Intuition of
the certain Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas, as in Demonstration; or an
Intuition or Perception, that they have a probable or not so much as a probable
Connection, as in other Deductions of Reason.

You farther overthrow p. 147.
the necessity of intuitive Knowledge, in every step of a Demonstration, by the
Authority of Aristotle, who says, Things that are self-evident, cannot be
Demonstrated. And so say I too, in several Places of my Essay B. 4. C. 7. 10
and 19. and elsewhere. B. 4. C. 2.
When your Lordship can show any Inconsistency between these two Propositions,
viz. That intuitive Knowledge is necessary in each step of a Demonstration; and
things that are self-evident cannot be Demonstrated; then I shall own you have
overthrown the necessity of Intuition in every step of a Demonstration by
Reason, as well as by Aristotle's Authority.

In the remainder of this Paragraph, p. 148-150.
I meet with nothing but your Lordship finding Fault with some, who, in this
Age, have made use of Mathematical Demonstrations in Natural Philosophy. Your
Lordship's two Reasons against this way of advancing Knowledge upon the sure
Grounds of Mathematical Demonstration, are these.

(1.) p. 148.
That Des Carts a Mathematical Man, has been guilty of Mistakes in his System.
Answer,

When Mathematical Men will build Systems upon Fancy, and not upon
Demonstration; they are as liable to Mistakes as others. And that Des Carts
was not led into his Mistakes by Mathematical Demonstrations, but for want of
them, I think has been Demonstrated Newton Phil. Nature. Principia Mathemat. 1.
2. Sect. 9.
by some of those Mathematicians, who seem to be meant here.

(2.) Your second Argument against accommodating Mathematics to the nature of
material things, is, p. 149.
That Mathematicians cannot be certain of the manner and degrees of force given
to Bodies, so far distant as the fixed Stars; nor of the Laws of Motion in
other Systems. A very good Argument why they should not proceed Demonstratively
in this our System upon Laws of Motion, observed to be established here. A
Reason that may persuade us to put out our Eyes, for fear they should mislead
us in what we do see, because there be things out of our sight.

It Is great pity Aristotle had not understood Mathematics as well as Mr.
Newton, and made use of it in Natural Philosophy, with as good success. His
Example had then authorized the accommodating of it to Material things: But
it is not to be ventured, by a Man of this Age, to go out of the Method, which
Aristotle has prescribed, and which your Lordship out of him, has set down in
the following Pages, 150-153.
as that which should be kept to: For it is a dangerous Presumption to go out
of a Tract chalked out by that supposed Dictator in the common Wealth of
Letters, though it led him to the Eternity of the World. I say not this, That I
do not think him a very great Man; he made himself so, by not keeping precisely
to beaten Tracts, which servile Subjection of the Mind, if we may take my Lord
Bacon's Word for it, kept the little Knowledge the World had, from growing
greater for more than a few Ages. That the breaking loose from it in this Age
is a Fault, is not directly said; but there is enough said to show, there is no
great Approbation of such a Liberty. Mathematics in gross, it is plain, are a
grievance in Natural Philosophy, and with Reason: For Mathematical Proofs, like
Diamonds, are hard as well as clear, and will be touched with nothing but
strict Reasoning; Mathematical Proofs are out of the reach of Topical
Arguments, and are not to be attacked by the equivocal use of Words or
Declamation, that make so great a part of other Discourses; nay, even of
Controversies. How well you have proved my way by Ideas guilty of any tendency
to Skepticism, the Reader will see; but this I will crave leave to say, That
the secluding Mathematical Reasoning from Philosophy, and instead thereof
reducing it to Aristotelian Rules and Sayings, will not be thought to be much
in favor of Knowledge against Skepticism.

Your Lordship indeed says, p. 149.
You did not by any means take off from the laudable Endeavors of those, who
have gone about to reduce Natural Speculations, to Mathematical Certainty. What
can we understand by this, but your Lordship's great Complaisance and
Moderation? who notwithstanding you spend four Pages, to show that the
Endeavors of Mathematical Men, to accommodate the Principles of that Science,
to the Nature of Material things, has been the occasion of great Mistakes in
the Philosophy of this Age; and that therefore Aristotle's Method is to be
followed: Yet you make this Complement to the Mathematicians, That you leave
them to their liberty to go on, if they please, in their laudable Endeavors to
reduce Natural Speculation, to Mathematical Certainty.

And thus we are come to the end of your Lordship's clearing this Passage; That
you grant that by Sensation and Reflection, we come to know the Powers and
Properties of Things; but our Reason [i. e. the Principles of Reason agreed on
by Mankind] is satisfied, that there must be something beyond these; because it
is impossible they should subsist by themselves: so that the Nature of things
properly belongs to Reason [i. e. the Principles of Reason agreed on by
Mankind] and not to mere Ideas. Which if any one be so lucky as to understand
by these your Lordship's fifty Pages spent upon it, better than my Friend did,
when he confessed himself gravelled by it, as it stands here recited, he ought
to enjoy the Advantage of his happy Genius, whilst I miss that Satisfaction by
the dullness of mine; which hinders me also from seeing how the Opposition, the
way of Certainty by Ideas, and the way of Certainty by Reason comes in the
Explication of this Passage, or at least if it does belong to it; yet I must
own, what is a greater misfortune, That I do not see, what the Opposition or
Difference is, which your Lordship has so much talked of between the way of
Certainty by Ideas, and the Method of Certainty by Reason. For my excuse, I
think others will be as much in the dark as I, since you no where tell, wherein
you your self, my Lord, place Certainty. So that to talk of a Difference
between Certainty by Ideas, and Certainty that is not by Ideas, without
declaring in what that other Certainty consists, is like to have no better
success, than might be expected from one who would compare two things together,
the one whereof is not known.

You now return to your Discourse of Nature and Person, and tell p. 154.
me, That to what you said about the general Nature in distinct Individuals, I
object these three Things;

1. That I cannot put together one and the same. This I own to be my Objection;
And consequently there is no Foundation for the distinction of Nature and
Person. This, with Submission, I deny to be any Objection of mine, either in
the place 2d Let. p. 127.
quoted by your Lordship, or any where else. There may be Foundation enough for
Distinction, as there is of these two, and yet they may be treated of in a way
so obscure, so confused, or perhaps so sublime, that an ordinary Capacity may
not from thence get, as your Lordship expresses it, clear and distinct
apprehensions of them. This was that which my Friend and I complained of in
that place, want of clearness in your Lordship's discourse, not of want of
distinction in the things themselves.

(2.) That what your Lordship said about common Nature, and particular
Substance in Individuals, was wholly unintelligible to me and my Friends. To
which, my Lord, you may add if you please, That it is still so to me.

(3.) That I said, That to speak truly and precisely of this Matter as in
reality it is, there is no such thing as one and the same common Nature in
several Individuals, for all that in Truth is in them, is particular and
nothing but particular, etc. Answer. This was said, to show how unapt these
Expressions, The same common Nature in several Individuals, and several
Individuals being in the same common Nature, were to give true and clear
Notions of Nature. To this your Lordship answers, p. 156.
That other, and those very Rational Men have spoken so: To which I shall say
no more, but that it is an Argument, with which any thing may be defended; and
all the Iargon of the Schools be justified, but I presume not strong enough to
bring it back again, let Men never so Rational make use of it.

Your Lordship adds, p. 146.
But now it seems, nothing is intelligible but what suits with the new way of
Ideas. My Lord, the new way of Ideas, and the old way of speaking intelligibly
was always, and ever will be the same. And if I may take the liberty to declare
my Sense of it, herein it consists; (1.) That a Man use no Words but such as he
makes the Signs of certain determined Objects of his Mind in Thinking, which he
can make known to another. (2.) Next, that he use the same Word steadily for
the Sign of the same immediate Object of his Mind in Thinking. (3.) That he
join those Words together in Propositions, according to the Grammatical Rules
of that Language he speaks in. (4.) That he unite those Sentences in a coherent
Discourse. Thus and thus only I humbly conceive any one may preserve himself
from the Confines and Suspicion of Iargon, whether he pleases to call those
immediate Objects of his Mind, which his Words do, or should stand for, Ideas
or no.

You again p. 156.
accuse the way of Ideas, to make a common Nature, no more than a common Name.
That, my Lord, is not my way by Ideas. When your Lordship shows me, where I
have said so, I promise your Lordship to strike it out: And the like I promise,
when you show me where I presume that we are not to judge of things by the
general Principles of Reason, which you call p. 156.
my Fundamental Mistake.

These Principles of Reason, you say, p. 157.
must be the Standard to Mankind. If they are of such Consequence, would it not
have been convenient, we should have been instructed something more
particularly about them, than by barely being told their Name, that we might be
able to know what are, and what are not Principles of Reason?

But be they what they will, because they must be the Standard to Mankind, your
Lordship says, p. 157.
You shall in this Debate proceed upon the following Principles to make it
appear, that the Difference between Nature and Person is not imaginary and
fictitious, but grounded upon the real Nature of things. With Submission, my
Lord, you need not be at the Pains to draw up your great Artillery of so many
Maxims, where you meet with no Opposition. The thing in Debate, whether in this
Debate or no, I know not; but what led into this Debate, was about these
Expressions, One common Nature in several Individuals, and several Individuals
in one common Nature; and the Question I thought, was, whether a general or
common Nature could be in Particulars, i. e. Exist in Individuals? But since
your Lordship turns your Artillery against those who deny, That there is any
Foundation of Distinction between Nature and Person: I am out of Gunshot; for
I am none of those, who ever said, or thought there was no Foundation of
distinction between Nature and Person.

The Maxims you lay down in the following Paragraph p. 158.
are to make me understand how one and the same, and distinct may consist; I
confess, I do not see how your Lordship's Words there at all make it out. This,
indeed, I do understand, that several particular Beings may have a conformity
in them to one general abstract Idea, which may, if you please, be called their
general or common Nature: But how that Idea or general Nature can be the same
and distinct, is still past my Comprehension.

To my saying, That your Lordship had not told me what Nature is, I am told, p.
159.
That if I had a mind to understand you, I could not but see, that by Nature
you meant the Subject of essential Properties. A Lady asking a learned
Physician what the Spleen was, received this answer, That it was the Receptacle
of the Melancholy Humor: She had a mind to understand what the Spleen was; but
by this Definition of it, found her self not much enlightened; and therefore
went on to ask, what the Melancholy Humor was; and by the Doctor's answer,
found that the Spleen and the Melancholy Humor, had a Relation one to another;
but what the Spleen was she knew not one jot better than she did, before he
told her any thing about it. My Lord, relative Definitions of Terms, that are
not relative, usually do no more than lead us in a Circuit to the same place
from whence we set out; and there leave us in the same Ignorance we were in at
first. So I fear it would fall out with me here, if I, willing as I am to
understand what your Lordship means by Nature, should go on to ask what you
mean by essential Properties.

The three or four next Pages p. 159-161.
I hope your Lordship does not think contain any serious Answer to what my
Friend said 2d Let. p. 132-135.
concerning Peter, James and John; and as for the Pleasantry of your
Countryman, I shall not pretend to meddle with that, since your Lordship, who
knows better than any body his way of chopping of Logic, was fain to give it
off, because it was growing too rough. What Work such a dangerous chopper of
Logic would make, with an Argument, that supposed the names Peter, James and
John, to stand for Men; and then without scruple affirmed, That the Nature of
Man was in them, if he were let loose upon it, who can tell? Especially if he
might have the liberty strenuously to use the Phrase for his Life, and to
observe what a turn the chiming of Words without determined Ideas annexed to
them, give to the Understanding, when they are gone deep into a Man's Head, and
pass there for Things.

To show that the common or general Nature of Man, could not be in Peter or
James, I alleged, That whatever existed (as whatever was in Peter or James
did) was particular, and that it confounded my Understanding, to make a general
a particular. In answer, your Lordship tells me, p. 164.
That to make me understand this, you had told me in your Answer to my first
Letter. That we are to consider Beings as God had ordered them in their several
sorts and ranks, etc. And thereupon you ask me, p. 165.
Why it was not answered in the proper Place for it? Answ. I own I am not
always so Fortunate, as to say things in that, which your Lordship thinks the
proper Place; but having been rebuked for Repetitions, I thought your Lordship
could not be Ignorant, that I had considered Beings as God had ordered them in
their several sorts and ranks, etc. Since you could not but have read these
Words of mine, Essay (...)
I would not here be thought to forget, much less to deny, that Nature in the
production of Things, makes several of them alike. There is nothing more
obvious, especially in the Races of Animals, and all things Propagated by Seed,
etc. And I have expressed my Sense in this Point, so fully here, and in other
Places, particularly B. 3. C. 6. that I dare leave it to my Reader, without any
farther Explication.

Your Lordship farther asks, p. 165.
Is not that a real Nature, which is the Subject of real Properties? And is not
the Nature really in those who have the essential Properties? I Answer to both
those Questions yes, such as is the reality of the Subject, such is the reality
of its Properties; the abstract general Idea, is really in the Mind of him that
has it, and the Properties that it has are really and inseperably annexed to
it; let this reality be whatever your Lordship pleases: But this will never
prove, That this general Nature exists in Peter or James. Those Properties,
with Submission, do not, as your Lordship supposes, exist in Peter and James:
Those Qualities indeed may exist in them, which your Lordship calls Properties:
But they are not Properties in either of them, but are Properties only of that
specific abstract Nature, which Peter and James, for their supposed Conformity
to it, are ranked under. For Example, Rationality as much a Property as it is
of a Man, is no Property of Peter he was Rational a good part of his Life,
could Write and Read, and was a sharp Fellow at a Bargain: But about Thirty, a
knock so altered him, that for these Twenty Years past, he has been able to do
none of these Things, there is to this Day, not so much appearance of Reason in
him, as in his Horse or Monkey: And yet he is Peter still.

Your Lordship asks, p. 165.
Is not that a real Nature, that is the Subject of real Properties? And is not
that Nature really in those who have the same essential Properties? Give me
leave, I beseech you, to ask, are not those distinct real Natures, that are the
Subjects of distinct essential Properties? For Example, the Nature of an
Animal, is the Subject of essential Properties of an Animal, with the exclusion
of those of a Man or a Horse; for else the Nature of an Animal, and the Nature
of a Man, and the Nature of a Horse, would be the same: And so, wherever the
Subject of the essential Properties of an Animal is, there also would be the
subject of the essential Properties of a Man, and of a Horse, and so, in
effect, whatever is an Animal, would be a Man: The real Nature of an Animal,
and the real Nature of a Man, being the same. To avoid this, there is no other
way (if this reality your Lordship builds so much on, be any thing beyond the
reality of Two abstract distinct Ideas in the Mind) but that there be one real
Nature of an Animal, the Subject of the essential Properties of an Animal; and
another real Nature of a Man, the Subject of the essential Properties of a Man:
Both which real Natures must be in Peter, to make him a Man. So that every
individual Man or Beast, must according to this account, have two real Natures
in him, to make him what he is: Nay, if this be so, Two will not serve the
turn. Bucephalus must have the real Nature of Ens or Being, and the real Nature
of Body, and the real Nature of Vivens, and the real Nature of Animal, and the
real Nature of a Horse, i. e Five distinct real Natures in him, to make him
Bucephalus: For these are all really distinct common Natures, whereof one is
not the Subject of precisely the same essential Properties as the other. This,
though very hard to my Understanding, must be really so, if every distinct,
common or general Nature, be a real Being, that really exists any where, but in
the Understanding. Common Nature, taken in my way of Ideas, your Lordship truly
says, P. 164.
will not make me understand such a common Nature as you speak of, which
subsists in several Individuals, because I can have no Ideas of real
Substances, but such as are particular; all others are only abstract Ideas, and
made only by the act of the Mind. But what your Lordship farther promises
there, I find, to my Sorrow, does not hold, viz. That in your Lordship's way
(as far as you have discovered it) which you call the way of Reason, I may come
to a better understanding of this Matter.

Your Lordship in the next Paragraph p. 166.
declares your self really ashamed to be put to explain these Things, that
which you had said being so very plain and easy: And yet I am not ashamed to
own, that for my Life, I cannot understand them, as they are now farther
explained. Your Lordship thinks it proved, That every common Nature is a real
Being: Let it be so, that it is the Subject of real Properties; and that
thereby it is Demonstrated to be a real Being, this makes it harder for me to
conceive, that this common Nature of a Man, which is a real Being, and but one,
should yet be really in Peter, in James and in John. Had Amphitruo been able to
conceive this, he had not been so much puzzel'd, or thought Sosia to talk Idle,
when he told him, Domi ego sum in quam et apud te adsum Sosia idem. For the
common Nature of Man, is a real Being as your Lordship says, and Sosia is no
more: And he that can conceive any one and the same real Being, to be in diverse
places at once, can have no difficulty to conceive it of another real Being:
And so Sosia may at the same time be at home, and with his Master abroad. And
Amphitruo might have been ashamed to demand the explication of so plain a
Matter; or at least, if he had stuck a little at here and there too, ought he
not to have been satisfied, as soon as Sosia had told him, I am another
distinct I here, from the same I that I am there? Which no doubt Sosia could
have made out; let your Lordship's Countryman chop Logic with him, and try
whether he cannot. Countryman. But how is it possible Sosia, that thou the real
same, as thou say, should be at home, and here too? Sosia, Very easily,
because I am really the same, and yet distinct. Countrym. How can this be?
Sosia, By a Trick that I have. Countrym. Can thou teach me the Trick? Sosia.
Yes, it is but for thee to get a particular Subsistence proper to thy real self
at home, and another particular Subsistence proper to thy same real self
abroad, and the Business is done, thou will then easily be the same real thing,
and distinct from thy self; and thou may be in as many places together, as
thou can get particular Subsistences, and be still the same one real Being.
Countrym. But what is that particular Subsistence? Sosia, Hold ye, Hold ye
Friend, that is the Secret, I thought once, it was particular Existence, but
that I find is an ineffectual Drug, and will not do: Every one fees it will not
make the same real Being distinct from it self, nor bring it into two different
places at once, and therefore it is laid aside, and Subsistence is taken to do
the Feat. Countrym. Existence my Boy's School master made me understand, the
other Day, when my gray Mare Fol'd. For he told me that a Horse, that never was
before, began than to exist; and when the poor Fool died, he told me the same
Horse ceased to exist. Sosia, But did he tell thee what became of the real
common Nature of an Horse, that was in it, when the Fool died? Countrym. No.
But this I know, That my real Horse was really destroyed. Sosia, There Is now
thy Ignorance, so much of thy Horse as had a real Existence, was really
destroyed, that is true: But there was something in thy Horse, which having a
real particular Subsistence was not destroyed; nay, and the best part of thy
Horse too, for it was that, which had in it all those Properties, that made thy
Horse better than a Broom-stick. Countrym. Thou tellst me Wonders of this same
Subsistence, what I pray thee is it? Sosia. I beg your Pardon for that, it is
the very Philosopher's Stone, those who are Adepti, and can do strange things
with it, are Wiser than to tell what it is. Countrym. Where may it be Bought
then? Sosia. That I know not: But I will tell thee where thou may meet with
it. Countryman, Where? Sosia, In some of the shady Thickets of the Schoolmen,
and it is worth the looking after. For if particular Subsistence has such a
power over a real Being, as to make one and the same real Being to be distinct
and in diverse places at once, it may perhaps be able to give thee an Account
what becomes of that real Nature of thy Horse after thy Horse is dead, and if
thou can but find, whether that retires, who knows but thou may get as
useful a thing as thy Horse again? Since to that real Nature of thy Horse,
insepeparably adheres the Shape and Motion and other Properties of thy Horse.

I hope, my Lord, your Countryman will not be displeased to have met with
Sosia to chop Logic with, who, I think, has made it as intelligible, how his
real self might be the same and distinct, and be really in distinct places at
once, by the help of a particular Subsistence proper to him in each place, as
it is intelligible how any real Being under the name of a common Nature, or
under any other name bestowed upon it, may be the same and distinct; and really
be in diverse places at once, by the help of a particular Subsistence proper to
each of those distinct sames. At least, if I may answer for my self, I
understand one as well as the other: And if my Head be turned from common Sense
(as I find your Lordship very apt to think) so that it is p. 169.
great News to you that I understand any thing: If in my way of Ideas I cannot
understand Words, that appear to me either to stand for no Ideas; or to be so
joined, that they put inconsistent Ideas together, I think your Lordship uses
me right to turn me off for desperate, and leave me, as you do, to the p. 169.
Reader's Understanding.

To your Lordship's many Questions concerning Men and Drills, in the Paragraph
P. 169, and 170.
where you begin to explain what my Friend and I found difficult in your
Discourse concerning Person; I answer, That these two names, Man and Drill, are
perfectly Arbitrary, whether founded on real distinct Properties or no; so
perfectly Arbitrary, that if Men had pleased, Drill might have stood for what
Man now does, and Vice versa. I answer farther, That these two Names stand for
two abstract Ideas, which are (to those who know what they mean by these two
Names) the distinct Essences of two distinct Kinds; and as particular
Existences, or things Existing are found by Men (who know what they mean by
these Names) to agree to either of those Ideas, which these Names stand for;
these Names respectively are applied to those particular things, and the things
said to be of that Kind. This I have so fully and at large explained in my
Essay, that I should have thought it needless to have said any thing again of
it here, had it not been to show my readiness to answer any Questions you shall
be pleased to ask concerning any thing I have writ, which your Lordship either
finds difficult, or has forgot.

In the next place, your Lordship comes to dear what you had said in answer to
this Question put by your self, Vindie. p. 259.
What is this distinction of Peter, James and John, founded upon? To which you
answered, ibid.
That they may be distinguished from each other by our Senses, as to difference
of Features, distance of Place, etc. But that is not all; for supposing there
was no external difference, yet there is a difference between them, as several
Individuals in the same common Nature. These Words, when my Friend and I came
to consider, we owned, as your Lordship here p. 171.
takes notice, that we could understand no more by them but this, That the
ground of Distinction between several Individuals, in the same common Nature,
is, That they are several Individuals in the same common Nature. Hereupon your
Lordship tells me, p. 171.
The Question now is, what this distinction is founded upon? Whether on our
observing the difference of Features, distance of Place, etc. or on some
antecedent ground.

Pursuant hereunto, as if this were the Question, you in the next Paragraph p.
171.
(as far as I can understand it) make the ground of the Distinction between
these Individuals or the principium individuationis, to be the Union of the
Soul and Body. But with Submission, my Lord, the Question is, Whether I and my
Friend were to blame, because when your Lordship, in the Words above cited,
having removed all other grounds of Distinction, said there was yet a
difference between Peter and James, as several Individuals in the same common
Nature, we could understand no more by it, but this, That the ground of
Distinction between several Individuals in the same common Nature, is, That
they are seral Individuals in the same common Nature?

Let the ground that your Lordship now assigns of the Distinction of
Individuals be what it will, or let what you say be as clear as you please,
viz. That the ground of their Distinction is in the Union of Soul and Body; it
will, I humbly conceive, be nevertheless true, That what you said before might
amount to no more but this, That the ground of the Distinction between several
Individuals in the same common Nature, is, That they are several Individuals in
the same common Nature; and therefore we might not be to blame for so
understanding it. For the Words, which our Understandings were then employed
about, were those which you had there said, and not those which you would say
five Months after: Though I must own, that those which your Lordship here p.
171-173.
says concerning the Distinction of Individuals, leave it as much in the dark
to me as what you said before. But perhaps I do not understand your Lordship's
Words right, because I conceive that the principium individuationis is the same
in all the several Species of Creatures, Men as well as Others; and therefore
if the Union of Soul and Body be that which distinguishes two Individuals in
the Humane Species one from another, I know not how two Cheries or two Atoms of
Matter can be distinct Individuals; since I think there is in them no Union of
a Soul and Body. And upon this ground it will be very hard to tell, what made
the Soul and the Body, Individuals (as certainly they were) before their Union.

But I shall leave what your Lordship says concerning this Matter to the
Examination of those, whose Health and Leisure allows them more time than I
have for this weighty Question, wherein the Distinction of two Men or two
Cheries consists, for fear I should make your Lordship's Countryman a little
wonder again to find a grave Philosopher make a serious Question of it.

To your next Paragraph p. 173-174.
I answer, That if the true Idea of a Person, or the true Signification of the
Word Person lies in this, That supposing there was no other difference in the
several Individuals of the same kind; yet there is a difference between them as
several Individuals in the same common Nature, it will follow from hence, that
the name Person will agree to Bucephalus and Podargus, as well as to Alexander
and Hector. But whether this Consequence will agree, with what your Lordship
says concerning Person in another place, I am not concerned; I am only
answerable for this Consequence.

Your Lordship is pleased here, p. 173.
to call my endeavor to find out the meaning of your Words, as you had put
them together, trifling Exceptions: To which I must say, That I am heartily
sorry, that either my Understanding, or your Lordship's way of Writing obliges
me so often to such trifling. I cannot, as I have said, answer to what I do not
understand; and I hope here my trifling, in searching out your Lordship's
meaning, was not much out of the way, because I think every one will see by the
Steps I took, that the Sense I found out by it, was that which your Words
implied; and your Lordship does not disown it, but only replys, That I should
not have drawn that which was the natural Consequence from it, because that
Consequence would not well consist with what you had said in another place.

What your Lordship adds farther p. 174 175.
to clear your saying, That an individual intelligent Substance is rather
supposed to the making of a Person, than the proper definition of it, though in
your definition of Person, you put a complete intelligent Substance, must have
its effect upon others Understandings: I must suffer under the short
sightedness of my own, who neither understood it as it stood in your first
Answer, nor do I now as it is explained in your second.

Your Lordship being here, as you say, p. 176.
come to the end of this Debate, I should here have ended too; and it was time,
my Letter being grown already to too great a Bulk. But I being engaged by
Promise, to Answer some Things in your first Letter, which in my Reply to it, I
had omitted, I now come to them, and shall endeavor to give your Lordship
satisfaction in those Points; tho to make room for them, I leave out a great
deal that I had Writ in Answer to this your Lordship's Second Letter. And if
after all, my Answer seems too long, I must beg your Lordship, and my Reader,
to excuse it, and impute it to those occasions of length, which I have
mentioned in more places than one, as they have occurred.

The Original and main Question between your Lordship, and me, being, whether
there were any thing in my Essay, Repugnant to the Doctrine of the Trinity; I
endeavored, by Examining the Grounds and manner of your Lordship's bringing my
Book into that Controversy, to bring that Question to a Decision. And
therefore in my Answer to your Lordship's First Letter, I insisted particularly
on what had a Relation to that Point. This Method your Lordship in your Second
Letter Censured, as if it Contained only Personal Matters, which were fit to be
laid aside. And by mixing new Matter, and charging my Book with new
Accusations, before the first was made out, avoided the Decision of what was in
Debate between us; A strong Presumption to me, that your Lordship had little to
say, to support what began the Controversy, which you were so willing to have
me let fall; whilst on the other side, my Silence to other Points, which I had
Promised an Answer to, was often Reflected on, and I Rebuked, for not Answering
in the proper Place.

Your Lordship's calling upon me on this occasion shall not be lost; It Is fit
your Expectation should be satisfied, and your Objections Considered; which for
the Reasons above mentioned, were not Examined in my former Answer. And which,
whether true or false, as I humbly conceive, make nothing for or against the
Doctrine of the Trinity. I shall therefore consider them barely as so many
Philosophical Questions, and endeavor to show your Lordship where, and upon
what Grounds it is I Stick; and what it is, that hinders me from the
Satisfaction it would be to me, to be in every one of them of your mind.

Your Lordship tells me, 1 Ans. p. 7.
Whether I do own Substance or not, is not the Point before us; But whether by
Virtue of these Principles, I can come to any certainty of Reason about it? And
your Lordship says, the very Places I produce do prove the Contrary; which you
shall therefore set Down in my own Words, both as to Corporeal and Spiritual
Substances.

Here again my Lord, I must beg your Pardon, that I do not distinctly
Comprehend your meaning in these Words, viz. That by virtue of these Principles
one cannot come to certainty of Reason about Substance: For it is not very
clear to me, whether your Lordship means, that we cannot come to certainty,
that there is such a thing in the World as Substance; or, whether we cannot
make any other Proposition about Substance, of which we can be certain; or
whether we cannot by my Principles, Establish any Idea of Substance of which we
can be certain. For to come to Certainty of Reason, about Substance may
signify either of these, which are far different Propositions: And I shall
waste your Lordship's time, my Readers, and my own (neither of which would I
willingly do) by taking it in one Sense, when you mean it in an other, lest I
should meet with some such Reproof as this: That I Misrepresent your meaning,
or might have understood it if I had a mind to it, etc. And therefore cannot
but wish, that you had so far Condescended to the slowness of my Apprehension,
as to give me your Sense to determined, that I might not trouble you with
Answers to what was not your Precise meaning.

To avoid it in the present Case, and to find in what Sense I was here to take
these words, come to no Certainty of Reason about Substance, I looked into what
followed, and when I came to the 13th Page, I thought I had there got a clear
explication of your Lordship's Meaning, and that by no Certainty of Reason
about Substance, your Lordship here meant no certain Idea of Substance. Your
Lordship's words are 1. Ans. p. 13.
I do not charge them, (i. e. me as one of the Gentlemen of the new way of
Reasoning) with Discarding the Notion of Substance, because they have but an
imperfect Idea of it; but because upon those Principles, there can be no
certain Idea at all of it. Here I thought my self sure, and that these words
plainly Interpreted the meaning of your Proposition, p. 7. to be, that upon my
Principles there can be no certain Idea at all of Substance. But before I came
to the end of that Paragraph, I found my self at a loss again, for that
Paragraph goes on in these words, 1 Ans. p. 13.
Whereas your Lordship asserts it to be one of the most natural and certain
Ideas in our minds, because it is a Repugnance to our first Conception of
Things, that Modes or Accidents should subsist by themselves, and therefore you
said the rational Idea of Substance is one of the first Ideas in our Minds; and
however imperfect and obscure our Notion be, yet we are as certain that
Substances are and must be as that there are any Beings in the World. Here the
Certainty which your words seem to mean, is Certainty of the Being of Substance.

In this Sense therefore I shall take it, till your Lordship shall determine it
otherwise. And the reason why I take it so is, because what your Lordship goes
on to say, 1 Ans. p. 7. 8.
seems to me to look most that way. The Proposition then that your Lordship
undertakes to Prove is this; That by Virtue of my Principles we cannot come to
any Certainty of Reason, that there is any such thing as Substance. And your
Lordship tells me, 1 Ans. p. 7.
That the very Places I produce do prove the Contrary, which you therefore will
set down in my own Words, both as to Corporeal and Spiritual Substances.

The First your Lordship brings 1 Ans. p. 6.
are these words of mine: When we talk or think of any Particular sort of
Corporeal Substances, as Horse, Stone, etc. Though the Idea we have of either of
them, be but the Complication or Collection of those several simple Ideas of
sensible qualities, which we use to find United in the thing called Horse or
Stone; yet because we cannot conceive how they should subsist alone; nor one in
another, we suppose them existing in, and supported by some common Subject,
which support we denote by the Name Substance; though it be certain we have no
clear and distinct Idea of that thing we suppose a Support.And again,

The same happens concerning the Operations of the Mind, viz. Thinking,
Reasoning, Fearing, etc. which we considering not to subsist of themselves, nor
apprehending how they can belong to Body, or be produced by it, we are apt to
think these the Actions of some other Substance, which we call Spirit, whereby
yet it is evident that having no other Idea or Notion of Matter, but something
wherein those many Sensible Qualities, which affect our Senses do subsist; by
supposing a Substance, wherein Thinking, Knowing, Doubting, and a Power of
Moving, etc. do subsist. We have as clear a Notion of the Nature or Substance
of Spirit, as we have of Body; the one being supposed to be (without knowing
what it is) the Substratum to those simple Ideas we have from without; and the
other supposed, (with a like Ignorance of what it is) to be the Substratum to
those Operations which we Experiment in our selves.

But how these words prove that, upon my Principles we cannot come to any
Certainty of Reason that there is any such thing as Substance in the World; I
confess I do not see, nor has your Lordship, as I humbly, conceive shown. And I
think it would be a hard matter from these Words of mine to make a Syllogism,
whose Conclusion should be, Ergo, from my Principles we cannot come to any
Certainty of Reason, that there is any Substance in the World.

Your Lordship indeed tells me 1 Ans. p. 9.
that I say, that these and the like fashions of speaking, that the Substance
is always supposed something. And grant that I say over and over that Substance
is supposed; but that your Lordship says, is not what you looked for, but
something in the way of Certainty by Reason.

What your Lordship looks for, is not, I find, always easy for me to guess. But
what I brought that, and some other Passages to the same purpose for, out of my
Essay, that I think they prove, viz. that I did not Discard nor almost Discard
Substance out of the Reasonable part of the World. For he that supposes in
every Species of Material Beings, Substance to be always something, does not
Discard or almost Discard it out of the World, or deny any such thing to be.
The Passages alleged I think prove this, which was all I brought them for. And
if they should happen to prove no more, I think, you can hardly infer from
thence, That therefore upon my Principles, we can come to no Certainty, that
there is any such thing as Substance in the World.

Your Lordship goes on 1 Answ. p. 9.
to insist mightily upon my supposing; and to these Words of mine, We cannot
conceive how these sensible Qualities should subsist alone; and therefore we
suppose a Substance to support them. Your Lordship replies, It is but supposing
still; because we cannot conceive it otherwise: But what Certainty follows from
not being barely able to conceive? Answer. The same Certainty that follows from
the Repugnancy to our first Conceptions of things, upon which 1 Answ. p. 25.
your Lordship grounds the relative Idea of Substance. Your Words are, It is a
mere effect of Reason, because it is a Repugnancy to our first Conceptions of
things, that Modes or Accidents should subsist by themselves. Your Lordship
then, if I understand your Reasoning here, concludes, That there is Substance,
because it is a Repugnancy to our Conceptions of things (for whether that
Repugnancy be to our first or second Conceptions, I think that is all one) that
Modes or Accidents should subsist by themselves; and I conclude the same thing,
because we cannot conceive how sensible Qualities should subsist by themselves.
Now what the difference of Certainty is from a Repugnancy to our Conceptions,
and from our not being able to conceive; I confess, my Lord, I am not acute
enough to discern. And therefore it seems to me, that I have laid down the same
Certainty of the Being of Substance, that your Lordship has done.

Your Lordship adds, 1 Answ. p. 9.
Are there not multitudes of things which we are not able to conceive; and yet
it would not be allowed us to suppose what we think fit upon that account?
Answer. Your Lordship's is certainly a very just Rule; it is pity it does not
reach the Case. But because it is not allowed us to suppose what we think fit
in things, which we are not able to conceive; it does not therefore follow,
That we may not with Certainty suppose or infer, that which is a natural and
undeniable Consequence of such an inability to conceive, as I call it, or
repugnancy to our Conception, as you call it. We cannot conceive the Foundation
of Harlem Church to stand upon nothing; but because it is not allowed us to
suppose what we think fit, viz. That it is laid upon a Rock of Diamond, or
supported by Fairies; yet I think all the World will allow the infallible
Certainty of this Supposition, from thence, that it rests upon something. This
I take to be the present Case; and therefore your next Words, I think, do less
concern Mr. L. than my Lord B. of W. I shall set them down, that the Reader may
apply them to which of the two he thinks they most belong. They are, 1 Answ. p.
9.
I could hardly conceive that Mr. L. would have brought such Evidence as this
against himself; but I must suppose some unknown Substratum in this Case. For
these Words, that your Lordship has last quoted of mine, do not only not prove,
That upon my Principles we cannot come to any Certainty, that there is any such
thing as Substance in the World; but prove the contrary, that there must
certainly be Substance in the World, and upon the very same Grounds, that your
Lordship takes it to be certain.

Your next Paragraph, 1 Answ. p. 10.
which is to the same purpose, I have read more than once, and can never
forbear, as often as I read it, to wish my self young again; or that a
liveliness of Fancy suitable to that Age, would teach me to sport with Words
for the Diversion of my Readers. This I find your Lordship thinks so necessary
to the quickening of Controversy, that you will not trust the Debate to the
greatness of your Learning, nor the gravity of your Subject without it,
whatever Authority the Dignity of your Character might give to what your
Lordship says; for you 1 Answ. p. 10.
having quoted these Words of mine; As long as there is any simple Idea, or
sensible Quality left, according to my way of Arguing, Substance cannot be
discarded, because all simple Ideas, all sensible Qualities carry with them a
Supposition of a Substratum to Exist in, and a Substance wherein they inhere.
You add, What is the meaning of carrying with them a Supposition of a
Substratum and a Substance? Have these simple Ideas the Notion of a Substance
in them? No, but they carry it with them: How so? Do sensible Qualities carry a
Corporeal Substance along with them? Then a Corporeal Substance must be
intromitted by the Senses together with them: No, but they carry the
Supposition with them; and truly that is burden enough for them. But which may
do they carry it? It seems its only, because we cannot conceive it otherwise:
What is this Conceiving? It may be said it is an Act of the Mind, not built on
simple Ideas, but lies in the comparing the Ideas of Accident and Substance
together; and from thence finding that an Accident must carry Substance along
with it: But this will not clear it; for the Ideas of Accidents are simple
Ideas, and carry nothing along with them, but the impression made by sensible
Objects.

In this Passage, I conclude, your Lordship had some regard to the
Entertainment of that part of your Readers, who would be thought Men, as well
by being risible as rational Creatures. For I cannot imagine you meant this for
an Argument; if you did, I have this plain simple answer, That by carrying with
them a Supposition, I mean, according to the ordinary import of the Phrase,
That sensible Qualities imply a Substratum to Exist in. And if your Lordship
please to change one of these equivalent Expressions into the other, all the
Argument here, I think, will be at an end: What will become of the Sport and
Smiling, I will not answer.

Hitherto, I do not see any thing in my Words brought by your Lordship that
proves, That upon my Principles we can come to no Certainty of Reason, that
there is Substance in the World, but the contrary.

Your Lordship's next Words 1 Answ. p. 11, 12.
are to tell the World that my Simile about the Elephant and Tortoise, is to
ridicule the Notion of Substance, and the Europaean Philosophers for asserting
it. But if your Lordship please to turn again to my Essay, B. 2. C. 13. 19.
you will find those Passages were not intended to ridicule the Notion of
Substance, or those who asserted it, whatever that it signifies. But to show,
that though Substance did support Accidents, yet Philosophers, who had found
such a support necessary, had no more a clear Idea of what, that support was,
than the Indian had of that, which supported his Tortoise, though sure he was, it
was something. Had your Pen which 1 Answ. p. 11.
quoted so much of the nineteenth Sect. of the thirteenth Chap. of my second
Book, but set down the remaining line and an half of that Paragraph, you would
by these Words which follow there; So that of Substance we have no Idea of what
it is, but only a confused obscure one of what it does, have put it past doubt,
what I meant. But your Lordship was pleased to take only those, which you
thought would serve best to your purpose; And I crave leave to add now these
remaining ones to show my Reader, what was mine.

It Is to the same purpose I use the same Illustration again in that other
place, B. 2. C. 23. 2.
which you are pleased to cite likewise, which your Lordship says you did, only
to show, that it was a deliberate and (as I thought) lucky similitude. It was
upon serious consideration I own, that I entertained the Opinion, that we had
no clear and distinct Idea of Substance. But as to that Similitude, I do not
remember that it was much deliberated on: Such unaccurate Writers as I am, who
aim at nothing but plainness, do not much study Similes: And for the Fault of
Repetition you have been pleased to Pardon it. But supposing you had proved,
That that Simile was to ridicule the Notion of Substance, published in the
Writings of some Europaean Philosophers; it will by no means follow from
thence, That upon my Principles we cannot come to any Certainty of Reason, that
there is any such thing as Substance in the World. Men's Notions of a thing may
be laughed at by those, whose Principles establish the Certainty of the thing
it self; and one may laugh at Aristotle's Notion of an Orb of Fire under the
Sphere of the Moon, without Principles that will make him uncertain whether
there be any such thing as Fire. My Simile did perhaps serve to show, that
there were Philosophers, whose Knowledge was not so clear, nor so great as they
pretended. If your Lordship thereupon thought, that the vanity of such a
pretension had something ridiculous in it, I shall not contest your Judgment in
the Case: For, as humane Nature is framed, it is not impossible, that whoever is
discovered to pretend to know more than really he does, will be in danger to be
laughed at.

In the next Paragraph, 1 Answ. p. 12.
your Lordship bestows the Epithet of Dull on Burgersdicius and Sanderson and
the Tribe of Logicians. I will not Question your right to call any Body Dull
whom you please. But if your Lordship does it to insinuate, that I did so; I
hope I may be allowed to say thus much in my own Defense, that I am neither so
Stupid, or Ill-natured to discredit those whom I quote for being of the same
Opinion with me. And he that will look into the eleventh and twelfth Pages of
my Reply, which your Lordship refers to, will find, that I am very far from
calling them Dull, or speaking diminishingly of them. But if I had been so
Ill-bred or Foolish as to have called them Dull; I do not see how that does at
all serve to prove this Proposition; That upon my Principles we can come to no
Certainty of Reason, that there is any such thing as Substance any more than
what follows in the next Paragraph 1 Answ. p. 13.
.

Your Lordship in it asks me, as if it were of some great importance to the
Proposition to be proved, whether there be no difference between the bare being
of a thing, and its Subsistence by its self. I answer, Yes, there is a
difference as I understand those Terms, and then I beseech your Lordship to
make use of it to prove the Proposition before us. But because you seem by this
Question to conclude, That the Idea of a thing that subsists by its self, is a
clear and distinct Idea of Substance; I beg leave to ask, Is the Idea of the
manner of Subsistence of a thing, the Idea of the thing it self? If it be not,
we may have a clear and distinct Idea of the manner, and yet have none but a
very obscure and confused one of the thing. For Example, I tell your Lordship,
that I know a thing, that cannot subsist without a support, and I know another
thing that does subsist without a support, and say no more of them, can you by
having the clear and distinct Ideas of having a support, and not having a
support, say, that you have a clear and distinct Idea of the thing, that I know
which has, and of the thing, That I know which has not a support? If your
Lordship can, I beseech you to give me the clear and distinct Ideas of these,
which I only call by the general name Things, that have or have not supports;
for such there are, and such I shall give your Lordship clear and distinct
Ideas of, when you shall please to call upon me for them, though I think your
Lordship will scarce find them by the general and confused Idea of Thing, nor
in the clearer and more distinct Idea of having or not having a support.

To show a blind Man that he has no clear and distinct Idea of Scarlet, I tell
him, that his Notion of it, that it is a Thing or Being, does not prove he has
any clear or distinct Idea of it; but barely that he takes it to be something,
he knows not what. He replies, that he knows more than that, v. g. he knows
that it subsists or inheres in another thing, And is there no difference, says
he in your Lordship's Words, between the bare being of a thing and its
subsistence in another? Yes say I to him, a great deal, they are very different
Ideas. But for all that, you have noclear and distinct Idea of Scarlet, not
such a one as I have who see and know it, and have another kind of Idea of it
besides that of inherence.

Your Lordship has the Idea of Subsisting by it self, and therefore you
conclude you have a clear and distinct Idea of the thing, that subsists by it
self, which methinks is all one, as if your Countryman should say, he has an
Idea of a Cedar of Lebanon, that it is a Tree of a Nature, to need no Prop to
lean on for its support, therefore he has a clear and distinct Idea of a Cedar
of Lebanon: Which clear and distinct Idea, when he comes to examine, is nothing
but a general one of a Tree with which his indetermined Idea of a Cedar is
confounded. Just so is the Idea of Substance, which however called clear and
distinct is confounded with the general indetermined Idea of Something. But
suppose that the manner of Subsisting by it self, give us a clear and distinct
Idea of Substance, how does that prove, That upon my Principles we can come to
no Certainty of Reason, that there is any such thing as Substance in the World?
Which is the Proposition to be proved.

In what follows, 1 Answ. p. 13.
your Lordship says, You do not charge any one with discarding the Notion of
Substance, because he has but an imperfect Idea of it: But because upon those
Principles there can be no certain Idea at all of it.

Your Lordship says, here, those Principles and in other places these
Principles, without particularly setting them down, that I know: I am sure
without laying down Propositions, that are mine, and proving, that those
granted, we cannot come to any Certainty, that there is any such thing as
Substance, which is the thing to be proved, your Lordship proves nothing in the
Case against me. What therefore the certain Idea, which I do not understand, or
Idea of Substance has to do here, is not easy to see. For that which I am
charged with, is the discarding Substance. But the discarding Substance. is not
the discarding the Notion of Substance. Mr. Newton has discarded Des Cartes's
Vortices, i. e. laid down Principles from which he proves there is no such
thing; but he has not thereby discarded the Notion or Idea of those Vortices,
for that he had when he confuted their Being, and every one who now reads and
understands him, will have. But, as I have already observed, your Lordship
here, I know not upon what Ground, nor with what Intention, confounds the Idea
of Substance and Substance it self; for to the Words above set down, your
Lordship subjoins, 1 Answ. p. 13.14.
That you assert it to be one of the most natural and certain Ideas in our
Minds, because it is a repugnance to our first conception of Things, that Modes
or Accidents should subsist by themselves; and therefore your Lordship said,
the rational Idea of Substance is one of the first Ideas in our Minds, and
however imperfect and obscure our Notion be, yet we are as certain that
Substances are and must be, as that there are any Beings in the World. Herein I
tell your Lordship that I agree with you, and therefore I hope this is no
Objection against the Trinity. Your Lordship says, you never thought it was,
but to lay all Foundations of Certainty as to matters of Faith, upon clear and
distinct Ideas, which was the Opinion you opposed, does certainly overthrow all
Mysteries of Faith, and excludes the Notion of Substance out of rational
Discourse, which your Lordship affirms to have been your Meaning.

How these Words, as to Matters of Faith, came in, or what they had to do
against me in an answer only to me, I do not see: Neither will I here examine
what it is to be one of the most natural and certain Ideas in our Minds. But be
it what it will, this I am sure, That neither that, nor any thing else
contained in this Paragraph, any way proves, that upon my Principles we cannot
come to any Certainty, that there is any such thing as Substance in the World.
Which was the Proposition to be proved.

In the next place then, I crave leave to consider, how that is proved, which
though nothing to the Proposition to be proved, is yet what you here assert,
viz. That the Idea of Substannce is one of the most natural and certain Ideas
in our Minds: Your Proof of it is this, Because it is a repugnancy to our first
conception of Things, that Modes and Accidents should subsist by themselves,
and therefore the rational Idea of Substance is one of the first Ideas in our
Minds. From whence I grant it to be a good consequence, that to those who find
this repugnance, the Idea of a support is very necessary, or if you please to
call it so, very rational. But a clear and distinct Idea of the thing it self,
which is the support will not thence be proved to be one of the first Ideas in
our Minds; or that any such Idea is ever there at all. He that is satisfied
that Pendennis Castle, if it were not supported, would fall into the Sea, must
think of a support, that sustains it: But whether the thing that it rests on be
Timber, or Brick, or Stone, he has by his bare Idea of the necessity of some
support that props it up, no clear and distinct Idea at all.

In this Paragraph you farther say, That the laying all foundation of Certainty
as to Matters of Faith on clear and distinct Ideas, does certainly exclude the
Notion of Substance out of rational Discourse. Answ. This is a Proposition that
will need a Proof: Because every Body at first sight will think it hard to be
proved. For it is obvious, That let Certainty in matters of Faith, or any
matters whatsoever, be laid on what it will, it excludes not the Notion of
Substance certainly out of rational Discourse, unless it be certainly true,
that we can rationally Discourse of nothing, but what we certainly know. But
whether it be a Proposition easy or not easy to be proved, this is certain,
that it concerns not me, for I lay not all Foundation of Certainty as to
matters of Faith, upon clear and distinct Ideas; and therefore, if it does
discard Substance out of the reasonable part of the World, as your Lordship
phrases it above, or excludes the Notion of Substance out of rational
Discourse: Whatever havoc it makes of Substance, or its Idea, no one jot of
the Mischief is to be laid at my Door, because that is no Principle of mine.

Your Lordship ends this Paragraph with telling me, 1 Answ. p. 14.
that I at length apprehend your Lordships meaning.

I wish heartily that I did, because it would be much more for your ease as
well as my own. For in this case of Substance, I find it not easy to know your
meaning, or what it is I am blamed for. For in the beginning of this Dispute,
Vir dic. P. 236.
it is the being of Substance. And here again, p. 7.
it is Substance it self, is Discarded. And in this very Paragraph, p. 13. 14.
writ as it seems, to explain your self, so that in the close of it you tell me
that at length I apprehend your meaning to be that the Notion of Substance is
Excluded out of Rational Discourse, the Explication is such, that it renders
your Lordship's meaning to me more obscure and uncertain, than it was before.
For in the same Paragraph your Lordship says, That upon my Principles there can
be no certain Idea at all of Substance; and also that however imperfect and
obscure our Notions be, yet we are as certain that Substances are and must be,
as that there are any beings in the World. So that supposing I did know (as I
do not) what your Lordship means by certain Idea of Substance, yet I must own
still, that what your meaning is by discarding of Substance, whether it be the
Idea of Substance, or the Being of Substance I do not know. But that, I think,
need not much trouble me, since your Lordship does not, that I see, show how
any Position or Principle of mine overthrows either Substance it self, or the
Idea of it, or excludes either of them out of rational Discourse.

In your next Paragraph, 1 Answ. p. 14.
you say, I declare, p. 35. That if any one assert that we can have no Ideas
but from Sensation and Reflection it is not my Opinion. My Lord, I have looked
over that 35th Page, and find no such Words of mine there. But refer my Reader
to that and the following Pages, for my Opinion concerning Ideas from Sensation
and Reflection, how far they are the foundation and materials of all our
Knowledge: And this I do, because to those Words, which your Lordship has set
down as mine, out of the 35th Page, but are not there, you subjoin, 1 Answ. p.
14.
That you are very glad of it, and will do me all the right you can in this
Matter, which seems to imply, That it is a matter of great consequence, and
therefore I desire my meaning may be taken in my own Words, as they are set
down at large 1 Let. p. 35-38.


The Promise your Lordship makes me, of doing me all the Right you can, I
return my humble Thanks for, because it is a piece of Justice so seldom done in
Controversy. And because I suppose you have here made me this Promise, to
Authorize me to mind you of it, if at any time your haste should make you
mistake my Words or meaning: To have ones Words exactly Quoted, and their
meaning Interpreted by the plain and visible design of the Author in his whole
Discourse being a right, which every Writer has a just Claim to, and such as a
lover of Truth will be very wary of Violating. An Instance of some sort of
Intrenchment on this I humbly conceive there is in the next Page but one, 1
Answ. p. 16.
where you Interpret my Words, as if I excused a mistake I had made, by calling
it a slip of my Pen; whereas my Lord, I do not own any slip of my Pen in that
Place, but say that the meaning of my Expression there is to be Interpreted by
other places, and particularly by those, where I Treat Professedly of that
Subject: And that in such cases, where an Expression is only incident to the
Matter in Hand, and may seem not exactly to Quadrate with the Author's Sense,
where he designedly treats of that Subject, it ought rather to be Interpreted
as a slip of his Pen, than as his meaning. I should not have taken so
particular a notice of this, but that you by having up these Words with an Air
that makes me sensible how wary I ought to be, show what use would be made of
it, if ever I had pleaded the slip of my Pen.

In the following Pages, 1 Answ. p. 15-29.
I find a Discourse drawn up under several Ranks of Numbers to prove, as I
guess, this Proposition, 1 Answ. p. 20.
that in my way of Ideas we cannot come to any Certainty as to the Nature of
Substance. I shall be in a condition to Answer to this Accusation, when I shall
be told what particular Proposition, as to the Nature of Substance, it is,
which in my way of Ideas we cannot come to any Certainty of. Because probably
it may be such a Proposition concerning the Nature of Substance, as I shall
readily own, that in my way of Ideas we can come to no Certainty of; and yet I
think the way of Ideas not at all to be blamed, till there can be shown an
other way, different from that of Ideas, whereby we may come to a Certainty of
it. For 'twas never pretended, that by Ideas we could come to Certainty
concerning every Proposition, that could be made concerning Substance or any
thing else.

Besides the doubtfulness visible in the Phrase it self, there is another
Reason that hinders me from understanding precisely what is meant by these
Words to come to a Certainty as to the Nature of Substance, viz. Because your
Lordship p 100 and 101.
makes Nature and Substance to be the same, so that to come to a Certainty as
to the Nature of Substance is, in your Lordship's Sense of Nature, to come to a
Certainty as to the Substance of Substance, which I own I do not clearly
understand.

An other thing that hinders me from giving particular Answers to the
Arguments, that may be supposed to be contained in so many Pages is, that I do
not see, how what is Discoursed in those Thirteen or Fourteen Pages is brought
to prove this Proposition, that in my way of Ideas we cannot come to any
Certainty as to the Nature of Substance; and it would require too many Words to
Examine every one of those Heads, Period by Period, to see what they Prove;
when you your self do not apply them to the direct Probation of any Proposition
that I understand.

Indeed you wind up this Discourse with these Words, 1 Answ. P. 29.
That you leave the Reader to judge whether this be a tolerable account of the
Idea of Substance by Sensation and Reflection. Answ. That which your Lordshp
has given in the precedent Pages, I think is not a very tolerable account of my
Idea of Substance, since the account you give over and over again 1 Answ. p.
15, 16, 17, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
of my Idea of Substance is, that it is nothing but a Complex Idea of
Accidents. This is your account of my Idea of Substance, which you insist so
much on, and which you say 1 Answ. P. 24.
you took out of those places, I my self produced in my first Letter. But if
you had been pleased to have set down this one, which is to be found there 1
Let. p. 10.
amongst the rest Produced by me out of B. 2 chapter 12. Sect. 6. of my Essay, viz.
That the Ideas of Substances are such Combinations of simple Ideas, as are
taken to Represent distinct particular Things Subsisting by themselves, in
which the supposed or confused Idea of Substance is always the first and chief.
This, would have been a full Answer to all that I think you have under that
variety of Heads, Objected against my Idea of Substance. But your Lordship in
your Representation of my Idea of Substance, thought fit to leave this Passage
out; though you are pleased to set down several others produced both before and
after it in my first Letter, which I think gives me a Right humbly to return
your Lordship your own Words, And now I freely leave the Reader to judge
whether this, which your Lordship has given, be a tolerable Account of my Idea
of Substance.

The next Point to be considered, is concerning the Immateriality of the Soul;
whereof there is a great deal said. 1 Answ. p. 47-79.
The Original of this Controversy, I shall set down in your Lordship's own
Words: 1 Answ. p. 67.
You say, The only Reason you had to engage in this Matter, was this bold
Assertion; That the Ideas we have by Sensation or Reflection are the sole
Matter and Foundation of all our Reasoning, and that our Certainty lies in
perceiving the Agreement and Disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in any
Proposition: which last, you say, are my own words.

To overthrow this bold Assertion, you urge 1 Answ. p. 68.
my acknowledgment, 1 Let. p. 67.
That upon my Principles it cannot be demonstratively proved, that the Soul is
Immaterial though it be in the highest degree probable. And then ask ib.
Is not this the giving up the cause of Certainty? Answer: Just as much the
giving up the cause of Certainty on my side, as it is on your Lordship's. Who
though you will not please to tell wherein you place Certainty, yet it is to be
supposed you do place Certainty in something or other. Now let it be what you
will, that you place Certainty in, I take the liberty to say, that you cannot
certainly prove i. e. demonstrate, that the Soul of Man is Immaterial; I am
sure you have not so much as offered at any such proof, and therefore you give
up the cause of Certainty upon your Principles. Because if the not being able
to demonstrate, that the Soul is Immaterial upon his Principles, who declares,
wherein he thinks Certainty consists, be the giving up the cause of Certainty;
the not being able to demonstrate the Immateriality of the Soul upon his
Principles, who does not tell wherein Certainty consists, is no less a giving
up of the cause of Certainty. The only odds between these two is more Art and
Reserve in the one than the other. And therefore my Lord, you must either upon
your Principles of Certainty demonstrate that the Soul is Immaterial, or you
must allow me to say, that you too give up the cause of Certainty, and your
Principles tend to Skepticism as much as mine. Which of these two your Lordship
shall please to do, will to me be advantageous; for by the one I shall get a
Demonstration of the Souls Immateriality, (of which I shall be very glad) and
that upon Principles, which reaching farther than mine, I shall embrace, as
better than mine, and become your Lordship's professed Convert. Till then I
shall rest satisfied, that my Principles be they as weak and fallible as your
Lordship please, are no more guilty of any such tendency, than theirs, who
talking more of certainty cannot attain to it in cases, where they condemn the
way of Ideas for coming short of it.

You a little lower in the same Page, 1 Answ. p. 68.
set down these as my Words, That I never offered it as a way of Certainty,
where we cannot reach Certainty. I have already told you that I have been
sometimes in doubt what Copy you had got of my Essay: Because I often found
your Quotations out of it, did not agree with what I read in mine: But by this
Instance here, and some others, I know not what to think, since in my Letter,
which I did my self the Honor to send your Lordship, I am sure the Words are
not as they are here set down. For I say, not that I offered the way of
Certainty there spoken of which looks as if it were a new way of Certainty,
that I pretended to teach the World Perhaps the difference, in these from my
Words is not so great, that upon an other occasion I should take notice of it.
But it being to lead People into an Opinion, that I spoke of the way of
Certainty by Ideas, as something new, which I pretended to teach the World, I
think it worth while to set down my Words themselves, which I think are so
Penned, as to show a great Cantion in me to avoid such an opinion. My Words 1
Let. p. 81.
are, I think it is a way to bring us to a Certainty in those things, which I
have offered as Certain, but I never thought it a way to Certainty, where we
cannot reach Certainty.

What use your Lordship makes of the term offered, applied to what I applied it
not, is to be seen in your next Words, which you subjoin to those which you set
down for mine. 1 Answ. p. 68.
But did you not offer to put us into a way of Certainty? And what is that but
to attain Certainty in such things where we could not otherwise do it? Answ. If
this your way of reasoning here, carries Certainty in it, I humbly conceive in
your way of Certainty by Reason, Certainty may be attained, where it could not
otherwise be had. I only beg you my Lord, to show me the place, where I so
offer to put you in a way of Certainty different from what had formerly been
the way of Certainty, that Men by it might attain to Certainty in things, which
they could not before my Book was writ. No Body who reads my Essay with that
indifferency, which is proper to a Lover of Truth, can avoid seeing, that what
I say of Certainty was not to teach the Wrold a new way of Certainty (though
that be one great Objection of yours against my Book) but to endeavor to show,
wherein the old and only way of Certainty consists; what was the occasion and
design of my Book may be seen plainly enough in the Epistle to the Reader,
without any need that any thing more should be said of it. And I am too
sensible of my own Weakness not to profess, as I do Essay B. 2. C. 11.. 17.
, That I pretend not to teach, but to enquire. I cannot but wonder what service
you, my Lord, who are a Teacher of Authority, mean to Truth or Certainty, by
condemning the way of Certainty by Ideas: Because I own by it I cannot
demonstrate, that the Soul is Immaterial. May it not be worth your considering,
what advantage this will be to Skepticism, when upon the same grounds, you
Words here 1 Answ. p. 68.
shall be turned upon you; and it shall be asked, What a strange way of
Certainty is this, [your Lordship's way by Reason] if it fails us in some of
the first Foundations of the real Knowledge of our selves?

To avoid this, you undertake 1 Answ. p. 69.
to prove from my own Principles, that we may be certain. That the first
eternal Thinking Being or Omnipotent Spirit cannot, if he would, give to
certain Systems of created sensible Matter, put together as he sees fit, some
degrees of Sense, Perception and Thought: For this, my Lord, is my Proposition,
Essay B. 4. C. 3. Sect. 6.
and this the utmost that I have said concerning the Power of Thinking in
Matter.

Your first Argument 1 Answ. p. 69-73.
I take to be this That according to me, the Knowledge we have being by our
Ideas, and our Idea of Matter in general being a solid Substance, and our Idea
of Body a solid extended figured Substance; if I admit Matter to be capable of
Thinking, I confound the Idea of Matter with the Idea of a Spirit: To which I
answer, No, no more than I confound the Idea of Matter with the Idea of an
Horse, when I say that Matter in general is a solid extended Substance; and
that an Horse is a material Animal, or an extended solid Substance with Sense
and Spontaneous Motion.

The Idea of Matter is an extended solid Substance; wherever there is such a
Substance, there is Matter; and the Essence of Matter, whatever other Qualities
not contained in that Essence, it shall please God to superadd to it. For
example, God creates an extended solid Substance, without the superadding any
thing else to it, and so we may consider it at rest: To some parts of it he
superadds, Motion, but it has still the Essence of Matter: Other parts of it he
frames into Plants, with all the Excellencies of Vegetation, Life and Beauty,
which is to he found in a Rose or a Peach-tree, etc. above the Essence of
Matter in general, but it is still but Matter: To other parts he adds Sense and
Spontaneous Motion, and those other Properties that are to be found in an
Elephant. Hitherto it is not doubted but the Power of God may go, and that the
Properties of a Rose, a Peach or an Elephant, superadded to Matter, change not
the Properties of Matter; but Matter is in these things Matter still. But if
one venture to go one step further and say, God may give to Matter, Thought,
Reason and Volition, as well as Sense and Spontaneous Motion, there are Men
ready presently to limit the Power of the Omnipotent Creator, and tell us, he
cannot do it; because it destroys the Essence, or changes the essential
Properties of Matter. To make good which Assertion they have no more to say,
but that Thought and Reason are not included in the Essence of Matter. I grant
it; but whatever Excellency, not contained in its Essence, be superadded to
Matter, it does not destroy the Essence of Matter, if it leaves it an extended
solid Substance; wherever that is, there is the Essence of Matter; and if
every thing of greater Perfection, superadded to such a Substance, destroys the
Essence of Matter, what will become of the Essence of Matter in a Plant, or an
Animal, whose Properties far exceed those of a mere extended solid Substance?

But it is farther urged, That we cannot conceive how Matter can Think. I grant
it; but to argue from thence, that God therefore cannot give to Matter a
Faculty of Thinking, is to say God's Omnipotency is limited to a narrow
Compass, because Man's Understanding is so; and brings down God's infinite
Power to the size of our Capacities. If God can give no Power to any parts of
Matter, but what Men can account for from the Essence of Matter in general: If
all such Qualities and Properties must destroy the Essence or change the
essential Properties of Matter, which are to our Conceptions above it, and we
cannot conceive to be the natural Consequence of that Essence; it is plain,
that the Essence of Matter is destroyed and its essential Properties changed in
most of the sensible parts of this our System: For it is visible, that all the
Planets have Revolutions about certain remote Centers, which I would have any
one explain, or make conceiveable by the bare Essence or natural Powers
depending on the Essence of Matter in general, without something added to that
Essence, which we cannot conceive; for the moving of Matter in a crooked Line,
or the attraction of Matter by Matter, is all that can be said in the Case;
either of which, it is above our Reach to derive from the Essence of Matter or
Body in general; though one of these two must unavoidably be allowed to be
superadded in this instance to the Essence of Matter in general. The Omnipotent
Creator advised not with us in the making of the World, and his ways are not
the less Excellent, because they are past our finding out.

In the next place, the vegetable part of the Creation is not doubted to be
wholly Material; and yet he that will look into it will observe Excellencies
and Operations in this part of Matter, which he will not find contained in the
Essence of Matter in general, nor be able to conceive how they can be produced
by it. And will he therefore say, That the Essence of Matter is destroyed in
them, because they have Properties and Operations not contained in the
essential Properties of Matter as Matter, nor explicable by the Essence of
Matter in general?

Let us advance one step farther, and we shall in the Animal World meet with
yet greater Perfections and Properties no ways explicable by the Essence of
Matter in general. If the Omnipotent Creator had not superadded to the Earth,
which produced the irrational Animals, Qualities far surpassing those of the
dull dead Earth, out of which they were made, Life, Sense, and Spontaneous
Motion, nobler Qualities than were before in it, it had still remained rude
senseless Matter; and if to the Individuals of each Species, he had not
superadded a Power of Propagation, the Species had perished with those
Individuals: But by these Essences or Properties of each Species, superadded to
the Matter which they were made of, the Essence or Properties of Matter in
general were not destroyed or changed, any more than any thing that was in the
Individuals before, was destroyed or changed by the Power of Generation,
superadded to them by the first Benediction of the Almighty.

In all such Cases, the superinducement of greater Perfections and nobler
Qualities, destroys nothing of the Essence or Perfections that were there
before; unless there can be showed a manifest Repugnancy between them; but all
the Proof offered for that, is only, That we cannot conceive how Matter,
without such superadded Perfections, can produce such Effects; which is, in
Truth, no more than to say, Matter in general, or every part of Matter, as
Matter has them not; but is no Reason to prove, that God, if he pleases, cannot
superadd them to some parts of Matter, unless it can be proved to be a
Contradiction, that God should give to some parts of Matter, Qualities and
Perfections, which Matter in general has not; though we cannot conceive how
Matter is invested with them, or how it Operates by Virtue of those new
Endowments. Nor is it to be wondered that we cannot, whilst we limit all its
Operations to those Qualities it had before, and would explain them, by the
known Properties of Matter in general, without any such superinduced
Perfections. For if this be a right Rule of Reasoning to deny a thing to be,
because we cannot conceive the manner how it comes to be: I shall desire them
who use it, to stick to this Rule, and see what Work it will make both in
Divinity, as well as Philosophy; and whether they can advance any thing more in
favor of Skepticism?

For to keep within the present Subject of the Power of Thinking and
Self-motion, bestowed by Omnipotent Power on some parts of Matter: The
Objection to this is, I cannot conceive how Matter should Think: What is the
Consequence? Ergo, God cannot give it a Power to Think. Let this stand for a
good Reason, and then proceed in other Cases by the same. You cannot conceive
how Matter can attract Matter at any distance, muchless at the distance of
1000000 Miles; Ergo, God cannot give it such a Power; you cannot conceive how
Matter should feel, or move it self, or affect an Immaterial Being, or be moved
by it: Ergo, God cannot give it such Powers, which is in effect to deny Gravity
and the Revolution of the Planets about the Sun; to make Brutes mere Machins
without Sense or Spontaneous Motion, and to allow Man neither Sense nor
voluntary Motion.

Let us apply this Rule one degree farther. You cannot conceive how an extended
solid Substance should Think, therefore God cannot make it Think: Can you
conceive how your own Soul, or any Substance Thinks? You find indeed, that you
do Think, and so do I; but I want to be told how the Action of Thinking is
performed: This, I confess, is beyond my Conception; and I would be glad any
one, who conceives it, would explain it to me. God, I find, has given me this
Faculty; and since I cannot but be convinced of his Power in this Instance,
which though I every moment Experiment in my self, yet I cannot conceive the
manner of; what would it be less than an insolent Absurdity, to deny his Power
in other like Cases only for this Reason, because I cannot conceive the manner
how?

To explain this Matter a little farther. God has created a Substance; let it
be, for Example, a solid extended Substance; is God bound to give it, besides
Being, a Power of Action? that, I think, no body will say: He therefore may
leave it in a State of Inactivity, and it will be nevertheless a Substance; for
Action is not necessary to the Being of any Substance, that God does create:
God has likewise created and made to Exist, de novo, an immaterial Substance,
which will not lose its Being of a Substance, though God should bestow on it
nothing more but this bare Being, without giving it any Activity at all. Here
are now two distinct Substances, the one Material the other Immaterial, both in
a State of perfect Inactivity. Now I ask, what Power God can give to one of
these Substances (supposing them to retain the same distinct Natures, that they
had as Substances in their State of Inactivity) which he cannot give to the
other? In that State, it is plain, neither of them Thinks; for Thinking being an
Action, it cannot be denied, that God can put an end to any Action of any
created Substance, without anihilating of the Substance whereof it is an
Action; and if it be so, he can also create or give Existence to such a
Substance, without giving that Substance any Action at all. By the same Reason
it is plain, that neither of them can move it self: Now I would ask, why
Omnipotency cannot give to either of these Substances, which are equally in a
State of perfect Inactivity, the same Power, that it can give to the other? Let
it be for Example, that of Spontaneous or Self-motion, which is a Power that
it is supposed God can give to an unsolid Substance, but denied that he can give
to solid a Substance.

If it be asked, why they limit the Omnipotency of God, in reference to the one
rather than the other of these Substances; all that can be said to it, is, That
they cannot conceive, how the solid Substance should ever be able to move it
self. And as little, say I, are they able to conceive how a created unsolid
Substance should move it self: But there may be something in an immaterial
Substance, that you do not know. I grant it; and in a material one too: For
Example, Gravitation of Matter toward Matter, and in the several Proportions
observable, inevitably shows, that there is something in Matter that we do not
understand, unless we can conceive Self-motion in Matter; or an inexplicable
and inconceivable Attraction in Matter, at immense and almost incomprehensible
Distances: It must therefore be confessed, that there is something in solid, as
well as unsolid Substances, that we do not understand. But this we know, that
they may each of them have their distinct Beings, without any Activity
superadded to them, unless you will deny, That God can take from any Being its
Power of Acting, which it is probable will be thought too Presumptuous for any
one to do; and I say, it is as hard to conceive Self-motion in a created
immaterial as in a material Being, consider it how you will: And therefore this
is no Reason to deny Omnipotency to be able to give a Power of Self-motion to a
material Substance, if he pleases, as well as to an immaterial; since neither
of them can have it from themselves, nor can we conceive how it can be in
either of them.

The same is visible in the other Operation of Thinking; both these Substances
may be made, and exist without Thought; neither of them has, or can have the
Power of Thinking from it self: God may give it to either of them according to
the good Pleasure of his Omnipoteney; and in which ever of them it is, it is
equally beyond our Capacity to conceive, how either of those Substances thinks.
But for that Reason, to deny that God, who had Power enough to give them both a
Being out of nothing, can by the same Omnipotency, give them what other Powers
and Perfections he pleases, has no better a Foundation than to deny his Power
of Creation, because we cannot conceive how it is performed; and there at last
this way of Reasoning must terminate.

That Omnipotency cannot make a Substance to be solid and not solid at the same
time, I think, with due Reverence, we may say; but that a solid Substance may
not have Qualities, Perfections and Powers, which have no natural or visibly
necessary Connection with Solidity and Extension, is too much for us (who are
but of Yesterday, and know nothing) to be positive in. If God cannot join
things together by Connections inconceiveable to us, we must deny even the
Consistency, and Being of Matter it self; since every Particle of it having
some bulk, has its Parts connected by ways inconceiveable to us. So that all
the Difficulties, that are raised against the Thinking of Matter from our
Ignorance or narrow Conceptions, stand not at all in the way of the Power of
God, if he pleases to ordain it so; nor proves any thing against his having
actually endued some parcels of Matter, so disposed as he thinks fit, with a
Faculty of Thinking, till it can be shown, that it contains a Contradiction to
suppose it.

Though to me Sensation be comprehended under Thinking in general, yet in the
foregoing Discourse, I have spoke of Sense in Brutes, as distinct from
Thinking. Because your Lordship, as I remember, speaks of Sense in Brutes. But
here I take liberty to observe, That if your Lordship allows Brutes to have
Sensation, it will follow, either that God can and does give to some parcels of
Matter a Power of Perception and Thinking; or that all Animals have immaterial
and consequently, according to your Lordship, immortal Souls, as well as Men;
and to say that Fleas and Mites, etc. have immortal Souls as well as Men, will
possibly be looked on, as going a great way to serve an Hypothesis, and as it
would not very well agree, with what your Lordship says, 2 Answ. p. 64. to the
Words of Solomon, quoted out of Eccles. C. 3.

I have been pretty large in making this Matter plain, that they who are so
forward to bestow hard Censures or Names on the Opinions of those, who differ
from them, may consider whether sometimes they are not more due to their own:
And that they may be persuaded a little to temper that Heat, which supposing
the Truth in their current Opinions, gives them (as they think) a Right to lay
what Imputations they please on those who would fairly examine the Grounds they
stand upon. For talking with a Supposition and Insinuations, that Truth and
Knowledge, nay and Religion too, stands and falls with their Systems; is at
best but an imperious way of begging the Question, and assuming to themselves
under the pretense of Zeal for the Cause of God, a Title to Infallibility. It
is very becoming that Men's Zeal for Truth, should go as far as their Proofs,
but not go for Proofs themselves. He that attacks received Opinions, with any
thing but fair Arguments, may, I own, be justly suspected not to mean well; nor
to be led by the Love of Truth; but the same may be said of him too, who so
defends them. An Error is not the better for being common, nor Truth the worse
for having lain neglected: And if it were put to the Vote any where in the
World, I doubt, as things are managed, whether Truth would have the Majority,
at least, whilst the Authority of Men, and not the examination of Things must
be its Measure. The imputation of Skepticism and those broad Insinuations, to
render what I have writ suspected, so frequent as if that were the great
Business of all this Pains you have been at about me, has made me say thus much
my Lord, rather as my Sense of the way to establish Truth in its full Force and
Beauty, than that I think the World will need to have any thing said to it, to
make it distinguish between your Lordship's and my Design in Writing, which
therefore I securely leave to the Judgment of the Reader, and return to the
Argument in Hand.

What I have above said, I take to be a full Answer to all that your Lordship
would infer from my Idea of Matter, of Liberty, and of Identity, and from the
power of Abstracting. You ask, 1 Ans. p. 73.
How can my Idea of Liberty agree with the Idea that Bodies can operate only by
Motion and Impulse? Answ. By the omnipotency of God, who can make all things
agree, that involve not a Contradiction. It Is true, I say, Essay B. 2. C. 8. 11.
That Bodies operate by impulse and nothing else.And so I thought when I writ
it and yet can conceive no other way of their operation. But I am since
convinced by the Judicious Mr. Newton's incomparable Book, that it is too bold a
Presumption to limit God's Power in this Point, by my narrow Conceptions. The
gravitation of Matter toward Matter, by ways unconceivable to me, is not only
a Demonstration that God can, if he pleases, put into Bodies, Powers, and ways
of Operation, above what can be derived from our Idea of Body, or can be
explained by what we know of Matter, but also an unquestionable and every where
visible Instance, that he has done so And therefore in the next Edition of my
Book, I shall take care to have that Passage rectified.

As to Self-consciousness, your Lordship asks, 1 Answ. p. 74.
What is there like Self-consciousness in Matter? Nothing at all in Matter as
Matter. But that God cannot bestow on some parcels of Matter a Power of
Thinking, and with it Self-consciousness will never be proved by asking, ib.
How is it possible to apprehend that mere Body should perceive that it does
perceive? The weakness of our Apprehension I grant in the Case: I confess as
much as you please, that we cannot conceive how a solid, no nor how an unsolid
created Substance thinks; but this weakness of our Apprehensions, reaches not
the Power of God, whose weakness is stronger than any thing in Men.

Your Argument from Abstraction, we have in this Question, 1 Answ. p. 76.
If it may be in the power of Matter to think, how comes it to be so impossible
for such organized Bodies as the Brutes have, to enlarge their Ideas by
Abstraction? Answ. This seems to suppose, that I place Thinking within the
natural Power of Matter. If that be your Meaning, my Lord, I neither say, nor
suppose, that all Matter has naturally in it a Faculty of Thinking, but the
direct contrary. But if you mean that certain parcels of Matter, ordered by the
Divine Power, as seems fit to him, may be made capable of receiving from his
Omnipotency the Faculty of Thinking; that indeed I say, and that being granted,
the Answer to your Question is easy, since if Omnipotency can give Thought to
any solid Substance, it is not hard to conceive, that God may give that Faculty
in an higher or lower Degree, as it pleases him, who knows what Disposition of
the Subject is suited to such a particular way or degree of Thinking.

Another Argument to prove, That God cannot endue any parcel of Matter with the
Faculty of Thinking, is taken from those Words of mine, 1 Let. p. 139.
where I show, by what connection of Ideas we may come to know, That God is an
Immaterial Substance. They are these, The Idea of an eternal actual, knowing
Being, with the Idea of Immateriality, by the intervention of the Idea of
Matter, and of its actual Division, divisibility and want of Perception, etc.
From whence your Lordship thus argues, 2 Ans. p. 77.
Here the want of Perception is owned to be so essential to Matter, that God is
therefore concluded to be Immaterial. Ans. Perception and Knowledge in that one
Eternal Being, where it has its Sourse, it is visible must be essentially
inseparable from it; therefore the actual want of Perception in so great part
of the particular parcels of Matter is a Demonstration, that the first Being,
from whom Perception and Knowledge is inseparable, is not Matter: How far this
makes the want of Perception an essential property of Matter I will not
dispute; it suffices that it shows, That Perception is not an essential
Property of Matter; and therefore Matter cannot be that eternal original Being,
to which Perception and Knowledge is Essential. Matter, I say, naturally is
without Perception: Ergo, says your Lordship, want of Perception is an
essential Property of Matter, and God does not change the essential Properties
of things, their Nature remaining. From whence you infer, That God cannot
bestow on any parcel of Matter (the nature of Matter remaining) a Faculty of
Thinking. If the Rules of Logic since my days be not changed, I may safely
deny this Consequence. For an Argument that runs thus, God does not; Ergo, he
cannot, I was taught when I came first to the University, would not hold. For I
never said God did. But B. 4. C. 3. 6.
That I see no Contradiction in it, that he should, if he pleased, give to some
systems of senseless Matter, a Faculty of Thinking, and I know no Body, before
Des Carts, that ever pretended to show that there was any Contradiction in it
So that at worst, my not being able to see in Matter any such Incapacity, as
makes it impossible for Omnipotency to bestow on it a Faculty of Thinking,
makes me opposite only to the Cartesians. For as far as I have seen or heard,
the Fathers of the Christian Church never pretended to domonstrate that Matter,
was incapable to receive a Power of Sensation, Perception and Thinking, from
the Hand of the omnipotent Creator. Let us therefore, if you please, suppose
the form of your Argumentation right, and that your Lordship means, God cannot:
And then if your Argument be good, it proves, That God could not give to
Baalam's Ass a Power to speak to his Master as he did, for the want of rational
Discourse, being natural to that Species, it is but for your Lordship to call it
an Essential Property, and then God cannot change the Essential Properties of
things, their Nature remaining: Whereby it is proved, That God cannot with all
his Omnipotency, give to an Ass a Power to speak as Balaam's did.

You say, 1 Ans. p. 78.
my Lord, you do not set Bound's to God's Omnipotency. For he may if he please
change a Body into an Immaterial Substance, i. e. take away from a Substance
the Solidity which it had before, and which made it Matter, and then give it a
Faculty of thinking, which it had not before, and which makes it a Spirit, the
same Substance remaining. For if the same Substance remains not, Body is not
changed into an Immaterial Substance. But the solid Substance and all belonging
to it is Annihilated, and an Immaterial Substance Created, which is not change
of one thing into another, but the destroying of one, and making another de
novo. In this change therefore of a Body or Material Substance into an
immaterial, let us observe those distinct Considerations.

First, you say, God may if He Pleases take away from a Solid Substance
Solidity, which is that which makes it a Material Substance or Body; and may
make it an Immaterial Substance, i. e. a Substance without Solidity. But this
privation of one Quality gives it not another; the bare taking away a lower or
less Noble Quality does not give it an Higher or Nobler; that must be the gift
of God. For the bare Privation of one, and a meaner Quality, cannot be the
Position of an Higher and better: unless any one will say, that Cogitation, or
the Power of thinking results from the Nature of Substance it self, which if it
do, then where ever there is Substance, there must be Cogitation or a Power of
thinking. Here then, upon your Lordship's own Principles is an Immaterial
Sub^ance without the Faculty of thinking.

In the next place, you will not deny, but God may give to this Substance thus
deprived of Solidity a Faculty of thinking; for you suppose it made capable of
that by being made Immaterial, whereby you allow, that the same numerical
Substance may be sometimes wholly Incogitative or without a Power of thinking,
and at other times perfectly Cogitative, or endued with a Power of thinking.

Further, you will not deny, but God can give it Solidity and make it Material
again. For I conclude it will not be denied, that God can make it again, what
it was before. Now I crave leave to ask your Lordship, why God having given to
this Substance the Faculty of thinking after Solidity was taken from it, cannot
restore to it Solidity again, without taking away the Faculty of thinking. When
you have Resolved this my Lord, you will have proved it impossible for God's
Omnipotence to give to a Solid Substance a Faculty of thinking; but till then,
not having proved it impossible, and yet denying that God can do it, is to deny
that he can do, what is in it self Possible; which as I humbly conceive is
visibly to set Bound's to God's Omnipotency, though you say here, 1 Ans. p. 78.
you do not set Bound's to God's Omnipotency.

If I should imitate your Lordship's way of Writing, I should not omit to bring
in Epicurus here, and take notice that this was his way, Deum verbis ponere, re
tollere. And then add, that I am certain you do not think he promoted the great
ends of Religion and Morality. For it is with such Candid and Kind insinuations
as these, that you bring in both Hobbes, 1 Ans. p. 55.
and Spinosa, Ib. p. 79.
into your Discourse here about God's being able, if he please, to give to some
parcels of Matter ordered as he thinks fit, a Faculty of thinking. Neither of
those Authors having as appears by any Passages you bring out of them said any
thing to this Question, nor having, as it seems, any other business here, but
by their Names skilfully to give that Character to my Book, with which you
would recommend it to the World.

I pretend not to enquire what measure of Zeal, nor for what, guides your
Lordships Pen in such a way of Writing, as yours has all along been with me:
Only I cannot but consider, what Reputation it would give to the Writings of
the Fathers of the Church, if they should think Truth required, or Religion
allowed them to imitate such Patterns. But God be thanked there be those
amongst them who do not admire such ways of managing the Cause of Truth or
Religion. They being sensible, that if every one, who believes or can pretend
he has Truth on his side, is thereby Authorized without proof, to insinuate,
what ever may serve to prejudice Men's minds against the other side, there will
be great ravage made on Charity and Practice, without any gain to Truth or
Knowledge. And that the Liberties frequently taken by Disputants to do so, may
have been the cause that the World in all Ages has received so much harm, and
so little advantage from Controversies in Religion.

These are the Arguments which your Lordship has brought to confute one saying
in my Book, by other Passages in it, which therefore being all but Argumenta ad
Hominem, if they did prove what they do not, are of no other use, than to gain
a Victory over me, a thing methinks so much beneath your Lordship, that it does
not deserve one of your Pages. The question is, whether God can if he pleases,
bestow on any parcel of Matter ordered as he thinks fit, a faculty of
Perception and Thinking. You say, 1 Ans. p. 79.
You look upon a Mistake herein to be of dangerous Consequence, as to the great
ends of Religion and Morality. If this be so, my Lord, I think one may well
wonder, why your Lordship has brought no Arguments to Establish the Truth it
self, which You look on to be of such dangerous consequence to be mistaken in;
but have spent so many Pages only in a Personal Matter in endeavoring to show,
That I had Inconsistencies in my Book, which if any such thing had been showed,
the Question would be still as far from being decided, and the danger of
mistaking about it as little prevented, as if nothing of all this had been
said. If therefore your Lordship's Care of the great ends of Religion and
Morality have made You think it necessary to clear this Question, the World has
reason to conclude there is little to be said against that Proposition, which
is to be found in my Book concerning the Possibility, that some parcels of
Matter might be so ordered by Omnipotence, as to be endued with a faculty of
Thinking, if God so pleased, since your Lordship's Concern for the promoting
the great ends of Religion and Morality, has not enabled you to produce one
Argument against a Proposition, that you think of so dangerous consequence to
them.

And here I crave leave to observe, That though in your Title Page you promise
to prove, that my Notion of Ideas is inconsistent with it self, (which if it
were, it could hardly be proved to be inconsistent with any thing else,) and
with the Articles of the Christian Faith; Yet your Attempts all along have been
to prove me in some Passages of my Book inconsistent with my self, without
having shown any Proposition in my Book inconsistent with any Article of the
Christian Faith.

I think, your Lordship has indeed made use of one Argument of your own: But it
is such an one, that I confess I do not see how it is apt much to promote
Religion, especially the Christian Religion founded on Revelation. I shall set
down your Lordship's Words, that they may be considered, you say: 1 Ans. p. 54.
55.
That you are of Opinion, that the great Ends of Religion and Morality are best
secured by the Proofs of the Immortality of the Soul from its Nature and
Properties; and which you think proves is Immaterial. Your Lordship does not
question whether God can give Immortality to a Material Substance; but you say,
it takes off very much from the Evidence of Immortality, if it depend wholly
upon God's giving that, which of its own Nature it is not capable of, etc. So
likewise you say, 2 Ans. p. 28.
If a Man cannot be certain, but that Matter may think (as I affirm) then what
becomes of the Soul's Immateriality (and consequently Immortality) from its
Operations? But for all this, say I, his assurance of Faith remains on its own
Basis. Now you appeal to any Man of Sense, whether the finding the uncertainty
of his own Principles which he went upon in point of Reason, does not weaken
the Credibility of these fundamental Articles, when they are considered purely
at Matters of Faith? For before there was a natural Credibility in them on the
account of Reason; but by going on wrong grounds of Certainty, all that is
lost; and instead of being Certain, he is more doubtful than ever* And if the
Evidence of Faith falls so much short of that of Reason, it must needs have
less effect upon Men's Minds, when the Subserviency of Reason is taken away* as
it must be when the grounds of Certainty by Reason are vanished. I^ it at all
probable, That he who finds his Reason deceive him in such Fundamental Points,
should have his Faith stand firm and unmovable on the account of Revelation?
For in Matters of Revelation, there must be some Antecedent Principles supposed
before we can believe any thing on the account of it.

More to the same purpose we have some Pages farther, where from some of my
Words your Lordship says, Ib p. 35.
You cannot but observe, That we have no Certainty upon my grounds, that
Self-consciousness depends upon an individual Immaterial Substance, and
consequently that a Material Substance may, according to my Principles, have
Self-consciousness in it; at least that I am not certain of the contrary.
Whereupon your Lordship bids me consider, whether this does not a little affect
the whole Article of the Resurrection? What does all this tend to? But to make
the World believe, that I have lessened the Credibility of the Immortality of
the Soul and the Resurrection, by saying, That though it be most highly
probable, that the Soul is Immaterial, yet upon my Principles it cannot be
demonstrated; because it is not impossible to God's Omnipotency, if he pleases
to bestow upon some parcels of Matter disposed as he sees fit, a faculty of
thinking.

This your Accusation of my lessening the Credibility of these Articles of
Faith is founded on this, That the Article of the Immortality of the Soul
abates of its Credibility, If it be allowed, That its Immateriality (which is
the supposed Proof from Reason and Philosophy of its Immortality) cannot be
demonstrated from natural Reason: Which Argument of your Lordship's bottoms, as
I humbly conceive, on this, That Divine Revelation abates of its Credibility in
all those Articles it proposes porportionably as Humane Reason fails to support
the Testimony of God. And all that your Lordship in those Passages has said,
when Examined, will I suppose be found to import thus much, viz. Does God
promise any thing to Mankind to be believed? It is very fit and credible to be
believed, if Reason can demonstrate it to be true. But if Humane Reason comes
short in the Case, and cannot make it out, its Credibility is thereby lessened;
which is in effect to say, That the Veracity of God is not a firm and sure
foundation of Faith to rely upon, without the concurrent Testimony of Reason,
i. e. with Reverence be it spoken, God is not to be believed on his own Word,
unless what he reveals be in it self credible, and might be believed without
him.

If this be a way to promote Religion, the Christian Religion in all its
Articles, I am not sorry, that it is not a way to be found in any of my
Writings, for I imagine any thing like this would, (and I should think
deserved) to have other Titles than bare Skepticism bestowed upon it, and would
have raised no small Outcry against any one, who is not to be supposed to be
in the right in all that he says, and so may securely say what he pleases. Such
as I, the Prophanum Vulgus, who take too much upon us, if we would examine,
have nothing to do but to hearken and believe, though what he said should
subvert the very Foundations of the Christian Faith.

What I have above observed, is so visibly contained in your Lordship's
Argument, That when I met with it in your Answer to my first Letter, it seemed
so strange from a Man of your Lordship's Character, and in a Dispute in defense
of the Doctrine of the Trinity, that I could hardly persuade my self, but it was
a slip of your Pen: But when I found it in your second Letter 2 Ans. p. 28, and
29.
made use of again, and seriously enlarged as an Argument of Weight to be
insisted upon, I was convinced, that it was a Principle, that you heartily
embraced, how little favorable soever it was to the Articles of the Christian
Religion, and particularly those which you undertook to defend.

I desire my Reader to peruse the Passages as they stand in your Letters
themselves, and see whether what you say in them does not amount to this, That
a Revelation from God is more or less credible according as it has a stronger
or weaker confirmation from Humane Reason. For,

1. Your Lordship says, 1 Answ. p. 55.
You do not question whether God can give Immortality to a material Substance;
but you say it takes off very much from the evidence of Immortality, if it
depends wholly upon God's giving that which of its own Nature it is not capable
of.

To which I reply, any ones not being able to demonstrate the Soul to be
Immaterial, takes off not very much, nor at all from the evidence of its
Immortality, if God has revealed, that it shall be Immortal, because the
Veracity of God is a Demonstration of the Truth of what he has revealed, and
the want of an other Demonstration of a Proposition, that is demonstratively
true, takes not off from the Evidence of it. For where there is a clear
Demonstration, there is as much Evidence as any Truth can have* that is not
Self-evident. God has revealed that the Souls of Men shall live for ever. But
says, your Lordship from this Evidence it takes off very much if it depends
wholly upon God's giving that, which of its own Nature it is not capable of. i.
e. The Revelation and Testimony of God loses much of its Evidence, if this
depends wholly upon the good Pleasure of God, and cannot be demonstratively
made out by natural Reason, that the Soul is immaterial, and consequently in
its own Nature immortal. For that is all that here is or can be meant by these
Words, which of its own Nature it is not capable of, to make them to the
purpose. For the whole of your Lordship's Discourse here, is to prove, That the
Soul cannot be material, because then the Evidence of its being immortal would
be very much lessened. Which is to say, That it is not as credible upon divine
Revelation, that a material Substance should be immortal, as an immaterial; or
which is all one, That God is not equally to be believed, when he declares,
that a material Substance shall be immortal, as when he declares, that an
immaterial shall be so, because the Immortality of a material Substance, cannot
be demonstrated from natural Reason.

Let us try this Rule of your Lordship's a little farther. God has revealed,
that the Bodies Men shall have after the Resurrection, as well as their Souls,
shall live to Eternity. Does your Lordship believe the eternal Life of the one
of these, more than of the other, because you think you can prove it of one of
them by natural Reason, and of the other not? Or can any one who admits of
divine Revelation in the Case, doubt of one of them more than the other? Or
think this Proposition less credible, the Bodies of Men, after the
Resurrection, shall live for ever; than this, That the Souls of Men shall*
after the Resurrection, live for ever? For that he must do, if he thinks either
of them is less credible than the other. If this be so, Reason is to be
consulted, how far God is to be believed, and the credit of divine Testimony,
must receive its force from the Evidence of Reason; which is evidently to take
away the credibility of divine Revelation, in all supernatural Truths, wherein
the Evidence of Reason fails. And how much such a Principle as this tends to
the support of the Doctrine of the Trinity, or the promoting the Christian
Religion, I shall leave it to your Lordship to consider.

I am not so well read in Hobbes or Spinoza, as to be able to say, what were
their Opinions in this Matter. But possibly there be those, who will think your
Lordship's Authority of more use to them in the Case, than those justly decried
Names: And be glad to find your Lordship a Patron of the Oracles of Reason, so
little to the Advantage of the Oracles of Divine Revelation. This at least, I
think, may be subjoined to the Words at the bottom of the next Page, 1 Answ. p.
65.
That those who have gone about to lessen the Credibility of Articles of Faith,
which evidently they do, who say they are less credible, because they cannot be
made out demonstratively by Natural Reason, have not been thought to secure
several of the Articles of the Christian Faith, especially those of the
Trinity, Inoarnation, and Resurrection of the Body, which are those upon the
account of which I am brought by your Lordship into this Dispute.

I shall not trouble the Reader with your Lordship's Endeavors in the
following Words, to prove, That if the Soul be not an immaterial Substance, it
can be nothing but Life; your very first Words visibly confuting all that you
allege to that purpose. They are, 1 Answ. p. 55.
If the Soul be immaterial Substance, it is really nothing but Life; which is
to say, That if the Soul be really a Substance, it is not really a Substance,
but really nothing else but an affection of a Substance; for the Life, whether
of a material or immaterial Substance, is not the Substance it self, but an
affection of it.

2. You say, 1 Answ. p. 57.
Although we think the separate State of the Soul after Death, is sufficiently
revealed in the Scripture; yet it creates a great difficulty in understanding
it, if the Soul be nothing but Life, or a material Substance, which must be
dissolved when Life is ended. For if the Soul be a material Substance, it must
be made up, as others are, of the Cohesion of solid and separate Parts, how
minute and invisible soever they be. And what is it which should keep them
together, when Life is gone? So that it is no easy matter to give an account,
how the Soul should be capable of Immortality, unless it be an immaterial
Substance; and then we know the Solution and Texture of Bodies cannot reach the
Soul, being of a different Nature.

Let it be as hard a matter, as it will, to give an account what it is, that
should keep the Parts of a material Soul together, after it is separated from
the Body; yet it will be always as easy to give an account of it, as to give
an account what it is which shall keep together a material and immaterial
Substance. And yet the difficulty that there is to give an account of that, I
hope does not, with your Lordship, weaken the Credibility of the inseparable
Union of Soul and Body to Eternity: And I persuade my self, that the Men of
Sense, to whom your Lordship appeals in the Case, do not find their belief of
this Fundamental Point, much weakened by that difficulty. I thought heretofore
(and by your Lordship's Permission, would think so still) that the Union of
Parts of Matter, one with another, is as much in the Hands of God, as the Union
of a material and immaterial Substance; and that it does not take off very
much, or at all, from the Evidence of Immortality, which depends on that Union,
that it is no easy matter to give an account what it is that should keep them
together: Though its depending wholly upon the Gift and good Pleasure of God,
where the manner creates great difficulty in the understanding, and our Reason
cannot discover in the Nature of things, how it is, be that which your Lordship
so positively says lessens the Credibility of the Fundamental Articles of the
Resurrection and Immortality.

But, my Lord, to remove this Objection a little, and to show of how small
force it is even with your self; give me leave to presume, That your Lordship
as firmly believes the Immortality of the Body after the Resurrection, as any
other Article of Faith: If so, then it being no easy matter to give an
account, what it is that shall keep together the Parts of a material Soul, to
one that belives it is material, can no more weaken the Credibility of its
Immortality, than the like difficulty weakens the Credibility of the
Immortality of the Body. For when your Lordship shall find it an easy matter
to give an account, what it is besides the good Pleasure of God, which shall
keep together the Parts of our material Bodies to Eternity, or even Soul and
Body; I doubt not but any one, who shall think the Soul material, will also
find it as easy to give an account, what it is that shall keep those Parts of
Matter also together to Eternity.

Were it not that the Warmth of Controversy is apt to make Men so far forget,
as to take up those Principles themselves (when they will serve their turn)
which they have highly condemned in others, I should wonder to find your
Lordship to argue, That because it is a difficulty to understand what should
keep together the minute Parts of a material Soul, when Life is gone; and
because it is not an easy matter to give an account how the Soul should be
capable of Immortality, unless it be an immaterial Substance: Therefore it is
not so credible as if it were easy to give an account by Natural Reason, how
it could be. For to this it is, that all this your Discourse tends as is
evident by what is already set down out of Page 55; and will be more fully made
out by what your Lordship says in other places, though there needs no such
Proofs, since it would all be nothing against me in any other Sense.

I thought your Lordship had in other places asserted, and insisted on this
Truth, That no part of Divine Revelation was the less to be believed, because
the thing it self oreated great difficulty in the understanding, and the manner
of it was hard to be explained; and it was no easy matter to give an account
how it was. This, as I take it, your Lordship condemned in others, as a very
unreaonable Principle, and such as would subvert all the Articles of the
Christian Religion, that were mere matters of Faith, as I think it will: And is
it possible, that you should make use of it here your self, against the Article
of Life and Immortality, that Christ has brought to light through the Gospel;
and neither was, nor could be made out by Natural Reason without Revelation?
But you will say, you speak only of the Soul; and your Words are, That it is no
easy matter to give an account how the Soul should be capable of Immortality,
unless it be an immaterial Substance. I grant it; but crave leave to say, That
there is not any one of those Difficulties, that are, or can be raised about
the manner how a material Soul can be immortal, which do not as well reach the
Immortality of the Body.

But if it were not so, I am sure this Principle of your Lordship's would reach
other Articles of Faith, wherein our natural Reason finds it not so easy to
give an Account how those Mysteries are: And which therefore, according to your
Principles, must be less credible, than other Articles, that create less
difficulty to the Understanding. For your Lordship says, 2 Answ. p. 28.
That you appeal to any Man of Sense, whether to a Man who thought by his
Principles, he could from natural Grounds demonstrate the Immortality of the
Soul, the finding the uncertainty of those Principles he went upon in point of
Reason, i. e. the finding he could not certainly prove it by natural Reason,
does not weaken the credibility of that fundamental Article, when it is
considered purely as a Matter of Faith? Which in effect, I humbly conceive,
amounts to this, That a Proposition divinely revealed, that cannot be proved by
natural Reason, is less credible than one that can: Which seems to me to come
very little short of this, with due reverence be it spoken, That God is less to
be believed when he affirms a Proposition, that cannot be proved by natural
Reason, than when he proposes what can be proved by it. The direct contrary to
which is my Opinion, though you endeavor to make good, by these following
Words. 2 Answ. p. 29.
If the evidence of Faith falls so much short of that of Reason, it must needs
have less effect upon Men's Minds, when the subserviency of Reason is taken
away; as it must be when the Grounds of Certainty by Reason are vanished. Is it
at all probable, that he who finds his Reason deceive him in such fundamental
Points, should have his Faith stand firm and unmovable on the account of
Revelation? Than which I think there are hardly plainer Words to be found out
to declare, that the credibility of God's Testimony depends on the natural
evidence or probability of the things we receive from Revelation* and rises and
falls with it: And that the Truths of God, or the Articles of mere Faith, lose
so much of their credibility, as they want Proof from Reason: Which if true,
Revelation may come to have no credibility at all. For if in this present Case,
the credibility of this Proposition, The Souls of Men shall five for ever,
revealed in the Scripture, be lessened by confessing it cannot be
demonstratively proved from Reason; though it be asserted to be most highly
probable: Must not by the same Rule its credibility dwindle away to nothing, if
natural Reason should not be able to make it out to be so much as probable; or
should place the probability from natural Principles on the other side? For if
mere want of Demonstration lessens the credibility of any Proposition divinely
revealed, must not want of probability, or contrary probability from natural
Reason, quite take away its credibility? Here at last it must end, if in any
one Case the Veracity of God, and the credibility of the Truths we receive from
him by Revelation, be subjected to the verdicts of humane Reason, and be
allowed to receive any accession or diminution from other Proofs, or want of
other Proofs of its Certainty or Probability.

If this be your Lordship's way to promote Religion or defend its Articles, I
know not what Argument the greatest Enemies of it could use more effectual for
the Subversion of those you have undertaken to defend, this being to resolve
all Revelation perfectly and purely into Natural Reason, to bound its
Credibility by that, and leave no room for Faith in other things, than what can
be accounted for by Natural Reason without Revelation.

Your Lordship 1 Answ. p. 48-54.
insists much upon it, as if I had contradicted what I had said in my Essay, B.
2. C. 23.
by saying, That upon my Principles it cannot be demonstratively proved, that
it is an immaterial Substance in us that Thinks, however probable it be. He
that will be at the pains to read that Chapter of mine, and consider it, will
find, that my Business there was to show, that it was no harder to conceive an
immaterial than a material Substance; and that from the Ideas of Thought, and a
Power of moving of Matter, which we experienced in out selves (Ideas originally
not belonging to Matter as Matter) there was no more difficulty to conclude
there was an immaterial Substance in us, than that we had material Parts. These
Ideas of Thinking, and Power of moving of Matter, I in another place showed did
demonstratively lead us to the certain knowledge of the Existence of an
immaterial Thinking Being, in whom we have the Idea of Spirit in the strictest
Sense; in which Sense I also applied it to the Soul, in that 23d Chapter of my
Essay, the easily conceivable possibility, nay great probability, that that
thinking Substance in us is immaterial, giving me sufficient Ground for it: In
which Sense I shall think I may safely attribute it to the thinking Substance
in us, till your Lordship shall have better proved from my Words, That it is
impossible it should be immaterial. For I only say, That it is possible, i. e.
involves no Contradiction, that God the omnipotent immaterial Spirit should, if
he pleases, give to some parcels of Matter, disposed as he thinks fit, a Power
of Thinking and Moving: Which parcels of Matter so endued with a Power of
Thinking and Motion, might properly be called Spirits, in contradistinction to
unthinking Matter. In all which, I presume, there is no manner of Contradiction.

I justified my use of the word Spirit in that Sense from the Authorities of
Cicero and Virgil, applying the Latin word Spiritus, from whence Spirit is
derived, to the Soul as a thinking Thing, without excluding Materiality out of
it. To which your Lordship replies, 1 Answ. p. 58-60.
That Cicero, in his Tusculan Questions, supposes the Soul not to be a finer
sort of Body, but of a different Nature from the Body. -- That he calls the
Body the Prison of the Soul. -- And says, That a wise Man's Business is to draw
off his Soul from his Body. And then your Lordship concludes, as is usual, with
a Question, Is it possible now to think so great a Man looked on the Soul but
as a modification of the Body, which must be at an end with Life? Answ. No; it
is impossible that a Man of so good Sense as Tully, when he uses the word
Corpus or Body for the gross and visible parts of a Man, which he acknowledges
to be mortal, should look on the Soul to be a modification of that Body; in a
Discourse wherein he was endeavoring to persuade another, that it was
immortal. It is to be acknowledge'd that truly great Men, such as he was, are
not wont so manifestly to contradict themselves. He had therefore no Thought
concerning the modification of the Body of Man in the Case: He was not such a
Trifler as to examine, whether the modification of the Body of a Man was
immortal, when that Body it self was mortal: And therefore that which he
reports as Dicoearchus's Opinion, he dismisses in the beginning without any
more ado, c. 11. But Cicero's was a direct, plain and sensible Enquiry, viz.
What the Soul was, to see whether from thence he could discover its
Immortality? But in all that Discourse in his first Book of Tusculan Questions,
where he lays out so much of his Reading and Reason, there is not one Syllable
showing the least Thought, that the Soul was an immaterial Substance; but many
Things directly to the contrary.

Indeed (1.) he shuts out the Body taken, in the Sense he uses Chapter 19, 22, 30,
31, etc.
Corpus all-a-long, for the sensible organical parts of a Man; and is positive
that is not the Soul: And Body in this Sense, taken for the Humane Body, he
calls the Prison of the Soul; and says a wise Man, instancing in Socrates and
Cato, is glad of a fair opportunity to get out of it. But he no where says any
such thing of Matter: He calls not Matter in general the Prison of the Soul,
nor talks a Word of being separate from it.

2. He concludes, That the Soul is not like other Things here below, made up of
a Composition of the Elements, c. 27.

3. He excludes the two gross Elements Earth and Water, from being the Soul, c.
26.

So far he is clear and positive: But beyond this he is uncertain; beyond this
he could not get. For in some Places he speaks doubtfully, whether the Soul be
not Air, or Fire. Anima sit animus ignisve nescio, c. 25. And therefore he
agrees with Panoetius, that, if it be at all Elementary, it is, as he calls it,
Inflammata Anima, inflamed Air; and for this he gives several Reasons, c. 18,
19. And though he thinks it to be of a peculiar Nature of its own, yet he is so
far from thinking it immaterial, that he says, c. 19. That the admitting it to
be of an aereal or igneous Nature, would not be inconsistent with any thing he
had said.

That which he seems most to incline to is, That the Soul was not at all
Elementary, but was of the same Substance with the Heavens; which Aristotle, to
distinguish from the four Elements and the changeable Bodies here below, which
he supposed made up of them, called Quinta Essentia. That this was Tully's
Opinion is plain from these Words, Ergo, Animus qui ut ego dico, divinus est,
ut Euripides audet dicere Deus; and quidem si Deus, aut anima aut ignis est,
idem est animus hominis. Nam ut illa natura coelestis and terra vacat and
humore; sic utriusque harum rerum humanus animus est expers. Sin autem est
quinta quaedam natura ab Aristotele inducta; primum haec and deorum est and
animorum. Hanc nos sententiam secuti, his ipsis verbis in Consolatione haec
expressimus, c. 26. And then he goes on c. 27. to repeat those his own Words,
which your Lordship has quoted out of him, wherein he had affirmed, in his
Treatise de Consolatione, the Soul not to have its Original from the Earth, or
to be mixed or made of any Thing earthly; but had said, Singularis est igitur,
quaedam natura and vis animi sejuncta ab his usitatis notisque naturis:
Whereby, he tells us, lie meant nothing but Aristotle's Quinta Essentia; which
being unmixed, being that of which the Gods and Souls consisted, he calls it
divinum coeleste, and concludes it eternal, it being as he speaks, Sejuncta ab
omni mortali concretione. From which it is clear, That in all his Enquiry about
the Substance of the Soul, his Thoughts went not beyond the four Elements, or
Aristotle's Quinta Essentia to look for it. In all which there is nothing of
Immateriality, but quite the contrary.

He was willing to believe (as good and wise Men have always been) that the
Soul was immortal; but for that it is plain he never thought of its
Immateriality, but as the Eastern People do who believe the Soul to be
immortal, but have nevertheless no Thought, no Conception of its Immateriality.
It is remarkable what a very considerable and judicious Author Loubere du
Reyaume de Siam, T. 1. c. 19. 4.
says in the Case. No Opinion, says he, has been so universally received as
that of the Immortality of the Soul: But its Immateriality is a Truth the
knowledge whereof has not spread so far. And indeed it is extremely difficult
to let into the Mind of a Siamite, the Idea of a pure Spirit. This the
Missionaries, who have been longest among them, are positive in. All the Pagans
of the East do truly believe, That there remains something of a Man after his
Death, which subsists independently and separately from his Body. But they give
Extension and Figure to that which remains, and attribute to it all the same
Members, all the same Substances, both solid and liquid, which our Bodies are
composed of. They only suppose that the Souls are of a Matter subtle enough to
escape being seen or handled. -- Such were the Shades and the Manes of the
Greeks and the Romans. And it is by these Figures of the Souls, answerable to
those of the Bodies, that Virgil supposed Eneas knew Palinurus, Dido and
Anchises, in the other World.

This Gentleman was not a Man that traveled into those Parts for his Pleasure,
and to have the opportunity to tell strange Stories, collected by Chance, when
he returned: But one chosen on purpose (and he seems well chosen for the
purpose) to inquire into the Singularities of Siam. And he has so well
acquitted himself of the Commission, which his Epistle Dedicatory tells us he
had, to inform himself exactly of what was most remarkable there, that had we
but such an Account of other Countries of the East, as he has given us of this
Kingdom, which he was an Envoy to, we should be much better acquainted than we
are, with the Manners, Notions and Religions of that part of the World,
inhabited by civilized Nations, who want neither good Sense nor acuteness of
Reason, though not cast into the Mould of the Logic and Philosophy of our
Schools.

But to return to Cicero. It Is plain, That in his Enquiries about the Soul his
Thoughts went not at all beyond Matter. This the Expressions, that drop from
him in several places of this Book, evidently show. For Example, That the Souls
of excellent Men and Women ascended into Heaven; of others that they remained
here on Earth, c. 12. That the Soul is hot and warms the Body: That at its
leaving the Body it penetrates and divides, and breaks through our thick,
cloudy, moist Air: That it stops in the Region of Fire, and ascends no farther,
the equality of Warmth and Weight making that its proper place, where it is
nourished and sustained with the same Things, wherewith the Stars are nourished
and sustained, and that by the convenience of its. Neighborhood it shall there
have a clearer View and fuller knowledge of the Heavenly Bodies, c. 19. That
the Soul also from this height shall have a pleasant and fairer Prospect of the
Globe of the Earth, the disposition of whose Parts will then lie before it in
one View, c. 20. That it is hard to determine what Conformation, Size and Place,
the Soul has in the Body: That it is too subtle to be seen: That it is in the
Human Body as in a House or a Vessel, or a Receptacle, c. 22. All which are
Expressions that sufficiently evidence, that he who used them had not in his
Mind separated Materiality from the Idea of the Soul.

It may perhaps be replied, That a great part of this, which we find in chap.
19. is said upon the Principles of those who would have the Soul to be Anima
Inflammata, inflamed Air. I grant it. But it is also to be observed, That in
this 19th and the two following Chapters he does not only not deny, but even
admits, That so material a thing as infiamed Air may think.

The Truth of the Case in short is this; Cicero was willing to believe the Soul
immortal, but when he sought in the Nature of the Soul it self something to
establish this his Belief into a Certainty of it, he found himself at a loss.
He confessed he knew not what the Soul was; but the not knowing what it was, he
argues, c. 2. was no Reason to conclude it was not. And thereupon he proceeds
to the repetition of what he had said in his 6th Book de Repub. concerning the
Soul. The Argument, which borrowed from Plato he there makes use of, if it have
any force in it, not only proves the Soul to be immortal, but more than, I
think, your Lordship will allow to be true: For it proves it to be eternal, and
without beginning, as well as without end, Neque nata certa est, and aeterna
est, says he.

Indeed from the Faculties of the Soul he concludes right, That it is of divine
Original: But as to the Substance of the Soul, he at the end of this Discourse
concerning its Faculties, c. 25. as well as at the beginning of it, c. 22. is
not ashamed to own his Ignorance, what it is; Anima sit animus, ignisve,
nescio; nec me pudet ut istos, fateri nescive quod nesciam. Illud, si ulla alia
de re obscura affirmare possum, sive anima, sive ignis sit animus, eum jurarem
esse divinam, c. 23. So that all the Certainty he could attain to about the
Soul, was, That he was confident there was something divine in it, i. e. there
were Faculties in the Soul that could not result from the Nature of Matter, but
must have their Original from a Divine Power; but yet those Qualities, as
Divine as they were, he acknowledged might be placed in Breath or Fire, which I
think your Lordship will not deny to be material Substances. So that all those
divine Qualities, which he so much and so justly extols in the Soul, led him
not, as appears, so much as to any the least Thought of Immateriality. This is
Demonstration, That he built them not upon an exclusion of Materiality out of
the Soul; for he avowedly professes he does not know but Breath of Fire might
be this thinking Thing in us: And in all his Considerations about the Substance
of the Soul it self, he stuck in Air or Fire, or Aristotle's Quinta Essentia;
for beyond those it is evident he went not.

But with all his Proofs out of Plato, to whose Authority he defers so much,
with all the Arguments his vast Reading and great Parts could furnish him with
for the Immortality of the Soul, he was so little satisfied, so far from being
certain, so far from any Thought that he had, or could prove it, that he over
and over again professes his Ignorance and Doubt of it. In the beginnig he
enumerates the several Opinions of the Philosophers, which he had well studied,
about it: And then full of Uncertainty says, Harum Sententiarum quae vera sit,
Deus aliquis viderit, quae very simillima magna quaestio, c. 11. And toward
the latter end having gone them all over again, and one after another examined
them, he professes himself still at a loss, not knowing on which to pitch, nor
what to determine. Mentis acies, says he, seipsam intuens nonnunquam hebescit,
ob eamque causam contemplandi diligentiam omittimus. Itaque disbitans,
circuspectans, haesitans, mulia adversa revertens tanquam in rate in mari
immenso, nostra vehitur or atio, c. 30. And to conclude this Argument, when the
Person he introduces as discoursing with him, tells him he is resolved to keep
firm to the belief of Immortality, Tully answers, c. 82. Laudo id quidem, etsi
nihil animis oportet considere; movemur enim saepe aliquo acute concluso,
labamus, mutamusque sententiam clarioribus etiam in rebus; in his est enim
aliqua obscuritas.

So unmovable is that Truth delivered by the Spirit of Truth, That though the
Light of Nature gave some obscure glimmering, some uncertain hopes of a future
State; yet Human Reason could attain to no Clearness, no Certainty about it,
but that it was JESUS CHRIST alone who had brought Life and Immortality to
light, through the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Though we are now told, That to own the inability of natural Reason to bring
Immortality to Light, or which passes for the same, to own Principles upon
which the Immateriality of the Soul (and as it is urged consequently its
Immortality) cannot be demonstratively proved does lessen the belief of this
Article of Revelation, which JESUS CHRIST alone has brought to Light, and which
consequently the Scripture assures us is established and made certain only by
Revelation. This would not perhaps have seemed strange from those who are
justly complained of, for slighting the Revelation of the Gospel, and therefore
would not be much regarded, if they should contradict so plain a Text of
Scripture in favor of their all-sufficient Reason: But what use the Promoters
of Skepticism and Infidelity, in an Age so much suspected by your Lordship, may
make of what comes from one of your great Authority and Learning, may deserve
your Consideration.

And thus my Lord, I hope, I have satisfied you concerning Cicero's Opinion
about the Soul in his first Book of Tusculan Questions; which, though I easily
believe, as your Lordship says, you are no Stranger to, yet I humbly conceive
you have not shown (and upon a careful perusal of that Treatise again I think I
may boldly say you cannot show) one Word in it, that expresses any thing like a
Notion in Tully of the Souls Immateriality, or its being an immaterial
Substance.

From what you bring out of Virgil your Lordship 1 Answ. p. 62, 63.
concludes, That he no more than Cicero does me any kindness in this Matter,
being both Assertors of the Souls Immortality. My Lord, were not the Question
of the Souls Immateriality, according to Custom, changed here into that of its
Immortality, which I am no less an Assertor of than either of them, Cicero and
Virgil, do me all the kindness I desired of them in this Matter; and that was
to show, that they attributed the word Spiritus to the Soul of Man, without any
thought of its Immateriality; and this the Verses you your self bring out of
Virgil, Aeneids 4. 385.
Et cum frigida mors animae deduxerit artus
Omnibus umbra locis adero, dabis improbe poenas.
confirm, as well as those I quoted out of his 6th Book; and for this Monsieur
de la Loubere shall be my Witness in the Words above set down out of him; where
he shows, that there be those amongst the Heathens of our days, as well as
Virgil and others amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans, who thought the Souls
or Ghosts of Men departed, did not die with the Body, without thinking them to
be perfectly immaterial; the latter being much more incomprehensible to them
than the former.

Your Lordship's 1 Answ. p. 64-65.
Answer concerning what is said, Eccles. 13. turns wholly upon Solomon's taking
the Soul to be Immortal, which was not what I questioned: All that I quoted
that place for, was to show, that Spirit in English might properly be applied
to the Soul, without any Notion of its Immateriality, as (...) was by Solomon,
which whether he thought the Souls of Men to be immaterial, does little appear
in that Passage, where he speaks of the Souls of Men and Beasts together, as he
does. But farther, what I contended for, is evident from that place, in that
the Word Spirit is there applied, by our Translators, to the Souls of Beasts,
which your Lordship I think does not rank amongst the immaterial, and
consequently immortal Spirits, though they have Sense and Spontaneous Motion.

But you say, 1 Answ. p. 65.
If the Soul be not of it self a free thinking Substance, you do not see what
Foundation there is in Nature for a day of Judgment. Answer. Though the Heathen
World did not of old, nor do to this day, see a Foundation in Nature for a day
of Judgment: Yet in Revelation, if that will fatisfie your Lordship, every one
may see a Foundation for a day of Judgment, because God has positively declared
it; though God has not by that Revelation taught us, what the Substance of the
Soul is; nor has any where said, That the Soul of it self is a free Agent.
Whatsoever any created Substance is, it is not of it self, but is by the good
Pleasure of its Creator: Whatever degrees of Perfection it has, it has from the
bountiful Hand of its Maker. For it is true, in a natural, as well as a
spiritual Sense, what St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Not that we are sufficient of our celbes to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God.

But your Lordship, as I guess, by your following Words, would argue, That a
material Substance cannot be a free Agent; whereby I suppose you only mean,
that you cannot see or conceive how a solid Substance should begin, stop, or
change its own Motion. To which give me leave to answer, That when you can make
it conceivable, how any created, finite, dependent Substance can move it self,
or alter or stop its own Motion, which it must to be a free Agent; I suppose
you will find it no harder for God to bestow this Power on a solid, than an
unsolid created Substance. Tully, in the place above quoted, Tusculan
Quaestion, L. 1. C. 23.
could not conceive this Power to be in any thing, but what was from Eternity;
Cum pateat igitur aeternum id esse quod seipsum moveat quis est qui hane
naturam animis esse tributa^ neget? But though you cannot see how any created
Substance, solid or not solid, can be a free Agent (pardon me, my Lord, if I
put in both, till your Lordship please to explain it of either, and show the
manner how either of them can, of it self, move it self or any thing else) yet
I do not think, you will so far deny Men to be free Agents, from the difficulty
there is to see how they are free Agents, as to doubt, whether there be
Foundation enough for a day of Judgment.

It is not for me to judge how far your Lordship's Speculations reach: But
finding in my self nothing to be truer than what the wise Solomon tells me,
Eccl. 11. 5.
As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones do grow
in the Womb of her that is with Child; even so thou know not the Works of
God who makes all things. I gratefully receive and rejoice in the Light of
Revelation, which fets me at rest in many things; the manner whereof my poor
Reason can by no means make out to me: Omnipotency, I know, can do any thing
that contains in it no Contradiction; so that I readily believe whatever God
has declared, though my Reason find Difficulties in it, which it cannot master.
As in the present Case, God having revealed, that there shall be a day of
Judgment, I think that Foundation enough, to conclude Men are free enough to be
made answerable for their Actions, and to receive according to what they have
done, though how Man is a free Agent surpass my Explication or Comprehension.

In answer to the place I brought out of St. Luke, C. 24. v. 39.
your Lordship asks, 1 Ans. p. 66.
Whether, from these Words of our Savior, it follows, that a Spirit is only an
Appearance. I Answer. No, nor do I know who drew such an Inference from them:
But it follows, that in Apparitions there is something that appears, and that
that which appears is not wholly immaterial; and ye this was properly called
(...), and was often looked upon by those, who called it (...) in Greek, and
now call it Spirit in English, to be the Ghost or Soul of one departed, which I
humbly conceive justifies my use of the Word Spirit, for a thinking, voluntary
Agent, whether material or immaterial.

Your Lordship says, 1 Ans. p. 67.
That I grant, that it cannot, upon these Principles, be demonstrated, that the
spiritual Substance in us is immaterial: From whence you conclude, That then my
Grounds of Certainty from Ideas, are plainly given up. This being a way of
arguing, that you often make use of, I have often had Occasion to consider it,
and cannot after all see the force of this Argument. I acknowledge, that this
or that Proposition cannot upon my Principles be demonstrated, Ergo, I grant
this Proposition to be False, that Certainty consists in the Perception of the
Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas. For that is my ground of Certainty, and
till that be given up, my grounds of Certainty are not given up.

You farther tell me, ib.
That I say, the Souls immateriality may be proved probable to the highest
degree; to which your Lordship replies. That is not the Point: For it is not
Probability but Certainty, that you are promised in this way of Ideas, and that
the Foundation of our Knowledge and real Certainty lies in them, and is it
dwindled into a probability at last? This is also what your Lordship has been
pleased to object to me more than once, That I promised Certainty. I would be
glad to know in what Words this Promise is made, and where it stands, for I
love to be a Man of my Word. I have indeed told wherein I think Certainty, real
Certainty does consist, as far as any one attains it: And I do not yet, from
any thing your Lordship has said against it, find any Reason to change my
Opinion therein: But I do not remember, that I promised Certainty in this
Question, concerning the Souls immateriality, or in any of those Propositions,
wherein you thinking I come short of Certainty, infer from thence, That my way
of Certainty by Ideas is given up. And I am so far from promising Certainty in
all Things, that I am accused by your Lordship of Skepticism, for setting too
narrow Bounds to our Knowledge and Certainty. Why therefore your Lordship asks
me, and is the Certainty [of the Souls being immaterial] dwindled into a
Probability at last? Will be hard to see a Reason for, till you can show, that
I promised to demonstrate, that it is immaterial; or that others upon their
Principles without Ideas, being able to demonstrate it immaterial, it comes to
dwindle into bare Probability, upon my Principles by Ideas.

One thing more I am obliged to take notice of. I had said, 1 Let. p. 113.
That the Belief of God being the Foundation of all Religion and genuine
Morality, I thought no Arguments, that are made use of to work the persuasion
of a God into Men's Minds, should be invalidated, which I grant is of ill
Consequence. To which Words of mine I find, according to your particular Favor
to me, this Reply, 1 Ans. p. 89.
That here I must give your Lordship leave to ask me, what I think of the
universal consent of Mankind, as to the Being of God? has not this been made
use of, as an Argument, not only by Christians, but by the wisest and greatest
Men among the Heathens? And what then would I think of one who should go about
to invalidate this Argument? And that by proving, That it bath been discovered
in these latter Ages by Navigation, that there are whole Nations at the Bay of
Soldania, in Brasil, in the Caribbe-Islands and Paraquaria, among whom there
was found no Notion of a God. And even the Author of the Essay of Hum ane
Understanding has done this.

To this your Question, my Lord, I Answer, That I think that the universal
consent of Mankind, as to the being of a God, amounts to thus much, that the
vastly greater majority of Mankind, have, in all Ages of the World, actually
believed a God; that the majority of the remaining part have not actually
disbelieved it, and consequently those who have actually opposed the belief of
a God, have truly been very few. So that comparing those that have actually
disbelieved with those who have actually believed a God, their number is so
inconsiderable, that in respect of this incomparably greater majority of those
who have owned the belief of a God, it may be said to be the universal consent
of Mankind.

This is all the universal consent which Truth of matter of Fact will allow,
and therefore all that can be made use of to prove a God. But if any one would
extend it farther, and speak deceitfully for God: If this universality should
be urged in a strict Sense, not for much the majority, but for a general
consent of every one, even to a Man in all Ages and Countries; this would make
it either no Argument, or a perfectly useless and unnecessary one. For if any
one deny a God, such a perfect universality of consent is destroyed; and if no
Body does deny a God, what need of Arguments to convince Atheists?

I would crave leave to ask your Lordship, were there ever in the World any
Atheist or no? If there were not, what need is there of raising a Question
about the being of a God, when no Body Questions it? What need of provisional
Arguments against a Fault, from which Mankind are so wholly free; and which by
an universal consent, they may be presumed to be secure from? If you say (as I
doubt not but you will) that there have been Atheists in the World, then your
Lordship's universal consent reduces it self to only a great majority, and then
make that majority as great as you will, what I have said in the place quoted
by your Lordship, leaves it in its full force, and I have not said one Word,
that does in the least invalidate this Argument for a God. The Argument I was
upon there, was to show, That the Idea of God was not innate; and to my purpose
it was sufficient if there were but a less number found in the World, who had
no Idea of God, than your Lordship will allow there have been of professed
Atheists; for whatsoever is innate must be universal in the strictest Sense:
One Exception is a sufficient Proof against it. So that all that I said, and
which was quite to another purpose, did not at all tend, nor can be made use of
to invalidate the Argument for a Deity, grounded on such an universal consent
as your Lordship, and all that build on it, must own, which is only a very
disproportioned Majority: Such an universal consent my Argument there neither
affirm snor requires to be less, than you will be pleased to allow it. Your
Lordship therefore might without any prejudice to those Declarations of good
Will and Favor you have for the Author of the Essay of Humane Understanding,
have spared the mentioning his quoting Authors that are in Print, for matters
of Fact, to quite another purpose, as going about to invalidate the Argument,
for a Deity from the universal consent of Mankind, since he leaves that
universal consent as entire, and as large as you your self do, or can own, or
suppose it. But here I have no reason to be sorry that your Lordship has given
me this occasion for the Vindication of this Passage of my Book, if there
should be any one besides your Lordship who should so far mistake it, as to
think it in the least invalidates the Argument for a God, from the universal
consent of Mankind.

But because you question the credibility of those Authors I have quoted, which
you say in the next Paragraph, 1 Answ. p. 89.
were very illchosen: I will crave leave to say, That he whom I relied on for
his Testimony concerning the Hotentots of Soldania, was no less a Man, than an
Ambassador from the King of England to the Great Mogul. Of whose Relation
Monsieur Thevenot, no ill Judge in the Case, had so great an Esteem, that he
was at the pains to translate it into French, and publish it in his (which is
counted no unjudicious) Collection of Travels. But to intercede with your
Lordship for a little more favorable allowance of Credit to Sir Thomas Roe's
Relation, Coore, an Inhabitant of the Country who could speak English, assured
Terry's Voyage, p. 17. and 23.
Mr. Terry, That they of Soldania had no God. But if he too have the ill luck
to find no Credit with you, I hope you will be a little more favorable to a
Divine of the Church of England now living, and admit of his Testimony in
confirmation of Sir Tho. Roe's. This worthy Gentleman, in the Relation of his
Voyage to Suratt, printed but two Years since, speaking of the same People, has
these Words, Mr. Ovington, p. 487.
They are sunk even below Idolatry, are destitute of both Priest and Temple,
and saving a little Show of rejoicing, which is made at the full and new Moon,
have lost all kind of religious Devotion. Nature has so richly provided for
their Convenience in this Life, that they have drowned all Sense of the God of
it, and are grown quite careless of the next.

But to provide against the clearest Evidence of Atheism in these People, you
say, 1 Answ. p. 90.
That the Account given of them makes them not fit to be a Standard for the
Sense of Mankind. This, I think, may pass for nothing, till some Body be found,
that makes them to be a Standard for the Sense of Mankind: All the use I made
of them was to show, That there were Men in the World, that had no innate Idea
of a God. But to keep something like an Argument going (for what will not that
do?) you go near denying those Cafers to be Men, what else do these Words
signify? Ibid.
A People so strangely bereft of Common Sense, that they can hardly be reckoned
among Mankind, as appears by the best Accounts of the Cafers of Soldania, etc.
I hope if any of them were called Peter, James, or John, it would be past
Scruple that they were Men, however Courvee, Wewena, and Cousheda, and those
others who had Names, that had no place in your Nomenclator, would hardly pass
Muster with your Lordship.

My Lord, I should not mention this, but that what you your self say here may
be a Motive to you to consider, That what you have laid such Stress on
concerning the General Nature of Man, as a real Being and the Subject of
Properties, amounts to nothing for the distinguishing of Species, since you
your self own that there may be Individuals wherein there is a common Nature
with a particular Subsistence proper to each of them, whereby you are so little
able to know of which of the Ranks or Sorts they are, into which you say, P.
165.
God has ordered Beings, and which he has distinguished by essential
Properties, that you are in doubt whether they ought to be reckoned among
Mankind or no.

Give me leave now to think, my Lord, That I have given an Answer to all, that
is any way material in either of the Letters you have honored me with. If
there be any Argument which you think of weight, that you find omitted, upon
the least Intimation from your Lordship where it is, I promise to consider it,
and to endeavor to give you Satisfaction concerning it, either by owning my
Conviction, or showing what hinders it. This Respect I shall think due from me
to your Lordship: Though I know better to employ the little Time my Business
and Health afford me, than to trouble my self with the little Cavillers, who
may either be set on, or be forward (in hope to recommend themselves) to meddle
in this Controversy.

Before I conclude, it is fit I take notice of the Obligation I have to you, for
the Pains you have been at about my Essay, which I conclude could not have been
any way so effectually recommended to the World, as by your manner of writing
against it. And since your Lordship's sharp Sight, so carefully employed for
its Correction, has, as I humbly conceive, found no Faults in it, which your
Lordships great Endeavors this way have made out to be really there, I hope I
may presume it will pass the better in the World, and the Judgment of all
considering Men, and make it for the future stand better even in your
Lordship's Opinion. I beg your Lordship's Pardon for this long Trouble, and am,

My LORD, Your Lordships most humble, and most obedient Servant, John Lock.
Oats, 4 May, School.
ERRATA.
P. 1. read 170 17 SEparate 182 24 up, the Scripture having 186 30 Seminal 32
Seminal 199 31 (...) 31 (...) 218 24 If 229 2 fashion 253 7 using 277 23 dele
1. 290 17 Infidelity, 291 6 said 273 21 say, 305 24 us. 321 32 Epithet 381 4
327 5 dele the Idea 347 13 *p. 152. Mr. in the Margent 348 24 351 20 opposition
of the 22 comes in in the 22 passage: 358 28 Peter. 361 7 in- 371 11 reason
about 372 34 my 406 21 dele as 409 31 what 412 12 Substance, but 19 these 428 8
make it good 434 3 divinum, coeleste 437 18 certe 27 nescire 441 3 anima
seduxerit 443 9 hanc 10 tributam 444 19 Yet


