A DISCOURSE of God's ways of DISPOSING OF KINGDOMS.

By the Bishop of S. ASAPH, Lord Almoner to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

A DISCOURSE of God's ways of DISPOSING OF KINGDOMS.

PART I.

By the Bishop of S. ASAPH, Lord Almoner to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

King Charles I. Works p. 711. in his Letter to his Son. With God I would have
you begin and end, who is King of Kings, the Soverain disposer of the Kingdoms
of the World, who puts down one and sets up another.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Thomas Jones, at the White-Horse, without
Temple Bar. 1691.

TO THE READER:
HAVING had the honor to preach before their Majesty's on the fifth day of
November last, and afterward to be commanded by Them to print my Sermon, which
contained many things concerning the late Revolution; I humbly craved leave to
put my thoughts into another form; wherein I might, not only say those things
more at large, but also prove what I had said in that Sermon; knowing I could
do it by such Authorities as would be sufficient to clear me from that charge
of Singularity or Novelty which has been too liberally thrown upon others that
have preached or written on that subject.

I know I am not better then my Brethren that have been thus used, and
therefore I expect to be treated no better then they have been. But I think I
have taken a Course to prevent the bringing of any charge against me on that
head. It will appear that I have delivered no other Doctrine then that which has
been received and past for current in the Church of England, ever since the
Reformation. And I hope it will be some service to that excellent Church, to
show that what some have reported of her Doctrins, has had no other ground,
but the mistakes of some of her Sons; who, tho excellent men, and such as our
Church may justly glory of upon other accounts, yet I must needs say have
judged too hastily of this matter; and seem to be too jealous of themselves,
for fear some wordly consideration should strike in with those second thoughts
that would make them judge otherwise.

We are not to answer for the private Opinions of all that are or have been of
our Communion. But, God be praised, we may safely stand by the Doctrins of our
Church, and the most approved Writers thereof. They are those that I have
endeavored to set forth in this following Discourse. While we adhere to them,
it will be for the honor of our Church; that as it has been always accounted
the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion, and proved it self to be so most
eminently in the last Reign; so it will appear to be the only unshaken strength
of this Monarchy; especially by the encouragment it has now under their
Majesty's Government, which I beseech God long to continue, to his Glory, and
the peace and prosperity of these Kingdoms.

THE CONTENTS OF CHAPTER I.
1. THE Occasion of Psalm LXXV. page 1. 2. The Scope of the Words, verse. 6, 7.
1. 3. I. That Power is from God. 2. 4. II. That he gives it Judicially. 3. 5.
The Heads of the following Discourse. 4. 6. Of the Institution of Government 5.
7. Of the several sorts of it. 6.
I. Of God's Conferring it on Persons. 1st. Immediately.
8. I. In the Patriarchical times. 7. 9. 2. In the Jewish Theocracy. 9. 10. 3.
In their hereditary Kingdom. 9. 11. 2dly. Mediately by the Peoples consent. 10.
12. 1st. On Account of Merit, 11. Thus especially on Founders of Nations. 11.
13. On first Planters. 12. 14. On Restorers and Deliverers. 12. 15. 2dly. On
Account of Favor. 14. 16. In the first Elections of Kings. page 14. 21. In the
hereditary Successions from them. 15. 22. In Elective Kingdoms. 16. 23. In Free
States. 16. 24. II. Of God's Transferring it from one to another. 17. 25. That
this is the Act of God. 18. 26. By giving one a Conquest over the other. 19.
27. That God does this Judicially. 21. 28. I. By way of Judgment on King or
People. 21. 29. Particularly on Kings. 23. 29. For neglect of Government. 23.
30. For Oppressing their People. 24. 31. This is Just and necessary. 25. 32.
II. By way of Justice, for. 27. 33. 1. War is an Appeal to God. 28. 34. 2. It
is proper to Kings. 29. 35. 3. It Is lawful when they have Just Cause. 33. 36.
Great danger makes it Necessary. 34. 37. Especially when also Religion is
concerned. 37. 38. When Religion is oppressed in another Kingdom. 39. 39. Example
of this in Queen Elizabeth's time. 42. 40. Especially, where it is settled by
Law. 45. 41. 4. Such a Cause makes a Just Conquest, 49. 42. And that Conquest
gives Right. 50. 43. Doubted when the Cause is certainly unjust. 55. 44. No
doubt when the Cause is certainly Just. 58. 45. A doubtful Cause is enough for
the Prince in Possession. 59. 46. The People^ ought to be satisfied with this.
61. 47. But much more when they see a certain Just Cause. 33. 48. When the
Cause is for their sake, it is to them not a Conquest, but a Deliverance. 66.
A DISCOURSE of God's ways of DISPOSING OF KINGDOMS.
Psalm LXXV. verses 6, 7. For Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from
the West, nor from the South.

But God is the Judge; He puts down one, and sets up another.


. 1. THIS Psalm was composed The Occasion of this Psalm.
by David (as I take it,) considering the State of Affairs that was immediately
after Readiness death: Psalm. LXXV. 3.
When (as it is here, ver. 3.) the Land, and the Inhabiters thereof were
dissolved, and even ready to fall; but that David bore up the Pillars of it.

. 2. Then, being in the nearest prospect The scope of these words
of the Kingdom, he called to remembrance what he had formerly said, what
warnings he had given, to those Fools and wicked men, that laid about them in
Readiness time, as if there would be no end of it. Psalm. LXXV. 45.
I said to the fools, deal not so foolishly; and to the wicked lift not up your
horn. Do not bear your selves so high, as it seems they did on that unhappy
King's Favor. Do not boast your selves of the power you have to do Psalm. LII. 1.
mischief; That Is the common use of Power, when it comes in the hands of Fools
and wicked men.

. 3. To teach them better, David shows I. That all Power is from God.
whence it is that Power comes into Men's hands; and upon what terms they are to
hold it. These two things the Psalmist shows in the words of this Text.

First, for the true Original of Power.

This in David's time all men took to be from Heaven, but from whom there, many
knew not. The Eastern Nations, who were generally given to Astrology, took it
to come from their Stars; and especially from the Sun, which was the chief
Object of their Worship. The Psalmist tells them, No. Promotion comes not that
way: Neither from the Planet's rising, nor setting, nor from its exaltation in
Mid-heaven. That Is the meaning of the words, from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South.

From the North of the Zodiac, or from (...) the hidden part under the Horizon,
they never thought it to come. And (as In Aben-Ezra.
some think) that is the reason why that part of Heaven is not mentioned.

But the Psalmist might have another Reason to himself, why he did not think
fit to say, it comes not from the North. For there (as he says Psalm. XLVIII. 1.
elsewhere) on the North-side of Jerusalem was Mount Sion, the City of the
great King of Heaven and Earth. There in David's time was the Tabernacle, and
afterward there was the Temple, in which the Mercy-seat between the Cherubims
was the place of the Symbolical Presence of God. It was that Esa. XIV. 13.
a Mountain of the Congregation in the sides of the North, where God ordinarily
sat to hear the Prayers of his people. And where, in case of any Oppression,
he stood to (a) judge among the Gods. (b) Psalm. LXXXII. 1.
Could David say Promotion comes not from thence? No, he says the contrary in
the following, words; for God is the Judge: plainly showing, that to him Kings
owe their Authority. But

. 4. Secondly, It is to him as Judge. He II. That he gives it Judicially.
gives it Judicially. And so to him they are to account for it. Them that use
their Power well, he rewards for it; and that ordinarily, with a long and
prosperous Reign. Them that abuse their Trust, he as ordinarily deprives; and
gives that power into other hands; as it follows, He puts down one, and sets up
another.

This is the plain meaning of the Psalmist's words; which will be of great use
in the following discourse. Now for the matters contained in it.

. 5. First, Promotion, or Exaltation to power; The Heads of the following
Discourse.
and Secondly, the transferring of it from one to another, (as from Saul to
David in the Case before us,) both these are ascribed here to God: and that by
Him that was best able to judge of these matters.

David, as being a Prophet inspired, best knew the mind of God, and his ways of
dealing with Mankind. And David, as being called to be a King by the immediate
designation of God, best knew what belonged to that dignity. His word therefore
is on all accounts a sufficient proof.

But that what he says may be the better understood, I shall show, First in
General, and then in Sundry particulars, that it is the Prerogative of God, by
which He acts, both in the disposing, and also in the transferring of Kingdoms.

Secondly, I shall show that the work of God in bringing His Majesty into this
Kingdom; was truly God's making use of the latter branch of his Prerogative, in
putting down one, and setting up another.

Lastly, That it ought to be acknowledged by us; not only in an humble
Submission to their Majesty's Government, but also by paying them all those
Duties which Subjects owe to their Prince, according to the word of God, and
the Laws of this Kingdom.

. 6. First, for the Original of Government. Of the Institution of Government.
Of this the less needs to be said, because it is so plainly declared, and so
often repeated in Scripture. It is declared of Government in general, that it
is the Romans XIII. 1, 2.
Ordinance of God; that is, it is a thing of Divine Institution. It is not only
permitted by his Providence, but it is appointed by his Will, that there should
be a Government among Men. It is the way he has provided for the good of human
Society. And therefore whosoever is against it, he is an Enemy to human Society.

But because all Mankind cannot be under any one Government, no more than they
can all be one People, or one Nation; therefore the Apostle goes farther, to
apply this to the several Governments of the several Nations and Countries.

The (a) Powers that be are of God: That is, the several Kingdoms and States,
even all that are in the World, all have their Authority from God. And
whosoever disobeys or resists, the public Order and Government of the Kingdom
or State where he lives, he disobeys or Romans Xiii. 1.
resists (c) Verse. ^.
the Ordinance of God; and (...), he shall be called to account for it. The
Magistrate may punish him if he will. He has the Sword of God committed to him
for that purpose, as well for the punishment of this as of all other
Enormities. But for this, if the Magistrate will not, or cannot, God will
surely do it, first or last; He that resists, shall receive to himself
Damnation. Here is a plain Declaration God's ways of conferring Soverain Power.
of the Will of God, as to the Institution of Government in general. But now as
to the conferring of it on particular Persons.

. 8. Immediately, in the Patriarchs times.
This at first was from God, we are sure, because it was from the beginning of
Mankind. The first Men that were born into the World, were all of Adam's
Family. And so were all that came after, till some of them went sorth, as Cain
did to make Families for themselves. Till then, they were governed by him that
was the common Father of Mankind.

Noah was the Father of all them that lived after the Flood; and he was their
Governor too, till his Children were too many to live in one Country, or under
one Government, and then they branched themselves into Nations, Genesis X. 32.
among whom the Earth was divided.

When the Fathers or Heads of some of those Nations made Conquests upon one
another, as Nimrod did on the Nations about him, who was therefore called Genesis
X. 9.
a mighty hunter before the Lord; or when they were otherwise incorporated
together; these made the ancient great Monarchies, whereof the Assyrian and
Egyptian are famous in ancient History.

Other of those Nations, or rather great Families, continu,d in their ancient
way of Patriarchical Government. Particularly in that Line out of which God
chose his peculiar People; Abraham was Genesis Xxi^i. 6.
a mighty Prince in his days: But all his Subjects were of his Family, out of
which proceeded Genesis Xvi 5.
many Nations. From his Son Isaac, there came G^n. Xxv. 23.
two Nations of People; one of them by Esau Father of Edom, the other by Jacob
the Father of Israel; who for their times also governed those Families or
Nations.

When Jacob and all his Family went down into Egypt, there ended their
Patriarchical Government. After which, being Subjects to the King of that
Country, they were brought into a long and sore Bondage, which Exodus I. 14.
made their Lives bitter to them for many Generations.

. 9. In the Times of the Theocracy.
From this God delivered them by the hand of Moses. And to show them how they
ought to value this mercy, from thence he entitled himself to be Exodus Xix. 4,
5. 2 Samuel Xii. 12.
their King, and dated the Psalm. Cxxiv. 1, 2
beginning of his Reign. As such he gave them Laws, according to which they
were governed by his Vicegerents. First his Servant Moses, then Joshua, and
then all the Judges successively. They were all such as he either named to them
himself, or gave such signs of his choosing them as were equivalent to a
Nomination.

. 10. In the Hereditary Kingdom of Israel.
This Theocracy, as we call it, continued from their coming up out of Egypt,
till such time as God, at his Peoples desire, gave them 1 Samuel Viii. 5.
a King to judge them like all the Nations. How was that? In most Nations we
read of at that time, and perhaps in some from the Confusion of Tongues, it was
the Peoples part to choose who should rule over them: And that either upon every
Vacancy, as in Elective Kingdoms; or at the first, once for all, as in those
that were Hereditary. God was pleased so far to grant his Peoples Request, that
they should be an Hereditary Kingdom: But for the first King of the reigning
Line, God would have the choosing of him himself. And accordingly, first he
chose Saul, whose 1 Samuel Xiii. 13.
Kingdom should have been Hereditary, if he had not hindered it by his
Disobedience to God. Then God made choice of David, a Man Ver. 14.
after his own heart; and David having many Sons, among them all God 1 Chronicles.
Xxviii. 5.
chose Solomon to continue the Succession in him and his Heirs, as he did till
the Babylonian Captivity.

This Account that I have given, runs through half the Age of the World. And so
far, I think, it is worth the observing, that there was no other standing
Government in that Nation, which God chose to be his peculiar People, but what
was administered by single Persons. And those Persons Title to the Government
was either Patriarchical, or by Divine Nomination: Both which ways of coming
into Power were so wholly of God, that the People had nothing to do, but to
accept the Choice of God, and to submit to it.

. 11. Mediatly by consent of the People.
In other Nations indeed, that did not keep up the Patriarchical Right, there
the Peoples Consent was required, except in the Case of Conquest
beforementioned. And this Consent being merely an human Act, it may seem that
the Authority it gives, is not, as we are here taught, from God only.

But to set this Matter right, we are to consider And that,
by what Motives it is, that the People are generally led, to choose any one to
rule over them. All their Motives may be reduced to these two; either Merit, or
Favor. If there be any other, they are but Compositions of these.

. 12. On account of Merit. Thus especially on Founders of Nations.
The first Choice of Kings I conceive to have been made on account of Merit,
the People being led to it by a sense of the Benefits they had received. I
judge so from that which having been already shown I take now for granted, that
the Earth was peopled at first by great Families. Now when those, by Oppression
of powerful Neighbors, or by Civil Discord among themselves, came to be in
great Distress, such as made them see the Necessity of being united in greater
Bodies for their own Preservation; those Heroic Men, that showed them the way
of it, and that brought them under Government and Laws, these were called the
FOUNDERS of the Nations. Such was Moses among the People of Israel. When he had
brought them out of Egypt, they owned this as a Title to Government, that he
would have had, Exodus Xxxii. 1.
even without Divine Nomination. Such was Cecrops among the Athenians, and
Romulus among the Romans, and other first Kings in other Nations; who were so
sensible of the Benefits that they received by them, that they not only
believed them sent from God, but they made them Gods themselves, and worshipped
them, as the Tutelar Deities of their Nations.

. 13. Next to these, and something like On first Planters.
them, were the first Planters of Colonies: Such as Cadmus was at Thebes,
AEneas in Latium, and the like. In England such were Hengist, and the rest that
began the Seven Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy. From one of these, namely,
from Cerdic King of the West Saxons, the Descent of our Royal Family is
unquestionable.

. 14. But the most like to Founders are they whom God raises up to be the
Restorers On Restorers and Deliverers.
and Deliverers of a People, when they are either brought low by Tyranny and
Oppression, or when they are torn in pieces by Factions among themselves. Thus
when the Jews were oppressed by Antiochus Epiphanes, who had Right indeed to a
Tribute from that People, but not content with that, would usurp an absolute
Dominion over them; Mattathias and his Sons stood up for their Religion and
Liberty; and by asserting both, they so won the People to themselves, that with
their Consent 1 Macc. Xiv. 41, 49.
the Government was established in that Family. And thus when the Roman State,
being torn by a long Civil War had even bled it self to death, (it had
certainly expired, if it had been left to it self,) Augustus came in, and not
only bound up the Wounds, but put, as it were, a new Soul into the Body; He
made it not only live, but flourish, by his great Care and Wisdom, and
Industry; which so obliged the People, that they even forced him to accept of
the Empire. These were such Benefits to Mankind, as whosoever was enabled to
do, it was as if God had put a Glory about his Head; it so marked him out to the
People, that they could not go beside him in their Choice; they took him as one
already chosen of God.

. 15. On account of Favor.
Where Kings have been chosen on account of less Benefits, there have been
grains of Favor thrown in to make up weight. Favor is a Motive, (as I have
shown,) which works as well singly, as when it is joined with any other
Consideration. For it is grounded, not so much upon real Worth, as upon the
Opinion they have conceived of any Person. It is Opinion that governs the
unthinking sort of Men, which are far the greatest part of the Body of a
Nation. And when all these go together, they are like the Atoms of Air, which
though taken apart they are too light to be felt, yet being gathered into a
Wind, they are too strong to be withstood. But he that brings the Winds out of
his Treasures, he also governs these, and turns them which way he pleases. It
is the same great God, that Psalm. Lxv. 7.
rules the roaring Waves of the Sea, and the (...) In the first Elections of
Kings.
Multitude of the People.

. 16. For Examples of this in the Electing of Kings, we are not to look for
them in Scripture, because all the Kings that God set over his People were, as
I have shown, by Divine Nomination. But since there were other ways by which
Kings were made in other Nations; and since we are sure the Psalmist's words
are as true of these, as of any that we read of in Scripture; therefore I
conclude, that in these also Promotion came from God, by those ways King
James's Works, page 612. What God did directly by his Word and Oracle among his
own People in the Election of Kings, he did it only by his secret working in
the Hearts of other Nations, though themselves knew not whence those Motions
came which God by his Finger writ in their Hearts.
which his Providence used in setting up the first Kings in other Nations.

S. 21. This Doctrine is as true of the following In Hereditary Successions.
Kings that came in by Hereditary Succession, where that way was taken in the
Constitution of any Kingdom. These Kings are indeed so much more the Creatures
of God, as they owe less to Men than any others; except only those that came in
by Patriarchical Right, or by Divine Nomination. There was the Act of Man in
that general Consent by which their Ancestors came first into the Government.
And by this Consent the Government being made Hereditary, there was no need of
any other Human Act for the Continuance of it in their Family. There is nothing
more Sacred among Men than a Right of Inheritance. But for the Derivation of
that Right to their Persons, they owe it only to God: Iren. adv. Haeres. V. 24.
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur. By whose
Command they are born Men, by his Command they are also made Kings.

Tertull. Apologet. c. 30. Inde est Imperator unde and homo antequam Imperator;
inde Potest as illi unde and Spiritus. He is from thence made Emperor from
whence he has also his Breath.


For it comes to them by their Birth, and they owe their Birth only to God.

S. 22. In those Kingdoms wherein the Succession In Elective Kingdoms.
is continued by a new Election upon every Vacancy, or wherein a new Election
is made upon the Extinguishing of the Royal Family, the Person on whom the
Election falls in either Case, ows his promotion to God, from whom it comes the
same way to him, as it came to his first Predecessor in that Kingdom.

S. 23. I do not speak all this while of Free States In Free States.
or Commonwealths, because I do not believe there was any such Government known
in the World in David's time. For as we read of no such in Scripture, so it is
agreed among the Plato de Legibus iii. Aristot Polit* l. 3. Polyb. Hist. vi.
There are others in Sanderson. de Oblig. Consc. vii. 16.
most learned Heathen Writers, that the first Government every where was by
Kings. But wheresoever, upon the Cession of Kings, or the ceasing of the Royal
Family, or the like, there has followed a Change of the Government, from a
Monarchy to a Free State or Commonwealth; there also the Sovereign Power was of
God; and they that were invested with it had their Promotion from him, by that
Act of his Providence by which the Change was made, namely, by the Consent of
the People. And the same way the Providence of God brings in others to succeed
them in their Power from time to time.

It has been proved in all sorts of Government, that as the Sovereign Power in
every Country or Nation is of God, so they that are invested with it, whether
one or many, are in the place of God, and have their Promotion from him: which
was the first Part of the Doctrine of this Text.

S. 24. The 2d. Part is, that the Transferring Of Transferring the Power from
one to another.
of this Power from one to another, is the Act of God. And this he does
proceeding Judicially, as being Judge, says our Psalmist.

Here are two things to be considered. First, that it is God that does this;
and Secondly, that he does it Judicially.

S. 25. For the first of these, that the transferring That this is the Act of
God.
of power from one to another is the Act God, this adds much to that which went
before in the Text. It shows that God has such an Interest in the disposing of
power, as none can pretend to but himself.

Men have their part in setting up what they cannot put down again. It is a
Woman's Consent makes a Man be her Husband, the Fellows of a College choose one
to be their Head, a Corporation choose one to be their Mayor: All these do only
choose the person, they do not give him the Authority. It is the Law that gives
that, and that Law so binds their hands that they cannot undo what they have
done.

No more can a Nation (a) undo its own Act, in choosing Men into Sovereign
power. I do not say but they may choose Men into Government, expressly with that
Condition, that they shall be accountable to the people; and then the
Government remains in the Body of the Nation, it is that which we properly call
a Commonwealth. But for Sovereign Princes and Kings, even where they are chosen
by the Nation; and much more in Hereditary Kingdoms; as they have their
Authority from God, so they are only This is Protestant Doctrine. See Sanderson
de Oblig. Conscient. Vii. 20. Grot. de Jure B. and P. l. 3. 8: Pufendorf. de
Jure Not. and Gent. Vii. 6. 1. Popish Writers, as Bellarmin, Becan, etc. teach
otherwise. Suarez de Legibus III. 4. 6 mentioning that Doctrine, that a People
may depose their King, says it is altogether false; but corrects this
afterward, saying, nisi fortasse in Tyrannidem declinet, unless he happen to
become a Tyrant; of which this Jesuit allows the People to be Judge. He might
as well have agreed with his Fellows.
accountable to him. For he is the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. He alone both makes Kings by his Sovereign Power, and by the same he can
unmake them when he pleases.

Nay more than so, He puts down one, and sets up another. Both the Words imply
something of an High Place, and here they are used of Civil Government or
Dominion. Of this it is said, that God so deprives one of it, as that he
advances another in his stead.

S. 26. This can be understood of nothing else By giving one a Conquest over
the other.
but the Conquest of one Prince over another. For what one resigns by a
Voluntary Act, he is said to lay down, or to give it up to another. But putting
down is the Act of a Superior, by which one's place is taken from him against
his Will. Now God being the Superior that does this by the Act of his
Providence, it must be such an Act as gives the Power from one against his
Will, to another whom God is pleased to set up in his stead. Thus in giving one
Prince a Conquest over another, he thereby puts one in Possession of the
other's Dominions, he makes the other's Subjects become his Subjects, or his
Slaves, accordingly as they come in upon Conditions, or at the Will of the
Conqueror. In short, he gives him the whole Right and Power of the other
Prince.

But how can this be? For, if the other had a Right to his Kingdom, it cannot
be taken from him without Injury: and that cannot ordinarily be without a War,
and all the Evils contained in it; which are so much Inhumanity and Impiety
together, that whoseever has a true Notion of God, cannot think he would
approve of things so contrary to his Justice and Goodness; much less that he
would be the Author of them, as he must be according to this Doctrine.

S. 27. Thus some may object. But in Answer God gives a Conquest Judicially.
to this, Consider how we judge of the Actions of Kings, when they take away
the Lives and Estates of Offenders. To do the same things would be Murder and
Robbery in private Men. But we know they are Acts of Judgment in them that have
the power of the Sword; and they would not be faithful to their Trust if they
did not do them. In this Text we are taught to think so of God, that when he
puts down one, and sets up another, he does it as a Judge, even Psalm. Lxxxii. I.
Judge among Gods. He deals with them, as they ought to do with their Subjects.
Think of that, and you will not stick at this Objection.

As a Judge, he administreth Judgment and Justice both which are said to be the
habitation of his Throne. Particularly, when he decrees a Conquest of any King
or Kingdom; it is either as a Judgment on them for Offenses against himself, or
it is by way of Justice to others whom they have injured. And both these ways
he does what is best, for the glory of God, and the good of Mankind.

S. 28. First by way of Judgment, or punishment I. By way of Judgment.
for the Sins of a Prince, or People, or both; God ordinarily suffers a
Rebellion to arise within the Kingdom, or a Foreign power to break in upon it.
And though these Rebels, or this Foreign power, may be such as have received no
provocation, nor mind nothing else but Dominion and Prey: yet God makes use of
them in this Case, as he does of an Inundation at other times; He lets them
loose, to overrun, and waste, and spoil the Country; to overthrow the
Government, and to make themselves Lords of it; and therein to execute God's
Judgment on that wicked Prince or Nation.

This was Readiness Case, on which Psalm. Lxxv. 8.
this Psalm seems to have been made. He had driven out David, the Terror of the
Philistines; and put the Priests to death for relieving him: for which
Injustice and Cruelty, together with his other Sins, God brought in the
Philistines upon him, and made him feel the want of those brave Men that he had
driven away; for in the day of Battle he had none to stand by him, and so he
lost both his Kingdom and his Life.

S. 29. So it commonly happens to those Kings On Kings.
that, living in a settled King James's Works, page 531. Every King, in a settled
Kingdom, is bound to observe the Paction made to his People by his Laws, in
framing his Government agreeable thereunto. Ib. A King, governing in a settled
Kingdom, leaves to be a King; and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he
leaves off to govern according to his Laws: in which Case, the King's
Conscience may speak to him, as the poor Widow said to Philip of Macedon,
either govern according to your Law, Aut ne Rex sis.
Kingdom, will not govern according to the Laws thereof. It is a breach of
Faith, not only to their people, but to King James's Works, page 553. I was
sworn to maintain the Law of the Land, and therefore I had been perjured if I
had altered it. Ib. page 531. All Kings that are not Tyrants or perjured, will
be glad to bind themselves within the Limits of their Laws. -- And they that
persuade them the contrary are Vipers and Pests, both against them, and the
Commonwealth.
God also, where they are sworn to the observing of Laws Pufendorf. de Leg.
Not. and Gent. VII. 6. 10. If he promises at his Coronation to govern
according to Laws, and breaks his Promise, he is forsworn: and yet that does
not dissolve his Government. King James's Works, page 531. Though no Christian
ought to allow any Rebellion of People against their Prince, yet does God never
leave Kings unpunisht when they transgress these Limits.
And though they are not therefore to be deposed by the people, yet they cannot
escape the vengeance of God, who ordinarily punishes them with the natural
effects of their Sin.

S. 30. Thus in the Case of not execution of For Neglect of Government.
Laws, especially those that are a check upon Irreligion and Immorality, the
very neglect of the due administration of Justice, though it seems to be
nothing at present, yet in time it will destroy the Government. It brings the
people into a Contempt of Authority, and they are not much to be blamed for it,
for what are they the better for such a Government? It lets them loose to all
manner of Sins, many of which are destructive to Society, and all expose them
to the wrath of God. Both these ways they are disposed for Rebellion at home;
and so enfeebled withal, that they cannot withstand a Foreign Enemy. In this
corrupt and weak Estate of a Government, it is almost impossible that there
should not be an Alteration.

S. 31. On the other hand, if a Prince will have For oppressing the People.
no Law but his Will, if he tramples and oppresses his people, their patience
will not hold out always, they will at one time or other show themselves to be
but Men. At least they will have no heart to fight for their Oppressor. So that
if a Foreign Enemy breaks in upon him, he is gone without remedy, unless God
interpose. But how can that be, when God is Judge himself? Should the Judge
hinder the doing of Justice? It is God's Work that Foreigner comes to do,
Howbeit he Esaias X. 7.
means not so. He means nothing perhaps, but the satisfying of his own Lust.
But though he knows it not, he is sent in God's Message: for which all things
being prepared by natural Causes, and God not hindering his own Work, but
rather hastening it, no wonder that it succeeds, and that oftentimes very
easily.

S. 32. If there seems in all this to be any This is Just and Necessary.
hard measure put upon Kings, it ought to be considered how much harder it
would be upon the People, if it were otherwise. When it happens (as it does
sometimes, and that especially for the Sins of a Nation,) that they come to be
under weak or wicked Kings; even these they must not resist, God has Romans
Xiii. 2.
taught them otherwise. What then? Must they be left to the Wills of these
Tyrants? Or of them that govern weak Kings, which is commonly worse? Must they
endure all the load of Oppression that these will lay upon them? that is, for a
few Men's pleasure must a Nation be made miserable? This is far from God's
design in the Institution of Government. He makes Kings his Ministers Romans
XIII. 4.
for the good of their People. If any will take that Office upon them, they
must behave themselves accordingly. Otherwise, if they take it as given them
only for themselves, it is such a breach of Trust, that God cannot but punish
them for it. But how should he do this, so as that the punishment may have its
effect, in warning others not to transgress in like manner? He cannot do this
better, than by making Men his Instruments in it. And therefore it is that God,
though he has infinite ways, yet commonly chooses to employ Men in this Service.
He either finds them at home, that are not afraid Romans XIII. 3.
of the Power as they ought to be: or he brings them in from Foreign Countries,
Whistling for the Fly out of Egypt, or the Be out of the Land of Esaias VII. 17.
Assyria; In plain words, stirring up a Pharaoh or a Nebuchadnezzar against
them. God may employ such if he will, though none is too good for this work, to
execute his righteous Judgments. And when God does his work by their hands,
whatsoever the Instruments may be, the Cause being so Just, and so evident as
we have supposed; All Men that see it will say, Doubtless Psalm. Lvii. 11.
there is a God that judges on the Earth When Don Pedro King of Castile, by his
Tyranny, had so lost himself at home, and gained so many Enemies abroad, that
his Bastard Brother, being set up against him by some of the Neighboring
Kings, had driven him out of his Kingdom without Blood; he came to our Black
Prince, who was then at Bourdeaux, and desired him to bring him back into his
Kingdom. The Prince called a Council upon it, where some of his Friends advised
him to forbear: telling him the great Evils that this King had done; and adding
this in the Conclusion, All that he has now to suffer, is but the Rod of God,
sent to chastise him, and to give Example to other Christian Kings and Princes
of the Earth that they may not do like him. Froissart Hist. l. 231.


S. 33. God does this by way of Justice.
In the way of Justice, God acts as a Judge between two Sovereign Powers, when
they bring their Causes before him; that is, when they make War upon one
another. And when he sees his time, that is, when he finds the Cause ripe for
Judgment, if it proceeds so far, then he gives Sentence for him that is
injured, against him that has done the Injury. The effect of this Sentence is
a just Conquest; and that is the other way in which God, proceeding Judicially,
puts down one, and sets up another.

That this may be the better understood, there are four things to be considered
particularly.

First, That War is an Appeal to the Justice of God.

Secondly, That none can be Parties to this, but they that are in Sovereign
Power.

Thirdly, That to make it a just War, there must be a just and sufficient Cause.

Fourthly, That Conquest in such a War is a decisive Judgment of God, and gives
one a Right to the Dominions that he has conquered from the other.

S. 34. War is an Appeal to God.
That War is an Appeal to God, this appears in the nature of the thing. For it
is the Act of two Parties that differ about their Right. And they put it upon
such an issue as none but God can give. For both agree in effect, that the
Right shall be adjudg'd to him that has the Victory. And it is God alone that
is the Giver of 1 Chronicles. Xxix. 11.
Victory.

Therefore the Judgment of God has been solemnly appealed to by Nations when
they were engaging in War. We see a notable Instance of this in the History of
Jephtha. When his Country was invaded by the Ammonites, he stood up to defend
it, with this express Declaration to their King: I have not sinned against
thee; Judge. XI. 27.
But thou do me wrong to war against me, The Lord the Judge, be Judge this
day between the Children of Israel and the Children of Ammon. The like
Declarations are frequent in the ancient Roman History.

S. 35. It is proper to Kings.
The Parties to this Appeal, are properly such as have no Superior but God. For
them that have an earthly Superior, their Appeal lies to him as God's Minister
Romans Xiii. 6.
attending continually on this very thing. So that Subjects know whither to go
on all occasions, whether for the asserting of their Rights, or reparation of
Injuries. Their proper recourse is to the KING as Supreme, or to those 1 Pet.
II. 13, 14.
that are Commissioned by him: and these are to judge their Cause according to
the LAW of the Land, which is the common Standard of Justice among private Men.

It has been the manner indeed, (and perhaps is so still in some Nations,) that
where Princes find a Cause too hard for them to decide, they give the Parties
leave to end it in a Duel between themselves. But this, being an Appeal to God,
is most strictly forbidden to Subjects in all well-ordered Kingdoms. And this
very Usage shows that they have no Right to it otherwise, but only by their
Princes permission.

For Sovereign Princes, their Rights and their Injuries are inseparably joined
with those of their Kingdoms and Nations. And therefore they cannot pass by
Injuries, as private Men may, for Peace sake: they must insist on those Rights
with which God has entrusted them for others more than themselves: it is not
only their Interest, but their Duty so to do.

But all Princes being equally concerned in this matter, what if a Question
should arise between any two of them? or what if one should invade the
unquestionable Rights of the other? There is no ending the difference between
them in the way of private Men: for they have no earthly Superior to fly to:
they have nothing to do with one another's Laws: there is no adjusting of their
Damages and Costs. Private Justice has Scales to weigh out these things,
Bishop Bramhall's Works, p. 834. Private Right, and private Justice, is between
particular Men. Public Right, and public Justice is between Commonwealths, as
in a Foreign War.
but public Justice has none. Therefore Princes must have some other way to
come by their Rights, or else they are in much worse Case than private Men.

But what Way should that be, by which Princes can be obliged against their
Wills to do Right to one another? It must be by such a LAW as they all agree
to, and by such a JUDGE as is their common Superior. Such a Law is that which
we call the Law of Nations; See Pufendorf. de Jure Not. and Gent. II. 3. 21.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. I. Says of the Law of Nations, that it can be no more
prejudiced by the Laws of any Kingdom, than these can be by the Resolutions of
private Men.
being made up of such Customs as are observed among Princes, as our Common Law
is made up of those that are observed in this Kingdom. And for that common
Superior, it is God alone, who styles himself the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. But as by the Law of Nations, the Way that Princes have for the ending
of those differences among themselves which cannot be ended otherwise, is See
Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis i. 2. 1. ad 5.
by War. So this (as has been already shown) is an Appeal to God; it is the
Way that Princes have to sue one another in his Court.

And he has therefore given them the Power of the Romans Xiii. 3, 4.
Sword; that they may use it, not only in Judging their own People, but in
going to Law with other Princes.

This confirms that which has been said already, that Subjects have no Right to
make War, without the leave of their Princes. For as God has given Princes the
Power of the Sword, so he forbids it to Subjects, under a great Penalty, They
Mat. xxvi. 52.
that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword. And if he has not admitted
them to be Parties in his Court, then it is certain that they cannot sue there;
or if they do, they can acquire no Right by it. There is an Original Nullity in
all their Proceedings. Dudley Digs of the unlawfulness of Subjects taking up
Arms -- London, 1675. 3. p. 75. Equals -- if injured they require Satisfaction,
and upon denial of it attempt to compass it by force, they are esteemed by the
Law of Reason and Nations, Just Enemies; whereas Subjects, if they make War
upon their Sovereign, though when wronged, are worthily accounted Rebels.

See Albericus Gentilis de jure Belli B. fol. 1. from Pomponius, c. 118. tituli
Digest. de verb. Signif. and Ulpian. c. 24. tit. de Captivis. See Grot. de Jure
Belli and Pacis l. 3. 5. Zouch p. 30 de jure inter Gentes, l. 6.




As none have right of making War but they that are in Sovereign Power, so
neither is it given to them that they may make what use of it they please:
Particularly, they must not make War for the satisfying of their Lusts,
Ambition, Covetousness, Vainglory, or the like. He that troubles an earthly
Court of Justice upon any litigious or trifling Account, ought to be condemned
in good Costs. But if it appear he comes thither to defraud or to oppress, and
that with a Color of Justice, he must look for greater Severity. How much more
ought Princes to dread the just Judgment of God, if they presume to Appeal to
him for no Cause, or for such as he hates and abhors? Nay the righteous God
will not hold him guiltless that has Justice in his Cause, and yet in his
Heart has no such thing. Lawful things must be done lawfully. This Princes
must look to, as they will answer it to God.

35. But as far as Man can judge, it is 3. When they have Just Cause.
a Lawful War that is made for a just and sufficient Cause, which is the third
Thing we are to consider.

To make a Cause just, in strictness of Law, a very small matter may suffice.
For no Man has right to do another the smallest Injury, any more than he has
to do him the greatest. And Princes Justinian Instit. l. 2.
have no other way than by War to right themselves for the least Injury. But if
they are so tame to pass by the smallest Injuries, it will tempt ill-minded Men
to go on, and to do greater. These and many other things may be said, to make
it seem reasonable that Princes should insist upon the rigor of Justice.

But after all this, we must remember we are Christians; and Christ has given
us other measures of Justice, according to which even Princes ought to govern
themselves. He has taught us to soften the rigor of Justice, with a
Temperament of Goodness and Equity: And therefore not to run to Extremes, for
the righting of any small, any tolerable Injury.

36. Especially War, that is such an Extreme As in fear of great Danger.
as a wise and good Prince would not run into, if he could with a good
Conscience live out of it. But that he cannot do without the leave of other
Princes, that do not consider it with so great an Aversation. They may make it
Necessary for him to defend his just Rights, which he cannot forego without
wronging his Conscience. They may force him to it, if they will, with
insupportable Injuries. They may bring things to that pass, that the dangers of
Peace may be worse than the mischiefs of War are like to be. If it once come to
that, that there is more danger in sitting still, than there is like to be in
the hazards of War, then it is time for them to draw the Sword, to whom it is
given. And to do it first, if they can, to Lord Bacon's Works, London 1670, p.
2. in his Considerations on the War with Spain. The second of his three Just
Grounds for that War, was a just Fear of Subverting our Civil Estate: And
thereupon he says, That Wars preventive, upon just Fears, are true Defensives,
as well as upon an actual Invasion.

In his Works, London 1638. among his Sermones Fideles, p. 189. he goes
further, in saying, justus metus imminentis periculi, etsi violentia aliqua non
praecessit, proculdubio Belli causa est competens and legitima. A just Fear of
imminent Danger, tho there has not been any Violence used, is but of all Doubt
a sufficient and lawful Cause of War.


prevent the danger of doing it too late afterward. They may do it Se
defendendo, as well against great and imminent See Grot. de Jure Belli and
Pacis, II. 20, 39. And Pufendorf. de Jure Naturae and Gentium, VIII. 6. 3.
danger, as against open actual Invasion. They may do it in Albericus Gentilis
de Jure Belli, I. fol. C. 3. says, it is Defensio Utilis, quando verendum ne
petamur. And Defensio Honesta quando alios tuemur. He brings both these
together, in the Case of Queen Elizabeth's defending the Dutch against the King
of Spain. Ib. and fol. D. he says, She might justly do it; for if the
Government of the Netherlands should be changed, and the King of Spain become
Absolute, she her self would be in Danger of him. He says this is ipsa Ratio
Imperiorum.

See Grot. de Jure B. and P. II. 25. 8. And Pufendorf. de Jur. Not. and Gent.
VIII. 6. 14. ending.


defense of another King's Subjects, if they see themselves in extreme danger
of suffering an intolerable Injury by his Oppression of his own People. And in
these Cases if one Lawfully may, then it is certain he ought to do it. There
needs no Scripture for this, it is the plain natural Law of Self-preservation.

They are so much the more obliged to this, when it is evident, that the
threatening mischief is like to fall upon others, as well as themselves; and
them such as they are bound in Honor and Conscience to protect and support.
When by sitting still they should certainly expose, not only themselves to be
ruined, but also their Friends and Allies to perish with them; in that Case
Saevitia est voluisse mori, it is a sort of bloody Peaceableness, it See
Grotius de Jure Belli and Pacis II. 20. 40.
is cruelty to Mankind to go to that degree of suffering Injuries.

37. But especially, when the Cause of Especially when also Religion is
concerned.
God is concerned, to whom we owe all things, and ought to venture all for his
sake. Surely it is his Cause, when it touches Religion; which is all that is
dear to him in this World. And though Religion it Self teaches us, if it be
possible, as much as in us lies to live peaceably with all Men; yet as it is
there supposed there may be Cause to break the Peace; so it Justinian Coll. VI.
7. 4. It is for this Cause that wo^^^ have made so many Wars in Africa and
Italy; namely, for Orthodoxy in Religion, and for the Liberty of our Subjects.
adds infinitely to that Cause when it comes to concern our Religion. Bishop
Bilson of the true difference between Subjection and Rebellion, Oxford, 1625.
p. 381. in the Margin has this Position. Princes who bear the Sword may
lawfully wage War for Religion.


I do not say, that Religion is to be propagated with the Sword. No, nor that
Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis II. 20. 48.
Princes may force it on their own Subjects; much less, upon other Princes or
their Kingdoms. These are things we justly abhor among those inhumane See
Council. Lateran. IV. Canon. 4. that it is every Prince's duty to persecute; and
that in Case he neglect it, he thereby forfeits his Dominions.

See the Oath that every Popish Bishop takes in the Pontisicale Romanum. It has
these words in it; I will persecute all Heretics and Schismatics, Rebels to
our Lord the Pope, and will fight against them to the utmost of my Power.

Suarez de Legibus III. 5. 8. ending. Says, Heathen Kings cannot be deprived
of their Power by War, unless they abuse it to the injury of Christian
Religion, or the destruction of the Faithful that are under them, as is the
constant Opinion of Divines: Meaning of them in the Roman Church.

Again III. 10. 6. If Insidels have the Faithful for their Subjects, and would
turn them from the Faith or Obedience of the Church, -- then the Church has
just Cause of War against them. But for Heretic Princes, he says there, that
the Church has direct Power over them, and may deprive them in punishment of
their Infidelity or Heresy. Ib.


Doctrins and Practices by which Popery has distinguished it Self from all other
Religions.

We have the more Cause to abhor it, for the sake of a Prince that is the very
Scandal of Popery; that has not only exceeded all Heathen Cruelty, in the
persecuting of his own Protestant Subjects, but even forced a neighbor Prince
to give him Game in his Dominions. His butchering the poor Vaudois was
barbarity beyond all Example. We have reason to believe, he would have hunted
here next: His Dogs had been upon us 'ere this time, if God had not wonderfully
preserved us. God preserve us still from Kings that have that way of
propagating Religion.

38. Yet it may be a Question, whether Q. when Religion suffers in another
Kingdom.
such Tyrannies being used on the account of Religion, give a just Cause of War
to other Princes of the same Religion. I speak now of Persecution in such
Countries where their Religion is not established by Law.

It is certainly true which the Apostle says, We are all Members of one and 1
Cor. Xii. 25, 26.
the same Body; and it is the duty of Members to have the same Care of one
another; and whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or one
Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it. It is true that Christian
Princes especially, as they have the charge of that part of Christ's Body that
is in their own Dominions, so they ought to extend their Care and Compassion to
their Fellow Members elsewhere. But whether they ought to concern themselves
for them so far as to make War on their account against their Kings by whom
they are persecuted, nay whether they may lawfully do this, is a doubt that may
deserve some farther Consideration.

The Christian Emperors seem to have made no doubt of this. For they made War,
sometimes for no other Cause but that of Religion, against such Kings as
persecuted the Christians in Their own Dominions: Sometimes, when they had
other Causes of War, they preferred this before all the rest; which certainly
they would not have done, if it had not weighed much in their Justinian. Coll.
VI. 7. 4. It is for this Cause that we have made so many Wars in Africa, and
Italy; viz. for Orthodoxy in Religion, and for the liberty of our Subjects.
Opinion

Of them of the Roman Communion there has been enough already said to show
their Opinion of this Cause. They that are for propagating Religion by the
Sword, cannot but think it a just Cause of War against any Prince, that he
persecutes those of their Religion. We have a notable Instance of this in
Cardinal Pool, who was one of the moderatest Papists of his age, and yet writ a
Book, wherein he pressed it most earnestly upon the Emperor Charles V. as his
Duty, to give over his War with the Turk, and to turn his Arms against King
Henry VIII. for oppressing the Catholics in his Dominions. Pope Pius V. whom
they have lately made a Saint, was as earnest with the Emperor Maximilian, and
with the Kings of Spain, France, and Portugal. He would have them all make War
against Queen Elizabeth, for persecuting his Catholics; though she never
touched one of them, till that Pope had forced her to it, by stirring them up
to Rebellion against her with his famous Bull of Deprivation. See Girolamo
Catena's Life of that Pope: And from him Camden's Annals, A. D. 1572.


39. For the Opinion of Protestants in Example in Q. Elizabeth's time.
this matter, we have it sufficiently declared in the Reign of that excellent
Queen; who made War first or last against Camdeni Annals A. D. 1559. In the
Queen's Consultation concerning the demands of Succor for the Protestants of
Scotland against the French faction in that Kingdom, says Pessimi Exempli
videbatur Principem patrocinium praestare tumultuantibus Principis alterius
Subditis: At Impietatis ejusdem Religionis cultoribus deesse. It seemed a thing
of very ill Example for one Prince to Patronize another Prince's Subjects in
Commotion: But it seemed an Impious thing to be wanting to them of the same
Religion. Whereupon the Resolution was taken, Ejusdem Religionis Professoribus
Subveniendum, and Gallos a Scotia exturbandos: That the Professors of the same
Religion must be helped, and that the French must be driven out of Scotland.

Ib. A. D. 1562. When she sent the Earl of Warwick with an Army into France,
she declared, she could not but do it, unless she would let the Guises* do
their pleasure with that young King and his Protestant Subjects. Quodque
Maximum, ne suam Religionem, Securitatem, and Salutem, ignave prodere
videretur: And which was chiefly to be considered, least she should seem basely
to betray her own Religion, Security, and Safety.

Ib. A. D. 1585. After Deliberation whether she should take upon her the
Protection of the States against the King of Spain, this was her Resolution,
Statuit and Christianae Pietatis esse, afflictis Belgis ejusdem Religionis
Cultoribus subvenire; and Prudentiae, exitiosas hostium Machinationes
praevertendo, populi sibi commissi incolumitati consulere -- Hinc B^lgarum
patrocinium palam suscepit -- She did Resolve, that it was a duty of Christian
Piety to help the Afflicted Dutch, being Professors of the same Religion; and
that it was a point of Prudence by preventing the destructive designs of their
Enemies, to provide for the Safety of her own People -- Thereupon she took upon
her publicly the Protection of the Dutch.


all the Popish Princes in her neighborhood, for persecuting the Protestants in
their Kingdoms. And herein, she was not only justified by the Pens of our
greatest Albericus Gentilis (her Professor of Law in the University of Oxford)
de jure Belli D. Speaking of her War with Spain, says, Age, age, obsiste,
Principum fortissima, nam obsistis Justissime.
Lawyers and Bishop Jewell's Defense of the Apology, p. 16. etc. and Bilson of
the Difference between Subjection and Rebellion, ubi supra.
Divines, but she had also the approbation and assistance of The Acts of
Parliament and Convocation that prove this, see at the end of this first
Chapter.
our Parliaments and Convocations.

It appears she was the rather inclined to do this, by a Jealousy of State, for
which there was an evident Cause in those Popish Doctrins beforementioned. For
she knew that those Kings accounted her and her People to be Heretics, as well
as they did their own Subjects, whom they used so very ill, for no other Cause
but because they were of her Religion. And therefore she had Reason to fear,
that when they had done their Work in the destroying of that Religion at home
in their own Kingdoms, the same blind Zeal, acted by the same Principles, would
bring them hither at last for the finishing of their Work, or as some have
worded it since, for the rooting out of the Northern Heresy. This was such a
danger that if she had suffered it to grow upon her, it had been a betraying of
her Trust, which she could not have answered to God. And yet, there being no
way to prevent it but by making War upon them in their own Kingdoms, this ought
to be accounted a Defensive War, and that made upon very just Cause, as has
been 36.
already shown.

We have Reason to hope that all Popish Princes are not under the Power of
those Principles. But yet, when any of them persecutes his Subjects that are of
another Religion, beyond the standing Laws of his Kingdom, they cannot expect
that other Princes, which are of that Suffering Religion, can be so confident
of this, as to stand idle and look on, and not rather when they see the danger
comes toward them, to defend themselves from it, if they can, by beginning a
War in that Prince's Dominions.

40. There is yet a greater Cause for this, Especially where it is the Religion
settled by Law.
when the Suffering Religion is that which is established by the Laws of that
Kingdom; and yet the King that is sworn to those Laws, and therefore bound to
support that Religion, is manifestly practicing against it, and endeavors to
supplant and oppress and extinguish it. What should other Princes or States
that profess the same Religion do in this Case? They see that such a King is
set upon the destroying of their Religion. He has declared a hostile mind
toward the Professors of it, in judging them not capable of enjoying their
Temporal Rights. If he deals thus with his own People, what are Foreigners to
expect at his hands? Can they think themselves secure because they are at Peace
with him? They cannot, unless Treaties are more Sacred then Laws. Or can they
rely upon his Oath? But they see he has broken it. And therefore they have
reason to Judge, that either he makes no Conscience of an Oath, or he thinks
Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, or he has a Superior that can dispense
with him, or that will absolve him from the guilt of Perjury in such Cases
where Religion is concerned. In short, they are sure of his Will to destroy
them, and cannot be sure of his Oath to the contrary. Wherein then can they be
safe? But in his Want of Power to do them hurt? But he will not want Power, if
they let him go on, for he is getting it as fast as he can. He is now
strengthening himself by those ways that he takes to be absolute Lord of his own
People: And he is now weakening Them, by oppressing all those among his People
whom he knows to be their Friends and Well-wishers. He does both these things
together: He daily lessens their Party, and makes them as many more Enemies, as
he gains Men over to his Religion. And if that be such a Religion as pretends
to a Right of destroying Men of other Religions; knowing this, they know what
they are to expect. When this pretended Right is armed with Power, it will
certainly fall upon them. So that they must begin before he is ready for them,
or else it will be too late to do any thing for their own Preservation.

But as it is necessary for them to do this for themselves, so they ought to do
it much the rather for the Sakes of their oppressed Brethren: That, by a timely
asserting of their own Right, they may also deliver them from the Evils they
suffer at present, and save them from that Destruction which is coming upon
them. As it was Just and Necessary on those former Accounts, so this makes it a
Pious Cause, and therefore the more Worthy of a true Christian Prince. It has
been judged so by them whose Names we have in great Veneration. We have the
Examples of our own Princes here in England in the best of Times since the
Reformation: These the Reader may find collected to his An Answer to the Paper
delivered by (...) his (...), to the (...) of London, p 16, 17, 18, 19.
Hand, in an excellent Book that has been lately published. But this may as
well be shown in the Examples of them whom our Princes chose to follow as their
Patterns; namely, of the Christians in Primitive times, and especially at the
time of the first Nicene Council. In these times we find that Constantine and
Licinius, having shared the Roman Empire between them, had passed a Decree
together at Milan, for Christianity to be the established Religion: And when
afterward Licinius, in his part of the Empire, would have oppressed it contrary
to Law; for that cause Constantine the Great made War upon him; and in
prosecution of that War, thrust him out of his Empire: For which he was so far
from being blamed by any Christian in those times, even by those that had been
Licinius's Subjects, as most of those Bishops were that sat in the Nicene
Council, that they all gave him the highest Praises and Encomiums, and Blessed
God that had sent them that happy Deliverance by his means. Eusebius was
Licinius's Subject, and he afterward writ the Life of Constantine the Great,
in which they that please may read whole Chapters to this purpose. Of Licinius
he tells us, how designing War against his Brother in Law Constantine, but not
thinking fit yet to declare it, first he fell upon the Christians in his own
part of the Empire. Eusebius. Hist. X. 8. Edit. Vales. p. 396. B.

He began first with the Bishops, not suffering them to meet in Synods. Vit.
Constant. l. 51. Then he turned all Christians out of their places at Court.
Eufeb. Hist. X. 8. and Vit. Constant. l. 52. Then he turned all Christians out
of the Army, and out of Offices. Eusebius. Hist. Ib. and Vit. Constant. l. 54.
Then he seized their Estates. Ib. and Ib. At last he fell on the Bishops.
Eusebius. Hist. X. 8. p. 397. B. At first secretly and cunningly, not by himself
for fear of Constantine, but by his Governors. Ib. He killed some Bishops for
Praying for Constantine. Vit. Constant. II. 2. Then Constantine began to stir,
thinking it Holy and Pious to remove one, and save a Multitude. Vit. Constant.
II. 3.

The Joy of Christians upon his Victory, see Eus. X. 9. p. 399. C, D. and Vit.
Constant. II. 19. p. 452. C.




. 41. As that is a Just War which is made Then it makes a Just Conquest
upon Just and sufficient Cause, so the Effect of such a War being a Conquest,
is Just, which is the Fourth thing we are to consider.

Conquest being the way by which a Kingdom or Dominion is taken from a
Sovereign Prince See. 26.
against his Will, and by which another Prince gets it into his Possession; as
often as this happens, there arises a Question between the two Princes, whether
of them has a Right to that Kingdom or Dominion.

For the deciding of this Question, it must be by such a Law as is common to
both the Parties, whose Rights are to be judged by it. That cannot be the Law
of the Kingdom; for though the Prince that is disseiz'd was obliged by that Law
while he was in Possession, yet now it seems he is not; and it never was a Law
to the Prince that is now in his place. It must therefore be a Superior Law,
such as is common to all Sovereign Princes in their Affairs with one another,
and that (as has been See. 35.
already shown) is ordinarily the Law of Nations.

I say Ordinarily, because there is yet a Superior Law, namely, the Law of God;
whether written in our Hearts, which we commonly call the Law of Nature; or
whether an express Revelation from God, such as was sometimes given to Men in
ancient Times; either of these may derogate from the Law of Nations: For this,
being made up of Customs observed by Princes and States among themselves, is
always subject to the will of him that is Lord of Lords and King of Kings. But
whether, or how far, this may alter the case, will be considered afterward; at
present we are only to consider what Judgment can be made of it, according to
the Law of Nations.

. 42. By this it seems to be plain, that the Right should go along with the
complete Possession: And Conquest gives Right.
So as that wheresoever this is once settled, whether by length of time, or
even sooner by a general Consent of the People, there it ought to be presumed
there is a Right, at least there ought to be no farther Dispute of it. There
seems to be the same Reason for this, that there is for the Law of Nations it
self; for if that Law was ordained for the Peace of Mankind, this quieting of
Possession must be a part of it, for there can be no end of Wars otherwise.

Accordingly we see, in a Dispute between Gods Ancient People the Jews, and the
Heathen Nations about them, when they differed about a Title to Land, it was
agreed, that whatsoever Conquest they had made on either side, they should hold
it as being given them by their God. This appears by Jephtha's Speech to the
King of Ammon that Judges XI. 24.
had Chemosh for his God; Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God
gives thee to possess? So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from
before us, them will we possess.

That Is a plain Evidence, so far as it goes. But that is only for part of a
Country. But we have as great Proof, that God gives even Kingdoms in this
manner, Dan. II. 21. Dan. II. 21.
There Daniel having received a full Account from God, of a Vision which King
Nebuchadnezzar had seen, and forgot; when he saw what it was, that it contained
the Fates of Empires that were to grow up successively in the World; he adores
the Majesty of God, with an humble Confession of his Prerogative, in these
words, It is He that changes the Times and the Seasons: It is He that removes
Kings, and sets up Kings. Both these ways of Expression signify one and the
same thing. For the Chaldeans reckoned the Times and the Seasons by the Years
of their Kings Reigns, as we do by the Years of our Kings Reigns at this day.
And therefore according to the Change of their Kings, there was also a change
of the Times and the Seasons.

They were the Changes of Four great Empires, which God here considered, not as
being the greatest in the World, but as being those to which his People were to
be subject. They were subject successively to those Four great Empires, of the
Babylonians, the Persians, the Greeks, and the Romans. Those Four are
understood in this Vision, by Josephus, and by all the Jews that Jos. Antiq. X.
(...). 14.
have written, and by all the Primitive Christians. But these words, being so
understood, afford us a plain Instance of this Doctrine.

They show that it is by way of Conquest that God puts down one, and sets up
another. For so the Babylonian Empire was put down by Cyrus, who set up the
Persian in its stead. The Persian Empire was put down in their last King
Darius, and Alexander set up the Macedon in its stead, The Macedon Kingdom was
put down in their last King Perseus, and the Roman was set up in its stead.

All these Kingdoms were changed by Conquests that they made one upon another.
And so it was by those Conquests, that God removed Kings, and set up Kings.
Which, though we see not yet, that it was any more than by the Permissive
Providence of God; yet that was enough to make the People of God become
Subjects to those Kings that came in by no other Title.

I do not say but they would have opposed the making of one of those Conquests,
namely, that of Alexander the Great, because King Darius was then living. But
when they saw they could not Oppose, the Conquest being already made, then Just
or Unjust, they submitted to it; and having submitted, they were subject
without any more Controversy. Seldom. de Jure Not. and Gent. VI 17. p. 789.
Argent. 1665. Ita non solum armis Alexandri se, ex Jure quod ei competiit
bellico, subdidere; sed imperio ejus dilatando stipendiarios se libenter tune
praebuere; nec interea de belli causa, aut Religione dispari, soliciti. So they
not only submitted themselves to Alexander's Arms on the account of that Right
which he had gotten by War; but then they willingly offered themselves to serve
under him for the farther Enlargement of his Empire; not troubling themselves
the mean while, about the cause of the War, or the Difference of Religion.


Therefore also Just and Religious Kings have reckoned their Thus David, Psalm.
I. X. 8. and CVIII. 9. Thus Constantine the Great styled himself TRIUMPHATOR,
and Stamped his Coin with the words VICTORIA GOTHICA, SARMATIA DEVICTA, etc.
DEBELLAIORI GENTIUM BARBARARUM. Thus likewise the following Christian Emperors.
Conquests (...) the great things that God wrought in (...) means; and
accounted them as (...) Subjects whom they had gained by (...) Justinian Coll.
II. 2. 10. We have recovered all Afric, and subdued the Vandals, and hope to
receive of God many yet greater things than these. Id. Coll. V. 15. 1. We
ordain these Laws to be observed in all Nations under our Government: Some
whereof God gave us at first, others he has added since, and we hope he will
still increase.
Sword, as them that were born in th^^^ Dominions.

Therefore also God has commanded his People to give Obedience to the Kings
that came in by Conquest, without any other Title. Nay to such as were capable
of no other, for they were Deuteronomy. XVII. 15.
forbidden to set a Stranger over them, which was not their Brother. And yet
they were Subjects to Strangers, such as Cushan, Eglon, and Jabin, etc. And in
Zedekia's time God Jer. XXI 8, 9.
commanded them upon pain of Death to become the Subjects of Nebuchadnezzar,
who had made a full Conquest over them, and held their Lawful King Jeconia then
in Captivity. This is plainly the Doctrine of that Convocation Book. I. 28. etc.
Convocation which sat in the beginning of King James I. his time; and
therefore it cannot but be very Unjust to charge any Man with Singularity or
Novelty, that goes in the Steps of so many and so great Authors.

. 43. Yet it cannot be denied that many others, Doubted when the Cause is
certainly unjust
and those also Men of great Learning and Judgment, have not gone on so smooth
with this Doctrine; they think it gives too much to the Success of a War,
without due regard to the Cause on which it was made. But it is the Cause that
makes a War either Just or Unjust: And though the Events of both these may be
the same, for either of them may end in a Conquest, by which God puts down one,
and sets up another; yet whether this be Justly obtained, or Unjustly, it makes
a great Difference.

For whereas the latter happens through the Judgment of God, for the Punishing
of a Sinful Prince or Nation, it does not appear that he that is the Instrument
of this, acquires any Right by it; more that those Pirates or Robbers, who are
Instrumental likewise, in the Punishing of Inferior Transgressors. And if God
gives no Right to him whom he sets up, then it remains still in him whom he has
put down: So that he is rightful King still; though he is out of Possession,
and the other is but an Usurper that is in Possession.

In this Case, if the Usurper has no Pretense of Right, no Prescription of
time, no Consent of the People, but only an unjust Possession; how a Subject
ought to behave himself toward him, even this is a DIFFICULT Pufend. de Jur.
Not. and Gent. VII. 8, 9.
QUESTION, in a most learned Man's Judgment: Who yet Ib. VII. 8. 10.
Judges, that even here, it may be not only Lawful, but a Duty, to obey him
that is in Possession; when the Legal King is reduced to that pass, that he can
no more do the Office of a King to his People. For (says he) the Kingdom
cannot be without Government, and if the Usurper preserves the Kingdom, a Lover
of his Country ought not (as things are) to give any farther cause of trouble
by his unprofitable Contumacy. But then put case the Usurper has Sworn the
People to him, and does the Office of a King, which (it seems) in his Judgment
does not take away the Duty that is owing to that former King; how one can pay
his Duty to both the expelled Legal King, and to such an Usurper. This our
Author says is A MOST DIFFICULT SCRUPLE; and so it seems, both by his, and our
most Learned Casuist's Sanderson Obl. Consc. V. 17, etc.
handling the Question, where they show how far one ought, and how far one
ought not, to comply with such an Usurpation.

But these Difficulties are only in case the Possession is obtained by a War
that was certainly unjust; for if the Cause of the War was but doubtful, and a
Conquest follows upon it, there is no place for these Difficulties: Much less
where the cause of War was certainly Just, for if a Conquest follows upon this,
it gives a Right, and then there is no Usurpation.

. 44. We judge of doubtful things by those No doubt when the Cause is certainly
Just.
that are certain, and therefore to speak of these first: Being certain that
the Cause of War is Just, we are as certain of the Effect of it. So that if it
be suffered to run on to a Conquest, this also is Just; and we ought to look
upon it as the Execution of a Sentence of God, by which, acting as a Judge in
the way of Justice, he puts down one, and sets up another. And this being
followed by the Horn. de Civ. II. 9. 2. (as quoted by Pufend. Jur. Not. and
Gent. VII. 7. 3. If one Prince overcomes another that unjustly provokes him,
and has deserved it by other Injuries, he has forthwith a Lawful Power
against him whom he has so overcome; and is not to stay for the Consent of the
People whom he has brought under his Dominion. Pufendorf there says, that
where there was a Just Cause of Invasion, there the getting of a Country into
Possession, makes for the obtaining of the Dominion thereof; and is confirmed
by the Consent of the Subjects, and their following Covenant. But that till
this is had, the State of War continues, and there is no Obligation, nor Faith,
and so no Dominion.

Dudley Digs of the Unlawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms, etc.. 4. p. 132.
Puts an Objection, That if the Conqueror comes in by Force, he may be turned
out by the same Title. In Answer to it, he says, de Jure he cannot -- For
though Conquest be a name of greater Strength only, and be not it self a Right,
yet it is the Mother of it; because when the People are in his Power, -- they
pass their Consent to be his Faithful Subjects, -- and this subsequent Act
gives him a LAWFUL RIGHT TO THE MONARCHY.


Peoples attorning their Allegiance, the Right is as fully Andrews on the
Commandments. Land. 1650. p. 331. Kingdoms -- when they are obtained by a Just
Conquest, are not to be accounted Tyrannical, because they are Just; for there
may be A JUST TITLE BY CONQUEST, when the War is upon Just Grounds.

Ib. p. 461. Besides those original ways of Propriety, there is also a
Propriety by the Right of War, or Law of Arms; because the Magistrate has
Power and Authority -- to use his Sword abroad as well as at home, and may
punish a Foreign Enemy in some cases, even by expelling him his Land, -- and in
this Right of Propriety, he has not only Dominium, the Lordship and Dominion
over it, but Usum, the use also.

Sanderson. Oblig. Consc. VII. 17. Speaking of them that come into Government
vi and armis, says, they come in either by mere Usurpation without any
pretense of Right, or by making Just War upon their Enemies by whom they are
unjustly provoked.

Ib. VII. 24. He says, BY THE LAW OF NATIONS that Power of a Prince is Just,
which is either gotten by Just War, or which by long Possession is confirmed as
by a Right of Prescription.

Bramhall's Works, p. 527. Those whose Predecessors, OR THEMSELVES, have
attained to Sovereignty by the Sword, by a Conquest in a Just War, claim
immediately from God.

Ib. p. 537. Just Conquest in a Lawful War acquireth good Right of Dominion, as
well as Possession. -- Neither is this to alter the Course of Nature, or
frustrate the Tenor of Law, but it self is THE LAW OF NATURE AND NATIONS.


settled in him that comes in in this manner, as if he came in by the ordinary
way of Succession.

. 45. The Right of a Conquest being so clear A doubtful Cause is enough for the
Prince in Possession.
when the Justice of the War is certain, there is the less to be said of the
Case when there is a doubtful Cause of War. If the Effect of such a War be a
Conquest, it is evident that the Right of this Conquest ought to be judged of
very favorably; for he that has Conquered is now in Possession. And therefore
according to that common Saying, which is most true in this case, He has
Eleven Points of the Law. But beside, if (as it commonly happens) one of the
two must be obeyed; either he that is driven out, or he that comes in his
stead; the Matter being so doubtful between them; then, as it seems most
reasonable that Obedience should be paid to the latter, as having all the
Advantage of Law on his side, so it is plainly necessary for the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Nation, which cannot well be settled otherwise. Thus it was
judged by our great Sanderson. de Oblig. Consc. V. 15. Where, among the
Examples of such Competitors, he mentions that very sharp and long Dispute that
was between the two Houses of York and Lancaster concerning the Succession of
this Kingdom; in which, according to his Judgment, a good Patriot ought to have
obeyed the King that was in Possession. And thus he concludes, IT IS CERTAIN BY
THE CONSENT OF ALL NATIONS ALL THE WORLD OVER, that the Laws every where (not
only that of 11 Hen. VII. but the Laws EVERY WHERE) have favored him that is
in Possession; and in such Cases that Famous Sentence of the Lawyers has always
carried it, In rebus dubiis melior est conditio possidentis.
Casuist, in a Question of Hereditary Right between two or more Competitors;
that as long as they are yet in Dispute with one another, It is the Duty of one
that loves his Country, to obey him that is in Possession of the Kingdom, as
his Lawful Prince.

. 46. Upon this Ground it has been See. 42. The People ought to be satisfied
with this.
commonly judged by the Law of Nations, that the Right goes along with the
Possession. Of this we see Examples in every Revolution that happens in this or
any other Kingdom. When a King is driven out with any color of Right, the
Neighboring Princes and States make no great Difficulty of applying themselves
to him that comes in his stead; wherein though perhaps they too much follow
their own Interest, yet it cannot be said that what they do is against the Law
of Nations. But what should Subjects do in this Case? Of this we have an
Example in the People of God, when they passed successively under the Yoke of
those four great Monarchs that were See. 42.
formerly mentioned. It is likely that each of those Kings that got the Power
over them, first declared the Cause of the War that he made upon their former
Lords. In that Case, though they could not judge of the Cause, whether it was
Just of Unjust, yet no doubt they did well in adhering to him that was in
present Possession. Thus we see they did to Darius, till such time as they
found themselves in the Power of the Enemy: but then, the same Reason being
turned on his side, they thought it necessary to preserve themselves and their
Country, by yielding to him, who had a Just Cause of War for ought they knew,
and so far as they could judge by the Success, it had Gods Approbation.
Albericus Gentilis de Jure Belli III. f. C. blames Lucan for calling Alexander
Orbis Terrarum Praedonem. For (says he) Alexander declared a Just Cause of
War; and when he had the Victory, that then he might possess himself of his
Enemies Dominions, is MORE THEN A RECEIVED OPINION; Alexander's Reasons are
expressed in his Epistle to Darius, which is in Arrian Exped. Alex. II.


To a People that are in such a case, it is no small Comfort, that whatsoever
doubt they may have of the Cause of the War, yet there is no doubt at all
concerning their Duty. There is nothing more certain than this, that they ought
to preserve themselves, if they can do it Lawfully. But it is Lawful for them
to forbear Fighting, when they are unsatisfied of the Cause: And if their own
Prince is not able to protect them, it is lawful for them to take protection
elsewhere. Therefore, in Case of Invasion for a Cause which is just for ought
they know, it is lawful for them to live quietly under the Invader: nay it is
not only Lawful, but their Duty (as has been See 45.
already shown,) to acquiesce in his Government, when he comes to be in
Possession.

. 47. But when they are certain that a War But much more with a certain just
Cause.
is made upon their Prince for just Cause; that is, when they plainly see he
has drawn it upon himself, by making it See 36.
not only Lawful, but Necessary for another Prince to invade him for his own
Preservation; What are the People to do in this Case? No doubt they ought first
to have a care of their Souls, and not to endanger them by being Partakers of
other Men's Sins. They cannot but see, that, by engaging in the War, they abet
their own Prince in his injustice; though not in his doing the Injury, yet in
continuing what is done, and in his not giving Reparation. And therefore they
are subject to the same Punishment with him. Nay their Condition is worse then
his: For he may shift for himself, and leave them and all they have to be a
Prey to the Enemy: Who by right of War may do with them and theirs what he
pleases. It is therefore certainly their wisest Course to keep themselves free
from all Offense, both toward God and toward Man: That having had no part in
the Cause of the War, they may not be involved in the ill Consequences of it.
And this they have reason to expect from a Generous Enemy, that he will not use
the Right See Grot. de Jure B. and P. III. 13. 4. and 15. 12.
of War against them that desire to live peaceably. Much more, if he has
declared he would not hurt them that should not resist him, they have Reason to
trust a just Prince upon his Declaration. And if he went so far as to declare,
that upon their Submission they should enjoy the benefit of their own Laws;
then, although it should come to a Conquest, they may reasonably expect to be
in no worse condition under the Stranger, then they were under their own
Prince: They have his Faith engaged to them for this.

But if the Stranger declares he makes War in defense of another King's
Subjects, as (we have See. 36.
shown,) he may lawfully do, when he finds himself in danger of suffering by
that King's Oppression of his own People; in this Case, they are first to
consider, whether it is a mere pretense, or whether there be a real ground for
his Declaration. If they find there is a just and sufficient ground for it,
they see in effect, that it is through Them that he is struck at; and therefore
the War is not so much His, as their own. It is true according to our See. 25.
Doctrine, they are united to their Prince as a Wife to her Husband; so that
they can no more right themselves by Arms, then she can sue her Husband while
the bond of Marriage continues. Yet as, when her Husband uses her extremely ill,
she may complain of him to the Judge, who, if he see's Cause, may dissolve the
Marriage by his Sentence; and after that she is at liberty to sue him as well as
any other Man: So a People may cry to the Lord by Reason of their Oppression,
and he Jud. II. 18. and IV. 3.
may raise them up a Deliverer, that shall take the Government into his hands;
(a Foreign Jud. III. 9, 15
Prince may lawfully do this, as has been. 36.
already shown;) and then they are not only free to defend themselves, but are
obliged to join with Him, against their Oppressor.

For the People's Union with their Prince; though it cannot be dissolved but by
a Sentence from God; yet by the Prince's own Act it may be so loosend, that it
may be next to dissolution. The Laws are the Bond of Union between Prince and
People: By these, as the Prince holds his Prerogative, so do the People their
just Rights and Liberties. Now suppose a People so Oppressed by their Prince,
that their Laws being trodden under foot, they are in danger of losing not only
their Temporal Rights, but, as much as can be, their Eternal: In this Case,
there is no doubt that the Oppressor and the Oppressed become two Parties, being
distinguished by the most different Interests that can be in the World.

. 48. In this Case, if another Prince, having a just Cause of War, is so far
Concerned for When the Cause is for their Sake, it is to them not a Conquest,
but a Deliverance.
such a People, as to take them into his Care, and to declare that he makes the
War for their Deliverance: The Effect of this War, though We may call it a
Conquest, because it has Resemblance of it, yet it cannot be properly so in any
respect; whether we consider the Prince on whom it is made, or the People that
have their Deliverance by it.

As to Him, it is properly an Calvin's Law-Dictionary has this sense of the
word Evictio; est ejus rei, quam Adversarius legitimo jure acquisierat, per
Judicem recuperatio. In this Sense it seems to have been used in speaking of
the fall of Maxentius; whereof see the following Note.
Eviction by the just Sentence of God; who thus put's him out of a Trust, that
he abused to the hurt of them for whose sakes it was given him. And as to the
People, it cannot be a Conquest over them, who are so far from having the War
made against them, that it was made chiefly for their sakes. If there be any
pretense of a Conquest, it is only over them that were their Oppressors. But as
for them that were Oppressed, it makes altogether on their side; So that They are
the Conquerors in Effect, for they have the Benefit of it: And he that obtained
this for them has a much more glorious Title then that of a Conqueror, for he
is properly their RESTORER and DELIVERER.

Thus it has been always judged by the People of God, as it were easy to show
in many Instances; but very few may suffice, when there is none to be produced
on the Contrary.

For that. 46 47.
former Doctrine, We have the Example of the Jewish Church in the Time of
Alexander the Great. When by his Victory at Issus, he had driven Darius out of
Syria, the Jews yielded to him. They had had no part in the War. Even for that
Reason, he did not use the Right of Conquest upon them. He required nothing
more at their hands, but that they should pay him the same Duties that they had
paid to Darius, and that as many of them as pleased should serve him in his
Wars: Both which Conditions they accepted, and performed, as if they had been
his Natural Subjects.

Much more in that Case of Cyrus's Conquest. When he had taken Babylon, where
the Jews were in a state of Captivity; did he use the Right of Conquest over
them? Did he sell them for Slaves, or take away what they had? So far he was
from it, that he restored them from their Captivity. Having understood from
their Prophets, that God had given him those Successes for their sakes; he did
not look upon them as a Conquered People, but as them whom God sent Him to
deliver: And treated them accordingly, with all Possible kindness and
obligation.

But there are no Examples more to be observed by us Christians, then those
that happened in the Time of Constantin the Great; both because he was the
first Christian Emperor, and because the first General Council was held in his
Reign. Now in those times of the purest Christianity, we find not that in any
of those Countries which he had gained by the Sword, any Christian had the
least scruple concerning his Right to the Government: nay they welcomed him to
it with all Demonstrations of Joy. And though he had acquired a Title to it by
the Expulsion of those Princes that had been their Oppressors, and so might
have taken it upon him as a Conqueror, which Title he seemed to See. 42. Note a.
affect upon other Occasions; yet where he had declared his Cause of War to be
for a Peoples Deliverance, this being so just and so honorable a Title, he used
it, and would have no other, in all his Inscriptions. In memory of his Victory
over Maxentius, the day on which it happened being the 27th. of October was
styled in the Christian Roman Calendar Evictio Tyranni, what that means See in
the former Note. On the Arch which was set up in memory of it, and which is yet
to be seen at Rome, there is Inscribed CONSTANTINO MAXIMO etc. LIBERATORI
URBIS, FUNDATORI QUIETIS. See Grut. Inscr. p. 282. In his Coins he is called
RESTITUTOR LIBERTATIS, CONSERVATOR URBIS SUAE, and AFRICAE SUAE etc. See
Mediobarbus. Likewise upon the overthrow of Maximinus, the joy and thanksgiving
of Christians for their Deliverance, See in Eusebius. hist. X. 1 and 2. And see
his Panegyric to Paulinus, Bishop of Tire, esp. p. 378. of Valesius Edition,
and remember that both these were Subjects of that Emperor Maximinus. Of the
joy of Christians upon their Deliverance from the Tyranny of Licinius enough
has been said in. 40.


There might be given many other Instances of this kind: But these are enough,
to show that one and the same Person may Conquer and drive out an oppressing
Prince, and yet, as to the Subjects of that Prince, he may have no Right of
Conquest; but that which is much better, the best that can be now in the World,
that is, the Right of a RESTORER and DELIVERER of His People. Acts of
Parliament and Convocation in Queen Elizabeth's time, by which it appears (as
has been already said in. 39.) that, in the Wars that She made on the account
of Religion, She had both their approbation and assistance.

Vo. Eliz. A. D. 1562. In the Convocation that framed the 39 Articles. The
Prelates and Clergy being Lawfully congregated, calling to remembrance etc. and
finally pondering the inestimable charges sustained by Your Highness in
reducing the Realm of Scotland to Unity and Concord; as also in procuring as
much as in Your Highness lies, by all kind of Godly and prudent means, the
abateing of all hostility and Persecution within the Realm of France, practiced
and used against the Professors of God's holy Gospel and true Religion; has
given and granted etc. A Bill of Subsidy, in Rastall's Collection II. p. 84.
Edit. Land. 1618.

XIIIo. Eliz. A. D. 1571. When the Parliament enjoined the subscribing of those
Articles. The Prelates and Clergy etc. considering farther the inestimable
Charges sustained by Your Highness in procuring, -- by all Godly and prudent
means, the abating of all Hostility and Persecution within the Realm of France,
and in other Places, practiced against the Professors of God's holy Gospel and
true Religion; have given and granted as follows, Rastall Ib. p. 167.

XLIIIo. Eliz. A. D. 1601. In her Convocation, a Subsidy was granted by the
Clergy, with this reason expressed, For who should have a more lively sense of
Your Majesty's princely Courage and Constancy, in advancing and protecting the
free profession of the Gospel within and without Your Majesty's Dominions, then
the Clergy. Rastall Ib. p. 520.

XXXVo. Eliz. There was a Subsidy granted by the Temporalty, together with an
acknowledgment of the Great Honor which it has pleased God to give Your
Majesty abroad (in France and Flanders) in making You the Principal Support of
all just and Relegious Causes against Usurpers: So that this Island has in
Your Majesty's days been a Pray and Sanctuary to distressed States and
Kingdoms, and is a Bulwark against the Tirannies of mighty and usurping
Potentates. Rastall Ib. p. 421.

XXXIXo. Eliz. There is another Subsidy granted to that Queen by the
Temporalty, almost in the same words. Rastall Ib. p. 479.




The End of the first Part.
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS.
Printed for T. Jones, at the White-Horse. without Temple Bar, 1691.
A Letter to Dr Sherlock, in Vindication of his late Book, Entitled The Case
of Allegiance.

A Sermon preached before the Queen, January the 30th. being the Day of the
Martyrdom of King Charles I. By the Bishop of S. Asaph.

There is newly Published a Choice Collection of Ayrs for 2 and 3 Treble
Flutes. Composed by the best Masters of Music. Price 2. shillings 6. p.


