THE Schoolmasters AUXILIARIES, To remove the Barbarians Siege from Athens;
ADVANCED UNDER TWO GUIDES. The first, leading by Rule and Reason to read and
write English dexterously. The second, asserting the LATIN TONGUE in Prose and
Verse, to its just Enlargement, Splendour, and Elegancy.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for the Author. 1654.

Errata.
IN the first Guide, page 3. l. 6. and 7 place first j consonant and last i
vowell, line 22. add u little Rakes head with the teeth upward, p 4. l. 17.
change Co, cu, co, to Ca, cu, co, l. 19. blot Che, and l 20. add Chees, That Is
good after meat, p 5. l. 13. blot s in words, p. 7. l. 3. change lynx to jynx,
p. 8. l. 2. ^^ i. for j. and l. 3. put u. for v. p. 10. l. 10. put e. for c.
and l. 11. change c. into t. p. 11. l. 2. put u. for v. p 12. l 8: place the
Comma that is before with sound after them, p: 13: l: 15: blot the Comma p. 14.
l. 10. put other for any, p. 16. l. 9. write commixtion, and l. 11. motion, p.
18. l. 25. add g. before m. or n. of the same syllable, as in fleagme, feign,
p. 19. l. 23. write not for no, p. 20. l. 21. blot own, p. 24. l, 7. write
blood for blood and l. 13. write be for be p. 25. l. 1. write knowledge, p.
29. l. 4. put a Comma after couple, and change whereof to Then, l. 5. blot the
Comma, p. 30. l. 3. write often times, and p. 38. l. 20. suffering, p. 40. l.
11. write 2. 8. for r. s. p. 43. l. 6. write where in. p, 44, l. 2, write
leaning, p, 47, l, 3, write pulse, p, 48, l, 26, write regular, p, 50, l, 7,
write heaven, l, 12, write in appellative names of dignity, p, 51, l, 17, write
Sr. yor. Mr:

In the second Guide, p, 11, l, 22, write specifically, p. 12, l, 11, write
animo, p, 25, l, 3, write defecimus, p, 37, l, 27, add unto the Rule, And it
may come after an Infinitive of Verbs Substanive, or Passive of calling, in
apposition to a precedent Accusative, as Nolo te meumesse aut dici Magistrum.
p, 44, l, 5, write all Adjectives of three diverse endings, p, 47, l, 8, write
otis or es edis, p, 48, l, 7, after i, blot vel, c, p, 51, l, 31, write tristis
for ^ussi^, p, 56, l, 11, under Genitivo blot u, p, 61, l, 21. after declined
write alius ille and ipse, p, 68, l, 28, write ereor for tueo^, p, 71, l, 14,
unto ^eddo add abscondo ^, 22, write Imitatives, p, 72, l, 17, before
frequenta^ives blot simple, and after it blot being Polysyllables ^, 77, l, 6
after the Infinitive Mood, add having always the sign to, l, 16, write
abscindere, l, 28, write Gerunds, p, 82, l, 12, write and in the Imperative, p,
89, l, 14, after of all blot other, p, 98, l, 20, write pol for sep: so p, 104,
l, 4, p, 115, l, 28, blot the Comma between ruit and aeris, p, 127, l, 22,
write eo for ec, p, 128, l, 2, write after adversum ante pone cis circiter
circa before circum, p, 132, l, 32, write yet both as such, p, 138, l, 9, join
praeterpropter, l, 23, sever prae, clam, ad per, p: 143: l: 24: write
Pleonasmus, p: 155: l: 17: write perhibent, p: 167: l: 25: write Juventutis,
and blot the Colon after consors, l: 26: write Comes for Compes, p: 171: l: 30:
write with such other, p: 181: l: 14: write a judicious, p: 189: l: 33: write
if really From page 192, unto the end all the pages want orderly Numbers,
according to which due orders, p: 199: l: 26 write Learners, p: 200. l 16:
write as hou, p, 202: l: 21: write a form, p: 206: l: 34: write caelebs for
caelestis, p: 207: l: 22: place the Comma before, after Minions, l: 28: write
such Clients for her Clients.

In Prosodia, p 1: l. 12: addito l, p: 4: l: 13: scribito hydra, p: 9: l 9:
post abscindit dele i: necnon scribe Conia pro Covia, p. 13. l. 20. scribe l.
sive r. p. 14. l. 14: scribe reicitque l: 18 quantitati, p: 15. l: 6: scribe
sic pro si, l: 13: Vires pro vireo, p: 16: l: 17: scribe incrementi p: 17 l.
19: scribe alterutrinque p: 19: l: 14, scribe per et enis, l. 19. Anienis, p.
21. l. 6. scribe hujuscemodi, l. 12. biduum, l: 19: u. vel y. p: 24 l: 17:
scribe foris, l: 20: Dativi Gerundiorum, l, 23: ut co p: 9: schedae C, atque l:
9: scribe fertilioris, l: 18: aspiratae, p: 10: l: 1: scribe utpote, l: 27:
scribe indolis pro imolis, p: 16: l: 29. scribe nume: to, l. 33: Lyricorumque
p: 17: l: 16: scribe sedi, p: 23: l: 12: scribe did actylo, p. 49. l. 18.
scribe tetrametrum Maeonium, l. 19. sacrosancta, p. 50. l. 1. pone Comma post
co^ is. l, 8. scribe cogat pro rogat, l. 24. trinario pro trimario, l. 36 sic
salus, p. 51 l. 9. iniquam, p. 52. l. 5: tetrametrum, l. 14. ortum, l. 16,
Dianapasto. l: 20: hypercatalectica, l: 32, Idem Maeo nio, p: 53: l: 32: dacty
lospondaicum, p: 54: l: 1: Quid, p: 55, l: 12: praesentia, l: 13: quum, l. 32:
majestas tui, p, 56: l: 31: Idem trimetrum, p: 57: l: 15: condensius, p: 59: l:
5: longam, l: 11: dicolon recipiens, p: 61: (...) Cumulatos, p: 63: l: 31: r^i
metricae.

Of Reading.
SPEECH is no Gift of Nature, but an help of Art, which does require a Method
necessary as in other Offices, so in Reading, whether of Print, or Written
Books: for which purpose this short Treatise is composed, prescribing plain
and certain Rules unto the Reader, who must walk by steps, and not by skips,
else may prove lame and disabled for further Progress. Therefore he that will
read rightly, must learn first the Letters and their Properties, then proceed
unto the nature and constitution of a Syllable; and lastly to distribute
Polysyllables to their just parts.

Of Letters.
LEtters are the first Elements of every word needful to be perfectly known of
Learners in three Properties. First, in the Shape or Figure. Secondly, in their
Force or Power. Thirdly, in their several Names taken from their several
powers in Pronunciation.

The figure of Letters.
THE Figure of Letters should be made familiar to the Learners, specially the
different parts thereof distinguishing each from other, to prevent mistakes:
and for that purpose Teachers may accustom Children to some easy resemblances
of each Letter, suitable to their Wits. To prescribe therein ought satisfactory
unto Schoolmasters, were impossible; yet til better Judgment provide a better
way, such as want a Guide may at first entrance begin with small Roman
Letters, according to the Example following.

a the half Heart. b the new Moon stuck at the bottom of a Stake. c the old
Moon. d the old Moon stuck at the bottom of a Stake. e the weeping Moon. f the
Thetchers Rake. g the Carriers Pack. h the back Chair. i the long Stake half
in the ground. j the little Stake with a Boitles head over it. k the back
Chair and Footstool. l the long Stake above ground: m the great Rakes head
with the teeth downward. n the little Rakes head with the teeth downward. o The
ring, or full Moon. p The new Moon at the stakes head. q The old Moon at the
stakes head. r The old Moon with a stake at her back. ss The hedghook and link
of a chain. t The old Moon spotted on the top. v The little Bell turned up. w
Two Bells both turned up. x The cross, or two Bells tied top to top. y The Bell
and Rope. z The tack.
Thus Learners may take perfect notice of every letter which of them are like,
and by what unlikenesse each letter may be discerned from any other.

The power of Letters.
THe speediest and easiest way to gain a certain knowledge of every letters
power in pronunciation will be, to assign such names for them as will best
express their sounds, and (as nearly as can be comprehended in familiar words)
the mere pure sounds thereof having no mixture of any other with addition of
some pleasing gloss for the learners better memory, as in the ensuing
instances.

a A The deaf man's answer. b B That does make the honey. c CoCuco That does
sing always the same ditty. Che ceci The Latin for blind men. d Do You Says the
Master when boys do amiss. e E The Kids bleating. f Fee The Lawyers reward. g
Gagogu The Ganders call. Gheegegi The Carters charge.
h He That speaks of a Male. j Iay That devoureth the garden fruit. i I The
best Scholar. k Key That does lock and unlock the doors. l Lee That is used to
drive Buck-cloths. m Me Whom all should favor. n Ney The speech of Horses. o
O The wonderers language. p Pie Both bread and meat. ph Phy A note of dislike
and loathing. qu Qui The latin for which. r Ree The drivers words to put
Horses from him. ss See The office of the eyes. sh She Whereby we speak of
Females. t To You The word amongst good fellows. th The thie That part between
hip and knee. tio Tio The scene of hypocrites. v Vie The common exercise of
Gamesters. u U A note of courting Doves. w We The Scholars. wh Why A word
requiring reason. x Xee That fetched up knotty phlegm. y Ye The Teachers. z Zee
The noise of hot iron in water.
IT were an easy matter with coining a new figure for every letter, to make
their shape as well as sound to be suitable to their names. But such
Hieroglyphics, like new devised Characters, would conduce rather to enthral,
then to enlarge knowleledg, being useful for the Learned, not for Learners, for
acting private Interests, not advancing the public good. Wherefore it is
omitted as devious from that only end aimed at herein, to wit, the inabling of
Learners to read with understanding those good Authors extant, never hoping to
repair the loss of such a fruitful Harvest by the gleanings of new fangled
fancies.

Children may with their sports be taught their letters, having upon Dice or
Cards the Alphabet instead of spots, as a. for Ace, b. for Blanck, c. for
Catre, d. for Dewse, or the like invention for such and all the rest.

Otherwise, wealthy men may with small charge, and their childrens great
encouragement in learning, procure several pictures to be exactly drawn, and
colored, with the first letters of their names: as for instance, Anthus,
Bittor, Cock, Dove, Eagle, Finch, Goose, Hawke, Iay, Kite, Lark, Martin,
Nightingale, Owl, Pie, Quail, Rooke, Snite, Teale, Vultre, Widgeon, Iynx,
Yelamber, buzZard, or some other names of any creatures most familiar to the
Scholars, and agreeable to the purpose, being useful to make Learners more
readily remember both the shapes and sounds of letters, but further are not fit
for proper names, conducing to spell words thereby, wherein the only expedient
must be a recourse unto the Abcedary.

The distribution of the Letters.
TO perfect knowledge in the sound of Letters, it will be necessary to
understand that some are Vowells, and that the rest are Consonants.

Of Vowells.
The Vowels, so called, because they sound of themselves, are six, a. e. i. o.
u. y. all which are aspirated, having h. before them.

Of Consonants.
Consonants, so named, because having no sound of their own, they join in
sound with vowels, are twenty, b c d f g h i k l m n p q r s t u w x z.

The division of Consonants.
Consonants are considered with reference either formally to the sound, or
instrumentally to the Organs that frame the sound, or accidentally to their
variation; for some by conjunction with different letters differ in their
sounds.

Their division by the sound.
Consonants with reference to their sounds are mutes, liquids, asperates, or
double consonants.

Of Mutes.
The Mutes are eleven, b c d f g k p q t j v. so called, because of themselves
they have no sound, neither will any two thereof move before a vowell in
English words, nor but seldom after. In Greek words they will move before by
couples, as in Bdellium, Ctesiphon, Ptolomy.

Of Liquids.
The liquids or halfe-vowels are five, l m n r w. whereto some add s and h; so
named, because having clearer sound then mutes, and being liker unto vowells,
two or more of them together, or joined unto mutes, will move with any vowell:
as in shrill, strength.

Of Aspirates.
The Aspirates are nine, s h ch gh ph sh wh th and tio, and in Greek words rh.

Of double Consonants.
The double Consonants are two, x and z, either of both having the sound of a
mute and liquid, as Axe, sounding like Acse, and Maze like madse; whereto may
be added the former Aspirates, having a double sound.

Division of Consonants by the Organs.
Consonants referring to the Organs, whereon they sound are gutturalls,
palatalss, linguals, dentals, labials.

Of Gutturalls.
Gutturalls sounding from the throat are seven, a e i o u y and w, whereto may
be added gh wh.

Of Palatalls.
Palatalls sounding on the roof of the mouth are seven, r s x z j consonant,
with e and g before e and i vowell, whereto may be added c before h, and c
before i, with another vowell following.

Of Lingualls.
Linguals sounding on the tongue are four, k q and c g both before a o u.

Of Dentalls.
Dentals sounding on the teeth are four, d l n t and t h.

Of Labialls.
Labialls sounding on the lips are five, u b f m p; whereto may be added ph.

Division of Consonants by variation of the word.
Few letters in any tongue, whether vowels or consonants, but with reference to
the affections of words, are mutable, and so they are found in English, as I,
me, we, us, thou, thee, you, he, him, they, them, she, her, mine, our,
thine, your, his, their, foot, feet, staff, staves, man, men, am, art, is,
are, do, did, have, had, make, made, flee, fled, flown, buy, bought, dare,
durst, slay, slew, slain, help, help, smite, smote, smitten, sling, slang,
slung, and in such other words; yet in other Languages letters are not varied,
either so many, or so often, as in the Greek and Latin, having several
Declensions and Conjugations, which other tongues do generally want, and
therefore have fewer mutable letters. It is a property of English, that some
letters by conjunction amongst themselves in syllables do become mutable only
in sound or power, not in shape or figure, which will appear in the following
observations upon the several letters.

Of the constitution of Syllables.
The premises rightly understood, will easily inform Learners in the nature of
a syllable, being the least part of a word pronounced, with sound so named, as
comprising no more but a single note, which may be either any of the six vowels
severally, as we are wont to say (a by it self) or a composure of two, or
more letters, whether they be all vowels, called homogeneous syllables, as
being all of a kind, and called Dipthongs, as carrying a double sound, or else
be vowels and consonants joined together, called heterogeneous syllables,
because made of diverse kinds of letters, which may be many in the same
syllable, as in straights.

Of single syllables.
A I and O are often found separable, but any other vowel as well as they will
require in many words to be spelled apart, as in a-men, e-quall, i-doll, o-ven,
u-surp, y-ron.

Of heterogeneous Syllables.
Syllables made of Vowels, or Dipthongs joined with Consonants in words of one
or many Syllables, beginning with Vowels or Consonants, and these either Mutes,
or Liquids, severally or jointly are in particular instanced in the Abcedary,
or Primar.

The reason of dividing Syllables.
EVery Syllable that does not end a word, should end in a Vowell, if no more
Consonants follow then will begin a word, according to the series of words,
beginning with Mutes, and Liquids in the following Abcedary.

When more Consonants follow, the precedent Vowell then will begin a word,
those over and above what will begin a word should be taken with the precedent,
and all the rest being initials should be put to the next succeeding Vowell, as
in pur-chas, brasse-panne:

Such Consonants as otherwise would begin a word, being parcels of many words
compounded, and commonly the formatives of words derived, should be severed, as
in composition, so in derivation, to notify their respective condition; so not
a-brupt, but abrupt, not co-gnize, but cog-nize, not di-suse but dis-use, and
pas-ture, not pa-sture, scripture, not scri-pture, doc-trine, not do-ctrine
pleas-ed, not plea-sed, but pla-ced, ra-ging because c. and g. move only
before e. and i^ in that peculiar sound, having different sound when they move
after any Vowell.

Observations upon the Letters tending to right Syllabizing.
THough to strengthen Memory by the sound of known words, sundry Consonants
are moved in the former Names by sundry Vowels, yet were it very expedient i^
framing Syllables to move all Letters uniformly, as in the following Abcedary,
no only Vowels, as in the common Alphabet but also Consonants, to wit, as be,
cee dee; so likewise see, gee, he, etc. all in a distinct sound from any
Vowell, thereby making them receptible of the sound of every Vowell without
confusion in a repetition of the same sound in spelling, From which Rule must
he excepted, ce, ci, tio, differing them from see; and key, differing it from
cee, and jay, differing it from ge, gi, and phy, differing it from fee. And
lastly ye, differing it from i. reserving only unto these the former Names,
assigned to express their power in Pronunciation, for better notice of
distinct Characters, having the same common sound.

The Letters j and v have either of them two distinct Figures, one as Vowels,
the other as Consonants, and therewith a distinct sound, the property of
distinct Letters. Wherefore if either next before a Vowell, or a Dipthong does
begin a Syllable; as enjoin, rejoyn, vail, prevail, or if v after a Vowell, or
after I or after r in the same Syllable does end it, as in cave, knives,
calves, carve, then they are Consonants, else both are always Vowels.

The Letter s without change of sounds has change of Figures; the last, being
properly final, is designed in that figure to close words with more grace in a
lesser, model.

Other Letters in English have more sounds then Figures, whereas in the Mother
Tongues each aspirate, as ch ph th in Greek, and the same with gh sh in Hebrew,
have every one their peculiar figure yielding their entire sound.

It is proper to the Latin with modern Autors, that t has a sibilation
sounding like s before i, and another vowel in middle syllables, having neither
s nor x immediately precedent, as in Caution: not in fustian, commixion: And in
English both vowels with t make but one sylable, as in Cretians, pa-tient,
moiton, all dissylables well known in poetical measure.

W. is a letter proper unto English, and before a vowell moves only with h and
r as in who, wrote; but after vowels moves with t d k or any liquids, as in
spowt, bawd, hawke, brawl, rewm, down, flower, stews, and with c in the sound
of s, as in sauce.

Q. is a letter proper to the Latin tongue, associated every where with u,
else does sound like k, another letter proper to the English, and both sound
like c before a o u, before which vowels g does keep like sound, but not quite
so strongly. Both c and g have always a strong sound in the end of syllables,
except e silent does immediately follow, as in ne-glect; but both moving after
vowels with h are aspirated, as in high, rich, and c with h moving before a
vowell, as in chief: both c and g moving before e i or y being the final
vowels, are softened, as in clemence, or cle-men-cie, or cle-men-cy, sponge, or
spongie, and every where before e or i in any Latin word, as in center,
circle, gentle, gi-ant; but in English words g does commonly sound strongly, as
in get, give, and likewise moving with silent h before a vowell, as in ghost,
and also c moving with h silent in words borrowed from the Hebrew and Greek, as
Chemosh, Character.

In the beginning of Greek words h after r ^s soundlesse, as in Rhetoric: And
the final h in Hebrew words is silent, as in Selah, Sarah, so is h in John.

The final e moveable in all proper names being of other Languages, as Iesse,
Phoebe, is always silent, or quiescent in English words, except in, the, where
the office of e being silent, is to soften the next precedent letter, as in
robe, differing it from rob, and it retains the same office in the midst of
compounds, or derivatives, as in robe-like, a-merce-ment, in-gage-ment, and so
it does continue silent with a final s, the common note of pluralls, or
genitives, for, of, as in robes, or in a robes place, for the place of a robe;
but that final e will move in pluralls, between consonants of like sound, to
keep either from being soundlesse, as in faces, patches, wages, wedges, roses,
rushes, foxes, and such others; so in all Exotic proper names, as Chremes,
unles they be forced by custom to an English termination, as Theb's, Rhod's.

Moreover u will be silent with a final e after q and g in words both simple
and compounded, as in relic, plague, relique-like, plagues-marke, where u
silent does fortify g, as also in guest, guide, and such like. Lastly, o
before a final n does after liquids give no sound, as in prison, iron, which
are pronounced prisne, irne: Likewise ou is silent after v consonant, and
before a final r in primitives or derivatives, as in favor, favorable,
pronounced fav're, favorable: so is e silent before a final n and r, as in
Stev'n, given, even, never, flow're, tabre, massacre, powdre, maugre, capre,
flatre, smoothre, and such like. O is silent between ti and us in the same
syllable, as in spa-tious.

And any vowell by Crasis or Synaeresis may be silent, or change sound in the
improper dipthongs, as in the following instances.

A in Aetna, ease, beauty, goat. E in view, rheum, George, neutre, friend. I in
chief, fruit. O in Oedipus, feoffe, people, blood, good, precious. U in
ancient, guile, humors, Y in Iay, key, pronounced like Iea, kea.
The vulgar use in English Schools to desert uniformity of names, or to keep
constantly to one sound of letters, are either way exceeding prejudicial unto
Learners, and therefore do require some good redress. It is against both rule
and reason of the best Grammarians, that y a vowell sounding of it self should
take thereto a consonant to express its sound, being vulgarly called wy. And
it is no less irregular, that w, a plain consonant, and no vowell should be
called double u, a name taken from the figure, not from the form or sound,
which should denominate letters: And so it is no less incongruous that all
consonants have no uniform names beginning with their proper sound, moved by a
subsequent vowell; not some by subsequent, as be, cee, dee, others by
precedent Vowels, as of el em en es ex ar, and others by precedent and
subsequent, as izard; which complication of letters in the name would amaze a
learner to find out the proper sound of letters that are so named. It is
likewise unreasonable, that h a mere aspiration serving to any vowell, and to
many other consonants, no less then c should from thi^ last be called ach, if
it must have no proper name being due thereto, as having distin^^ shape and
sound, it should with more equit^ joyno in the appellative name with s, as ne^^
rest thereto in sound and nature, both being Aspirations; wherefore Sir with us
in the Saxon tongue, whence English comes, called Her.

The forementioned letters I. U. C. ^ with all the Aspirates, must be allowed
different sounds, and therewith names, or el^^ the names and sounds which
should be suitable, will by their own unconformities beg^^ mistakes, yet will
be read for jet, wary for very, mask for mack, rage for rag, and in li^^ sort
other words, if as it ought the sound shound be pursued rightly. Now if ^^ny
should tell John Do, having sheep maked with A. B. that A. is for John, and B.
for Do, neither A. nor B. conferring any sound proper to any letter of his
name, it would be thought those sheep were plundered, and so pass for a bitter
jeer. And so we are no less mocked with names of letters that are impertinent
to their sounds. True it is, that such names are at last corrected in the
practick part, and custom does overmaster the first error against the known
sound and common sense: But it would be far more congruous and successful,
that principles and practice should concur with us, leaving that property to
the French men, who affect a pronunciation of their words quite different from
what they are in print or writing.

This did move the Author to propound a new Abcedary, with a Preface, declaring
the true reasons of Innovation, being no affectedness, which he does most
deeply abominate, much less any inclination to disturb the vulgar, whom he
heartily endeavors by much hardship in this enterprise, though seeming never
so despicable, to relieve by a surer and shorter way of gayning literature: And
for evidencing the truth thereof, he does willingly refer himself to any
impartial Judgments to determine which way shall seem most reasonable and
likeliest to succeed with most proficiency upon a just comparison of the
principles in rules and practice of either methods, to wit, of the vulgar way
formerly accustomed, and of the new form here propounded, desiring first these
premonitions to be remembered.

The rules of right and ready spelling.
1. ALl letters joining in one sound should pass under one name, agreeable to
that sound, as in Dipthongs, and quee tio, with all aspirate consonants
instanced in the examples following, and ca co cu ceci, ga go gu ge gi, having
no certain sound, but as moved by certain vowels, should for a certainty be
moved constantly therewith. Learners also should observe the difference between
cee or gee fortified, moving after vowels, and ce or ge mollified before e i or
y in the end of words, or in any place of Latin words.

2. The letters h o u and e should be notified when they are silent as a just
account when their sound is missing: And so should a silent vowell in any
improper Dipthong be likewise specified where one vowel only sounds by
Synaeresis, or the succeeding sound, when the sounds of both vowels are changed
by Crasis. Therefore in pursuance of the proper sound of every letter, being
the peculiar use or end thereof, take this particular theme as a pattern for
all others.

Good Physicians ought to quit vicious humors with what speed they can,
striving next to engender wholesome blood: And the chief care in Christian
Schools should be zealously to eject errors from childrens lives and judgment,
then to endeavor quick progress in virtue and knowledge meet for ingenuity.

The practicke way of spelling.
Gee double o (for long u) dee (good) phy ye phy see i si tia nee see tians
(Physicians) ou (for o long) ghee tee (ought) tee o (to) quee l double tee (e
silent) (quitte) vee i vi tiou (o being silent) see tious (vicious) he, u hu
me ou (for o long) ree see mours (humors) we i thee (with) whee a tee (what)
see pee double e (for shrill e) dee (speed) thee ey (they) ca nee (can) see tee
ree i vee striv i nee gee ing (striving) nee e xee tee (next) tee o (to) i nee
in ge nee gen dee e ree der (engender) whee o lee (e silent) whole see o me (e
silent) some (wholesome) be lee ou (for u long) dee (blood) A nee dee (And)
thee e (the) chee ie (for e shrill) fee (chief) cee a ree (e silent) (care) i
nee (in) cee (he silent) ree i chri see tee i sti a nee an (Christian) see cee
(he silent) double o (for u long) e silent) see (Schools) she ou (for u
long) lee dee (should) be double e (for shrill e) be) zee ea (for e long) zea
lee ou see lous lee ye ly (zealously) tee o (to) e (by it self) jee e cee tee
ject (eject) e ree er ree ou (for o long) ree see rours (errors) fee ree o me
(from) chee i lee dee child ree e nee see rens (childrens) lee i vee (e silent)
see (lives) a nee dee (and) jee u dee ge (silent) judge me e nee tee meant
(judgment) thee e nee (then) tee o (to) e nee en dee ea (for e long) dea vee ou
(for o long) ree vour (endeavor) or dee ea vee (ou silent) ree deav'r
(endeav'r) quee i cee key (quick) pee ree o pro gee ree e see gres (progres) i
nee (in) vee e ree ver tee u e silent tue (virtue) a nee dee (and) kee nee o
we know lee e dee ge (silent) ledge (knowledge) me double c tee (meet) fee o
ree (for) i nee (in) ge (by it self) nee u nu i (by it self) tee ye ty
(ingenuity.)

Thus a just account is given of every letter in the right sound thereof: and
when the same is silent, or does vary from the proper sound, which the vulgar
Alphabet cannot perform, wanting convenient principles, whence the common
people versed only thereunto ever failed in Orthography; for when they write
their own affairs, after much racking of their wits, it were easier to
uncipher characters, then to read their riddles

Therefore being quitted by these or the like helps from the thralldome of the
former evil grounded custom, though at the first use the strangenes of a new
method may seem irksome, yet learners in short time will find therein both ease
and pleasure, joined with much profit, to their no less contentment, then
amazement, that they were freed no sooner.

Directions to teach and learn with profit.
1. Of Prayer.
TEachers before and after Schoole-employments, both in the Morning and
Afternoon, should make humble addresses to the Father of lights, the Author of
Wisdom and all good things in a set form of devotion appointed by grave
judgment of godly Magistrates, as fittest for public use, which should be
common and familiar to all the company, that God may bless their labors,
without which no good success can be expected.

2. Of Catechism.
Masters likewise ought once or twice in every week to design a set time for
catechizing of their Scholars in authorized forms; for by such instructions
they will better understand what grace they want, and more heartily petition
for it, and more seriously endeavor to exercise it in their daily practice.

Of attendance in School-time.
It is necessary that Masters be constantly present with their company to keep
Learners to their several tasks, else improvident youth will be disperately
careless to improve their time.

4. Of short Lessons.
Learners will be much encouraged by small and easy lessons, whereas greater
tasks might soon amaze them.

5. Of slow and sure progress.
He that will teach with speed and good success, must not suffer Scholars to
proceed until they are perfect in that which they have in hand: as for
instance, none can read with reason, or understandingly, that cannot syllabize
rightly, or be made a perfect speller, except he does first know the affections
of letters for the constitution of a syllable, or understand their affections,
without knowledge of their certain sounds, or be free from error in any of the
premises, being not well skilled in the distinct figure of every letter, each
degree being subservient one to another in the due progress made therein.

6. Of entering beginners carefully.
A small error at first entrance will soon get ground, and hardly be
discontinued, which should add to the Masters care, that each beginner be
first entered by himself, or by such as he may trust, and in his presence,
until the Novice is well acquainted with the properties of all letters and
monosyllables, and enabled by the Laws thereof to divide the polysyllables to
their just parts, according to the rules prescribed in that behalf.

7. Of putting syllabizers to set forms.
Scholars that can syllabize rightly, will be made therein more ready, if they
be ranged into forms by couples, or rather by three or four in company; that
while one does spell the Lesson, the rest giving good heed thereto, some may
learn thereby to do the like: And others that have better skill may reform
mistakes of him that is the Reader, until all of them by turns have spelled,
and read their Lesson: And in conclusion, they may equally divide the Lesson
into several parts, for every couple whereof, each one in his turn reading
word by word in his Book, the others part may require his Partner to spel the
same accordingly without book: And the Reader that heedeth the same by Book,
may reform all errors of the speller, swarving thence; which being used with
care and diligence for a while, will for ever after make right spelling
habitual to the company.

8. Of Scholars communicating knowledge.
Scholars that have attained the true reason of reading rightly will be much
perfected therein by reducing received precepts to frequent practice, which is
done to the best advantage when such do teach their fellows; for as the more
ingenious are thereby more exercised, so the duller sort are more capable of
instruction from them, having among themselves an easier method in a proportion
near their own capacity, by a more familiar discourse, fuller of freedom for
ingenuity to express it self where there is no disgrace for mistakes, no
fear of offense, much less any amazement, as often as it happens in rendering to
hasty Masters, besides that Scholars made super-visors of their fellows, are
far more studious and considerate in teaching others, then when they learn
themselves, expecting more credit or disgrace as guides, then guided: And in
such Scholars exercise, Masters, who have forgotten that they were children,
may by fresh experience find what will suite with childrens wits, and apply
all industry thereunto.

9. Of emulation bred in Scholars.
It will much excite the wit of Learners to nourish in them a conceit of
excellency, and set each at strife with other who shall be most eminent, and
upon fit occasions to foment such good ambition.

10. Of retributions.
Proficients should be encouraged with any lawful contentments, specially such
as are serviceable to their own and others further progress, as by notifying to
them, that all the credit, profit, and pleasure that befall them, are
attendants on ingenuity: and contrariwise loiterers should be discountenanced
by abridgment of their delights, adding thereto some disgrace and penance, as
by sticking at their girdle a rod, or by branding their hands with ferules, so
making them exemplary to their company, until they do repair their former
negligence by more care and industry.

11. Of time to be spent at School.
Scholars should not ordinarily be kept unto their Books above four hours
together, or less then two: an abatement hurts less then an excess
therein; for that does only delay proficiency, this does dull the Learners,
and quite discourage them.

12. Of Scholars recreations.
Recreations should not be granted in School-time, but as the reward of former,
or bribe of future diligence; and the sports allowed should be by special
thoise proportioned to advance ingenuity as well as to refresh the Body, and
therefore free from uncivility unto men, and much rather from dishonor unto
God.

13. Of correcting evil manners.
Common faults of ordinary conversation should be corrected by Parents, or
other Friends at home where they are committed, not brought to School for
punishment, which would more endeer that place to Learners, where the Masters
presence does acquit them of such crimes: But otherwise to make Schools houses
of correction, will make Scholars no less impatient of good literature, then
of the severity annexed thereto.

14. Of removing Truants.
Masters after friendly exhortations unto virtue, and implacable dislike
declared unto vices, to prevent contagion in the company, should remove the
unreclaimable, continuing either in profaneness against the known principles
of piety, or contumaciousnesse against the rules of government, the maine
support of humane society, specially when either is defended with a flourish of
excogitate sophistry, a plain evidence of impenitency capital in childhood, by
a maxim in the Law, that malice does comprehend a manhood.

The Abcedary, Or Primar Teaching.
The Figure, power, and names of letters with their affections for framing
SYLLABLES.

a A b Be c Cee ca co cu c Ce Ci. ch Chee. d Do You e E. f Fee. g Gee ga go gu g
Ge Gi gh Ghee h He
Vowels b. e. a. e. i. o. u. y.

Consonants 27.

11. Mutes, b c d f g k p q t j r

7. Liquids, l m n r s w h.

2. Double consonants, x z

7 Aspirates, ch gh ph sh wh th tio.

9 Mutable in sound, c g h j p ^ t u w.

Quiescent vowels are sometimes e o u, or any vowel

a. A. b. Be. c Cee. ca. co. cu. ce. ci. chapter Chee. d. Dee. e. E. f. Fee. g
Gee. ga: go gu. ge gi. gh. Ghee. h. He. j. Jay. i. I. k. Key. l. Lee. m. Me.
n. Nee. o. O. p. Pee. ph. Phy. qu. Quee. r. Ree. s. s. See. sh. She. t. Tee.
th. Thee. tio. Tio. v. Vee. u. U. w. We. wh. Whee. x. Xee. y. Ye. z. Zee.
Six Vowells, a. e. i. o. u. y. twenty seven Consonants, whereof eleven Mutes,
b. c. d. f. g. k. p. q. t. j. v. and seven Liquids, l. m. n. r. s. w. h. and
two double Consonants, x. z. and seven Aspirates, chapter gh. ph. sh. wh. th. tio.
likewise nine thereof be mutable in sound, c. g. h. i. p. s. t. u. w. and five
Quiescents, g. before m. and n. with h. e. o. u. or any Vowell in improper
Dipthongs, eighteen proper Dipthongs, ai. au. ay. ei. eu. ey. ia. ie. io. oi.
ou. oy ua: ue. ui. ya. ye. yo.

Eighteen improper Dipthongs, A. long aa. au. E. long, ae. oe. ea. ay. ey. E.
shrill, ee. eo. J. long, ie. ei. O. long, eo. oa. ou. V. long, eu. ou. oo. ui.

Five Homogeneous Syllables, aye. eye. yea, ye, you.

Heterogeneous Syllables of Consonants and Vowells.

ab. eb. ib. ob. ub. ba. be. by. bo. bu. by. ac. ec. ic. oc. uc. ca. co. cu.
ce. ci. cy. cha. che. chi. cho. chu. chy. ag. eg. ig og. ug. augh, eigh, ough,
ja, je, jo, ju, av, ev, iv, ov, va, ve, vi, vo, vu, vy. aph, ephesians, iph, oph,
uph. pha, phe, phi, pho, phu, phy. ash, esh, ish, osh, ush. sha, she, shi, sho,
shu. qua, que, qui, quo. ath, eth ith, oath, uth. tha, the, thy, tho, thu, thy.
tia. tie, tij, tio, tiu. wha, when, whi, who, why. barn, best, bitch, both,
buckles, camp, center, circle, coble, cursed, chyts, dazzle, fence, gigs, given,
got, gulf, gathre, geld, gentle, hight, john, kiss, lust, maze, never,
pith, philtre, quote, rogues, relics, sauce, shelfe, tithes, tongues, thirst,
po-tion, vultre, wart, whelpe Xe^-Xes, york, Zuph.

Syllables of Consonants and proper Dipthongs. Gain-full, laugh-ter, pay-able,
feig-ned, beu-ty, ney-ing, Gra-tian, pa-tient, mo-tion, vi-tious, joi-full,
howse-wife, toylesome, per-suade, banquet, lan-guish, yately, yelping, yo-ked.

Syllables of Consonants with improper Dipthongs. Aa-ron aun-tient, Ae-gipt,
Phoe-bus, plea-sant, of-pray, money, feoste-ment, theev-ish, peopl-ed,
neigh-bour, chiefest, yeo-man, geor-gicks, roaring, humor, unthought,
guilfull, roach-es, fav-rable, neu-ter, spacious, bloody, good-nes, fruit-full.

Syllables of Mutes and Liquids before Vowells or Dipthongs. Bdel-li-um, black,
bread, chrisme, cloistre, Cneius, crawle, Cte-nes, draught, dwell, fleagme,
fringe, ghost, glaunce, py^gmeys, gnash, grudge, guest, knight, Mne-ster,
phrase, plague, Pnyx, pris'n, psalms, ptisan, rhewme, Scepter, School,
sclandre, scruple, shields, shrove, skaines, sleights, smoothre, snafle,
speake-spleen, sprinkle, squibs, stople, strugle, switch, through, thwarte,
Tmo-lus, troubles, twice, wharfe, wreathes.

GOod Physicians ought to quit vicious humors with what speed they can,
striving next to engender wholesome blood: And the chief care in Christian
Schools should be zealously to eject errors from Childrens lives and
judgment, then to end eavour quick progress in virtue and knowledge, meet for
ingenuity.

OUr father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done, in Earth as it is in Heaven, give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us,
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

Of Mutes and Liquids, with either of them.
Blaines, bread, cheese, chrisme, cloistre, Cnei-us, crawle, Cte-sias, drench,
phlegm, freeze, glut, gnash, grief, grig, knight, mne-ster, phrase, pledge,
pneu-ma-tick, prince, psalm, pti-san, quit, rhewm, scepter, school, sclaundre,
shield, shrouds, skains, sleights, smoothre, snuffle, spouse, springs, square,
stews, strokes, swim, the, thrush, thwart, Theo-pole-mus, Tmo-lus, troubles,
twyn, wharfe, wreathes.

Of Polysyllables.
Ab-ra-ham, Bel-te-shaz-zar, Cle-o-phas, Dy-o-ny-si-us, E-le-a-zar,
For-tu-na-tus, Ga-ma-li-el, Ha-ba-cuc, Is-ra-el, Ke-ren-hap-puck, Le-mu-el,
Ma-la-chi-as, Na-than, O-ba-di-as, Phi-ne-as, Quar-tus, Re-chab, Sam-son,
Ti-mo-thie, U-ri-as, Wen-ces-laus, Xan-thus, Yo-lan-da, Ze-lo-tes,
Hal-le-lu-jah.

Copies, or Presidents.
1. i u n m c e o x r s t z v w a q g j p y l b d h k f ff s ss sh.

2. ambm amdm emsm gmhm jmim kmlm mmnm ompm quirm smstm vmum wmxm ymzm, etc.

3. Expect thy self surprised here in toils, Being quit of them, take heed of
worser foyls.

4. A. B. D. P. R. C. G. X. O. Q. S. E. Z. L. I. T. F. H. K. M. N. U. V. W. Y.

5. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z.

6. Who is content with his afflicting fate,

Does place therein his bliss, though not till late
Entirely reap't, Ropasts suffice him now,
Hard crusts at work, when he does leave the plow;
Being well assured of endless feast and Ease;
That makes hardship the mean while to please.
A stock, or Stoicke he is not without sense
Of suffering, his support is Continence,
Grounded on faith, that matter must take form
From passive power, freed from destructive storm:
Lo he delights in durance, not as bliss,
Nor end, but means, which never thereof do miss.
Know then that Virtues Quintessence, whose Zeal,
Yea Xanthicke venom, turns to healthy meal.
The rules of Art in writing.
1. SUch as will learn to write with good proficiency, ought as a necessary
ground or principle thereof, have a perfect skill in Reading: And being so far
prepared, they should make it their first care to mark well their Copies,
observing therein the shape of every letter in the likeness and unlikenesse of
each to others; for which purpose both sorts of letters, small and capital are
ranged for the Learners easier apprehension, in such an order as they have most
affinity among themselves, the leading Characters in either Alphabet showing
the way how the rest that follow may be performed with the best advantage.

2. Learners should likewise know the terms of Art in writing: as for instance,
they should know the threads, as,- which do begin and end all letters, joining
each to other in every word, and therefore should be made as small as Pen can
draw them, to be thereby distinguished from the main part of any letter, the
downright strokes, as i u n m called Minims; the waved strokes, as r s t v w a
z: the rounds, as c e o x: the stems or pillars, as b d l h k: the reversed or
sloape, as j p y g q: the full length, as f s: the traverse or cross thread,
as in t and f: Last, the parallels of four sorts, that is to say, the mean
sort, all contained in a double line, as a c e i m n o r s t u v w x z, the
over-lines, as b d h k l: the underlines, as g j p q y: the over and
underlines, as f s.

3. It should be further understood, that the breadth or fullness of every
stroke (the thread excepted) ought to be made equal in all letters of the
same sort, whether small or Capital, proportionable to the rest of the same
rank; for to make some strokes thicker, and others thinner, either in the same
letters, or others of the same sort, does argue too much impetuousnesse.

4 The fullness of every stroke in all the smaller letters, should be a just
third part of the length of mean letters, and their length an even half
length of the over, or under-line letters: But the over and under-line letters
should have thrice the length of mean.

5. The distance between word and word in every line should be the breadth of
three downright strokes called Minims, and between letter and letter in every
word the breadth of one such stroke; in which space the thread should join the
end of every letter to the beginning of the next that does successively follow
throughout the whole word: such composures of letters keeping a just proportion
of the several parallels in fullness compass, light and length, are called
equidistances, adding a meet decency to all writings, necessary to be aimed at
industriously, and attained to by Learners: But an ignorance of the Premises
will disable both Masters readily to inform, and Scholars rightly to
understand which way to draw the letters, where and why the same being made may
be allowed, or where and how they fail.

6. Teachers at first entrance of their Scholars should draw before them a dry
pen upon the letters in the Copy, and then give the pen unto the Learners, and
make them do the same, and tell them when they do amiss; and if need require,
guide their hand, and not give them over until they do it rightly, being a
necessary help to a further progress.

7. Pit Instruments being provided; that is to say, a vial of shining Ink,
good Pens, a smooth Rule, and flat for steadiness, a little Compass, a keen
soft-edged Knife, and strong smooth Paper folded for short lines, in the first
Copy-book four leaves to a sheet, and five or six sheets to a Book. Then
Learners should be taught with their Compass to prick their Paper-books at
three lengths of Minims between prick and prick, and afterward to take the
Rule and draw a double line upon every prick with the Compass points, or a
forked quill made distant a Minims length, where all empty spaces between such
double lines will be two Minims length, for the over and under-line letters
just height and depth to keep them from encroaching either upon the others
places: Or the Paper-book may be ruled in a speedier way with a piece of Iron
or Ivory made comb-wise, with short and sharp teeth, fitted to draw lines
equally distant at a Minims length each from another; wherein every four lines,
the first will bound the height of the over-line letters, and the fourth will
bound the depth of underline letters, and the two middle lines will bound both
height and depth of mean letters: Likewise the three first lines will bound both
height and depth of Capitals, sorting therein with over-line letters: And each
several bound being made familiar in writing, by ruled lines after frequent use
thereof, will grow customary and habitual without ruling.

8. After preparation as aforesaid, the Scholar sitting at some distance from
Deske or Table whereon his Book is laid, with an upright body toward the light,
should take his pen (dipped in Ink so full as none may drop from it) between the
two fore-fingers of his right hand set out at length, and the thumb meeting the
foremost finger on the other side of the pen, having the back upward, and the
cut side leaning close under the nail upon the top of the middle finger,
having the two lesser closed together, leaving under it for a certain stay to
give a quick impulsion, with all advantage to the Pen, being held gently and
stedily, not griped hard, being a let to speed, which does give the luster and
life to writing.

9. Then the Learner should set out his pen, hand, and arm well settled to the
elbow, kept close unto his body, straight toward his Paper-book, having
thereon a blotting piece, both to keep clean his Book, and to assay therein all
difficult letters before he does write them in his Book for good: And withal
he should lay his left hand fingers, two over and two under the writing place,
or keep the point of a Knife in that hand, close under the line that he does
write upon, either of both helps being needful to keep the paper-book smooth
and steady in the writing place. In which posture he should begin with Minims,
both as the easiest Characters, and as the principles to all other letters,
which will be a competent exercise for some days employment.

10. If any Novice prove so dull, that he does not understand how to frame his
letters by the former rules, specially when he comes to some difficult strokes
in the over and under-line letters, it will be requisite that the Teacher with
a leaden pen does draw before him such hard letters, giving him good notice at
every turn, and afterward require him in the same manner to draw his writing
Pen, being full of Ink, upon those letters; for after such experiments a
Learner can hardly mistake right draughts: And such attempts of diligence will
be most necessary in the first draughts of Capital letters, whereof in their
due place.

11. Young Writers must not be suffered at the first entrance to scribble, or
follow their own fancy, or frame letters in any other way then according to
their Copy, and the directions of their Teacher, or to proceed faster then
they can make good proficiency, or to begin the transcribing of any letter in
fewer draughts then a whole line, or more, as need requires, and so to
continue in their progress until they can attain a true and perfect stroke in
all the Alphabet, according to the first Copy or President.

12. When Learners are well skilled in the draughts of the smaller letters, it
will be expedient, before they enter upon the Capital, to teach them upon
fresh memory how to join the same together, first by couples with m after
every letter in proportion of so many words, as in the second Copy; and when
that is performed regularly, to proceed unto the third succeeding president:
both which will require much time to gain therein perfection; for Learners
should endeavor therein exact performance of all circumstances required in the
third and fourth, and fifth precedent Rules.

13. After a good habit gotten in composing handsomely all the letters in
several words, Learners may conveniently assay to form the Capital or great
letters, as it is prescribed in the tenth rule, and in the fourth and fifth
copies: But that work being the Masterpiece, should be done piece-meale to
gain therein the mastery, being the knottiest parcel in all the task: and
when that is well accomplished, Learners will only want a constant exercise of
transcribing the sixth and last Copy, to make the due joining of small and
great letters alike habitual, which is never performed dexterously, until the
Writer can finish any word with a light and nimble pull, before he takes off
the pen, the only way to make smooth clear letters, which slow penmen will
never attain unto with their often correcting, the Art becoming thereby tedious
to such Dullards, which to swift Penmen is delightful in dispatch of business
with speed and ease, the Authors chief end in these directions.

14. Writers should add to their former knowledge a competent skill, to make and
amend their Pens, which is sooner learned by the guidance of a well skilled
Teacher, then by Book-rules, be they never so exact; yet to supply defects,
Learners may use the Instructions following, to wit, taking Goose quils, the
strongest and roundest that they can choose, let them first scrape clean a
quill, and rub it smooth, then cut slope-wise the forepart thereof two inches
long; next fork the back part at end. Afterward, giving it with their knife a
short straight cleft in the midst of the fork, let them slit the cleft with
another quill an inch deep, straight and smooth, without snarling: And lastly,
let them them cut the quill first on the side next to the thumb, then upon the
fingers side, after the form of the pens wherewith they wrote before; so
cutting smooth the nib, being left twice as long as the slit upon the nail of
their left hands thumb, and enlargeing the slope of the forepart, if it be not
well near an inch long, to avoid blurring. The work is done by rule and reason;
which if trial approve for good, it will not need correction: Else if the pen
will not make clean strokes, and there is no hair therein, the fault is in a
snarling and ragged slit, or in the unevenness of the nib, which must be
amended by a smoother and cleerer slit, and an evener nib: otherwise if the pen
does write too full, the slit must be made shorter, or the nib smaller, or
happily both: And contrariwise, if the pen prove over-hard, the slit is too
short, or the nib too sharp, and is to be reformed accordingly. Last, as the
skillful Swimmers do convert to another use the Bladders, formerly good helps,
but since grown hindrances to their exercise: So may quick and ready Penmen
do with rule and compass, when without them all their lines and strokes prove
irregular.

15. It will much perfect the learners hand, and withal improve their skill
and dexterity for inditing any affairs if they practice daily to transcribe
some useful matter from printed or written Books, conducing to their
employments; for such exercise will habituate them, as in Orthography and
sensible expression of what they write, so in reading and understanding with
ease and readiness the writings of other men: Whereas by neglect of this
practick part, good Pen men have proved so silly Clerks, that they durst not
profess their skill, for fear of betraying their ignorance, and by long disuse
grew quite disabled in that Art. It is commonly found in Writing Schools that
Learners are never taught to read their Copies, much less what themselves do
write: It is not so much regarded there how falsely copies are transcribed, so
as the same he but fairly imitated, amounting often to just nothing: which is
here advertised, in hope that so great an oversight will be looked unto, and a
better provision made for more proficiency, being the Authors hearty wish, free
from all intention of aspersing any with disgrace.

16. Lastly, to make Learners complete Penmen, they should know where and when
to use all kinds of letters both great and small in every word, and how to put
a proper point, or due stop to every sentence.

The places of Capital letters.
Great letters take place as follows: A capital letter should begin the
first word in every period, as Our father which art in Heaven. 2. The first
letter is capital in proper names, as Augustus Caesar. 3. The first letters in
words derived from proper names, as Augustan, Caesarean. 4. The first letter in
appellative names, as King, Queen, Lord, Master, etc. 5. The first letter in
any word of singularity, as Law, Gospel, Virtue, Vice, Grammar, Logic. 6.
The first letter in every verse or meeter, as

War through our Saviors grace.
May from us slide,
That truth may bide,
And shine in every place.
The places of small letters.
Small letters will take any place in words excepting, 1. The places designed
for capital letters specified in the former Rule. 2. That the short waved s
does always take the last place in words, whereas s of the full length does
serve for the first, or middle letters; both which places the short s joined
with the stems, will take in the Roman, but specially in the Italian
Characters, as in least, skill. 3. That the waved v does ever begin the word,
be it either vowell or consonant, as in up, void, but it has no other place to
stand for a vowel, whereas the Minim u may be used indifferently for a vowell
or consonant in any place besides the first. 4. That the waved r is mostly used
with o, being final, as in honor, or with any letter in words contracted, as
in Sir, your, Mr. 5. The e of two small rounds will fit best at last, as in the.

Of points or stops.
Points direct to the true meaning of words, being all in number 11. to wit, 7.
primary and usual, whereof four be simple, Comma, Semicolon, Colon, Period:
and three mixed, having besides their own commonly a period implied therewith,
Interrogation, Exclamation, Parenthesis: which seven are pauses, or stops for
sentences; and four secondary points of lesser use, serving only for words, not
sentences, Apostrophus, Diaeresis, Hyphen, Ecthlipsis.

Of the four simple Points.
Comma is the shortest pause of most imperfect sense in a simple axiom, or
sentence, marked thus,

Semicolon is the next shortest stop of imperfect sense, commonly in a compound
axiom, marked thus;

Colon is a point of perfect sense, but not of perfect sentence constantly in a
compound axiom, marked thus:

Period is the longest pause of perfect sense and sentence, marked thus.

Of all which take this following instance: A Samaritan passed by, where the
wounded lay; and when he saw him, he had pity upon him: And he bound up his
wounds, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him.

Of the three mixed points.
Exclamation is a long pause mostly of a simple axiom, imperfect for most part
in sense and sentence, marked thus!

Interrogation is a short pause commonly of a compound axiom; perfect in
sense, but not in sentence, marked thus? An instance of both: O generation of
vipers! who taught you to flee from the wrath to come? bring forth fruit meet
for repentance.

Parenthesis, called by some parathesis, both having the same use, is a short
pause, mostly of a simple axiom, having a perfect sense, not sentence,
inserted to a precedent axiom, where it may be spared without detriment of
sense or structure, being used for explanation of the former, and marked thus
() as for instance, Iudaes (not Iscariot) asked a question. All the Egyptians
(both Horses and Chariots) pursued the Israelites. The Captain without
violence (for he feared the people) put the prisoners in ward.

Of the four points for words.
Apostrophus is a note of a dipthong, or vowell cut off in the same, or diverse
words, as in favored for favored, learned st for learnedest; lovd, given,
never, it is nothing, for it is nothing; is it for is it; the Author, for the
Author; And sometimes a liquid is cut off, as Pth house, for in the house;
usually s does stand for of, a sign of genitives, as the sheep's head, for
head of the sheep.

Diaeresis is a note of two vowels parted, as in Lais, Bagoas, Diers.

Hyphen does notify a continuation of the same word, being a compound, or
derivative, as rats-bane, harm-lesse, lame-nesse.

Ecthlipsis does notify an abatement in the beginning, or end of verses:

-- Repasts suffice him now,
Hard crusts at work, when he does leave the plow;
Being well aessur'd of endless feasts --
FINIS.

