The Late APOLOGY In behalf of the PAPISTS, Reprinted and Answered In behalf of
the ROYALLISTS.

LONDON:

Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXIII.

TO THE AUTHOR OF THE Apology.
SIR,
ABout fourscore Years ago, in a time when there were such Apprehensions of the
Papists as now there are, (and howsoever they are now, surely V. Cambdeni
Annals. Anno 1586. concerning Babington's Conspiracy.
then they were not without cause) some of your Predecessors, to palliate the
matter, and to make their Governors more secure of them; writ a Book to this
effect, that Catholics are to employ no other Arms against their Prince but
the Arms of Christians, viz. Tears, and Spiritual Means, daily Prayers, and
Watchings and Fastings*. So you begin,

[My Lords and Gentlemen, The Arms which Christians can use against lawful
Powers in their severity are only Prayers and Tears.] We cannot say that you
writ your Book for the same End as they did. But we do not like it, that you
jump so together in the same Beginning.

[Now since nothing can equal the infinity of those we have shed, but the
cause, viz. to see our dearest Friends forsake us, we hope it will not offend
you, if (after we have a little wiped our eyes) we sigh out our Complaints to
you.] Of the Cause of your Tears, we shall say more anon. Of the Quantity of
them, you say very extravagantly, Nothing can equal the infinity of those we
have shed. For you might have excepted those of the Protestants in Queen Mary's
days, or of them that suffered in the late Irish Rebellion. You ought to have
excepted the Fears of your Fabulous Purgatory: and yet those are said to be
short of Infinity. But you Jesuits love to be Hyperbolical, whether ranting or
whining; as if that Religion which obliges you to damn all other Christians,
had likewise forbidden you to speak like other Men.

[We had spoke much sooner, had we not been silent through Consternation to see
you inflamed, whom with reverence we honor) and also to show our submissive
patience, which used no slights nor tricks to divert the Debates of Parliament:
for no body can imagine where so many of the great Nobility and Gentry are
concerned, but something might have been done; when as in all Ages we see
things of public advantage by the managers dexterity nipt in the bud, even in
the very Houses them selves. Far be it from Catholics to perplex Parliaments,
who have been the Founders of their I riviledges, and all Ancient Laws: Nay
Magna Charta it self had its rise from us, which we do the less boast of, since
it was not at first obtained in so submiss and humble a manner. In the same
Roman Style you commend your own silence and patience. You boast that you have
been the Founders of the Parliaments Privileges, and all Ancient Laws. Of the
first, let every man believe as he sees cause. But the second we cannot allow,
in either sense, whether you mean it of your selves, or of your Predecessors.

For as now in your Church, men are of two sorts, even so they were heretofore
in this Realm. There were some that wholly minded the common interests of
Christian Religion and Civil Government. Others were Papalini, asserters and
promoters of the Popes usurpations. They which acted in those first capacities
were not more your Predecessors than Ours. They which acted in the other were
truly and only Yours. You say,

[We sung our Nunc Dimittis when we saw our Master in his Throne, and you in
your deserved Authority and Rule.] It Is very well. And yet Answer to Philanax,
p. 85
some of you sung your Venite Exultemus when you saw his Blessed Father upon
the Scaffold. But what of that? since the Son is King, who is not glad So
Argyle said Let them take all, since my Lord the King is come home in peace.
that he is King? or whom would it not grieve to have his Loyalty called in
Question?

[Nor could any thing have ever grieved us more, but to have our Loyalty called
into question by you even at the instigation of our greatest Adversaries. [If
we must suffer let it be by you alone; for that is a double Death to men of
Honor, to have their Enemies not only accusers, but for their insulting Judges
also.] Sir, he that is Loyal, and a man of Honor, has no cause to fear Death,
double or single. For our Kings have always Declared K James Premonition, p.
336. of his Works.
that they put no man to death for Religion. Therefore if you Truly fear Death,
it is for Treason. If you only pretend this, it is a Calumny. Either way you
are no friend to the Government, for all your pretenses to Honor and Loyalty.

[These are they that by beginning with us, murdered their Prince, and wounded
you: and shall the same method continue by your Approbation? We are sure you
mean well; though their design be wicked: but never let it be recorded in
story, that you forgot your often Vows to us, in joining with them that have
been the cause of so great Calamity to the Nation.] How far it is true, that
the Kings Murderers began with you, we shall consider anon. But it seems you
take the Liberty of bestowing that Character upon whom you please; that no man
hereafter may dare move for the Execution of any Law against you, for fear of
being said to continue the Method of the Kings Murderers.

As for any Vows that we have made to you, whatsoever they are, you are more
sure of them than we can be of any that you make to us; for we have no Pope to
dispense with them. Neither is it recorded in Story, V. I^^. K. Charles his
Testimony in his Letter to the Prince.
that English Protestants ever joined with the Enemies of their Nation.

[Of all Calumnies against Catholics, we have admired at none so much as that
their Principles are said to be inconsistent with Government, and they
themselves thought ever prove to Rebellion.] It Is a Calumny of yours to call
those things Calumnies, which are true, and which you cannot Deny without such
a Presumption as we should much admire in you if it were not so very Ordinary.
Concerning your Principles, where should we look for them, but in your
Councils, your Decretals, and the Books of your Divines? In each of these we
are taught, that the Pope has a Power to depose Kings, and to discharge
Subjects from their Allegiance: which Doctrines are utterly inconsistent with
Government: for whosoever believes them, no Prince can be secure of him. But
whosoever is a Papist, is bound to believe them. And he that has imbibed this
Faith, may well be thought ever prone to Rebellion.

The Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent III. expressly Conc. Lateran. IV. c.
3.
Ordains, that in case any Prince be a favourer of Heretics, after admonition
given, The Pope shall discharge his Subjects from their Allegiance, and shall
give away his Kingdom to some Catholic, that may root out those Heretics, and
possess his Kingdom without contradiction. It Is observable, that this Pope was
himself a deposer of Kings, namely of John King of England, and of Otho IV. the
Emperor; and also that this Council which made Rebellion a Duty, was the first
that made Transubstantiation an Article of Faith.

Next for the Bulls and Decrees of your Popes, which according to Bellarmine
are sufficient to make that to be sin Bellarm. in Barclaium c. 31.
which is not sin, or not to be sin which is sin: it would be tedious to
instance in all that could be produced to this purpose.

From Gregory VII. downward* such a Trade was driven of deposing Kings, that no
weak Prince could wear his Crown, but at the Pope's Courtesy. And that it
might never be otherwise, Pope Boniface VIII. declares it for Law in these
words: Extrav. de Majoritate and O^ed. c. 1. Unam sanctam
We say, and Define, and Pronounce, that it is absolutely Necessary to
salvation, for every humane Creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome: Which
Oracle is thus interpreted by Bertrand; Every humane 1 Pet. 2. 13. (...). ^ulg.
Lat. Om^^ humanae (...).
Creature, ( i. e.) Every Magistrate, Must be subject, etc. (i. e.) Must submit
himself to be deposed, when the Pope thinks fit. And that the Gloss does not
injure the Text, it appears by the Tenor of the Decree; especially by those
words about the middle of it, that the Spiritual Power* is to order the Worldly
Power, and to Judge, it if it be not as it ought; according to that in Jeremy,
I have set thee over Nations and over Kingdoms, Jer. 1. 10.
etc. In which suppletive, etc. these words are wound up; To root out, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. All which
powers this Lawgiver of yours endeavored himself to exercise. He endeavored,
says Plat. in Vit. Bonf. VIII.
Platina, to give and take away Kingdoms, to expel men, and to restore them at
his pleasure.

Agreeably to this doctrine and practice your great Canonist Lanc. in
Temploomn. Judic. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 4
Lancelottus teaches you, That the Pope may depose Kings and Emperors, and
transfer their Kingdoms and Empires from one Line to another. Which wholesome
Doctrine, no doubt, as well as the rest of his Book, Pope Pius IV. has made Ib.
in Traef.
Authentic by his unerring Approbation.

Lastly for your Divines, They have generally owned it; and many of them have
written large Books in defense of it. We do not tell you this as news, for your
Clergymen know it already; but that your Laity may not be ignorant of it, we
shall quote them some few of the greatest Doctors of your Church in this Age.
And we shall leave it upon you to show them, when and where they were
condemned, what Justice has been executed on the Persons, what Index
Expurgatorius has censured the Writings of these Authors. Nay, if you deal
honestly, you cannot but confess, that their Works are generally approved, and
that their Persons are had in admiration among you that are the guides of the
Laymens Consciences.

We pass over the gross things of Mariana's Book*; because, they which once
licensed it for love of the Doctrine; have since condemned it, for fear of
their King's heavy Displeasure.

But pray Sir, who condemned your Cardinals, Bellarmine Bell. de Romans Pont. l
5. c. 8. Baron. Anno 800. Sect. 10.
and Baronius? who teach you, that the Pope may do with any King, as Jehoiada
did with Athalia; that is, he may deprive him first of his Kingdom, and then of
his Life. Bellarmine indeed elsewhere expresses it more like a Jesuit, and a
man of distinctions, in these words; The Pope does not allow Bell. in Bar
claium c. 3.
you not to obey your King, but he makes him that was your King to be not your
King; as who should say, when the Pope has done His part, then you are free to
do Yours.

Again, who condemned your great Schoolmen, Suarez Suar. in Reg. M. B. l. 6.
c. 4. Sect. 20.
and Valentia? of whom the one writes against his Majesty's Grandfather, that
a King, Canonically Excommunicated, may be deposed or killed by any man
whatsoever: the other says, Greg. de Val. Tom. 3. in Thomam dis. 1. q. 12. p.
2. ^hilopater. p. 149.
that an Heretical Prince may, by the Pope's sentence, be deprived of his life,
much more of his Estate, and of all Superiority over others.

Nay, who has condemned our Countryman Parsons, or Cresswel? (for the
high-fliers of Popery have been those of our own Nation) by whom this is laid
down as a Conclusion of the whole School of Divines and Canonists, and declared
to be Certain, and of Faith; that any Christian Prince whatsoever, that shall
manifestly swerve from the Catholic Religion, and endeavor to draw off
others, does immediately fall from all Power and Dignity, etc. and that, even
before any Sentence of the Pope is pronounced against him; and that all his
Subjects whatsoever are free from all obligation of any Oath of Obedience which
they have made to him as their lawful Prince; and that they may and ought (if
they be strong enough) to eject such a one from the Government of Christians,
as an Apostate, an Heretic, a deserter of Christ, and an enemy of his
Commonwealth, etc.

Cardinal Perron went not altogether so high; but yet he held to the Roman
Catholic Principle, that Kings may be deposed by the Pope when he sees cause.
He seemed to be of another opinion while Henry IV. was alive: but when He was
dead, and a Child was in the Throne, then he ventured to declare this publicly
in his Oration Jan. 15. 1615
on behalf of the whole Clergy of France. Note that the Pope sent him thanks
for it; and King James writ in answer to it, that solid Defense of the Right of
Kings
He maintained that this was the current Doctrine in France till the time of
Calvin: and for the contrary Doctrine, viz That Kings are not deposable by the
Pope, Rossaeus Ross. p. 85.
calls it the Paradox of the Lutherans; Perron calls it a Doctrine that breeds
Schisms: a gate that leads into all Heresy; and to be held in so high a degree
of detestation, that rather then yield to it, he and his fellow-Bishops would
choose to burn at a Stake.

But how has this Doctrine taken among the Papists in our Kings Dominions? it
has not taken with some of them: either because you have not thought it
seasonable for you to instruct them in it (for Doctrines of this sort are then
only proper to be Inculcated, when they may do Execution) or else because your
Instruction has been over ruled by some better Principle; as we doubt not there
have always been some of your Church, in whose generous breasts the English man
has been too strong for the Papist. But yet this Doctrine has taken with
others; and many of them have practiced according to it, as we shall show you
hereafter; and many more would have been practicing, if there had not been
something to hinder them or deterr them. For it is allowed by your Divines, as a
very good Reason, for Catholics to omit the Duty of Rebellion, if they are not
strong enough to go through with it. So Bannez excuses our English Catholics,
and so Bellarmin Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
does the Primitive Christians: Nay your Watsons Quodlibets, p. 255, and 295,
etc. out of Bannez, Valentia, and Parsons.
Casuists say, If there be any notable danger of Death or Ruin, without which
you cannot perform it, that then you are not bound to endeavor it. Long may
these Good Reasons continue; for if these were removed, we know not how far we
may trust you. For one of your Brethren, another poisoner of the people, has
been so forward already, since His Majesty's Restoration, as to declare in
Print, that in case your Pope should take upon him to Deprive our King, he
would not meddle between them. The Exhortation in the afternoon, p. 22.
I leave that Question, says he, to be decided by the two Supreme Powers, the
Pope, and the King, when occasion shall be for it.

[My Lords and Gentlemen, had this been a new Sect not known before, something
perchance might have been doubted; but to lay this at their doors that have
governed the civilliz'd world, is the miracle of miracles to us] Sir, we know
not how to cure your wonder, but by showing you, it is unreasonable. For you can
it a Miracle, that men judge according to good Evidence. Who doubts less of the
dangerousness of your Principles and Practices, than they that have Read most,
and had most Experience of them? We can give you no greater instance, than in
King James of blessed Memory, who was no stranger to you either way, and this
is his judgment of you: That as on the one part, many 1. His speech in
Parliament. p 504. of his Works.
honest ^en s^d^ced with some Errors of Po^ery, may yet remain go^d and
fait^ful Subjects: So on the other part, none of those that truly know and
believe ^he whole grounds and School-conclusions of their Doctrines, can ever
prove either go^d Christians or good Subjects.

But pray Sir, when was it that you governed the civilized World? For the
Eastern and Southern Churches never owned your Government; nor yet the Western,
while Learning flourished: But when Barbarity had overrun it, then Popery grew
up by degrees, and made it more Barbarous both in Ignorance and in Cruelty.
Then came in those Doctrines of Transubstantiation, etc. Then came in those
Papal Usurpations, etc. which the Wo^ld, being again Civilized, has partly
thrown off, and partly reduced into more tolerable terms.

[Did Richard the First, or Edward Long-shanks, suspect his Catholics that
served in Palestine, and make our Countries Fame big in the Chronicle of all
Ages? or did they mistrust (in their dangerous absence) their Subjects at home,
because they were of the same profession? could Edward the Third imagine those
to be traitorous in their Doctrine, that had that care and duty for their
Prince, as to make them (by Statute) guilty of Death in the highest Degree,
that had the least thought of ill against the King? be pleased that Henry the
Fifth be remembered also, who did those Wonders, of which the whole World does
yet resound; and certainly all History will agree in this, that 'twas Oldcastle
he feared, and not those that believed the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the
Church.] The Reigns of those Kings whom you speak of, were in those dark times;
when all Goodness declined, and Corruptions were daily growing upon us. Richard
the First, being Daniel's Hist. Ric. I. in fin.
told he had three wicked Daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and Leachery, said he
could not Match them better than among your Templers, Fathers, and Friars.
Edward the First out-lawed the whole Clergy of this Realm, for refusing to pay
the King any Taxes, because the Pope had forbidden Walsingham. Edw. I. 1298.
them to do it. And both those other Princes whom you mention, made Laws
against his Usurpations. Edward the Third made a notable one of this kind, by
advice of 25. E. 3. Vide Statute of Provisors.
that very Parliament, in which he enacted his Laws against Treason. And
certainly, Henry the Second was more vexed with Becket, than ever Henry V.
feared Oldcastle. We doubt not, those Kings had many good Subjects, and our
King has some better than you seem to be. But they differed not in Religion,
as you do from ours: And yet then, your Faction was always encroaching where it
was suffered, and dangerous where it was opposed.

Did not your Pope force King John to do him homage for England? Did he not
wrestle with Edward I. Mat. Westminster. 1301.
for the Sovereignty of Scotland? Has he not often laid claim to the Kingdom
of Ireland? If the old Gentleman in a pet should go to turn out his Tenant,
what would our King have left, when these are disposed of?

[We will no longer trouble you with putting you in mind of any more of our
mighty Kings who have been feared abroad, and as safe at home as any since the
Reformation of Religion. We shall only add this, That if Popery be the
enslaving of Princes, France still believes it self as absolute as Denmark or
Sweden.] The French King will believe what he pleases, but not all that you say
of him. For he cannot but know, that the Pope gave away that Kingdom from some
of his Predecessors; and maintained War in it against his Grandfather, till he
brought him to his terms. And why has not His Holiness dealt so with him that
now is? partly for the sake of his Religion; but chiefly for fear of a Storm,
lest his Coin should do that which Lewis the Twelfth's only threatened in the
Inscription Thu. Hist. l. 1.
of it, PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN.

[Nor will ever the House of Austria abjure the Pope, to secure themselves of
the fidelity of their Subjects.] For the Austrian Princes that are so linked to
the Pope* and whose Subjects are all Papists; you suggest a mad way The
Spaniard holds the Kingdoms of Navar and of Naples, and Sicily, only by the
Popes gift; by which he should have Ireland too, and England, but that the
right Heir keeps them from him.
to secure themselves by firing their Country about their ears.

But what is this to England? where, since the exclusion of that trash, which
you call the Catholic Faith, the King and the greatest part of his People are
no Papists, and have had so much trouble and danger for it from them that are.
May not Reason and Experience teach us to fear, that having to do with the same
kind of Adversaries, we may still have some troublesome and dangerous Enemies?

No, we have none to fear but our selves, if we may believe you. For, say you,

[We shall always acknowledge to the whole world, that there have been as many
brave English in this last Century, as in any other place whatsoever: yet,
since the exclusion of the Catholic Faith, there has been that committed by
those who would fain be called Protestants, that the wickedest Papist at no
time dreamt of.] Pray Sir, what may that be? For you have murdered Kings, and
them of your own Religion, four or five in this Realm since the Conquest (not
to speak of those Numbers elsewhere.) But that was in the growing Age of
Popery. In latter times, have you so soon forgot our Kings Grandfather, Henry
IV. murdered by Ravilliac? or his Predecesfor Henry III. murdered by Friar
Clement? and the People you have killed up by whole Families and Townships?
Witness England, Ireland, France, Piedmont, which you may hear of elsewhere.
These things have been done by Papists broad awake; and what must that be which
the wickedst of them never dreamt of?

['Twas never heard of before, that an absolute Queen was condemned by
Subjects, and those styled her Peers; or that a King was publicly Tried and
Executed by his own People and Servants.] First, you tell us of the Queen of
Scots being put to Death Walsingham, Hist. Edw. I. 1306.
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. It was by the same color of right, we suppose,
that Wallis suffered in Edward the First's Reign, namely of that Sovereignty
that our Princes challenged over Scotland. But Edward I. was ere while a
laudable Papist; and Queen Elizabeth, for all this, might be a very good
P^otestant. Sure we are, that King James and King Charles, who were nearest
concerned in this matter, never imputed the Fault of it to her Religion.

Your other instance is, of that most execrable Murder, committed on the best
of Kings, by his own Subjects, and by such as you say, would fain be called
Pro^estants. Sir, we would fain be called Christians, and Members of the
Catholic Church: would you take it well of a Turk, that should therefore
charge our faults upon you? but you do worse than a Turk, in charging these
men's faults upon us. They were neither then nor since of our Communion; but
that blessed Prince was, whom they murdered. He declared upon the Scaffold, I
dye a Christian, according to the profession of the Church of England, as I
found it left me by my Father. He charged the Princess Elizabeth, not to
grieve, and torment her self for him; for that would be a glo^ious Death which
he should dye, it being for the Laws and Liberties of this Land, and for
maintaining the true Protestant Religion. He died with some Care not to leave
you this advantage by his Death; as it appears by these words of his last
Letter to His Majesty that now is. The scandal of the late Troubles which some
may Letter to the Prince.
object and urge to you against the Protestant Religion established in England,
is easily answered to them or your own thoughts in this, that scarce any one
who has been a beginner or an active prosecutor of this late War against the
Church, the Laws, and Me, either was or is a true lover, embracer, or
practicer of the Protestant Religion established in England; which neither
gives such Rules, nor ever before set such Examples.

[My Lords and Gentlemen, we know who were the Authors of this last
abomination, and how generously you strove against the raging Torrent; nor have
we any other ends to remember you of it, but to show that all Religions may
have a corrupted spawn; and that God has been pleased to permit such a
Rebellion, which our Progenitors never saw, to convince you perchance (whom for
ever may he prosper) that popery is not the only source of treason] But do you
indeed know, who were the Authors of this last abomination? Pray Sir be plain
with us, for in these doubtful words, there seems to be more truth than every
man is aware of. The Rebellion that led to it, began we know in Scotland, where
the design of it was first laid by V L'Estrange 1639. in Habernfields Relation.
Cardinal Richelien His Majesty's Answer to the Reasons for no Address.
irreconcilable Enemy. Then it broke out in Ireland, where it was blessed with
His Holiness's Letters, and assisted by his Nuntio, whom he sent purposely to
attend the Fire there. Lastly here in England, you did your parts to unsettle
the People and gave them needless occasions of jealousy, which the vigilant
Phanaticks made use of, to bring us all into War and Confusion.

Both in England and Scotland, the special Tools that they wrought with, were
borrowed out of your Shops.

It was His Majesty's own Observat on (by which you may guess whose spawn they
were) Their Maxims, says he, Large Declaration concerning the tumults in
Scotland, p. 3.
were the same with the Jesuits; their Preachers Sermons were delivered in the
very phrase of Becanus, Scioppius, and Eudaemon Johannes; their poor Arguments,
which they delivered in their seditious Pamphlets printed or written, were
taken almost verbatim out of Bellarmin and Suarez.

In Ireland, where you durst do it, you employed Iron and Steel against him;
with which you might as well have preserved him, if you had pleased; but you
denied to do that, (as he tell us) Answer to the Reasons for the Votes of no
Address
only upon account of Religion. Then followed the accursed Fact it self, agreed
to in the Councils of your Answer to Philanax, p. 59
Clergy, contrived and executed by the Phanaticks. In vain did the poor
Royallist strive against it, for what could he do? when two such streams met
against him; of which the deepest was that which came from Rome, where the
false Fisherman opened all his Floodgates, to overwhelm us with those
troubles, which, for the advantage of his trade, he had often before
endeavored, but could never prevail till now to send them pouring in upon us.

[Little we think, (when your Prayers and ours were offered up to beg a
blessing on the Kings Affairs) ever to see that day, in which Carlos Gifford,
Whitgrave, and the Pendrels, should he punished by your desires for that
Religion which obliged them to save their forlorn prince; and a stigmatized man
(for his Offenses against King and Church) a chief promoter of it.

Nay less, did we imagine, that by your Votes Huddleston might be hanged, who
again secured our Sovereign; and others free in their fast Possessions that
sat as Judges, and sealed the Execution of that great Prince of happy Memory.]

That many Gentlemen of your Church were not of your Party, we do willingly
acknowledge; and that some of them in that critical day of Danger, did the King
very eminent Service. But so did Protestants too; therefore you cannot ascribe
this to Your Religion. Nor does it seem reasonable, that to requite particular
persons for their service, we should abandon those Laws which may secure the
public against as great a danger.

To question his Life that had freely exposed it for our Sovereigns, were too
great a Barbarity for any Christians but of your Sect, or any Age but Queen
Mary's days; Dolemans Conference of Succession, part 2. p. 237.
for then Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was indeed so dealt with; but we do not more
detest those times than such examples. And we know that His Majesty, without
any trespass on his Laws, may protect and reward those persons whom he judges
deserving it; as well as his Royal Predecessors did, in whose Reigns the penal
Laws were made.

Pray be you as favorable to the stigmatized Man, (whom sure you are not angry
with for his Offense against King and Church, whatsoever you say;) and if he be
now a promoter of any thing that displeases you, bear with him, as His Majesty
does; for whom he lately did his utmost against Phanaticks toward the bringing
of him in: and he would not willingly live to see the Pope turn him out again.

For the Regicides, be as severe with them as you please; only beware how you
tax His Majesty's Mercy, for fear you may have need of it.

[We confess we are unfortunate, and you just Judges, whom with our lives we
will ever maintain to be so; nor are we ignorant the necessity of Affairs made
both the King and you do things, which formerly you could not so much as fancy.
Yet give us leave to say, we are still loyal; nay* to desire you to believe so,
and to remember how Synonymous under the late Rebellion) was the word Papist
and Cavalier; for there was never no Papist that was not deemed a Cavalier, nor
no Cavalier that was not called a Papist, or at least judged to be popishly
affected.] Your fawning upon the Parliament, and commending of your selves, we
pass over as things of course. And we equally believe you now, as you did the
Phanaticks heretofore, when they called us Papists; or as we did you e'rewhile,
when you called them Protestants. For pray Sir, what did they to be called
Protestants? or what did we to be judged Popishly Affected? And if all Papists,
as you say, were deemed Cavaliers; we hope some of them have had the grace to
be ashamed of it. In Ireland there were whole Armies of Irish and English, that
fought against His Majesty, solely upon the account of your Religion. In
England it is true, some came in voluntarily to assist him; but many more of
you were Second Moderator, p. 43.
hunted into his Garrisons, by them that knew you would bring him little help
and much hatred. And of those that fought for him, as long as his Fortune
stood; when that once declined, a great part, even of them, fell from him. From
that time forward, you that were, always, all, deemed Cavaliers, where were
you? In all those weak Efforts 1647, 1656, 1659.
of gasping Loyalty, what did you? You complied, and flattered, and gave
sugared words to the Rebels then, as you do to the Royallists now. You addressed
your Petitions First Moderator, p. 59.
to the Supreme Authority of this Nation the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England You affirmed Second Moderator, p. 41. V. Answer to Philanax, p. 63. of
Father Bret..
that you had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagement. You
promised, that if you might but enjoy your Religion First Moderator, p. 31.
you would be the most quiet and useful Subjects in England. You proved it in
these words. First Moderator. p. 36.
The Papists of England would be bound by their own Interest (the strongest
obligation amongst wise men) to live peaceably and thankfully in the private
exercise of their Consciences; and becoming gainers by such compassions, they
could not so reasonably be distrusted, as the Prelatick Party that were losers.
You proved it more amply by real Testimonies; which we have no pleasure in
remembering, and you would have less in hearing of them. These things were too
lately done to be talked of.

If after all this said and done for your own Vindication, you were still
deemed Cavaliers, the more was your wrong. But who could help it? all the right
we can do you, is, Not to believe it.

[We know though we differ something in Religion (the truth of which let the
last day judge) yet none can agree with your Inclinations, or are fitter for
your Converse than we; for as we have as much Birth among us as England can
boast of, so our Breeding leans your way both in Court and Camp: and therefore,
had not our late sufferings united us in that firm tie, yet our like humors
must needs have joined our hearts.

If we err, pity our condition, and remember what your great Ancestors were,
and make some difference between us (that have twice converted England from
Paganism) and those other Sects that can challenge nothing but intrusion for
their imposed Authority.]

As for Religion, we agree with you in all that is truly Catholic: We differ
from you only in not admitting your Innovations. And whether justly, we say
also, let the last day Judge. Your Converse, Breeding, etc. we heartily respect
as far as it is English. But we suspect every thing that Leans toward a Foreign
Jurisdiction. And we would be loath, by our kindness to those things wherein we
agree with you, to be drawn into the danger of those things in which we differ
from you.

By that flam of your having twice converted England from Paganism, sure you
mean that we in this Land have been twice converted by persons sent to us from
Rome. Which you will never persuade any one to believe, that dares trust
himself to taste of Church History without one of your Fathers chewing it for
him. But, supposing this to be true, pray what would you infer from it? that
because we received good from the Primitive Christians of that place, therefore
we should lay our selves open to receive any evil that may happen to us from
their degenerous Successors.

[But it is generally said, that Papists cannot live without persecuting all
other Religions within their reach.

We confess, where the name of Protestant is unknown, the Catholic Magistrates
(beliveing it erroneous) do use all care to keep it out: Yet in those Countries
where liberty is given, they have far more privileges than we, under any
reformed Government what soever. To be short, we will only instance France for
all, where they have public churches, where they can make what Proselytes they
please, and where it is not against Law to be in any charge or employment. Now
Holland (which permits every thing) gives us, it is true, our Lives and Estates,
but takes away all trust in Rule, and leaves us also in danger of the Scout,
whenever he pleases to disturb our Meetings.]

What is generally said of the Popish Persecutions, is also generally believed.
But Sir, you answer it deceitfully. For you tell us of the manner; first, of
those Countries where the Name of Protestant is unknown: and next, of those
Countries where liberty is given: but you slip over a third sort, namely, of
those where the Name of Protestant is well known, and yet no Liberty is given.
Pray what Liberty have the Protestants in Flanders? we are told they have none:
and yet the Name of them is very well known there. The like may be said of
diverse other Countries: Nay in England, while it was Yours, did you give any
Liberty at all? yet the Name of Protestant was very well known here, and was
sufficient for the burning of any one that was known by it. But you say, you
will only instance France for all. Very wisely resolved: for it would not have
been for your credit to instance any other. In France then, whatsoever Liberty
the Protestants enjoy, it is by virtue of their Edicts: which how they were
obtained, we shall have occasion to mind K. James Defense of the Right of Kings
p. 479, 480.
you; and how they are observed, let the poor Hugonots tell you. But if they
were observed to the full; should we therefore grant You that Liberty which is
against Law? because they are allowed that which you say is not against Law.

In Holland, the Papists may have some reason to complain, if their Masters
allow them no more Liberty than you speak of. For, it was chiefly by their
hands, that the Spanish yoke was thrown off: which, on the contrary, our
Papists were so fond of, that for diverse years together, we had much ado to
keep them from pulling it on upon our necks.

[Because we have named France, the Massacre will perchance be urged against
us: but the world must know, that was a Cabinet-Plot, condemned as wicked by
Catholic Writers there, and of other Countries also: besides, it cannot be
thought they were murdered for being Protestants, since 'twas their powerful
Rebellion (let their Faith have been what it would) that drew them into that
ill machinated Destruction.] The French Massacre, which you next speak of, was
a thing of so horrid a Cruelty, that, as Thuanus Thu. Hist. l, 53.
tells us, Considering-men, having turned over the Annals of the Nations, could
find no example of the like in all Antiquity. Thu. Hist. l. 52.
It was cloak'd over with shows of the greatest Amity in the world; namely of a
Marriage between the Houses of Valois and Bourbon; to which all the chief of
the Protestants were most lovingly invited. There, after the Jollity of Mirth,
and caresles of Entertainment, in the dead-time of the night, the whole City
was in Arms about them; they fell upon all the Protestants Houses and Lodgings;
they butchered them without distinction, Men, Women and Children, till the
Channels ran down with Blood into the River: And scarce a Protestant was left
alive, except the Guignard, in his Oration said, It was ae great error that
they had not cut the Basilick vein.
Bridegroom and the Prince of Conde; who turned Papists to escape their hands,
and yet they could not escape them; the one being poisoned, and the other
stabbed by men of your Religion. This hellish Stratagem, you say, was condemned
as wicked by Catholic Writers. It was likewise extolled as glorious by
Catholic Writers. But pray Sir, what think you of it? you are bashful in
company, but one may guess at your meaning. First, you say it was a
Cabinet-Plot: a fine soft word, for the butchering* Id. l. 53.
of 30000 persons. Next, in answer to them that call it murder, you seem to
blame it as a thing done to Halves; for what else can you mean, by calling it
an ill-machinated Destruction? Lastly, whatsoever it was, that which drew it
upon them, you say, was their Rebellion (let their Faith have been what it
would.) Nay Sir, it was their Faith (let their Obedience have been what it
would.) For neither had that King better Subjects than those which were
Massacred; nor had his Successor erranter Rebels than those that did Massacre
them. Brave Coligni was the first murdered; and his Head was sent to Rome,
while his Body (according to his own ominous Thu. Hist. l. 52. says, that
being forewarned of the Plot, and advised to stand upon his Guard; He wished
rather to have his Body dragged, etc. than to see any more Civil Wars in Franc.
wish) was mangled and dragged about the Streets of Paris. The Duke of Guise
was chief of the murderers; whose factious Authority, as you sweetly style it,
was as black a Rebellion as ever that Kingdom saw. But to end this Question,
whether these men were massacred for Protestant Religion, or for Rebellion; let
us take judges between us: for possibly, We may be partial for the one, and You
for the other.

First, of Rebellion, a King should be the most competent Judge: hear therefore
what King James says, who lived in the fresh memory of those days. I could
never yet Defense of the right of Kings, in his Works, p. 479, 480.
learn (says he) by any good and true Intelligence, that in France, those of
the Religion took Arms against their King. In the first Civil Wars they stood
only upon their Guard, they stood only to their lawful Wards, and Locks of
Defense. They armed not, nor took the Field, before they were pursued with Fire
and Sword, burnt up and slaughtered. Besides, Religion was neither the root nor
the rind of those intestine Troubles. The true ground of the Quarrel was this;
during the Minority of King Francis II. the Protestants of France were a refuge
and succor to the Princes of the Blood, when they were kept from the King's
Presence, and by the Power of their Enemies were no better than plainly driven
and chased from the Court. I mean the Grandfathers of the King now Reigning,
and of the Prince of Conde, when they had no place of safe Retreat. In regard
of which worthy and honorable Service, it may seem the French King has reason
to have the Protestants in his gracious remembrance. With other Commotion or
Insurrection the Protestants are not justly to be charged. Certain it is, that
King Henry III, etc. by their good Service was delivered from a most extreme
and eminent peril of his Life, etc. they never abandoned that Henry III. nor
IV. in all the heat of Revolts and Rebellions raised by the Pope, and the more
part of the Clergy, etc.

Then of Religion, since you will allow none but the Pope to be Judge, let us
hear his Judgment from Thuanus, who was a Roman Catholic, and a most
authentic Historian. Thu. Hist. l. 53.
He tells us, the Pope had an account of the Massacre from his Legate at Paris,
that he read his Letter in the Consistory of Cardinals, that there it was
decreed that they should go directly to St. Marks, and there solemnly give
thanks to Almighty God for so great a blessing conferred upon the Roman See,
and the Christian World. That soon after a Jubilee should be published through
the whole Christian World, and these causes were expressed for it, To give thanks
to God for destroying in France the Enemies of the Truth, and of the Church,
etc. In the Evening, the Guns were fired at St. Angelo, and Bonefires were
made, and nothing was omitted of all those things that use to be performed in
the greatest Victories of the Church. Some days after, there was a Procession
to St. Lewis, with the greatest resort of Nobility and People. First went the
Bishops and Cardinals, then the Switzers, then the Ambassadors of Kings and
Princes: then under a Canopy, went His Holiness Himself, with the Emperor's
Ambassador bearing up his Train for him, etc. Over the Church-Door was an
Inscription set up, in which the Cardinal of Lorain, in the name of the King of
France, congratulated his Holiness, and the College of Cardinals, etc. for the
plainly stupendous effects, and altogether incredible events, of their
Councils given him, and of their Assistances sent him, and of their twelve
Years Wishes and Prayers. Soon after, the Pope sent Cardinal Ursin in his name,
to congratulate the King of France, who in his Journey through the Cities,
highly commended the Faith of those Citizens that had to do in the Massacre;
and distributed his Holiness's blessings amongst them. And at Paris, being to
persuade the reception of the Council of Trent, he endeavored it with this
Argument, That the memory of the late Action, to be magnified in all ages, as
conducing to the Glory of God, and the Dignity of the Holy Roman Church, might
be as it were sealed by the Approbation of the Holy Synod: for that so it would
be manifest to all men that now are, or hereafter shall be, that the King
consented to the destruction of so many lives, not out of hatred or revenge, or
sense of any injury of his own, but out of an ardent desire to propagate the
Glory of God. That, what could not be expected whilst the Faction of
Protestants stood, now since they were taken away, the Catholic Apostolic
Roman Religion which by the Synod of Trent is cleared from the venom of the
Sectaries, might be established without Controversy, and without Exception,
through all the Provinces of the French Dominion.

Well spoken, worthy Head of the Church! we will take thy Judgment about
cutting of throats at any time; thou do not mince the matter, as this English
limb of thee does: who yet is thus far to be commended; that since he durst not
say of it as he desired, for fear of provoking us, yet he would not call it as
it deserved, for fear of too much contradicting thee.

[May it not be as well said in the next Catholic Kings Reign, that the Duke
of Guise and Cardinal, Heads of the League, were killed for their Religion
also? Now no body is ignorant, but 'twas their Factious Authority which made
that jealous Prince design their Deaths, though by unwarrantable means.] The
Duke of Guise and his Brother, were not killed for their Religion; for they
were killed by Henry III. of France.
one of the same Religion, and one that was bent against the Protestants as
much as they. Only because he spared the blood of the Protestants your Zealots
hated him; and so much the more, because a Protestant Henry IV.
being his Heir, he would not declare him incapable of the Succession. For
these causes, by the Popes consent, these Guises (whom he called the Maccabes
Thu. Hist. l. 91.
of the Church) entered into an Holy League against their King; and called in
the Succors of Spain and Savoy, which they paid for with the Rights of the
Crown; they maintained a sharp War against him, and did all that was in their
power to deprive him of his Kingdom and Life. Whereupon that jealous Prince (as
you favorably Rossaeus, one of your Predecessors, calls him a thousand times
worse than Mahomet, p. 170. and says, From the beginning of the world, no
Nation or State ever endured such a Tyrant, p. 171.
call him) for his own preservation, was urged to deal with them, as they had
dealt with the Protestants; from whose case, this of the Guises is so vastly
different, that one would wonder why you should mention it.

But since you have led us thus far out of the way, let us invite you a little
farther. The Pope Excommunicated the King for this Action, and granted 9 Years
of true Indulgence to any of his Subjects that would bear Arms against him; and
foretold, Sixtus ^. quoted his own Prediction in his Oration that follows.
(as a Pope might do without Astrology) that e're long he should come to a
fearful Death. The Subjects took Arms, and earned the Indulgence. A Friar took
his Knife, and fulfilled the Prediction; by ripping up those Bowels that were
always most tenderly affected with kindness to the Monkish Orders. But what joy
was there at Rome for this! as if the news of another Massacre had come to
Town, one would think so, by the Popes Oration Printed at Paris, 1589, by the
Printers of the Holy League, and approved by the Sorbon.
to his Cardinals: in which he sets forth this work of God (the Kings Murder)
for its wonderfulness to be compared with Christ's Incarnation and Resurrection.
And the Friars Virtue, and Courage, and fervent Love of God, he prefers before
that of Eleazar in the Maccabees, or of Judith killing Holofernes: and the
murdered King (who had professed himself to dye in the Faith of the Roman
Catholic Apostolic Church) he declared to have died in the Sin against the
Holy Ghost. Pray Sir, may it not well be said, that Papists cannot live without
persecuting Protestants? when we see a Popish King stabbed and damned for not
persecuting them enough, or for doing the work of the Lord negligently.

[If it were for Doctrine that Hugonots suffered in France, this Haughty
Monarch would soon destroy them now, having neither Force nor Town to resist
his Might and Puissance. They yet live free enough, being even Members of
Parliament, and may convert the Kings Brother too; if he think fit to be so.
Thus you see how well Protestants may live in a Popish Country, under a Popish
King: nor was Charlemain more Catholic than this; for though he contends
something with the Pope, it is not of Faith, but about Gallicane Privileges,
which perchance he may very lawfully do.] [Iudge then worthy Tatriots, who are
the best used, and consider our hardship here in England, where it is not only
a Fine for hearing Mass, but death to the Master for having a Priest in his
House; and so far we are from preserment, That by Law we cannot come within 10
miles of London; all which we know your great mercy will never permit you to
exact.] You say, if this were true, then this Hanghty Monarch would soon
destroy his Hugonots now. No such consequence, Sir, for he may persecute them,
and not destroy them; he may destroy them, but not so soon. Princes K. James
works, p. 483.
use to go their own pace, whilst they are upon their legs; but if any
misfortune throws them upon all four, then the Pope gets up and rides them what
pace he pleases. Nor is this Monarch yet so Catholic as Charlemain was; if he
were, he Canon Agatho Did. 63.
would do as Charlemain did. He would be Patron of all the Bishoprics in his
Empire, even of Rome it self, if it were there. He would make the Pope himself
know the distance between a Prelate and an Emperor. He would Fauchet. Anno 801.
c. 10. that the Pope adored him, not he the Pope.
maintain the Rights of his Crown; and not chop Logic about Gallicane
Privileges, which you say, like a sly Jesuit, that perchance he may lawfully
do. He would call a Council when he pleased, to separate Errors from the Faith;
as Charlemain himself called a Council Council of Frankford, An. 794.
against Image Worship, which was then creeping into the Church. This were a
good way of destroying the Hugonots, by taking away all causes of strife
amongst Christians. By any other way than this he cannot destroy them, without
the violation of his Laws: which, as they are the only Forces and Towers,
whereby Subjects ought to be secured against their King; so, since he is
pleased to allow them no other, these Laws, backed with his puissance, are
forces enough to secure them against their Fellow Subjects.

We cannot pass this Paragraph, without observing your Jesuitical ingenuity;
how you slight those favors that you have; how you complain of those hardships
that you have not; and how you insult over the poor Hugonots, by comparing with
them, who generally would mend their condition by changing with you. Pray Sir,
do not Popish-Peers sit in our English Parliaments, as well as Protestants in
the French? or have you not as free access to our Kings Brother, as they have
to theirs? or would you have his Highness to Catechize, as the Abbot had the
Duke of Gloucester? perhaps that you would have. Otherwise we know nothing but
His Highness's Wisdom, and care of his Conscience, that guards him from you.

Of the Laws you complain hideously, Worthy Patriots consider our hardship. And
yet, those very Laws you complain of, you never knew executed in your life; and
you tell us soon after, that you know they never will be.

For what cause then were they enacted? Plainly for this cause, to guard the
lives of our Princes against your traitorous practices.

[It has often been urged, that our Misdemeanors in Queen Elizabeth's days,
and King James's time, was the cause of our Panishment.] Your Misdemeanors! We
cry you mercy, if they were no more; but that comes next to be argued, Whether
they were Misdemeanors or Treasons?

[We earnestly wish that the Party had more patience under that Princess. But
pray consider (though we excuse not their faults) whether it was not a question
harder than that of York and Lancaster, the cause of a War of such length, and
death of so many Princes, who had most right, Q Elizabeth or Mary Stuart: for
since the whole Kingdom had crowned and sworn Allegiance to Q. Mary, they had
owned her Legitimate Daughter to Henry the Eighth; and therefore it was thought
necessarily to follow by many, That if Mary was the true Child, Elizabeth was
the Natural, which must then needs give way to the thrice Noble Queen of
Scots.] Under Queen Elizabeth, you wish your Party had more patience; and we
think they Needed none; for in the first ten Years of her Reign they had no
Business for it. In all that space of time, which was twice as long as Queen
Mary's Reign, though it was fresh in memory what the Papists had done, yet not
one of them suffered Death: till the Northern Philopater. p. 103.
Rebellion: which being raised against her, only upon the account of her
Religion; it appears that She was the persecuted person: She had the occasion
for Patience; and you would have wished Them more Loyalty, if any such thing
had been in your thoughts. But perhaps you wish they had so much patience, as
not to have discovered their design before it was fully ripe for execution. Not
unlike. For it appears, you account Rebellion no fault; by this, that you say,
you excuse not their faults, and yet you do excuse their Rebellion.

You excuse them, by saying, it was a very hard Question, whether the Right of
the Crown lay in her, Ross. p. 223. says of them that were pretended to die
for your Religion, Where was it ever heard that they denied her to have been
the lawful Queen.
or in the Queen of Scots; for that many thought Queen Elizabeth Illegitimate.
Pray Sir, who Thought it? or when arose that Question? The Archbishop of York
though a Papist, in his Speech at the publishing of Queen Mary's Death, said,
No man could doubt of the justness of the Lady Elizabeth's Title to the
Succession. The whole Kingdom received her, and owned her as Queen, more
generally and freely than eyer they did Queen Mary. The Neighbor Kings of
Spain and France, and the Emperor offered Philip II. and Henry III. for
themselves, and the Emperor Maximilian for his Brother Charles.
Marriage to her, in hopes to have got the Crown by her. The Queen of Scots her
self did acknowledge her, and claimed nothing more than to be Heir to her, and
so did King James that was her Successor. So that whosoever opposed Queen
Elizabeth's Right, if they were English, 'cis apparent they were Rebels; and if
they were Papists, we may guess what led them to it For the first that
Questioned her Title, was Pope Council of Trent. l. 5. An: 1558.
Paul IV. who would not acknowledge her for sundry causes; the chief that he
alleged, were these: First, Because this Kingdom is a Fee of the Papacy, and
it was audaciously done of her to assume it without his leave. The second was,
because she was Illegitimate: for if her Fathers Marriage were good, the Pope
must let down his Mill. But after all this, his Successor Pius IV In his Letter
by Parpaglia, dated 1560. May 5.
did own her, and would have done any thing for her, so she would have owned
him. Which because she would not, the next Pope Pius V. issued out his Bull
Dated 1570. Feb. 25.
against her, and deposed her; not for Bastardy See the Bull it self, there is
not the least mention of Bastardy in it.
but for Heresy; that is, for being a Protestant; for which Heresy it was,
that the Northern men Rebelled against her, and many more of her Subjects
disowned her: and some or other were every foot plotting how to take away her
life.

True it is, that some of these pretended to do it in favor of the Queen of
Scots. But how if that Queen had not been a Catholic? or Queen Elizabeth had
not Been thought Illegitimate? would a legitimate Protestant have been so
contended for? or would a Popish Bastard have been rejected by them?

Pope Gregory XIII. had occasion to consider this. For his Holiness had a
Bastard James Buoncompagno.
of his own to provide for, and another Don John.
of the Emperors; no doubt good Catholics both of them. To one he gave the
Kingdom of Ireland, and set out Stukely Whom his Holiness had created Marquess
of Lemster, Earl of Wexford, etc. Thu. Hist. l. 64.
with Forces to win it for him. To the other he gave the Kingdom of England,
and gave him leave to win it for himself. But what was all this to the thrice
Noble Queen of Scots? Possibly she might have been preferred to have married
one of the rwo? but then it must have been expressly with this condition, That
her Son King James (who was a Heretic) should have nothing to do with the
Succession.

When their bubbles were broken, and she was dead, all her Right descended to
King James, who being as little to the Pope's mind, as Q. Elizabeth was, Sixtus
V. only took no public notice of Him, but he proceeded with all his might
against Her. He cursed her afresh, and published a Croysade against her, and gave
the whole Right of Her Kingdoms to Philip the II. King of Spain. But neither
that Popes Bounty, nor his three Successors Blessings, nor the Spanish Arms,
nor the Italian Arts (for no way was left untried) could ever prevail against
Gods Providence; which, till the end of her days, kept that Queen always fast
in her Possessions.

At last, Pope Clement VIII. seeing there was nothing to be done against her,
resolved to let her go like a Heretic as she was; and to take the more care
that another Heretic should not succeed her. For which cause he sent over two
Breves into England, one to the Clergy, and the other to the Laity, commanding
them not to admit any other but a Catholic, though never so near in Blood, to
the Succession: Cambden, Eliz. 1600.
that is to say, in plain words, not to admit King James to Reign after Queen
Elizabeth's death. So it is clear, that your Popes never stuck at that hard
Question that you speak of.

Let us see what our Countrymen did, who, as you say, suffered for it in those
days. They did like obsequious Members, at every turn, as their Head directed
them. They acted for the Papal Interest as far as they were able. They made the
House of Scotland the Cloak for it, as far as it would reach. And it reached
pretty well, as long as the Title was in Queen Mary. But after the Title came
to be in King James, Pray Sir, name us those Papists, or but one single person
of them, that either died or suffered for Him: and then you bless us with a
discovery.

What then? were they idle for so many years as past between the commencing of
his Title, and the Death of Queen Elizabeth? Nothing less. For they were as
busy as Bees, in contriving how to hasten her Death, and how to put him by the
Succession. And if it were for his Service, that they would have destroyed Her;
pray for whose service was it, that they would have defeated Him? but that will
be known by the story.

Soon after his Mothers Death was the Spanish Invasion; which would have
defeated him with a Witness, if it had sped; and yet our Papists, both
Negotiated Cambden Eliz. 1588.
it, and writ in Defense Cardinal Allen's Admonition. V. Watson's Quodl. p.
240. and 247.
of it. Afterward in Scotland your Jesuits procured the Earl of Huntley
Cambden Eliz., An. 1589. Watso. Quodl. p. 150.
and others to raise a powerful Rebellion against him. In England, they
endeavored to persuade the Earl of Derby Cambden Ib. Anno 1593. Watson Ib. p.
154.
to set up a Title to the Crown; who honestly revealing it, was poisoned soon
after, according to the prophetical threatening of Hesket whom they had made use
of to persuade him.

When these single shots failed, Father Parsons Cambden Ib. Anno 1594. Dolmans
Conference about the next succession to the Crown.
gave a broadside to the Royal House of Scotland. For he published a Book under
the name of Dolman, wherein he set up diverse Competitours for the Succession,
and consequently so many Enemies to the unquestionable Right of that Family.
And to provide one sure Enemy upon the place, he found out a Title for the Earl
of Essex, the most ambitious and popular Man in the Nation, to whom also he
craftily dedicated his Book. In which he mentions, Dolman. part. 2. p. 9.
among other Books of this nature, one written by Lesley concerning the Queen
of Scots Title; another by Heghinton for the King of Spains Title; and another
concerning the Prince of Parma's; But for his part, before these and all
others, he prefers the Title of the Infanta. And, to show that he meant as he
said, Cambden Ib. 1602. Watson. Ib. p. 279.
he caused their Scholars in the Seminaries abroad to subscribe to it, and made
them swear to maintain it, and bound the Missionaries to promote it in those
places whither they were to be sent. Whereas for King James his Title, he
preferrs several others before it, and tells us, Dolman Ib. p. 109.
I have not found very many in England that favor it: meaning sure of your
Catholics, with whom his converse chiefly was; and concerning whom he gives
this remarkable testimony, that Ib. p 110.
the Catholics make little account of his Title by nearness of Succession.

We have reason to believe he did not wrong them, because when an answer was
written to his Book, Watson. Ib. p. 107.
the Archpriest Blackwel would not suffer it to be published. And your next
Head-Officer, the Provincial of the Jesuits, Tortura Torti. p. 197.
declared he would have nothing to do with King James his Title; and 'twas the
common voice of the men of his Order that Watson. Ib. p. 150.
if King James would turn Catholic, they would follow him; but if not, they
would all die against him.

Which pious Resolutions were seconded with agreeable Actions. For they
endeavored, as far as Catholics are obliged by their Principles, viz. as far
as they durst and were able; at first; to hinder him from coming in, and
afterward to throw him out again, or to destroy him in the place, as we shall
have occasion to show you in the answer to the next Paragraph.

The mean while out of this present discourse, in which you cannot deny any
thing that is material to our purpose; It appears that this hard Question of
Right to the Crown, was not between the Parties themselves in one or the other of
whom you confess the Right was. It appears that your Infallible Judge of
Controversies very easily and impartially resolved it, by denying both sides of
the Question, and assuming the whole right to himself. It appears that your
Catholics, who are said to have sided with one against the other, did in truth
side with the Pope against them both. And lastly it appears that their
Misdemeanors were inexcusable Treasons, if any Treason can be inexcusable that
is befriended with such an Apologist.

['Twas for the Royal House of Scotland that they suffered in those days; and
it is for the same Illustrious Family we are ready to hazard all on any
occasion.] Sir, we have found you notoriously False in that which you Affirm:
Pray God you prove True in that which you Promise.

[Nor can the consequence of the former procedure be but ill, if a Henry VIII.
(whom Sir W. Raleigh, and my Lord Cherbury, two famous Protestants, have so
homely Uncharacterized) should after twenty years cohabitation turn away his
Wife, and this out of scruple of Conscience as he said) when as History
declares that he never spared Woman in his Lust, nor Man in his Fury. This
Character would better agree with many a Head of a Church whom we could name
you, than with Henry VIII. of whom better V. Thu. Hist. l. 1.
Historians speak better things. But if he were such a Monster as you would
make him, perhaps it was for want of a better Religion; for he was Philopater,
p. 308. and 323. and v. Thu. Ib.
perfectly of Yours, except only in the point of Supremacy. And you had no
occasion for this flurt at him; unless that, having undertaken to put the best
colors upon Treason, you might think you did something toward it in
bespattering of Kings.

We have a touch of the same Art in the next Paragraph. Where having undertaken
to excuse the Gun-powder-Treason, you call it first a Misdemeanor, then the
Fifth of November, and then a Conjuration; soft words all of them: but you deal
wicked hardly with the great Minister of State; whom you make to have been the
Author of it; as if the Traitors had not conspired against the State, but the
State against them.

But before we come to answer this, It will be needful to set down the story,
as it appears out of the Examinations and Confessions of the Traitors
themselves.

The rise of this Treason, was from the beforementioned Breves of Pope Clement
VIII. in which he required all his Catholics, that after the death of that
wretched Woman Queen Elizabeth, they should admit none but a Catholic to reign
over them. These Breves were by Garnet the Provincial of the Jesuits,
communicated to Catesby and others: who in Obedience thought best to begin
their Practices in her life time. So they sent Father Tesmund and Winter into
Spain to crave the assistance of that Crown. The Spaniard sent them back with
the promise of an Army. But soon after Queen Elizabeth died, and no Army came.
Therefore again they sent Christopher Wright into Spain to hasten i^ and
Stanley out of Flanders sent Fawks thither upon the same errand; who finding
the Councils of Spain at this time wholly inclined to peace, returned quickly
back, and brought nothing but despair along with them.

Yet the Breves had so wrought upon Catesby, that he could not find in his
heart to give over; but still casting about for ways, he hit upon this of the
Powder Treason, which as being much out of the common Rode, he thought the most
secure for his purpose He communicated this to Winter, who approved it, and
fetched Fawks out of Flanders to assist in it. Not long after Piercy being in
their company, and offering himself to any service for the Catholic Cause,
though it were even the Kings Death: Catesby told him, that that was too poor
an Adventure for him: but, says he, if thou will be a Traitor, there is a Plot
of greater advantage; and such a one as can never be discovered. Thus having
duly prepared him, he took him into the Conspiracy. And the like he did with so
many more as made up their Number thirteen of the Laity.

But where were the Jesuits all the while? rot idle, you may be sure. The
Provincial Garnet was privy to it from the beginning, so were diverse Baldwin,
Hammond, Tesmund, and Gerard, were named by the Conspirators, as privy with
them.
more of the Society. Insomuch that when Watson endeavored to have drawn them
into his Plot (for the setting up of the Lady Arbella's Title, in opposition to
King James his) they declined it, V. VVatsons Confession.
saying, They had another of their own then afoot, and that they would not
mingle designs with him for fear of hindering one another.

But Watson miscarried with his Plot, and the Jesuits went on with theirs.
They absolved the Conspirators of the Guilt, and extenuated the Danger of their
design; they persuaded them how highly Beneficial it would be in the
Consequences of it; they gave them their Oath, by the Holy Trinity, and the
Sacrament which they did then receive, that none of them should reveal it to
any other, or withdraw himself from it without common consent: and for the
pitiful scruple of destroying the Innocent with the Guilty, Garnet answered,
they might lawfully do it in order to a greater good. Yet it seems there was a
spark of Humanity in some of them. which the Divinity of this Casuist had not
quite extinguish't; as appeared, either by the absenting of some Lords that
were afterward fined for it in the Star Chamber, or certainly by that Letter of
warning to my Lord Monteagle, which was the happy occasion of the Discovery of
the whole Treason.

In Warwickshire, where the Princess Elizabeth then was, they had appointed a
meeting, under the pretense of a Hunting-Match, to seize upon her, the same day
in which the King and his Male Issue were to have been destroyed. There met
about fourscore of them, which was a number sufficient for that business. But
the news of the Discovery coming among them, they were so dismayed at it, that
they desisted from their enterprise, and fled into Staffordshire; where, the
Country being raised against them, they were some of them killed, and the rest
taken; and those which were left alive of the prime Conspirators were sent up
to London, and there Executed.

This is the plain story, now let us see how you color it.

[Now for the Fifth of November; with hands lifted up to Heaven, we abominate
and detest.] What is it that you abominate and detest? That day which is the
Festival of our Deliverance? We can believe you without your hands lifted up to
Heaven. Or mean you the Treason which was to have been acted upon that day? why
then do you not speak out and call it so? For if you cannot afford to call it
Treason, it is not the lifting up of your hands that can make us believe you do
heartily abominate and detest it.

[And from the bottom of our hearts say, that may they fall into irrecoverable
Perdition, who propagate that Faith by the Blood of Kings, which is to be
planted in truth and meekness only.] It was a good caution of a Philosopher to
the Son of a common Woman, that he should not throw stones among a multitude,
for fear of hitting his Father. You might have had that caution when you threw
out this curse; for your Father the Pope stands fairest for it of all men that
we know in the World.

[But let it not displease you, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, if we ask whether
Ulysses be no better known? or who has forgot the Plots Cromwell framed in his
Closet; not only to destroy many faithful Cavaliers, but also to put a luster
upon his Intelligence, as if nothing could be done without his knowledge. Even
so did the then great Minister, who drew some few Desperadoes into this
Conjuration, and then discovered it by a Miracle.] Having spit and wiped your
mouth, now you make your speech. And it begins with a mixture of Apostle and
Poet; to show what we are to expect from you; namely, with much Gravity, much
Fiction: and so far you do not go about to deceive us.

The scope of your speech is to make the world believe that your Catholics
were drawn into this Plot by Secretary Cecil. You are so wise, that you do not
offer to prove this; but you would steal it into us by an example, that we are
concerned in. As Cromwell trepanned many faithful Cavaliers, even so Cecil drew
in some few Desperadoes. Comparisons (they say) are odious: But to the business.

First, admitting your Fiction, as if it were true, that Cecil did draw in
those wretches into this Treason. Was it ever the less Treason because he drew
them into it? For, according to your own supposition, they did not know that
they were drawn in by him. But they verily thought that they had followed their
own Guides; and they zealously did according to their own Principles. They did,
what they would have done, if there had been no Cecil in the world; provided
there had been a Devil in his room, to have put it into their heads. For your
excuse only implies, that they had not the Wit to invent it: But their progress
in it shows, that they wanted not the Malice to have executed it. So that
according to your own illustration: As those faithful Cavaliers whom Cromwell
drew in, had their Loyalty abused, and were nevertheless Faithful still; so
those Powder-Traitors whom you say Cecil drew in, had their Disloyalty
outwitted, and were nevertheless Traitors still. For as well in the one case as
in the other, this very thing that they could be drawn in, is a clear
demonstration that they were beforehand sufficiently Disposed for it.

Secondly, When you have considered the absurdity of your excuse for your
friends, you may do well to think of an excuse for your Self. For that which
you affirm of Cecil's having drawn them into this Plot, is a very groundless
and impudent Fiction, and you are properly the Author of it. For though others
perhaps may have spoken this in raillery; yet you are the first, that we know
of, that has asserted it in Print.

Pray Sir, whence had you this tale? By what Tradition did you receive it? Or
had you some new Revelation of the Causes threescore years after the Fact? For
it is plain, that King James V. His speech in Parliament 1605. and his Relation,
etc. Warmington, p. 7. says* None were therein culpable, but only Jesuits and
Catholics.
knew nothing of it. Bellarmin and his fellow Apologists in that Age never
pretended it. The parties themselves, neither at their Trial, nor at their
Execution, gave any intimation of it. Can you tell us which of the Conspirators
were Cecil's Instruments to draw in the rest? Or can you think he was so great
an Artist, that he could persuade his Setters to be hanged, that his Art might
not be suspected? For it is well known that he saved not any of those wretches
from suffering. And they which did suffer, charged none other, but themselves,
in their Confessions. Particularly, Father Garnet said, before Doctor Overal,
and diverse Casaub. Epist. ad Front. Du^^um.
others, that he would give all the World, if it were his, to clear his
Conscience, or his Name from that Treason,

These are strong presumptions of the Negative; but you ought to have proved
your Affirmative, or at least to have offered something toward it. For if
barely to say this, be enough, then here is an excuse indifferently calculated
for all Treasons in the world that miscarry: (and if they prosper, who dares
call them Treasons?) Here is a never failing Topic for any one that would
write an Apology in behalf of any Villainy whatsoever. For if the Traitors be
discovered by any kind of accident, this will always remain to be said for
them, that the then great Minister drew them in.

But why did you not say this for those Conspiracies in Queen Elizabeth's days?
You might have said it perhaps with less improbability. But then had you a
higher Game to fly at, namely the Queens Title to her Crown; and if you durst
have made so bold with King James his, you would not have stoopt at so low a
Quarry as a Minister of State.

But by the way we cannot but acknowledge, that you Jesuits are a sort of most
obliging Gentlemen. If men will believe what you Say, nothing that you do can
fall amiss. In your attempts against the life of Queen Elizabeth, you obliged
his Majesty that now is, as being Martyrs for the Royal House of Scotland. And
in your Plot to blow up that Royal House, you were a kind of Fellow Sufferers
with the Faithful Cavaliers; for as they used to be trapp'd by Cromwell, even so
you were drawn in by Secretary Cecil.

It is worth observing in this Paragraph, how you diminish that hellish Plot,
by calling them that were engaged in it, a few Desperadoes.

The Fewness of them will be considered in your next.

But in what sense do you call them Desperadoes? Were they such in respect of
their Fortunes? That is so well known to be false, that it needs no Answer.
Were they such in respect of their Discontents? that seems to be your Meaning.
But there was little Reason for any. For at the time of this Conspiracy, there
was none of your Priests in Prison, there was no Mult taken of any Layman, Nor
was there a man of them, as King James. King James Speech in Parliament, 1605.
said, that could allege any pretended cause of grief. And yet they were
continually Restless, as we have shown you in their story. Was it because they
had not all the Liberty they would have had? This is so far from excusing them,
that it rathet gives us occasion of suspecting You.

It Is no wonder that you, who cannot afford to call this Conspiracy a Treason,
are not willing to allow the Discovery of it a Miracle. Yet you might have
forborne Scoffing at it, in respect to king Ib.
James, who was pleased to Name it so. Especially when his adversary Bellarmin
Tortus, p. 85. Edit. Colon.
acknowledges that it was not without a Miracle of Divine Providence. And sure
our King makes a better use of this word Miracle in the thankful
acknowledgement of Gods great Mercy in his deliverance; than your Pope Sixti
Orat.
Sixtus V. did in his insolent Oration upon the King of France's Murder; by
which we may guess what Some body would have called this Plot, if it had Sped.

[This will easily appear, viz. how little the Catholic Party understood the
Design, seeing there was not a score of Guilty found, though all imaginable
industry was used by the Commons, Lords, and Privy Council too.] The design it
self was understood but by Few, because it was neither safe nor needful to
impart it to many. But the Papists generally knew that there was a Design in
hand; and though they did not know the horrid nature of it, yet many of them
prayed for the success of it: and if the Plot had taken effect, and the
Hunting-Match had gone on, we should then have been better able to have judged
how your Catholic Party stood affected toward it. Sure enough though there
were but a 5 Jesuiteb 13. Laymen, besides Owen and Stanley*
Score in the Treason, yet there appeared fourscore in the Rebellion: and it
cannot be imagined, that so small a Number could Expect, without any other
Assistance, to have made any great Advantage by surprising the Lady Elizabeth.
But when the Treason had miscarried, as hateful as it was, (for who does not
hate Treason when it is unsuccessful?) yet many of you had a high Veneration
for some of those Wretches that were deeply engaged in it. What a Coil here was
about the Miracle of Father Garnet's straw? And perhaps you have seen his
Picture, and Gerard's too among the At La Fleche, and elsewhere.
Martyrs of your Society. Nay his Holiness himself showed his good Will to
them, when after all this, he made Tesmund Penitentiary at S. Peter's in Rome.

[But suppose, my Lords and Gentlemen, (which never can be granted) that all
the Papists of that Age were consenting, will you be so severe then to still
punish the Children for the Fathers Faults?] [Nay such Children that so
unanimously joined with you in that glorious Quarrel, when you and we underwent
such sufferings, that needs we must have all sunk, had not our mutual love
assisted.] You suppose that which is False, to avoid that which is True. For
who ever said, that All the Papists of that Age were Consenting to the
Gun-Powder-Treason? Or who can deny that some Papists in this Age retain the
Principles of them that were consenting to it? Who, although they are not to be
Punished for what their Predecessors did; yet they ought to be so restrained,
that they may not do like their Predecessors.

And though, by that long word Unanimously, you endeavor to shuffle in the men
of these Principles, amongst them that served his Majesty in that Glorious
Quarrel: Yet we think it no hard matter to distinguish them. For those among
you which did the King Service, are not so many but that they may be Numbered.
And as for the rest of you, which Only suffered with us, we thank you for your
Love, but not for your Assistance. For we could not well have sunk lower than
we did. But some of you floted the while* like Cork; and others of you swum
upon the Bladders of Dispensations. So that as we received no Help from you in
your Swimming; so we can apprehend no Assurance of you by your Sufferings.

[What have we done that we should now deserve your Anger? has the indiscretion
of some few incensed you; it is true, that is the thing objected.] Sir, our
Anger is only a Necessary Care, that what you now call your Indiscretions, may
not grow to be such as you lately called your Misdemeanors.

[Do not you know an Enemy may easily mistake a Mass-Bell for that which calls
to Dinner?] We know he may upon a Fast Day; For then you use to ring your
Vesper- Bell before Dinner. And how can a simple Heretic tell, whether it
calls you, to Pray, or to eat Fish? But we do not know that ever any of you was
brought in trouble about this Question.

[Or a Sequestrator be glad to be affronted being Constable? when 'twas the
hatred to his Person, and not present Office, which perchance egged a a rash
man to folly.] Possibly he May be glad of it. For it was your Jesuitical
distinction between Person and Office, that first holp him to be a
Sequestrator. And now he sees that Distinction come in play; he may hope,
within a while, to have his Place again.

(We dare with submission say, Let a public invitation be put up against any
Party whatsoever; nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves and some
malicious Informer or other will allege that, which may be far better to
conceal.) (Yet all mankind by a Manifesto on the house door are encouraged to
accuse us; nor are they upon Oath, though your Enemies and ours take all for
granted and true.) What an Ambush you have laid here for the Bishops! to have
them thought Popish, because you Reverence them, and Obnoxious, in such
matters, as (you say) it may be far better to conceal. But as in the one, your
kindness to them is sufficiently understood. So they are able to defy your
Malice in the other. It Is for a Bishop of Donna Olympia's V. Her Life. p. 61.
and p. 156, 157.
to need concealment. Our Bishops in England are of another make, than to hold
their Credit at any one's Courtesy.

For the Manifesto that troubled you, what could the Parliament do less, when
the Complaints of you were great in all parts of the Nation, than to Invite men
to bring their Grievances to the proper place of Redress? But then say you, men
were not upon Oath, for what they said against you. What a Hardship was this,
that the House of Commons would not do that for your sakes, which no House of
Commons ever did upon any occasion?

[It can not be imagined where there is so many men of heat and youth, (ever
joined with the happy restoration of their Prince) and remembering the
insolences of their Grandees, that they should all at all times prudently
carry themselves; for this would be to be more than men. And truly we ecteem it
as a particular blessing, that God has not suffered many through vanity or
frailty to fall into greater faults, than are yet as we understand laid to our
charge.] The King will never be out of your debt, if a Jesuit may but keep the
reckoning. Your old Treasons you put upon the account of his Family and
Friends, and your late Insolences upon the score of his most Happy
restoration. But would you seriously persuade us, that, at six years distance,
so many men of heat and youth were still transported with the Joy of that
Blessing? That there were some fresher causes of this Jollity, has been
vehemently suspected by many, who considered the great Unseasonableness of it,
in so Calamitous a time, while the Fire was ranging in our Metropolis, and a
French Army lay hovering upon our Coasts.

(Can we choose but be dismayed (when all things fail) that extravagant Crimes
are fathered upon us.

It is we must be the Authors (some say) of firing the City, even we that have
lost so vastly by it; yet in this, our ingenuity is great, since we think it no
Plot, though our Enemy an Hugonot Protestant acknowledged the Fact, and was
justly Executed for his vain Confession. Again, if a Merchant of the Church of
England buy Knives for the business of his Trade; This also is a Papist
Contrivance to destroy the well affected.)

There can be nothing charged on you, more extravagant than those things were,
which your Predecessors committed, and which here, You have taken upon you to
justify or excuse. The Particulars of your Charge, whatsoever they are, we
leave to the Consideration of the Parliament: where we heartily wish there may
appear more Reason on your side, than there is to be found in this Apology. For
as to the Firing of the City, if according to your words (which we have not
hitherto found to be Gospel) you have lost so vastly by it; yet that will not
Acquit you from the suspicion of the Fact. in the judgment of any one that
considers the Determination of your late Provincial, Garnet in the Case of the
Powder Plot.
viz. that it is lawful to destroy the Inrocent with the Guilty in order to a
greater good. And it seems this vast loss goes not near your Heart; one would
think so by your pleasantness in the very next passage. For there you call
Hubert your Enemy, and a Hugonot Protestant: which Hubert, after Father Harvey
had had him at Confession, did indeed affirm himself to be a Protestant; but
then being asked whether he meant a Hugonot (which it seems was beyond his
Instruction to say) he earnestly denied that, as he very well might, for he
then also declared that he believed Confession to a Ptiest was necessary to his
salvation: and being admonished to call upon God, he repeated an Ave-Mary,
which he said was his usual Prayer. So that it evidently appears, he was
neither Hugonot, nor Protestant, nor Your Enemy upon any account of Religion.
And yet you, being about to avouch this knot of Falsehoods, are pleased to usher
them in with this Preface, (either in Praise of your Brother Harveys Pious
Fraud, or of your own Proper Virtue) Truly in this, our ingenuity is great.

[We must a little complain finding it by experience, that by reason you
discountenance us, the People rage: and again, because they rage, we are the
more forsaken by you.] [Assured we are, that our conversation is affable, and
our Houses so many Hospitable receipts to our Neighbors. Our acquaintance
therefore we fear at no time; but it is the stranger we dread: that (taking all
on hearsay) zealously wounds, and then examines the business when it is too
late, or is perchance confirmed by another, that knows no more of us than he
himself.] [Tis to you we must make our Applications, beseeching you (as
Subjects tender of our King) to intercede for us in the execution, and weigh
the Dilemma, which doubtless he is in, either to deny so good a Parliament
their requests, or else run counter to his Royal Inclinations, when he punishes
the weak and harmless.] He that complains without a cause, must be heard
without redress.

We only desire to be Safe from those dangers, to which your Principles would
expose us, and against which neither Affableness nor Hospitality will secure
us. The Protestants of Ireland were never so treated and caressed by their
Popish Neighbors, as they were the very year before* they cut their throats.

The best Means of our security, is, that which his Majesty has been pleased to
require, viz. The discreet Execution of his Laws. By which (if others shall
please to distinguish themselves from the rest by renouncing their disloyal
Principles) only the disloyal and seditious will be kept weak, that they may be
harmless.

[Why may we not, noble Countrymen, hope for favor from you, as well as
French Protestants find from theirs? a greater duty then ours none could
express, we are sure; or why should the United Provinces, and other magistrates
(that are harsh both in mind and manners) refrain from violence against our
Religion, and your tender breasts seem not to harbor the least compassion or
pity?] [These barbarous People Sequester none for their Faith, but for
Transgression against the State. Nor is the whole Party involved in the Crime
of a few, but every man suffers for his own and proper fault. Do you then the
like, and he that offends, let him dye without Mercy:] [And think always, I
beseech you, of Cromwels Injustice: who for the Actions of some against his
pretended Laws, drew thousands into decimation, even ignorant of the thing,
after they had vastly paid for their security and quiet.] We have answered your
Instances, of the French Protestants, and the Dutch Papists; and your unjust
upbraiding us with the greatness of your Duty, and with our want of compassion
and pity. And yet, as if all these were Unanswerable, you come over with them
again and again.

These barbarous people, you say, sequester none for their Faith; but pray what
did you, when you governed the Civilized World? you hanged and burned men, for
no other cause but their Faith; and this you did with abundance of Civility; so
it seems we may be worse than Barbarous, and yet much better than you.

But that were little for our credit, unless we had this to say more; that not
the worst of you suffers any otherwise than by known Laws, or any more than is
of pure Necessity. For, we hold it Necessary to maintain the Authority of the
King, and the Peace of the Nation. If you call any thing Religion, that is
contrary to these; must we therefore alter our Laws? or ought you to mend your
Religion?

You put the Effigies of Cromwell upon any thing that you would render odious;
as your Inquisition bedresses one with Pictures of Devils, whom they are about
to burn for his Religion. For such Disguizes are apt to work much upon the weak
judgments of the multitude. But he must be very weak indeed that cannot
perceive the wide Difference, between the Edicts of Cromwell, that were designed
to Ruin men for their Loyalty, and those Laws that our Princes have made to
Restrain them from Treason and Rebellion.

[We have no other study, but the glory of our Sovereign, and just liberty of
the Subjects.] Sir, if we may judge by your Works, there is nothing less
studied in your College.

[Nor was it a mean Argument of our Duty, when every Catholic Lord gave his
voice for the Restoration of Bishops; by which we could pretend no other
advantage, but that 26 Votes (subsisting wholly by the Crown) were added to the
defense of Kingship, and consequently a check to all Anarchy and Confusion.]
This is no Argument of Your Duty; for, sure, You are no Lord. Nor is it likely
that these Lords followed Your direction in the doing of this Duty.

['Tis morally impossible but that we who approve of Monarchy in the Church,
must ever be fond of it in the State also.] If you mean this of Papists in
General, that which you call morally impossible, is Experimentally True. For in
Venice, Genoa, Lucca, and the Popish Cantons of Switzerland, where they very
well approve of Monarchy in the Church; yet they are not fond of it in the
State also. But if you mean this of the Jesuitical Party, then it may be true
in this sense, that you would have the Pope to be sole Monarch both in
Spirituals and Temporals.

[Yet this is a misfortune, we now plainly feel, that the longer the late
Transgressors live, the more forgotten are their Crimes, whiles distance in
time calls the faults of our Fathers to remembrance, and buries our own
Allegiance in eternal oblivion and forgetfulness.] We can now allow you to
complain, and commend your selves without Measure; having proved already, that
you do it without cause.

[My Lords and Gentlemen, consider we beseech you the sad condition of the
Irish Soldiers now in England; the worst of which Nation could be but
intentionally so wicked, as the acted Villainy of many English, whom your
admired Clemency pardoned. Remember how they left the Spanish Service when they
heard their King was in France; and how they forsook the Employment of that
unnatural Prince, after he had committed the never to be forgotten Act of
banishing his distressed Kinsman out of his Dominions. These poor men left all
again to bring their Monarch to his home: and shall they then be forgotten by
you? or shall my Lord Douglas and his brave Scots be left to their shifts, who
scorned to receive wages of those who have declared War against England. To
swell up the Bill of the Merits of your Party, you take in the Services of the
Irish and Scottish Soldiers, as if they were a part of the English Catholics,
whom you profess to plead for in the Title of your Apology. And that you may
seem to have done this, in kindness to Them, and not to your Selves; you exhort
us to Consider them, in such terms, as if You were the first that had ever
thought of them. God forbid but they should be considered as they deserve; and
he is neither good Christian, nor good Subject, that would grudge to contribute
his proportion toward it.

But you seem to have a farther drift in the mentioning of these Loyal Irish.
For you immediately mingle them with the worst of that Nation; namely with
those infamous Butchers, that in times of as great Peace and Liberty as ever
that Nation enjoyed, and in the Name of that gracious King under whom they
enjoyed these, cut the throats of above an hundred thousand of his Protestant
Subjects of all Sexes and Ages. It was so black a Villainy, that You, the
Apologist Lord Orory's Answer to W^lsh, p. 20. says. Within few months about
two hundred thousand.
of such Actions, knew not how to mention in its proper place, viz. after the
French Massacre, because you had not wherewith to color it. And yet being
conscious to your self that this lay as a blot upon your Cause, you thought fit
to place it among these brave Men; as if their Names would mend the hue of an
Action that will make the Names of all that had to do in it, look black, and
detestable to Mankind, throughout all Generations.

Nor do you deal much better with our Royallists themselves; of whom you do not
stick to affirm, that in their admired Clemency, (and if this were true, who
would not admire it?) they pardoned Many English, whose Acted Villainies were so
wicked, that the worst of the Irish Nation could be but Intentionally so wicked
in their Villainies.

[How commonly is it said that the Oath of Renouncing their Religion is
intended for these, which will needs bring this loss to the King and you, that
either you will force all of our Faith to lay down their Arms (though by
experience of great Integrity and Worth) or else, if some few you retain, they
are such whom necessity has made to swear against Conscience, and who
therefore will certainly betray you, when a greater advantage shall be offered.
By this Test then you can have none, but whom (with Caution) you ought to shun.
And thus must you drive away those who truly would serve you; for had they the
least thought of being false, they would gladly take the advantage of gain and
pay to deceive you] You proceed, concerning the Irish and Scottish Soldiers, in
these words; How commonly is it said, that the Oath of Renouncing their
Religion is intended for them! Pray Sir, can you tell who are said to intend
this? For if they are such as have no Authority, it is frivilous. If they are
such as have Authority, it is false. And we do verily believe it was never
said, wished, or thought of, by any one that loved the King, and the peace of
the Nation.

But what trick had this Jesuit in his head when he framed this? One may guess
at his design: But let it pass. Perhaps he only imagined this, to heighten his
Fancy, that he might think and write the more Tragically toward the end of his
Oration.

[We know your Wisdom and Generosity, and therefore cannot imagine such a
thing; nor do we doubt when you show favor unto these, but you will use mercy
to us, who are both your fellow Subjects, and your own flesh and blood also; if
you forsake us, we must say the world decays, and its final transmutation must
needs follow quickly.] Here you un-imagine for the Soldiers, and imagine for
your self; and, as if you really thought your self in danger, you beg for mercy
of the Royalists, in such words as your Predecessor First Moderator, p. 76.
Your own Kindred and Allies, your own Countrymen, born to the same freedom with
your selves; who have in Much less measure (than the Scots) offended in matter
of Hostility, nay diverse of them not at all.
used to the Rebels. Only for the last strain, we do not know that any one hit
upon it before, nor do believe that any one will ever use it again.

[Little do you think the insolences we shall suffer by Commitee men, etc.
whom chance and lot, has put into petty Power. Nor will it choose but grieve
you to see them abused (whom formerly you loved) even by the common enemies of
us both.] It seems Committee Men are entrusted with his Majesty's Authority; or
that none must use it against Papists for fear of being accounted Committee Men.

It is time to have done, when we are come to the dregs of your Rhetoric.

[When they punish, how will they triumph and say, take This (poor Romanists)
for your love to Kingship; and again This, for your long doting on the Royal
Party: all which you shall receive from us Commissioned by your dearest
Friends, and under this Cloak we will gladly vent our private spleen and
malice. Sir, though you set your self before to speak Tragically, this does
rather seem a piece of Drollery. But you Have your design either way. For no
man can read it, but he must either Laugh, or Shake his head.

[We know my Lords and Gentlemen, that from your hearts you do deplore our
condition, yet permit us to tell you, your bravery must extend thus far, as not
to sit still, with pity only, but each is to labor for the distressed as far
as in reallity his ability will reach: Some must beseech our Gracious Sovereign
for us, others again must undeceive the good, though deluded multitude:
therefore all are to remember who are the prime raisers of the storm; and how
through our sides they would wound both the King and you: for though their
hatred to us our selves is great, yet the enmity out out of all measure
increases, because we have been yours, and so shall continue even in the fiery
day of trial.

Protect us we beseech you then, upon all your former promises, or if that be
not sufficient, for the sakes of those that lost their Estates with you; many
of which are now fallen asleep: But if this be still too weak, we must conjure
you by the sight of this bloody Catalogue, which contains the names of your
murdered Friends and Relations, who in the heat of the Battle perchance saved
many of your lives, even with the joyful lofs of their own.

Sir, in answer to this Paragraph, you oblige us to speak plainer, what before
we only intimated to you.

It was the policy of the Rebels in the beginning of the late War, to harrass
the Papists in all parts of the Kingdom. One Reason of it was to make his
Majesty Odious; for, the Papists being his Subjects, and having none but him to
fly to, it was certain he would do what he could to Protect them, and this
would make many Zealous People believe* that what the Rebels pretended was
true, viz. that his Majesty was a Friend to Popery. Another Reason was to
enrich themselves with their Spoils, and to invite the Needy * Second Mo
derater, p. 43. Most of them in the beginning of the late War (seeing themselves
unprotected by the Parliament, and exposed to the plunder of the then Soldiery)
fled into the King's Garrisons, to save their own lives, without taking up Arms
to offend others.
Rabble with a Prospect of Booty; among which, if they found a string of Beads,
or a Crucifix, it served them upon both Accounts, both to fill their Pockets,
and to justify the Cause.

By this Means you were driven into his Majesty's Garrisons; where, besides
those that Voluntarily offered themselves to his Service, many of you were
Necessitated to it for a subsistence, and many more of you did not serve him at
all, but only shrouded your selves under his Protection. Whereas the Protestant
Royallists had no such Necessity, for they might have been welcome to the
Rebels, to do as They did; or they might have been Permitted to live quietly at
their home. But they chose to do otherwise, and were hated the more for it by
the Rebels, because they preferred their duty before those Considerations.

From this account of the Motives that brought us together, it is easy to
Judge how far we are in Debt to one another.

First, As for them which lost their Estates with us, We remember those things
were alleged in their Defense, Second Moderator, p. 43.
which we would have been loath to have admitted in ours. But possibly it was
not their Fault that these things were Alleged, nor was it to our Advantage
that they were not Accepted. For the Rebels, having devoured these Gentlemen's
Estates, fell to ours, with the more Color, and never the less Appetite.

In your Catolague of those Papists which were Slain in the Service, you have
Omitted some names which we are able to Reckon. But perhaps you did this in
Design, that you might the more excusably Reckon some names that you ought to
have Omitted. So you begin with my Lord of Carnarvon, the only noble man in
your Catalogue, who was indeed too negligent of his Religion, till he came to
be in view of Death; But then, in his extremities, he Refused a Priest of
yours, and Ordered the Chaplain Mr Langford
of his Regiment to pray with him. If you take this libert of stealing Martyrs,
we have Reason to wonder, that you had not taken in one that would have adorned
your Cause indeed, viz. his Majesty himself; since Militiere In his Victory of
Truth.
was not ashamed to publish, that that Blessed and Glorious Prince died of your
Religion. Him alone we might weigh against All that ever was good in your
Church. But besides, we could reckon you a far greater number of Protestants,
than you pretend to do of Papists, that lost their lives also in the Day of
Battle. They lost them joyfully, in hopes to have saved his Majesty's Life; and
'twas an Accession to their Joy, if perchance they saved any of yours.

But did they ever intend their sufferings should go for nothing, or become
Ciphers to yours in the day of Reckoning? or that their blood should be made
use of to stop the Execution of those Laws for which they shed it? Did they
think your condition was so deplorable, or their own was superfluously fenced
and secured against you before the late troubles?

Pray Sir do not persuade us to believe a thing so incredible, or to do at the
rate as if we did believe it. Rather if you have such an opinion of your own
Faculty; Try what you can do with your own Party, and persuade them to do what
is fittest and best for Themselves.

But because the Genius of your Writing does not give us any such Hopes of You:
We shall rather make bold to say something from our selves, by way of Advice,
to as many of them as may happen to need it, and are capable to receive it.

We desire them to content them selves with that condition which they enjoyed
under his Majesty's Royal Predecessors: and neither to Disparage those days,
by endeavoring to persuade the world that they which suffered then for Treason
died for Religion; Nor to Undervalue all the Liberties which they now Enjoy, if
they may not be allowed to Exceed the Measures of their Fathers. We wish they
would not, for the paring of their nails, make all Christendom ring with Cries
of Persecution. We wish them deeply to lay to Heart, the Honor, and Peace, and
Welfare of their Nation. To abhor him, that could D. of Medina in 88. said his
Sword knew no distinction between Catholic and Heretic,
wish to see it in Troubles, in hope that at next Turn it would settle in
Popery; or that could find in his heart to bid a Foreigner welcome upon the
terms of restoring Catholic Religion. We desire them to keep their Religion to
themselves: and not lay about them, as some do, to make Proselytes; of which
they have had a plentiful harvest in the late Confusions; and if they should
think to go on at that rate, we have reason to fear, it would be a means to
bring us into Confusion again. We desire them at least not to abuse the
weakness of dying persons: nor under pretense of carrying Alms to condemned
Prisoners, to Convert some of them with Drink, and to Cheat others with hopes
of Salvation upon easier terms than ever God yet declared unto Men. We desire
them not to hinder the course of Justice, by interposing in the behalf of any
Criminal, because he is a Catholic. We desire them to content themselves, as
their Fathers have done, with such Priests as are known and protected V.
Cambden's Eliz. 1602.
by the Civil Power; and that They would be pleased to demean themselves as
Priests ought to do: not disguising themselves like Hectors, or mingling with
Gentlemen, to poison the Clubs and Coffee-Houses with Phanatick Discourses, or
even with Atheism it self, to destroy all Religion that they may have their
will upon ours. We desire them not to fill the World with their Pamphlets,
Parallels, Philanaxes, Exhortations, Apologies, etc which tend only to the
fermenting of Men's Passions, not at all to the conviction of their Reason. If
they please to come into the fair Field of Controversy, we shall not decline
them; and we think we are not in Debt to them upon that Account. But for Books
of the other sort which are apt only to inflame Parties, and make the People
Jealous, and the Government Uneasy, We wish they would spare their Own pains,
and consequently Ours. If they will not; let them bear their own blame, and let
them Answer it to the world what Occasion they had to give us this trouble of
Answering them.

FINIS.

