A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL. The 24th. of November. 1678.

BY WILLIAM LLOYD, D. D. Dean of Bangor, And Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's. 1678.

A SERMON ON
ACTS ii. 42. And they continued steadfastly, in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship and in Breaking of Bread, and in Prayer.
THey of whom this is said, were that Multitude of People whom the Apostles
first converted to the Christian Faith. All together in one word, they are
called the Church in the last verse of this Chapter. Which being observed, it
will soon appear what we are to learn from these words.

They teach us, First, What the Church of Christ was in the Apostles days.

Secondly, What Church is now a true Member or Branch of it.

Thirdly, That, having such a Church, it is our duty to continue in it.

Accordingly in my discourse on these words, I shall endeavor to show you,

First, a description of that Original Church by all it is Tokens and
Characters; which are described in my Text to have been,

First, the Apostles Doctrine,

Secondly, their Fellowship,

Thirdly, their Sacraments Breaking of Bread,

Fourthly, their Worship of God, and Prayers.

Second^y, I shall consider what Church in our days has those Characters of
the Original Church. I shall show, they are very confused in that Church which
will own them in no other: They are through Gods blessing, in great Purity and
Perfection in our Church.

Lastly, I shall show that it is the Duty of every Christian to continue
steadfastly; first in the Church that has these Characters, and secondly in
these things that are the Characters of the Church, and thirdly to live sutably
to them in his whole Conversation.

First, be^^re I speak of the Characters of a true Church, I ought to show in
few words what it is that is to be known by them.

The Church, Ecclesia, among Christians in the largest use of the word, is the
whole Multitude of Believers joined together in one Body or Society under one
Head Jesus Christ.

In the Nicene Creed it is called, the Catholic Apostolic Church. Apostolic,
because it was planted at first by the Apostles, and still retains the
Characters of their Original Church. Catholic, that is, Universal; (for that is
the plainer English word,) because it is made up of all those Particular
Churches, of which every one has these Characters in my Text, and is therefore
a true part of the Catholic or Universal.

For the word Catholic, as fond of it as they are now in the Roman Church, If
any Christian of Rome, for some ages after Christ, had heard any one say I am a
Catholic, he would not have been able to have guest what Religion he had meant.
But when the Greeks had used the word (...) in their language; First, to
distinguish the Christian Church as extending to all Nations, from the Jewish
which was confined to one Nation in particular; Afterward to distinguish the
Common Christianity, which was in all parts of the World, from that of a Sect
which sprang up in some particular Country: After this, the word Catholic was
taken up by them of the Roman Church. And in process of time they came to
distinguish themselves by it, from the Greeks, and from those of the other
Eastern Churches that first used it.

It could not but seem very strange to the Greeks, to see them of the Roman
Church, whose Communion extended no farther at that time, than only to the West
part of Europe; that they should call the Roman Church the Catholic, or
Universal, in Opposition to the Greeks, and to all other Christians, that then
possessed, not only all the rest of this Europe, but all that was Christian in
Afric and Asia besides. But this is not strange to any one that considers, how
natural it is for men of any Sect to make a great Business about Words. As they
are apt to bestow the worst words they can find upon their Adversaries, so with
the same Partiality they are ready to appropriate the good ones to themselves.
Thus the Jews will have none but themselves to be the children of Abraham. The
Turks will have none but themselves to be called Musulmans, Believers, The
Arrian Heretics, in their Day, would allow none but themselves to be Catholics,
Lucifer, (...) 1568. p. 79. and 328. Prosper. Chr. (...)
If they of the Roman Communion will be the only Catholics now, who can help
it? But we shall not allow it them, till they can prove all other Christians to
be Schismatics, and us in particular; Which will be tried in the issue of this
Discourse.

The mean while to give the word its Original use, the Catholic Church (as I
have shown) signifies the Universal. And by the Universal Church Iren. adv.
har. l. 3. c. 3. calls it, the Church from which every Church had its beginning.
we mean that which from this Head in my Text came to disperse it self into all
parts of the inhabited World. The Original of this Church Universal was that
Church which the Apostles planted first at Jerusalem; Therein following the
Command of our Savior who bade them, Luke xxiv. 47.
Go, preach to all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. The Body of this Universal
Church consists of all those, whether National, or Less, that are called
Particular Churches. Which were either derived from that Original Church in
that age; such as were, those seven Churches of Asia, and the rest which are
mentioned in Scripture: or that have been deri^ed from them by any after
Conversion, in whatsoever Country or Age.

These Particular Churches are many, as the parts of the Body are many. And as
all those parts together are one Body, so all these Particular Churches make up
one Universal. One I say, in both respects, both as being derived from one
source, that Original Church at Jerusalem: And also One, as being united
together in those Common Characters, by which that Original Church is described
in this Text.

Those Characters are four, which I come now to consider particularly; The
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and Sacraments, and Prayers.

The first is the Apostles Doctrine, the Doctrine of Faith; and not the Inward
Belief, but the Outward Profession of it. The Inward Belief is required to make
us true Christians, but the Outward Profession makes us Members of a true
Church. And as it can be no true Church that has not a Public Profession of the
Apostles Doctrine; so it can be no sound Church that embraces any other for the
Doctrine of Faith, then what was received from the Apostles.

Now their Doctrine, at this time referred to in my Text, was no other than what
they preached as the Faith of Jesus Christ. But considering how long ago it was
that they preached; how many ages have past since; and especially what ages
they have been; many ages together, of Darkness and gross Ignorance, as they
cannot but know, that are any thing acquainted with V. Card. Baron. Annal.
Eccl. Anno 900. etc.
History; I say, after so many extreme ignorant Ages, it is impossible we
should have known what was preached by the Apostles, unless it had been also
delivered in writing, and unless those writings had been brought down to our
Hands. And, blessed be God! there was such a Delivery, in the Books of the New
Testament. In which Books, the Apostles bearing witness, as they do, to the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, that they were 2 Timothy iii. 16. 2 Pet. i. 21.
Written by Divine Inspiration, and that they 2 Timothy iii. 15.
are able to make us wise to Salvation through Faith in Jesus Christ; and
delivering the Faith in Jesus Christ, as they do, in their own writings, to the
end Joh. xx.
that all men may believe on him to Eternal life; Therefore in these Books of
the Old and New Testament together, we have a Standard of the Apostles
Doctrine; and we have not the like for any other than what is written in these
Books.

Here is all that we can surely call the Doctrine of the Apostles, unless we
know more than the Fathers of the Primitive Church. They through whose hands
this Doctrine must pass, before it could come into ours, knew nothing but what
they had in the Scriptures. This was constantly their Standard and Rule of all
things, in the words of St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Hom. 13. Edit.
Savil. Tom. III. p. 624. 43.
Who says again, Idem in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3. Ib. Tom. IV. p. 234, 19.
All things that are necessary, are plain and manifest in the Scriptures. So
St. Austin says, Aug. de Doctr. Christiana l. 2. c. 9. Edit. Basil. 1541. Tom.
III. Col. 25. D. In iis enim, etc.
All things that belong to Faith or Life are to be found in plain places of
Scripture. St. Basil says, Basil. M. Hom. 29. Edit. Paris. 1618. Tom. I. p.
623. C.
Believe those things that are written, inquire not into things that are not
written. St. Ierom, Hieron. adv. Helvid. Edit. Basil. 1524. Tom. II. p. 13. B.
Non credimus quia non legimus; we believe no more than we ^ead. In like manner
say many other of the Fathers.

And though they did sometimes quote the Apostles Traditions, for Ritual
things; yet in matters of Faith, if they prove any thing from Tradition, it is
either the Written Tradition of Scripture; of if Unwritten, it is no other than
the Creed (as it were easy to show in many Instances.) Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1.
c. 2. and 3. and alii passim.
And withal they believed there was nothing in the Creed but what they could
prove from the Scriptures; and they did prove it from the Scriptures upon
occasion in every Particular. Cyprian. Testim. ad Quirinum. lib. 1. and 2.
proving all things of Faith and Life from the Scripture. Constantin. M. apud
Theodorit. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 7. Edit. Vales. p. 25. D. Offers the Scriptures
for deciding all Controversies touching the Faith. So Athanasius and others
prove every disputed Article. And when the Heretics produced Tradition on their
side, the Fathers always held them to the Scriptures.


So that in their Judgment, it is not only a sufficient, but the only Measure
of the Doctrine of the Apostles. And by this we may judge (as to matter of
Doctrine) who are, and who are not Members of the Apostolical Church.

The next Character is this, that they continued in the Apostles (...) or
Fellowship; a word that has diverse senses in Scripture. In this place it seems
to be the same as Society. They were in the Apostles Society or Communion.

Now to continue in their Society (considering what they were, men deputed by
Christ for the Government of his Church;) it could be no other than to continue
as Members of that Body which Christ put under their Government.

But how can any be so now? they being dead so many Ages since, and their
Government so long since expired with them. No, their Government is not
expired, though they are. For it was to continue Mat. xxviii. 2c.
till the end of the World. So that according to the common saying among the
Jews, Whosoever one sends being as himself: So our Savior having sent the
Apostles says, Mat. x. 40.
Whosoever receives you, receives me; In like manner, whosoever were sent by
the Apostles, were as themselves; And whosoever continued in their Fellowship,
were in the Fellowship of the Apostles.

Now their Government is declared to have been (...), their Bishopric. Act. i.
20.
And in this Office they were equal among themselves; as our Savior describes
them, sitting on twelve Thrones, and judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Mat.
xix. 28. Luke xxii. 30.


It is observable that this was after his Promise to St. Peter, Mat. xvi. 16,
etc. Which Promise I consider, by the way, because it is so much pressed by the
Romanists, to prove a Power, which Christ had given St. Peter over the rest of
the Apostles. If Christ had truly given it, we must then have considered,
whether St. Peter left any Successors in that Power? And if so, why not St.
John the Apostle by Survivance? why not the Bishop of the undoubted
Mother Church at Jerusalem? Why not the Bishop of some other City, where the
Scripture has assured us that St. Peter Preached? rather than of Rome, where if
he did preach, we have not a word of it in Scripture. These and sundry more
such Questions would have risen upon that Hypothesis, of such a Power given to
S. Peter. But it is out of Question that the Apostles never so understood those
words of Christ. They knew of no Power that was promised to St. Peter more than
to themselves in that Text. For after this, Matthew. xviii. ^. xx. 24.
they were at strife among themselves who should be chief. After this, Mat.
Luke xxii 24
they disputed it again and again: and Christ chid them every time, but never
told them, I have promised it to Peter. Nay it appears that Christ did not
intend it, by his open Declarations to the contrary; That Mat. xx. 26. and
xxiii. 8, 9, 10. Luke xxii. 26.
it should not be among them, as in Secular Kingdoms and Monarchies. It appears
more plainly in the fulfilling of his Promise. For he both ordained the rest
with S. Peter, Joh. xx. 21, 22, 23.
without any Difference; And when they all together had received the Holy
Ghost, in this Chapter, St. Peter stood up with the eleven, ver. 14. And upon
him and them Christ built his Church; even all these who continued, not only in
his, but in the Fellowship of all the Apostles.

Now if all the Apostles were equal in their (...) or Government, then it is
certain that their Successors must be so in like manner. Though one must have
Precedence before other, for Order's sake; as St. Peter had Usually, but not
always; for at Jerusalem, St. James, being Bishop there, had the Precedence.
Act. xv. ^al. ii. 9.
usually among the Apostles, when they were together: And though one may be
above others, in the same National Church, as all Primats are, by Human Laws;
Yet none, by the Law of God, has Authority over others; I say none among their
Successors, any more than among the Apostles themselves. So St. Cyprian Cyprian
de Unit. Eccl. c. 3. Edit. Paris. 1649. p. 208. The other Apostles were also
that which Peter was, they had an equal share both of Honor and of Power.

Epist. 51. p. 80. Every Bishop orders his own, affairs, and is to give account
to God.

Epist. 54. p. 95. Every one has his own Flock to govern, of which he is to
give account to God.

Conc. Carth. de Bapt. Haeret. p. 353. No Bishop can be judged by another, or
can judge another. But we all wait for the Judgment of Christ, who is the only
One that has Power, both to put us into the Office, and to judge of our
Discharge of it.

Tertullian. de Praescript. c. 36. Edit. Paris. 1641. p. 245. Run over the
Apostolic Churches, in which are yet the very Chairs of the Apostles. Ye have
Corinth. Ye have Ephesus. Ye have Philippi. Ye have Rome.

Cyprian. Epist. 26. p. 42. Christ said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and I will
give thee the Keys, etc. From thence by course of times and successions, is
derived the Ordination of Bishops in the Church.

Epist. 74. p. 163. The Bishops have succeeded the Apostles being ordained in
their stead.


declares oftentimes in his Writings. Not to mention the like, as I might, from
many other of the Fathers.

Now the Bishops in after times, in their several Churches, were undoubtedly
held to be the Successors of the Apostles. Iren. contra Haereses. l. III. c. 3.
We can reckon up them who by the Apostles were made Bishops in the several
Churches.
We have as great a consent among the Ancients for this, as we have for the
Observation of the Lord's Day. And it is evident from the Epist. 68. p. 136.
The Church is a People united to their own Bishop, and a Flock adhering to
their own Pastor.
Primitive Writers, that they looked upon Communion with their Bishops as
Communion with the very Apostles. They held it the Duty of every Christian, to
obey them in Spiritual things; They held it the Duty of every Bishop, to govern
and feed his own Flock; To attend to that only, Ibid. Polycarpus, by the
Apostles made Bishop of the Church of Smyrna.
and not to usurp upon his Brethren; But all, as occasion served, to do all
good Offices one for another, and to join their endeavors for the common
Concernments of the Church Epist. 66. p. 128. To Steven Bishop of Rome.
Therefore, my dear Brother, there is a numerous body of Bishops united together
by the bond of Concord and Unity; that if any one of our College should attempt
to make a Sect and to tear and spoil the Flock of Christ, the rest may come in
to help, and as good and compassionate Shepherds may gather the Lord's sheep
into the flock.
And for them so to govern the Church, and for the People to live under their
Government, in Spiritual things; This was to live in the Fellowship of the
Apostles, which is the Second Character in my Text.

The third is the Participation of the same Sacraments. One only is mentioned
in my Text, that is the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. For being already
baptized, they had no more occasion for Baptism; But that being spoken of
before ver. 41. I therefore mention both these Sacraments.

The use of both these, in the Apostles times, was a Character and Token of the
Christian Church. Thus St. Paul, 1 Cor. xii. 13. mentions both these
Sacraments, as the Instruments and Means by which we are united to Christ. By
one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, and we have all been made to
drink into one Spirit.

Both these Sacraments they received of Christ's own Institution, who required
them to be used in all Ages of the Church; to be administered to all it is
Members by every Church. And that in the same manner as they were instituted by
Christ; I mean as to all the Essential parts of the Sacraments. However
Ceremonies or Rites may be varied; yet in their Essential parts they are of
perpetual Obligation.

For Baptism, when it was instituted by our Savior for the Admission of
Members into his Church; he said thus to his Apostles, Matt. xxviii. 19. (...),
make Disciples, so Acts xiv. 21. But (...), Disciples, is as much to say as
Christians. Acts. xi. 26.
Go, make Disciples, (that is, Christians,) of all Nations, Baptizing them, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And thus doing,
Matt. xxviii. 20.
Lo I am with you till the end of the World.

And for the Lords Supper, he ^dministred it himself to his Disciples, (who
were then not in Orders, for it was before his Death; and he did not ordain
them till after his Resurrection.) And administering the Sacrament to them, who
were not in Orders, Matt. xxvi. 26. Mar. xiv. 22. Lu. xxii. 19. 1 Cor. xi. 24.
He took Bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to them, saying,
Take, eat, this is my Body, and what follows. Matt. xxvi. 28. Mar. xiv. 24.
Luke xxii. 20. 1 Cor. xi. 25.
He gave them the Cup in like manner, saying, Drink ye all of it. This is my
Blood, or this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.

Accordingly it was done in the Church in the Apostles times. The Apostle calls
it the Bread and the Cup which they received in the Sacrament, never otherwise;
though Spiritually and Sacramentally the Body and Blood of Christ, yet Bread
and Wine in its Natural and Bodily substance. He says, 1 Cor. x. 16.
The Cup which we bless is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the
Bread which we break is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? No doubt we
have the Mind of Christ in these words. It is properly the Communion of His
Body and Blood, which we receive in this Sacrament. And according to his Law
they are conveyed to us, under the Elements of Bread and Wine. For so the
Apostle tells us, that, even after Consecration, It is Bread which we break; it
is Bread which we partake; It is Bread that we eat in this Sacrament. Which
last thing he says three times together, in three Verses. 1 Cor. x. 16, 17. and
xi. 26, 27, 28.
In like manner it was properly Wine which remained in the Cup, even after
Consecration. So it was called by our Savior, Matt. xxvi. 29. Mar. xiv. 25.
the fruit of the Vine, and this Fruit; even the same of which he had said,
This is my Blood. And, as he said to his Apostles, being Laymen, Matt. xxvi. 27.
Drink ye all of it; and as St. Mark observes, Mark xiv. 23.
They all drank of it, so did all other in those times, as well Laity as
Clergy. 1 Cor. xii. 13. We are all made to drink into one Spirit.

It Is observable, the whole Sacrament there is called drinking, as here the
whole Sacrament is called Breaking of Bread.

And the Sacrament being thus instituted by Christ, being thus administered by
his Apostles, and being thus received in his Church, was to continue till
Christ's coming again. So the Apostle says expressly. 1 Cor. xi. 26. So that
here is a third Character of an Apostolic Church; to continue the use of those
Sacraments which they used, and that in all the Essentials of them, according
to Christ's own Institution.

A fourth Character in this Text is Prayer, (...), in the Plural Number; that
is, not one or two, but many, and often. And it appears they were public
Prayers, by what follows, ver. 46. They continued daily with one accord in the
Temple. There the Apostles used to meet after Christ's Ascension into Heaven.
They were continually in the Luke xxiv. 53.
Temple praising and blessing God. They were constantly there in the times of
Devotion, as may appear from Acts iii. 1. and other places. They continued this
Practice as long as the Jews would suffer them; till they drove them away from
their Temple and Synagogues. After which, these first Christians had Assemblies
elsewhere, as we read Acts xviii. 17. In which Assemblies, what they prayed,
and what they did besides praying, we have no particular account in Holy
Scripture. But we have in those Writers that lived within the Age of the
Apostles. That is, in an Epistle of the Younger Pliny to Trajan, Plin. lib. ^.
Epist. 97.
and in St. Justin Martyr's second Apology. Justin M. Apol. II. Edit. Paris
1636. p. 97, etc.


There we find in Pliny, Plin. ib.
that they did Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum in vicem. They spoke
Verses, answering one another by turns; as we speak the Reading Psalms, I know
not how he could better express it.

And, says Justin Martyr, they read Lessons out of the Apostles, and out of
the Prophets; Justin ibid. p. 98. D.
And when the Reader had done the Bishop Preached, (...), either the Bishop, or
the chief Minister.

Then they rose up all together, and prayed. They had, says Justin Martyr,
(...), Common Prayers. (Those are his Words.) P. 97. C.
In which they prayed for themselves, and for their Princes, P. 64. D.
and for all others that were living P. 97. C. and for all others every where,
that we may learn the truth. etc.
with them. They prayed only to God, p. 63. D. (...), p. 64. D. (...).
says Justin Martyr twice. P. 97. D. and 98. D,


This, together with the Administration of the Sacraments, and their gatherings
for the poor, is all the Account they give us of their Meetings. Which account
being given much within fifty years of the Apostles times, we may reasonably
conclude it was the manner of their Prayers, the use whereof was the fourth
Character in our Description of the Apostolic Church.

Besides these you see my Text has given us no other: and therefore whosoever
would make sure of such a Church, he may do well to judge of it by these
Characters, being all that the Apostles have given us.

But if these were the Notes of a true Church in the Apostles times, what mean
they of the Now Roman Church, to require any other? Or what would they have
that cannot content themselves with these? Sure their hearts misgive them that
these are not for their turn. Either they have them not, or others have them as
well as they: And therefore they choose rather to insist upon those, which they
can hope to appropriate to their own Faction.

It is not worth the while, in this Place, to reckon up the fifteen Notes of a
true Church, which Bellarmin de Conciliis and Ecclesia lib. 4.
Bellarmin gives us. All which, are either common to other Societies, as well
as a true Church; or if they are proper to such a Church, they are elsewhere no
less, nay, much more in some others, than in theirs.

As for the Essential Properties, here in my Text, they are but four, and those
are from an Infallible Authority, The like whereof cannot be showed for any
other. Therefore our Church desires nothing more than to be tried by these
Tokens. If the same way of Trial does not please them so well in the Roman
Church, we cannot wonder at it, for these make no way for them, but against
them in every Particular. I shall make a short Proof of it, trying their
Catholic Church (as they call it) by these Characters of the Primitive
Apostolic Church.

And first for the Doctrine of the Apostles. If the Public Profession of that,
without any other, be required of any true Church; and if the Scriptures
contain all the Doctrine of the Apostles, as it was firmly believed by the
Fathers in the Primitive Church: How come they of the Roman Church to find out
so many Doctrines, of which there is no mention in the Scripture, nor in any of
the Primitive Fathers? In what place were they kept, to be made known in
aftertimes, that were not known to them that lived in or near the Apostles
times?

But they have I know not how many such Doctrines, and they are properly
Doctrines of their Church. They are declared by their Councils, with most
dreadful Anathemas to all those that shall presume to deny them. We see they
Unchurch us; we know what they have done more, and may guess what they would do
more to us, for denying them. But they have them in their Creed, the Creed that
is sworn by all their Clergy. In the form of Profession, Prescribed by Pius IV.
according. Decree of the Council of Trent. Sess. XXIV. Decret. de Reform. cap.
1. and 12.
They swear first the old Nicen, and add to that the new Roman Creed: They
conclude it in these terms, Hanc esse veram Catholicam Fidem extra quam nemo
salvus esse potest. Council. Edit Labb. Tom. XIV. Col. 946. B.
That this is the true Catholic Faith, without which no man can be saved.

What a horrible thing is this, to couple together, I believe in God, and in
our Lord Jesus Christ; with I believe the Doctrines of Transubstantiation,
Auricular Confession, Image Worship, Purgatory, Indulgences, and what not? some
of which things some of themselves do confess, Of Transubstantiation, this is
confessed by Did in Can. Missae Lect. 40. beginning, that Whether the Bread be
turned into Christ's Body, or remains with his Body, it is not found expressed in
the Scriptures.

Bellarmin. de Eucharist. III. 23. Tertio addit. mentions others of their
Church that had said the like and he grants it not improbable that it could not
he proved out of Scripture, till the Scripture was declared by a General
Council; meaning (as he there shows) that of Lateran, above twelve hundred
years after Christ.

Of Auricular Confession Gloss. in Decr. de Poenit. did. 5. beginning, Semeca
says, it was instituted by some Tradition of the Universal Church, rather than
by the Authority of the New or Old Testament. Panormitan super Quinto, de
Poenit. and Remis. c. Omnis utriusque, says, I am much pleased with that
opinion of Semeca: For there is not any plain Authority, which shows that God
or Christ instituted plainly, that Confession should be made to a Priest, Biel
in Sent. IV. 17. G. says, It was delivered, by word and deed, without any
Scripture.

For Image Worship. Bellarmin de Eccl. Triumph. II. 12. can find only two Texts
of the New Testament. Mat. 5. 33. Swear neither by Heaven, for it is Gods
Throne; nor by Earth, for it is his Footstool; and 2 Timothy iii. 15. From a Child
thou have known the Holy Scriptures.

Of Purgatory. Baconthorp in sent. 1. 4. did. 49. q. 1. says, Others think it
cannot be proved by the Authority of Scripture. Petrus a Soto, says, It cannot
be plainly proved from testimonies of Scripture; Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid.
Sess. 25. beginning. Perion. says, he knows no place of Scripture to prove it.
Bulenger says, It is hard to bring any express and clear Text for it; Chamier
Panstr. Tom. III. l. 26. c. 2.. 3.

For Indulgences. St. Antonin. Sum. Moral. part. 1. Tit. 10. c. 3. beginning.
Of Indulgences we have nothing expressly from Scripture, nor from the sayings of
the Ancients, but of the late Doctors. Cajetan opusc. Tom. I. tract. 15. c. 1.
Of the Rise of them, no Authority of Scripture, or Ancient Doctors Greek or
Latin, have brought this to our knowledge: only within these three hundred years
it has been written, etc. Bishop Fisher Assert. Luther. Confutatio Art. 18. p.
135. grants there is neither Precept, nor Counsel for it in Scripture.


are not so much as once mentioned in Scripture; and none of them is mentioned
there in plain words, not in any words that were understood so by the Fathers
for many Ages after Christ.

For the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Besides that we find nothing for it,
but many things against it in the Ancients, As that What we receive in the
Sacrament is Bread in it is own nature and essence, and that it nourishes our
Body, etc. That wicked men receive no other but Bread, though to the Faithful
it is truly Christ's Body, and therefore it is called his Body. That it is a
Sacrament, a Sign, an Image, and a Figure of his Body. Which last words were in
the Canon of the Mass, till it was altered in favor to this new Opinion. v.
Gratian Decr. de Consecr. Did. 2. c. 55.
so many that we are sure it could not be the Tradition of those Times. We see
at its first birth it was declared to be a Novelty, and a Falsehood, by Rabanus
Archbishop of Mentz, Rabanus in his Canonical Epistle published by Baluz, with
his Regino. p. 517. has these words, Some of late, not holding aright of the
Sacrament, have said that the Body of Christ which was born of the Virgin Mary,
etc. is [the same which is received at the Altar.] Against which Error we have
written to Egilus Abbas. But that Book is lost; and in this, as Baluz shows,
[those last words] were rased out of the Manuscript.
and by other Bertramus, or Ratrannus Corbeiensis in his Book written against
it, by order of Carolus Calvus, and transcribed in great part into our Saxon
Homily. Which Book is mentioned as his, by the nameless writer in defense of
Paschasius, and by Sigebert, de Script. Eccl. c. 96.

Johannes Scotus, Professor at Oxford in King Alfrid's time, in his Book
against it, that was burnt 200 years after, when this Innovation had prevailed.
But none of these Books were censured in that Age when they were written.


of the learned men that lived eight or nine hundred years after Christ. We
find at that time, and for two hundred years after, it was a rude lump, Anno
1059. The Pope and his Roman Council put these words into the mouth of
Berengar, that not the Sacrament, but the very body of Christ is broken and
ground by the Teeth of the Faithful. Which, the Gloss there says, was a
greater Heresy then Berengar's, unless their words be taken in a sound sense,
that is, otherwise than they signify. Decr. de Consecr. did. 2. c. 42. Ego
Berengarius.
which asked much licking over to perfect it About the year 1150 the Master of
the Sentences l. 4. did. 11. says, Whether the change be Formal, or
Substantial, or of some other kind, I am not able to define. Only I know it is
not Formal. But Anno 1215. Pope Innocet defined it to be, of no other kind but
Substantial. Conc. Lateran. IV. c. 1.
. And then having both Shape and a Name, it was defined to be of Faith by Pope
Innocent in his Lateran-Council, above twelve hundred years after Christ.

For Confession to a Priest, the necessity of it was unknown to the Fathers of
the Primitive Of secret sins no Confession is necessary, but to God only.
Chrysostom. Edit. Savil. Tom. I. p. 708. 11. IV. p. 589. 40. V. p. 258. 6. and.
p. 262. 44.
Church. Nay, above a thousand years after Christ, it was held disputable in
the Roman Gratian. Decret. de Poenit. Did. 1. c. 89. Quibus Autoritatibus,
having brought Arguments for and against it, thus Concludes, Which side is in
the right, I leave the Reader to judge, for on both sides there are wise and
Religious men.

The Master of the Sentences lib. 4. did. 17. Though himself was for
Confession, yet says, Learned men differ about it, for so the Doctors seem to
vary and deliver things near contrary to one another about it. So that yet it
was disputable in those times.


Church. And though the Practice of it was imposed by Pope Innocent, in his
Council of Lateran Conc. Lateran. IV. Can. 21.
; yet even then it remained disputable Gloss. in Decr. de poenit. Did, 1. c.
37. Allii e contr. says. Here follow Allegations, to prove that one of Age is
not forgiven sin without Confession. Which is false.
as to the Doctrine, till it was made to be of Faith by the Trent Council Conc.
Trident. Sess. 14. Can. 6, 7, 8. After which, in the Roman Edition of the Canon
Law, there were notes put upon those places abovementioned. Where Gratian
doubted whether Confession were necessary, they say, It is most certain, and to
be held for most certain, that Confession is necessary. And where Semeca had
said, It is false, they say, Nay it is most true.
.

For their Doctrine of Image Worship, than which nothing can be more contrary
to the Scriptures, as they were understood by the Primitive The Second
Commandment which forbids bowing down defore any Image or Likeness, though it
does not appear in the Roman Decalogue, was held by the Fathers to be a Law of
Perpetual Obligation. So Irenaeus adv. Here Is. l. II. c. 6. and l. IV. c. 31.
Clemens Alex. Admon. ad Gentes Edit. Leyd. 1616. p. 31. 12. Strom. V. Ib. p.
408. 22. Tertull. de Idololatria c. 4. p. 105. D. Idem. adv. Marcion. l. II. c.
22. p. 470. A. B. Idem. in Scorpiac. c. 2. p. 617. C. D. Cyprian. de Exhort.
Mart. p. 283. Idem. in Testim. ad Quirinum l. III. c. 59. p. 345. Augustine.
Epist. 119. c. 11. Tom. II. col. 569. A.
Fathers; we know it was established by the second Nicen The English, and
French, and Germans of that Age, called it Pseudosynodum, the Mock-Synod, of
Nice; or rather of Constantinople, because it began and ended in that City.
Council. Edit. Labb. Tom. VII. p. 37. D. and 592. B. Hincmar. Opusc. 33. c. 20.
Edit. Sirmondi Tom. II. p. 457. Ado Vienn. aet. VI. Edit. Paris. 1512. fol.
181. Annal. Fuld. and V. opera Alcuini in fine.
Council, and we know what a Council that was. But it was condemned in the same
Age by two as numerous Councils; that of Constantinople Of which there is
nothing left, but what is repeated out of it in the second Nicen Council Act.
6. Edit. Labb. Tom. VII. col. 392. E.
a little before it, and that of Frankfort Ib. col. 1057. E.
immediately after it.

And the matter was held in debate all that Age, in both the Eastern Baron,
Anno 843. number. 16. says, Till that year the Nicen Council had not prevailed in
the Eastern Church.
and Western Witness the Book of Charles the Great, and that of the Synod of
Paris under Ludovicus Pius, and that of Agobard Bishop of Lions, against the
Worship of Images as it was then in the Roman Church.
Church: till at last it was settled in the East according to the Nicen Council;
which they have so much out done in the Roman Church, that even the Greeks
charge them with For their Carved Images of Saints; Goar in Eucholog. p. 28.
says, The Greeks abhor Carved Images, as Idols, of which they do not stick to
sing in David's words, They have mouths and speak not. And for picturing God,
the second Nicen Council condemns it, by approving the Epistle of St. German,
which calls the Image of God an Idol. Council. Edit. Labb. Tom. VII. col. 301.
E. and 304. A.
Idolatry; And they are not wholly excused from it by many Lud. Vives in his
notes on Aug. de Civitate Dei l. VIII. c. 27. Tom. V. col. 494. B. says, In
many Catholics, I do not see what difference there is between their opinion of
the Saints, and the Heathens opinion of their Gods. Polydor. Virg. de Invent.
l. VI. c. 13. says, Men are come to that pitch of madness, that this part of
Piety differs little from Impiety. For very many -- trust more in their
Images, then in Christ or the Saints, to whom they are dedicated. The like
complaints have many other of their Writers. Bellarmin de cultu Imag. II. 22.
Edit. Venet. Tom. 1599: II. col. 836. E. says, That they who hold that some
Images are to be worshipped with Latria, are forced to use most subtle
distinctions, which they themselves scarce understand, much less the ignorant
People. And yet this, which he so censures, is the constant judgment of
Divines, and seems to be the meaning of the Council of Trent, says Azorius,
Institut. Moral. l. 9. c. 6.
of their own Communion.

For their Doctrine of Purgatory, it does not appear that any one of the
Ancients hit upon it, among all the different Opinions Some held, that all go
immediately after Death, to Heaven or Hell. Others, that none go to either, but
that all are kept in secret Receptacles till the general Resurrection. Some,
that the Martyrs go to Heaven, and the Damned Souls to Hell; but all the rest
are kept there in expectation and suspense till the Day of Judgment. Some held,
that there shall be a first Resurrection of the Righteous; of whom some shall
rise sooner, some later, in the thousand years of Christ's Reign upon Earth. And
that the delay of that Resurrection shall be the Punishment of their Sins.
Others held, that their sins shall be purged away by that fire that shall burn
the World at the last Day. And that they shall burn a longer or less while, and
with more or less pain, according to the Degrees of their sins. All the Fathers
were of some or other of these Opinions, which are all inconsistent with the
Roman Doctrine of Purgatory.
that they had concerning separated Souls, till St. Austins time; and yet then,
we are as sure it was no Catholic Tradition, Aug. de Fide and Operibus, c. 15.
Tom. IV. p. 69. E. says, Some think men that die in sin may be purged with
Fire, and then be saved, holding the Foundation. For so they understand that
Text. 1 Cor. iii. 13. They shall be saved as by Fire. So Enchirid. ad Laurent.
c. 67^. Tom. III. p. 175. C. Ibid. de Fide and Operibus p. 71. B. He says.
that this is one of those places which St. Peter says are hard to be
understood, which men ought not to wrest to their own Destruction. Ibid. c. 16.
p. 73. B. He says, for his own part, he understands that Text to be meant of
the Fire of Tribulation in this life. So Enchir. ad Laur. Ib. c. 68. But for
the Doctrine, he says, that some such thing may be, is not Incredible: and
whether it be so, it may be enquired; and it may be found, or it may not. So
Enchir. ad Laur. c. 69. p. 176. D. All these Texts he repeats again, in his
answer to the first of the eight Questions of Dul^itius. De Civitate Dei l.
XXI. c. 26. Tom. V. p. 1315. B. He again delivers the same meaning of that
Text. And as to the Doctrine, he says, I do not find fault with it, for Perhaps
it is true. Ibid. p. 1316. B. I suppose St. Austin would not have said this of
the Doctrine of Christ's Incarnation.
as we can be of any thing of that Age. After near two hundred years more, it
was believed by one of great Name: Pope Gregory. I. in his Dialogues, where,
among many idle tales, he has some that are palpably false, andd such as
bewray both his Ingorance and Credulity together. For Example, that of St.
Paulins being a Slave in Afric till the Death of the King of the Vandals, who
could be no other than Genseric, that outlived St. Paulin five and forty
years. And yet Gregory says, I heard this, from our Elders, and this I do as
firmly believe as if I had seen it with my own Eyes. lib. 1. Praef. etc. 1.
from whose fabulous writings Bishop Fisher against Luthers Assert. Art. 18. p.
132. says, it was a good while unknown, and then it was believed by some,
pedetentim by little and little, and so at last it came to be generally
received by the Church.
it got Credit; And so crept by Degrees Platina (who then lived,) in the life
of Eugenius IV. Edit. Colon. 1593. p. 310. says, After many meetings, and much
contention about it, the Greeks at last being overcome with reasons did believe
there was a place of Purgatory. But he adds, that not long after they returned
to what they held before. And in the life of Nicolas V. p. 323, 324. he says,
that he would fain have reduced them to the Catholic Faith, but he could not.
Bishop Fisher ubi supra, says, There is none, or very seldom mention of it
among the Ancients; and it is not believed by the Greeks to this day. Alphonsus
de Castro adv. Haeres. l. 8. Tit. Indulg. has the same words. and l. 12. Tit.
Purgatorium, says That this is one of the most known Errors of the Greeks and
Armenians. Bzov. contin. Baron. Anno 1514. n. 19. says, The Muscovites and
Russians believe no Purgatory. Most of these believe a middle State, as those
Ancients did; but that will not stand with this Doctrine.
into the Faith of the Roman Church. But it is received by no other Christians.

For their Doctrine of Indulgences, It is so confessedly For the Age of it,
scarce any go higher than the Stations of Pope Gregory. I. Who lived about the
year Six hundred, And to fetch it from those Times, they have no antienter
Author than Thomas Aquinas. (for neither Gratian, nor Peter Lombard, have so
much as one word of this matter.) So Cardinal Cajetan Opusc. Tom. I. tract. 15.
c. 1. says, This only has been written within these three hundred years, as
concerning the Ancient Fathers, that Pope Gregory instituted the Indulgences of
Stations, as Aquinas has it. So likewise Bishop Fisher, and Alphonsus a
Castro, both ubi Supra. Cardinal Bellarmin de Indulg. l. 3. offers some kind of
proof from Elder Times, in such a manner, as if he would not oblige us to
believe it. But for the Instance of Pope Gregory I. he says, we are Impudent
if we deny it. But with Bellarmins leave, a French Oratoire, Morinus de Poenit.
l. 10. ^. 20. does deny it; and convicts this, and all his other Proofs of
Indulgences before Gregory. VII. to be nothing but Forgery and Imposture.

It seems probable indeed, that Gregory VII. (commonly known by his former
name, Hildebrand,) was the first that granted any Indulgences; and that was
above a thousand years after Christ. Cardinal Tolet. casuum l. VII. c. 21. 1.
says, that Paschal II. was the first that granted Indulgences for the Dead.
That must be about the year eleven hundred. And Ibid. lib. VI. c. 24. 3. he
says, that the first that granted Plenary Indulgences, was Pope Boniface VIII.
who lived about the year thirteen hundred. So ancient is this new Catholic
Faith.


new, It was at first so ill The Ground of this Faith, according to Bellarmin
de Indulg. l. 2, 3. is made up of a number of School Opinions put together;
about which Opinions (as he there says) the Schoolmen have differed among
themselves. But all his comfort is, that they that did not hold his way, were
ready to acquiess in the Judgment of the Church, if she held otherwise. He
might as well have said, that the Church, when they lived, was so far from
having declared her Judgment of this Doctrine; that she had not yet declared
her sense of those Opinions, which were to be the Ground of it in aftertimes.
grounded, and so The design of Hilde^ands Indulgences was to engage men to
fight in his quarrel, and to do other Services to the Papacy. Greg. VII. Epist.
II. 54. and VI. 10, 15. and VII. 13. and VIII. 6. The design of Pope Boniface,
in his farther Improvement of this Invention, was to get Money. Chron. Citiz.
Anno 1289. He was greedy of Money, and to gather it, he sent his Legates into
diverse parts of the world, to trade with Indulgences. And with these, he raised
very great sums, enough to have maintained a Holy War. But what became of it,
we shall know at Doomsday.
wickedly designed, that God seemed to have suffered them to run on into this,
to show the World (as afterward he did,) by this Example, what Stuff the Lusts
of men left to themselves, would bring into the Christian Religion.

It were easy to show the like in all their new Articles of Faith. Most of
them I shall consider as they come under the other Heads of my Discourse. The
mean while these may pass for a sample of the rest. They all sprung up in late
corrupt Times, and went at first as Private Opinions only; but being found to
make well for the Interests Transubstantiation, for the Honor of the Clergy;
Confession for their Power and Authority; Image Worship, to bring in Oblations
to the Church; Purgatory, for the Profit of Masses to the Lower Clergy;
Indulgences, for the Profit of the Superior; Plenary Indulgences, for the Popes
own Coffers.
of the Clergy, they were concerned to bring them in credit with the People.
And they took a way for it that could not fail in such an Age, by forging New
Revelations For Transubstantiation, the first that wrote was Paschas. Rathertus
about the year 820. And he tells us of sundry Persons, that had seen, instead
of the Host, one a Lamb, another a Child, another flesh and blood. Paschas. de
corp. and sang. Dom. c. 14. And after the year 1200, when it was defined to be
of Faith; Caesarius of Heisterbach wrote a whole Volume, of Miracles that were
wrought in that Age to confirm the Truth of it, more in number than are
Recorded in Scripture to confirm the whole Divine Revelation.

For Auricular Confession. Bellarmin produces sundry Revelations and Miracles,
by which he says God witnest that the Churches Faith concerning it was true,
de Poenit. l. III. c. 12. Quarta. Among the rest, he has that of St. Francis,
who raised one from the Dead to be Confessed, which I take to be no less than
the fetching of Trajans Soul from Hell, according to their Doctrine.

For Image Worship, the Fathers in that second Nicene Council set it up in
contemplation of the Miracles that were wrought by the Images, Council. Edit.
Labb. Tom. VII. p. 252. C. So Bellarmin de Imagine Sanct. l. II. c. 12.
Miracula; says, The Miracles which were done by the Images, were therefore
done, that they might prove and establish the Doctrine of Images.

For Purgatory. Pope Gregory in his beforementioned Dialogues l. IV. c. 55.
etc. declares upon what ground it was that he believed it; namely, from the
Relation of the poor Souls themselves, that were confined to the Hot Baths, and
kept there at hard work, Swelterd as Tenders use to be: From which miserable
Bondage they were redeemed by Prayers and Masses, as he tells us. So Bishop
Fisher ubi Supra p. 132. says, Purgatory was found out, partly by Revelations
and partly by Scriptures; but Scriptures, he confesses, so understood as they
never were in former times.

And for Indulgences, he tells us, that they came not in use till after men had
quaked a while at the flames of Purgatory, The belief of that Doctrine fitted
men for this. And yet this had Miracles to support it. So Lintur. App. ad
Fascic. temp. Anno 1489. tells, how at Friburg one Devil in the Shape of a Dog
helped one to rob the Pope of all the Money that his Factors had taken in that
City, for which the Thief, having confessed it, was put to a m^st direful death.


and Miracles. when by these means, worthy of their Doctrines, they had brought
them into the Christian Faith; then beside the Interest that first brought them
in, there was another reason to continue them. It was necessary for the Credit
of the Infallibility of the Roman Church. Touch that, and you shake the whole
building of Popery, even to the Foundation, that Bellarmin de Romano Pontifice,
Praef. says, When we speak of the Popes Power, we speak of the Sum of
Christianity.
is, the Papacy it self. To secure that, they are brought under this miserable
necessity, of holding all for Catholic Faith, that is once received in the
Roman Church. Whatsoever she brings forth, must be fathered on the Apostles,
though there is not the least Color for it in their Writings.

But to show how little trust they have in the Apostles writings, there needs
no other instance than this, that their Church has forbid Rule 4th. of the
Index made by order of the Council of Trent, that Whosoever shall presume to
read, or have a Bible, though of a Catholic Translation, without a Faculty in
writing from his Bishop; such a one cannot receive Absolution, till he has
delivered up his Bible to the Ordinary. For fear this should not be enough,
Pope Clement VIII. has added this Note, that by command and practice of the
Holy In^isition, no Bishop has power to grant any such Faculty to read or keep
a Bible any vulgar tongue.
her Laity to read them, and has taken a course that if they read they cannot
well understand them. The Scripture was writ by the Apostles in the most vulgar
language of their times, the Greek, which was the mother tongue of most, and
well known in all Cicero pro Archia, Edit. Grut. l. 292. 17.
Countries where the Scripture was written. And they writ it for every one to
read, as it appears in plain words St. John says at the end of the Gospel;
These things are written, that ye might believe, and that believing ye might
have Life.

St. Paul directs his Epistles to all in general; Romans i. 7. To All that be in
Rome, beloved of God. etc. 1 Cor. i. 2. To the Church of God at Corinth, with
All that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ 2 Cor. i. 1. To the
Church at Corinth with All the Saints which are in all Achaia. So in other
Epistles.


in their writings. And the Ancient Fathers required Chrysostom. in Genesis Sermon.
29. Tom. I. p. 225. 10. I beseech you to attend with diligence to the reading
of the Scriptures: and that not only while you are here, but also at home; to
take the Bible in your hands, and receive the profit of it with care.

Lin. 22. Let us not, I beseech you, neglect so great a profit; but also in our
houses, let us diligently attend the reading of Scriptures.

Lin. 36. That we may not only have enough for our selves; but be able to help
others, and instruct wife and children and neighbors, etc.

Id. in Joh. Sermon. 53. Tom. II. p. 776. 27. I beseech you, get Bibles.

Id. in his Sermon of the profit of reading Scripture. Tom. VIII. p. 112. 43.
Let us apply our selves to reading, not only these two hours, for this bare
hearing is not enough to secure us; but continually, let every one, when he is
come home, take his Bible, and go over the sense of those things that have been
said. For the tree that was planted by the waters, was by the waters, not two
or three hours, but all day and all night; therefore it brings forth leaves
and fruit, etc. So he that is continually reading the Scriptures, though he
have none to interpret, yet by continual reading he draws much profit.

Id. de Lazaro Sermon. 3. Tom. V. p. 242. 30. This I always beseech, and will
never leave beseeching you; that you would not only attend to what is said in
this place, but also that when you are at home, you would continually be
reading the Scriptures. This also at all times I have not ceased to beg of them
with whom I speak in private.


all men to read it, all the Laity, even the Chrysostom. in Coloss. Sermon. 9. Tom.
IV. p. 136. 18. On these words, of the Apostle, Let the word of God dwell in
you richly; Hear you people of the world, you that have charge of wife and
children, how he exhorts you more than others to read the Scriptures; and that
not slightly, or any how, but with much diligence.

Again, p. 137. 2. Hear, I beseech you, all you that work for your living, and
get your selves Bibles for the cure of your souls.

Lin. 7. This is the cause of All evils, that men do not know the Scriptures.

Lin. 9. Do not throw all upon Us [of the Clergy] You are Sheep; but not
brutes, but rational creatures.


meanest of the Laity; they Condemned the neglect of it; they Id. de Lazaro
Sermon. 3. Tom. V. p. 244. 43. Take the Bible in your hands, Read all the
History; Hold fast the known things. For the dark and unknown, go often over
them; and if thou can not by continual reading find out what is said, Go to
thy teacher; If he shall not teach thee, God will, seeing thy diligence, etc.
commended them that read it day and night. There is nothing more frequent in
the writings of the Ancient Fathers.

Yet now it is found out that the Laity may hurt themselves with reading it.
How so? It will make them Hereitics. One would little expect it, that had read
what the Fathers Chrysostom. de Lazaro. S. 3. Tom. V. p. 245. 18. The reading of
Scripture is a great security against sin. The ignorance of Scripture is a
great precipice, and a deep pit. It is a great Betraying of our Salvation to
know nothing of the Laws of God. It is this, that has brough forth Heresies;
this that has brought in corrupt life; this has turned things upside down. For
it is impossible, I say it is impossible for any one to depart without fruit
that enjoys reading continually with observation.
say of this matter. But now it is Heresy to disbelieve the Roman Church. And,
no doubt, to read the Scripture Bellarm. de verbo dei II. 15. Quid quod. The
people would not only receive no benefit, but would also receive hurt by the
Scriptures, etc.

Peter Suitor tralat, Bibliae, c. 22. fol. 96. Will not the people be drawn away
easily from observing the Churches Institutions, when they shall find that they
are not conteind in the Law of Christ?


will bring men to this. But whose fault is it? Surely theirs, that instead of
reforming their Church, have rather chosen to silence the Scriptures. Which
being done in favor of their Doctrines, it appears that they themselves, (I
mean the governors of their Church) have been sensible that some at least of
their Doctrines are not the Doctrines of the Apostles.

In the next place for the Apostles Fellowship, which I have interpreted to be
Union under lawful Pastors and Governors; They can by no means allow this
Character to our Church, or to any that submits not to their Universal Pastor.
Which title they appropriate to the Bishop of Rome; and him they swear, in
their forementioned profession of Faith, to be the Vicar of Christ, and the
successor of St. Peter the Apostle. And to show how far they dare go against
Luke xxiv. 47. Gal. iv. 26. The second General Council called the Church of
Jerusalem the mother of all Churches, Theodorit. Eccl. Hist. V. 9. Edit. Vales.
p. 211. D.
evidence, they swear also, that his Roman Church is not only Mistress, but
also the Mother of all Churches.

Not to say in how many things, he that will be Supreme Pastor, invades the
just rights of other Pastors, who are all, in the judgment of Primitive times,
the Successors of the Apostles of Christ; Or how little he has to show for his
claim to a succession in that Power from St. Peter, either in Scripture Story,
or in the writings of the Primitive Considerations against Popery. p. 81, 82,
etc.
Church: I shall only desire you to consider these beginnings of Christianity
in my Text. When the whole Church was comprehended in three or four thousand
believers, and they were all together with the Apostles at this time in
Jerusalem; It is certain that then there was no Bishop, nor no Christian, at
Rome. So that then for the Bishop or Church of Rome to be any thing, which they
swear they are, in those Articles of their Faith, was surely no part of the
Apostles Doctrine.

Nor did the Fellowship of the Apostles consist in subjection to St. Peter.
Though he was the first Mat. x. 2.
in Order, yet that he had Authority over the rest, there is no ground to
assert: There is much evidence against it, as I have shown from sundry places
of Scripture.

Nor granting this to St. Peter, (which they can never prove,) can they bring
down a title from him to the Roman Bishop. He has a better pretense to succeed
the Roman Emperors, D^m. a S^to in Sent. IV. did. 46. q. 1. art. ^. Though
[Daniels fourth Monarchy, that is,] the Civil Empire of the Romans, has now
ceased; yet the world is not at an end, because that Temporal Empire has been
changed into a Spiritual, as Pope Leo says in his Sermon of the Apostles.
in Monarchy, than he has to succeed any of the Apostles. And indeed that was
the design, as they know that are skild in the writers of ancient times. Rome
seemed a place designd for Empire; and when the Emperors faild, then the
Bishops set up in What the Popes would have had, it may appear by their forging
a donation from Constantin; in which they make him give them his Crown and
Scepter, together with the City of Rome, and all the Western Provinces, Places
and Cities. And that he might leave the Pope in possession, they make him
remove into the East, and there build a new Seat for his Empire; reserving only
the honor to put on the Popes Crown and hold his stirrup, to himself and his
Successors. Council. Edit. Merlini 1530. fol. 58. A. B. This donation was a part
of the Acts of S. Sylvester, which were forged in the eighth Century; and that
probably by Pope Adrian I. for he first quoted them. And he may justly be
suspected to be the Author of that body of Law, which, under the name of St.
Isidors Collection, was generally received within a hundred years after; and
which obtains to this day in the Roman Church, though the learned men among
them are convinced and own that it is an errant heap of Corruption and Forgery.
their stead. What the Emperors could not hold by Arms, the Bishops would fetch
in by Religion. And so they obtrude upon all Christians, in truth, a Secular
Monarchy, instead of that which my Text calls the Fellowship of the Apostles.

Thirdly, for the two Sacraments of the Apostles, they tell us of seven, which
were instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ. In this Chapter we read of Baptism p.
41. and we read of breaking of Bread in my Text. Here are two; but where are
the other five? They were not thought of at that time, for ought that appears
to us in Scripture. 1 Cor. x. 2, 3, 4. and xii. 13. S. Paul mentions only
Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Nay it does not appear in a thousand years after. It was eleven hundred years
after, when Peter Lombard wrote his Book of the Sentences, before which they
cannot find the least mention Bellarm. de Sacram. II. Cap. 24. endeavors to
show that each of the five has been called a Sacrament by one or other of the
Fathers; (and the like he might have shown of twenty things more.) But he could
not produce one Father, that either said there were seven Sacraments of Christ's
Instituting; or that spoke of all these as being such, or of so many as would
make up that Number. Only he says Cap. 25. The Master of the Sentences, and all
Divines since his time* have delivered that there are seven Sacraments; And
adds, if this be false, the whole Church for four hundred years must have erred
most perniciously. He might have said the whole Roman Church, and we should not
much have differed about it.
of that number of Sacraments.

But to speak of no more than that mentioned in my Text. Where is the breaking
of bread? As they receive it in the Roman Church, there is neither breaking nor
bread The invention of the Wafer came in after the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Cassandri Liturgic. c. 27. It was then of use. For the
Senses have less to do about a Wafer than about Bread.
in their Sacrament. Where is the Communion 1 Cor. x. 16.
of Christ's Body and Blood? Their daily Worship is the Mass. But their Mass is
no Communion Verse xvii. For we being many are one bread and one body, For we
are all partakers, etc. If that be a good reason; then they which are not
partakers, have not that Communion. So it is inferred by the twelfth Council of
Toledo Can. 5. That they who do not eat are not partakers of the Altar. Council.
Ed. Lab. Tom. VI. 1230. B.
. The Priest only Consecrates and eats, while all the people stand by and
adore. Was there ever such a thing heard of in the Primitive Justin M. Apol.
11. p. 97. E. They give to Every one that is present to receive of that which
is Consecrated. So. p. 98. E. The giving and receiving of the Consecrated
things is to Every one.

Apost. Constit. VIII. 13. Council. Ed. Labb. Tom. I. 483. E. The Bishop
receives, and then the Priests, etc. and then All the people in order. Again,
485. A. Let the thirty third Psalm be said while all the rest are receiving,
and when all the men and all the women have received, Let the Deacons take what
is left, etc. The same may be observed in all the Ancient Liturgies.

Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Sermon. 3. Tom. III. 778. 26. Ye hear Proclamation made, As
many as are in Penance be gone. As many as do not Receive are in Penance.

Ib. p. 779. 3. How is it that you tarry, and do not partake of the Table? You
are Unworthy, you say; then you are so of Communi^n in Prayer. Your Eyes are
unworthy of these sights, and your Ears are unworthy, etc.

Ib. Line 13. It is no more lawful for you to be here, than for one that is not
Christened.


times? In those times, none were suffered to be present but only Justin M.
Apol. 11. p. 97. E. They give to Every one that is present to receive of that
which is Consecrated. So. p. 98. E. The giving and receiving of the Consecrated
things is to Every one.

Apost. Constit. VIII. 13. Council. Ed. Labb. Tom. I. 483. E. The Bishop
receives, and then the Priests, etc. and then All the people in order. Again,
485. A. Let the thirty third Psalm be said while all the rest are receiving,
and when all the men and all the women have received, Let the Deacons take what
is left, etc. The same may be observed in all the Ancient Liturgies.

Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Sermon. 3. Tom. III. 778. 26. Ye hear Proclamation made, As
many as are in Penance be gone. As many as do not Receive are in Penance.

Ib. p. 779. 3. How is it that you tarry, and do not partake of the Table? You
are Unworthy, you say; then you are so of Communi^n in Prayer. Your Eyes are
unworthy of these sights, and your Ears are unworthy, etc.

Ib. Line 13. It is no more lawful for you to be here, than for one that is not
Christened.


such as received. And if any were present, they were punishable Apostol. Can.
9. Repeted and explained by the Council of Antioch, Can. 2. Council. Edit. Labb.
Tom. II. p. 561. D. That all that come to Church, and hear the Holy Scriptures;
but do not join in Prayer with the People, or decline the Receiving of the
Eucharist, therein doing disorderly; these must be cast out of the Church by
Excommunication.

Greg. I. Dialog. II. c. 23. At Mass according to the Custom, the Deacon cried.
If any one do not Receive, let him give place.

Gratian. Decret. de Consecr. did. 1. c. 59. And more at large, Did. 2. c.
10. Peracta. After the Consecration, let all Receive that will not be put out
of the Church. For so it was Ordained by the Apostles, and is held by the Holy
Roman Church. On which words the Gloss tells us; Thus it was Anciently, but now
every one is left to do as he pleases.


if they did not receive. What could they have thought of such a Sacrament as
is now the daily Worship Bellarm. de Missa. II. c. 9. Tertia, says We read no
where expressly that the Ancients offered the Sacrifice without the Communion of
some one or more beside the Priest. Yet we may easily gather it by Conjectures.
His first Conjecture is from a Canon of the Council of Nantes, which is not to
be found but in Ivo after the year 1100. His second is from that Canon which
teaches plainly the contrary, and which therefore I quoted in Note (c) The rest
are such weak colors for the justifying of this practice, that he might better
have only gone about to excuse it, as he does Cap. 10. Septima, by saying, That
new oftentimes the Priest alone eats the Sacrifice* It is no fault of the
Priests, or the nature of the Sacrifice, but the negligence of the People. But
he seems to have forgot that at some Masses the Church does not require the
presence of the People.
of the Roman Church?

Sure enough in the Apostles Church, as often as they met to Worship God, they
All did eat of that one bread. 1 Cor. x. 17. And they All were made to drink
into one Spirit. 1 Cor. xii. 13.

And whereas of this last, our Savior having said to his Disciples, who were
then Laymen, Drink ye Matthew. xxvi. 27.
all of it; St. Mark takes particular notice, Mar. xiv. 23.
that they all drank of it; which practice (we see) was followed in the
Apostolic 1 Cor. x. 21. Ye -- drink the Cup of the Lord; and xi. 26, 27, 28. Ye
eat this bread and drink this Cup; and 12, 13. We have been all made to drink.
So Justin M. Apol. 2. p. 97. E. and 98. E. declares the manner of those times,
that every one of the people that were present at the Sacrament did receive it
in both kinds.
Church: The Roman It appears that this manner was continued in following Ages,
it does not appear that it was changed in any Church, till that Doctrine came
in which requires men to disbelieve their Senses. This being hard to do in that
part of the Sacrament, the Cup was taken away by degrees in these Western
Churches.

The first that writ for this use, (as far as I can find) was Gislebertus, that
lived about the year eleven hundred. Aquinas, that lived about one hundred and
fifty years after, says that then this new manner was providently observed in
some Churches. Sum. Part. III. q. 80. art. 12. in Corp. After one hundred and
fifty years more was the Council of Constance, which enjoined it to all; and
that with a bold non obstante to all that Christ had said or done to the
contrary. For thus the Decree. Sess. 13. Council. Ed. Labb. Tom. XII. 100. B, C.
Though Christ administered this Sacrament to his Disciples in both kinds, of
bread and wine; yet Notwithstanding this, -- the approved Custom of the Church
is otherwise. -- And though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was then
received by the faithful in both kinds; Yet this Custom was brought up with
good reason; for the avoiding of some Perils and Scandals, etc. It seems they
were such as Christ did not foresee, or the Ancient Church did not find, for
otherwise this had not been then to do.


Church will let her Laity drink none of it. None of the Cup of blessing which
we bless; But the Cup of Unblessed Wine, the Ablution as they call it: A trick
which they brought up in those corrupt ignorant times, I know not why, if not
on purpose to deceive the people, that they may not miss the Wine, though they
have none of the Blessing. So far they are removed from the Original Church in
her Sacraments.

Lastly, for the Worship of God, here called the Apostles Prayers, There are
many things in the Roman Church, whereof some were forbidden by the Apostles,
and others cannot consist with their Doctrine.

The chief part of her Worship is the Sacrifice of the Mass; and that is
declared, in the Creed beforementioned, to be a true proper propitiatory
Sacrifice for the living and the dead.

This horrible affront of Christ's Sacrifice, It makes the Sacrifice of Christ
as much lower in value, as it is oftener offered than the Levitical Sacrifices.
For the reason of their being often offered was because of their insufficiency
to take away sin. Heb. x. 11. Had Christ's Sacrifice been like theirs, he must
often have suffered, Heb. ix. 25, 26. He must have oftentimes offered the same
Sacrifice, Heb. x. 11. As they say he does at every Mass in the Roman Church.
But this he needed not; Christ's Once was enough. Heb. vii. 27. and ix. 12, 26,
28. and x. 10. He offered one Sacrifice for sin for ever. Heb. x. 12. and by
that one offering he has perfected for ever them that are Sanctified, V. 14.
So that there is no more offering for sin, V. 18. No more true proper
propitiatory Sacrifice.
and abuse of his Sacrament The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was Ordained, for
the remembrance and representation of the propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ, to
be offered or made by every believer. He takes, eats, drinks; he Does this, in
remembrance of Christ. Luke xxii. 19. and so doing he shows forth the death
of Christ, 1 Cor. xi. 26. and applies to himself Christ's body broken and his
blood shed for us. There goes with it an Eucharistical Sacrifice, that is,
before the Sacrament an Oblation solemnly presented to God: in, and after it, a
Spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer and Thanksgiving, an offering of our selves souls
and bodies. For this every Christian is a Priest 1 Pet. ii. 5. The manner of it
is thus described in the old Roman Missal set forth by Pamelius. After the
reading of the Gospel, the Offertory is sung, and the Oblations are offered by
the people: out of which, Bread and Wine are set upon the Altar to be
Consecrated; and the Prayer is said over the Oblations. After this the Priest
began the Canon of the Mass, and said the Commemoration in these words,
Remember Lord, all here present, who offer to thee this Sacrifice of praise,
for themselves and all theirs. Menardi Sacr. Gregor. p. 2. In those times men
saw the Oblations to which those words did refer. But afterward when there was
no more such offering, and no more breaking of Bread, but a Wafer to be offered
by the Priest for the People, then the Ancient form was improper, and therefore
they altered it thus. Remember Lord all here present, for whom We offer to
thee, etc. So it stands now in the Roman Missal. Where all the other Prayers,
which were designed for the Eucharist, are misapplied to the new Propitiatory
Sacrifice. And yet still they continue these following words of the Prayer
after the Diptychs; through our Lord Jesus Christ, By whom thou O Lord Createst
all these things always good, etc. and give them to us. This they say over
the Wafer and Wine after Consecration. Of the Creatures of Bread and Wine, See
the end of Page 47.
together, was brought in upon the back of that Doctrine of the Corporeal
Presence. When, according to that Doctrine, the Priest has made Christ; Next
he is to kill him, or do something as bad; for they pretend to Bell. de Missa.
Lib. l. Cap 2. Secundo. says, All things whatsoever that are called Sacrifices
in Scripture were of necessity to be destroyed: and that by Killing them, if
they were living things; if without life, by Burning them, etc.
sacrifice him to God.

How this is done, the Divines of that Church Bell. de Missa. Lib. I. Cap. 27.
the whole Chapter. Whether by (...), etc.
are not yet agreed. It were well if, at least, they could tell Why they do it.
For they had need, for such a Sacrifice, to have a clear Institution from God.
But they cannot pretend to that. There is nothing clearly for it in all the
Texts that they bring out of Scripture. This they were told aloud at the
Council of Trent 1562. Jul. 24. Padre Pa^l^* says Atai^e* Cardinal Palavicino
says F^rer^ showed, that the Sacrifice of the Mass cannot be pr^ved from
Scripture alone, without Tradition: particularly, that it cannot be pr^ved from
Christ, words at the last Supper* but by the uniform exposition of the Fathers.
He adds, that They did not so understand it, as if their sense were of Faith.

The truth is, the Ancient Fathers did not so understand our Saviors words,
nor perhaps did many of the Trent Fathers themselves. For when the question was
put, whether Christ at the last Supper offered himself for a Propitiatory
Sacrifice; it held both the Divines and Bishops in long Dispute, says Card.
Pallavicino. XVII. 13. 11, etc. It was alleged on the one hand, that if that
at the last Supper was a true Propitiatory Sacrifice, then that upon the Cross
could be only in remembrance of this: and on the other hand, if it was not such
a Sacrifice, then there was no such Sacrifice Instituted by Christ; for the
words of Institution, Hoc Facite, could refer to nothing else but to what was
done then and there. (I have showed that they refer to those words, Take, Eat,
Drink; and were spoken to the Disciples, as Communicants, and no otherwise.)
After much time and heat, at last the Doctrine was set down in these words,
that at the last Supper Christ offered himself for a Sacrifice, without saying
whether Propitiatory, or Eucharistical. But neither did this satisfy, says
Cardinal Pallavicino, XVIII. 9. 3.


: and others since have acknowledged Suarez in tertiam Aquin. disp. 41. art. I.
Secundo potest. says, in the New Testament there are no convincing testimonies
to prove that there is a true proper Sacrifice under the Gospel.
it. They pretend indeed that it is clear in the Tradition of the Fathers. But
for the Fathers that received the Scripture from the Apostles, it is evident
None before Justin Martyr speaks of Sacrifice among Christians; unless Clemens
Remanus, in his Epist. ad Cor.. 36. Where he calls Christ the High Priest of
our offerings. But he speaks only of the Sacrifice of praise, and contrite
hearts. Ibid. and. 52.

But for Justin in his Book against Tryphon, p. 344. c. He proves that we are
all a Holy Priesthood, because God accepts none but Priests: and yet all that
offer the Sacrifices which Christ delivered, in the Eucharist, or blessing of
Bread and Wine, are accepted of God. And whereas the Jews say that, since they
have no temple, now their Prayers are their Sacrifice: So, says he, I say;
that Prayers and Thanksgivings, offered by them that are Worthy, are the Only
perfect Sacrifices and acceptable to God. For Christians have learnt to offer
these things Only; and that even in commemoration of that food in which there
is a remembrance of the Passion of Christ.

The next Father was Irenaeus, who writing adversus Haereses, Lib IV. Cap. 32.
and 34. shows, that in the Oblation at the Eucharist those things which were
offered to God according to the custom of those times were no other than his
own Creatures of Bread and Wine. See the end of Page 45. And concludes, that
our Altar is in Heaven; for thither it is that we send up our Prayers and
Oblations. Which last words being taken into the Canon of the Roman Mass remain
there for a Testimony against their new Doctrine.


that they could not find any such thing in it. Nor could any of them Eusebius.
demonstr. Evang. Lib. I. Cap. 10. Edit. Paris. 1628. p. 38. C. Christ offered
to God that eminent Sacrifice for the Salvation of us all, and delivered to us
a memorial to offer to God Continually instead of a Sacrifice. Again p. 39. A.
We are taught to celebrate the memorial of that Sacrifice [of Christ] on a
Table by the Symbols of his body and blood, He goes on thus to the end of that
Chapter.

Austin Epist. 23. Tom. II. p. 93. B. Toward Easter, we say to morrow is the
Lords Passion; though it was many years ago that he suffered, and that Passion
was but Once. So on Easter Day, we say, to day the Lord arose; though so many
years are passed since his Resurrection. Why is no man such a fo^l, to say we
lie when we speak thus? But because we name these days upon the account of
their Likeness to those days in which these things were done. Was not Christ
but once Offered in Himself? and yet in the Sacrament he is Sacrificed by the
People, not every Easter, but every [Communion] day; and it is no lie, if being
asked one should answer that Christ is Sacrificed.

Chrysostom. in Hebr. S. 17. p. 523. 15. We offer not another Sacrifice, as the
High Priest did [among the Jews.] but we offer always the same. Nay rather we
make a Remembrance of the Sacrifice.


that lived in the first six hundred years. Nay they were to seek for it that
lived above a thousand years after the Apostles times. Pet. Lombard Sent. Lib.
IV. did. 12. Puts the question, Whether that which the Priest does, is called
properly a Sacrifice? He answers, that which is Offered and Consecrated by the
Priest, is called a Sacrifice and Oblattion; because it is a Remembrance and
Representation of the True Sacrifice on the Cross.

Gratian de Consecr. II. did. 2. c. 48, 51, 53, 54. is plain for the
Sacrifice, but seems to be against the True Proper Propitiat^ry.




Some indeed of the Ancients have spoke of an unbloody Sacrifice, See Eusebius.
demonst. Evang. lib. 1. c. 10. p. 39, 40. Where he explains it also, of a
Contrite heart, and of Praises and Prayers. So in his Eccles. Hist. l. x. c. 4.
p. 386. D. and life of Constantin, lib. iv. c. 45.
and that offered by every Chrysostom. in 2 Corin. v. 18. p. 647. 2. In these
things there is no difference between the Priest and the Layman.
Christian; as well without the Sacrament as with it. But as they always denied
any more Bloody Sacrifice; So little did they think of an unbloody to take away
sin, and that such as none could offer but the Priest. How much less, that
Chirst himself must be that Sacrifice; nay, must come from heaven, both to
offer, and to be offered; and that upon such pitiful small, or needless
occasions! The most common pretense, not to mention any To allay a Storm, to
cure Cattle, etc. See the Roman Missal.
worse, is to fetch a soul out of Purgatory; Which the Priest is to do for a
small piece of Silver. But they have other devices to do the same thing.
Therefore why must Christ come from Heaven to earn this money? And be sent on
these errands ten thousand times a day? And every time suffer as much Conc.
Triden. Sess. XXII. Cap. 2. It is one and the same Sacrifice with that which
Christ offered on the Cross, and differs only in the Way of offering it.
as it cost him to Redeem all mankind? This horrible Mystery, unknown to former
Ages, was kept for times worthy of such a discovery; Those dark dismal times
that brought in the Grossest errors of Popery.

Other things in their Worship are new and bad Enough, though they do not come
up to the Monstrousness of this: Namely, their prayer to Angels, and to Saints
departed this life, and their prayer for Souls in Purgatory; which things
together make up a great part of their Offices in the Roman Church.

For the first of these, Prayer to Angels; We cannot say that there was no such
thing in the Apostles times. For an Apostle, by mistake, was like to have used
it, Rev. xix. to St. ^word ^aith of the Angel with whom he sp^ke. I fell down
so Worship him: and (...) said to me. See thou do it not; I am thy fellow
Servant. etc. Worship God. Again, Rev. xxii. S. 9. The Apostle was like to have
committed the same Error, taking the Angel for Christ whom he represented, and
in whose name he spoke; verse 13. and 16. Till he was better informed by the
Angel himself. For, says Athanasius cont. Arianos Orat. 3. p. 394. B. Angels
know that they are, not of them that are to be Worshipped, but if them that are
to Worship the Lord. The like is said by St. Austin de vera Relig. c. 55. Tom.
l. p. 717. C.
but was forbid by the Angel to whom he offered worship. And another Apostle
writ Coloss. ii. 1S. Let no man beguile you of your Reward, in a voluntary
humility, -- Worshipping of Angels, intending into things he has not (...).
Whether is was that Superstition of the Essens mentioned by I^sep^us de bell.
Jud. xi 7. Or whether that of Simon Magus, serving Angels, which was accounted
a sort of Idolatry, and condemned by St. Peter the Apostle, as Tertullian
says, de praefer, haeret. c. 33. p. 245. B.

Chrys^st. in Coloss. S. 1. p. 90. 9. Says, it was the chief design of that
Epistle, to beat down the Error of them that made addresses to God by the
Angels.

Ibid. S. 5. p. 114. 14. He says, it was the Devil, that put it in their heads.

Ibid. S. 6. p. 123. 27. They said* We must come to God by his Angels; and not
[immediately] by Christ, for that is a thing too high for us.

This Error, says Theodoret in his Comment on that Text, continued long among
the People of Colossae and of the adjacent Countries. And for this cause a
Council met at La^dicet, a City about twenty miles from Colossae, made a Law
against Praying to Angels. It is the 35. Canon of that Council, that no
Christian so all leave the Church, and go, and name Angels; that is, call upon
them in Prayer, as all the Scholiasts understand it, with Theodoret
abovementioned. To do which thing, the Council says, is Secret Idolatry: a
charge that so nearly touches them in the Roman Church, that, to avoid it, they
have made no Conscience of turning the word Angelos into Angulos, and the Sense
of the Canon into Nonsense, in their Latin Editions of that Council.


purposely against it as being a Superstition that some would then have brought
into the Church. But those instances sufficiently show that it could be no part
of the Apostles Prayers.

For Prayer to Saints, as the Apostles have left no Example; so they could have
none before them, according to the Doctrine They hold that all that died before
Christ were in Limbus Patrum till his Resurrection; and therefore could not
hear the Prayers of the Living. This is observed by Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat. l.
19. Item Exodus Who therefore, as he pretends not to bring any Text out of the
New Testament, So might have spared those which he brings out of the Old
Testament, to prove the Invocation of Saints in Heaven, which is the thing in
Question.
of the now Roman Church. Nor is there any color for it in Card. P^rron
Replique V. 12. Grants, that for Prayer to Saints, there is no Precept nor
any formal Example in Scripture.
Scripture, nor in the Ibid. V. 19. p. 871. He also grants, that in the
Authors who lived next the times of the Apostles -- There is not to be found
any Footstep of this. But he comforts himself, that in them there is nothing
repugnant, but all favorable to it. Of which see more in the next note.
Tradition of the Apostles Age. There are many things in both For Scripture. 1
Kings viii. 39. Thou Only know the hearts of all men. Psalm. lxv. 2. Thou
that hear Prayer, to thee shall All flesh come. Mat. iv. 10. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him Only shall thou serve. Christ also shows us
this in his perfect Pattern of Prayer.

For the Fathers of the Apostles times; See Justin Martyr before in P. 20. Note
^, i. The Church or (...) in their Epistle concerning Polycarp's death, says,
It was a Calumny of the Jews, who said that we would worship him after his
death. For we cannot leave Christ, nor can we worship any other. For we worship
him, as being the S^n of God: But for the Martyrs, as being the Disciples and
F^ll^wers of the Lord* we (...) them accordingly. Uss. Edit. p. 27. Theophilus
Antioch. ad Au^ol. l. p. 77. A. The King will not allow any that bear Office
under him to be called Kings. -- So neither is it lawful for any so be
worshipped* but God only. Tertullian Scorp. c. 4. p. 620. I am prescribed not
to call any other, God; -- nor so other, nor so worship, any other, in any
manner whatsoever.


to the contrary.

But after some hundreds of years; when Christianity was the Established
Religion, and Heathens came by droves into the Church; It is no wonder that
they who in their Gentilism Prayed to Deified men, more than to God, were apt
to run into this Superstition. They were still for a Religion that would affect
the sense. And they found matter for it at the Memories of the Martyrs; where
from the Miracles that were wrought for the Testimony of their Faith, They took
occasion to treat the Saints as before they had done their Heathen Austin
Confess. Lib. 6. c. 2. Tom. I. p. 108. B. Says, It was the Custom in Afric to
bring Potages and Bread and Wine to the Monuments of the Saints. And thus his
mother Monica did till St. Ambrose rebuked her for it. The like was done in
other Countries. It was a Custom brought in out of Heathenism.
Gods, and to address themselves to them for those Temporal Austin Sermon. de
Sanctis 47. We expect by their Intercession to receive of the Lord Temporal
benefits. It is in the R^^an Breviary, the fourth Lesson in Commune Plu^im.
Mart. extra temp. Pasch.
benefits which they took to be conferred by their means.

It may seem strange that some of the Fathers of the Church should give
countenance Some of the Fathers, as Nazianzen, etc. used those Rhetorical or
Poetical streins, which sounded like formal Prayers. But they were not so
intended, as appears by his calling upon Saints with these Additions. If you
have any sense, or if you have any care of our matters: Which plainly shows
that he spoke in imitation of the Heathen Orators and Poets, or of the Academic
Philosophers who held nothing certain concerning the state of departed souls.
Greg. Naz. in Gorgoniam, and Stelit. 1.
to this popular Error. But however they complied with the weakness of the
people, in hope to promote their Zeal to Religion; and perhaps they might have
some other Hypotheses Basil and Austin have some taste of that Platonic Opinion;
That souls hover about those places where their bodies or any part of them is
laid. And hence they thought that the souls of the Martyrs might be present to
hear and to dispatch those suits that were made at their Memories. Bas^ of St.
Mamas Tom. I. p. 595. D. Aug. de Cura pro mort. c. 16. Tom. IV. p. 892. B.
of their own; yet they writ things St. Austin de Ver^ Religione. c. 55. Tom.
1. p. 716. C. Says he worship^ (...) dead men^ should be no part of our
Religion. If they have (...) to be honored for Imitation, not to be worshipped
for Religion.
which could not consist with this worship. And some of the Fathers Epiphan.
haer. ^g. cap. 5. Neither is Elias to be worshipped, (...) among the living^
nor is John to be worshipped; -- (...) is Tecla, no^ any (...) the Saints
worshipped: and cap. 7. Though Mary was a (...) and holy, and honored; yet not
so as to be worshipped.
writ directly against it. They asserted to God Greg. Nyssen, Cont. Eunom. or.
4. Edit. Paris 1635. Tom. II. p. 146. B. We are taught to consider every
Creature as being without the Divine Nature, and to worship and adore that
Nature Only which is not Created.

Aug. de Quant. Animae, c. 34. Tom. I. p. 598. C. It is Divinely and singularly
delivered in the Catholic Church, that the soul is to worship no Creature, but
him only that is the Creator of all things.


the whole duty of Worship. They owned no other Mediator but Christ. Aug. in
Psalm. lxvi. Tom. VIII. p. 661. B. He alone of them that has w^rn flesh, there
within the veil makes Intercession for us.

Id. cont. Parmen. l. 2. c. 8. Tom. VII. p. 32. B. He who Intercedes for all,
and none for him, is the only and true Mediator.


This they all acknowledged to be the sense of the That this is not the sense
of the now Roman Church, appears by the Index Expurgatorius, Ed. Madrit, 1667.
Which on those words of Nyssen Note (^) bids, strike out the word Only. p. 146.
Col. 1. from the Index of Epiphanius, bids strike out these words, That no
Creature is to be worshipped; and also those, that Saints are not to be
worshipped. p. 547. Col. 1. and 2. and from the Index of St. Austin, strike out
those words, that only God is to be worshipped; and also those, that Saints are
to be honored, and not worshipped. p. 56. Col. 2. and p. 57. Col. 2. We may be
sure that what they dislike is not their own Doctrine.
Catholic Church.

But the darker times grew, the more that Error prevailed. The people led their
Guides, and tolled them on with worldly advantage; who repaied them with lying
Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat. l. 19. Probatur quinto, shows how it was proved by
Visions and Miracles.
Wonders and Visions to confirm them in their Error. At last by Poetry By Hymns
and Antiphons.
it got into the Offices of the Church. And yet then they had no Doctrine
sufficient to bear it. A thousand years Gratian deer. II. cause. 13. c. 2. c.
29. The Case has his sense in these words. Gratian m^ves the Question. Whether
they that are departed this life know what is done here by the living? and he
Answers that they do not.

Lombard Sent. l. 4. c. 45. Sed forte. Puts the Question Whether Saints hear
the Prayers of their Petitioners? and he answers, that it is not Incredible
that they do. This was far enough from a certainty.


after Christ they were not sure that the Saints heard their Prayer, or that
the Saints Conc. Trent. Sess. ult. Founds this worship on this Doctrine, That
the Saints are in Heaven and reign with Christ. This is the Foundation of all,
says Bellarmin de Sanct. Beat. in Praef. For therefore the Souls of the
Prophets and Patriarchs were not so worshipped and called upon, as we n^w
worship and call upon the Apostles and Martyrs; because they were yet kept shut
up in the infernal Prisons.

Now that all deceased Christians are shut up in like manner, (the Saints not
excepted,) was the Doctrine of the Old Roman Church. For thus she Prayed; Lord
remember all thy Servants and All thy Handmaids, who have gone before us with
the sign of Faith, and who sleep^ the sleep of ^eace. Grant to all that rest in
Christ a place of Refreshing, and of Light and Peace, we humbly beseech thee.
Liturg. Gregor. in Bibl. Patr. Gr. Lat. Tom. II. p. 129. C.

Therefore also, in their Masses for any Bishop that died, they prayed thus;
Grant, O Lord, that this Oblation may profit the Soul of thy servant and Bishop
Such a one. Gregor. Sacram. super Oblata, Edit. Menardi. p. 227. and Edit.
Pamelii. p. 38^. And thus they Prayed yearly for Pope Le^ I. on his day June,
28. as appears in Edit. Menardi. p. 112. and thus for Pope Gregory I. on his
day, Ma^th 12. as appears in Edit. Pamelii. p. 209.

But in the now Roman Missal all these Prayers are changed. And great reason
they should be so, when the Church has changed her Doctrine. For as the Gloss
says of Le^, Anciently the Church prayed for him, but Now he prays for us,
and so the Church Office was changed. Gregor. Decr. III. 41. 6. Tertio Loco.
Therefore now the Prayer on those Saints-days is thus; Grant, Lord, that this
Oblation may profit Us by the Intercession of thy servant Le^, or Gregory. And
yet in the Office pro defunctis; and that as well for any other, as for a
Bishop; the words are still, (what they used for those Saints in former times,)
Grant, O Lord, that this Oblation may pr^^it the Soul of thy Servant Such a one.

And for that Prayer abovementioned, in Canon Missae Commem. pro defunctis,
they first left out those words All thy Servants and All thy Handmaids; and
Prayed thus, Lord remember Them who have gone before us, as it stands in Ed.
Pamelii. p. 182. But the word Them extending to Saints as well as others, they
altered it again, Remember Lord thy Servants and Handmaids N. and N. who are
gone before us. But still the end of that Prayer remains as it was, Grant All
that rest in Christ a place of refreshing, and of light and peace, we humbly
beseech thee. They that Made this Prayer did not believe that the Saints were
already in Heaven; and therefore they knew not the Foundation of these Prayers
to Saints that are now used in the Roman Church.


are in Heaven, which is the very Foundation of their worship. Their very
Prayers (e) taught them the contrary. And therefore they that came after,
altered them in some places. But yet still there is enough left in the Mass
Book (f) to show them how far they are removed from the Old Roman Church.

The Prayers for Souls in Purgatory could be no antienter than the Doctrine of
Purgatory was. And therefore having shown p. 24, 29, 30.
that the Apostles had no such Doctrine, I need not prove that these were none
of their Prayers. But if they prayed for the dead on any other 2 Timothy i. 18.
St. Paul prays for Onesiphorus; the Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy
of the Lord in that Day: that is, at the day of Judgment. He might well be
living when St. Paul made that Prayer.
account, it does not concern the now Roman Church: For she pretends Conc.
Trent. Sess. 25. That the Souls which are kept there in Purgatory are profited
by the Prayers of the Faithful.

Bellarm. de Purg. lib. 2. c. 38. It is certain that the Prayers of the Church
do not profit the Blessed, nor the Damned, but only them that live in Purgatory.

Azor. Instit. Moral. Tom. I. lib. 8. c. 20. Neque vero; says, the Greeks pray
for the dead: but Certainly neither for the Blessed, nor for the Damned, which
were plainly Absurd and Impious.

The truth is, the Greeks prayed for the Blessed; even for the Virgin Mary, and
the Apostles. And so did the Ancient Roman Church; in those Offices which the
present Roman Church has both corrupted, and misapplyed.


not to pray for any dead, but for them that are in Purgatory.

And yet to do her Right, she has not one prayer expressly for them in all her
Offices In the Mass for the dead, there is not the name of Purgatory; nor it
does not appear that the Church thought of any such thing. The Hymn is wholely
of the day of Judgment. The Prayers are for deliverance at that Day: and if
they are for any thing else, it is nothing but what is asked for All the
Faithful as much as for any person. The Lessons and Sequences are all
concerning the Resurrection. There is not among them One Text of those Many
that are brought for the proof of Purgatory: except only 2. Mac. xii. 43. Which
according to the Roman Doctrine should be rather for (...), than for Purgatory;
But indeed it relates to neither, but (as the Office intends it,) to the
Resurrection.
for the dead, The Reason is, because those Offices were made before that
Fiction was generally believed. The Offices were fitted to those Doctrines They
are agreeable enough to several of those opinions concerning the state of
Souls, which are mentioned before p. 29. Note (a.)
which were Then in the Roman Church; Which (as I have shown) See* p. 55, 56.
were much different from what she has now. So where their Doctrines were
doubtful, there the Prayers are in ambiguous Miss. pro defunct. O^^ertorium;
Lord Jesus -- deliver the souls of All Faithful (...) from the Pains of Hell --
that they may not fall into darkness; But that the standard bearer St. Michael
may carry them into eternal light.

Ibid. The Prayer in the Obits; We pray thee for the soul of thy Servant N.
that thou would not deliver it into the hands ^f the Enemy* no^ f^rget it
for ever; but command it to be received by thy Holy Angels, and be led to the
land of the Living. That he may come to rejoice in the Society of thy Saints;
So Miss. Sarum. That he may not suffer Eternal pains but p^ssess Eternal joys;
So the Old Roman. But the New has changed Eternal into Infernal, as being more
for the sense of the present Church.


terms. But they are plain enough in that which is of Faith; that is, where
they pray Ib. Tractus. Absolve, O Lord, the Souls of all the Faithful decea^t
from every b^nd of their sins; and by the (...) if thy Grace let them obtain to
escape the Judgment of Vengeance, and to enjoy the blessedness of Eternal Light.

Ib. Post-communion among the diverse Prayers; O Lord, the soul of this thy
servant from every bond of his sins; that, in the glory of the Resurrection, he
being Raised again may have refreshment among thy Saints and (...) ones.


(as we do,) for a blessed Resurrection.

But because that is assured to all that die in Christ, whether in a Perfect or
Imperfect estate; and men will not buy Prayers for that which will come without
asking: Therefore to get their money, there was no better way, than to persuade
them that their friends, might be fetched out of Purgatory, or might be eased
in it, by such Prayers as were then used in the Church. There might have been
new Prayers made for the purpose. But as bad as times were, in that darkness of
Popery, some would have declared against such a gross Innovation. Therefore it
was thought enough to keep the old Prayers, and get the Church to interpret
them, as she has done C^^nc. Tr^nt. Sess. 25. d^cr. Of Purgat^ry. Let the
Bishops take care, that the suffrages of the living Faithful, v^^. the
Sacrifices of Misses and Prayers, etc. which have been usually made for the
Faithful deceased, be made according to the Ordinance of the Church.
sufficiently to show her own Novelty in this matter.

For the other parts of their Worship, we read that the Ptimitive Christians,
that lived next the Apostles times, had their Lessons from the Scriptures See
p. 20. Note, d.
of the Old and New Testament. So they have some likewise in the Roman Church.
But for every such Lesson, they have Two Lessons out of other Books: And no
small part of them (I say no more than I can prove,) are as arrant Fables For
their Saints. whom they make sharers with Christ in their Prayers, and pray to
God to be heard for their Merits and Intercession, not a few of the Persons
themselves are mere Fictions; as St. Christopher, St. Parnel, St. Catherine,
St. Win^frid, St. Vrsula and her eleven thousand companions. Most of the others
are of doubtful Authority: and Some* for ought they can know, and as they have
reason to fear, are Damned Souls: as Pope Steven, Pope Marcel^^nus, Pope Felix
II, St. Thomas Becket, St. Deminie. But of the true Saints, not a few of their
stories are Fables; as those of the Immuculate Conception, Presentation, and
Assumption of the Virgin Mary; of the Apparition of St. Michael; May, S. Of the
Martyrdoms of some Apostles, Of almost all the Ancient Popes; Of St. Denis and
his fellows, etc. Add the Tales of St. Peter's chains, August, 1. Of the
Dedication of the Later^n, and the Vatican Churches, November. 9. and 18.
as any that are in the Heathen Poets.

For the Language of their Prayers and Offices in their Church; it is all in
Latin, and that is an Unknown tongue. It is a chance if any there understands
it. And their Church is not concerned Conc. Trent Sess. 22. cap. 8. It has
seemed to the Fathers not to be expedient that every where Mass should be said
in the Vulgar Tongue. There is an Order indeed, that oftentimes between the
Masses some body should expound Something to the people of what is read to them
in the Mass. Suppose some part of the Gospel, or the like. But that will not
make them able to join with him that reads it. And Bellarmin says, in those
Mysteries there are Many things which Ought to be secret: meaning I suppose,
that the People Ought not to understand them. Bellar. de Verbo Dei. I. II. c.
15. Septim^.
that they should understand it: But St. Paul was; as we read, 1 Cor. xiv. 14.
If I pray, says he, in an Unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, but my
Understanding is unfruitful. But I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray
with the Understanding also. Again, verse 16. How shall he that stands in the
room of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks? seeing he Understands
not what thou say. Again, verse 9. In the Church I had rather speak five
words with my Understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than
ten thousand words in an Unknown tongue. These are plain Texts of Scripture,
which the Roman Church evidently transgressing, does wisely no doubt to keep
the Scriptures from the Reading or Understanding of her people. For otherwise,
it could be no great comfort to them, to find how directly she goes against, as
well the Precepts, as the Practice of the Apostles.

I shave shown that she does it, not only in One, or a few, Instances; But in
Many, and those of the greatest note; In all the Notes that the Apostles have
given us of a true Christian Church.

Having given this account of her that calls her self the Catholic Church;
Having shown how far she is removed from this Church in my Text; I shall not
pass any judgment upon her, as she peremptorily does upon others, damning all
that are not of her Communion: Better leave that to God, and they will find so
at the last day. Only, being as she is, I think we have all reason to beware of
her; to thank God that we are at this distance from her; to bless her for her
curses, Gunpowder Treason Edit. 1679. p. 1^9. F^r from the year Eliz. 1. unto
11. all Papists came to our Church and Service without Scruple. -- But when
(...) the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus was come and published, wherein the Queen
was accursed and deposed, and her Subjects discharged of their Obedience and
Oath, yea, Cursed if they did obey her; Then did they all f^r^^with refrain the
Church, then would they have no more society with us in Prayer.
that have caused that distance; to Pray for her and her Children, that they
may be purged from their Errors; And till then, to Watch and Pray for our
selves; and to put it, at least, in our Private Litany, (it shall always be in
mine,) from Popery good Lord deliver us.

Let us next consider our own Church; and when I say our own, I know you all
understand me, that I speak of the Church of England in the first place; and
proportionably of all other Reformed Churches. And this I say; If any Church
which holds the same Doctrine, which retains the same Government, which
partakes the same Sacraments, and the same Worship of God, as they did in the
Apostles times, be a true Apostolical Church: We are bound to bless God, who
has placed us where we are; who has made us Members of such a Church, which
has all those Characters so entire and so visible in it.

First for Doctrine, we profess to believe 3^. Art. Art. 6.
the Holy Scriptures, which (I have shown) See. p. 10. Note ^, etc.
have been anciently thought to contain the whole Doctrine of the Apostles. We
acknowledge for Canonical Scriptures, neither less nor more, than all those
Books lb. Art. 6. And this is proved in Bishop Cousins Book of the Canon of the
Scripture.
whose Authority is undoubted in the Church. We profess the same Faith, and no
more, than all Christians have professed in all Ages: namely Art. 8.
that which is briefly comprised in the Apostles Creed; Office of Baptism. Will thou be Baptized in this Faith? I will.
explained in the Creeds called the Nicen, This alone was enough to make one a
Catholic in the times of the Christian Emperors. Cod. Theodos. lib. XVI. Edicta
de Fide Catholica.
and that of Athanasius; and proved in every Article or Point Canon Anno 1571.
of Pre^^^ers. We are obliged, under pain of Excommunication, to teach nothing
but what is agreeable to the Old and New Testament, and what the Catholic
Fathers and Ancient Bish^ps have gathered out of that very Doctrine. Statut. 1.
Eliz. 1. We judge all those things to be Heresy which were declared so by the
four General Councils: therein following the Judgment of the Ancient Church.
See Aelfrics Saxon Canon 33. There were four Councils for defense of the Faith
against Haereties. -- There were many (...), since that time, but these four
were the most firm.
by the Holy Scriptures taken in that sense, which is both most evident in the
words, and which has been approved by the consent of the Universal Church.

Secondly for the Government Art. S.
of our Church, as to the Constitution of it, it is according to the Scripture
rules and Primitive patterns.

And for the Exercise of it; It goes as far as the looseness of the Age will
bear. If this has weakened the Sea the Commination.
Discipline of our Church, we know the same looseness has the same effect
elsewhere, even in those Churches of the Roman Communion: And it had no less in
the Church of Corinth 1 Cor. i. 11, 12. and v. 2, etc. and see Clemens Epistle
to the Corinthians.
in the Apostles times.

For the persons that are employed in the Ministry; Art. 23. and Offices of
Ordination.
They are such as are lawfully called to it; they are Consecrated and Ordained
for that purpose; and that Proved by Mason in his Book de Minist. Angl.
according to the Scripture and Canons of the Universal Church. They are such
as wholly attend on this very thing, in the Apostles Romans xiii. 6.
words. And for our Church of England, I may add, without prejudice to any
other, we can derive the Succession Mason Ibid. and Bramhal of Succession.
of our Bishops from the Apostles, as high as most Churches can, even of them
in the Roman Communion.

Thirdly, for our Sacraments; Art. 25.
we use the same, and no other than those, which Christ expressly left to his
Church: I mean, which he both Instituted, and Commanded us to use; Which can be
said of no other than only Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Lastly, For our Public Worship, we have cause to bless God that has given us
such a Liturgy; in which, according to all the measures we have of the
Apostles, we can see nothing but what, as to the Substance, is Theirs; And our
most malicious Enemies can tell us of no other ill they see in it; but only
this, that the Words of it are Ours.

The Ministration of this Worship and of these Sacraments, is in a Language
Art. 24.
understood by all those that are concerned in them. They can all say Amen 1
Cor. xiv. 16.
to their Prayers. It is performed with such Rites, Art. 20.
as are not against the word of God, but are agreeable to it; being only 1 Cor.
xiv. 40.
for order and decency. And we use them, Art. 34. and Pre^a^es before the
Liturgy.
not as necessary in themselves, but in obedience to the Authority which every
Church has over its own Members.

We do, according to Saint Cyprians Cyp^^^ Epist. ^2. p. 151. and (...)
Carthag. de (...). Bapt. P. 353.
rule, condemn or judge no other Church. We separate from none, any otherwise,
than by purging our selves Anno 1603. Can. 3^. the Church of England declares:
that she was so far from being willing to depart from the Churches of Italy,
France, Spain. Germany. etc. in all things that she knew they held and
Observed; that she disserted from those Churches in th^se Articles Only, in
which they first fell away, ^^th from their own former Integrity, and also from
the Apostolical Churches from which they had their Original.
from those things, which we believe to be Corruptions, and Errors: to which
end several of those Articles were framed, to be subscribed by our own Clergy,
without imposing them on any other.

In all these respects, our Church holds a Communion, or has done nothing to
break it, with any other National Church; no, not with those of the Roman
Communion: and is, not only, what they deny, a true Member; but what they are
not, a Sound member, of that one Holy Catholic Church, which was from the
beginning, and which will be to the end of the world.

The last thing is, having proved we have a true Church, to persuade you, First
to continue in it steadfastly. And Secondly in the Belief and Practice of those
things, by which it appears to be a true Church. And Lastly, to profit by them;
and so to adorn our Holy Religion with a Holy and good Conversation.

First, to persuade you to continue steadfastly in this Church; it is enough, if
you are convinced that you cannot mend your selves by any Change.

Who would not desire to continue where he is well? Who would not stick to that
which is the best he can choose? Who would needlessly run the danger of any loss?
Especially of losing himself, which is the greatest loss that is possible? and
yet That we have reason to expect from the just indignation of God, if we shall
reject the great benefit that he has given us, to be born in the womb, and
bred up in the bosom of such a Church.

No doubt you hear, (for who does not?) on every side the voices of them that
would allure you, or would threaten you out of it. But whatsoever they say,
remember what the Philosopher made the first part of wisdom, (...) do not
believe all that is said. Remember how our Savior forewarned, Matthew. xxiv. 23.
Mar. xiii. 21.
if any tell you, Christ is here, or Christ is there, believe him not. If
Antiquity be pretended on the one hand, if large boasts of Purity on the other,
many fine things are said, believe them not. And if many have been seduced by
these means, let them answer for themselves: you had best to look before you
follow them. If many have fallen off from our Church, so did many from Christ.
But some were wiser, and considered what they should get by it. They said, John
vi. 68.
whither should we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. If our Church has
but that, whatever she wants else, it will be our wisest way to continue in it.

But then secondly, you are to continue in those Characters by which it appears
to be a true Church: And to exercise your Communion in all the Acts that belong
to these Characters; namely in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in
the Sacraments, and in Prayers.

First for Doctrine; Hold fast 2 Timothy i. 13.
the form of sound words which you have received. Contend Jude verse 3.
earnestly for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints. Seek it not in
muddy Streams, but in the living Fountains of Scripture. All Scripture 2 Timothy
iii. 16, 17.
is given by inspiration from God; and is enough to make the man of God
perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every good work. It is sufficient to make us
wise Verse 15.
to salvation: So that if we mind only that, we have no need of any other; and
yet we would refuse no other that could be made out, as this is, to be the
Doctrine of the Apostles of Christ.

Secondly, as to the Apostles Fellowship, we have heard it is continued in the
Bishops their Successors. Therefore we ought to take heed how we break
Communion with them. We are both to acknowledge, and make use of their
Ministry; to obey them Heb. xiii. 17.
in spiritual things, as being those that must give account for our souls.

Thirdly, for the Sacraments and Worship of God, forsake not the assembling of
your selves together, Heb. x. 25.
nor run into separate Meetings, as the manner of some is. Some will always be
straggling; we cannot help what they do; and what they do among themselves we do
not enquire. They that are of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, will be only
for the Catholic and Apostolic Sacraments; Namely, for those which Christ
himself instituted in his Church: Baptism, by which we are Romans vi. 5.
planted into Christ's death; and the Lords Supper, in which we keep up the
remembrance of it 1 Cor. xi. 26.
till he comes. We have also the same worship of God, which was in the Apostles
times, and which has been ever since in the Church. They who are now Saints in
Heaven, while they were upon earth, prayed to no other but God only. If we pray
not to them, they will excuse us, we do as they did. And we do it in assurance
that the same worship which they used, will bring us (as it did them) to be
Saints in Heaven too, if we continue in it.

Lastly continuing in the Church, and in all the Characters of it, our business
is to profit by all these; to grow 2 Pet. iii. 18.
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It concerns us, not only to be in a true Church, but to see that we our selves
are true Christians; and that can no otherwise appear, than in the likeness of
Christ, in Righteousness and Holiness of life. Without this, though you be of a
true Church, you will not be so long, or you will be so to no purpose. A wicked
life will, in time, eat out all the sense of Religion; or the more sense one
has, he will find the less comfort in Ours. Our Religion has no comfort for
him that is and will be Wicked. Our Religion has no Purgatory to keep him from
Hell. Our Religion can make him no penny-worths of Heaven. Our Religion has no
pardon for sin, but on Repentance; No Repentance, but on real amendment of
Life. He that cannot come to that, Alas! what does he in our Religion? As it
cannot, if he knows it, but be uneasy to him; so he will make himself unworthy
of it. He will provoke God to deprive him of the benefit. And it is all one
which way he deprives him; whether by letting him now run out of the Church, or
whether by shutting him out of Heaven at the last. For that it will come to,
when all is done, without holiness there is no coming thither. Without holiness
Heb. xii. 14.
no man shall see the Lord. None shall; If you want that, not you in
particular; and then what will your Religion signify? Though your Church has
all that the Apostles Church had, What good will this do you, if you perish in
it? Though your Ship will go its Voyage, what is that to you, if you die of a
surfeit by the way? Though you have the True Doctrine, Communion, Sacraments,
and Prayers, what comfort will all this give you in that terrible day? Yea,
what Horror will it be, that being placed well by God, you are fallen from it?
You have lost, you have thrown away that great Blessing that he had given you.

Beloved Heb. vi. 9.
we hope better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though we
thus speak.

I Hope, and therefore Pray, that all that hear me this day may be the better
for being of such a Church. God intended we should. He has dealt exceeding
graciously with us. But yet he expects that we should do something for our
selves: That considering the Opportunity that is put in our hands, Seeing how
near God has brought us to the Kingdom of Heaven, Seeing nothing but our own
sins between us and it, (should that sight make us fly out; and seek other
ways; ways that God never made nor will bless? Nay rather) we should break
through our sins, and go the way that he calls us in his Word; there can be no
better, there is no other than this.

So performing his design, pursuing the ends of our Calling, living suitably to
our excellent Religion: We are indeed the followers of the Apostles in this
life, and shall be with them hereafter in the blessedness of Life Everlasting.

FINIS.

