AN EXPOSITION Of the PROPHECY OF SEVENTY WEEKS, WHICH GOD SENT TO DANIEL By
the Angel GABRIEL. Dan. IX. 24 -- 27.
CHAP. I.
A short View of the Historical things that are in the foregoing part of this
Chapter.

BEFORE we come to the Prophecy it self, it will be of Of the Historical things.
use to consider those historical things that are delivered together with it in
the same Chapter; particularly, what the Prophet tells us concerning Himself,
and the Time when he had this Revelation from God, and the Occasion on which it
was given him. These things, we shall see, are communicated to us with great
exactness and care; which, we have reason to believe, was done not only to stir
up our Attention in reading, but also in order to our better Understanding of
this Prophecy.

1. First, of the Prophet himself, it will be our business elsewhere Concerning
Daniel himself. See
(in our DISSERT. I. His great Holiness.
first DISSERTATION,) to show what a bright shining Saint he was in his
Generation; and that even from his Childhood, throughout the whole course of
his Life. But here we are to speak only of those instances of it that occur in
the Historical part of this Chapter. Such were, his diligent studying of the
Holy Scriptures, his pious zeal and concernedness for the Church of God, his
deep His Zeal for Religion.
sense of the Sins of his People, his sad apprehension and fear of their
obstructing the promised Deliverance, for which he applied himself to God with
fasting and fervent Prayer. How highly acceptable these His Favor with God.
things were to God, we cannot but see by his sending such a Person, and much
more by the several gracious Messages that he sent by him.

2. The Favor appeared very signal in God's sending to Showed in God's Sending
Messages to him by the Angel GABRIEL, the same whom he sent afterward to the
Virgin MARY.
him by the Angel Gabriel, the only Angel of his rank whom God has made known
to us by name. And that we had not known, but on the account of God's sending
him with such extraordinary Messages; first, to the Prophet Daniel, and
afterward to the Virgin Mary. Those to Daniel were of a very different nature.
The two first were only Discoveries of the meaning of those dark figures that
he had seen. They were frightful Sights of Beasts, that appeared to him in a
prodigious manner: the Ann. 555. before Christ. Dan. VII.
first, in a Dream of the Night, in the first Year of King Belshazzar, as we
read in the seventh Chapter of this Book; the Ann. 553. before Christ. Dan.
VIII.
other in a Vision which he had two Years after, as we read in the eighth
Chapter. But now at the Angel's third Ann. 558. before Christ. Dan. IX.
coming to Daniel, (which was fifteen Years after his second coming,) in the
first Year of King Darius, He was sent to him, not as before, to interpret a
Dream, or a Vision, but to deliver him a Message from God; in plain words,
containing a Prediction of several of the most wonderful Events that were to
happen in this world; and that of such great and lasting Consequence, that God
would have him put it in writing, to be left upon Record for the use of his
Church in after times.

3. Why God was pleased to make choice of Daniel for this service It was so
Declared by the Angel.
before any other person, the Angel tells him in Dan. IX. 22. 23.
these words; I am sent to show thee these things, (...) because thou art
GREATLY BELOVED. It might as well have been translated in the same words as
that is which the same Angel said to the blessed Virgin, Luke I. 28. Thou art
Luke I. 28.
(...) HIGHLY FAVORED OF GOD. The same Angel uses the same Expression again to
Daniel twice after this; calling him Dan. X. 11, and 19.
(...) a man GREATLY BELOVED; which being not used to any other of the
Prophets, nor perhaps to any other person, but only the blessed Virgin; there
must be something extraordinary in it. And it seems to be plain what that is,
by the Angel's never speaking these words to Daniel before till he came to
deliver this Prophecy to him from God.

4. It is plain why he used these words to the blessed Virgin, by his But
appeared much more by his Messages: to Her of Christ's Incarnation;
telling her the Effect of his Message, that she should be the Mother of
Christ. For certainly there could be no greater Instance of the singular favor
of God to any Human creature than that which God vouchsafed to the blessed
Virgin, that Christ should be born of her body. But the Chief end of Christ's
birth being to Dye for our Salvation, ^o Daniel, of the just Time of christ's
Death,
therefore the Prophecies of That are of the Weightiest concern to mankind
above all other Prophecies of Scripture. It was that SALVATION by THE
SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST, which Moses and all the Prophets had foretold, Luke XXIV.
26, 27. Act. XXVI. 22, 23.
Luke XXIV. 26, 27. Acts XXVI. 22, 23. and yet they knew not when it would be.
But for that they enquired and searched diligently, as St. Peter 1 Pet. I. 10.
11, 12.
tells us; desiring to know (...), what Time, or what manner of Time it should
be that the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, did signify, when he testified
beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and of the Glory that should follow.
Nay not only Men, but even the Angels, Which was a Mystery,
desired to look into these things, as St. Peter there tells us. For even they
were not in this Secret, at St. Paul plainly shows; calling it THE MYSTERY of
our Redemption by the Death of Christ; and telling us Ephesians. III. 9, 10. unknown
to the Angels themselves.
that from the beginning of the World it was hid in God, Ephesians. III. 9, 10. to
the intent that unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly places, (that
is, to the blessed Angels themselves) might be known by the Church the manifold
wisdom of God. According to both these Apostles, the Discovery of the
Determinate time of Christ's death, which God was pleased to send to Daniel by
the Angel Gabriel, was not more surprising News to the Prophet, than it was to
the Angel himself. But when the Angel considered withal, that he should not
have known it now, but for the Prophet's sake; and knowing no doubt how well he
was Qualified for it by those eminent Graces, that had so much endeared him to
God; the Angel could not find how to deliver his message with a fitter Preamble
than that before mentioned: telling him how much he was beloved of God, from
whom he brought him this sure Token of it, in giving him the first Revelation
of the precise time of Christ's death; the knowledge of which had been so
earnestly desired, and sought after, by Angels as well as Men; but could never
be attained by any of them.

5. For the TIME when Daniel had this Revealed to him, we are The TIME OF this
Vision; the first year of K. Da^us's Reign over Babylon.
told in Da^. IX. 1.
the beginning of the Chapter, that it was in the first year of DARIUS the Son
of AHASUERUS, of the Seed of the MEDES, who was now made King of the Realm of
the CHALDEANS Dan. IX. 1, 2.

6. That AHASUERUS the Father of this King DARIUS was King This Darius was K of
the Medes as his Father had been before him.
of the MEDES, and the same that, in Alliance with King NEBUCHADNEZZAR, took
the great City of Ninive, Tobit XIV. 15.
and utterly destroyed it, thereby putting an End to the Assyrian Empire; this
the Reader may see proved in our DISSERT. 1.
first Dissertation. Or, (if he would see it more at large) in Usser. Annal.
ante Chr. 600.
the most learned Primate Usher's Annals in the year 600 before Christ, with
his MS. Additions. They are in the hands of that most worthy Gentleman, his
Grandson, James Tyrrel Esquire who, it is to be hoped, will cause them to be
published in a new Edition of that incomparable book.


7. There also the Reader will find that this Darius succeeded his He was
called CYAXARES SON of Astyages.
Father, and was King of the Medes many years before he was made King of the
Chaldeans; being the same that was called Cyaxares the Son of Astyages by the
Herodot. and Xenophon.
oldest heathen Historians.

8. How this Cyaxares came to be King of the Chaldeans, the Reader may see in
the forementioned Heathen writers; whose account of it perfectly agrees with
that which Daniel gives us of K. Darius in Dan. V. 30. Daniel's account of his
coming to to be King of the Chaldeans,
the end of his fifth chapter. There Daniel having told us what happened at a
great feast that was made by the King of the Chaldeans for all his Lords and
great men, thus Dan. V. 30.
ends it v. 30. In that night was Belshazzar King of the Chaldeans slain.
Thereupon immediately v. 31.
he tells us v. 31. that DARIUS the Mede took or (...)
received the Kingdom being about 62 years old. These last words, except what
is said of his age, are the same in effect with those IX. 1.
above mentioned, that DARIUS of the seed of the Medes was made King of the
Realm of the Chaldeans. Dan. IX. 1.

9. Here are several things concerning this King DARIUS, to be and of many
other things of his History.
gathered out of those few words of Daniel's History. First as to his Country,
he was a Mede by Dan. V 31.
birth and and IX. 1.
descent. As to his Family, he was Son of AHASUERUS; that was always a King's
name. He was King himself of the Medes and Persians; whereof more will be said
see n. 20, 21.
afterward. He was also King over the Realm of the Chaldeans; but neither by
birth, nor by conquest; for he was IX. 1.
made so. IX. 1. He V. 31.
received the Kingdom. chapter V. 31. and therefore some other delivered it to him.
But that was upon the death of King BELSHAZZAR, who was killed immediately
before, as the v 30.
Text says v. 30. And yet, as it appears by the following words, this Darius
must have had a great number of Kingdoms before he came to this. For presently
VI. 1.
after, it is said, that he had a hundred and twenty Provinces under him. These
were more than any King of Chaldea ever had: for among these were v. 8, 12, 15.
the Medes and the Persians which were never under the Chaldeans. And these
were as many, within seven, as ever the Kings of Persia had, even after they
had subdued Esth. X. 1.
the Isles of the Sea, which as See U^r. Ann. 495 before Chr.
the Greek Historians tell us, was never done till Darius Hystaspis his time.
Lastly where, Dan. V. 3^.
as Daniel observes, that when Darius received the Kingdom of the Chaldeans, he
was then sixty two years old; there can be no better reason given for it than
this, that he would have us know, that Darius did not live long after he had
that Kingdom. And he was also careful to VI. 28.
tell us, that after this Darius's death the According to Daniel there was no
other King between Darius and Cyrus. But VI. 28.
according to Sr. I. M. there was another between them; namely Ahasuerus in the
book of Esther; to whom he gives a long reign of 42 years. Canon Chron. page
590. Where did he think Daniel was all that while?
next King was Cyrus the Persian. chapter VI. 28.

10. These things we have thus particularly observed, that we may Different
Accounts, from Sr. I. M. etc.
give the Reader, here at once, a full view of all that Daniel tells us,
concerning the state of those times in which this Prophecy was given. There are
different Schemes of it set up by several What a vain Attempt Sr. John Marsham
has made: to bring Daniel's four Visions Sus^ expugna^ Ann. Nab. 161. ut ait
Can. Chr. 564. sed anno 165. Nebu. ^had. fuit in statu floren^issimo. Dan. IV.
4, 22. and V. 29. and post XII menses insanivit. IV. 29. Id autem contigi^ Ann.
Nab. 166. u^ ipse ait in C^n. Chron. p. 55^.
to terminate in one and the same thing; and that to be only the profaning of
the second Temple, by setting up Heathen Idolatry in it, for 3 or 4 years in
Antiochus Epiphanes his time; and to make this third vision of no other use but
only to be a Chronology for it: And for his beginning the first VII Weeks of
the LXX in the first year of Darius, what strange Fancies he had; to make him
to be a Medo-Persian, that was made King over the Realm of the Chaldeans, as he
says, at Susa, by taking that City and Kingdom from King Nebuchadnezzar; who,
for all that, within 4 or 5 years after, by this Gentleman's telling, run mad
with excess of Prosperity; these things the Reader may see an Account of in the
Premonition: and hereafter more at large in a following Dissertation.
learned men, which must fall, if this Collection be true. But if we should
here go about to repeat and confute them, we should give the Reader too long a
Digression. We hope he will think it none, to see, how these things were, in
great part, foretold by the Prophets; and how the fulfilling of their
Predictions appears in the most ancient Heathen History.

11. First as to the Prophecies of Scripture, it plainly appears that at How
the^ things were foretold by the Prophets: and they explained by Heathen
writers.
that very time when Daniel received this Message from God, His head was full
of what Dan. IX. 2.
he understood by Books, that the Captivity of his People was to be for LXX
years Dan. IX. 2. Those Books, as we shall presently show, were the two
Prophecies that God gave to Jeremiah; Ier. XXV. (...).
one in Ier. XXV. 11. and and XXIX. 10.
the other in Ier. XXIX. 10. In the XXV. 14. that there should come against
Babylon,
former of these it was plainly declared, that at the end of those LXX years,
Many Nations, and great Kings, should serve themselves of the Chaldeans. And
these very words are repeated again, in Ier. XXVII. 7.
another Prophecy, between both the former. But in this intermediate Prophecy
they are introduced with something else, that being compared with the former,
gives them both a very great Illustration. For, whereas in the XXV. 11.
first Prophecy it was said, These Nations shall serve the King of Babylon LXX
years, which words were Verse. 9.
plainly spoken of King Nebuchadnezzar, v. 9. it might well be asked, whether
he was to reign those LXX years? Now XXVII. 7.
here it is shown that he was not: but that the meaning of that Prophecy was,
that all Nations should serve NEBUCHADNEZZAR and his SON and his SON'S SON;
each of them being King of Babylon successively. Thus it should be, until the
very Time of his Land came; that is, till the end of the LXX years. And then,
as it was said before, in the I^r. XXV. 14.
first of these Prophecies, Many nations and great Kings should serve
themselves of him.

12. No Doubt Daniel was Curious to know what those great Kings MEDES, Kings,
and Nations.
and Nations should be. But he could not be to seek for it, farther than
another Prophecy of Ieremy's, where it was shown very particularly; namely,
that in the L. and LI. chapters, which was given him in the IV th. year of King
Zedekiah's Reign. There the same Prophet Ann. 595. before Christ.
speaking of the future as present, has I^r. L^. 11.
these words, The Lord has raised up the Spirit of the Kings of the MEDES: for
his device is against Babylon, to destroy it. The same he repeats in v. 28.
these words, v. 28. Prepare against her the Nations, with the Kings of the
MEDES. Some of those Nations are named in the verse next before, being said to
be the Kings of Ararat and Minni; that is, of both the Armenias, They were in
the Hebrew called A^kenaz, that first peopled Phrygia and Bithynia: from
whence, as Bochart thinks, with great probability, the adjacent Sea was called
Axenu^. But the Greeks not liking that word, which signifies Inhospitable in
their language; they changed it, for luck's sake to Euxenus, that signifies
very hospitable. It is now not so commonly called the Euxin^, as the Black Sea,
and those about the Black-Sea. These Xenop^. Cyrop. VII. has the King and
Queen of Armenia, the Phrygian^. Paphlagontan^, Cappadocian^, etc. led by a
PERSIAN.
Nations are reckoned by Xenophon among those that joined with the Medes under
their King Cyaxares Son of Astyages, in his War against the Chaldeans, which
ended in the destruction of that Empire.

13. But as to the Conduct of these against Babylon, the Prophet Ier. LI. 27.
showed how it should be, in the next words. Appoint a Captain against her,
cause the Horse In the English Ier. LI. ^7.
Bible, it is, her horses; but the word her is not in the Hebrew, nor is horses
in the plural.
to come up, as the rough Caterpillars; for so they appeared as having their
Backs all bristled with Sheaves of Arrows. Thus the people of Elam are Esai.
XXII. 6.
described in their fighting Attire, being all (...) Horsemen, bearing the
Quiver, Esai. XXII. 6. where the word Perashi^, that signifies Horsemen,
shows plainly Bochar^. Geogr. S. IV. 10. and Casielli Lex. in (...).
whence the Elamites came to have the name of Persae (or as they are now called
Pharsi) they being anciently noted for Horsemanship above all other Nations.
Xenoph. Cyrop, (...). 3, says of Persia, that it was so mountainous a country,
that it was rare to see a horse in it, And there were none but Foot in Cyrus
his Army; till after his first victory over Crasus. Then he mounted them on
Lydian horses, and taught them all Horsemanship; upon which they so valued
themselves; that, as Xenophon says, in his time, no Persian of any credit
would be seen on foot by his good will. Xen. Cyrop. IV. 3. That* Humor
continues among them to this day. But that was extraordinary, which S^bo tells
us; That this was inscribed on the Tomb of King (...), (...). I was the best
Horseman, and Archer. Stra^. XV. 730. D.


14. Of these Persae Camby^s was King, but in dependence on namely, by CYRUS.
Cyaxares King of the Medes, at that time when the war broke out between him
and the King of Babylon. Cyrus, who Xenoph. Cyr. l. 2.
is said to have been son of this Cambyses, by Mandane Sister of King Cyaxares,
having Ib. 1. 5.
then brought the Persian Troops into his Uncle's service, was by him made
Captain General of all his forces in that war. There can be no doubt but it was
He, with his Persian Troops, that was intended in that Ier. LI. 27.
Prophecy of Jeremy, LI. 27. because he is named by the Prophet Esaias, as we
shall n. 33.
afterward show. And therefore we may be assured that King Cyaxares, together
with King Cambyses beforementioned, were they that were called the Kings of
the MEDES v. 11, 28.
in v. 11, 28. of that Chapter.

15. The War continued many years, in which Cyrus went on so They came, and
took the City of Babylon.
successfully, that at last he came to besiege the King of Babylon himself in
that his Capital City. It was a City, Her^d. I. 178, 179.
which by walls of incredible height and strength, with deep and wide ditches
about them, was made quite impregnable in all men's Opinion. But it was much
stronger Ib. I. 186.
by the great River Euphrates running through it, out of which river the
ditches were filled with water, as high as they pleased that were to defend the
place. That King was so secure of the strength of it, that having laid up all
sorts of provisions, for a siege; of many years, Her^d I. 190.
as Herodotus says; of twenty years, Xenop^ Cyrop. VII. 5.
as Xenophon says; he spared not on the usual Festival days to feast all his
great men; which was something extraordinary in a besieged City. But his Feast
being joined with evcessive drinking, that gave opportunity to the Besiegers to
make a short end of their work. For Cyrus, knowing before hand when a great
Feast, probably their Ath^n. Deipnosoph. XIV. from C^esias, and Berosus. Their
Sheshach (Ier. XXV. 26,) is Ven^s. in all the Rabbis Comments, as Broughton
says, p. 122. of his works.
Sacea, would be; Her^d. I. 178, 179.
had employed a great part of his Army in cutting a vast number of Drains, to
be opened all at once, and so to let out the River at that very Time. And then,
having made all things ready for an Attack, he caused his Army to take that
way, all along, in the channel, where the Water being Her^d. I. 19^.
then no higher than to the middle of the thigh, they entered the City at
midnight, Xenoph. Cyrop. VII. 5.
when all that should have defended it, were either drunk or fast asleep. And
then King Belshazzar himself being Xenoph. Ib.
killed, whether by the Enemy, or by his D^n. V. 30.
own Servants, the City became an easy Prey to the Medes and Persians. This
whole account we have, partly from Herodotus, but chiefly from Xenophon in his
Cyropaedia. The first of these Writers was born within the^escore years of the
time, and the other not very long after. There is no reason to think that
either of them had ever read Daniel's History: and yet having, as they tell us,
received their Informations from the people of those Countries, we cannot
wonder that in all these things their Histories do so well agree with his
writings.

They differ chiefly in the Names of Persons; Daniel calling him Darius the son
The Heathen writers, not having the same Names that are in* Scripture,
accounted for, by their common changing of Names in the Eastern* Nations.
of Ahasuerus, whom those Greek writers call Cyaxares the son of Astyages; and
Daniel calling him B^shazzar, whom they call Labynitus, or Nabonidus, whom also
the Astronomer's Canon calls Nabonadius, and Josephus calls Naboandelus. But
this cannot be strange to any one that considers the manner of those Eastern
Nations. At Babylon Daniel himself, as he tells us, had his name changed to
Bel^shazzar. And of the Three that were brought thither with him, every one had
a Chaldee Name given him instead of his Hebrew. So among the Persians likewise
Zerubbabel was called Sheshbazzar by Cyrus when he put him into the Govenment:
and Esther, being made Queen, had her name changed to Ha^assa. Of their Kings
themselves, the two that came between. Cyrus and Darius, whom Ezra chapter IV. 5,
7. calls Ahasuerus and Artaxerxes, are called Cambyses, and Smerdis the Magu^,
by the Greek Historians. It were easy to add more examples; but these may
suffice to show that where in the Eastern Histories we read different names of
Persons, we are not from thence to conclude that they' are not the same
Persons; but rather to judge of them by what we read of their. Actions, and of
their other Circumstances.




16. This was that which God had foreshewn to King Belshazzar DARIUS the Mede
had that Kingdom.
himself by the hand writing on the wall, together with Daniel's
Interpretation. Dan. V. 25 -- 28. which will be farther considered in the n. 24.
following Discourse. Especially the last Dan. V. 25 -- 28.
words of it, Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and the Persians.
These Nations being joined with several others in the Action of taking the
City, doubtless they all shared the spoils of it among them according to Ier.
XXV. 14. -- XXVII. 7.
Ieremy's Prophecies. But for the Government of it, that fell into the hands of
their General CYRUS the PERSIAN, from whom, as it Dan. V. 31. (...)
is worded Dan. V. 31. DARIUS the MEDE Xenoph. Cyropaed. VIII. 5. It seems he
came not to Babylon.
received the Kingdom, being about threescore and two years old.

17. That K. Darius ever came to Babylon himself, is scarce to be found in any
writer that lived near his time On the contrary we find in the Astronomer's
Canon, that, after the seventeenth year of Nabonadius, (or Naboandelus, if that
be a true reading Ios. Ant. X. 12.
in Josephus, who says that so they carled K. Belshazzar) that seventeenth
year being his last, the next year was the first of Cyrus in their account,
without any mention of Darius between. But then, whereas Xen. Cyropaed. VIII.
Xenophon makes the reign of Darius to have been Two years over Babylon, and
then gives seven years to Cyrus; the Astronomers give all these Nine years to
Cyrus, which is a certain proof that, in all that time, they at Babylon never
saw any other King there but Cyrus,
. And Xenoph. Cyropaed. VIII. 5.
Xenophon tells us, that after the taking of Babylon, Cyrus stayed there till
he had settled all things according to his mind; then he went to give an
account of it to Cyaxares. Wherein, Ib. VIII. 9.
as Xenophon says, he told him such things of the place as might have tempted
him thither; but that he was either in love with his Ecbatana, or much
indisposed for travel. This last is the more likely; for Xenoph. Ib.
it appears that he dyed about a year after.

18. Cyrus, as we are told Ios. Ant. X. 12.
by Josephus, brought the Prophet But Cy^us came to him at E^batana, bringing
Daniel thither with him.
Daniel thither with him, to show K. Cyaxares the man that had given such
proofs of a Divine spirit that was in him; not only by foretelling this Change
to Belshazzar, but even much greater things before to K. Nebuchadnezzar; who
thereupon had advanced him to the highest trusts in his Realm. What followed
thereupon to Daniel, the Reader will find n. 45.
partly here, but more fully in Dissert. I. There he married the daughter of K.
Da^us, who declared him his Successor in his Kingdoms.
his life.

19. But as for Cyrus. with King Cyaxares's leave, he went presently to see his
Father and Mother; who were yet living in Persia, but Xenoph. Cyrop. VIII. 7.
it seems dyed not long after. Thence he returned to Media, where King
Cyaxares, who before had promised Cyrus to give him his only daughter and Heir,
now, probably finding himself in a decaying Condition, Ib. VIII. 5.
hastened the Marriage; and declared him withal to be his Successor in all his
Kingdoms and Dominions. They were then, by the Conquests that Cyrus had made,
come to be no less than a hundred and twenty Provinces; Da^. VI. 8, (...), 15.
Dan. VI. I. all which were governed at that time by the Laws of the MEDES and
PERSIANS. But here it may be observed, that afterward, when Cyrus had added
some Provinces more, and Egypt also was conquered by his Son Cambyses; then,
in the time of K. Ahasuerus, they were risen to the number of CXXVII Provinces,
Esther I. 3. 14. 18
Esther I. 1, which were all reckoned into the Kingdom of B^nsia and Media, v.
3, 14, 18. and were governed by the Laws of the PERSIANS and the MEDES verse. 19.
v. 19.

20. Thus every thing came to pass according to Daniel's Dream, that The first
Empire in Dan. VIII.
he had in An. 553. before Christ. (being the second of the four in Dan. VII.)
the third year of Belshazzar, together with the Angel's Interpretation. His
Dream was concerning the second Monarchy, of those four which he had seen like
Beasts* coming up out of the Sea. (d) Dan. VII. 2. There this second appeared
like a Bear, -- verse. 6.
v. 6. But here he saw it in a m^ different figure, VIII. 3.
Dan. VIII. 3. like a Ram with two borns, (...) ^han the other, and the higher
came up last. The Angel gi^ (...) Interpretation of it, -- v. 20.
v. 20. The Ram which thou (...) ^ns, are the Kings of Media was there said to
be of Media and Persia.
and Persia. Both these Kingd^ (...) ^he horns of one Beast, they were both
joined together in one (...). But whereas that Empire was headed, at first, by
the Kings of the Medes, of whom the last was that King Darius, whom the Greeks
call Cyaxares all this while mentioned; here the other horn was growing up in
his Nephew, and Son in Law, Cyrus the Persian. And so that which all this while
had been called the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, now came to be called
the Kingdom of the Persians and Me^

21. It was now the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians (...) The M^des had the
^dence ^n (...) ^ime.
time when this Prophecy was given; for Da^. IX. 1.
the Text says, i^ (...) the first year of DARIUS of the Seed of the Medes,
who (...) King of the Realm of the Chalde^. We have seen ho^ (...) MADE so by
Cyrus taking that City, in the night when Belshazzar was slain. There ended the
XVII years of King Belshazzar's reign. The next year was the first of Cyrus's
Nine years N^ reigned 17 years, and after him Cyrus. 9 years. P^l. Can. and
Berosus in Josephus against Ap^. 1.
according to the Astronomer's Canon; but the first of D^ according to Xen.
Cyropaed. VIII. The OCCASION of God's sending Daniel this Prophecy.
Xenophon, who ^ckons Two years of the (...) to Darius the Sovereign Prince,
while he lived; and only the other seven to Cyrus, after the dea^ of K. Darius,
when Cyrus had no other King over him.

22. Having cleared those Historical things, concerning the Person to whom; and
the Time when, this Prophecy was given; it remains to give some accoun^ of the
(...) of it: which must be something very extraord^, as the Prophecy it self
was, the like having never been given sin^ the Creation.

23. In (...) con^ of the Babylonian Empire, which was indeed He had now seen
the fulfilling of many Prophecies.
on (...) ^ccounts a wonderful Act of God's Providence, the Jews that w^ (...)
Captiv^ at Babylon could not but (...) and admire the ha^ (...) which was how
as it were visibly reached forth (...) An^ (...) Ch^ proves the (...) K. A^rus
was the same whom the (...) call Darius Hy^.
But still the old style remained in the (...), (...)
from Heaven to avenge them of their Enemies. And it could not but affect them
the more, having so much reason, as they had, to expect that the same good
Providence would show it self next in their Deliverance out of the Babylonian
Captivity.

24. First, in what had already happened, according to the Account that we have
see n. 15.
given of it, they saw the fulfilling of that Prophecy of Daniel, which he had
given to Belshazzar but a few hours before his death.

This King had made a great Feast to a Thousand of his Lords, and other great
men, which no doubt was the same that, as Cyropaed. VII.
Xenophon tells us, was fatal to the City of Babylon; and also to him and his
Empire. Toward the end of that alt, while King Belshazzar was The latest of
these Prophecies was that of the Handwriting on the Wall.
sitting yet at his Table, he sa^ pa^ of a man's hand come out of the wall just
before him. T^ w^ surprising enough. But it was so much the more, to see tha^
(...) ^ngers of that hand were then writing something on the W^. What it was
that they wrote, the King himself could not read, nor could any that were there
present with him. But the King could not doubt but that, whatsoever it was, it
must be something that highly concerned him. And therefore he sent for the wise
men of Babylon, whose College was not far from the Court, to hear what they
could say of the matter: offering very high, and even extravagant rewards, to
any of them that should read and interpret this writing. They all confessed
that it was past their skill; which made the King the more impatient to know
what it should be. Thereupon his Mother, or Grandmother; (probably the wise
Dan. V. 10, 11.
Queen. Herodot. I. 188.
Nitocris,) minded him of one that in King Nebuchadnezzar's time was admired
for his knowledge in such matters. Daniel was the man; so he was sent for in
have; and being brought in before the King, at his Command, he both read Daniel
read it publicly.
the writing, and gave him the Interpretation.

The result of it was, in the words before cited, Dan. V. 28.
thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. This another
would not have adventured to say. But Daniel had a greater than the King to
bear him out; and knowing this, he showed himself to be not only void of fear,
but above those rewards, as high as they were, that had been offered to Him, as
well as to those others before him. As Soon as they were mentioned to him, he
immediately refused them. And yet afterward, when the King, in a sort of
drunken bravery, would needs force them upon him; he took them, as public
testimonies of his doing that wonderful thing which no other could do. And so,
as the King had ordered it, Proclamation being presently made, all the Court
came to know what it was that Daniel had Prophesied, some hours before they saw
the first step of the Accomplishment. It began with that unhappy King's death;
which it was fulfilled the same night.
followed the same Night after the feast, as both Herodotus, and Xenophon tell
us; and immediately after Daniel's prediction, as it follows these words, Dan.
V. 30.
In that very night BELSHAZZAR King of the Chaldeans was slain.

25. But besides this Prophecy; which, being made so publicly This minded the
Jews of their ancient Prophecies against Babylon.
known, no man then living in Babylon could be ignorant of; there were also
many other Prophecies which God had given his chosen people the Jews before
their being carried to Babylon; and which they had ever since kept among their
sacred writings. Wherein God had foretold them the fates of that City and
Kingdom, with sundry of the most remarkable Circumstances; so particularly
described, that any of those Jews that lived in Belshazzar's days, which was
the Chief time of fulfilling those predictions, if they looked into their own
Scriptures, might read there many of those things which now happened before
their Eyes.

26. They might see how ne^r ^wo hundred years since, upon occasion
particularly, those of Esaiah.
of Senacherib's coming up a^st Judah with a design of making a conquest of
God's people, the Prophet Esaia first denounced the Judgments of God that
should come on Senacherib himself, and his people the Alsyrians, Esai. X. 5,
etc.
Esaia X. 5. etc. Then how he went on to denounce the like against the
Chaldeans that should succeed them in that design, and should go through with
it, for the Punishment of God's people for their disobedience. The Jews in
Daniel's time had in their hands the Burden of BABYLON, which ESAIAH bb --
XIII. 1.
did see XIII. 1. There they saw it foretold how God would lift up his banner
against Babylon, -- v. 2.
ver. 2. gathering the Kingdoms of the Nations together, and mustering them to
the Battle, -- v. 4.
v. 4. the weapons of his indignation to destroy the whole land -- v. 6.
v. 6. But particularly, as it has been already see n. 12.
shown, they saw that God would stir up the MEDES against Babylon, Esai. XIII.
v. 17.
ver. 17. It has also been see n. 13.
shown from Esai. XXI. 2.
Esaia XXI. 2. that the Persians were to come in the head of this Army, for so
they are called first to the Service, Go up O ELAM, besiege O MEDIA; which
Prophecy given so many Ages since, the Jews now saw fulfilled by the Armies of
CYRUS, and DARIUS. So again XLI 25.
Esaia XLI. 25. God says of both these together, I have made my Levies from the
North, and one shall come from the East to Babylon. Media is on the North, and
Persia on the East of it. But it was he on the East, namely CYRUS, that was
fittest for this Service; and therefore he is called to it particularly, XLI 2.
and XLVI. 11.
Esaia XLI. 2 and XLVI. 11. His people the Porsians, who chiefly worshipped the
Sun, were above that sort of Idolatry of the Chaldeans, Herodot. I. 131.
that worshipped the Images of Dead men. The chief of their Deities were Bell
and Nebo, Esai. XLVI. 1.
Esaia XLVI. 1. The first of these two was certainly the Founder, the other
(perhaps Nabonassar,) the Restorer of that Monarchy. But their adored Images of
Gold and Silver Esai. XLVI 6.
ver. 6. were to those Persians no more than so much old plate. They would make
no scruple to break them in pieces, and carry them away, XLVI. 1, 6.
Esaia XLVI. 1. There seemed to be another God of that sort, that had been
deified since Esaiah's time; That was Merodach, who was also to go with the
other Ier. L. 2.
Ierem. L. 2. But this belongs to another Prophecy which ought to be considered
by it self.

27. It is that long Prophecy against Babylon Ierem. L. and LI. and those of
Jeremiah L. and LI.
which the Prophet received in King Zedekiah's time, and sent it to the Jews
that were there at that time in Captivity. Many of them were of the best of
that Nation; who had been carried thither together with Daniel, and those three
others of the Royal Family, in King Iehoiakim's time; or who went afterward,
as the Prophet Ezekiel did, and many others, together with King Ieconiah. God
was so pleased to send them away from ^salem, before he would pour out his
judgments on that wicked City and Nation. But the mean while, being Captives
at Babylon, many of them were in a very disconsolate Condition. Therefore God
was pleased to let them know for their Comfort, that their st^y there should be
of no long Continuance; when the Will of God was fulfilled on Jerusalem by the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar, and his people, it should not be long ere the like or
greater judgments should be executed on Babylon, and the Land of Chaldea,
Jerem. L. 1. etc. After which God would soon give his people a Deliverance out
of their present Captivity, and would bring them back into their own Land Ier.
L. 4 -- 8 and v. 19, 20. and LI. 5, 10.
Ierem. L. 4 -- 8 and 19, 20 and LI. 5, 10. It is plain from Ezra III. 12, 13.
Ezra III. 12. 13. that many of the Jews, to whom this prophecy was given,
lived to see the fulfilling of it to a tittle; save only the utter Desolation
of that City and Country, which was then foretold, and has been long since
fulfilled, as Travelers see it at this Day.

28. But they saw then in Daniel's time, first the Assembly of great These they
saw now fulfilled.
Nations come up against Babylon Ier. L. 9.
Ierm. L. 9. It was L. 41. and LI. 48.
foretold they, should come out of the North, L. 41 and LI. 48. The Medes did
so, and those other Nations mentioned, LI. 27.
Ierem. LI, 27. whose Kings, being subject to the Median King, are therefore
LI. 11, 28.
called Kings of the Medes, Ierem. LI. 11. 28. That the Median should come
himself, it is not said; but that there v. 27.
should be (...), a chief Captain, or General over them, v. 27, attended with
Troops of horse, bristled like Caterpillars, that is Archers, as we see n. 13.
have explained it. These Troops now appeared to be Persians; and their Prince
Cyrus, who came in the head of them, Ier. L. 42. LI. 27.
had the Command of all this Army, Ierem. L. 42. LI. 27.

The Jews now saw what a Spoil all these Troops made in Chaldea, as was L. 10.
foretold, Ierem. L. 10. how they v. 21, 23, 24, 28.
wasted, and utterly destroyed all the Country, v. 21. up to Babylon it self,
v. 23, 24, 28. and also v. 29.
encamped against that City round about v. 29. Now they saw the Sword upon the
Chaldeans, and on the people of Babylon, on them of all ranks and conditions;
as was v. 35, 36, 37.
foretold, v. 35. 36. 37. At last they came to see v. 38.
the waters gone from about Babylon v. 38. LI. 36.
her Sea dried up. LI. 36. which was perhaps the great pool of Queen Nitocris.

29. This last thing is placed next before the Destruction of that Especially
in the taking of Babylon.
great City. For, as see (...). 15.
we have shown from the ancient Historians, the River Euphrates being let out,
and the Herodot. I. 191.
Chanel of it made fordable, so that the water thereof came not up above the
middle of the thigh, which was all brought to pass in one Evening; then the
Persians went down into the Chanel, and waded through it; making their way with
fire and sword into the City. So that, as Herod. ibid.
Herodotus says, both ends of it were taken, before they in the middle of the
City knew any thing of it.

But it was from the End, ^t which they first entered, that the news came to
the Court. The ^ophet foretold it would be so, in Ier. LI. 31.
these words Ierem. LI. 31. one post shall run to meet another, and one
messenger to meet another, to show the King of Babylon that his City is taken
at one end. It seems he was asleep, and was wakened with the news. For as
Xenoph. Cyrop. VII. 5.
Xenophon says, when a party of them that best knew the Place, being detached
by Cyrus for that purpose, had broken into the Royal Palace, there they found
him (...). lb.
they found the King got up on his Legs, and having drawn his Sword to defend
himself. But, as Xenophon further says, they soon dispatched him, and those,
that were with him; or, as the Prophet words it, they laid him to sleep again,
and that Ier. LI. 39, 57.
for ever, Jerem. LI. 39, 57.

30. In this last Instance they saw how true it was which the and the End of
that Empire in Nebucadn^zzar's Son's Son.
Prophet Jeremy had elsewhere foretold, that the Babylonian Empire was to last
no longer than the Reigns of Nebucadnezzar, and his Son, and his Son's Son,
Ier. XXVII. 7.
Jerem* XXVII. 7. This Prophecy of Ieremiah's was written in the first year of
King Nebucadnezzar v. 1.
XXVII. 1. The Jews now living when Daniel writ this, had seen that Empire,
after Nebucadnezzar's death Ios. An^. X. 1^.
continued in his Son Evil-Merodach: and in Belshazzar, who was his Son's Son,
Dan. V* 11, 28.
Dan, V. 11, 28. they saw how God had made an end of that Empire. They saw many
other things happen, which they could not but observe to be exactly the same
that had been foretold in those Prophecies which they found recorded in their
Scriptures.

31. But above all the rest, when they saw that City of Babylon all this done
by a Persian.
taken by one that came out of Persia, a Country that lay East from Babylon;
and especially when they heard that his name was Cyrus* they could not but
remember what was written of such a one in their Scriptures, above a hundred
years before this Cyrus was born. It was Esai. XLI. 2.
foretold by the Prophet Esaia XLI. 2. That God would raise up a Righteous man
from the East; and again, in a Prophecy against Babylon, XLVI. 1.
Esaia XLVI. 1. that he would call a bird of Prey, a fighting Prince, v. 10.
from the East v. 10. that God would give the Nations before him, and make him
rule over Kings; that they should XLI. 2.
be dust to his Sword, and driven stubble to his Bow^; they could not but
observe, how God laid such weight on these Prophecies, that he challenged them
of Babylon to produce any such predictions as these; that had been given out so
long before, by any of their Gods, which the Goldsmiths had made, and the
Carpenters set up, for them to worship XLI. 7. XLVI. 6, 7. and him coming from
the North,
Esaia XLI. 7. XLVI. 6, 7.

32. In the former of these Prophecies, XLI. 25. there is added something more
of that Eastern Prince, that he should come immediately XLI. 25.
out of the North, (and so Cyrus did come from the North against Babylon,) this
is not only introduced with such a Challenge, in these words, v. 22. 23.
show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods
v. 22. 23, but also it follows, v. 26.
v. 26. who has declared from the beginning that we may know? etc. So again in
the XLVI. 9.
other Prophecy, Esaia XLVI. 9. 10. God assumes the whole Glory to himself; not
only of foretelling what shall be, Declaring the End from the Beginning, and
from ancient times the things that are not yet come to pass, but also of
bringing them to pass in the time that he had prefixed; saying, my Counsel
shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.

33. But that which God chiefly insists on, as a most clear Demonstration CYRUS
by Name.
of this, is his naming the very man that should be his Instrument in doing the
work that he had foretold he would do. God had thus named Josiah some hundreds
of years before he was born, that by him he would destroy all that Jeroboam had
built for his Idolatrous worship 1. Kin. XIII. 2.
at Bethel, 1 Kings XIII. 2. And God having raised up Josiah, and made this
Prophecy known to him, he came thither to Bethel, and ordered every thing to be
done according to that Prophecy. In like manner now God declared that he would
raise up a King named Cyrus, to deliver his people out of the Babylonian
Captivity, and to order the building of his Temple at Jerusalem, and that He
should build the Temple.
Esai. XLIV. 28.
Esaia XLIV. 28. saying of CYRUS, he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure. God declares that by his performing of this he would evidently prove
that he was the only true God. v. 24 -- 27.
v. 24 -- 27. Again XLV. 1.
Esaias XLV. 1. Thus says the Lord JEHOVAH to his Anointed, to CYRUS, whom I
have enabled to conquer Cities and Kingdoms; this I do, that thou may know
that I who call thee by thy Name am the God of Israel.

34. That Cyrus did know this, it appears by the Edict he put forth Cyru^ knew
of this Prophecy.
in the Ann. 536. before Christ.
first year of his Reign over Babylon, Ezra I. 1.
Ezra I. 1. It was the year in which K. Darius dyed, Ann. 606. before Christ.
that was the 70th year from the fourth of Iehoiakim, according to Ieremy's
Prophecies Ie^. XXV. 1, 10.
XXV. 1, 10. In the preamble of this Edict Cyrus declared, that JEHOVAH* the
God of Heaven (so called in opposition to Idols) had given him all the Kingdoms
of the Earth, and charged him (even CYRUS by Name) to build him an house at
Jerusalem.

So great, and so wise a man, as he was, would never have said this to the
honor of a God whom neither he nor his Forefathers had known; and whom he now
knew to be the God of no other but a Conquered people, that were come to be his
vassals, and slaves. Especially, he would not have said it in such a public
Act as this was: if he had not Read what was written of himself in those
Prophecies; and if those Prophecies themselves had not been so well attested to
him, that he could have no reason to doubt, but that they were of that Age in
which they were pretended to be written.

35. It is not to be imagined that Daniel had not read all those But he could
not build it yet.
Prophecies. No doubt they were his Comfort, and his Hope, the whole time of
his Captivity: and therefore, when he saw them all fulfilled to the last,
namely the Promise of his people's deliverance; that being the chief thing of
all, he could not but be greatly concerned to see that fulfilled, as well as
the rest. But yet it did not come presently after Cyrus's taking of Babylon.
For the Power that Cyrus had there at present being only under King Darius, who
perhaps knew nothing of the Jews at that time, or at least had given no order
concerning them; therefore when Cyrus had done all that he had Commission to do
there at Babylon, he left it; and, as it seems, taking Daniel with him, he went
to King Darius in Media; and leaving Daniel there, went on into Persia, as it
has been see n. 18, 19.
already shown.

36. There being no appearance all this while of any thing done This made
Daniel think of Two Prophecies, each of LXX weeks.
for God's people, or to be done now Cyrus was gone so far from them; this was,
in all likelihood, that which put Daniel upon searching into BOOKS, as he tells
us he did, Dan. IX. 2.
Dan. IX. 2. He knew and was fully assured, that the time of their Deliverance
was not far off; but he had a Mind to know how much longer they were to wait
for it. And where should he look to find this, but in those Prophecies of
Scripture that set forth the time during which they were to be in Captivity?
There are two such Prophecies in the Collection of Ieremy's writings. We call
that whole Collection the Book of JEREMY; but the Prophet himself called each
of these Prophecies, a BOOK. And in two of these BOOKS there is express mention
of a time of seventy years, which God had prefixed for two very different
purposes. One was for the duration of the Babylonian Empire: the other was for
the time of his people's Captivity. We shall speak of both these particularly.

37. The first of these was the BOOK, which Jeremy. prophesied 1. that after
LXX weeks God would punish Babylon.
against all the Nations therein named, Ier. XXV. 13.
Ierem. XXV. 14. There it is said, these Nations shall serve the King of
Babylon 70 years: and it shall come to pass, when 70 years are ACCOMPLISHED,
that I will punish the King of Babylon, and that Nation, says the Lord, v. 11,
12.
v. 11, 12. The Time spoken of in this Prophecy should begin Ann. 607. before
Christ.
in the third year of Iehoiakim: for then it was, that Nebucadnezzar came up
against Dan. I. 1.
Jerusalem, and besieged it, Dan. I. 1. This time being reckoned by Chaldee
years, whereof 70 are very near see DISSERT III.
equal to 69 Julian, must necessarily expire in the first year of King Darius.
And so it came to pass; for in Ann. 538. before Christ.
that very year, those 70 years being ACCOMPLISHED, God did punish Belshazzar
King of Babylon, and his Nation, as it has been already shown.

38. The other (a) BOOK (for so it is called in the Original) a a (...)
was the Ier. XXIX. II. that after LXX weeks, he would bring back his Captive
people.
Epistle which Jeremy sent from Jerusalem to his Brethren that were in the
Babylonian Captivity. In this Epistle, among other things, the Prophet says,
thus says the Lord, AFTER 70 years be ACCOMPLISHED at Babylon, I will visit
you, and perform my Good Word toward you, in Causing you to return to this
place, Ier. XXIX. v. 10.
v. 10.

It was in the fourth year of Iehoiakim that Nebucadnezzar smote the Army of
Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt at Charchemish, Ier. XLVI. 1.
Ierem. XL. VI. 1. And then it was that he took Jerusalem, and brought
Iehoiakim under Tribute, XXV. 1.
Ierem. XXV. 1. At which time also he carried away Daniel, and many others,
together with a great part of the Vessels of the Temple, to Babylon. Dan. I. 2.
II Chron. XXXVI. 7.
Dan. I. 2. 2 Chronicles. XXXVI. 7.

In that Ann. 606. before Christ.
fourth year of Iehoiakim was the beginning of the 70 years of Captivity; which
years, according to that Prophecy, must be ACCOMPLISHED at Babylon. There were
just so many Chaldee years from the fourth of Iehoiakim till Ann. 537. before
Christ.
the second year of year of Darius inclusively. And AFTER these 70 years were
ACCOMPLISHED, then God was to visit his people, and to cause them to return to
Jerusalem: accordingly this came to pass in the first year of Cyrus. Ezra I. 1.
Ezra I. 1.

39. That there were just 70 Chaldee years from the third year of Daniel saw
that the first LXX years were past, and Babylon punished.
Iehoiakim till the first of Darius, and so likewise from the fourth of
Iehoiakim till the Second of Darius, this will be Dissert. III.
afterward shown in the proper place. The mean while, by what has been said,
the Read^r ^ay understand that which Dan. IX. 2.
Daniel says, IX. 2. In the ^st year of HIS, that is, of K. DARIUS'S Reign, I
Daniel understood by (...)
BOOKS, the number of the years whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah
the Prophet, that he would Accomplish 70 years in the Desolation of Jerusalem.

40. By these (...) He saw the second year near past, but nothing done for his
People;
BOOKS, or Prophecies, Daniel understood now, in the first year of DARIUS, that
his People were within a year, or little more, of being restored from their
Captivity. And though, at this time, he was for his own part in a most
prosperous and flourishing Condition, Dan. VI. 2, 3.
Dan. VI. 2, 3. such as drew upon him the Envy of them that were the Chief men
about King Darius, v. 4. etc.
v. 4, etc. yet he considered not Himself, nor any thing that he enjoyed, nor
any thing that could happen to him. All his thoughts were taken up with those
Promises of God, concerning his people's Deliverance, and especially the
building of the Temple at Jerusalem.

41. These Promises being made without any Condition, God was He knew they must
Pray for it.
sure to perform for his Truth's sake, even to them that should have no benefit
by it. The Benefit would be only to them that were qualified by Faith, and
Obedience, and that sought it with fervent Prayer. All this, Daniel could not
but know to be so, according to the General rules of God's dealing with his
people. But besides, he knew that, as to these part^cular Promises, God was
pleased I^. XXIX. 12, 13, 14.
in the Prophecy it self to charge them with this Condition; that whosoever
would receive any benefit by them should obtain it by Prayer, he should not
have it otherwise. This God had expressly -- verse. 1^.
required of his people v. 12. Then shall you call upon me, and you shall go
and pray unto me* and I will hearken unto you. And you shall seek me, and find
me, when you shall search for me with all your Heart. And I will be found of
you, says the Lord, and I will turn your Captivity, etc.

42. It is more likely that also at this time his People having been He Prayed,
and joined Fasting with it.
for many years Captives at Babylon, had contracted much Impurity by living so
long in that Idolatrous City and Nation. And that Righteous man, dwelling among
them, might have seen and known so much of this, that though he could not doubt
of God's Truth in performing his Promis^ (...) he might fear least the
Generality of his people might be very (...) to receive any Benefit by it.
Therefore he not only prays for their Deliverance, (...) he joins fasting with
it, and Confession of those Sins by which they (...) made themselves unworthy
of that Mercy, Dan. IX. 3, 4.
Dan. IX* (...)

43. First, as for Daniel's Fast on this occa^ (...) ^rs to have He kept a
strict Fast.
been only for One day. But how strict a Fast it was, he expressly tells us. It
was not such a fast as, he says, he kept Dan. X. 2, 3.
in the third year of Cyrus, Dan. X. 2, 3. That was not so properly a fast, as
a MOURNING for three full weeks v. 3. that is for -- 1. 13.
one and twenty days together, v. 13. All which time he eat no (...)
pleasant Victuals: particularly, no flesh, nor wine came into his mouth; nor
did he The Persians used to anoint themselves every day, delicately and
profusely. P^in. Not. Hist. XIII. 1.
Anoint himself; he used no manner of delicacy. But then he kept his Fast, as
devout people do among us, their Passion week* or as many do their whole Lent,
as well here, as in other Countries.

But this one days Fast, on this solemn occasion, was joined with Dan. IX.
(...).
Sackcloth and Ashes v. 3. These are higher expressions of ^row than were used
in any ordinary Fast. They were such (...) King of Ninive used, for the
averting of the Judgments of God* (...) were denounced by the Prophet (...)
III. 6.
Jonas against him and his people, Jonas III. 6. Whether he did it by the
Prophet's advice, or out of a mere natural sense of Religion. In like manner
did E^. IV. 1* 2, 3.
Mordecai, and many other of the Jews, afflict their souls for the Sins of
their People, when they were at the very brink of Destruction. Daniel now did
the same, he sought the Lord by prayer, with Dan. IX. 1* 2, 3.
Fasting, and Sackcloth, and Ashes, out of a holy fear, lest his people by
their Sins should obstruct their approaching Deliverance.

44. In the next place, as to Daniel's Prayer, here are several things Of
DANIEL'S PRAYER.
to be observed in it. As namely, First, The Time: This, as we shall show in
it is proper Tract. IV.
place, was at one of the Hours of Prayer; and particularly at the Ninth Hour,
which was the time of the Dan. IX. 21.
Evening Sacrifice. Secondly, The Ceremonies that he used in his Devotions: of
these here is nothing expressed, but only this, which Daniel says of himself,
v. 3. Dan. IX. 3.
I set my face unto the Lord God; meaning thereby, toward the Ruins of the
Temple of God at Jerusalem, as he shows Dan. VI. 10. v. Grotium in ^oc.
elsewhere, Dan. VI. 10. Thirdly, The Substance of his Prayer. This he IX. 20.
divides in two parts* the Confession of his Sins, and his People's; and his
Supplication to God; IX. 20. Before all, he begins with an verse. 4.
Address to God, the same that was afterward used by Neh. I. 5.
Nehemiah in his Prayer on a like occasion. His Confession of Sins, we shall
Tract V.
show, he also begins with a Dan. IX. 5.
set Form; composed by King Ps. CVI. 6.
David, and prescribed by his Son (...) Kin. VIII. 47.
Solomon to the used by God's People when they should be in Captivity, as (...)
were now in Daniel's time.

45. But for these Circumstantial things; the use of set forms of
Circumstantial things are only touched at.
Prayer* the Hou^ of Prayer that Daniel observed; and the Ceremony abov^ (...)
they do all deserve a longer consideration than we ca^ (...) them in this
place, so our enlarging upon them here is not ^ry for the understanding of this
Prophecy. And therefore a farther discourse upon these is reserved for some of
the Tract. IV. and V.
Tracts that are to follow in the end of this work. As to our present business,
it will be sufficient to observe those things in Daniel's Prayer to which the
Angel plainly refers in any part of his Answer, but especially in the words of
this Prophecy.

46. In the first place, whosoever reads Daniel's Prayer, and well In the Main,
it shows us his excellent Spirit;
considers it, cannot but admire his excellent temper of Spirit, made up
wholely of Humility and Self-denial, and of ardent Zeal for God's Glory, and
the good of his Church. There is a wonderful mixture o^ (...) these together
that shines forth throughout his whole Prayer: for which, as it was intimated
see (...). 1, 2, 3.
before, the Angel that brought him this Prophecy, told him in his Preface to
it, that he was GREATLY* BELOVED OF GOD.

47. First, to speak of his Humility. Throughout the first part of his Humility*
(...) Prayer, which is chiefly a Confession of Sin, he every were joins his
own Sins with those of his People; as if He had been one of the Number of them
that had drawn down those heavy Judgments of God upon themselves and their
Nation; of whom a great part were destroyed, and the rest were now, as he was,
in Captivity in a foreign Land. But he does more than this, he calls that
whole part of his Prayer Dan. IX. 4.
MY CONFESSION, v. 4. And so at last, all the matters of his Confession, he
sums up in these words, I was confessing MY SIN, and the Sin of my people
Israel. He speaks as if he had been the Chief Sinner of Israel; He Ezekiel. XIV.
14, 20. see Dissert. I.
whom, See Usser. Ann. 594. before Christ: and remember this Prayer was I^o
D^ll, that is, in the year before Christ 537; near threescore years after that
Prophecy.
above fifty years before, all they that were then in Captivity with him at
Babylon looked upon as so great a Saint, that they hoped to be delivered on the
account of his Holiness.

48. In the second part of his Prayer, which he calls his Supplication his
Self. Denial;
to God; first, as to the Matters he had to ask in it, this holy man was so
intent on the concernments of his People, that he quite left out himself, as if
he were not worth thinking of. It may indeed seem as if he had not any thing to
ask for himself; being then as great as the greatest King in the World could
make him, in his worldly condition. But besides, he could have no concernment
himself in that which he was chiefly to ask for his People. His great suit for
them was that God would put an end to their Captivity, that they might return
to their own Land. But that was above Ezra VII. 9.
four months Journey, too much for a Man of his Age, being then above See
Dissert. I.
Ninety years old. Yet now, at this age, being first Minister of State in that
great Empire he underwent perhaps a greater toil, for his People's sake, than
that Journey would have been. And he continued in it, Dan. VI. 28.
even till King Cyrus's time. It was four years at least, till the third year
of Cyrus; after which God was pleased to give him his dismission. Dan. XII. 12,
13.
Dan. XII. 12, 13. His Zeal for God's Glory will appear in the Arguments that
he uses in his Prayer, which we shall presently come to consider.

49. But first, something more must be said of the Persons, and his Concern for
God's People, especially for the City of Jerusalem;
things that he prayed for. He asked only in general for his People, that God
would bring them back into the Land of their Fathers. But there he seems to
have thought of nothing but the City of Jerusalem. It is that which he insists
upon more than any thing else in his Prayer. It appears by his mentioning this,
five or six times at least; whereas he does not mention the Temple more than
once, though that was surely the most valuable thing in that City. Both these
Daniel Dissert. I.
had seen in their Glory, in the end of King Iosiah's Reign, though he was very
young at that time. But Jerusalem he could never forget, nor no Captive at
Babylon could, that had read those passionate words in Ps, CXXXVII. 5, 6. King
David's beloved City.
Ps. CXXXVII.

50. The Royal Psalmist himself could not but have a vehement affection See Ps.
CXXII.
for that City, on many accounts. It was that which he, having taken it from
the Iebusites, first made the Royal Seat of his Kingdom: afterward, having
brought the Ark of God thither, he made it the Mother Church of all Israel: and
to perpetuate that Privilege to it, he would have built a Temple there for the
God of Israel, but that God made him leave the doing of that to his Son
Solomon. But without that Addition, the City alone David called Ps. XLVIII. 1.
the holy Mountain of God, Ps. XLVIII. 1. And so did Daniel in this Dan. IX.
16, 24.
Prayer, v. 16. which the Angel refers to, verse. 24. It was the City of
Jerusalem that was called the holy Mountain by God himself, Zech. VIII. 3. Now
indeed it was nothing but a Mountain of Rubbish, without either Houses or
Walls. It was as David foresaw it would be, a heap of Ruins without any
Inhabitant; and he made several Ps. LXXIV. LXXIX, LXXX, CII, CVI, CXXXVII, all,
or most of them: see Tract. V.
Psalms for it, when it should be in that condition. One of those Psalms, Ps.
CVI. it may reasonably be presumed Daniel had in his mind, when he used the Ps.
CVI. 6.
words of it in his Prayer.

51. It may well be enquired, what the reason should be, why not so much for
the Temple.
Daniel in his Prayer speaks so Dan. IX. 7, 12, 16, 18, 19.
often of the City of Jerusalem that lay then in ruins; and scarce The Only
mention of the Temple in Daniel's prayer verse. 17. where the word (...) thy
holy place, is rendered the Sanctuary: But some take that to be the same which
the Angel calls thy holy City, verse. 24.
once mentions the Temple of God which was in the same condition. This deserves
to be thought of so much the more, because the Angel in his Answer to Daniel,
takes verse. 24.
notice of his praying for his holy City, and in his Prophecy tells him of a
Dan. IX. 25.
Commandment that there would be for the building of Jerusalem; upon which the
Wall should be built, and the Street; but the Angel says nothing of the Temple
in his Answer, nor promises any thing of it in his Prophecy. But at last,
(...) verse. 26.
where he speaks of the death of the Messiah, he says that after that, both
the City and the Temple should be destroyed. In these last words it was plainly
employed that there was a Temple to be built, for there was none in being at,
the time of this Prophecy: and it must be Built before it could be destroyed.
But there was no Promise of this.

52. Now the reason of Daniel's saying so little of the Temple, he knew that
would forth with be built.
and therefore the Angel's saying nothing of the rebuilding of it, was plainly
this, that Daniel was perfectly secure that the Temple should be built; the
Angel also knew that he was so; having God's word for it, not only that it
should be done, but that it should be now within a year or two. He also knew
who should Order the doing of it. He saw and knew the Man, even CYRUS by name;
of whom God had said, Esaia XLIV. 28.
it is He that shall perform all my pleasure; saying to Jerusalem, thou shall
be built; and to the Temple, thy Foundation shall be laid.

53. It was little more than a year after this that King Darius But he knew not
when the City would be built.
died; and Cyrus being his Successor did give out that order, upon which soon
after Ezra I. 1.
the foundation of the Temple was laid, according to that Esai. XLIV. 28.
Prophecy of Esaiah: But that was all that was done to it in Cyrus's time; the
building of the Temple being put off till the Ezra IV. 5. 24.
second year of King Darius, which was some fifteen years after. No doubt Cyrus
gave also order, or leave, for the building of Houses at Jerusalem, for the
dwelling of those few that had to do about the Temple. But for the Generality
of the People that came up from Babylon, Ezra II. 70.
they went to live in the Cities about which their Inheritances lay; so that
after all that Cyrus had done, there were no more than scattered Houses or
Sheds for present use at Jerusalem. There were Neh. VII. 4.
no Streets built to make it a City; and much less Walls to make it defensible
till the II. 1.
twentieth year of Artaxerxes, which was above seventy years after this. When
that would be done, Daniel had no manner of View; there being no Prophecy in
Scripture concerning it, till that which the Angel now gave him in this Dan.
IX. 24.
Prophecy of LXX weeks. Here indeed, the Angel, being to set the Time from
whence he was to date the beginning of these weeks, told him v. 25. these weeks
were to begin verse. 25.
from the going forth of the Commandment to build Jerusalem again: and that
there might be no mistake of his words, the Angel showed what Commandment he
meant, by adding what was to follow upon it; namely Ib.
that the Wall should be built, and the Street, even in a straight of Times.
This was clear to them that lived in King Artaxerxes's time, when they came to
see the Neh. II. 5, 6.
Issuing forth of that Commandment of his, in the year of his Reign Neh. III,
VI, etc.
before mentioned. And to Us it is as plain by reading the account of it in the
Book of Nehemiah, who lived at that time, and was employed by that King in that
building.

54. But Daniel, who lived so long before, being wholely ignorant Therefore he
prayed for that chiefly.
of this, till he had this intimation of it from the Angel in the words of this
Prophecy; it is no wonder that he was so passionately concerned for the
rebuilding of the City of Jerusalem; as we see he was, by his so often
repeating it in his Prayer for his Church and Nation; that being their Center
of Union, in all their Civil affairs, as well as those of Religion.

55. We are next to show the ardent Zeal that he had for God's He also showed
his Zeal for God's Glory, in the Arguments that he used in his Prayer.
Glory; which especially appears in the Arguments that he made use of for the
speeding of those his Petitions. He made use between whiles of Arguments drawn
from the Attributes of God, that are known, even by the light of Nature, to
them* that have no Divine Revelation. Dan. IX. 4, 7. 9, etc.
Arguments from the Wisdom and Power, the Truth, and Holiness of God; his
Justice, and Goodness, and Mercy; all these do afford us helps in Prayer; some
of them for the strengthening of our Faith, and Hope, and Resignation to God;
others also to mind us of those Divine qualities, in which we are, as near as
we are able, to conform our selves to the Image of God: and thereby to qualify
our selves for those Mercies and Blessings we ask of him, which is the most
proper use of such Considerations.

56. But this holy man did especially insist on that Privilege that especially
in praying for the Jews, as God's People.
the Jews had above all other Nations, on the account of their particular
Relation to God. He shows it all along in his Prayer; where, speaking to God,
he calls him, sometimes Dan, IX. 9, 15.
the Lord our God, v. 9, 15. sometimes verse 10, 13, 14.
JEHOVAH our God verse 10, 13, 14. And of the ^ewish Nation he tells him, We
are thy People, verse. 15, 16.
v. 15, 16. thy People that are called by thy Name verse. 19.
v. 19. All the Jew's Prayers for their People and Nation are full of such
Instances as these.

57. To show what ground they had for this, it will be necessary A DIGRESSION.
to look so far back into the Jewish Origins, that some may think it a tedious
Digression from our main Business. But we hope they will think otherwise, when
they see the Use of it in our explaining of some parts of the following
Prophecy by such Notes as they will find in this Disquisition.

58. The Jews have an ancient Tradition in their Talmud, which Of the Rabbis
three Olams.
divides the whole Age of the world into three Olamim, as they call them. The
first they call Olam Tohu, the Age of Emptiness, being all that which passed
before their Divine Revelation. The second they call Olam Tora, the Age of the
Law, which contains all that space of time from the Call of Abraham, Genesis XII.
till the coming of the Messiah. The other they call the Age of the Messiah,
which is to extend from his coming to the end of the world. To each of these
Ages there was assigned by their Tradition the space of two thousand years.
That reckoning of years the present Jews would be glad to be rid of; for, if
that Tradition be true, the Messiah is come, and gone, above a thousand years
since. We see v. Raim. Mart. pugio ^d. II. 10, 1. etc. Hoornb. de Conv. Iud.
II. p. 180.
what miserable shifts they are driven to for the avoiding of this.

59. But for their account of the three Ages here mentioned, we the threefold
Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace.
have no occasion to differ from them about that. It is plain that God has so
ordered a threefold dispensation of the Covenant of Grace to Mankind in that
Estate into which we are fallen by the sin of our first Parents. The first
Dispensation began with that Gracious Promise of Genesis III. 15.
the Seed of the Woman, which God made to them immediately after the Fall. We
all acknowledge this to have been the first promise of the Messiah. The History
of the Creation, together with this; and afterward the History of Noah's
Flood; was doubtless conveyed from ^e to age by unwritten Tradition. And the
knowledge of these ^ings, together with something of Instituted worship, being
added to the Natural Religion, was all that God gave Mankind to conduct them in
the way to Eternal Life during that whole first Dispensation. Afterward, when
God had given us a sufficient trial* what shift Human Nature could make without
any other helps than those before mentioned, then he proceeded to a second
Dispensation, wherein he superadded to the former an immediate Divine
Revelation. With this he was pleased to entrust one particular Nation; not only
to be the Depositaries of it, but also to be Patterns to all the rest of
Mankind, by living up to it, as he had reason to expect that they should during
that Dispensation. Then at last, it pleased God to begin a third Dispensation,
by sending his Son into the World, with the most perfect Revelation that ever
shall be given to Mankind; causing this to be put in writing, for the use of
all future ages even unto the end of the world.

60. For that second Dispensation, of which we are to speak par especially the
second, being that of the Jewish Church.
ticularly at this time, God made choice first of Abraham, a Man of such
Godlike qualities, that he was therefore called the 2 Chronicles. XX. 7. Esai. XLI.
8. Iam. II. 23.
Friend of God. To that excellent Man God first gave the Promise, that there
should be one of Genesis XII. 3.
his Seed, in whom all the Families of the earth should be blessed, Genesis XII.
3. which promise the Jews understood of the Mess^as, and accordingly St. Paul
applied it to Gal. III. 1^
Christ, Gal. III. 18. After this, God was pleased to establish a Covenant with
him, that he would be a God to Him and his Seed, Genesis XVII. 7. For a lasting
token whereof, God gave him first the mark of Genesis XVII. 1^
Circumcision in his Flesh; and ordered that to be continued on all his male
Issue that should be born into the world. The first of these, namely Isaac, was
called Genesis XXI. 12.
the Seed of Promise, as being not only the Ancestor of Christ, but also a most
lively Type of him in sundry respects; but especially in his being offered up
by his Father in Sacri^ce to God, as the Apostle observes, Heb. XI. 17, 18, 19.
Hebr. XI. 17, 18, 19. This Covenant God having first made with Abraham,
personally, by the Name of ELSHADDAI, that is Genesis XVII. 1.
God Almighty, Genesis XVII. 1. did afterward by the same name confirm it in his
son XXVIII. 3.
Isaac, XXVIII. 3. and after him to his son XXXV. 11.
Jacob, XXXV. 11. and after him to a NATION that should come out of his Loins.
This was in effect an Exclusion to all the rest of Abraham's Seed, and of
Isa^c's also, from being of the National Church.

61. But yet this Covenant of God he did never appropriate to the First in
Egyp^ God called them to be a National Church.
Seed of Jacob, or Israil* till above two hundred years after his death. They
were then in the land of Egypt, whither at first they came only Genesis XLVI. 27.
LXX persons in number There went thither of Abraham's Seed only Jacob himself,
and L^IV Sons and Grandsons of his, together with one daughter, Di^, and
Grandaughter, Ser^; and there they found Joseph and his two Sons, which made up
that whole number of LXX. Genesis XLVI. 7 -- 27.
Genesis XLVI. 7. -- 27.
. In that space of time they were so increased that they came to be Deuteronomy X. 22.
like the Stars of Heaven in multitude, Deuteronomy. X. 22. In little more than half
that time their Numbers had made them formidable to the Egyptians, Ex. I. 7 --
10.
Ex. I. 7. -- 10. insomuch that they thought it necessary for their own safety
to make them the. In order to that, first they brought them under such a
slavery as -- v. 14.
made their lives bitter to them, v. 14. When that would not do, (...) were for
-- v. 22.
drowning all the (...) ^ren as fast as they came into the world, v. 22. No
other sort of (...) could seem strange after this. Under which that poor people
(...) ^o way to help themselves, but by their sighs, and groans, and cries to
God against their oppressors, Ex. II. 23, 24.
Ex. II. (...) 24* God heard them, and was graciously pleased to let them kn^
^t he remember^ (...) Covenant with their Fathers.

62. He appeared to Moses for that purpose Ex. III. 6.
Ex. III. 6. and Sent by Moses, from JEHOVAH, their God,
gave him Authority to let them know that now in this woeful condition he would
take them to be his chosen People, and he would be their God, according to his
promise made to their Fathers. He also gave him Power to work* IV. 1 -- 9.
Miracles for the proving of his Mission from God. But it being a thing then
unheard of, that any People should have a God without a Name; and Moses saying
his People would expect one, III. 13.
III. 13. God was therefore pleased to let them know that they should call him
^ir God by the (...) ^VAH, that is, the Eter^al Being* And accordingly Mo^
having so proved his (...) that the E^ers of Israel belie^ed him, took them
with (...) (...) King of Egypt, and told him, J^HOVAH the God of the He^ is
called upon us It is (...) Ex. III. 18.
(...). But it should be (...) in that plac^ (...) V. 3.
(...)
so it is rendered in both these places in the Sept^agint, and also in Onk^los,
and in ^rom's Latin Transla^on which shows that they that made those
Translations had it ^us (...) And so the meaning is plain* the name JEHOVA^ ^s
(...) (...) is* (...) has given us that name to call o^ ^ people ^o, that they
may serve me Ex. V. 1, 3.
^

63. (...) being provok^ ^ yet worse, He found them weak and perve^.
which so dishe^ ^ Mos^ would have them, they even ^ell but wi^ ^ V. 21.
(...) Then God was plea^d ^ and with^l to al^ ^ their Father^ by the name of
Ex. VI. 3.
^ (...), Ex* ^ by the name that he had now assume^ ^ VI. 7.
(...) I will take you to ^ shall kn^w that ^ from (...) the ^ were so ^unk
with opp^ ^ God could no^ them aga^. The would not ^o mu^ (...) to Mos^s (...)
VI. 9.
^ ^ ^ (...) XIV. 1^. and given to Ido^atry.


^ ^aith ^lsewhere, (...) ^ing wor^ ^. They ^ k Ez^k. XX. 7.
^ (...) Thu^ (...) More Nebochim. 1. 6^.
Hen^ ^ thy People, being D^ IX. 19.
(...).
of Egypt; insomuch that even now, when he said, I am JEHOVAH your God, they
would not hearken to him, Ezekiel. XX. (...).
v. 8. They would not forsake the Idols of Egypt It seems that from the
Egyptian Apis, and Mnevis, they took that Idea of their God, in which they made
A^n set up a Golden Calf for them to worship, Ex. XXXII. 4
Ex. XXXII. 4.
. This was such a provocation to God, that he was ready to have poured out his
Fury upon them, even there in the midst of the land of Egypt: but forbore to do
that XX. 9.
for his Name's sake, verse 9. that the Egyptians might not say that he had
begun a work, and could not go through with it, Deuteronomy. IX. 27.
Deuteronomy. IX. 27. Moses has other reasons, which led him to this; as namely, God's
love to their Fathers which made him choose Israel for his People Deuteronomy. IV. 37.
Deuteronomy. IV. 37. his Promise that he had given their Fathers, Genesis XV. 13. 14.
Ps. CV. 42.
Genesis XV. and confirmed it to them, saying, I will bring you up out of Egypt
(f) Ex. III. 17. and having bound this with an Oath, Deuteronomy. VII. 8.
Deuteronomy. VII. 8. he had made it immutable.

65. It being therefore so determined by God, that his People must God sent him
to Phar^h, with Miracles;
come out of Egypt: and there being no other way to gain their consent, much
less to bring Pharaoh to it, but by Miracles; therefore God employed Moses that
way, first to Pharaoh, and afterward to his own People. Moses first goes to
Pharaoh in the name of JEHOVAH the God of Israel, Ex. VII. 1.
Ex. VII. 1. and shows him such signs as the Egyptian Gods, which were ver. 11,
12.
Devils, however they might Ape him by their Magicians, could not do it so
artificially, but that all present might see how short their Miracles were of
those which Moses wrought in the Name of Jehovah his God. But Pharaoh's heart
being so hardened as not to be wrought upon by gentle and innocent signs, God
ordered Moses to inflict those Plagues upon him, which would surely compel him
at last.

66. There were Ten of these in all. The three first were wrought with ten
Plagues
only in those parts of Egypt about the River Nilus, in which God's People were
not so greatly concerned. But by the last of those three, the plague of Lice,
the Magicians themselves were convinced, and Ex. VIII. 19.
told Pharaoh, that this was the finger of God. This came too late, for now he
was hardened to that degree that there was no further hope of doing any good
upon him: therefore then God ordered Moses to work the following Plagues in
such sort, as might convince his own People.

67. And therefore these Plagues being such as went over the not touching God's
People.
whole land of Egypt, God ordered them so as that they should not touch VIII.
^2.
the Land of Goshen in which his People dwelt: and even where his People were
mingled with the Egyptians, God put a visible distinction between the one and
the other, ver. 23.
v. 23. This appeared most remarkably in the ninth plague, which was of X. 21.
thick darkness over all the land of Egypt, for three days, in which they saw
not one another, neither rose any from his place all over Egypt: for even then
v. 23.
all the Children of Israel had light in their dwellings. Here was such an
instance of the Almighty power of JEHOVAH their God, and of his especial
Providence over them, administered by his Servant Moses, that now whatever he
had to command, they could not but be ready to obey.

68. Therefore now, before God's inflicting his tenth and last He takes them
into Covenant.
plague on the Egyptians, viz. the killing of their First born, upon which he
foresaw they would not only permit, but beg, and hire his People to be gone out
of the Country; He took this never to be forgotten occasion to bind his People
to himself, by entering into Covenant with them, and thereby forming them into a
National Church.

69. The way of making the Solemnest Covenants between man by the Sacrifice of
the Passover.
and man was by a Sacrifice, wherein they made God a Party, by pouring the
blood on his Altar first, and then eating the flesh together with one another.
God was pleased so far to comply with the weakness of mankind, that to affect
their Senses the more, he took this way of covenanting with his People. And
withal, to let them know for whose sake, and on what account it was that he did
this, he appointed them such a Sacrifice, as should be the most perfect Type of
the Messias's redeeming Mankind from a Bondage infinitely worse than that of
Egypt; and that, by the shedding of his blood, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot, 1 Pet. I. 18, 19.
1 Peter I. 18, 19.

70. That the Messias's way of Redeeming his People was to be by the chief Type
of the Messiah,
dying for their sins, will be DEMONSTR. II. 1.
demonstrated to the Jews out of Esai. LII, LIII.
Esaiah's Prophecy, as it is clear in the Text, and as it was understood by
their ancientest writers. That the Time of his redeeming his People was to be
on the Evening of the Passover, will Ib. D^M. II. 2.
there also be proved, so as that it cannot be denied to be their most Ancient
Tradition. That Jesus of Nazareth did dye on the Cross in the Evening of the
Passover, is plainly Ib. THEM. II. 3.
told them several times in their Talmud. That the suffering of our Lord Jesus
Christ was plainly foreshadowed by this Type of the Paschal Lamb, will be
showed in the latter part of our Summary of the Gospel. Where also it will be
Demonstrated, First, that our Savior's Death was in the very year of our Lord
33. which was exactly according to the Angel's Prophecy of the Time of the
Messiah being to be cut off, Dan. IX. 26.
v. 26. and that in that year A. D. 33. the Iew's day of killing their Passover
was, not on the Maunday Thursday, as some will have it; but on the next day,
being Good Friday, as we call it. So that our Savior's dying on the Cross was
precisely at the time that was prefixed for the killing of the Paschal Lamb;
Ex. XII. 6.
Ex. XII. 6. viz. on the fourteenth day of the first Month, between the time of
the Evening Sacrifice and the Sunsetting; that is, as it is there worded,
between the two Evenings.

But at present we have only this to observe, that here, by this Federal right
of the Passover, the whole Nation of Israel did enter into Covenant with God,
XII. 47.
Ex. XII. 47. And though there were other Nations that had circumcision, as
namely the Edomites, the Ishmaelites, etc. yet even of them, without being of
the Jewish Religion, none was to be admitted to the Passover, (...) V. 43.
Ex. XII. 43. No stranger was to eat thereof: but only such as, sojourning with
them, had all their Males circumcised, and so became Proselytes of
Righteousness; that is, came over entirely to be of their Religion.

71. No sooner was the Covenant made between God and his People, God delive^
his People out of Egypt.
but he immediately performed the first act of his part of it, by bringing them
out of the Egyptian bondage.

72. And now he immediately took them under his Protection; of He brought them
through the Red Sea.
which they were assured by that visible sign of a Pillar of Cloud by day, and
of Fire by night, that went before them as often as they marched, and when they
rested, stood just over them, E^. XIII. 21.
Ex. XIII. 21. Besides having now these visible proofs of God's presence with
them, and of his Providence over them, continually before their Eyes; they
could not so soon forget how within two days before he had on their account
killed Ex. XI. 5. X^. 29.
all the Firstborn of Egypt, both man and beast, and Pharaoh's among the rest;
which surely ought to have made them trust in God, against all the Power of
Pharaoh and his Host. But no sooner these appeared to be now in pursuit of
them, and the Red Sea was in sight just before them; but though at first they
cried out unto the Lord, they forgot him presently, and were in d d Ex. XIV. 10.
open Mutiny against his Servant Moses, verse. 11, 1^.
Ex. XIV. 10, 11, 12. They would not stir a foot, till they saw v. 19, ^0.
the Pillar come behind them, and appear between them and their Enemies. Then
also, upon Moses stretching out his hand, they saw the Sea divided before them;
so that, going into the midst of it v. 21.
on the dry ground, they saw the waters a wall to them, on the right hand, and
on the left. At last, when they were quite passed through, the next morning,
they saw all the Host of Pharaoh that followed them drowned in the Sea; there
remained not so much as one of them, XIV. 2^.
v. 28. and then, seeing all this, they believed the Lord, and his Servant
Moses, v. 31.
v. 31.

73. This one would have thought should have never gone out They were murmuring
on all Occasion^.
of their heads; but there appeared little remembrance of it three days after.
For then, only upon finding no water where they passed, but what had a
bitterness in it, they presently murmured against Moses, XV. 24.
Ex. XV. 24. Much more some weeks after, when their Victuals were spent, then
the whole Congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, would to God
we had died by the fleshpots in Egypt, when we did eat bread to the full: for
you have brought us forth to kill us with hunger in this wilderness, Ex. XVI.
2, 3.
Ex. XVI. 2, 3. He truly told them, your murmurings are not against us, but
against the Lord, v. 8, 9.
verse. 8. and he has heard them, v. 9. This God immediately showed, by the
shining forth of his Glory in the Pillar of Cloud then just over them. And
forthwith he told them by Moses, Ex. XVI. v. 12.
this Evening you shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall be filled with
bread. Accordingly it happened. v. 13.
That Evening the Quails came up, and covered the Camp: and in the Morning the
dew lay round about the Host, v. 13. That dew was Manna, of which they made
their bread all those 40 years that they were in the wilderness. It fell v. 21.
every morning, but on the Sabbath day: for which there was a constant
provision by their gathering a double quantity on every sixth day: whereupon
they received their first precept of observing v. 26, 28.
the Sabbath.

After this, one would think there should be no place left for any farther
unbelief. But they fell into it again, upon the want of water in that place
where they encamped in the wilderness. For this, they not only murmured against
Moses, but they outright chid with him, and were almost ready to stone him, Ex.
XVII. 1 -- 4.
Ex. XVII. 1. -- 4. Nay they went farther in their Rebellion. v. 7.
They tempted the Lord, saying, is the Lord among us, or not? God showed them
he was, by v. 5.
bidding Moses take the Elders of Israel with him, and in their sight smite the
Rock with the Rod in his hand: whereupon there came out such a stream of water,
as supplied all their present needs. And not only so, but it followed them
wherever they went in the wilderness, till the fourtieth year after this. Then,
upon their coming back to the Red Sea, where this stream of water ran out, they
were at a loss for water again; and thereupon they broke out into a second Number.
XX. 2.
Massa and Mereba, worse than the former, Number. XX. 2, etc.

74. But all the Instances that we have given, hitherto, except this God still
bore with them, and took care of them;
last, were within 40 Days after their coming out of Egypt. And it is
remarkable that, during all this time, notwithstanding all their great
provocations, God made them no other return but in deliverances and blessings.
Of this kind there was one more than we have yet mentioned; viz. the Victory
that God gave them over the Ex. XVII 8, etc.
A^alekites. These their unnatural Brethren looking upon them as no other than
heartless slaves, that had never seen fighting, and had no other Arms but what
the Sea threw up together with the dead Bodies of the Egyptians; fell upon
them, Deuteronomy. XXV. 18.
faint and weary, as they were with their Journey, and smote all the hindmost
of them; not doubting to have taken the rest, with all the riches of which they
had Ex. XII. 36.
spoiled the Egyptians, Ex. XII. 36. But Moses orderd Joshua to draw out all
the men of Israel that were likeliest to fight, and to lead them against the
Enemy. He did so; and God showed them to whom they owed their Success, by
ordering that to attend the motions of Moses's hands It is hand in the singular
Number in the Hebrew text, but hands in the Samaritan and LXX.
in his prayer. Ex. XVII. 11.
When he held them up, Israel prevailed: when he let them down, Amalek
prevailed. But Moses seeing that, and finding his hands to grow weary, verse. 12.
got help to keep them up till the Evening; and so obtained a complete Victory
for Israel.

75. With this farther Instance of God's good Providence over He brought them
to M. Horeb.
them, they came to Mount Horeb, in the wilderness of Sinai. It is that which
Moses calls the Mount of God; for it was there he had the vision of God in a
Ex. III. 1. 2.
flame of fire in a bush. And there first God gave him the charge over his
People, and a promise withal Ex. III. 12.
that when he had brought them forth out of Egypt, they should serve God on
that very mountain, Ex. III. 12. As soon as they were come thither, XIX. 3, 4,
5.
Moses went up forth with to God, who called to him out of the Mount, saying,
thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel; ye have seen what I did to the
Egyptians, and how I bare XIX. 3 -- 6.
you on Eagles wings, and brought you to my self. Now therefore, if you will
obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then you shall be a peculiar
treasure to me above all People, etc. Upon his bringing them this Message from
God, v. 8.
they all answered together, v. 8. all that the Lord has spoken we will do.
Hereupon by God's Command, v. 10, 11.
v. 10, 11. to make the more Impression on their souls, they sanctified
themselves, by washing their Bodies for three days together with the Baptism of
Repentance So the Jews understand it, as the learned Seldom shows Seldom. de
Syned. 1. 3. p. 24, etc.
at large in his Book de Synedriis. The whole manner of it is described in that
command of God for Lev. VIII. 7.
Sanctifying of the Levites, Lev. VIII. 7.
. They joined strict Abstinence with it, Ex. XIX. 14.
Ex. XIX. 14. And so being ready against the third day, then being brought by
Moses to the bottom of Mount Sinai, there they saw and heard from the Top of it
all those Glorious and dreadful sights and noises, v. 18. and XX. 18.
of thunder, and lightning. and clouds, and the voice of a Trumpet exceeding
loud, the Mountain smoking like a Furnace above, and the earth quaking under
them: so that all the People being stricken with Terror, removed, and stood
afar off. It seems they did this even while God was speaking to them. For, as
it presently follows, v. 19.
they said unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God
speak with us, lest we die. These were surely such Evidences of an Almighty
power, that all they that were present at that time, if they had any sense in
them, could not but, (as God told Moses, they should, on this Conviction,) Ex.
XIX. 9.
believe him for ever, Ex. XIX. 9.

76. What it was that God spoke to them, we see Ex. XX. 1 -- 17.
Ex. XX. He gave them the Law at M. Sinai.
1. -- 17. Where first, by way of Preface, he minded them that he had performed
his part of the Covenant, in these words; verse. (...).
I am JEHOVAH thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, etc.
Then to let them know what he expected on their part, he spoke to them those
Ex. XXXIV. 28. Deuteronomy. X. 13.
Ten words, as God calls them, which we call the Decalogue; being the ten
Precepts of the Moral Law. The first of them was in these words, Ex. XX. 3.
Thou shall have no other God before me (...) being in the singular Number,
shows that it should be rendered, thou shall have no other God. And by those
words (...) before me, it was intimated to them, that if they had any other
God, they could not hide it so, but that the great JEHOVAH must see it.
. The second is in these words, verse. 4.
thou shall not make to thee any graven Image, or the likeness of any thing,
that is in Heaven, or Earth, etc. thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
worship them, for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God, etc. intimating that
however he might bear with the Idolatry of other Nations, yet he could not
endure it in his own People: no more than a Husband can Adultery in his own
wife; which, if he knows, he will surely punish, if he be able.

77. God knew what need there was of using such threatenings to a Warning them
especially against Idolatry.
People that were so inclined to Idolatry. And therefore the more to secure
them against that; when he had gone through all the rest of his Ten words, as
it were in one breath, he returned to this against Idolatry: for so we see it
again, verse. 22, 23. v. 22, 23.
The Lord said unto Moses, thus shall thou say to the Children of Israel; you
have seen that I have talked with you from Heaven, (from thence Deuteronomy. IV. 13,
15.
you only heard a Voice, but you saw no similitude,) therefore take heed, and
do not make with me Gods of Silver, nor Gods of Gold. This plainly shows what
the especial danger was, against which God thought fit to provide for the
safety of his People in Religious matters.

78. After this God gave them a Body of Ex. XXI, XXII, XXIII.
Political and Judicial He gave them the Judicial Law.
Laws, chiefly for the keeping of that vast number of People together, and the
Governing of them, in Civil Society. Then Moses having Ex. XXIV. 3, 4.
written all these in a Book; as well the Ten words beforementioned, as also
the Judgments now delivered; did by God's Command call all the People
together, and read the Book in their hearing. Which having done he v. 7.
bound them to the observation of these Laws, by v. 8.
an especial Covenant made by Sacrifice for that purpose. And to make the
stronger impression on their minds, he first sprinkled Ex. XXIV. 6.
half the blood of the Sacrifice on the Altar of God: and then, having taken a
solemn promise from them, in these words, v. 7.
all that the Lord has said, we will do, and be obedient; then he sprinkled
the other half of the blood on the People, saying to them, v. 8.
Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning
all these words, viz. all the words of the Law, and also of the Judgments
beforementioned.

79. When this Business was over, then Moses by God's Command Moses gets up
into the Mount.
went up to him into the Mount, there to receive Deuteronomy. IX 11.
the Tables of the Covenant from God himself. They were two Tables of Stone, on
which there were written Ex. XXIV. 12.
the Law, and the Commandment, as Moses calls them, Ex. XXIV. that is to say,
Deuteronomy. IX. 10.
the words which the Lord spoke to them out of the midst of the fire on Mount
Sinai, Deuteronomy. IX. The Tables were no bigger than Moses could carry in his hands,
Ex. XXXII. 19. and yet they were cut out of the Rock by the Almighty hand of
God, which also writ all that was contained in them, to give them the more
Authority with his People.

80. There Moses continued in the Mount Ex. XXIV. 18.
forty days and Stays there forty days.
forty nights, neither eating, nor drinking, but wholely taken up with
Attention to God; who delivered to him those Instructions and Laws, concerning
the Ex. XXV -- XXXI.
making of the Ark, and the Tabernacle, and all the furniture of it, together
with all the Utensils for his Instituted worship; and also concerning the
Priest's Vestments, and their Consecration, etc. They were matters in which
there was Ezekiel. XX 25.
no Intrinsec Goodness at all, Ezekiel. XX. 25. And therefore these things were
Ier. VII. 22.
not commanded by God to his People at their first coming up our of Egypt, Ier.
VII. 22. but were superadded afterward, to fill the Eyes and the Ears of a
Sensual People, that seemed to be scarce capable of any thing of Spiritual
Religion; having their minds wholely taken up with the remembrance of those
Pompous and Noisy rites they had seen among the Idolatrous Nations.

81. They showed now a great Instance of this, upon occasion of The People set
up a Golden Calf.
Moses's being so long absent from them, while he was with God in Mount Sinai
forty days. Ex. XXXII. 1.
For when the People saw that Moses delaied to come down out of the Mount in
all that time, they came in a Body to Aaron, whom he had left in charge over
them; and said to him, up, make us Gods to go before us, for as for this Moses,
the Man that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we know not what is become
of him. It was strange indeed, that they that within three months before had
seen all those plagues of Egypt, and their wonderful deliverance from thence;
and had been ever since conducted by the Pillar of Cloud and of Fire; and did
neither eat nor drink any thing, but what came to them immediately from God by
perpetual Miracles; should notwithstanding all this, so Ps. CVI. 21.
forget God their Savior, as to say, it was that Man Moses that brought us up
out of the Land of Egypt. It was yet more strange, that when by their Ex.
XXXII. 22.
importunity and threats they had gotten Aaron to make them a Molten Calf, the
likeness of an Ox that eats Grass, Ps. CVI. 20. they would cry up that as
they did, saying, verse. 4, 8.
This is thy God.... So it is in Neh. IX. 18.
this is thy God, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. But
this was strangest of all that Aaron who had seen the Glory of God, should so
quite forget that, as to build an Altar to this Image of a beast, and make
Proclamation before it, (as if the great God had come down to dwell in it,)
saying, v. 5.
tomorrow is a Feast to JEHOVAH. But however they had brought him to do this,
the People were pleased it was done. And as if it were a God indeed, v. 6.
on the morrow the People rose up early, and offered Sacrifices of all sorts,
as well burnt offerings to this new made God, as peace offerings to feast
themselves with. After which, Ib. 7.
they rose up to play, verse. 17, 18, 19.
singing, dancing, and shouting, as they had seen it done by the Egyptians at
the Feasts of their Idols.

82. On that very Morning Moses being to come down from the Moses intercedes
for them.
Mount, God v. 7.
hastened him away to see what they were doing in the Camp. And it may be
observed, that as they had called Moses v. 1.
the Man that brought us up out of Egyt, so God speaking to Moses called them
v. 7.
thy People which thou have brought up out of Egypt Ex. XXXII. 7. As the People
gave the Honor of that great work from God to Moses, so in effect God bids him
take the People together with it. Their making an Image of the Lord Jehovah
their God was so great a breach of their Covenant with him, after so strict a
charge he had given them to the contrary; that now he might well have rid his
hands of them, and v. 10. Deuteronomy. IX. 26.
consumed them all at once, v. 10 Deuteronomy. IX. 26. And it would not have been
inconsistent at all with his Oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of what he would
do for their seed, in bringing them to the land of Canaan: for that might have
been performed to Moses and his seed, which was theirs; and so here God offered
it to Moses, saying, Ex. XXXII. 10. Deuteronomy. IX. 14.
I will make of thee a Nation mightier and greater than they. Moses could not
hear of this. v. 11.
He besought the Lord his God, that the People of Israel might be his People
still, as ill as they deserved That Title. But his concernment was chiefly for
the honor of God; lest his destroying them might give occasion to the
Egyptians to blaspheme; charging God with Inconstancy, as if he knew not his
own mind in bringing them out of Egypt; or with Weakness, and not being able to
Carry them farther; or that it was out of Hatred to them that he brought them
out of Egypt to do them Deuteronomy. IX. 28.
a Mischief, to consume them there in the Wilderness. Upon Moses's most earnest
Intercession God was pleased to try them farther; laying it upon Moses for the
present to correct what he saw amiss in the People: and for Aaron, whom God
would have destroyed, he Deuteronomy. IX. 20.
Pardoned him on his Brother's prayer.

83. It was so horrible a sight to Moses, when he came to the Camp, He breaks
the Tables.
Deuteronomy. IX. 15.
wiih the two Tables in his hand, (which were Ex. XXXII. 16.
the work of God, and so was the writing on the Tables,) that in a violent
Passion, he v. 19.
threw them out of his hands, and broke them beneath the Mount, to make the
People sensible what they had done in breaking their Covenant with God. Then
with a Just Indignation he verse 20.
threw down the Calf from it is Basis, and melted it, and ground it to powder,
which he Deuteronomy IX. 21.
threw into the Brook that followed them out of the Mount, Deuteronomy. IX. 21. and so
Ex XXXII. 7.
mingled it with the water they were to drink, Ex. XXXII. 20.

84. But for Example's sake he took another course with those bigoted
Idolaters that were now in the midst of their Jollity. He cried out, Ex. XXXII.
26.
who is on the Lord's Side? let him come to me. All those that came in upon
that call were of the Sons of Levi: whom he commanded to take Arms, and fall
upon them, and kill every one of them that came in their way. They did as he
bade them; and so by their hands ver. 2^.
there fell of the People that day about three thousand men, v. 28. This Act of
the Levites, not only expiated the Crime of their Father in killing the
Shechemites; But also, instead of Genesis XLIX. 7.
Jacob's curse, it entitled them to that Blessing, of their being called to the
Ministry of God, to which this was their Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 9, 10.
first Consecration, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 9, 10.

85. But after all, God did not think fit that this, being a National God
requires their Public Repentance.
Sin, should be pardoned without a National Repentance. Moses seemed to fear he
could not bring them to that, in such measure, as might reconcile them to God
for such a breach of their Covenant with him. Therefore he begged that rather
than this Sin should not be forgiven them, Ex. XXXII. 32.
he himself might bear the punishment of it, in this life, instead of his
People. But God was not for being reconciled to them presently, without giving
them such Marks of his displeasure as would make them wiser for the future. At
first he had proposed, instead of conducting them himself, as hitherto he had
done, to turn them over henceforward to a created verse. 34. and Ex. XXXIII. 2.
Angel Ex. XXXII. 34. and XXXIII. 2. most probably to Michael their Prince, as
Daniel calls him, Dan. XII. 2. In the next place he declared that, although
hitherto he had not punished them for any of their Sins, but on the contrary he
had by his Mercy and Justice, as it were, hired them to their Duty; now he
would treat them in another manner for the future: and as often as they fell into
Sin, Ex. XXXII. 34.
he would punish them for it; and that the rather, to bring this particular sin
afresh into their memory. Lastly, to affect them the more, with a Sense of the
Provocation they had given him, Ex. XXXIII. 7.
God caused Moses to remove his Tbernacle that stood in the midst of the Camp,
over which God's Pillar used to appear; and to place it at a distance from the
Camp, that the whole Nation might see the great change of God's Countenance
toward them. The mean while God commanded them to verse. 5.
lay aside all their Ornaments, as a punishment for their abuse of them, in
parting with their Golden Ear rings of which Aaron made them a Golden Calf. At
the hearing of this, they not only verse. 6.
stripped themselves of all their Ornaments, but verse. 4.
put themselves in Mourning, Ex. XXXIII. 4.

86. This set Moses again to his Prayers, with great Vehemence, and forgives
them on Mose^'s prayer.
to beg of God, that he would afford his Presence again to his People. And at
last he did obtain it. God promised, verse. 14.
my Presence shall go with thee, v. 14. and afterward having verse. 16, 17.
repeated it, v. 16, 17. that he would go with them, so as that all People
should know that they were restored to his favor. By this it appears that the
Tabernacle was returned to the Camp together with the Pillar over it, which was
the visible token of his Presence. And then God Ex. XXXIV. 10.
renewed his Covenant with them, promising now again, that he would bring them
into the Land of Canaan. But withal, he obliged them afresh to take heed of
Idolatry, v. 14.
in these words: v. 14. Thou shall worship no other God, for the Lord whose
name is Jealous, is a jealous God.

87. This and some other Precepts Moses received, when by God's Moses a second
40 days in the Mount.
Command he was a second time with him in the Mount, Ex. XXXIV. 28. Deuteronomy. IX.
18, 25. X. 10.
for forty days and forty nights, fasting for the sins of his People. Now Moses
himself Deuteronomy. X. 1.
by God's command had hewed two other Tables out of the rock, instead of those
he had broken. And in these God himself v. 2, 4.
had written the words of the Covenant, even the Ten words, or Decalogue, as he
had done in the former. With these Tables in his hands Moses came down again
from the Mount, Ex. XXXIV. 29.
having beams of Glory on his face, that so dazzled the eyes of all beholders,
that none of the People could look upon him till he had put a Vail over his
face. This was a clear Testimony from God of his approving all that Moses had
done; as well in killing that Idolatrous Rabble, as in all the rest of his
conduct, concerning that matter of the Golden Calf: besides this Right done to
Moses, it was also an Evidence to the People, that now God had forgiven their
sin, and taken them again into his Favor. They could have no greater token of
it than this, that God made his face to shine upon them, as it were, by
Reflection from the face of his servant Moses.

88. After that severe Discipline, which was new to them; since Being come
down, he orders all the Levitical Worship.
God was so gracious as to be reconciled to them, they were, no doubt, much the
more careful to keep within the bounds of their Duty. And it appears that they
did it, not only for the second forty days, when Moses was from them, but for
many Months after his Return, all which time they had very great reason to
believe that God had thoroughly forgiven them. For whereas, soon after the
second forty days of Moses being in the Mount, all those that were above
twenty years old, being numbered, were found to be just 603550 men, Ex.
XXXVIII. 26. Seven months after that, being numbered again, they were found to
be just the same Number. Number. I. 46. So that in all that time of seven months,
there had not died one man of all that vast Number of them of the Children of
Israel that were above twenty years of age. It was Moses his business all this
while to see every thing done according to the Instructions that God had given
him in the first forty days before mentioned. Among these Ex. XXVII. I.
the making of the Ark being one, he employed God's chosen Workman XXXVII. 1.
Bezaleel, who when he had Ex. XXXVII. 1.
done that, then Moses, as God had Deuteronomy. X. 1 -- 5.
commanded him, put into it the IX. 9, 11.
two Tables of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. IX. 9, 11, from which it was called the X. 8.
Ark of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. X. 8. This was now the Symbol of God's presence
with his People. And so it continued to be till by breaking their Covenant with
God they provoked him to that degree, that he suffered the Ark and the Tables
in it to be burnt together with the Temple at Jerusalem: and this even in
Daniel's time.

89. When Moses had made all things ready according to his Instructions Now
going for Canaan.
from God, then the whole Instituted worship of God was put in due course,
according to the Levit. I. II. etc.
precepts he had given in the Levitical Law. Nothing was wanting, but that
God's People might go on to possess the Land which he had promised to their
Fathers. Now therefore in the second year of their coming out of Egypt, and the
second month, on the the twentieth day, the Number. X. 11.
Pillar of Cloud, that was over the Tabernacle, removed, and went before the
Camp. The people followed, as That led them, from Mount Deuteronomy I. 1^.
Horeb through all that great and terrible wilderness, as Moses called it,
Deuteronomy. 1. 19. This was their next way to the land of Canaan. But that was more
than they knew. It was a way They murmur at Taberah;
very grievous to travel in; which was all that they thought of. And it was a
wearisome Journey besides. For the Pillar of Cloud went on Number. X. 33.
three days together without intermission; only resting every night, as it
seems; for the Pillar of Fire is not mentioned. But what with the badness of
the Country, and with traveling every day, many of them were sorely
aggrieved; so that they lagg'd behind; and if others would have done the like,
the Pillar of Cloud might have been left to go by it self. But it seems, when
Night came, the Pillar of Fire punished them for it. For XI. 1, 2, 3.
it burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the
Camp: whence the place was called (...) Burning Number. XI. 1, 2, 3.

90. At their next remove Number. XI. 4.
(...) signifies the Rabble, or scum of the People. They seem to have been the
same that are called (...).
the mixed Multitude that came out of Egypt with the Israelites, Ex. XII. 38.
Ex. XII. 38. The word Ier XXV. 20, 2^.
Ereb there seems to signify Arabs, as it certainly does in Ier. XXV. 20, 24.
They were, no doubt, such as minded their bellies more than any thing else.
This appears by their wishing they had stayed in Egypt, where they had all
those delicacies mentioned, Number. XI. 5.
Number. XI. 5. Not only the Melons of Egypt are delicious; but even the Leeks and
Onions, as Travelers say, eat better than most of the Plums in our Northern
Countries.
the mixed multitude among them and again at Kibr^th Hattaavah.
fell a lusting for flesh to eat. They cried, Number. XI. 20. v. 6.
why did we come out of Egypt, where we had all those delicate things? They
loathed Manna, which the Psalmist Ps. LXXVIII. 25.
calls Angels food, Ps. LXXVIII. 25. coming fresh to them every day from
Heaven. They spoke against God also, v. 19, 20.
verse. 19, 20. questioning his Omnipotence, whether he could give them any
other. God showed them he could, by v. 27.
raining flesh upon them as dust, and winged fowl as the sand of the sea, Ps.
LXXVIII. 27. Number. XI. 31.
A wind from the Lord brought Quails from the sea, and let them fall by the
Camp, Number. XI. 31. The Arabian Gulf, as Ios. Ant. III. 1. p. 72. E.
Josephus says, abounds with Quails above all other things whatsoever: and they
fly extreme low, as he tells us. The text says of their flight, that it was
but two cubits high, so that the People could catch them with their hands. And
they took a vast Number. XI. 31, 32.
Multitude of them, Ludolph. Com. Aethiop. l. 966. is of opinion that (...),
here rendered Quails, might be Locusts: of which, he says, in those parts
there are infinite Numbers; and that they are as big as Birds, that they are
very wholesome, and are more pleasant than young pigeons. He has many Authors
for this, page 179 -- 189.
even for a Number. XI. 19, 20, 21.
whole Month together. They now saw what God was able to do. But they had
little Joy of it: for Ps. LXXVIII. 30, 31.
while the meat was yet in their Mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and
slew (...) etc.
even the healthiest and lustiest Men of all their Nation, Ps. LXXVIII. 30, 31.
It seems the disease that they died of, rotted out the palates of their Mouths:
for it was said, that what they eat should come out of their Nostrils, Number. XI.
20.
Number. XI. 20. But this happened only to them that had murmured; from whom the
place where they died was called Kibroth Hattaava, the Graves where they v. 34.
buried them that lusted.

91. After this, the People being come to Kadesh Barnea, in the Of twelve Spies
sent to Canaan, ten misrepresent it.
Confines of Canaan, Moses told them how near they were to it, and bade them
now, Deuteronomy. I. 19, 20, and 21. IX. 23.
Go up, and possess it, Deuteronomy. I. 19, 20, 21. He told them plainly God would
have them do it; and he would stand by them, so that they need fear nothing.
But, they durst not trust the wisdom of God. They came up to Moses, and
proposed to him, the sending of spies, to search out the Land, and bring word
what way they should go etc. Moses saw no ill in this, and therefore he
consulted God about it. God gave him leave to send one of every Tribe to Number.
XIII. 1, 2.
view the Land, Number. XIII. 1, 2. So Moses sent twelve chosen men, of the chief
of them, with Instructions proper for that occasion, v. 17 -- 20.
v. 17 -- 20. They went, and viewed the Country, and returned after v. 25.
forty days, with their mouths full of the v. 26, 27. Deuteronomy. I. 25.
praises of it; bringing with them some Tastes of the delicate Fruits of it,
particularly See Bp. Patrick on verse 23.
Grapes of an extraordinary bigness. But withal they brought such a frightful
v. 28, 29.
Account of the strength of their Towns, and of the Giants and Giantlike men
that lived there, that it struck the People with such terror, that they would
scarce hear Joshua and Caleb, telling them the Truth of these matters.
Especially when the other Ten, in Opposition to these two, not only v. 31.
persisted in what they had said of the Towns, and of the People; but
contradicted themselves in what they had said before of the Goodness of the
Land. For whereas before they had said, it was v. 27. 32.
a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey; now they said it was a Land that eat
up the Inhabitants thereof, Number. XIII. 32.

92. This put the People into a Rage, insomuch that Number. XIV. 1.
Number. This put all the People in a Sedition.
XIV. 1. all the Congregation lifted up their voice, and cried that night. And
the next day, v. 2.
v. 2. all the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron: and the
whole Congregation said to them, would God that we had died in the land of
Egypt, or would God we had died in this wilderness. Nay more, they plainly
said, it is Deuteronomy. I. 27.
because the Lord hated us, that he brought us forth out of the land of Egypt
hither, for the Amorites to destroy us. They were now for Number. XIV. 3.
returning back into Egypt: which was in effect, the undoing of all that God
had done for them. And to show they were in earnest, they said, v. 4.
let us make a Captain to bring us thither. The hearing of this so struck Moses
and Aaron, that they v. 5.
fell on their faces before all the Congregation. And for Joshua and Caleb, who
would have appeased this Rage by informing them better, v. 10.
all the congregation bade stone them with stones. Which probably had been
done, but that at that instant the Glory of the Lord appeared at the Tabernacle
before all the children of Israel.

93. This was a universal Rebellion, of the whole Israelitish Nation. It was a
brutish perverseness.
That vast number of them, of twenty years old and upward, which were Number. I.
1, 3.
numbered within six months before; was not lessened since, but by the death of
those persons that were cut off for having to do in the two last Mutinies. And
after the first of these two, there were Number. X^. 21.
six hundred thousand of them living, of whom, those that lusted for flesh
being dead of the plague, Number. XIV. 36* 37.
all the rest were engaged in this Rebellion: except only Joshua and Caleb, and
perhaps some few others that were of less consideration. It seems to be a
wonderful thing how they could so utterly forget what they had seen within two
years last past, in Egypt, and at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness, being so
many unquestionable Proofs of God's infinite Power, and of his Providence over
them. And later yet, what they had both seen and heard at God's giving them the
Law on Ex. XX. 19.
Mount Sinai, with such Astonishing Evidences of it, as made them beg they
might hear and see no more such things lest they should dye. It is yet more
wonderful, how they that, when they thought themselves dying, with Ex. XVI. 8.
hunger one time, and another time with XVII. 6.
thirst in the wilderness, being told before hand by Moses both times, that
they should have Bread come down to them from Heaven, and that they should have
Water out of the Rock; they both saw these things come to pass, and had both
their Bread and their Water continued to them ever since by perpetual Miracles.
Most of all it is to be Admired, how they could every day, and even at this
present, see over the Tabernacle a Number. X. 11, 34.
Pillar of Cloud by day, and Fire by night, which they knew was a Token of
God's Presence with them, and of his Care over them: and yet, as if all this
were nothing, should throw off all regard to God and his Ministers; and give up
themselves entirely to follow their own vain Fancies and Lusts, and what other
ill designing men should put into their heads. That this was their case, is
most evident in all their History. They were much like Beasts, that have Sense
and Memory enough; but have no manner of Consideration. They think of nothing
more than the Present, nor even that, when they have been Used to it. This
People were now come to that pass, that they minded the Pillar no more than
Brutes do the Sun, which they see every day. But as Beasts are ^artled with a
sudden Fire, because they know not what may come of it; so this People started
at the sudden appearance of that Glory in and over Number. XIV. 10.
the Tabernacle. That was it that put a stop to their Rage against Joshua and
Caleb. They were now in fear of themselves, lest this Fire might break out upon
them, as that at Tabera did, so lately, even the other day.

94. For that fright they were in, there was more Cause than they for which the
ten Spies dyed presently, the People must all dye in 40 years.
knew of. For now at this very time God said unto Moses, how long shall this
People provoke me etc.? v. 11.
I will smite this People with pestilence. v. 12.
And I will make of thee a greater Nation and mightier than they. God did
accordingly smite those ten Spies that had stirred up the People to this Sin. v.
37.
They dyed of the Plague before the Lord. That the People might not dye in like
manner, v. 13 (...) 19.
Moses vehemently prayed, using the like Arguments as he had done see n. 82.
before at the time of the Golden Calf. And he had the same success. For now
again Ex. XXXII. 14.
the Lord repented of the evil that he thought to do unto his People. He said
unto Moses, Number. XIV. 20.
I have pardoned according to thy word. But withal, God Number. XXXII 10. Deuteronomy. I.
34.
swear he would make an Example of them, such as should be famous to all
Nations. His words were these, all those Men which have seen my Glory and my
Miracles, which I did in Egypt, and in the Wilderness; and have Number. XIV. 22,
23.
tempted me now these Ten times; and have not hearkened to my voice; surely
they shall not see the Land of which I swear unto their Fathers. That their
Tempting of God, first in Egypt, and then in the wilderness, was Ten times in
all, neither more nor fewer, will appear in the following Account out of
Moses's books. That the Men here spoken of were all those that came out of
Egypt at the age of Ten times they had tempted God.
20 years and upward, except Joshua and Cal^b, this appears by what follows
afterward, v. 29, 30. And of these men it was that God said, Number. XIV. 22.
they have seen my Miracles in Egypt, and in the wilderness; and have tempted
me now these Ten times. These Times are therefore to be understood of what
happened in Egypt, as well as what happened in the wilderness. And it was
plainly in Egypt that God first showed them his Miracles. There first he gave
Moses the power to work those three Miracles that are Ex. IV. 1 -- 9.
mentioned Ex. IV. 1 -- 9. for the proving of his Mission to the people of
Israel. Accordingly Moses did show those Signs in the sight of the People; and
thereupon they believed v. 30, 31.
v. 30, 31. But when, upon his delivering his message to Pharaoh soon after,
they saw no other Effect of it, but that by this means Pharaoh was provoked to
use them worse, and to make their burdens heavier to them; Thereupon it was
that the Officers of the Children of Israel fell upon Moses and Aaron with
those bitter words, Ex. V. 20, 21.
Ex. V. 20, 21. This was their first murmuring

I. against Moses, and therein they first tempted God, that had given him the
power of working those Miracles before them.

II. Upon Moses complaint of this to God, he sent Moses to them a second time,
Ex. VI. 2 -- 8.
Ex. VI. 2 -- 8. But when he was about to deliver his Message, they had not
Patience to hear him, v. 9 -- 12.
v. 9, 12. they bid him, let us alone to serve the Egyptians, for it is better
for us to do so than to dye in the wilderness. This was their second murmuring
against Moses there in the Land of Egypt.

III. Afterward, when he had brought them out of Egypt, and they were come to
the very edge of the Red Sea; there seeing Pharaoh and his host in pursuit of
them, they murmured against Moses a third time: Ex. XIV. 11, 12.
Ex. XIV. 11, 12. minding him of the hard words they had given him, that second
Time.

IV. After this, when they were passed through the Red Sea, and come into the
wilderness; there, finding the water to be bitter, at the place which from
thence was called Ex. XV. 23. i v. 24.
Mara, Ex. XV. 23. There a fourth Time the People murmured against Moses, (b)
v. 24.

V. After that, when their Victuals were spent, then they murmured a fifth
time, even the whole Congregation of the Children of Israel; wishing they had
died in the land of Egypt, rather than come to be starved in this wilderness,
Ex. XVI. 2, 3.
Ex. XVI. 2, 3. Thereupon God sent them Manna from Heaven, v. 15.
v. 15. etc.

VI. After that, when they came to want Water, thereupon they murmured the Ex.
XVII 2, 7.
sixth time, which was at the place called Massa and Meriba in the wilderness
of Sin. Hitherto the Long Suffering of God had showed it self wonderfully, in
passing by all their provocations, so that not one Man died for any of them.

VII. The seventh was, when Moses had been receiving God's Commands on Mount
Sinai for forty days; upon which long Absence of his, (who had never been from
them one day before) the People said, Ex. XXXIII. 1. etc.
as for this Moses we know not what is become of him, let us make a God to go
before us, etc. Thereupon they made the Golden Calf; which being the Sin of
Idolatry, God, who had spared them hitherto, now began to punish them for this.
But it was only by cutting off the most notorious Transgressors, and putting a
Penance on the rest.

VIII. Their eighth murmuring was at Tabera, for which many of them were
consumed by the fire of the Lord that burns among them, Number. XI. 1.
Number. XI. 1.

IX. The ninth was at Kibroth Hattaavah, where they that lusted for flesh had
their fill of it, for a whole month, Number. XI. 4.
Number. XI. 4. But they died with it in their mouths, v. 33.
v. 33.

X. Therefore this murmuring against Moses, and this tempting of God, upon the
occasion of the Spies ill Report, was certainly Number. XIV. 1 etc
the Tenth including those two in Egypt. And it was the Act of those Men that
had seen v. 22. 23.
God's Miracles in Egypt, as well as in the wilderness: for he says of those
very men, they have Tempted me now these Ten times. Moses seems to have thought
of the same, when, speaking of this very matter of their Rebellion at Kadesh
Barnea, he told them that this was no new thing: for, says he, Deuteronomy. XI. 24.
you have been Rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you, Deuteronomy.
XI. 24. It plainly appears that they were so, by the Account that He gives us
of their Murmuring against him, and therein their Tempting of God, first in
Egypt, and afterward in the Wilderness, till they had made up the Ten times
above mentioned.




95. This perverse and stiff-necked People having fallen into so many Now he
Sentenced them to dye in the wilderness.
Rebellions against God, within the space of two years from the time wherein he
had first made himself known to them by his Servant Moses; and this last
breaking out being so much more violent than any of the former; it Number. XIV. 11
12.
did provoke God to have utterly consumed them, Number. XIV. 11, 12. And probably
at that v. 10.
appearance of his Glory they expected no other. But upon the Prayer of Moses
he was pleased to pardon this Sin, and to continue them, not only as a Nation,
but as his peculiar People. He did this according to his usual way of joining
^s. CI 1.
Mercy and Judgment together, Ex. XXXIV. 7.
keeping mercy for thousands, and yet by no means clearing the Guilty. He
showed this last at present, by cutting off first those ten persons that had
been the Ring leaders in this Rebellion. Number. XIV. 37.
They died there by the plague before the Lord. For the rest, he forbore them
Dan. VII. 12.
for a season and time, as Daniel words it, that is, some for a shorter time,
and some for a longer. But he passed one terrible sentence on them g Number. XIV.
28.
all; and bound it with an Oath to assure them how it would be, that as they
had wished that they had died in the Wilderness, v. 2.
v. 2. even so it should come to pass. Their Carcases should fall in the
wilderness, h v. 32.
v. 32. And so they died every Man of them, but Joshua and Caleb.

96. This Sentence was given, in or about the sixth Month of the year 1490.
before Christ: and the time of their passing over Deuteronomy II. 14.
Zered, when all that Generation was dead, except Joshua and Caleb; this was
about the sixth month of the year before Christ 1452. so that the Execution was
complete just 38 years after that Sentence. see Uss. Annal.
All the rest of them died in the wilderness, within 38 years all within forty
years.
from that present. But for their Children that came out of Egypt with them,
and had nothing to do in this Sin, Number. XIV. 31.
Number. XIV. 31. God bid Moses tell these Rebels; They, (your Children) shall
know the Land that their Fathers despised. For they shall go thither, and I
will give it them, and they shall possess it, Deuteronomy. I. 39.
Deuteronomy. I. 39. But he told them withal, that their Children Number. XIV. 33.
should wander in the wilderness forty years, according to the v. 34.
number of the days that those Spies were searching the Land. God would have it
so to be, for a perpetual Remembrance, of their Sin, and his Judgment on them
for it. And agreeably to what was said before, God told them withal, It was in
the year 1491 before Christ, Ex. XII. 23.
in the first Month, and on the tenth day of that Month, that by God's Command
the People of Israel chose out their Lambs for the first Passover in Egypt, Ex.
XII. 23. Which Passover they eat on (c) the fifteenth day of the first Month:
and that very night was their coming out of Egypt, Number. XXXIII 3.
Number. XXXIII. 3. But it was in the year before Christ 1451, on the tenth day of
the first Month that the Children of Israel first passed over Jordan into the
Land of Canaan, Ios. IV. 19.
Josh. IV. 19. and there at Gilgal they eat their first Passover on the
fifteenth day of the first month, V. 10. 11.
Josh. V. 10, 11. So that between their choosing of the Paschal Lambs, in order
to their going out of Egypt, and their passing over Jordan to enter into the
Land of Canaan, there was a space of just forty years. And there was neither
more nor less than forty years, between their first Passover in Egypt, and
their first in the Land of Canaan. For this also see Uss. Annal.
within those forty years your Carcases shall be wasted in the Wilderness, v.
33.
Number. XIV. 33. So it came to pass: for within these forty years were all the 38
years before mentioned.

97. When the People saw these Ten spies all dead of the Plague; They would go
up and fight, though forbidden.
then they knew this was a Judgment from God, who might justly deal with them
in like manner. Therefore then they confessed, they had sinned against the Lord
Number. XIV. 40.
Number. XIV. 40. And then to make amends, they were for running on headlong into
the Land of Canaan. But this was contrary to an express Command that God had
given to Moses, immediately upon their refusal before mentioned. On the very
day that they refused to go into Canaan, he bade Moses say to them, Number. XIV.
25. Deuteronomy. I 40.
to morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness, in the way to the Red
Sea. Now on the Contrary, though they confessed, they had v. 41.
sinned against the Lord, in disobeying him; they tell Moses in the same
breath, we will go up, and fight against the Amorites. They added indeed, they
would do it in obedience to God, as being that which the Lord our God has
commanded us. But to take away that excuse, God bade Moses say to them again,
Number. XIV. 24. Deuteronomy. l. 42.
Go not up, neither fight; for I am not among you. But they verse. 43.
would not hear, but Rebelled, and went up presumptuously into the mountain of
the Amorites. There they found things as they had reason to expect, God not
being with them. That Warlike people, being alarmed by the Spies having been so
lately among them The coming of those Spies was not only known to the
Canaanites, but was remembered by them forty years after, Number. XXI. (...).
Number. XXI. They knew that the God of the Israelites had given them that Land,
I^sh. II. 9.
Josh. II. 9.
, had called in the help of their Neighbors, Number. XIV. 4^, 45.
the Canaanites, and Amalekites. And these were all drawn together, to defend
their Country against that vast Multitude of people that were coming to eat
them up. A poor weak Multitude they were at this time, not having God with
them. They found themselves so when they came up to the Enemy. They were now in
their own sight, what the Spies had told them, as Grasshoppers in comparison.
All their fighting men were Number XIV. 45. Deuteronomy. I. 44.
beaten, and chased, and destroyed all the Country over. As many of them as
got back to the Camp, were now thoroughly sensible of their Sins. And no doubt
they remembered the sentence that God had laid on them for it, that, instead of
going into the Good land they had despised, they must now go wandering the rest
of their days in the wilderness. For this they v. 45.
wept before the Lord. They would have got him to take off that sentence: but
that could not be: only this God was pleased to change in it: whereas he had
ordered them to begin their Journey to morrow into the wilderness, and so on
Number. XIV. 45.
to the Red Sea, Number. XIV, 45. Now in compassion to their wounded men, he gave
them leave to lie still Deuteronomy. l. 46.
many days, till they were so well cured as to be able to go with the rest.

98. After this they took their Journey into the wilderness, as God They w^nder
38 ye^rs in the wilderness.
had commanded them. Their way was now directly from Canaan toward the Deuteronomy.
II. 1.
Red Sea: But it was not the same way that they came hither. For now they were
to v. 4.
compass the land of Edom: Deuteronomy. II. 1, 4. first from North to South, till they
came to the Red Sea; and then from South to North, still compassing v. 8.
Idumaea till they came to the wilderness of Moab, Deuteronomy. II. 8. There they were
to pass the brook v. 13.
Zered, v. 13. And so they did, thirty eight years after their coming from v.
14. 1^.
Kadesh-Barnea. In which time all those that came out of Egypt at the age of
twenty years old and upward, were v. 16.
consumed, and dead from among the people. It was a long and tedious Journey,
as God ordered it for them. For it was at his Commandment that they journied,
and at his Commandment they pitched their Camp. His pleasure was fignified to
them by the Pillar, of Cloud by day, and of Fire by night. When the Pillar was
taken up from the Tabernacle, then, after that, they journied: and wheresoever
that rested, there they pitched their Camp. The way of it is largely and
clearly Number. IX. 15 -- 23.
described Number. IX. 15 -- 23. And whereas from Kadesh Barnea to the Red Sea it
was not above Bp. Patrick on N^m. XXXIII. 19.
^en days Journey the shortest way; they made it a Journey of 37 years; in all
which time they had no more than 17 Resting places. So that, if in every one of
those places they had rested an equal space of time every time they had rested
it would have been more than two years. No doubt in some places they rested, a
less time, and in some much longer. Then from Ezion Geber at the Red Sea they
went somewhat quicker to the Brook Zered, which was in the Confines of Moab,
They went it in one year, during which they had no more but eight Resting
places. But now they had been full thirty and eight years in coming from Kadesh
Barnea to the Brook Zered; which, as we are told by one Geo. Synce^us in
Chronogr. p. 142. (...). Paris.
that traveled it himself, is no more than five days Journey. Thus it pleased
God to give those Rebel's time to dye in the wilderness, as every one of them
did within those thirty eight years; in all which time a New Generation was
growing up, which Joshua and Caleb were to bring into the promised Land: and
there to show them how that good Land was belied by their ungrateful and
rebellious Fathers.

99 Of what they did in those first thirty seven years, or what Of their three
last Rebellions.
happened to them in all that time, we have very little Information in History,
only Moses gives us an account of three of their Rebellions in that time: which
showed how far they were from being reclaimed by all their warnings and
punishments.

100. The first of these Rebellions was that which Korah and his (...). that of
Korah.
Accomplices raised against Moses and Aaron. It was, as the Ios. Ant. IV. 1.
Jewish Historian tells us, such a Sedition as never was known among the Greek
or Barbarous Nations. The chief mover in it was Korah, a Levite, whose father
Izhar was Brother to Amram the father of Moses and Aaron. He was himself a
chief man among those of his Tribe: but he was not contented with that. He was
for the Chief Priesthood, if he could get it. But there was no other way to
come at that, but by breaking through the divine Institution of the three
Orders of the Ministry. It was by God's immediate Ex. XXIX.
Command, that Moses had Lev. IX.
consecrated Aaron and his Sons to be Priests; which Act of his God had
confirmed by sending Fire from heaven on their Sacrifice, in the sight of all
the People of Israel, Lev. IX. 24.
Lev. IX. 24. He had also given them the Levites to assist them, Number. III. 9.
VIII. 19.
Number. III. 9. VIII. 19. in all the inferior parts of their ministry. But this
was it which Korah could not endure. He was for the Priesthood himself, and so
were others of his Tribe, Number. XVI. 10. Which since God had taken from them,
they would have it of the People's Gift. The People of Israel could not forget
that, before this Divine Institution, the Priesthood had gone by Primogeniture.
It was (i) instead of all the First born of Israel that God took the Levites
into Number. III. 12, (...).
his Service, Number. III. 12, 41. For this reason it seems that Korah applied
himself to Dathan and Abiram, the Sons of Reuben, who was the firstborn Son of
Israel; together with them there were Nu^. XVI. (...), 3.
two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation,
that rose against Moses and Aaron. It appears that all these took the
Priesthood upon them, as well as Korah himself. For v. 1^.
they took every man his Censer, and put fire in them, (no doubt from the Altar
of God,) and laid incense thereon, to offer it before the Lord. He that was not
a Priest, and did this, was to be put to death, Number. III. 10, 38. King Uzzial^
attempting to burn incense to God, though he was not put to death, he was
chastised with the utmost severity for it. C^ron. XXVI. 16 -- 21.
The Leprosy rose up in his Fore^ at that Instant, and they that saw it thrust
h^ out of the Temple; yea, himself also hasted to go out: and he dwel^ ever
after in a separate house, being a Leper unto the day of his death; and Iotham
his Son took upon him the Government of Israel 2 Chronicles* XXVI. 16 -- 21.
This they could not but know. But they would venture it: thinking perhaps that
the Laws which Moses delivered from God concerning the Priesthood, were not
God's, but his Own, made in favor of, and Combination with his Brother Aaron.
If they had not thought so, they would not have dared to break out into such
Language as they Nu^. XVI. (...)
gave Moses and Aaron, v. 3. When they said to them, you take too much upon
you; they could not mean less than Moses did, when he returned the v. y.
same words to Korah and his Brethren. It was as much as to say, you take that
which God has not given you, Verse. 7. God had surely given it to Aaron, as he
showed by (...). IX. ult*
sending Fire from Heaven on his Sacrifice. Therefore this which they were now
doing was directly in opposition to God. So Moses N^. XVI. (...)
tells Korah, v. 11. both thou and all thy Company are gathered together
against the Lord: and what is Aaron that you murmr against Him? That Miracle
was wrought in the sight of all Israel. And they could not have forgotten it
since, being wrought but five months before their coming to Kadesh Barnea. But
it seems they ascribed it to some other cause, and not to God's approbation of
A^ron. Therefore now there was no convincing them of their Error any otherwise
than by putting the matter to God. Moses offers them this, that they all should
v. 5, 6, 7.
take Censers, and put Fire on them, and offer Incense before the Tabernacle:
and Aaron should do the same; and then they should see whom God would choose.
Moses at the same time v. 11.
sent for those Sons of Reuben. But they seemed to have a mind to the civil
Government; and ^refore they Refused to obey him, They said, v. 11.
we will not come up. It is plain in the following words, that they charged him
with making himself v. 13.
a Prince over them, v. 13. and with breach of Trust, and deluding the People
with Promises of things, of which now their v. 14.
senses showed them the contrary, v. 14. They ended as they begun, we will not
come up. So they v. 24.
stayed still in their Tabernacles, v. 24. which were near to Korah's, the
Cohathites being encamped next to the Reubenites. Perhaps on account of this
Conspiracy they might have one Tabernacle in common. There to show they did not
fear what Moses could do to them, they had brought their wives, and all their
Children together, to stand or fall with them in the event of this matter.
Korah the mean while seems to have been every where. He was surely very busy to
bring up all the Numbers he could, that he might head them against Moses and
Aaron. That he was a great Demagogue, Ios. Aut. IV. 2.
Josephus says; and he showed it throughout this whole Action. In his speech
at the beginning, to Moses and Aaron, he tells them, all the Congregation are
holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them, in his Tabernacle;
wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Number.
XVI. 3.
v. 3. with these and such like flatteries of the People, he had charmed them
to that degree, that now he had verse. 19.
gathered all the Congregation together against Moses and Aaron at the door of
the Tabernacle. There it was now to be tried, who it was that God had chosen,
or would choose.

101. But while the 250 were preparing to offer their incense, God's Judgments
on Him, and his Accomplices;
Moses went where Dathan and Abiram were together, and called off the People,
verse. 26.
that they might not perish with those Men. He declared that here would be the
Trial, whether God had spoke by him, or no. v. 28, 29, 30.
If these Men dye the Common Death of all Men, then the Lord has not sent me:
but if the Earth open her Mouth, and swallow them up, with all that is theirs,
then it will appear, that these Men have provoked the Lord. No sooner had he
made an end of speaking those words, but 31, 3^.
the ground clave under them, and swallowed them up, and their Families, even
all that belonged to them. The mean while, for the 250 Men that were offering
Incense, (and likely Korah was among them; v. 40.
see verse. 40.) against them v. 35.
there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed them in the very Fact. It
was well for Korah's Sons, that they Number. XXVI. II.
deserted him in this Action, for by that means they saved their Lives, and
continued his Family; of whom came 1 Chronicles. VI. 22 -- 29.
Samuel the great Saint of the Lord, whom David Ps. XCIX. 6. and on the
incorrigible People.
pla^ next to Moses and Aaron, Ps. XCIX. 6.

101. It was wonderful to see the People's stupidity under all this. They that
just now had been Eye witnesses of those dreadful Judgments of God employing
both Heaven and Earth for the destruction of those Rebels, yet as if all this
had happened in their favor, they still called them Number. XVI. 41.
the People of the Lord. This they did after time for Deliberation: for it was
on the morrow after their death, that all the Congregation of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron, charging them with the Murder of these Men. They told
them plainly, you have killed the People of the Lord: as if it had not been
God's Work, but theirs; perhaps by Art Magic, in which they might think that
Moses and Aaron outdid the Magicians of Egypt. The People were so enraged at
this time, that they broke out into an open Insurrection. v. 42.
The Congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron. It was high
time for God to put a stop to this, as he did, by his Glory appearing in the
Tabernacle. God declared his meaning by it to Moses, that he would v. 49.
consume them as in a moment. But to prevent this, both Moses and Aaron fell
upon their faces, and prayed. At their Prayer God forbore destroying those
Rebels, but he sent the Plague among them, that presently v. 49.
consumed 14700 persons, beside them that died in the Earthquake, and by Fire
from Heaven.

102. It was very visible by this great Example, that Miraculous God appoints
two Memorials to be kept.
Judgments were not sufficient to quell the Rebellious Spirits of this People:
but that there must be some permanent Tokens besides to continue with them, and
to mind them from time to time, what they or their Forefathers had suffered, or
seen. Therefore God was pleased to Number. XVI. 37 -- 40.
order the taking up of the Censers of Korah and his 250 Men, and the working
of them into broad plates for the covering of the Altar; to be a Memorial to
the Children of Israel, that none that d v. 40.
was not of the seed of Aaron should come near to offer Incense before the
Lord; that he be not as Korah, andc. And to give them a further Memorial of
this, he caused XVII. 1, etc.
twelve Rods, or Staves, one for each of the twelve Tribes of Israel, with the
Tribe's name written upon it, and one for Levi besides, with Aaron's Name
written upon it; to be laid up in the Tabernacle before the Ark of God, and to
ly there only for one night. God told Moses what would be the issue of it; and
accordingly he found it so the next morning: Behold, the Rod of Aaron was
budded, and had brought forth Blossoms; and those came to be Almonds all in
that one night. Moses brought out all those Rods that the Children of Israel
might see them. Of the Princes of the twelve Tribes every one acknowledged his
own Rod. Then God caused Moses to bring back Aaron's Rod, and to lay it before
the Ark, to remain there, for a Token against those Rebels, and quite to take
away their Murmuring for the future.

103. Now the whole Nation of Israel had seen these miraculous The People
obstinate to the last:
proofs, of God's insisting on his choice of Aaron to be Priest, as well as his
asserting the Authority of Moses. They had also seen those dreadful Judgments
of God; Earthquake, and Fire from Heaven, and Plagues, that he sent all in one
day, to cut off those Rebels that attempted to set up themselves against these
his Ministers. What disposition that People were in after this, God has been
pleased to let us know, by giving us the Passionate words into which they broke
out on this occasion. He tells us, Number. XVII.
the Children of Israel spoke unto Moses, saying, behold we dye, we perish, we
all perish. Whosoever comes any thing near to the Tabernacle of the Lord,
shall dye. Shall we be consumed with dying After Mose^ and Aaron had brought
the Children of Israel out of Egypt, their first Complaint against them was
this, that whereas they had put the people in hope, of bringing them into Ex.
XIII. 5.
a Land flowing with milk and honey Ex. XIII. 5. They found fault that they had
brought them into a Ex. XIV. 11.
wilderness, Ex. XIV. 11. where first, their XV. 24.
water was b^r, XV. 24. and where there was XVI. 3.
nothing to eat, XVI. 3. and at last there was XVII 3.
no water, XVII. 3. God was so Gracious as, notwithstanding all this, to supply
fall these defects, and to forgive their Sin of murmuring, so that not one of
them died for it. And after that, he was pleased to renew to them that Promise,
of bringing them into Number. XXXIII. 3. Lev. XX. 24.
a Land flowing with milk and honey, Number. XXXIII. 3. But when he had just
brought them to that Land, and the Spies, whom they had sent to look into the
nature of it, had told them, it was Number. XIII. 32.
a Land that eat up the Inhabitants thereof; which was quite contrary to what
Moses had promised them; then they broke out into a Tumuk, worse than any of
the former. For this, in the first place, God XIV. 37.
cut off those Spies that had given them that false information. Then for their
so often repeated* Sin of murmuring against God, he declared that they all
should verse. 32.
dye in the wilderness; and that within the space of 33.
forty years. This terrible Sentence daunted them for a while. But soon after,
in the time of Kor^h's Rebellion, Dath^ and Abiram XVI. 13, 14.
revived this very thing, Number. XVI. 13, 14. In their charge against Moses, they
told him, Thou have brought us up to kill us in the wilderness; thou have not
brought us into a Land that flows with milk and honey. Will thou put out the
eyes of these men? Will thou make them believe this is a Land flowing with milk
and honey, when they see it is a Wilderness? This was a downright Rebellion
against God; for which, as those Ten Spies XIV. 37.
died of the plague; so these two Da^han and Abiran^, and all that belonged to
them, were XVI. 32.
swallowed up at once by the Ground opening under them. But it seems, the Sin
these Men died for, was no other than what all the People had in their hearts.
There seems to be an acknowledgement of it in these words; when, reflecting
upon this Judgment on Dathan and Ab^ram, they could not forbear telling Moses,
XVII. 1^.
XVII. 12. behold we dye, we perish, we all perish; that is to say, if all that
are of this opinion must dye, then, there is no help for it, we must all dye,
and perish. They were as good as their words. They boldly said this, again and
again, when they saw many others to join with them in it. And XX. 2, 3. XXI. 5.
this was the cause of their dying in the next judgments of God that came upon
them in the Wilderness, Number. XX. 2, 3. and XXI. 5.

But that which was freshest in their minds, and which most stuck with them,
was this, that Moses had advanced his Brother Aaron, and his Sons, to the
Priesthood; which always belonged to the first born in former times. This was,
in their opinion, such an engrossing of Honor and Riches into one Family, as
ought not to be endured. That this was the People's sense of the matter, it
appeared by their so generally joining with Korah and his Company, in
opposition to Aaron's Priesthood. Korah had with him Number. XVI. 2. verse. 18.
250 men of the chief of their Nation, who all took Censers in their hands, to
officiate as Priests in burning Incense at the Door of the Tabernacle. The
People saw them all struck dead with v. 35.
Fire from Heaven. After which, as Moses said, by God's Command, v. 37, 38, 39.
their Censers were taken up, and wrought into Plates for the covering of the
Altar; and that expressly for this reason, that it should be v. 40.
a Memorial to all others that were not of the ^ons of Aaron, that Number. XVI. 40.
(...) etc. not a man of them should come near to offer incense before the
Lord, that he be not as Korah and his Company, Number. XVI. 40. All this the
People must have known, or else it could not hare been a warning to them. They
might also know what Moses now said, as from God, concerning Number. XVII. 10, 11.
Aaron's Rod, being now laid up before the Ark, for a second Memorial. He had
said, that it was to mind the People not to meddle with any office of the
Priesthood, verse. 10.
that they dye not. It was, as most think, upon the hearing of this, that the
v. 12.
Children of Israel spoke to Moses those passionate words, we dye, we perish,
we all perish; that is in effect, we hear of nothing but dying. But those words
especially went to their hearts, that Moses had XVI. 40. XVII. 13.
said on occasion of the Plates, being made of those Censers, for a Memorial,
etc. They repeat them here in effect, (...) every one that shall come near the
Tabernacle of the Lord shall dye.

God heard this, and thereupon, for a farther provision against their falling
into this Sin, he made a fresh Declaration of his mind, almost in the same
words in which the People had repeated the former. They had said (...) every
one that comes near shall dye, God repeated it (...) every one that comes near
shall be put to death. For the Reason of this, enough XVIII. 7.
has been said in the Context of this Discourse.


?

104. The direful Complaints of the heavy Judgments of God, as appeared by
their bitter complaints;
that they had seen inflicted on others, and expected the like on themselves,
do plainly show that they had no Abhorrence of the Sins by which those their
Brethren, that died, and perished, had provoked the Righteous God to send these
Judgments upon them. So far they were from that, that, in the mind they were
in, they seem to have thought of no other but that they should Number. XVII. 12.
all perish in like manner: though they knew that could not be, unless they
themselves were guilty of the same Sins. They did not know but they might all
murmur against Moses, and do all the rest that Dathan and Aoiram had done.

105. But it seems, they took a more particular notice of the Sin especially on
K^rah's death.
of Korah and his Fellows, and of the Judgment of God inflicted on them. God
had appointed Number. XVI. 38.
the Censers of those Sinners against their own Souls to be worked into a
Covering for the Altar, that it might be a Memorial to all that were not of the
Seed of Aaron, that not See Number. XVI. 40. in the bottom of page 47.
o^e Man of them should come near to offer Incense, that is, to officiate as a
Priest; that they might not suffer as Korah and his Company had done. Moses
Number. XVII. 10, 11.
warned them again of the same at the setting up of that Second Memorial of
Aaron's Rod: which warning of his seems to have been the immediate occasion of
those passionate words. Thereupon, the Text says, verse. 12.
the Children of Israel spoke unto Moses, saying, behold, we dye, we perish, we
all perish: then adding that which stuck most in their thoughts, namely, the
XVI. 40.
words that he spoke at the setting up of the former Memorial, Number. XVI. 40.
There it was declared, as they here repeated the words, XVII. 13. See it here
in the bottom.
Every one that comes near the Tabernacle of the Lord to offer Incense, shall
dye. How then? say they, have we done dying? Is the Danger over? No certainly,
unless we give up our Right of doing the same that Korah did; which, it seems,
they would not promise for themselves. In short, here is nothing else in all
their speech, but Tokens of the utmost impenitence. They neither ask Pardon of
God, nor of either of his Ministers; they did not so much as desire that Moses
would Pray for them; nor did they make the least confession of any Sin, that
either they or those Rebels were guilty of. The last mention they made of them
in all this History was XVI. 41.
Number. XVI. 41, where they charged Moses and Aaron with killing them. They told
them plainly, you have killed the People of the Lord. For this God justly
called them Number. XVII. 10.
Rebels, chapter XVII. 10. and provided the second Memorial, quite to take away
their murmurings, that they dye not. But they were still for verse. 22, 13.
dying and perishing, rather than they would promise to Amend, and give over
those Rebellions, by which they that did dye and perish had brought those
Judgments on themselves.

106. By what has been said, it abundantly appears, that as yet God gives a New
Law, against intruding into the Priesthood.
the Murmurings were not quite taken away, nor were like to be, as long as this
Generation was living. God was therefore so much the more concerned to take
care that they might not destroy themselves by their Rebellions, before the
Time was run out that he had set them to wander in the Wilderness. And since,
for the preventing of this, no sort of Miracles would do, for all had been
tried, and cast away, on this stiff-necked People; therefore God was pleased to
resort to the Ordinary means, by enacting Judicial Laws, with strict Penalties;
and making it the business of Persons concerned to see them put in Execution.

It was Aaron himself that was chiefly concerned in all matters of public
worship. He was the High Priest, that was appointed of God to be Judge in all
causes touching Religion: and Deuteronomy. XVII. 11. 12.
from the Sentence of the Law, which he should deliver there was to be no
Appeal, Deuteronomy. XVII. 11, 12. Therefore now to put an end to those disputes about
the Priesthood, God was pleased to deliver to Aaron a Judicial Law, concerning
Holy places and things, Number. XVIII. 1 -- 7. By which, in the first place, Number.
XVIII. 1 -- 7.
God laid upon Him and his Sons the whole charge of those places and things
that belonged to the Priesthood, viz. of the Sanctuary, and the Vessels
thereof; and also of the Priest's Court, wherein was the Altar of Sacrifice.
But for the People's Court, and all the Offices in the outer Verge of the
Tabernacle, God laid the charge of all these on the other Levites, that were
not of the Sons of Aaron. And as well to oblige them, both Priests, and
Levites, to look to their respective charges, as to deter others from breaking
in upon them; he ordained, that if any one, who was not of the Tribe of Levi,
should intrude into any place of their Ministry, or should meddle with any of
the Vessels belonging to it, he should be put to death; and so should the
Levites that suffered him to do it. And for those places and vessels that were
within the charge of the Priests the Sons of Aaron; if any stranger should
presume to come near them, he must be verse. 7.
put to death, v. 7. nay, though he were a Levite, as Korah was, he must dye
for it; and the Priests that suffered it must also dye with him, v. 3. Their
second Massa and Meriba.
v. 3.

107. They were by this Ordinance of God kept under a lasting Aw, which they
could not be by Temporary Miracles. So that now, from this time forward, we
read no more of any one's intruding into the office of Priesthood, in Moses's
time, or his Successors: Nor do we read of the People's Murmuring on any other
account, till 37 years after their departure from Kadesh Barnea. Then the
Children of Israel, being come down to Number. XXXIII. 35.
Ezion Geber, Number. XXXIII. 35. which was by the Red Sea, 1 Kings IX. 26. n. 73.
1 Kings IX. 26. there it seems they lost the Brook that Moses fetched out of
the Rock at Massa and Meriba, Ex. XVII. This Brook had followed them hitherto,
but it could not ascend, as they did to their next station, which was at Number.
XX. 1. and XXXIII. 36.
Kadesh in the There it was that Miriam the Sister of Moses dyed; by which we
know the just Time of their being there. For at Mount Hor, which was their very
next stage, there her Brother Aaron dyed: which was in Number. XXXIII. 38.
the fortieth year of the Peoples coming out of Egypt, and on the first day of
the fifth month of that year. But Miriam's death is remembered by the Jews on
the Tenth day of the first month: by which account she dyed not quite four
months before him. Ios. Ant. IV. 4. p. 109. G.
Josephus says she was buried there on a Mountain, which they call Sein, So it
seems it was remembered in his time.
wilderness of Zin, Number. XX. 1. Hereupon there was a second Number. XXVIII. 14.
and Deuteronomy. XXXII. 51.
Massa, and Meriba, so called on the following occasion. There being no water
for the Congregation, they gathered themselves together against Moses and
Aaron: and the People Number. XX. 2. v. 3. (...)
chid with Moses and said, would to God we had dyed with our Brethren, etc.
wherefore have you made us to come out of Egypt to bring us into this evil
place? Here is none of all those good things we were to have in the promised
Land, v. 5.
neither is there any water to drink. This want of water was a Temptation that
they had not Faith to withstand. And yet, even now at this present, they could
not but see by the Pillar of Chud, that the same God which brought them up out
of Egypt was still with them. And they knew what he could do in this very case,
by having Ex. XVII. 6.
seen what he did in the like: which they could not forget, having lived upon
the effects of it ever since. But besides, they had seen many other wonderful
proofs of an Almighty Providence over them; by which they had been delivered
out of Egypt, brought through the Red Sea, and preserved and fed for so many
years since in the wilderness. But all these great works of God they threw back
to him, with Contempt, wishing they had never been. They wished that Number. XX. 3.
they had dyed with that Rebellious Crew that perished in the gain saying of
Korah. This was such a (...) v. 13.
quarelling with God, as he calls it, v. 13. that Moses the meekest Man on the
Earth could not bear it. It provoked him to that degree, that he could not
speak to them with Patience. Insomuch that, when God commanded him to take his
Rod, and go, and speak to the Rock before their Eyes: and told him, that, that
being done, it should give forth its water abundantly; He called the People
together to see this work of God; and as they stood there v. 10.
together before the Rock, v. 10. He said unto them, Hear now you Rebels, must
we fetch you water out of this Rock? v. 11.
And Moses lift up his hand, and with his Rod he sinote the Rock twice, and the
water came out abundantly. In his Anger, it seems, he did so far forget
himself, as to do things like one that believed not what God had said to him.
He struck the Rock twice; when God had told him only Number. XX. 8.
speaking to it would suffice. Aaron was, as it seems, in the same fault with
Moses: for which, the dignity of their Persons being considered, God thought
fit to lay Exemplary Punishments on both of them; and so he declared that v. 12.
neither of them should enter into Canaan. As for Aaron, God shortened his
Journey then presently; for he dyed at the next station, which was at v. 28.
Mount Hor, as has been already shown: and Moses dyed at Deuteronomy. XXXIV. 5.
Mount Nebo within six months after.

108. The next Journey of the People of Israel was through a Third Murmuring at
Tsalmona.
tedious and troublesome Number. XXI. 4.
way, in which they had nothing to live upon, but what came by daily and
continual Miracles. And whereas they ought to have been thankful for this, they
were so far from it, that they spoke, as well against God himself, as against
Moses. They joined them both together in this bitter Expostulation; v. 5.
wherefore have You brought us up out of Egypt? to dye in the wilderness? Number.
XXI. 5. This was their Third Rebellion, and the last that we read of, in the
History of this Generation. For the punishment of this Sin, v. 6. punished with
fiery Serpents.
God sent fiery Serpents among them, v. 6. It was a most venomous sort of
Creature, with which that Wilderness did abound. And they bit the People, so as
that a Multitude of them dyed of it. The rest came to Moses to intercede for
them. v. 7.
They said, we have sinned; for we have spoken against the Lord, and against
thee; pray unto the Lord, that he take away the Serpents from us. They could
not have asked a thing which Moses was readier to do. He prayed, and God
ordered him to v. 8.
set up the Image of such a Serpent, made of Brass, on the top of a very high
Pole; that every one that was bitten might look up to it, and live. It is more
than once that our blessed Lord minds us of this, as a Type of his being Ioh.
III. 14. XII. 32.
lifted up on the Cross; that they that are bitten with Sin may look up to Him,
and be saved.

109. This last Rebellion was at Tsalmona This place was so called from Tselem,
which signifies an Image, in memory of this Brazen Serpent. It seems the
People took this away with them, and had it in so great esteem, that in process
of time they came to worship it, as an Idol: for which it was 2 Kin. XVIII. 4:
broken in pieces by King Hezekiah, 2 Kings XVIII. 4.
, which was the thirty At Zered was an end of this murmuring Generation.
fifth station of God's People in the Number. XXXIII. 41.
wilderness, Number. XXXIII. 41. In four stations more they came to the place
called v. 45.
Dibon-Gad, in the Valley of Zered. There, as Moses tells us, being Deuteronomy. II.
13.
come over the Brook of that name, there were now none remaining of that
Generation of men that were twenty years old or upward when they came up out of
Egypt. It was now v. 14.
thirty eight years since they came from Kadesh Barnea, and full forty years
since God took them first to be his People in Egypt. All which time of Ps. XCV.
10.
forty years he was grieved with that Generation. It was a continual Massa and
Meriba, as the Psalmist v. 8.
calls it, Ps. XCV. 8. for which v. 11.
God swore in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest, v. 11.

110. Now they that were under that Sentence being all dead and The new ra^
under no Temptation to Murmuring.
gone, there remained none of any considerable Age, but only Moses himself,
together with Joshua and Caleb, for whom there was a particular Exception.
Besides these three, there was not a man left of that a Number. XIV. 30.
Nation that was full sixty years old. And of them that were now grown up, the
far greater part knew of nothing to murmur at, living as well at this time as
ever they did since they remembered. Especially after they had conquered Sihon
and Og, the two warlike Kings of the Amorites, who had been all their time a
Terror to the neighboring Nations. Og affected to make himself so; for being
descended from the old Giants, and having a body of their size, he would have
it seen what he was by his Deuteronomy. III. 11.
Gigantick Accoutrements. But Sihon made himself so by his wars with all the
Nations about him; whom having subdued, he not only took the Spoils of their
Countries, but what part of their Countries he pleased to add to his Dominions.
Thus he took Josh. XIII. 25.
half their Land from the Ammonites, and made them glad to live quietly with
the rest. From the Number. XXI. 26.
Moabites he took all the plains of Moab together with the City of Heshbon,
which he made the Seat of his Kingdom. As for the Losh XIII. 25.
Midianites, he had them so much at his will, that they let him choose whom he
would of their Nation to be Kings over them.

111. These Amorites we now speak of were the chief part of one Especially
having Conquered the Amorites.
of the seven Canaanitish Nations; whom, having now Genesis XV. 16.
filled up the measure of their iniquities, God had justly determined to
destroy. And he chose his own People Israel to execute that Judgment upon them.
It was by his Command that they killed Deuteronomy. II. 34. III. 6.
men, women, and children, in both these Kingdoms; which, when the rest of the
Canaanites heard of it, put them in such a Horror as made it impossible for
God's people to mingle with any of those Idolatrous Nations. But they that made
that slaughter were well paid for their pains. They -- II. 35. III 7.
got all the Riches to themselves that those Amorites had been gathering for so
many Ages, besides what they had so lately taken from those other Nations. All
this the People of Israel had done in little more than two Months after their
passing over Zered. And then they came to encamp in those Number. XXII. 1.
Plains of Moab which they had newly won from King Sihon. There they were in
full -- v. 2.
sight of the land of Canaan; having nothing between them and it, but the river
Jordan. So that now they were so far from having any Occasion to Murmur, that
they had the highest reason to thank God for those wonderful Successes he had
given them; and to trust in him for much greater things that he had promised to
their Forefathers, and particularly his Promise to bring them into possession
of that good Land which they saw now before them.

112. This made it necessary for the Devil to find out some other Therefore new
the Devil was for tempting them to Whoredom and Idolatry.
way for the tempting of that people into a National Sin. Of all other Sins, if
the Devil were to choose, he could find none more for his Turn than the Sin of
Idolatry: that Sin, in God's people, being an Absolute breach of their Covenant
with him. For the drawing of Them into this horrible Sin, the Devil could think
of no likelier way than by bringing 1 Kin. XI. 1.
strange women to keep Company with them, such as would be sure to v. 4, 5.
turn away their hearts after other Gods. This was no hard Matter for him to
do; they being generally young men, and living in the midst of so many
Idolatrous Nations. But that which made it easy was this, that all those
Nations at this time had such dreadful Apprehensions of the danger they were
in from the people of Israel, that though they lived friendly among them, yet
they passionately wished their Destruction, and would be at any price to bring
them to it.

113. Those of Moab and Ammon had no Reason for any such fear; All the
Neighboring Nations wished their Destruction.
God having warned his people Deuteronomy II 9, 19. (...)
not to do any Act of Hostility to them. But that was more than they knew: They
judged by what they saw before their Eyes. They saw a Number. XXII. 3, 4, 11.
Numerous people come into their Country. They had seen how King Sihon, whom
these Nations had found so much stronger than themselves, was as nothing in the
hands of this people. They had quite destroyed him and his Kingdom in very few
weeks. The Midianites (d) whose d d Josh. XIII. 25.
Kings had been King Sihon's Vassals, on that very account had more reason to
be afraid than either of the other Nations. They had therefore sent some of
their Number. XXII. 4, 5.
principal men to advise with Balak King of Moab what was to be done for
securing themselves against that potent numerous people. The only way they
could think of was, by engaging a Divine power on their side; such a power as
should be superior to that by which Israel was said to have done all those
wonderful things Ios. II 9, etc.
.

114. But for the obtaining of this, they must find out one that They hired the
Prophet Balaam to assist.
had such a power at his Call. They pitched upon one that was generally
believed to have this: that was Balaam was a Number. XXIII. 7.
Syrian, of XXII. 5.
Pethor, which was near the river Euphrates, in Deuteronomy. XXIII. 4.
Of BALAAM
Mesopotamia. Tera the Father of Abraham dyed in that Country. After which, his
Son Abraham being called by God, went from thence into Canaan: but his Son
Nahor continued there. Both Isaac and Jacob married into Nahor's Family, and
the latter of them lived twenty years in that Country. The knowledge of the
true God did not wear out there presently, though it was much defaced with
Idolatry. Even Balaam Number. XXIV. 4, 16.
called him sometimes by the Name of Elshaddai, as the Patriarchs usually did:
but oftener by the name of Number. XXII 8, 1^, 19. XXIII. 3. 8. 12, 15. 16. XXIV.
6, 13.
Jehovah; and once Number. XXII. 18.
Iehova my God, Number. XXII. 18. even the same that was XXIII. 21.
the God of Israel. Number. XXIII. 21. St. Peter plainly 2 Pet II. 16.
calls Balaam a Prophet; and no doubt there were many other such of the
Patriarchical Religion; as St. James also Iam. V. 10, 11.
calls Job, who lived some few ages before him, Iam. V. 10, 11.

In those first ages of the world there were very often seen such extraordinary
Actings of God on the Prayers of his Prophets, whether for or against any
Person or Nation, as were not to be expected by See Bp. Patrick's Comment.
them that lived under a written Revelation. For instance, we see, upon the
Plague that God sent on Abimelech King of Gerar, and his People; when he
besought God to take it off, God directed him to Abraham; in these words, He is
a Prophet, and he g g Genesis XX 7.
shall pray for thee. In like manner, God's wrath being kindled against Job's
three miserable Comforters, God sent them to Job to pray for them; saying, Ioh.
XLII. 8.
Him will I accept, and not deal with you according to your folly. We see
Balaam was famous for the proofs he had given of his Successfulness that way.
It was a common belief, that Number. XXII. 6.
those whom he blessed were blessed, and those whom he cursed were cursed, Number.
XXII. 6.

But whereas there were Sam. IX. 7.
Presents usually made to the Prophets by them that employed them in this kind,
this covetous Wretch could not deny himself the advantage that might be made of
this. He was for getting all that he could. And since, as it commonly happens,
the worst causes bring in the best Fees, he was for such to choose. 2 Pet. II
16.
He loved the wages of unrighteousness. And if in such Cases God would not help
him, the Devil certainly would, by God's permission; who in his just Judgment
sends 2 Thessalonians. II. 10, 11.
strong delusions on them that have not the Love of the Truth. No delusion
could be greater than this was upon Balaam; that, when God having forsaken him,
he was come to be Josh. XIII. 22.
Cosem, a Cunning man in vulgar speaking; whose way of doing things, by Kesem,
1 Samuel XV. 23. ^ee Deuteronomy. XVIII. 10. 11, 12.
witchcraft, is an Abomination to God; 1 Samuel XV. 23. yet still, upon his
invoking God's Name, the Devil came, and answered his Prayers; and did it so
artificially, that, though the things that he asked were such as were not fit
for God to grant, the Devil did it; and kept him still in the belief that it
was God that heard and answered his Prayers.


Balaam a (g) Syrian, that lived then Deuteronomy. XXIII. 4.
in Mesopotamia. The Situation of that Country, lying so much nearer to Midian
than it did to Moab, makes it very probable that Balak had this suggested to
him first by the Midianites. And it seems much more likely, because of the
Trade that the Midianites drove in Balaam's Country, and through it to Babylon
and Ninive, the chief Cities then in the world. But that which puts it out of
doubt was, his returning thither to Midian when Number. XXIV. 11.
Balak drove him out of his Country; of which more will be said n 116.
afterward. We take it therefore to have been by the Midianites advice that
Balaam was sent for. Their way to fetch him was by Presents; which 2 Pet II. 15.
he loved at his heart; and it seems they knew it, for Number. XXII. 7.
the Elders of Moab and of Midian came to him with the rewards of Divination in
their hands. What those Rewards were, it is not said: but no doubt they were
Silver and Gold, or else v. 18. and XXIV. 13.
Balaam's mentioning those things was not much to the purpose. That which they
would have had for their Money, was to get him to curse Israel; to the end that
when His Divine power had disabled, or chased away Their's, they they XXII. 11.
might be able to overcome them, and drive them out of their Country. This they
hoped he could obtain by Enchantments, and such like Diabolical ways as he was
v. 6.
commonly thought to be a great Master of. And so he was content they should
believe; and yet he pretended, and probably himself did believe, that all the
great things that he had done, and was so famous for, he had obtained by his
Intimacy with v. 18.
the true God, XXIII. 24.
the God of Israel. What Ground he had for this belief, and how it came to fail
him, will be considered See the bottom.
elsewhere.

115. At present it will be sufficient to observe, that when Balaam God would
not let him do it, by Cur^ing them.
made his Application to God, as Balak and those about him desired, for the
cursing of Israel; he presently found a great change in the person to whom he
applied. Of late days, while, through the just judgment of God for his asking
of things which were unfit for God to grant, he had turned him over to the
Devil; during his Correspondence with him, the Devil had always granted him
such things to choose; and not only so, but had taught him that way of Number.
XXIV. 1.
Enchantments by which he used to converse with his Votaries. But now, when
Balaam came for leave to curse Israel, the chosen people of God; as to that,
God would not suffer the Devil to give him his Answer, but was pleased XXII. 9.
to take that business on himself. But Balaam knew nothing of that. He went on
in doing what he could to obtain what his Clients desired. First they brought
him to a XXII. 41.
High place from whence he might see the utmost part of the Camp of Israel. It
was a place that was consecrated after the manner of that Country. There he
XXIII. 2, 4.
offered to God such sacrifices as he formerly used to accept. But when he came
to the point, God soon v. 8, 9, 10.
let him know that he must not curse Israel. When Balaam had told this to Balak
and his Princes, they, being unsatisfied with it, were for putting him on a
fresh Trial. It was the Sea le Clear on Number. XXIII. 27.
manner of most Heathen Nations, that when one Sacrifice would not do, they
were for trying another, and a third if they saw occasion. So v. 13.
Balak would have him offer another Sacrifice. But it must be in v. 14.
another View of the Camp of Israel, where possibly it might not be so well
guarded with Angels as it was in the former. Thereupon Balaam v. 15.
left them to sacrifice for themselves, and he went XXIV. 1.
to seek for Enchantments; in which he never used to fail of such success as
the Devil could give him. And that he might be sure of in this case, to Curse
the people of God. But here again God interposed, and let him v. 19, 20.
know, He had given his word to bless Israel, and it was not for man to reverse
it. Balaam made his own Reflections upon this, and plainly v. 23.
told Balak, here was nothing to be done. He saw plainly that v. 21.
God had not beheld iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. It is plain
he had not hitherto, in this new Race of people. Therefore it was in vain for
Balaam to think of reaching them with Enchantments, etc. as he might other
Nations. But yet after all this, upon the great Importunity of Balak, he
attempted once more to curse Israel, in another view of their Camp. But when he
XXIV. 1.
saw it pleased the Lord to bless Israel there also; then he went on no farther
to seek for Enchantments: but looking intently upon Israel, he received an
Inspiration from God. When this came upon him, v. 5.
first he broke out in praises of Israel. Then v. 8.
he fell to magnify the things that God had done for them, and what he had yet
to do. Then turning to Israel, he concluded all with these words; v. 9.
blessed is he that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses thee. This was
more than Balak had patience to hear. Who therefore interrupted him, and in
plain Terms bade him, v. 11.
Fly thou to thy place. To which Balaam answered, v. 14.
behold, I go to my people; but first I will advertise thee what this people
shall do to thy people in the latter days. And thereupon he gave him that most
noble v. 15 -- 25 (...)
Prophecy, concerning the Messiah, and the Fates of diverse Nations, even in the
Messiah's time, which Moses has recorded in his History.

116. After this, we are v. 25
told that Balaam rose up, and went, He therefore took the Devil's way.
and returned to his place. If we are to understand by these words, that he
went back into his own Country; then it is certain that he made little stay
there; for we Number. XXXI. 8.
find that he was killed in Midian within one or two months after this. His
business there was v. 16.
to put the The Midianites lived at this time in several Tracts of Arabia
Petraea: particularly, Of the MIDIANITES.
they that are here spoken of lived in those parts which lay Eastward of the
Countries of Moab and Ammon; having only a ledge of Mountains between them and
Arabia Felix; and only the Desert between them and Mesopotamia. By this
Situation of their Country, they had a great advantage for Merchandise. And
they diligently applied themselves to it, as it appears, from Genesis XXXVII. 28.
Ancient times. They trafficked, not only v. 25.
near home, but also in far distant Countries. This sort of business requiring
the use of Beasts for Carriage, and especially of Camels, which Nature seems to
have made on purpose for those dry Countries, they provided themselves with
these most particularly. We find, in the next Ages after this, they Iud. VI. 6.
had Camels without number; VII. 12.
as the sand by the Sea side for multitude. By their Merchandise they got very
great Riches, which Josephus Ios. Ant. IV. 7.
says, they made appear by their living so delicately and splendidly. It
appeared against their Will afterward, by the abundance of Number. XXXI. 16.
Plate and Jewels that were found among their Spoils. These Riches at present
enabled them to be at that charge that Moab, having only Corn and Cattle, could
not so well bear. They could reward Balaam according to his own Heart's desire,
as well for his Advice for the Destruction of Israel, as for the Journeys that
he made on that Occasion. They could set forth their Women more to advantage
for the carrying on of that accursed design, to cause Israel to fall into that
sin in the Ib.
matter of Peor. We find on that account a daughter of one of their five Kings,
was XXV. 8, 15.
killed in the fact of Whoredom with a Prince of the Simeonites. No doubt
there were many more of the Midianites women, and probably of their King's
daughters, engaged in it as well as she. For they not only joined with the
Moabites women, but led them into this design. We see it is wholely imputed to
the Midianites, that all was carried on by their cunning Number. XXV. 18. (...)
intrigues. It was indeed XXXI. 16.
through the Counsel of Balaam. But that was chiefly, if not only, owing to the
Midianites, as it is shown in this Digression.

That the Midianites were the chief Authors of it, appears by God's
distinguishing them from the others in their punishment. For God expressly
commanded Moses, saying XXV. 17. (...)
use Hostility against the Midianites, for they have acted Hostilely against
you. And again, after Moses had settled things among his own People, God gave
him a second Command for the execution of the former. He said to him XXXI. 2.
Avenge the Children of Israel of the Midianites, afterward shall thou be
gathered to thy People. It was as Moses ver. 3.
called it, the Avenging of the Lord against Midian. It was so especially
against their Women, for that v. 16.
these had caused the Children of Israel through the Counsel of Balaam to
commit trespass against the Lord in the matter of Peor. The Israelites, in
execution, of this Sentence, first slew the five Kings of the Midianites, and
all other Males, both old and young. Of the Females, at first they took all for
slaves, together with the spoils of the slain. But afterward, by Moses
Command, they killed all those Women that had known Man by lying with him for
the Reason abovementioned. And so they made an utter Desolation of that Rich
and Populous Country. This dealing of his with the Midianites was very
different from that which he used toward the Moabites and Ammonites: who did
only follow the Midianites into this Sin. For though even for that they were
not to pass without punishment; yet God did not therefore destroy them as he
did the other. But he set a Mark upon them and all their Posterity. He made it
a standing Law to his People, that v. 9, 10, 11.
no Soul of either of those Nations should be admitted into the Congregation of
the Lord, 'till the tenth Generation, Deuteronomy. XXIII. 3.


Midianites into the only sure way for the destroying of Israel; that was, by
tempting them into sin against God, the way n. 112.
beforementioned. It seems, at his hasty parting from Balak, this was not yet
come into his head. But the Devil, from whom it certainly came, helped him to
it soon afterward. He came full of it to the people of Midian. There he
certainly knew that any Advice would be welcome, that would rid them of the
Nation that they feared; and he knew that, as they were best able, so they
would not spare, to pay him well for this advice which he brought them. For
both these Reasons, he must impart it first to the five Kings of Midian: and
then he must take the general Consent of the Men, without which he could not
have brought the Women into this Matter. For the women, they were to be more
than passive in it. They had many things to do. They were first to take a
pretty long journey into the Land of Moab. There they were to engage the
Moabitish women, as many as they could, to join with them; and they were to go
together, and Act according to their Instructions. They were to hold a Feast to
Baal Peor, an Idol so called from the High-place of Number XXIII. 28.
Mount Peor, where it was to be worshipped. That Mountain belonged to Moab
formerly, till it was taken from them by King Sihon. But by Conquest over him,
it was now in the people of Israel's hands. And the place being near to their
Camp, it could not be doubted but that a Multitude of them would come to see
what all these women were doing. There, as Balaam had instructed the XXXI. 16.
Midianitish women, they were first by XXV. 18.
their Wiles to draw in those young men of Israel, (for so they generally
were,) v. 1.
to commit Whoredom with them. The women of those Idolatrous Nations did not
think it any shame to do this; See le Cle^ on Ex. XXXIV. 15.
especially when it was for the getting of Money to offer to their Idols. But
the Midianitish women might be persuaded to do the same thing on a higher
Consideration. Balaam might tell them, it was an Act of holy Zeal in them to do
it, for the gaining of a whole Nation of Aliens to their Religion. He was
wicked enough to tell them so, and they did, as if they believed it. It was to
Number XXV. 18.
their Wiles particularly, that God imputed all the Sin and Destruction of so
many of his People. And yet the Camp of Israel being so near the Moabites
Country, that their Women were better known to the Israelites, than the other;
therefore they were the Daughters of Moab with whom v. 1.
the People begun to commit Whoredom: and they were the Women of that Nation
that v. 2.
invited the People to the Sacrifices of their Gods. It is very likely that
they also came in greater Numbers than the other Women that lived so much
further from Peor.

117. The Feasts that those Idolaters held in honor of their Gods The
Moabitish Women tempted them to Fornication and Idolatry.
were always kept with Music and Dancing; by which they were whetted and
prepared for the following Impurities, that were to the Devils, their Gods, the
most acceptable part of their Worship. A great Number of the young men of v. 2.
Israel were tempted to comply with them in all this: after which, they would
scarce stick at any thing else that could be desired of them. And so, upon
these Women's Invitation, those wretches did not only eat with them at their
Idolatrous Feasts, but they also bowed down to their Gods, and so v. 3.
joined themselves to Baal Peor.

118. This was such a manifold Breach of Gods Express Ex. XXXIV. 15.
Command God sent a Plague for this.
to his People, that Number. XXV. (...).
his Anger was kindled against Israel for it: and it presently appeared, in a
Plague that came down upon them, in the midst of their Jollity. It fell upon
Deuteronomy. IV. (...).
no other, but them that were guilty of this complicated Sin. But that neither
the Sin, nor the Judgment, might spread any further, v. 4.
God called upon Moses to put a Stop to it, by doing Justice on the
Transgressors. It seems that hitherto Moses had no Information of those
horrible doings; all this being done at Mount Peor, which was some miles
distant from the Camp: or if he knew any thing of it, this wickedness being a
thing quite new to him, it struck him into such an Astonishment that, at first
he knew not what to do in it. But for that he was to take his direction from
God; and God was pleased to give him that before he asked it. The Lord said
unto Moses, v. 4.
take all the Chief Men of the Transgressors, and hang them up before the Lord.
This was necessary for the satisfying of his Justice, and thereby for the
turning away of his fierce Anger from Israel. And therefore he was to do this
as Publicly as he could, that all others might see, and fear. This Order was
certainly put in Execution by those whom Moses Authorized for that Purpose. And
to do it the more Effectually, he ordered the v. 5.
Judges of Israel, every one in his District, to put to death all that they
could find had joined themselves to Baal-Peor.

119. The mean while, all the rest of the People that had a sense Phineas zeal
put a Stop to it.
of their duty were v. 6.
weeping for their Brethrens horrible breach of it, and imploring the Mercy of
God before the Ex. XXIII. 9. 10.
door of his Tabernacle. That being on the Number. III. 38.
East Side of the Tabernacle, was the place where Moses and Aaron and his Sons
were to keep the Charge of the Sanctuary; and to attend there upon all such
Occasions. There was Number. XXV. 6.
Moses now present; and probably Aaron and his Sons, though the Text mentions
no more of them but v. 7.
Phineas. They were weeping there, together with all the Congregation; when one
of their young Men, being surely blinded with lust, brought a Midianitish Woman
along with him, and led her to his Tent in all their sight. Phineas in a holy
Indignation at this, rose up from all his weeping Company; and taking a Javelin
in his hand, he followed the Man into his El. Hakkubba to the Alcove. Le Clerc.
bedroom; where finding them in the Act of filthiness together, v. 8.
he thrust both of them through, both the Man of Israel, and the Woman, through
her belly. He did this by Moses's command, as De vita Mos^s. 1.
Philo says. No doubt he knew of the Command which God had given to Moses, and
likely had heard him charge others, and himself among the rest, to put it in
Execution. That his chief Motive in it was Zeal for Gods sake, he had a v. 10,
11.
Testimony from God himself. It was surely an Ardent Zeal for God that moved
him to do so bold a thing as this was; to kill a young Prince among the People
of Israel, and together with him the Daughter of a King of the Midianites, who
would surely make it a National Quarrel. This was such a thing as God would not
let us be ignorant of: and therefore he plainly tells us, that the Name of the
Man was v. 14.
Zimri the Son of Salu a Prince of the chief family among thr Simeonites, and
that the Woman was v. 15.
Cozbi the Daughter of Zur, who, as he tells us XXXI. 8.
elsewhere, was one of the five Kings of Midian. Such an Heroic Action as this
was, being done in pure Zeal for Gods Cause, was so highly acceptable to him;
that thereupon he stopped his hand, and would not suffer the Plague to proceed
any farther. And not only so, but as well for a Reward to Phineas at present,
as for a Memorial of it in future times, God gave him the promise of continuing
the Priesthood to him and his seed after him for ever.

120. By this one Act of his, it came to pass that this Judgment of The Plague
held but one day.
God was no more than (...) Cor. X. 9.
one days work. It was Number. XXV. 18.
the Day of the Plague as Moses calls it. But in that short space of time there
dyed v. 9.
of the Plague no fewer than 24000. Moses elsewhere has told us, that those
were Deuteronomy. IV. 3.
all the Men that followed Baal-Peor. And that none dyed after this day, till
the Date of the Book Deuteronomy. I. 3.
of Deuteronomy, which was but one Month before his death; This is certain from
what he told them in the next words; v. 4.
You that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day.

121. No doubt they that saw this terrible Judgment of God Moses's last
numbering of the People.
though they knew how just it was upon them that perished in it, yet could not
but be in some kind of fear for themselves: none of them being secure but that,
living as they did among those Idolatrous Nations, with whom God would not let
them be in hostility, they might by conversing with them be ensnared into some
Sin or other, for which they might perish in like manner. God was pleased
therefore to let them know, that the danger they were in on that account was
not long to continue. There was only the Number. XXVI. 3.
River Jordan between them and the Land which God had promised to their
Fathers. Their next Remove would bring them thither. And when they had taken
possession of that Land, which God could give them as easily as he had given
them all on this side Jordan, they were then 53... 55.
to divide it for an Inheritance among themselves. To let them see it was the
Care of Gods Providence that it should be equally shared, he was pleased to
order v. 1.
Moses and Eleazar the High Priest to make a second Numbering of the People,
like that which Moses and Aaron had Number. l. 1.
formerly made in the Wilderness of Sinai. It could not but comfort them to see
that, after the dying away of more than v. 46.
600000 men that had been then Numbered, many of them no doubt dying Natural
deaths, but all the rest, save Number. XXVI. 65.
only Joshua and Caleb, having been swept away by those Judgments of God that
had fallen upon them, within these last 38. Years; yet now they were but v. 51.
1120. men fewer than they were at that former Numbering: which small Number of
men might very likely have been lost by their own Miscarriages in the XXI. 31,
35.
Conquering of those two Kingdoms.

122. All this while, as well they, as their Fathers before them, They had now
all Extraordinary means.
had continually before their Eyes those v. 71, 86, 93.
evident proofs of Gods presence among them, in the Pillar of fire all night,
and of cloud all day, either moving before them, or resting over the
Tabernacle. They had the Deuteronomy. VIII. 3.
Manna which their Bread was made of, immediately from Heaven. They had their
v. 15.
Water, first out of one Rock, and then out of another, still following them
all the while they were in the Wilderness. None of them had his Raiment waxen
old, nor his v 4. and XXIX. 1.
Shoes grown uneasy to his feet, in all these 40. Years. God was pleased to let
them know that his design in all this was, as well to v. 2, 3, 16.
humble them, seeing they had nothing they could call their own, as also to
teach them to live in an entire Dependence on his Providence.

123. There was certainly Need of such Extraordinary ways, to With little of
the Ordinary.
instruct them, and to mind them of their duties; there being then so little of
the Ordinary means which God gave to his People in after times. They had not
the Sacrament of Josh. V. 5.
Circumcision, since their coming up out of Egypt. They had no v. 10, 12.
Passover, since the second Year after that. They had no written Rule to walk
by, but only that of the Ex. XX.
Ten Commandments XXXIV. 27.
written in Tables of stone: and they had also those National Judgments, which
are all contained in Ex. XXI. XXII. XXIII.
three Chapters of Exodus. Whatsoever Teaching they had more, it could be no
other than what they had from the mouth of Moses; for he writ nothing till the
last Deuteronomy. XXXI. 9 -- 25.
year of his life.

124. And yet perhaps no people in the world ever needed teaching Their great
Degeneracy.
more than they did. For, though they were Abraham's Seed by Sarah his wife,
and that according to the Genesis XVII. 19.
promise of God, which was their great Privilege; yet even that did not free
them from Original Corruption, that came to them from much nearer Parents than
Abraham and Sarah. The immediate Fathers of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, were
the Twelve Sons of Jacob, by whose names they were called. But for these
Patriarchs, how any of them lived, or what they did, we have no Account in any
other Book but that of Genesis; and even there, we have nothing told us
particularly, but of the four Eldest Sons, and of Joseph. And though this last
appears to us wholely without Spot: yet of those four others, the most that we
know is of their Crimes. We cannot read of the Incests of Genesis XXXV. 22.
Reuben and XXXVIII. 18.
Judah, the Faithbreach and Cruelty of XXXIV. 27.
Simeon and Levi, without sad reflections on the Ignorance of those times. For
the rest of Jacob's Sons, God has not been pleased to let us know any thing of
them; save only this, that when those two Bloody men were for XXXVII 18.
killing their innocent Brother, though the other nine could not come up to
that height of wickedness with them; yet they v. 27.
all, but v. 29.
Reuben, agreed to that which was but little short of the other. They all
joined in v. 26.
taking Money for their Brother Joseph, whom they sold into perpetual Slavery,
and that in an Idolatrous Nation.

Such were the Fathers of this people of Israel. And surely the Mingling with
Idolatrous Nations, Canaanites, and Egyptians.
Mothers were not like to mend the Breed. We read of no other wives that either
they or their Fathers ever had, but what were either Canaanites, or Egyptians:
and whatsoever corrupt Inclinations they derived, whether from their Mothers,
or their Fathers, they were not like to be cured of them by their Education.
For besides that Parents generally give their Children no other Education than
what is most agreeable to their own Inclinations; there was this worse than
ordinary in their Case, that the Nations among whom they lived were of the very
worst of Mankind. They could scarce see any other Examples among them, than of
things which they ought most to avoid. There could be nothing more contrary to
the Religion that God had taught his chosen people, than the Sin of See n. 76,
77.
Idolatry: and especially such as that was which generally obtained among the
Egyptians. They worshipped those Brute beasts which God had appointed his people
to Ex. VIII. 26.
Sacrifice to him. Only he had dispensed with their offering him any Sacrifice
of that kind, in Egypt, where the people would certainly have stoned them for
it. How apt they were to have done that, it abundantly appeared, by the extreme
hard Usage that they gave that poor people without any provocation. And yet
they could not be Ignorant, that their Fathers owed their Lives to Joseph, whom
they knew to be one of this Nation. But that was so utterly Ex. I. 8.
forgotten, that they treated, not only his Nation, but even his Posterity
among the rest, with the utmost cruelty and Inhumanity. First, they took all
the people for Slaves, and oppressed them, to that degree that Ex. I. 14.
they made their lives bitter to them with drudgery. One while they were for v.
16. 22.
killing all the Male Children of that Nation: And though that perhaps did not
last, yet their II. 23.
Slavery did, till it came to be quite intolerable. It may seem strange that
even that could not restrain them from following the Egyptians in the very
worst of their Sins. But such a See n. 64.
witchcraft there is in evil Example, that the people of Israel followed them,
even in that which God had most especially forbidden them. And they did this,
not only while they lived in Egypt, where it might have been done out of fear,
or in Compliance with the Egyptians; but they continued to do it afterward,
when they were perfect freemen. They showed an astonishing instance of it, in
their making and worshipping of the Ex. XXXII.
Golden Calf.

126. But the sin which the people of Israel were chiefly charged But their
peculiar sin was their Murmuring and tempting God.
with in these times, was their aptness, as often as any thing displeased them,
to Murmur, and to run into Rebellion, against God and his Servant Moses. This
they could not learn of the Egyptians, for there was no such thing in that
Nation. They were generally most dutiful The Egyptians gave them no such
Example.
to their Kings, and to their Gods, of all the Nations we read of in History.
Moses gives us very great Instances of it, in the History of Joseph; who, being
brought a Slave into Egypt, became a Savior to that Nation, as has been just
now abovementioned. That holy man, having it revealed to him from God, that
there e Genesis XLI. 1 -- 40.
should be Seven years of great Plenty in that Land, and after them v. 30, 31.
Seven years of Famine, such as should be very grievous; and having thereupon
advised King Pharaoh what to do for the saving of his People; was thereupon
made by him his chief Minister, with power to Order every thing as he advised.
The first thing he did was in those years of plenty to go v. 46.
throughout all the land of Egypt; having made Storehouses there in every City,
there to lay up all the Corn he could buy out of the Country about it. Having
done this every one of these years, and so v. 48.
Engrossed all the spare Corn of Egypt into those Granaries, He was then
provided for the seven years of Famine; in which, as the people came to want
bread, so he continually supplied them, by selling it at his own price. By this
means he got XLVII. 14.
all the money of Egypt into the Kings Treasury, in two or three of the first
years. Afterward, in the following years, he made them sell him v. 17.
their Cattle: and a year or two after, v. 20.
their Land; all but what belonged to v. 22.
the Priests, who by the King's command had their Corn freely given them. All
the rest of v. 20.
the Land of Egypt came by this means to be Pharaoh's. And so did the People
too; and they were very well satisfied with it. They v. 25.
said to Joseph, thou have saved our Lives: let us find grace in the sight of
my Lord, and we will be Pharaoh's Servants. They were so, to that degree that
he removed them at his pleasure, Genesis XLVII. 21.
from one end of Egypt to the other: and charged the Lands that he gave them
with a Rent to the King, which was a fifth part of the full value. And this, as
Moses tells us, v. 26.
Joseph made to be a Law, over all the Land of Egypt unto this day It was the
manner of the Kings of the Nations, that they had a Tenth part of the profits
of all the peoples land, as we see in 2 Samuel VIII. 15, 17.
Samuel's time. And it was ^o in Aristot. Oeconom. II.
Aristotle's time. But this was but half as much as the Kings of Egypt had by
Ioseph's Law.
They liked Joseph never the worse, but rather the better for this. They
accounted him the best friend they had, as it appeared by their attending him
to his Funeral. There Genesis L. 7.
went with him all the Servants of Pharaoh, and the Elders of his house, and
all the Elders of the land of Egypt. They attended his Corpse for many a day's
journey out of Egypt into the land of Canaan. And though it was by the King's
Command that they did this; yet their own Affections went with it, as appeared
by their v. 10.
Mourning for Joseph, with a great and very sore Lamentation. All the people of
Canaan took such notice of it, that they called the place ever since, v. 11.
Abel Mizraim, the mourning of the Egyptians.

127. Would the people of Israel, that lived in the first 40 years It was
wholely of themselves.
beforementioned, have paid such Duty and Affection to Moses, if he had come
among them as Joseph did among the Egyptians? One that was quite a stranger in
their Country, and was sold thither for a Slave; if he had been advanced to the
Power that Joseph had, and had made that use of it that Joseph did, would the
Israelites have taken it as the Egyptians did; Would they not have told Moses,
as soon as they had seen what he drove at, that he came to make them all like
himself, Slaves to Pharaoh, them and their children? And how long would they
have endured it? surely not a year to an end. For we see, in the first month or
two after this Peoples coming out of Egypt, how often they mutinied against
Moses. One while, because their Water was Ex. XV. 23, 24.
bitter, they murmured only for the unpleasantness of it. How much more, when
they came to XVI. 1.
want Bread, in another place? In a third when they had XVII. 1.
no water at all; then they outright v. 2.
child with Moses. They were almost v. 4.
ready to have stoned him. And yet, in every one of these Times, they saw their
wants were supplied, as it were with a hand reached out to them from Heaven.
And that still upon Moses's Prayer. It was he only, under God, to whom they
owed all the Thanks that were due, for their deliverance out of the Egyptian
bondage, for the Supply of all their wants in the Wilderness; for all their
Preservation hitherto. They could not but see, it was He that stood always
between God and them, as often as his wrath was breaking forth to consume them.
And yet that which chiefly occasioned it, was, that God could not show himself
unconcerned at their ill usage of his Servant Moses. It was doubtless from God
that he had that Testimony, of his being Number. XII. 4.
the meekest man upon Earth. And he showed it, in bearing all that ill usage
from them whom he had obliged, more than ever any mere man did or could, oblige
that, or any other Nation.

128. Therefore no Nation could more justly deserve that character, God called
them a Stiffnecked People.
which God was pleased to give to this People at first, and which stuck by them
ever after. It was given them first on occasion of their throwing that unworthy
See n 88.
Contempt upon Moses; and, that which followed upon it, their Sin of Calf
worship. God told Moses of it, and thereupon added these words, Ex. XXXII. 9,
10.
I have seen this People, and behold, it is The meaning of this word
stiffnecked, when it is spoken of Beasts, or of Men with Resemblance to them,
is doubtless that they are hard to be brought to the Yoke: But it seems to be
used in speaking of Men commonly without that Resemblance. For in the Hebrew
Phrase you to hear is usually put for to obey. And of them that will not be
brought to Obey, it is very often said, they will not hear, nor do any thing
toward it. They will not incline their ear. They will not turn toward him
that speaks to them. This is the common meaning of the word that they are
Stiffnecked. And so the Prophet Jeremy seems to have understood it, Ier. VII.
25. where charging the Jews of his Ier. VII. 25.
age with the Obstinacy derived to them from their Fathers, even from the time
of their coming forth of the Land of Egypt to this day; he tells them what God
said of them v. 26. I have sent to them all my Servants the Prophets etc. but
they hearkened v. 26.
not to me, nor inclined their ear, but stiffen^ their neck. So the words are
in (...) Ier. XVII. 22, 23.
the Hebrew. In like manner Jeremy himself having admonished them to keep the
Sabbath, Ier. XVII. 22, 23. when he could not bring them to it, says, They
obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might
not hear, nor receive Instruction Whosoever would see more Examples of this
kind, may find them in 1 Kin. XVII. 14. 2. Chren. XXXVI. 13. Neh. VII. 16, 17.
19. Ier. XIX. 5.
a stiffnecked People, Now therefore let me alone, that I may consume them. And
yet then, upon Moses's Intercession, v. 14.
God repented of the evil which he thought to do to his People. He revoked his
sentence for the punishing of them, but did not alter his Judgment of the merit
of their Sin. As to that, it was fit they should know it. And therefore he bade
Moses tell it them plainly, more than once. First, upon Gods withdrawing that
token of his Presence in the Pillar of Cloud and of Fire, and not suffering it
now to come within the Camp of Israel, as it had done hitherto: He gave them
this reason for it, XXXIII. 3.
thou art a stiffnecked People; if I come among thee, I shall consume thee.
Again, to make them more Sensible of the Condition into which they had brought
themselves; God bade Moses, v. 5.
say unto the Children of Israel, you are a stiffnecked People: put off thy
Ornaments from thee; thy Holyday Clothes; for in such they had dressed
themselves to keep a Feast to their Calf, according to Ex. XXXII. 5.
Aarons Proclamation. They obeyed Moses in this. XXXIII. 46.
They stripped themselves of all their fine Attire; and now they mourned for
Gods leaving them. This encouraged Moses to pray for them again. He asked now a
farther favor from God, that he would not only XXXIV. 9.
pardon their Sin, but own them to be his Inheritance: which would appear by
the Return of the Pillar to be over the Camp, as it was formerly. He begs it of
God in these words, I pray thee, go among us; FOR it is a stiffnecked People.

129. Among the Jews, Aben Ezra and Sal. Iarchi; and among the Christians,
Grotius, and others of the highest Note of Commentators, have been of Opinion
that (...) should be rendered as (...) Although. For so, as Noldius shows, it
Vid. Noldii Concord. partic. p. 399.
does signify in some other places of Scripture. But others are of Opinion that
the rendering of it so in this place would make the Text less intelligible than
it is in our English Translation. And ours follows the Septuagint, and the
Vulgar Latin, and the words are thus interpreted by R. Bechai, and likewise R.
Bechai fol. 113, 114.
by Calvin in locum.
Some very Learned Men have thought it strange that Moses, Moses makes it an
Argument in his Prayer.
in his prayer to God, should bring that for a Reason, why he should forgive
his People, and continue his presence among them; which God himself had given
for a Reason Ex XXXII. 9.
why he would have consumed them, but for Moses's Intercession; and why he
XXXIII. 3, 5.
must do it yet, if he continued to dwell with them. But those Learned Men seem
not to have considered how much the case was changed since the time of Gods
speaking those words. His People had now v. 4, 6.
repented of their Sin, and obeyed him by ^iripping themselves, and mourned for
his withdrawing himself from them. Upon these proofs of their Repentance, Moses
had reason to hope for their amendment, and better obedience for the future.
But yet in Moses's Opinion this was not to be hoped without the Extraordinary
assistance of the Shecina of God. For still they were a stiffnecked People,
though not now in Actual Rebellion, as they were at the time when God called
them so. They did still retain the same stubborn disposition, which made them
so extremely ungovernable as he had found them hitherto. Their necks were
naturally stiff, and would not bend to give ear to any thing he could say to
them from God, till such time as his Glory appeared in the Shecina: and then,
being Moses had seen some Instances of this, as we may read, Ex. XIV. 19, 20.
XVI. 7, 10. XXXIII. 10. He saw many more afterward, which he speaks of, Lev.
IX. 23, 24. Number. IX. 19 -- 23. XI. 25. XIV. 10, 14. XVI. 19 and 42. Though all
th^s while, as to the generality of them, it was true that is said Ps. LXXVII.
34 -- 36. They only flattered and lied, as the Text says, they trifled as
Jonathan renders it: and so it follows v. 37. their heart was not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. But still Moses hoped better
of them: and he knew, if there were any way to bring them to good, it must be
this, which he therefore so earnestly begs of God.
struck with what they saw of Gods visible presence among them, they would bend
a little for the present, and hear, and obey what he said to them. This was
surely that which Moses thought of, in useing this Reason, why God should go on
to forgive, as he had done; and continue his Presence among them, which they
needed so extremely, that it seemed impossible without it to keep them from
destroying themselves by their wilfulness. (...)

That the Proof which has been given, of our Lord JESUS hit being the promised
Messiah, may be set in a better light, it has been thought fit to bring it into
the two following sets of Chronological Tables; in which the Proof will appear
to any man that has but so much skill in Common Arithmetic, as is not above the
learning of an ordinary Reader.

THE first of these sets is of Julian years, from the 20th. year of King
ARTAXERXES, which was the 445th year before the common Christian Era, till the
19th of TIBERIUS, which was the 33th year of that Era; in which very year that
our Lord JESUS was crucisyed on the 3d day of April, being the Jewish Passover,
is the common Opinion of learned men among the Christians, and has been
sufficiently proved in this Work. But here it is proved by PTOLEMIES CANON, the
undoubted Measure of time among all the Astronomers, both Jews and Gentiles,
That this 20th year of ARTAXERXES (being the year on which (according to
Nehemiah II. 1 -- 8.) he gave the Commandment for the building of Jerusalem
again, and on which it was accordingly built,) was 476 years and odd days
before the said 19th year of TIBERIUS; that is, there were 483 Chaldee years
from the one to the other; which is the ground work of the farther Proof that
is offered in the second set of Tables.

The Second is of these Chaldee years, whereof every one has 360 Days; which
way of Measuring Time being unusual among us, it is therefore thought
necessary, for the making of it the more intelligible, that every one of these
Chaldee years should be adjusted with its concurrent Julian years, so as to
show in what Month and Day of those concurrent years it began and ended; and by
these any ordinary Reader may know whereabout he is in the time before or after
CHRIST, in every Chaldee Year that lies before him.

The use of these Tables will be made the more easy and clear by sorting the
483 years above mentioned into (...), septenaries or Weeks, whereof there are
just LXIX in that Number of years. For this being done, it will plainly appear
that these are the VII Weeks and the LXII Weeks in that Prophecy, Dan. IX. 25.
and whereas there it is said that after those LXII Weeks the MESSIAH shall be
cut off; it is here very evident in the last of these Tables, that the last of
these LXII Weeks ended on the 11th Day of May, in the Vulgar year of CHRIST 32:
which was within less than a year of the 3d of April 33, that was the time of
CHRIST'S death, as has been already showed.

And therefore CHRIST'S death being after the LXII Weeks; and that not a year
after, for that year would have been reckoned into the following Week; it
cannot be denied but that he was crucified at the very Time when MESSIAH was to
be cut off according to DANIELS prophecy.

After the 1st set of Tables there will be added the years of the IV Gospels
and of the Acts of the Apostles page xviij, xix. etc.

And after Daniels VII and LXII Weeks there will be added the single Week to
make up the LXX.

IN the first set of Tables every JULIAN year therein contained, has a Line
belonging to it that runs through all the Columns in that page: in which line
it is adjusted with 2 other sorts of years that are concurrent with it; namely,
first with DANIEL'S Chaldee years, and secondly with the years in PTOLEMY'S
Canon.

The Column marked with B under it, shows what Julian years are Bissextile, or
leap-years: which, in every 20 years before Christ, are the 17, 13, 9, 5, and
1st. in the years after Christ, the 4, 8, 12, 16, and 20th. These are carefully
to be observed in Computation; because, whereas every common year has 365 days,
every leap-year has 366, one day being added after the 24th day of February,
which makes that month to be of 29 days, which has but 28 in common years.

Column C is of the Julian years before Christ from the year 445 downward till
the Vulgar Era begins, and then afterward this Column will be of the years of
our Lord according to the Vulgar Era. Every one of these Julian years,
beginning on the first of January, and ending Dec. 31, is divided into 2
Numbers of Days in the Columns of Daniel's years. Those of the first number
always begin on the first day of January, and those of the second end on the
last of December: except only those in the lesser figures, whereof more will
be said in its proper place.

The two Columns marked D, D, are for the years of Daniel's weeks; whereof the
first VII weeks containing 49 years, the LXII following weeks containing 434
years, they make in all 483 years; every one of these years containing 360
days, as has been already shown.; and will more plainly appear in the 2d set
of Tables. Tab. I, II.

The first of these 483 years begins at the Nisan of the 20th year of
Artaxerxes. Now the first day of Nisan falling generally on the 21 day of
April, according to the most learned Primate Usher's Vid Uss. Annal. Tom. I. p.
25. p. 38 bis. p. 95, 96, and 115.
Account, and the 21 of April in the 20th of Artaxerxes falling into the Julian
year 445, as has been shown in the last Dissertation; therefore Daniel's first
year, beginning on the 21st of April, is placed in the line of that year 445
before Christ. And whereas after the 20 of April there are 255 days to the end
of a Julian year, this Number 255 is set down in that line, as being all that
part of the 445th Julian which concurs with the first year of the 483 before
mentioned.

But this Number of 255 days wanting 105 of the 360 that are in every Chaldee
year; therefore that first year of the 483 is placed a second time in the 1st
Column D in the second line; and there it is made whole, by allotting to it the
first 105 days of the Julian year 444; namely, from Ian. 1 till Apr. 15 of that
year: and whereas, besides these 105 days, there remain 260 from Apr. 16th to
the end of that Julian year, these go into the second year of the 483; and the
Number 2 is therefore placed before the 260 in the second line of that Table.

The 2 Columns marked F, F, contain in every line the 2 Numbers of days which
divide the 365 days of the Julian year in the beginning of that line, between
those 2 of Daniel's 483 years which are in the very same line in the Columns D,
D, above mentioned. Of these 2 Numbers of Days in every line it is to be always
remembered, that the first Number begins on the first day of Ian. and the 2 Ends
with the last of December. But besides,

Whereas in the Column over the letter G there is set down the month and day on
which every one of Daniel's Chaldee years begins, it is to be understood that
the next foregoing Chaldee year ends on the month and day next before it. As
for example; The first Daniel's year beginning on Apr. 21 in the Julian year
445, it has with that and the last of December 255 days out of that Julian
year; and this first Daniel's year wanting yet 105 days of its 360, it has
these out of the Julian year 444 before Christ, beginning at Ian. 1st, and
ending Apr. 15th. This appears in the Column over G: for there on Apr. 16
begins the second Chaldee year. This second Chaldee year has from Apr. 16 to
the last of Dec. inclusively, the Number therein noted, of 260 days out of that
Julian year, and these are made up 360 by adding 100 out of the Julian year
443; in which year they begin at Ian. 1, and end at Apr. 10th in that year.
Then on Apr. 11 begins the 3d Chaldee year, and taking in that day with all
that follow to the end of December, it has 265 days out of that Julian year
443: which Number being to be made up 360, therefore that third Chaldee year
has other 95 days out of the Julian year 442, beginning Ian. 1. and ending on
the 5th day of Apr. which appears by the next day, viz. April 6th beginning the
4th of the 483 years. And that 4th year goes on, and so do all that follow, in
like manner with those above mentioned.

Of the years in PTOLEMIE'S CANON more needs not be said, than that every one
of those years that are mentioned in the 2 first Columns over the first H and K
must be accounted to begin with the 1st of Ian. in that Julian year that stands
in the beginning of the line, and so to be concurrent with the same Julian year
until the next Thoth; that is, till that Month and day which in the same line
is placed in the Column over L. And that same month and day begins those two
following years in the 2 Columns over the 2d H and K: which last 2 years run on
to the end of the Julian in that line; and after that they are continued with
the next Julian year in the following line, from its ^st of Ian. till the next
Thoth, as is above mentioned.

The 2d set of Tables is of Daniel's VII and LXII Weeks, consisting of 483
Chaldee years, which are here adjusted with the Julian years, from the year
before Christ 445, till the 32d year after Christ, ending less than a year
before his Death.

In the 1st Column of every Table are set down the above mentioned Weeks, as
many of them as belong to that particular Table: and in the 2d Column are set
down as many of the 483 years as come within the Weeks contained in that Table.

The 8 following Columns are divided into 2 Fours, marked each of them with B,
C, G, F. The 1st C, G, in every line shows the Julian year, month, and day,
with which that Chaldee year begins that stands in the 2d Column of that Line.
The little b. shows when the Julian is a Bissextile: and the 1st F. shows the
Number of Days which the Chaldee year has out of that 1st Julian year.
Whatsoever Number of Days that is, there must be so many added to it as will
make it up 360 out of the 2d Julian year in that line: Which 2d year is marked
with the 2d B, C, in like manner as the 1st year was with the former B, C. And
as the 1st G showed what month and day in the former Julian year did begin the
Chaldee year of the same line; So the 2d G shows where that Chaldee year ends;
namely on what month and day of the 2d Julian year, (marked with the 2d, B, C.)
in the same Line.

NB. In every line of the 1st set of Tables, the two Numbers of Days in the
Columns F, F. being added together make up the Number 365 in a common Julian
year, and 366 in a Bissextile: But as to the 360 days of any Chaldee year, they
are made up of the Number of Days in the 2d Column F in the same line, adding
thereunto the Number of days in the 1st Column F, in the line next below it.

In every Line of the 2d set of Tables, the two Numbers of Days in the Columns
F, F, being added together make up the Number of 360 days for the Daniel's year
in the beginning of the Line: But as to the 365 days of a common Julian year,
or the 366 of a Bissextile, they are made up of the Number of Days in the 2d
Column F where that Julian begins, adding thereunto the Number of Days in the
1st Column F, in the line next below it.

TABLE I.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. b. In the 20th year of K. ARTAXERXES
Nehemia came up to Jerusalem. Neh. II. 1, 6.
445 1 Apr. 21 255 303 20 ARTAXERXES I. called LONGIMANUS. Dec. 12 304 21
ARTAXERXES I. called LONGIMANUS. 444 1 105 2 Apr. 16 260 304 21 Dec. 12 305 22
443 2 100 3 Apr. 11 265 305 22 Dec. 12 306 23 442 3 95 4 Apr. 6 270 306 23 Dec.
12 307 24 b. 441 4 90 5 Mar. 31 276 307 24 Dec. 11 308 25 440 5 84 6 Mar. 26
281 308 25 Dec. 11 309 26 439 6 79 7 Mar. 21 286 309 26 Dec. 11 310 27 438 7 74
8 Mar. 16 291 310 27 Dec. 11 311 28 b. 437 8 69 9 Mar. 10 297 311 28 Dec. 10
312 29 436 9 63 10 Mar. 5 302 312 29 Dec. 10 313 30 435 10 58 11 Feb. 28 307
313 30 Dec. 10 314 31 434 11 53 12 Feb. 23 312 314 31 Dec. 10 315 32 b. In his
32th year he returned to the King. Neh. XIII. 5. And after that he came back to
Jerusalem, and did those things which follow in his Book.
433 12 48 13 Feb. 18 318 315 32 Dec. 9 316 33 432 13 42 14 Feb. 12 323 316 33
Dec. 9 317 34 431 14 37 15 Feb. 7 328 317 34 Dec. 9 318 35 430 15 32 16 Feb. 2
333 318 35 Dec. 9 319 36 b. 429 16 27 17 Jan. 28 339 319 36 Dec. 8 320 37 428
17 21 18 Jan. 22 344 320 37 Dec. 8 321 38 427 18 16 19 Jan. 17 349 321 38 Dec.
8 322 39 426 19 11 20 Jan. 12 354 322 39 Dec. 8 323 40 b. 425 20 6 21 Jan. 7
360 323 40 Dec. 7 324 41 424 21 0 22 Jan. 1 360 324 41 Dec. 7 325 1 DARIUS II.
called NOTHUS. 22 0 23 Dec. 27 5 423 23 355 24 Dec. 22 10 325 1 DARIUS II.
called NOTHUS. Dec. 7 326 2 422 24 350 25 Dec. 17 15 326 2 Dec. 7 327 3 b. 421
25 345 26 Dec. 11 21 327 3 Dec. 6 328 4 420 26 339 27 Dec. 6 26 328 4 Dec. 6
329 5 419 27 334 28 Dec. 1 31 329 5 Dec. 6 330 6 418 28 329 29 Nov. 26 36 330 6
Dec. 6 331 7 b. 417 29 324 30 Nov. 20 42 331 7 Dec. 5 332 8 416 30 318 31 Nov.
15 47 332 8 Dec. 5 333 9 415 31 313 32 Nov. 10 52 333 9 Dec. 5 334 10 414 32
308 33 Nov. 5 57 334 10 Dec. 5 335 11 b. 413 33 303 34 Oct. 30 63 335 11 Dec. 4
336 12 412 34 297 35 Oct. 25 68 336 12 Dec. 4 337 13 411 35 292 36 Oct. 20 73
337 13 Dec. 4 338 14 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE II.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. the THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 410 36 287 37 Oct. 15 78 338 14
DARIUS II. Dec. 4 339 15 DARIUS II. b. 409 37 282 38 Oct. 9 84 339 15 Dec. 3
340 16 408 38 276 39 Oct. 4 89 340 16 Dec. 3 341 17 407 39 271 40 Sep. 29 94
341 17 Dec. 3 342 18 406 40 266 41 Sep. 24 99 342 18 Dec. 3 343 19 b. 405 41
261 42 Sep. 18 105 343 19 Dec. 2 344 1 ARTAXERXES II. called MNEMON. 404 42 255
43 Sep. 13 110 344 1 ARTAXERXES II. called MNEMON. Dec. 2 345 2 403 43 250 44
Sep. 8 115 345 2 Dec. 2 346 3 402 44 245 45 Sep. 3 120 346 3 Dec. 2 347 4 b.
401 45 240 46 Aug. 28 126 347 4 Dec. 1 348 5 400 46 234 47 Aug. 23 131 348 5
Dec. 1 349 6 399 47 229 48 Aug. 18 136 349 6 Dec. 1 350 7 398 48 224 49 Aug. 13
141 350 7 Dec. 1 351 8 b. 397 49 219 50 Aug. 7 147 351 8 Nov. 30 352 9 VII
Weeks after the 20th of ARTAXERXES, was to be the End of Vision and Prophesy in
the Jewish Church: after which they were to stick to the H. Scriptures Mal. IV.
4. and to look for no other Prophet, till John Baptist verse. 5, 6.
396 50 213 51 Aug. 2 152 352 9 Nov. 30 353 10 395 51 208 52 Jul. 28 157 353 10
Nov. 30 354 11 394 52 203 53 Jul. 23 162 354 11 Nov. 30 355 12 b. 393 53 198 54
Jul. 17 168 355 12 Nov. 29 356 13 392 54 192 55 Jul. 12 173 356 13 Nov. 29 357
14 391 55 187 56 Jul. 7 178 357 14 Nov. 29 358 15 390 56 182 57 Jul. 2 183 358
15 Nov. 29 359 16 b. 389 57 177 58 Jun. 26 189 359 16 Nov. 28 360 17 388 58 171
59 Jun. 21 194 360 17 Nov. 28 361 18 387 59 166 60 Jun. 16 199 361 18 Nov. 28
362 19 386 60 161 61 Jun. 11 204 362 19 Nov. 28 363 20 b. 385 61 156 62 Jun. 5
210 363 20 Nov. 27 364 21 384 62 150 63 May 31 215 364 21 Nov. 27 365 22 383 63
145 64 May 26 220 365 22 Nov. 27 366 23 382 64 140 65 May 21 225 366 23 Nov. 27
367 24 b. 381 65 135 66 May 15 231 367 24 Nov. 26 368 25 380 66 129 67 May 10
236 368 25 Nov. 26 369 26 379 67 124 68 May 5 241 369 26 Nov. 26 370 27 378 68
119 69 Apr. 30 246 370 27 Nov. 26 371 28 b. 377 69 114 70 Apr. 24 252 371 28
Nov. 25 372 29 376 70 108 71 Apr. 19 257 372 29 Nov. 25 373 30 B C D F D G F H
K L H K

TABLE III.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 375 71 103 72 Apr. 14 262 373 30
ARTAXERXES II. called MNEMON. Nov. 25 374 31 ARTAXERXES II. called MNEMON. 374
72 98 73 Apr. 9 267 374 31 Nov. 25 375 32 b. 373 73 93 74 Apr. 3 273 375 32
Nov. 24 376 33 372 74 87 75 Mar. 29 278 376 33 Nov. 24 377 34 371 75 82 76 Mar.
24 283 377 34 Nov. 24 378 35 370 76 77 77 Mar. 19 288 378 35 Nov. 24 379 36 b.
369 77 72 78 Mar. 13 294 379 36 Nov. 23 380 37 368 78 66 79 Mar. 8 299 380 37
Nov. 23 381 38 367 79 61 80 Mar. 3 304 381 38 Nov. 23 382 39 366 80 56 81 Feb.
26 309 382 39 Nov. 23 383 40 b. 365 81 51 82 Feb. 21 315 383 40 Nov. 22 384 41
364 82 45 83 Feb. 15 320 384 41 Nov. 22 385 42 363 83 40 84 Feb. 10 325 385 42
Nov. 22 386 43 362 84 35 85 Feb. 5 330 386 43 Nov. 22 387 44 b. 361 85 30 86
Jan. 31 336 387 44 Nov. 21 388 45 360 86 24 87 Jan. 25 341 388 45 Nov. 21 389
46 359 87 19 88 ^an. 20 346 389 46 Nov. 21 390 1 OCHUS who also called himself
ARTAXERXES. 358 88 14 89 Jan. 15 351 390 1 OCHUS who also called himself
ARTAXERXES. Nov. 21 391 2 b. 357 89 9 90 Jan. 10 357 391 2 Nov. 20 392 3 356 90
(...) 91 Jan. 4 2 392 3 Nov. 20 393 4 91 360 92 Dec. 30 355 92 358 93 Dec. 25 7
393 4 Nov. 20 394 5 354 93 353 94 Dec. 20 12 394 5 Nov. 20 395 6 b. 353 94 348
95 Dec. 14 18 395 6 Nov. 19 396 7 352 95 342 96 Dec. 9 23 396 7 Nov. 19 397 8
351 96 337 97 Dec. 4 28 397 8 Nov. 19 398 9 350 97 332 98 Nov. 29 33 398 9 Nov.
19 399 10 b. 349 98 327 99 Nov. 23 39 399 10 Nov. 18 400 11 348 99 321 100 Nov.
18 44 400 11 Nov. 18 401 12 347 100 316 101 Nov 13 49 401 12 Nov. 18 402 13 346
101 311 102 Nov. 8 54 402 13 Nov. 18 403 14 b. 345 102 306 103 Nov. 2 60 403 14
Nov. 17 404 15 344 103 300 104 Oct. 28 65 404 15 Nov. 17 405 16 343 104 295 105
Oct. 23 70 405 16 Nov. 17 406 17 342 105 290 106 Oct. 18 75 406 17 Nov. 17 407
18 b. 341 106 285 107 Oct. 12 81 407 18 Nov. 16 408 19 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE IV.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 340 107 279 108 Oct. 7 86 408 19
OCH. Nov. 16 409 20 OCH. 339 108 274 109 Oct. 2 91 409 20 Nov. 16 410 21 338
109 269 110 Sep. 27 96 410 21 Nov. 16 411 1 AROG. b. 337 110 264 111 Sep. 21
102 411 1 AROG. Nov. 15 412 2 336 111 258 112 Sep. 16 107 412 2 Nov. 15 413 1
DARIUS III. 335 112 253 113 Sep. 11 112 413 1 DARIUS III. Nov. 15 414 2 334 113
248 114 Sep. 6 117 414 2 Nov. 15 415 3 b. 333 114 243 115 Aug. 31 123 415 3
Nov. 14 416 4 332 115 237 116 Aug. 26 128 416 4 Nov. 14 417 1 ALEXANDER M. 331
116 232 117 Aug. 21 133 417 1 ALEXANDER M. Nov. 14 418 2 330 117 227 118 Aug.
16 138 418 2 Nov. 14 419 3 b. 329 118 2^ ^19 Aug. 10 144 419 3 Nov. 13 420 4
328 119 2^ ^20 Aug. 5 149 420 4 Nov. 13 421 5 327 120 2^1 ^21 Jul. 31 154 421 5
Nov. 13 422 6 326 121 206 ^22 Jul. 26 159 422 6 Nov. 13 423 7 b. 325 122 201
(...) Jul. 20 165 423 7 Nov. 12 424 8 324 123 19^ (...) Jul. 15 170 424 8 Nov.
12 425 1 PHIL. ARIDAEUS 323 124 190 125 Jul. 10 175 425 1 PHIL. ARIDAEUS Nov.
12 426 2 322 125 185 126 Jul. 5 180 426 2 Nov. 12 427 3 b. 321 126 180 127 Jun.
29 186 427 3 Nov. 11 428 4 320 127 174 128 Jun. 24 191 428 4 Nov. 11 429 5 319
128 169 129 Jun. 19 196 429 5 Nov. 11 430 6 318 129 164 130 Jun. 14 201 430 6
Nov. 11 431 7 b. 317 130 159 131 Jun. 8 207 431 7 Nov. 10 432 1 The other
ALEXANDER. 316 131 153 132 Jun. 3 212 432 1 The other ALEXANDER. Nov. 10 433 2
315 132 148 133 May 29 217 433 2 Nov. 10 434 3 314 133 143 134 May 24 222 434 3
Nov. 10 435 4 b. 313 134 138 135 May 18 228 435 4 Nov. 9 436 5 312 135 132 136
May 13 233 436 5 Nov. 9 437 6 311 136 127 137 May 8 238 437 6 Nov. 9 438 7 310
137 122 138 May 3 243 438 7 Nov. 9 439 8 b. 309 138 117 139 Apr. 27 249 439 8
Nov. 8 440 9 308 139 111 140 Apr. 22 254 440 9 Nov. 8 441 10 307 140 106 141
Apr. 17 259 441 10 Nov. 8 442 11 306 141 101 142 Apr. 12 264 442 11 Nov. 8 443
12 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE V.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. b. 305 142 96 143 Apr. 6 270 443 12
AL. Nov. 7 444 1 PTOLEMY Son of LAGUS. 304 143 90 144 Apr. 1 275 444 1 PTOLEMY
Son of LAGUS. Nov. 7 445 2 303 144 85 145 Mar. 27 280 445 2 Nov. 7 446 3 302
145 80 146 Mar. 22 285 446 3 Nov. 7 447 4 b. 301 146 75 147 Mar. 16 291 447 4
Nov. 6 448 5 300 147 69 148 Mar. 11 296 448 5 Nov. 6 449 6 299 148 64 149 Mar.
6 301 449 6 Nov. 6 450 7 298 149 59 150 Mar. 1 306 450 7 Nov. 6 451 8 b. 297
150 54 151 Febr. 24 312 451 8 Nov. 5 452 9 296 151 48 152 Febr. 18 317 452 9
Nov. 5 453 10 295 152 43 153 Febr. 13 322 453 10 Nov. 5 454 11 294 153 38 154
Febr. 8 327 454 11 Nov. 5 455 12 b. 293 154 33 155 Febr. 3 333 455 12 Nov. 4
456 13 292 155 27 156 Jan. 28 338 456 13 Nov. 4 457 14 291 156 22 157 Jan. 23
243 457 14 Nov. 4 458 15 290 157 17 158 Jan. 18 348 458 15 Nov. 4 459 16 b. 289
158 12 159 Jan. 13 354 459 16 Nov. 3 460 17 288 159 6 160 Jan. 7 359 460 17
Nov. 3 461 18 287 160 1 161 Jan 2 0 461 18 Nov. 3 462 19 161 360 162 Dec. 28 4
286 162 356 163 Dec. 23 9 462 19 Nov. 3 463 20 b. 285 163 351 164 Dec. 17 15
463 20 Nov. 2 464 1 PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS. 284 164 345 165 Dec. 12 20 464 1
PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS. Nov. 2 465 2 283 165 340 166 Dec. 7 25 465 2 Nov. 2 466 3
282 166 335 167 Dec. 2 30 466 3 Nov. 2 467 4 b. 281 167 330 168 Nov. 26 36 467
4 Nov. 1 468 5 280 168 324 169 Nov. 21 41 468 5 Nov. 1 469 6 279 169 319 170
Nov. 16 46 469 6 Nov. 1 470 7 278 170 314 171 Nov. 11 51 470 7 Nov. 1 471 8 b.
277 171 309 172 Nov. 5 57 471 8 Oct. 31 472 9 276 172 303 173 Oct. 31 62 472 9
Oct. 31 473 10 275 173 298 174 Oct. 26 67 473 10 Oct. 31 474 11 274 174 293 175
Oct. 21 72 474 11 Oct. 31 475 12 b. 273 175 288 176 Oct. 15 78 475 12 Oct. 30
476 13 272 176 282 177 Oct. 10 83 476 13 Oct. 30 477 14 271 177 277 178 Oct. 5
88 477 14 Oct. 30 478 15 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE VI.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 270 178 272 179 Sept. 30 93 478 15
PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS Oct. 30 479 16 PTOLEMY PHILADELPHUS b. 269 179 267 180
Sept. 24 99 479 16 Oct. 29 480 17 268 180 261 181 Sept. 19 104 480 17 Oct. 29
481 18 267 181 256 182 Sept. 14 109 481 18 Oct. 29 482 19 266 182 251 183 Sept.
9 114 482 19 Oct. 29 483 20 b. 265 183 246 184 Sept. 3 120 483 20 Oct. 28 484
21 264 184 240 185 Aug. 29 125 484 21 Oct. 28 485 22 263 185 235 186 Aug. 24
130 485 22 Oct. 28 486 23 262 186 230 187 Aug. 19 135 486 23 Oct. 28 487 24 b.
261 187 225 188 Aug. 13 141 487 24 Oct. 27 488 25 260 188 219 189 Aug. 8 146
488 25 Oct. 27 489 26 259 189 214 190 Aug. 3 151 489 26 Oct. 27 490 27 258 190
209 191 Jul. 29 156 490 27 Oct. 27 491 28 b. 257 191 204 192 Jul. 23 162 491 28
Oct. 26 492 29 256 192 198 193 Jul. 18 167 492 29 Oct. 26 493 30 255 193 193
194 Jul. 13 172 493 30 Oct. 26 494 31 254 194 188 195 Jul. 8 177 494 31 Oct. 26
495 32 b. 253 195 183 196 Jul. 2 183 495 32 Oct. 25 496 33 252 196 177 197 Jun.
27 188 496 33 Oct. 25 497 34 251 197 172 198 Jun. 22 193 497 34 Oct. 25 498 35
250 198 167 199 Jun. 17 198 498 35 Oct. 25 499 36 b. 249 199 162 200 Jun. 11
204 499 36 Oct. 24 500 37 248 200 156 201 Jun. 6 209 500 37 Oct. 24 501 38 247
201 151 202 Jun. 1 214 501 38 Oct. 24 502 1 PTOLEMY EUERGETES. 246 202 146 203
May 27 219 502 1 PTOLEMY EUERGETES Oct. 24 503 2 b. 245 203 141 204 May 21 225
503 2 Oct. 23 504 3 244 204 135 205 May 16 230 504 3 Oct. 23 505 4 243 205 130
206 May 11 235 505 4 Oct. 23 506 5 242 206 125 207 May 6 240 506 5 Oct. 23 507
6 b. 241 207 120 208 Apr. 30 246 507 6 Oct. 22 508 7 240 208 114 209 Apr. 25
251 508 7 Oct. 22 509 8 239 209 109 210 Apr. 20 256 509 8 Oct. 22 510 9 238 210
104 211 Apr. 15 261 510 9 Oct. 22 511 10 b. 237 211 99 212 Apr. 9 267 511 10
Oct. 21 512 11 236 212 93 213 Apr. 4 272 512 11 Oct. 21 513 12 B C D F D G F H
K L H K

TABLE VII.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIE'LS Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days His 483 years. Number of Days.
His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years of
Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 235 213 88 214 Mar. 30 277 513 12 PTOLEMY
EUERGETES Oct. 21 514 13 PTOLEMY EUERGETES. 234 214 83 215 Mar. 25 282 514 13
Oct. 21 515 14 b. 233 215 78 216 Mar. 19 288 515 14 Oct. 20 516 15 232 216 72
217 Mar. 14 293 516 15 Oct. 20 517 16 231 217 67 218 Mar. 9 298 517 16 Oct. 20
518 17 230 218 62 219 Mar. 4 303 518 17 Oct. 20 519 18 b. 229 219 57 220 Febr.
27 309 519 18 Oct. 19 520 19 228 220 51 221 Febr. 21 314 520 19 Oct. 19 521 20
227 221 46 222 Febr. 16 319 521 20 Oct. 19 522 21 226 222 41 223 Febr. 11 324
522 21 Oct. 19 523 22 b. 225 223 36 224 Febr. 6 330 523 22 Oct. 18 524 23 224
224 30 225 Jan. 31 335 524 23 Oct. 18 525 24 223 225 25 226 Jan. 26 340 525 24
Oct. 18 526 25 222 226 20 227 Jan. 21 345 526 25 Oct. 18 527 1 PTOLEMY
PHILOPATOR. b. 221 227 15 228 Jan. 16 351 527 1 PTOLEMY PHILOPATOR Oct. 17 528
2 220 228 9 229 Jan. 10 356 528 2 Oct. 17 529 3 219 229 4 230 Jan. 5 1 529 3
Oct. 17 530 4 230 360 231 Dec. 31 218 231 359 232 Dec. 26 6 530 4 Oct. 17 531 5
b. 217 232 354 233 Dec. 20 12 531 5 Oct. 16 532 6 216 233 348 234 Dec. 15 17
532 6 Oct. 16 533 7 215 234 343 235 Dec. 10 22 533 7 Oct. 16 534 8 214 235 338
236 Dec. 5 27 534 8 Oct. 16 535 9 b. 213 236 333 237 Nov. 29 33 535 9 Oct. 15
536 10 212 237 327 238 Nov. 24 38 536 10 Oct. 15 537 11 211 238 322 239 Nov. 19
43 537 11 Oct. 15 538 12 210 239 317 240 Nov. 14 48 538 12 Oct. 15 539 13 b.
209 240 312 241 Nov. 8 54 539 13 Oct. 14 540 14 208 241 306 242 Nov. 3 59 540
14 Oct. 14 541 15 207 242 301 243 Oct. 29 64 541 15 Oct. 14 542 16 206 243 296
244 Oct. 24 69 542 16 Oct. 14 543 17 b. 205 244 291 245 Oct. 18 75 543 17 Oct.
13 544 1 PT. EPIPHANES. 204 245 285 246 Oct. 13 80 544 1 PT. EPIPHAN. Oct. 13
545 2 203 246 280 247 Oct. 8 85 545 2 Oct. 13 546 3 202 247 275 248 Oct. 3 90
546 3 Oct. 13 547 4 b. 201 248 270 249 Sept. 27 96 547 4 Oct. 12 448 5 B C D F
D G F H K L H K

TABLE VIII.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIE'LS Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 Years. Number of
Days. His 483 Years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 200 249 264 250 Sept. 22 101 548 5
PTOLEMY EPIPHANES Oct. 12 549 6 PTOLEMY EPIPHANES 199 250 259 251 Sept. 17 106
549 6 Oct. 12 550 7 198 251 254 252 Sept. 12 111 550 7 Oct. 12 551 8 b. 197 252
249 253 Sept. 6 117 551 8 Oct. 11 552 9 196 253 243 254 Sept. 1 122 552 9 Oct.
11 553 10 195 254 238 255 Aug. 27 127 553 10 Oct. 11 554 11 194 255 233 256
Aug. 22 132 554 11 Oct. 11 555 12 b. 193 256 228 257 Aug. 16 138 555 12 Oct. 10
556 13 192 257 222 258 Aug. 11 143 556 13 Oct. 10 557 14 191 258 217 259 Aug. 6
148 557 14 Oct. 10 558 15 190 259 212 260 Aug. 1 153 558 15 Oct. 10 559 16 b.
189 260 207 261 Jul. 26 159 559 16 Oct. 9 560 17 188 261 201 262 Jul. 21 164
560 17 Oct. 9 561 18 187 262 196 263 Jul. 16 169 561 18 Oct. 9 562 19 186 263
191 264 Jul. 11 174 562 19 Oct. 9 563 20 b. 185 264 186 265 Jul. 5 180 563 20
Oct. 8 564 21 184 265 180 266 Jun. 30 185 564 21 Oct. 8 565 22 183 266 175 267
Jun. 25 190 565 22 Oct. 8 566 23 182 267 170 268 Jun. 20 195 566 23 Oct. 8 567
24 b. 181 268 165 269 Jun. 14 201 567 24 Oct. 7 568 1 PTOLEMY PHILOMETOR 180
269 159 270 Jun. 9 206 568 1 PTOLEMY PHILOMETOR Oct. 7 569 2 179 270 154 271
Jun. 4 211 569 2 Oct. 7 570 3 178 271 149 272 May 30 216 570 3 Oct. 7 571 4 b.
177 272 144 273 May 24 222 571 4 Oct. 6 572 5 176 273 138 274 May 19 227 572 5
Oct. 6 573 6 175 274 133 275 May 14 232 573 6 Oct. 6 574 7 174 275 128 276 May
9 237 574 7 Oct. 6 575 8 b. 173 276 123 277 May 3 243 575 8 Oct. 5 576 9 172
277 117 278 Apr. 28 248 576 9 Oct. 5 577 10 171 278 112 279 Apr. 23 253 577 10
Oct. 5 578 11 170 279 107 280 Apr. 18 258 578 11 Oct. 5 579 12 b. 169 280 102
281 Apr. 12 264 579 12 Oct. 4 580 13 168 281 96 282 Apr. 7. 269 580 13 Oct. 4
581 14 167 282 91 283 Apr. 2 274 581 14 Oct. 4 582 15 166 283 86 284 Mar. 28
279 582 15 Oct. 4 583 16 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE IX.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. b. 165 284 81 285 Mar. 22 285 583 16
PTOLEMY PHILOMETOR. Oct. 3 584 17 PTOLEMY PHILOMETOR. 164 285 75 286 Mar. 17
290 584 17 Oct. 3 585 18 163 286 70 287 Mar. 12 295 585 18 Oct. 3 586 19 162
287 65 288 Mar. 7 300 586 19 Oct. 3 587 20 b. 161 288 60 289 Mar. 1 306 587 20
Oct. 2 588 21 160 289 54 290 Febr. 24 311 588 21 Oct. 2 589 22 159 290 49 291
Febr. 19 316 589 22 Oct. 2 590 23 158 291 44 292 Febr. 14 321 590 23 Oct. 2 591
24 b. 157 292 39 293 Febr. 9 327 591 24 Oct. 1 592 25 156 293 33 294 Febr. 3
332 592 25 Oct. 1 593 26 155 294 28 295 Jan. 29 337 593 26 Oct. 1 594 27 154
295 23 296 Jan. 24 342 594 27 Oct. 1 595 28 b. 153 296 18 297 Jan. 19 348 595
28 Sept. 30 596 29 152 297 12 298 Jan. 13 353 596 29 Sept. 30 597 30 151 298 7
299 Jan. 8 358 597 30 Sept. 30 598 31 150 299 2 300 Jan. 3 360 598 31 Sept. 30
599 32 300 0 301 Dec. 29 3 b. 149 301 357 302 Dec. 23 9 599 32 Sept. 29 600 33
148 302 351 303 Dec. 18 14 600 33 Sept. 29 601 34 147 303 346 304 Dec. 13 19
601 34 Sept. 29 602 35 146 304 341 305 Dec. 8 24 602 35 Sept. 29 603 1 PTOLEMY
EVER GETES II. b. 145 305 336 306 Dec. 2 30 603 1 PTOLEMY EVER GELES II. Sept.
28 604 2 144 306 330 307 Nov. 27 35 604 2 Sept. 28 605 3 143 307 325 308 Nov.
22 40 605 3 Sept. 28 606 4 142 308 320 309 Nov. 17 45 606 4 Sept. 28 607 5 b.
141 309 315 310 Nov. 11 51 607 5 Sept. 27 608 6 140 310 309 311 Nov. 6 56 608 6
Sept. 27 609 7 139 311 304 312 Nov. 1 61 609 7 Sept. 27 610 8 138 312 299 313
Oct. 27 66 610 8 Sept. 27 611 9 b. 137 313 294 314 Oct. 21 72 611 9 Sept. 26
612 10 136 314 288 315 Oct. 16 77 612 10 Sept. 26 613 11 135 315 283 316 Oct.
11 82 613 11 Sept. 26 614 12 134 316 278 317 Oct. 6 87 614 12 Sept. 26 615 13
b. 133 317 273 318 Sept. 30 93 615 13 Sept. 25 616 14 132 318 267 319 Sept. 25
98 616 14 Sept. 25 617 15 131 319 262 320 Sept. 20 103 617 15 Sept. 25 618 16 B
C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE X.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 130 320 257 321 Sep. 15 108 618 16
PTOLEMY EVER GETES II. Sept. 25 619 17 PTOLEMY EVER GETES II. b. 129 321 252
322 Sep. 9 114 619 17 Sept. 24 620 18 128 322 246 323 Sep. 4 119 620 18 Sept.
24 621 19 127 323 241 324 Aug 30 124 621 19 Sept. 24 622 20 126 324 236 325
Aug. 25 129 622 20 Sept. 24 623 21 b. 125 325 231 326 Aug. 19 135 623 21 Sept.
23 624 22 124 326 225 327 Aug. 14 140 624 22 Sept. 23 625 23 123 327 220 328
Aug. 9 145 625 23 Sept. 23 626 24 122 328 215 329 Aug. 4 150 626 24 Sept. 23
627 25 b. 121 329 210 330 Jul. 29 156 627 25 Sept. 22 628 26 120 330 204 331
Jul. 24 161 628 26 Sept. 22 629 27 119 331 199 332 Jul. 19 166 629 27 Sept. 22
630 28 118 332 194 333 Jul. 14 171 630 28 Sept. 22 631 29 b. 117 333 189 334
Jul. 8 177 631 29 Sept. 21 632 1 PTOLEMY SOTER. 116 334 183 335 Jul. 3 182 632
1 PTOLEMY SOTER. Sept. 21 633 2 115 335 178 336 Jun. 28 187 633 2 Sept. 21 634
3 114 336 173 337 Jun. 23 192 634 3 Sept. 21 635 4 b. 113 337 168 338 Jun. 17
198 635 4 Sept. 20 636 5 112 338 162 339 Jun. 12 203 636 5 Sept. 20 637 6 111
339 157 340 Jun. 7 208 637 6 Sept. 20 638 7 110 340 152 341 Jun. 2 213 638 7
Sept. 20 639 8 b. 109 341 147 342 May 27 219 639 8 Sept. 19 640 9 108 342 141
343 May 22 224 640 9 Sept. 19 641 10 107 343 136 344 May 17 229 641 10 Sept. 19
642 11 106 344 131 345 May 12 234 642 11 Sept. 19 643 12 b. 105 345 126 346 May
6 240 643 12 Sept. 18 644 13 104 346 120 347 May 1 245 644 13 Sept. 18 645 14
103 347 115 348 Apr. 26 250 645 14 Sept. 18 646 15 102 348 110 349 Apr. 21 255
646 15 Sept. 18 647 16 b. 101 349 105 350 Apr. 15 261 647 16 Sept. 17 648 17
100 350 99 351 Apr. 10 266 648 17 Sept. 17 649 18 99 351 94 352 Apr. 5 271 649
18 Sept. 17 650 19 98 352 89 353 Mar. 31 276 650 19 Sept. 17 651 20 b. 97 353
84 354 Mar. 25 282 651 20 Sept. 16 652 21 96 354 78 355 Mar. 20 287 652 21
Sept. 16 653 22 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE XI.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. the THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 95 355 73 356 Mar. 15 292 653 22
PTOLEMY SOTER Sept. 16 654 23 PTOLEMY SOTER. 94 356 68 357 Mar. 10 297 654 23
Sept. 16 655 24 b. 93 357 63 358 Mar. 4 303 655 24 Sept. 15 656 25 92 358 57
359 Febr. 27 308 656 25 Sept. 15 657 26 91 359 52 360 Febr. 22 313 657 26 Sept.
15 658 27 90 360 47 361 Febr. 17 318 658 27 Sept. 15 659 28 b. 89 361 42 362
Febr. 12 324 659 28 Sept. 14 660 29 88 362 36 363 Febr. 6 329 660 29 Sept. 14
661 30 87 363 31 364 Febr, 1 334 661 30 Sept. 14 662 31 86 364 26 365 Jan. 27
339 662 31 Sept. 14 663 32 b. 85 365 21 366 Jan. 22 345 663 32 Sept. 13 664 33
84 366 15 367 Jan. 16 350 664 33 Sept. 13 665 34 83 367 10 368 Jan. 11 355 665
34 Sept. 13 666 35 82 368 5 369 Jan. 6 360 666 35 Sept. 13 667 36 b. 81 369 0
370 Jan. 1 360 667 36 Sept. 12 668 1 DIONYSIUS 370 0 371 Dec. 26 6 80 371 354
372 Dec. 21 11 668 1 DIONYSIUS. Sept. 12 669 2 79 372 349 373 Dec. 16 16 669 2
Sept. 12 670 3 78 373 344 374 Dec. 11 21 670 3 Sept. 12 671 4 b 77 374 339 375
Dec. 5 27 671 4 Sept. 11 672 5 76 375 333 376 Nov. 30 32 672 5 Sept. 11 673 6
75 376 328 377 Nov. 25 37 673 6 Sept. 11 674 7 74 377 323 378 Nov. 20 42 674 7
Sept. 11 675 8 b. 73 378 318 379 Nov. 14 48 675 8 Sept. 10 676 9 72 379 312 380
Nov. 9 53 676 9 Sept. 10 677 10 71 380 307 381 Nov. 4 58 677 10 Sept. 10 678 11
70 381 302 382 Oct. 30 63 678 11 Sept. 10 679 12 b. 69 382 297 383 Oct. 24 69
679 12 Sept. 9 680 13 68 383 291 384 Oct. 19 74 680 13 Sept. 9 681 14 67 384
286 385 Oct. 14 79 681 14 Sept. 9 682 15 66 385 281 386 Oct. 9 84 682 15 Sept.
9 683 16 b. 65 386 276 387 Oct. 3 90 683 16 Sept. 8 684 17 64 387 270 388 Sept.
28 95 684 17 Sept. 8 685 18 63 388 265 389 Sept. 23 100 685 18 Sept. 8 686 19
62 389 260 390 Sept. 18 105 686 19 Sept. 8 687 20 b. 61 390 255 391 Sept. 12
110 687 20 Sept. 7 688 21 B C D F D G F H K L H K

TABLE XII.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 60 391 249 392 Sept. 7 116 688 21
DIONYSIUS Sept. 7 689 22 DIONYSIUS 59 392 244 393 Sept. 2 121 689 22 Sept. 7
690 23 58 393 239 394 Aug. 28 126 690 23 Sept. 7 691 24 b. 57 394 234 395 Aug.
22 132 691 24 Sept. 6 692 25 56 395 228 396 Aug. 17 137 692 25 Sept. 6 693 26
55 396 223 397 Aug. 12 142 693 26 Sept. 6 694 27 54 397 218 398 Aug. 7 147 694
27 Sept. 6 695 28 b. 53 398 213 399 Aug. 1 153 695 28 Sept. 5 696 29 52 399 207
400 Jul. 27 158 696 29 Sept. 5 697 1 CLEOPATRA 51 400 202 401 Jul. 22 163 697 1
CLEOPATRA Sept. 5 698 2 50 401 197 402 Jul. 17 168 698 2 Sept. 5 699 3 b. 49
402 192 403 Jul. 11 174 699 3 Sept. 4 700 4 48 403 186 404 Jul. 6 179 700 4
Sept. 4 701 5 47 404 181 405 Jul. 1 184 701 5 Sept. 4 702 6 46 405 176 406 Jun.
26 189 702 6 Sept. 4 703 7 b. 45 406 171 407 Jun. 20 195 703 7 Sept. 3 704 8 44
407 165 408 Jun. 15 200 704 8 Sept. 3 705 9 43 408 160 409 Jun. 10 205 705 9
Sept. 3 706 10 42 409 155 410 Jun. 5 210 706 10 Sept. 3 707 11 b. 41 410 150
411 May 30 216 707 11 Sept. 2 708 12 40 411 144 412 May 25 221 708 12 Sept. 2
709 13 39 412 139 413 May 20 226 709 13 Sept. 2 710 14 38 413 134 414 May 15
231 710 14 Sept. 2 711 15 b. 37 414 129 415 May 9 237 711 15 Sept. 1 712 16 36
415 123 416 May 4 242 712 16 Sept. 1 713 17 35 416 118 417 Apr. 29 247 713 17
Sept. 1 714 18 34 417 113 418 Apr. 24 252 714 18 Sept. 1 715 19 b. 33 418 108
419 Apr. 18 258 715 19 Aug. 31 716 20 32 419 102 420 Apr. 13 263 716 20 Aug. 31
717 21 31 420 97 421 Apr. 8 268 717 21 Aug. 31 718 22 30 421 92 422 Apr. 3 273
718 22 Aug. 31 719 1 AUGUSTUS b. 29 422 87 423 Mar. 28 279 719 1 AUGUST 9. Aug.
30 720 2 28 423 81 424 Mar. 23 284 720 2 Aug. 30 721 3 27 424 76 425 Mar. 18
289 721 3 Aug. 30 722 4 26 425 71 426 Mar. 13 294 722 4 Aug. 30 723 5 B C D F D
G F H K L H K

TABLE XIII.
JULIAN Years before the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. b. 25 426 66 427 Mar. 7 300 723 5
AUGUSTUS. Aug. 29 724 6 AUGUSTUS. 24 427 60 428 Mar. 2 305 724 6 Aug. 29 725 7
23 428 55 429 Feb. 25 310 725 7 Aug. 29 726 8 22 429 50 430 Feb. 20 315 726 8
Aug. 29 727 9 b. 21 430 45 431 Feb. 15 321 727 9 Aug. 28 728 10 20 431 39 432
Feb. 9 326 728 10 Aug 28 729 11 19 432 34 433 Feb. 4 331 729 11 Aug. 28 730 12
18 433 29 434 Jan. 30 336 730 12 Aug. 28 731 13 b. 17 434 24 435 Jan. 25 342
731 13 Aug. 27 732 14 16 435 18 436 Jan. 19 347 732 14 Aug. 27 733 15 15 436 13
437 Jan. 14 352 733 15 Aug 27 734 16 14 437 8 438 Jan. 9 357 734 16 Aug. 27 735
17 b. 13 438 3 439 Jan. 4 360 735 17 Aug. 26 736 18 439 0 440 Dec. 29 3 12 440
357 441 Dec. 24 8 736 18 Aug. 26 737 19 11 441 352 442 Dec. 19 13 737 19 Aug.
26 738 20 10 442 347 443 Dec. 14 18 738 20 Aug. 26 739 21 b. 9 443 342 444 Dec.
8 24 739 21 Aug. 25 740 22 8 444 336 445 Dec. 3 29 740 22 Aug. 25 741 23 7 445
331 446 Nov. 28 34 741 23 Aug. 25 742 24 6 446 326 447 Nov. 23 39 742 24 Aug.
25 743 25 b. 5 447 321 448 Nov. 17 45 743 25 Aug. 24 744 26 There being a
Decree of AUGUSTUS Caesar, that Registers should be made of the Names and
Estates of all the Subjects of the Roman Empire; Luke II. 1, 2. in order to
this, Joseph with Mary his betrothed Wife came from their Dewlling Place, at
Nazareth in Galilee, to Bethlehem in Iudaea, where they were born; they being
of the lineage of David, and that being the Seat of his Family. Luke II. 4. On
this occasion it was that our Savior was born there this Year: and that on
Dec. 25. according to the Churches account. From hence we reckon the years of
the true Age of CHRIST.
4 448 315 449 Nov. 12 50 744 26 Aug. 24 745 27 In the 1st or 2d Month of this
3d year before the Vulgar Era, dyed Herod the great; having first slaughtered
the Infants at Bethlehem, and then his own Son Antipater, whom he had designed
for his Heir. He dyed in the utmost degree of torment and misery; leaving 3
Sons, between whom his Dominions were divided by Augustus toward the middle of
this Year. His Son Archelaus was made Tetrarch of Iudaea and Samaria; Herod
Antipas of Galilee and Peraea; and Philip of Iturea, Trachonitis, and
Lysanias's Abilene. Josephus de Bello Judaico I. 21. and II. 1. Jos. Antiq.
XVII. 10, and 13.
3 449 310 450 Nov. 7 55 745 27 Aug. 24 746 28 2 450 305 451 Nov. 2 60 746 28
Aug. 24 747 29 b. 1 451 300 452 Oct. 27 66 747 29 Aug. 23 748 30 B C D F D G F
H K L H K

TABLE XIV.
JULIAN Years of the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. DANIEL'S Years of 360 Days.
PTOLEMIES CANON. The years in it are of 365 Days. His 483 years. Number of
Days. His 483 years. The Days on which every year begins. Number of Days. Years
of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. The THOTH at which every year begins.
Years of Nabonasar. Years of Kings reigns. 1 452 294 453 Oct. 22 71 748 30
AUGUSTUS. Aug. 23 749 31 AUGUSTUS. 2 453 289 454 Oct. 17 76 749 31 Aug. 23 750
32 3 454 284 455 Oct. 12 81 750 32 Aug. 23 751 33 b. 4 455 279 456 Oct. 6 87
751 33 Aug. 22 752 34 5 456 273 457 Oct. 1 92 752 34 Aug. 22 753 35 6 457 268
458 Sept. 26 97 753 35 Aug. 22 754 36 Augustus having deprived Archelaus for
misgovernment* adds Iud^a and Samaria to the Province of Syria: and orders the
new Governor Quirinius to levy a Tax upon every ones Estate according to the
Valuation that was made in the 4th year before the Vulgar Era. Luke II. 2.
Act. V. 37. Other notes for this Table see in the next following pages.
7 458 263 459 Sept. 21 102 754 36 Aug. 22 755 37 b. 8 459 258 460 Sept. 15 108
755 37 Aug. 21 756 38 9 460 252 461 Sept. 10 113 756 38 Aug. 21 757 39 10 461
247 462 Sept. 5 118 757 39 Aug. 21 758 40 11 462 242 463 Aug. 31 123 758 40
Aug. 21 759 41 b. 12 463 237 464 Aug. 25 129 759 41 Aug. 20 760 42 13 464 231
465 Aug. 20 134 760 42 Aug. 20 761 43 14 465 226 466 Aug. 15 139 761 43 Aug. 20
762 1 TIBERIUS. 15 466 221 467 Aug. 10 144 762 1 TIBERIUS. Aug. 20 763 2 b. 16
467 216 468 Aug. 4 150 763 2 Aug. 19 764 3 17 468 210 469 Jul. 30 155 764 3
Aug. 19 765 4 18 469 205 470 Jul. 25 160 765 4 Aug. 19 766 5 19 470 200 471
Jul. 20 165 766 5 Aug. 19 767 6 b. 20 471 195 472 Jul. 14 171 767 6 Aug. 18 768
7 21 472 189 473 Jul. 9 176 768 7 Aug. 18 769 8 22 473 184 474 Jul. 4 181 769 8
Aug. 18 770 9 23 474 179 475 Jun. 29 186 770 9 Aug. 18 771 10 b. 24 475 174 476
Jun. 23 192 771 10 Aug. 17 772 11 25 476 168 477 Jun. 18 197 772 11 Aug. 17 773
12 26 477 163 478 Jun. 13 202 773 12 Aug. 17 774 13 27 478 158 479 Jun. 8 207
774 13 Aug. 17 775 14 b. 28 479 153 480 Jun. 2 213 775 14 Aug. 16 776 15 29 480
147 481 May 28 218 776 15 Aug. 16 777 16 30 481 142 482 May 23 223 777 16 Aug.
16 778 17 31 482 137 483 May 18 228 778 17 Aug. 16 779 18 b. 32 483 132 ending
May 11 0 779 18 Aug. 15 780 19 33 Apr. 3 being Passover CHRIST dies. 780 19 0
0 0 0 B C D F D G F H K L H K

Years of the Vulgar Era of CHRIST. Years of the true Age of CHRIST. Years of
TIBERIUS. DANIEL'S 483 years. A Chronological Account of such matters contained
in the Gospel, and also of such other concurrent things as may be of use for
the better understanding of this Prophecy. 26 29 12 477 THis year Valerius
Gratus was recalled from his Government of Iudaea. He had been put in by
Tiberius in the beginning of his Reign, and had now held the government 11
years: in the End whereof he made Cajaphas High Priest. Ios. Ant. XVIII. 3. The
next Governor was Pontius Pilate. Ios. ibid. He was made Procurator of Iudaea
in the 12th year of Tiberius, as Eusebius says twice in his Hist. Eccles. I.
9. Pilate continued in the Government 10 years, and was recalled in the last
year of Tiberius. Ios. Ant. XVIII. 5 ending. By all these notes of time it
appears that both Cajaphas and Pontius Pilate came into their Offices this
year. 27 30 13 478 Iun. 8th begins Daniel's 479th year. Aug. 19th begins the
14th of Tiberius. Dec. 25th begins Christ's 31th year. There was in these times
every where among the Jews a general Expectation of the Coming of the Messiah,
as appeared before at the time of Christ's birth. Matt. II. 1. etc. But now his
coming was to be proclaimed by John Baptist, whose preaching is therefore
called the beginning of the Gospel. Marc. I. 1. Act. X. 37. and was in the next
year after this. b. 28 31 14 479 Iun. 2d begins Daniel's 480th year. Aug. 19th
begins the 15th of Tiberius. In which year, Pilate being Governor, and
Cajaphas High Priest, John Baptist began his preaching in the Wilderness of
Iudaea. Luke III. 1, 3. All the People flocked thither to him. Matt. III. 5.
and were baptized by him in Jordan, confessing their Sins. v. 6. The Priests
and Levites, hearing of this, sent from Jerusalem to know of him by what
Authority he did this. Ioh. l. 25. All the People then mused whether John were
the Messiah, or no. Luke III. 15. John declared to them all, that he was not
the Messiah, but that he was sent before him to be his Forerunner. Luke III.
16. Ioh. I. 15, 23, 27. The next day after he had given this Answer to the
Priests, Jesus then walking by him, John saw the Holy Ghost descending upon
him. Thereupon John declared that this was He: and that he knew him by this
Sign, as he was told he should by him that sent him. Ioh. I. 29 -- 34. John's
Disciples that heard this, immediately followed our Savior. v. 37. Christ took
them with him, leaving John to his business, which was to prepare the People
for Christ Ioh. I. 31. The mean while our Savior went into Galilee, where he
was to begin his Preaching. Esai. IX. 1. There at Cana he began to work
Miracles. John. II. 11. He went from thence to Capernaum. v. 12. where also he
wrought Miracles, and thereby much displeased his Brethren at Nazareth. Luke
IV. 23. At this time Christ was about 30 years old. Luke III. 23. He was not
full 31, till Dec. 25. which began his 32th. 29 32 15 480 Toward the
Passover, Christ came up to Jerusalem. Ioh. II. 30. There he acted as a
Prophet, in whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. Ioh. II. 14, 18.
The Jews thereupon required of him a Sign, for the proving of his Authority.
Our Savior knowing they were such as would not be convinced by a Sign, gave
them none, but referred them to that great Sign which he intended to give them
by his Resurrection from the Dead. He did it in these words, Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again. The Jews understanding he
had spoken these words of that august pile of the Temple, which Herod had
built; they said to him, This Temple has been building now these 46 years, and
will thou rear it up in 3 days? v. 18 -- 20. By these words it appears that
this Passover was in the 29 year of the Vulgar Era. For about the Passover
of this year was the beginning of the 47th year from the Spring time of the
18th year before Christ, when Herod began his Building of the (...), being the
outer part of the Temple. Ios. Ant. XV. 14. The Building work about the Temple
was continued till the year of Christ 63. And then the dismissing of the
workmen, to the Number of 18000, was one of the occasions of the breaking out
of the Jewish war. Ios. Ant. XX. 8. Apr. 15. was the Passover this year.
Christ then at Jerusalem wrought Miracles, upon which many that saw them,
believed on him. Ioh. II. 23. and followed him into Iudaea, where he staid for
some time, and baptized all that came to him. Ioh. III. 22 -- 26. These were
more than John baptized, at this time; which when John heard of, he greatly
rejoiced. v. 26 -- 29. But the Pharisees were moved at it. Ioh. IV. 1. Christ
hearing of this, and knowing that as yet his time was not come, departed from
thence, and went away through Samaria into Galilee. There he went about, as he
had done before, preaching, and working Miracles. Ioh. IV. 43 -- 54. The mean
while May 28. had begun Daniel's 481 year. Aug. 19. began the 16th of Tiberius.
Dec. 25. begins Christ's. 33. 30 33 16 481 The blessed Jesus came from Nazareth
in Galilee to be baptized by John Baptist in the river Jordan. Mar. I. 9. It
was after all others had been baptized. Luke III. (...). There again the Holy
Ghost descended upon him. Matt. III. 16. Mar. I. 10. Luke III. 21, 22. It was
at his coming up out of the water; and it is not said that John saw it, but
that Christ himself did. After this, immediately from thence the Spirit led him
into the Wilderness. Mar. I. 12. Luke IV. 1. There he fasted 40 days, and was
all that while tempted of the Devil. Luke IV. 2. who, after he had carried him
several ways, at last brought him to the top of the Temple at Jerusalem. Luke
IV. 9. There it seems to have been that the Devil left him, and Angels came and
ministered to him. This was but a little before the Passover; for there he was
at the Feast, Ioh. V. 1. which was this year on the 7th of April. Seeing then
at the pool of Bethesda a lame man, that had been so 38 years, he made him
perfectly whole on the Sabbath day. The Jews holding this to be a breach of the
Sabbath, would therefore have killed him: but they sought much more to do it
for his calling God his Father. Ioh. V. 15, 18. Christ knowing their design,
Ioh. VII. 19, 23. which was also visible to others, v. 25. went therefore from
Jerusalem, because he would not die before the time appointed of the Father: and
he came thither no more till above 2 years after, and even then he found this
matter fresh in their memory. Ioh. VII. 23. The mean while Herod Antipas had
shut up John Baptist in prison at his Castle of Machaerus in Peraea. It was at
the Passover time, or soon after, that Christ came to hear of this. Whereupon,
when Christ left Jerusalem, he went from thence into Galilee. Matt. IV. 12.
There first he came to his Brethren at Nazareth. Luke IV. 16. But they were so
angry with him on the forementioned account, that they coldly received him, and
at last were ready to have killed him. Luke IV. 28. Thereupon he went, and
settled himself at Capernaum. Luke IV. 31. which is therefore called his own
City. Matt. IX. 1. From thence he went over all Galilee, preaching, and working
Miracles, Mar. I. 39. all the rest of that year. Wherein May 23 began Daniel's
482 year, Aug. 19th began the 17th of Tiberius, and Dec. 25. began Christ's 34.
31 34 17 482 Christ returned from his Progress back to Capernaum Matt. IX. 1.
Mar. II. 1. and there being at the Custom house by the Sea side, Matt. IX. 9.
Mar. II. 13, 14. he called Matthew the Publican to be his Disciple. Matt. IX.
9. Mar. II. 14. Soon after this, Jesus passing through the Corn fields, his
Disciples plucked the ears of Corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands.
Matt. XII. 1. Mar. II. 23. Luke VI. 1. This was on the Sabbath day, which made
the Pharisees yet more angry with him: and Luke says it was on the
second-first Sabbath, which was a great Aggravation. Probably the 1st Sabbath
of the year was in Tisri, at or near the Feast of the beginning of the year:
and as that Feast was appointed to be kept in memory of the Creation, so this
Sabbah might be observed in memory of the day in which God rested from his
Work. But there was a 2d beginning of the year appointed in Nisan, being the
month of their deliverance out of Egypt; and this might well be the Sabbath in
Passover week, which they observed in memory of that Deliverance. For then was
their Harvest, of which the 1st Sheaf was to be offered to God, on the morrow
after the Sabbath. Lev. XXIII. 11. which is now our Easterday. All agree that
the Disciples plucking the ears of Corn was much about the time of the 3d
Passover. After which our Savior healed another cripple on the Sabbath day,
at which things together the Pharisees were filled with madness. Luke VI. 11.
and took Counsel how to destroy him. Matt. XII. 14. But it seems they durst
not attempt it at present: for now there came multitudes of People from all
parts of Palestine to hear him. Mar. III. 7, 8. This made it necessary for him
to Ordain others into the Ministry. Therefore having first prayed all night,
the next day he called, and chose his XII Disciples. Luke VI, 13. whom he
ordained, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to
preach. Mar. III. 14. tho he did not send them from him till a good while after
this. But first taking them with him throughout all Galilee, he preached there
in every City and Village. Luke VIII. 1. At Na^m he raised a Widows Son, that
was carrying forth to his burial. Luke VII. 14, 15. About the same time some of
John Baptist's disciples coming to him, whom John had sent out of his prison to
our Savior, to satisfy them that he was the Christ; our blessed Savior gave
them this among other Proofs of it, that here they saw the dead raised. Luc.
VII, 22. Soon after this he also raised the only daughter of Iairus, that was
one of the Rulers of the Synagogue. Mar. V. 22 -- 42. Luke VIII. 41 -- 55.
After this he went on preaching, and healing throughout the country. But he was
no where so ill received, as at his own town of Nazareth: where they despised
him for what they saw of the meaness of his Family. Matt. XIII. 55. Mar. VI. 3.
So that no good being to be done there, he left them, and went on preaching and
healing through out all the Citys and Villages of that country. Matt. IX. 35.
Mar. VI. 6. In this 31 year of the Vulgar Era, May 18th, began Daniel's 483d
year; Aug. 19. began the 18th of Tiberius; and Dec. 25th began Christ's 35th
year of his age. It was toward the end of this year, or the beginning of the
next, that Herod put John Baptist to death, Matt. XIV. 10, 11. Mar. VI. 27. of
which see also Ios. Ant. XVIII. 7. About the same time our blessed Lord, having
given the XII full Instructions, sent them forth to preach the Gospel, and to
prove it with Miracles. Matt. X. 1. Mar. VI. 7 -- 13. Luke IX. 1 -- 6.
Accordingly they went through the Towns, preaching and healing every where Luke
IX. 6. b. 32 35 18 483 In the beginning of this year, there was a great fame of
the preaching of Christ's XII Apostles, and of the Wonders they did in his
Name. Whereupon the People took up a fancy that John was risen again, and that
this was HE. Luke IX. 7. Herod's heart also misgave him that it was true. Mar.
VI. 14, 16. It happened about the same time that John's Disciples came and told
our Savior of his Death, and how they had buried him. Matt. XIV, 12. The XII
also returned, and brought an Account of what they had done in their Mission.
Mar. VI. 30. Luke IX. 10. Our Savior understanding that Herod had a mind to
see him, Luke IX. 9. thought best to go out of his way. He took the XII with
him into a desert place belonging to the City called Bethsaida. Luke IX. 10.
Thither a great multitude followed him on the account of his Miracles. John.
VI. 2. And he taught them there. Mar. VI. 34. Luke IX. 11. The people staying
too late to get back to the places where they might have provisions; Christ was
pleased to feed them there with such as he had, being only five loaves and two
small fishes. With these he fed 5000 men, besides women and children. Matt.
XIV. 21. and yet after they had eaten, and were filled, the fragments that
remained filled twelve baskets. Matt. XIV. 20. Mar. VI. 43. Luke IX. 17. Ioh.
VI. 13. In this last place it is said that at this time the Passover was nigh
Ioh. VI. 4. by which it appears that Christ was not at this Passover, but that
still he continued in Galilee. For after this Miracle, when the people would
have made him King by force; to avoid this, having first shipped away his
Disciples, he withdrew himself into a Mountain to pray; and from thence, the
night being stormy, he followed them walking on the Sea; and coming up into the
Ship he went ashore in the land of Genesareth. Matt. XIV. 34. Mar. VI. 53.
Thence he went through that whole region round about. Mar. VI. 55. from thence,
to the parts about Tire and Sidon. Mar. VII. 24 and thence back through
Decapolis to the Sea of Galilee. v. 31. There in the desert he fed 4000 men,
besides women and children, with seven Loaves and a few little fishes; whereof,
after they had eaten and were filled, the fragments that remained were seven
baskets full. Matt. XV. 34 -- 38, and Mar. VIII. 1 -- 9. It was soon after
this, as appears by our Saviors words to his Disciples, Matt. XVI. 9, 10. that
he had the debate with the Pharisees and Sadducees, in the first verse of that
chapter. They required of him a Sign from heaven, to prove that he was the
Messiah, which they resolved not to believe. He sighed deeply in his spirit,
Mar. VIII. 12. and asked them, Ye Hypocrites, you can discern the face of the
Sky, but can you not discern the Signs of the Times? Matt. XVI. 3. It is hard
to say what Times he should mean, but those two times that are mentioned in
this Prophecy: namely, first, the time of the Messiah being cut off, which was
to be After the LXII Weeks; and 2dly, the time of the single Week, that follows
in the end of the chapter, the Week that was appointed of God, for the
destroying of the City and Temple at Jerusalem, and the dissolving of the
Jewish Church. That our Savior intended the former of these; namely, the time
when the Messiah was to be cut off; it will presently appear, by considering at
what time it was that he said this. It was now this very year, on the 11th day
of May, or some little time later, that the LXII Weeks were expired. The LXII
Weeks expired.
Now our Savior knew, the time was come, that St. Luke speaks of, Luke IX. 51.
the Time when he should be taken up, that is crucified, as the pious and
learned Dr. Hammond expounds it: Or rather, as Christ expounds it himself; for
this was his manner of speaking; He said, the Son of man should be lifted up,
Ioh. III. 14. He used the word lifted up, thereby signifying what death he
should dye. XII. 32, 33. and he was therefore delivered to Pilate to be
crucified, for the fulfilling of this Prophecy, as the Evangelist expounds it,
Ioh. XVIII. 32. For the precise TIME of the Messiah his death, there is no
other prediction of it in Scripture, than that which we have in this Prophecy.
Therefore those words of St. Luke before mentioned can signify no other TIME
than this, AFTER the expireing of the LXII Weeks. So the most learned Grotius
in his Annotations on that Text, Matt. XVI. 3. understands those words of our
blessed Savior to the Pharisees and Saducees before mentioned. He takes them,
as if Christ had said to those Jews; if you looked into the Prophecies of
Scripture, with as much concernedness as you do into the face of Heaven when
you are taking a Journey, you would see and acknowledge out of doubt that the
end of DANIEL'S Weeks is at hand. Our blessed Lord knew it to be so near, that
there was not one DAY of another Week left: he had not a year longer to live.
But he also knew that his piece of a DAY should not be at an end till next
Passover. He knew that that was his HOUR. Ioh. XIII. I. He should be cut off
then, and no sooner. Therefore in the mean space he takes particular care that
this should be no surprise to his Disciples. He first broke it to them,
immediately after the reproof that he gave to the Pharisees. It was in his
progress in the parts about Caesarea Philippi, that he (...) etc.
BEGAN to show his Disciples, that he must go up to Jerusalem, and there be
rejected by the Sanhedrim, and be killed, and after three days must rise again.
Matt. XVI. 21. Mar. VIII. 31. Luke IX. 22. These Words were so frightfull to
them, that Peter took him aside, and rebuked him for saying such things. Our
blessed Lord sharply returned it upon him: but nevertheless, a week after this,
he took Peter, together with James and John, to be present at his
Transfiguration. Matt. XVII. 1. Mar. IX. 2. Luke IX. 28. It seems not
improbable that the Feast of Transfiguration is rightly placed on the 6th of
August. For it was kept on that day in the Eastern Church in St. Saba's time,
which was within 500 years after this; as appears in the 60th chapter of his
Life, published by Cotelerius in the 3d Vol. of his Greek Monuments. There are
also in that Volume some pieces of Nicon, by which it appears that this Feast
was kept yearly 8 days at Jerusalem; but in the Church of Antioch, only on the
day abovementioned. At this time the Apostles both saw and heard Moses and
Elias, there present, and talking with our Savior. Their discourse was
concerning his EXODUS, (...), a proper word for the time of the Passover, that
being the very Type of his suffering which (...) he was about to accomplish at
Jerusalem. Luke IX. 31. After this our Savior being returned to the rest of
his Disciples, he again told them all, and bid them remember it, that he should
be betrayed, and delivered into the hands of men, and that they should kill
him, and the third day he should rise again. Matt. XVII. 22. Mar. IX. 31. Luke
IX. 44. This was so contrary to their Notion of a Messiah, that they could not
understand any thing that he said of this kind: and yet they would not show
their Ignorance by asking him what he meant by it. b. 32 35 19 On the 19th of
August, which was about this time, the Emperor TIBERIUS began the 19th year of
his reign. It appears that our Savior came to Capernaum, and staid there some
little time after this. Matt. XVII. 24. till XIX. 1. Mar. IX. 33. till X. 1.
But as St. Luke goes on, IX. 51. the time being come that he should be taken
up, he resolved thereupon to go to Jerusalem, to be there at all the great
Feasts, and to make use of those Opportunities, to do all the good that he
could before his going out of the World. The next Feast was that of
TABERNACLES, on the 15th day of Tisri, which was about the middle of October.
Against that Feast, his angry Relations at Nazareth would needs have him go up
with them to Jerusalem, to advance them together with himself to Greatness by
his working Miracles there; or else to leave him to his Enemies. Whatsoever the
matter was, he would not go up with them, but stayed behind them in Galilee.
Ioh. VII. 9. When they were gone up, he came after them, as it were in secret
Verse. 10. leaving a great part of his company behind him. For whereas he was
stopped in his next way through Samaria, Luke IX. 52. for toward any of the
great Feasts, the people there would hardly receive any one that was going up
to Jerusalem; Our Savior took this Occasion to send out LXX of his Disciples
to prepare the people to receive him in all places where he should come for the
future. Luke X. 1. and so took none but the Twelve, and those perhaps not all
together, along with him in his Journey to Jerusalem. Thither he came about the
midst of the Feast, Ioh. VII. 14 Where immediately as soon as it was known, the
Jews were ready to kill him, Verse. 19. upon the old grudge they had against
him, for healing on the Sabbath day. Verse. 23. But yet they could not hurt him
Verse. 30. because his HOUR was not yet come. So another time Ioh. VIII. 20.
when they would fain have laid hold on him, the same reason is given, why they
could not, because his HOUR was not yet come: it could not be till the
Passover. The latter time here mentioned, was on the 23th of Tisri, when our
Savior was teaching in the Treasury. In the end of that day, upon his saying
those words before ABRAHAM was I am, they took up Stones to cast at him. But
not to work Miracles needlessly, he escaped from them in the throng: and that
probably by the help of his Disciples, for they were then about him, or near
him. Ioh. IX. 2. He had no sooner escaped that storm, but another was raised
against him, upon his working a Miracle on the Sabbath day. It was his giving
Sight to one that was born blind: Ioh. IX. 14. for which, since they could not
reach our Savior, they laid hold on the poor man and cast him out of the
Synagogue. Verse 34. The mean while our blessed Savior, in his return from
Jerusalem, met with his LXX Disciples; who brought him an account of what they
had done in their Ministry. The first place he came to was Martha's house Luke
X. 38. She was a widow, as Grotius thinks. Her House was at Bethany. Ioh. XI.
1. about fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem Verse. 18. From thence he went on
through the Cities and Villages, Luke XIII. 22. which were prepared for him by
his LXX Disciples. No doubt it was by their means that wheresoever he came, he
found the People so ready to hear him. As we read Luke XI. 29. that in one
place they were gathered thick together for that purpose; So in another, it is
said, there were (...) Luke XII. 1. innumerable multitudes, insomuch that they
trod upon one another. But every where the Scribes and Pharisees got in among
them, Luke XI. 53, 54. who were still laying wait for him, seeking to catch
something out of his Mouth that they might accuse him. No doubt they were
these, that were still cavilling at his Miracles, and seeking Signs from
heaven. Luke XI. 15, 16. But it appears they put the people on the same. Verse.
29. and so again Luke XII. 56. where he gives them the same answer as he had
done before to the Pharisees. Matt. XVI. 3. Our Savior thus going on through
the Cities and Villages, where the LXX had been, was now again making his
journey to Jerusalem, Luke XIII. 22. This was no doubt to the Feast of
DEDICATION, which was yearly held on the 25th of Cisleu, above two months after
the Feast of Tabernacles. In his way to that Feast, we find him at Peraea in
Herod's Dominions. Luke XIII. 31. There Herod kept his Court at Machaerus, as
we learn from Josephus Ant. XVIII. 7. and elsewhere. But he could not like to
have the blessed Jesus so near him: for His being there could not but mind the
people of his forerunner John Baptist, whose death was very grievous to them.
It seems most likely that Herod for that reason sent the Pharisees to try if
they could affright him out of those coasts. It appears that our Savior knew
they came from Herod: for to Him he sends them with this Answer; go tell that
Fox, etc. I cannot dye out of Jerusalem. And thereupon he pronounced the Fate
of that City: that it should be laid desolate, and should be left so till the
time foretold, Psalm. CXVIII. 25, 26. even the Time when the JEWISH Nation shall
turn to him, saying, blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord. All
this our Savior repeated again, Matt. XXIII. 37 etc. when the Hosanna-time at
his coming up to Jerusalem was past; and therefore it is not necessary that
these words should refer to that particular Occasion. That being indeed a
fulfilling of that Prophecy, Zech. IX. 9. of Christ's coming to Jerusalem,
riding on an Ass, in such manner as is therein described, with all those Shows
of public joy among the common People, which were but a low Type of the
universal joy that shall be hereafter at their Restauation. Our Savior's
coming up now from Peraea to Jerusalem, was to the Feast of DEDICATION before
mentioned. It was now that he had that dispute with the Jews; Ioh. X. 24. upon
which they were for stoning him, more than once; Verse. 31, 39. but both times
he escaped out of their hands. And after the Feast he went again into Peraea.
Verse. 40. About this time on the 25th of December began the 36th year of his
Age. 33 36 19 Our blessed Lord being returned from the Feast of DEDICATION,
made his abode in Peraea with his Disciples for some time: John X. 40. and
there, on the account of what they had heard John Baptist say of him, as well
as what they saw of the Miracles that he wrought, many believed on him Verse.
41, 42. From thence, at the desire of Mary and Martha, he came into Iudaea
again, to help their Brother Lazarus, who was sick unto death. Ioh. XI. 7, 8.
At his coming thither he found Lazarus dead and buried some days before. There
in the presence of many witnesses our Savior restored him to life: which put
his Enemies out of all patience. The chief Priests and Pharisees from that day
forth were in consultation together how to put him to death. Now it was not
safe for our Savior to stay there, nor to go to any place that they were
acquainted with; for they had given a Commandment that if any man knew where he
was, he should show it, that they might take him Verse. 57. Our Savior
therefore retired into the Country near to the Wilderness. It was that which
reaches from Jericho to Bethel, Josh. XVI. 1. and which is called the
Wilderness of Bethaven XVIII. 12. There his retirement was in a City called
Ephraim; which seems to have been that where Absalom had his Sheep-shearing, to
which he invited David and his Sons. II Sam. XIII. 23. In St. Ierom's time
there was a very great Village, called Ephrea, about 20 miles North of
Jerusalem. This long Wilderness, as Joshua there shows, was in the confines
between Benjamin and Ephraim; or between the Countries of Iudaea and Samaria,
as they were called in our Savior's time. Our blessed Savior could not be
safer than there, in any place at that distance from Jerusalem: and he could
not well be further off, being soon to return to Jerusalem, for the Passover
was nigh at hand. Ioh. XI. 54, 55. So near, that they that sought his life were
enquiring, whether he would not come up that year. Verse. 56. They were afraid
he would stay away from this Passover, as he had done from the two last
beforegoing. But when our Savior saw his time to come up to the Feast, then
out of his retirement he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee. Luke
XVII. 11. that is, as the learned Dr. Lightfoot says in his Jewish Chorography,
he went over Jordan at the bridge of Scythopolis, and so came into Peraea,
which was called Galilee, as being a part of Hered's Tetrarchy. The reason of
his going that way is plain enough from what has been said. His Enemies then
were enquiring, and laying the roads for him, where soever they expected he
would come. He therefore took his way through the midst of Samaria, where the
Sanhedrim had no power. And thence he went into Peraea, where Herod durst not
touch him. There he had a multitude of Disciples ready at hand, Ioh. X. 42. who
no doubt came many of them up to the Passover, and helped to make up that great
multitude that attended him from Jericho, Matt. XX. 29. and that much greater
that welcomed him to Jerusalem with their Acclamations. That that part of
Galilee which Luka there speaks of was no other then Peraea, we find by those
Passages of his History, Luke XVIII. 15, 18. etc. which happened when he was in
Peraea, as we are told in the other Gospels. Matt. XIX. 13, 16. Mar. X. 13, 17.
Saint Luke goes on, as both those Gospels do, with our Savior's Journey from
thence to Jerusalem. Where by the way, having his Disciples by themselves; he
gave them the last Notice of his Sufferings in these Words: behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and
unto the Scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to
the Gentiles, that is, to the ROMANS, to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify
him, and the third day he shall rise again. Matt. XX. 18, 19. Mar. X. 33, 34.
St. Luke has the same Prediction XVIII. 31. tho not in the very same words: he
has not the word crucify in any of the Warnings they had from our Savior. But
he tells us, that after Christ's resurrection the Angel minded them of this
very Word, Luke XXIV. 6, 7. remember how he spoke to you while he was yet in
Galilee, saying, the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful
men, and be crucified: Where it may be observed by the way, that he says the
words were spoken in Galilee, which were spoken in Peraea, as it is plain in
both the other Gospels. But one thing St. Luke adds in our Saviors Prediction,
which ought not here to be omitted. It was that part of it which virtually
contained all the rest, Luke XVIII. 31. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all
things that are written by the Prophets concerning the Son of man shall be
accomplished. Could our Savior mention what the Prophets had written
concerning his suffering, and not think of Daniels Words in this Prophecy, that
after LXII. Weeks MESSIAH was to be cut off? It can scarce be imagined that the
Disciples could hear what he said now without thinking of them. All the Nation
of the Jews seemed to have them in their heads at this time. One can judge no
otherwise by the account that St. Luke gives of what our Savior said then to
them that were about him at Jericho, Luke XIX. 11. He says that Christ spoke
the Parable there following, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they
thought that the Kingdom of heaven should immediately appear. The Disciples it
seems were not singular in this Opinion: for, as Dr. Lightfoot says, Vol. II.
page 468. It was that Nations universal Opinion, being so taught by the
Prophecy of Daniel. He says that hence arose the Question of the Apostles,
Acts I. 6. and hence was that conflux of the Jews from all Countries to
Jerusalem. Acts II. 1. He says the same of this Prophecy, Daniel IX. expressly
in Vol. I. page 276. Our blessed Lord in his way to Jerusalem with a multitude
of people about him passed through Jericho, where he lodged at the house of
Zacchaeus the Publican. And from thence he came to Bethany abovementioned.
There For the Days, see the page before Daniel's Tables.
on Palm Sunday eve, the 9th of Nisan beginning, he was entertained at supper
by Simon a Leper, being probably one of the many of that sort whom our Savior
had cured. There were with him his most especial Friends, Lazarus, whom he had
raised from the dead, now sitting at Supper with him; and his sister Martha,
serving our Lord at the Table; and Mary, anointing him with an Oil of very
great price. This costly Ointment our Savior's pursbearer Judas would fain
have turned into Money, and so have got it into the Bag, that he might have
made his profit of it. Whereupon there passed some Words between our Savior
and him, that stuck in his Stomach afterward: and that, and his covetousness
together, set him on that cursed Design of betraying his Lord. This occasioned
the two first writers of our Saviors History to place this part of it,
concerning that Supper at Bethany, so much later, to the time when Judas made
his bargain with the chief Priests. That Bargain was struck but two days before
the Passover: and from that time Judas sought opportunity to betray him. Matt.
XXVI. 3. -- 16. Mar. XIV. 1 -- 11. The whole History of this Supper in those
two Gospels is placed as it were in a Parenthesis between the beginning and
concluding of that Bargain; which occasioned the placing of it there. It began
with the Consultation of the Sanhedrim, Matt. XXVI. 3 -- 5. It ended with
Iudas's striking in with them. Verse. 14, 15, 16. But St. John who no doubt was
present at that Supper, and had read the Account of it in these two Gospels,
thought fit to bring it into its right Place, as he does Ioh. XII. 1. Six days
before the Passover. He that reads and observes all the Words that Christ
spoke, as they are delivered here Ioh. XII. 7, 8. and as they are in the two
other Gospels, Matt. XXVI. 10 -- 12. and Mar. XIV. 7 -- 9. will find they are
the same Words, and will not doubt but that they were spoke at the same Supper.
The next day being Palm Sunday, and still the 9th of Nisan, our Savior made
his public Entry into Jerusalem; the History whereof is recorded in all the
four Gospels. His Attendance, and their Acclamations, were such as daunted his
Enemies: So that, tho they were mad at what they both saw and heard, yet they
durst not murmur against it; Only, to be eased of it a little, they prayed him
to make his Disciples hold their peace; Luke XIX. 39, 40. Which he told them
could not be, for it was the fulfilling of the Prophecy Zech. IX. 9. before
mentioned. It is to be observed, that coming down from Mount Olivet, where he
had the City in full view, he could not forbear weeping over it: and withal he
broke out into these Words, If thou had known, even thou, in this thy day,
the things that belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes.
Thereupon he declared the approaching Destruction, which had been so long since
foretold by the Prophet Daniel, as Grotius observes upon the Words, on this thy
Day. He says, respicitur hic potissimum locus Danielis IX. 27. Here our
Savior had an especial regard to the last Week in Daniel's Prophecy. Being
come to the City, our Savior at present did only go into the Temple; and
there he observed what was amiss, that he might set it right the next Day. This
we learn from Mar. XI. 11. Who herein clears what was obscure in the XXI of St.
Matthew's Gospel: There also he tells us, that at the Evening (which began
Nisan 10th) our Savior went out unto Bethany with the XII. Our blessed Lord
took that care of himself, not only this night, but the three nights next
following. He would not be shut up in the City, and put to death before his
time. Therefore, as St. Luke tells us, this was his manner on the three
following days: Luke XXI. 37. In the Day time he was teaching in the Temple,
and at Night he went out, and abode in the Mount of Olives; that is, at
Bethany. Mar. XI. 1. For the Days, see the page before Daniel's Tables.
According to this Method, on Monday morning the 10th of Nisan he went again
from Bethany to Jerusalem. Mar. XI. 12. And there being hungry on the Way, and
seeing a Figtree afar off, that had leaves, by which he had reason to hope
there might be Fruit also, he came to see what he could find; for there are
Figs more or less all the year; and therefore the time of gathering Figs being
not yet come, he thought he might be sure to find some on the Tree: but finding
nothing but Leaves, which plainly showed that this was a barren Tree, that it
might not draw others out of their Way, as it had done him to loose his labor,
he ordered, that as naturally it bore no fruit, so neither should it bear
Leaves for the future; whereupon the Tree presently withered away. Matt. XXI.
19. And the Disciples saw it was so, Verse. 20. But their seeing that it was
withered away was not till next day, as St. Mark plainly shows. Mar. XI. 20.
who herein also, as in many other places, clears what was obscure in St.
Matthew's Gospel. On this Monday, the 10th day of Nisan, our Savior being come
into the Temple, cast out them that bought and sold, and made that Reformation
that we read of Matt. XXI. 12. Mar. XI. 15. Luke XIX. 45. declaring that even
this House, which God was now about to leave; Yet, while it continued a House
of Prayer, even the worst part of it, the outer Court, which was not good
enough for any Jew, but was allotted to the Gentiles; (and where therefore the
Publican stood afar off; when he was praying, Luke XVIII. 13.) even that was
too good for these common uses. This was the 2d time that our Savior declared
this. The former was at his 1st Entrance into the Ministry, Ioh. II. 16. And
now it was just before his going out of the World. There again, the Children
crying in the Temple Hosanna, as they had heard the Men cry in the Highways and
Streets, the Priests and Scribes being sorely displeased at it, our Savior
gave them a Text of Scripture to think upon, and so left them, and went out of
the City to Bethany, and lodged there, Matt. XXI. 17. and Mar. XI. 19. This
Monday Evening began the 11th of Nisan. On the Tuesday morning, as Christ was
returning to Jerusalem, his Disciples then observed that the Figtree was
withered away. Whereupon our blessed Lord gave them that Instruction, Matt.
XXI. 20 -- 22. Mar. XI. 20 -- 26. Soon after, he being come to teach in the
Temple, the whole Sanhedrim came about him. Matt. XXI. 23. Mar. XI. 27. Luke
XX. 1. and as well they might question any one that set up for a Prophet, they
asked him by what Authority he did it: but he soon silenced them, by asking them
what they thought of John Baptist? That He was a Prophet they durst not deny,
for fear the People should stone them: and yet if they acknowledged that, they
could not deny the Authority of the blessed Jesus, whom ^hn had declared to be
much more than a Prophet; even the CHRIST, the SON of GOD. John. I. 34* and
III. 28. From his speaking of John Baptist, our blessed Lord went on to mind
the Pharisees of their Impenitence, whom that holy Prophet could work no good
upon by his Preaching. Thereupon he told them the Parable of the two Sons, in
which he preferred the Publicans and H^rlots before them. Matt. XXI. 28. Then
he mentions that of the Vineyard, in the conclusion whereof, he plainly told
them Matt. XXI. 43. the Kingdom of God, that is the Privilege of being his
Church, shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation that shall
bring forth the Fruits thereof, viz. to the Romans, who are called the future
People in this Prophecy. The chief Priests and Pharisees knew the meaning of
all this so well, that they would fain have laid hands on him, but they durst
not for fear of the People. Verse. 45, 46. Yet they stayed out one Parable more,
of those that he was teaching the People Matt. XXII. 1. It was of a King, that
sent out to bid Guests to the Marriage of his Son: but some of them instead of
accepting his Invitation, killed his Servants, by whom it was sent them:
Whereupon he sent forth his Armies, and destroyed those Murderers, (...) burnt
^p t^eir City. The Pharisees had not patience to he^r any more after this; but
went and took Counsel together, how to set the Roman Government against him.
The way that they took for the effecting of this, was by send^g some pre^ded
Religious men to put to him a C^se of (...) in such a matter as touched the
Vitals of the Roman Gov^nment. They pitched upon a Question* wh^ (...) to be of
great concern to their Religion: and therefore* he being a Prophet, could not
avoid the Answering o^ (...) tho if he Answered it directly, either way,
affirming (...) denying, it would be at his utmost peril. One way he would be
sure to loose the People, that had been hi^ Guard hitherto; and then he would
ly open to all his (...); but it he answered the other way, then they should
get Pilate to do their work for them in destroying him. In order to this, they
must have some to (...) and to Pr^ve what they should charge him with. And they
had the fittest for their turn that could be wished; the Herodians, who in
outward appearance differed not from the other Jews; But these being of Herod's
Court, or Officers under him, knew they could not oblige him more, who was then
at Jerusalem, and greedy of all Occasions there to show his Zeal for the Roman
Government; than by enabling him to make such a discovery as this would be, if
our Savior declared his mind freely, as they expected he would, there being
none but Jews within hearing. Their Question was, whether it were lawful to
give Tribute to Caesar, or not? Not a word of his Answer should be lost, and
therefore it ought to be read in the Text. Matt. XXII. 18. -- 21 Mar. XII. 15,
16. Luke XX. 23. -- 25. It was a just and full Answer to their Question; and
yet such as they could not take hold of either way; which struck them all with
Admiration: So that they gave him over, and returned to those that sent them.
The same Day came to him the Sadducees; Matt. XXII. who might probably hope to
magnify themselves by bafling him that had been too hard for the Pharisees, for
they were among a multitude of People Verse. 33. And therefore they brought him
such a Question as they thought was not to be Answered. It was concerning a
Woman who, according to their Law, had been married to seven Brethren, one
after another, all of them dying without Children. The Sadducees for their
parts believed no Resurrection: And perhaps they had posed the other Jews that
did, by asking them whose Wife she should be of the seven, when they all came
together at the Resurrection. They put this Question to our Savior, Matt.
XXII. 23 -- 32. Mar. XII. 18 -- 27. Luke XX. 27 -- 38. In his Answer he showed
them their Ignorance of the Scriptures; and proved the truth of that Article of
the Resurrection, so that the multitude were astonished at his Doctrine. Matt.
XXII. 33. This advancing the Peoples esteem of our Savior, was that which the
Pharisees could not endure. And therefore, though they had left him, yet to try
him once more, they set one of their Lawyers to attacque him, with a Question
in his own Profession. Matt. XXII. 35. He asked him, which was the great
Commandment of the Law? To this learned man our blessed Lord gave such an
Answer as himself could not but approve. And after that no man, for the present
neither Pharisee, nor other, durst ask him any Questions Matt. XXII. 46. But
when the Pharisees had done with him, then he began with Them; and asked them
such a Question as they could not Answer consistently with their Doctrine. So
they had not a word to say more; neither durst any man from that day forth ask
him any more Questions. Matt. XXII. 46. It does not seem likely that St.
Matthew would have used these last words, (...), if our Savior had not given
the Pharisees sufficient opportunity after that Day to have asked him more
Questions, if they would: especially that day being now near expired. For this
and other reasons that follow, it may be presumed, that our Savior bestowed
another Day after this, in teaching in the Temple, according to his daily
practice mentioned Luke XIX. 47. and XXI. 37. And even this day, after the
Pharisees had done with him, still the common People heard him gladly, Mar.
XII. 37. till toward night; when, as St. Luke there tells us, XXI. 37. he went
out, and abode in the Mount of Olives. It was at Bethany, where he had lodged
every night since Palm Sunday Eve: and no doubt there he lodged also this
Tuesday night, which begun the thirteenth of Nisan. The next day, which was
Wednesday the first of April; Our blessed Lord having done with the Pharisees,
applied himself wholely to the People; who, as St. Luke says, XXI. 38. came
early in the morning to him in the Temple to hear him. Of what he said this day
in teaching the People, Mar. XII. 38. there is nothing recorded in Scripture,
but only the Warnings that he gave them of that dangerous Sect of the
Pharisees, which he foresaw would harden them to their utter destruction. He
had formerly said as much to the Pharisees themselves, Luke XI. 39 -- 52,
telling them plainly how they had spoiled the Religion of the Jewish Church
with their Oral Tradition; and denouncing Woes against them for their
Hypocrisy, particularly in adorning the Sepulchers of the dead Prophets, and
killing the living ones, whom God sent to reprove them for their Sins. Some of
the same things he said of them now to his Disciples in the audience of all the
People, Luke XX. 46, 47. Mar. XII. 38, 39, 40. But he added a great deal more,
which St. Matthew has given us at large, XXIII. 13 -- 36. At last, out of a
deep sense of the approaching ruin which that hardened People were now
bringing on themselves; he repeated there in the City and Temple, that form of
Lamentation that he had made for them formerly at his coming thither, Luke
XIII. 34, 35. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem etc. Matt. XXIII. 37 -- 39. The effect of
what he said, was to let that People know he had done with them, and was now
leaving THEIR HOUSE to them DESOLATE; that is, leaving the City and Temple to
that utter Destruction which Daniel had so long since foretold would come upon
them, when the MESSIAH was CUT OFF, Dan. IX. 26. By this Act, they were now
about to fill up the measure of their Sins; after which they were no more to
expect that he should send them a National Call, till they should be ready at
their Conversion to give Him that National welcome, foretold in Psalm. CXVIII.
25, 26. The Words of which they sing always in their great Hallel at every
Passover, and the fulfilling whereof was typified in those public acclamations
given him at his last Entrance into their City, Matt. XXI. 9. above mentioned.
Having given this sad Farewell to the City and Temple, he sat a little while to
see the People throw their Money into the Treasury; where the rich threw in
much, but the poor Widow's two mites he valued above all. Mar. XII. 41. -- 44.
Luke XXI. 1 -- 4. After this he went out, and departed from the Temple. Matt.
XXIV. 1. to go to his retirement in Bethany. Luke XXI. 37. But in his way
thither, one of his Disciples Mar. XIII. 1. speaking of those vast buildings of
the Temple, and the goodly stones and gifts, which they saw in them; our
blessed Lord told them, the time was now coming when, of all they now saw,
there should not be left one stone upon another. Matt. XXIV. 2. Mar. XIII. 2.
Luke XXI. 6. Then, it seems, he dismissed all his other Disciples, but Peter,
and James, and John, and Andrew: for these four stayed, and talked privately
with Him. Mar. XIII. 3. He was now sitting on the Mount of Olives, Matt. XXIV.
3. Mar. XIII. 3. in full view of the Temple. And it appears, they were thinking
on what he had said at his leaving it. They desired him to tell them, when that
Destruction should be; and with this, they joined two other Questions, that, it
seems, run much in their minds, viz. what the Signs would be of his coming, and
of the end of the World? His answer to these three Questions, takes up near the
whole Chapters Matt. XXIV. Mar. XIII. and Luke XXI. His answer to the first
Question is in Matt. XXIV. 4 -- 28. Mar. XIII. 5 -- 23. Luke XXI. 8 -- 29. He
told them first what things would come one after another, before the
Destruction of Jerusalem; to the end they might not be surprised, but might
know what they were to do, when any of these things should come to pass. But
whereas in speaking of these things now mentioned, that his Disciples might not
mistake, he had told them, these things must come to pass, but the END is not
yet; Matt. XXIV. 6. Mar. XIII. 7. Luke XXI. 9. he at last tells them of one
particular thing that should be going on all the while; and says when that is
done, then shall the END come. Matt. XXIV. 14. It was the preaching of the
Gospel in all the [Roman] World. That was plainly the preparing of the
Messias's future People, mentioned Dan. IX. 26. This was the business of his
holy Apostles; and by what steps they went on in the doing of it, we are told
in the History St. Luke has given us of it, viz. in the Acts of the Apostles:
whereof there is a summary Account at the End of the Tables of Daniel's Weeks:
There it also will be shown, that at the very year, which ends the History of
the Acts of the Apostles, there begins Daniel's single Week. Dan. IX. 27. That
our Savior referrs to that Prophecy of Daniel, he plainly declares Matt. XXIV.
15. Mar. XIII. 14. And he not only uses the Words of that Prophecy, let him
that reads understand, which, as Grotius observes, are taken from Dan. IX.
25. but he quotes the principal thing in it, concerning the Destruction of
Jerusalem viz the Abomination of desolation being set up in the holy place Dan.
IX. 27. For the clear understanding whereof, the Reader may be pleased to see
what is said upon that verse, in the explication of Daniel's Prophecy. After
this Destruction, our blessed Savior shows, what the miserable Estate of that
People shall be, till their Conversion and Restoration. But this is a
principal part of that which these Disciples meant by his COMING in their 2d
Question; the Answer to which our blessed Savior gives them. Matt. XXIV. 29 --
35. Mar. XIII. 24 -- 31. Luke XXI. 25 -- 33. Then he comes to answer the last
of the three Questions, in the last part of the three chapters now mentioned.
But he ended not his Answer here, but went on with it through the whole 25th
chapter of St. Matthew in three parables: the first of the ten Virgins, the 2d
of the Talents, and the 3d. of his coming to Judge the World. It follows in St.
Matthew's Gospel XXVI. 1. When JESUS had finished all these Sayings; which was
most probably on the Wednesday night, that began the XIV of Nisan, that then,
at his return to Bethany, knowing that Judas, since his dismission that
evening, had gone to the chief Priests, and bargained with them to betray him;
without naming the Person, he imparted the matter to his Disciples, in these
words, verse. 2d. You know, that after two Days is the PASSOVER, and the Son of
man is betrayed to be crucified. It follows verse. 16. that from that time, of
Iudas's contract with the Priests, he continually sought opportunity to betray
him. Our blessed Lord knowing this, would not go on Thursday morning, as he had
done every day this Week, to Jerusalem; but continued at his retirement in
Bethany. Thither some Greek Proselytes, known to Philip, got him to bring them,
to see and hear the Lord Jesus. John XII. 21. 22. It appears that he did admit
them, by what follows, verse. 29 -- 34. and that on this occasion he said such
things, as he saw proper, as well for theirs, as for his Disciples Instruction
Verse. 30 -- 36. At his entrance into this discourse, he told them, the HOUR is
come, that the Son of man should be glorified John XII. 23. This is spoken of
his Passion, and Death, Verse. 24 -- 33. From which he prayed to be delivered,
verse. 27; but with Submission to the Will of his Father. All this was proper to
be said on Maundy Thursday, and no sooner; for Then he knew his next Sleep was
to be that of Death. But having something yet to do, before his going out of
the World; particularly in his Institution of the holy Sacrament: that he might
not be surprised besore he had done that, he hid himself; no doubt he went out
of Iudas's knowledge. Ioh. XII. 36. After this, the Evangelist gives a short
Account of the reasons of the Jews unbelief Verse. 37 -- 43. and after that, he
repeats some of those vehement Words, which our Savior had formerly said to
his Disciples; declaring his faithful discharge of his message from his
Father, and the consequence of Men's hearing, or not hearing him. It appears
that our blessed Lord was at his retirement in Bethany, when he sent two of his
Disciples, to prepare the Passover for him now, (as no doubt they had done in
former years.) Luke XXII. 8. This was, as St. Matthew tells us XXVI. 17. on the
first day of unleavened Bread: St. Mark XIV. 12. makes it plainer, by adding,
that it was the day on which they killed the Passover: St. Luke plainer yet,
that it was the day on which the Passover ought to be killed, Luke XXII. 7.
And in the beginning of that Verse, he has these words (...), and that day
came: which words plainly import that it was in the beginning of that day. But
the Passover ought to be killed on the XIV of Nisan, according to God's
command by Moses. Exodus XII. 6. and, as it is said there expressly, it must be
between the evenings, that is, as the Jews understand it, between three of the
clock in the afternoon and Sunsetting. So that this coming of the Disciples to
our Savior was after Sunset, in the Evening before the killing of the
Passover; that is, in the beginning of the XIV of Nisan. And that was after
Sunset, on Thursday the second of April, as will be shown at large in the
discourse before Daniel's Tables. St. Luke XXII. 8. tells us, they were Peter
and John, whom our Savior sent on this Affair. It seems, as if none of the
rest knew the place where he was. To be sure he would not trust Judas with the
knowledge of it, though it was his Office to buy in things for such an
Occasion. As for those two Disciples, our Savior bad them Go into the City;
and told them, there they should meet a man bearing a Pitcher of Water, and
they were to follow him to the House whither he was going. Mar. XIV. 13. We are
told it is the manner of the Jews after Sunset on the XIV of Nisan, to fetch
in the Water, with which they are to make their Azyms the next day; and
probably this man was so employed on this occasion. Our Savior bad them, tell
the Owner of the House, the Master says, my Time is at hand, I will keep the
Passover at thy House with my Disciples. Matt. XXVI. 18. that is, according to
Dr. Hammond's Exposition, the time of my Death is so near at hand, that I
cannot observe the Paschal Sacrifice; I will therefore eat the unleavened Bread
and bitter herbs -- this night at thy house with my Disciples. Our Savior also
told them, they should find every thing provided at that House, Mar. XIV. 15.
According to his Command they came into the City, and there they found every
thing, as he had said to them, verse. 16. So they made ready the Passover,
Matt. XXVI. 19. Mar. XIV. 16. according to our Savior's direction; which was
no doubt with respect to what the time would afford: we have seen what that
was, according to Dr. Hammond's opinion; and that of Grotius we shall have in
the following Discourse. It seems not likely, that our blessed Lord would lose
the benefit of his hiding himself, by coming abroad while there was daylight
enough to discover him. Especially since there was no need of his exposing
himself to any Danger on this Occasion: For the Passover was to be eaten in
the night. Exodus XII. 8. And so Dr. Hammond expounds the Words, Matt. XXVI. 20.
Mar. XIV. 17. (...) --, when it was evening, by those of St. Luke, when the
hour was come, Luke XXII. 14. viz. the Hour of night, at which they were to eat
the Passover. Then (at that hour) he came with the Twelve (Mar. XIV.) to the
house where all things were prepared; and there at the Table he sat down, Mar.
XIV. 17. Luke XXII. 14. and the Twelve with him, Judas not excepted. There no
doubt they did eat the Passover together, such as was prepared for them,
according to our Savior's direction. But whether they had a Paschal Lamb, or
no, is a great Question. It should seem they had not, by those Words of St.
John XIII. 1, 2. where he says, that our Savior, knowing the Hour was come,
that he should depart out of the World to the Father, he loved his Disciples to
the end; and he showed it particularly by what he said and did at his last
eating with them. That this in St. John was his last, will be made very plain
by what he has of our Savior's Predictions concerning Judas his betraying, and
Peter's denying him. This last time that our Savior did eat with his Disciples,
St. John calls a SUPPER, and not a Passover. And to make this the plainer, he
says it was before the Feast of the Passover, verse. 1. which Words will be
further considered in the Discourse before Daniel's Weeks. But what shall we
say to those Words in the three other Gospels, where it is as plain that this
last Supper of our Saviors is called a PASSOVER several times, by our Savior
himself, and by his Disciples? Especially those Words of his, when he and they
were eating together, are thought to imply that they had a Paschal Lamb then
before them: with desire I have desired to eat this PASSOVER with you before I
suffer; adding this reason, for I say unto you, I will not eat any more
thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. Luke XXII. 15, 16. The
like words he spoke of the fruit of the Vine, that he would drink no more of it
after that Supper, till the Kingdom of God should come. They that hold Christ's
Death to have been on the XIV of Nisan, cannot admit that he had a Paschal
Lamb at his last Supper, for the reasons already mentioned, and others that
will be offered in the following Discourse. Therefore they take those Words of
our Savior and his Disciples, where they call his last Supper a PASSOVER, as
a family of Jews would understand one another, if they were speaking now of a
Passover to be kept among themselves. They all know there can be no Paschal
Lamb now, because they have no Place for a Sacrifice. And then, at Christ's
last Supper, there was no Time for it, in their Opinion who believe that Christ
died on the XIV of Nisan. They take it that the Passover spoken of Now, could
be no other than what they had the two last years in Galilee: There, no doubt,
it was only of Unleavened bread and bitter herbs. So it was now, according to
Dr. Hammond, in those words above mentioned. And this, as Grotius words it, was
not (...), but only (...), not a Sacrifice, but a Memorial; The Sacrifice of
the Paschal Lamb was only a Type of Christ's Death, for which at this time
there was no Occasion, because Christ himself was to be slain at this
Passover. But for those other things, they were eaten only in Remembrance of
their Affliction in Egypt, and their sudden deliverance from it; and for those
to be called a Passover, where there was no Lamb to be called so, this is the
Jews common manner of speaking at this Day. And that it was anciently so, Ios.
Scaliger shows, Emend. Temp. VI. out of a Paschal Prayer of the Jews; in which
he observes, (...) cum amaris vocari Pascha; that the unleavened Bread,
together with the bitter things they eat with it, are called the Passover.
After this short Supper, as it must be, if there was no Lamb to be eaten, then
came the common Supper, which at such Festival times used to be of better Cheer
then on Ordinary days. And this Supper being ended, according to our
Translation; or after this Supper began, as the Words (...) rather signify;
then our Savior rose from the Table, and having laid aside his upper Garments,
and girded himself with a Towell, took Water, and washed his Disciples Feet,
and wiped them with that Towell; Ioh. XIII. 4, 5. Of which whole matter, he
Buxtorf. Exercit. de S. Coena XXX.
that could very well judge of such things, says it was no Paschal Rite, as
some understand it; but it was an extraordinary Action of our Saviors, to show
an extraordinary Example to his Disciples. The washing of the Feet was but a
common Act of kindness, with which they usually treated their Guests in those
hot Countries. Genesis XVIII. 4. XIX. 2. XXIV. 32. But for one of any eminent rank
to do this to them that were much his Inferiors, to Servants; this was such an
Act of Humility, as a greater could not be expressed. see I Sam. XXV. 41. This
was it that the Apostle would have us take especial notice of; what an infinite
Condescension it was, that He, who knew he came from God, and was going to God,
Ioh. XIII. 3. was pleased to take that low Office on himself to do this to his
Disciples; and thereby to give them such an Example of charity and Humility, as
might live in them, when He was gone. He told them plainly, that was the end of
his doing it. Ioh. XIII. 12 -- 17. And withal, by this Bodily washing, he
showed what purity of Soul is required of them that will have any Communion
with him, verse. 8, 9, 10. This ought especially to be considered in our
approaches to the Lord's Supper. And it was for this Reason, in that Learned
man's Opinion, that our Savior did thus to his Disciples, and thereupon, gave
them that Lesson, immediately before the Institution of the Sacrament. But he
first took his Clothes as before, and returned to his Place at the Table: where
he made all that Discourse to his Disciples. verse. 12 -- 17. And whereas upon
those Words of his, ye are clean, but not All, verse. 10. their minds were in
some kind of disorder, which he thought fit to quiet before their coming to the
Sacrament; he therefore explained himself verse. 18. by telling them, I speak
not of you All. He had told them before, Ioh. VI. 70 that of the XII he had
chosen, One of them was a Devil. The same in effect he tells them now. But he
adds, that this being their last time of eating together; now they should see
the fullfilling of that Prophecy, Psalm. XLI. 9. He that eats Bread with me,
has lift up his Heel against me. David, who was so eminent a Type of the
Messiah, that the Messiah is often called by his Name, spoke this immediately of
his false Servant Achitophel, that had betrayed him to his Enemies; but he
spoke it Prophetically of Judas, that would serve Christ in like manner. Judas
was also like Achitophel in his Death. This was one way of our Savior's
proving himself the Messiah, by showing, as he frequently did, how those things
that were said of the Messiah in the Prophecies of Scripture, were fullfilled
in Himself. Another way he used to prove it, was by his own Prophecies; showing
that he foreknew, and could foretell, all things that would come to pass. This
he told them was the Reason of what he now said of Judas, (though without
naming him) that when it is come to pass you may believe that I AM HE verse. 19.
And knowing who he was, even the CHRIST the Son of God, they knew what they
were to expect from him, verse. 20 Such things he put in between whiles, to keep
up their Hearts, that they might not be cast down by hearing of nothing but his
sufferings. It was after all this, according to Grotius, and Dr. Hammond, that
our blessed Savior, in his Postcoenium with his Disciples, did institute the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; whereof we have the History Matt. XXVI. 26 --
28. Mar. XIV. 22 -- 24. Luke XXII. 19, 20. After this, our blessed Lord in his
Table-Discourse foretold sundry things to his Disciples; particularly, in
relation to his sufferings, to show that he knew all that was coming upon him,
and that he submitted to it willingly in obedience to his Father: Withal he
gave them such Warnings, and Instructions, and Comforts, as he saw necessary
for them in their present condition. But of all these things, in the two first
Gospels we have only three of our Savior's Predictions: namely, that of Judas
his betraying him, and then of the Disciples forsaking him, and of Peter's
denying him at last. And even these, in those two Gospels, are delivered in
something a different order from that in which they are placed in the following
Gospels. It appears not only in these, but in many other Instances, that the
two first Evangelists delivered things so in their Gospels, as if they chiefly
minded the Truth of the things they delivered; without much concerning
themselves for the Order in which they should be placed. It was plainly the
Care of St. Luke, after he had read what Many others had written of the History
of Christ, and had been thoroughly informed Himself of all things from the very
first; then, as himself says, to write them in Order in his Gospel. And St.
John composed His after he had read all the other; as Eusebius tell us, and as
it evidently appears in his Gospel: so that where their placing things so at
large in the former two Gospels did or might occasion any mistake in the
Readers; there was care taken by the two other Evangelists to rectify any such
mistake, and to prevent the like for the future. We have an Instance of this,
in that part of our Savior's Discourse, wherein he foretold his Disciples of
Judas his betraying him. This, as it is placed in the two first Gospels, may
seem to have been spoken by our Savior at his Paschal Supper. Matt. XXVI. 21
-- 25. Mar. XIV. 18. -- 21. And if the two other Evangelists had let it pass
so, we had lost the knowledge of Judas his being at the Sacrament; which is the
declared Opinion of our Church in her Communion-Office. It is indeed on many
Accounts of great use in the Christian Religion; which St Luke was so sensible
of, that he would not suffer us to be ignorant of it. And therefore, after his
Account of the Sacrament, he brings in those Words of our Savior, as spoken in
a kind of surprise: (...), But behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is
with me on the Table. Luke XXII. 21. The Words with which our Savior entered
into this Discourse, are omitted by St. Luke, being full enough in the former
Gospels. But St. John having something to add of very great Moment, which was
in none of the other Gospels, he began with those Words which he saw in St.
Matthew's and St. Mark's Gospels: but having heard them himself from our
Savior's Mouth, he could not forget the unusual manner in which he uttered
them. Ioh. XIII. 21. There, (after a common form of Transition, for the Words
See Luke XIX. 28. Ioh. IX. 6. XI. 11. and 28. and 43. XVIII. 1.
(...) are no more) he notes how our Savior was troubled in Spirit. He could
not be otherwise, when he beheld how, at the first Sacrament, that poor
hardened Wretch eat and drank damnation to himself. Thereupon our blessed Lord
(...) broke out into those vehement Words: Verily, verily, I say unto you, that
one of you shall betray me. At the hearing of which Words, as those other
Evangelists tell us, the Disciples were all exceeding sorrowful; and began to
ask him one by one, Lord, is it I? Matt. XXVI. 21, 22. Mar. XIV. 18, 19. St.
Matthew says every one of them asked this Question: not excepting Peter and
John; who surely would not have asked this, if our Savior had told them
already, it was Judas that should betray him. Our Savior gave this one general
Answer to them all; It is one of the twelve that dips with me in the Dish,
Matt. XXVI. 23. Mar. XIV. 20. And to show his own unconcernedness at it, He
told them, as for himself, he was going as God had determined, Luke XXII. 22.
and as it was foretold in the Scriptures, that he should suffer. Matt. XXVI.
24. Mar. XIV. 21. But for him that should be the wretched Instrument of this,
he lamented his Condition; saying, woe unto him. Luke XXII. 22. It had been good
for him if he had never been born. It seems this touched Judas: for he asked
again, Lord is it I? Matt. XXVI. 25. to which our Savior answered, it is even
as thou have said. But the cursed love of Money had so hardened his Heart, that
this could make no impression upon it. It seems the other Disciples neither
heard this last Question of Judas, nor our Savior's Answer: So that, their
thoughts being taken up with what they heard last before, as St. John tells us
XIII. 22. they were looking one upon another, (...) being at a loss to think
who it should be of whom our Savior said this: And after a while, as St. Luke
says XXII. 23. They began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was
that should do this thing; The mean while, at St. Peter's desire, who beckned
to him for that purpose, St. John, lying next to our Savior, asked him who it
should be of whom he spoke. Ioh. XIII. 23 -- 25. Our Savior answered him, it
is he to whom I shall give a Sop, when I have dipped it. And when he had dipped
the Sop, he gave it to Judas. This great Benignity of our Savior would have
softened Judas his Heart, if there had been any sense of goodness in it left But
now it appearing there was none, it is said (...) Then Satan entered into him;
that is, took him wholely into his possession. Whereupon our Savior having
quite done with him, said no more, but bid him, what thou do do quickly.
Then Judas went immediately out, and it was night; The properest time for that
work of darkness, which he had sold himself to do. St. John goes on XIII. 31,
32. to tell us our Savior's reflection upon this, that now he was come near to
an end of his state of Humiliation; and having glorified the Father in this,
his next Step would be into that state of Glory in which he should for ever be
with the Father. It seems that the other Disciples, lying at a farther distance
from our Savior, did not hear any thing of what passed between him and St.
John: and though they overheard his last words to Judas, yet those were not
understood by them; for they thought our blessed Lord had ordered him, being
his Purs-bearer, to Buy in things for the Feast, or to give something to the
Poor. So that this did not put a stop to the Enquiry that the Disciples were at
among themselves. Nay it seems by the next following words of St. Luke XXII.
24. to have gone on to a Strife among them which of them should be accounted
the greatest. This Ambition was a Disease they were much subject to, as we read
Matt. XX. 24 -- 28. And now that they were falling into it again, our Savior
applied to them again, the same needful Considerations; Luke XXII. 24 -- 26.
showing them how unsuitable this was to their Profession, how contrary to the
Example he had given them, and especially Now, when he had been newly washing
their Feet. Withal he told them, that as by his Covenant with his Father, he
was through many Trials to enter into his Glory: So it was his Covenant with
them, that by the like Patience and perseverance they should come to partake of
the same with him in his heavenly Kingdom. It seems to have been for the
checking of their Ambition, that our Savior gave them that Prediction which we
read in the two former Gospels. Matt. XXVI. 31. Mar. XIV. 27. The placing of it
as it stands, in those Gospels, after his going to the Mount of Olives, shall
be considered afterward: but at present for the Prediction it self. Our
blessed Lord said to his Disciples, all You shall be offended because of me
this night: what he meant by these Words it appeared by the Event; that, seeing
him taken as a Malefactor, they would All leave him, and fly, to save their own
lives. This being very sad and frightfull to them that considered it; he
therefore told them two things, that might both give them Comfort at present,
and be of greater use to them afterward. One was, that their forsaking him in
this manner, would be the fulfilling of that Prophecy of the Messiah, Zech.
XIII. 7. Smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered. It was for their
Comfort that he called them His Sheep; for then, though they were to be
scattered, they knew the good Shepherd would not suffer them to be lost. There
was much more Comfort, if they had understood it, in the other Prediction,
which follows in the next Words: after I am Risen, I will go before you into
Galilee. Matt. XXVI. 31, 32. Mar. XIV. 27, 28. But they were in such Confusion
at present, that they seemed to have thought of this no farther, till the Angel
minded them of it after Christ's Resurrection. Mar. XVI. 7. As that great Sin
of the Disciples, in their forsaking our Lord, was the Punishment of that Sin
beforegoing, in their Strife about superiority; so it should be some great Sin
of St. Peter's that occasioned his falling into that far greater Sin of the
denying of Christ. This was so much more remarkable than the other, that
whereas we have our Saviors Prediction of the Disciples forsaking him, only
from St. Matthew and St. Mark; and they afterward give us the History of it,
only in five or six Words, Matt. XXVI. 56. Mar. XIV. 50. We have both Christ's
Prediction of Peter's denying him, and also the History of that, recorded at
length in all the four Gospels, They all agree that he run himself into that
Sin, by his over-confidence of himself; He seems to have presumed on his own
strength, as if he had no need of any assistance from God. This he showed that
night on 3 several occasions that arose in our Savior's Table-Discourse; as
has been shown in one Instance from St Matthew and St. Mark, and will be shown
in a second from St. Luke, and in a third from St. John's Gospel. Whereupon, to
show him his folly, our Savior told him once for all, that before the next
morning, he would as many times deny that he knew him. The first Occasion that
St. Peter gave our Savior for this, was upon that last mentioned Prediction of
his Disciples forsaking him. This being spoken of them all without any
distinction; St. Peter declared that, however this might be true of all the
rest, it would not be of him. These are his Words, though all men should be
offended because of thee, yet will not I. Matt. XXVI. 33. Mar. XIV. 29. To this
St. Luke adds another thing, which was very considerable. He says, that our
Savior told Peter that his Disciples, having given the Devil some advantage
against them, (Dr. Hammond thinks it was by their strife about superiority,)
that vigilant Enemy applied himself to God against them, as he formerly did
against ^ob, desiring to have them, that he might sift them as Wheat, Luke
XXII. 31. Our Savior told Peter, God had granted this for their Trial; but
withal he told him this for His Comfort, I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not. Our Savior required him withal, that after so great a fall,
when he was risen again, he should consider others Infirmities, and be the more
ready, when they fell, to help them up. Luke XXII. 31, 32. How contrary an
effect this had on St. Peter at the present, may be seen by his Answer to our
Savior: Wherein, with great Assurance he told him the same as before, Lord, I
am ready to go with thee, both into Prison, and to Death, Luke XXII. 33. St.
John adds a third thing of his own observation: and it seems to have been that
which immediately led our Savior to this Prediction. He had said to his
Disciples, (and this also probably on occasion of the Strife before mentioned,)
Ioh. XIII. 33. Little Children, yet a little while I am with you; after which,
I shall go where you cannot come. He had told them just before verse. 32. he was
going straitway to be Glorified in and with God. That was enough to assure them
they should still be under his Fatherly care. But withal, they must remember
that his Eye would be over them, to see how they behaved themselves.
Particularly in relation to his New Commandment that he gave them in these
words, as I have loved you, so do you also love one another. He tells them, by
their resembling him in This, they should show they were his Children and his
Disciples. It appears that by those words of his going away, Peter thought our
Savior meant, that he was now about to take a long Journey, probably in order
to the restoring of the Kingdom to Israel, (for that still run in their minds)
Acts I. 6. But whither soever it was, Peter would not stay behind: and
therefore he asked him, Lord whither go thou? Ioh. XIII. 36. Our Savior
meaning by those Words, that he was now going to dye upon the Cross, as also
he foresaw St. Peter would in God's time, accordingly answered him, Whither I
go thou can not follow me now, but thou shall afterward. Thereupon Peter
replied, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my Life for thy
sake. This no doubt was his fixed Resolution, and he thought he had strength to
make it good: but he Presumed too much on that; and therefore our Savior told
him, will thou lay down thy Life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
the Cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me thrice. Ioh. XIII. 38. St.
Mark words the latter part thus; to day, even in this night, before the Cock
crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. Mar. XIV. 30. It is most likely that he
writ the Words as he had them from St. Peter himself. Of his two Cock-crowings,
the first was at three in the morning; that being the middle between the two
last Watches of the night, Mar. XIII. 35. and his second was at Daybreak,
which being the Principal, is the Only Cock-crowing that is mentioned in the
other three Gospels. What the present effect of our Savior's Prediction was,
St. Luke, and St. John, needed not repeat, having seen it so fully delivered in
the two former Gospels: which tell us, that St. Peter, as if he knew himself
better than Christ did, answered him yet more vehemently than before; though I
should dye with thee, yet I will not deny thee Matt. XXVI. 35. Mar. XIV. 31.
And they add, that when he had said this, all the other Disciples said the
same; thinking, not without reason, that they might say it all, as well as he.
After this, it might seem to little purpose for our Savior to discourse with
them any longer: besides that, it was now grown Buxtorf. Synag. c. XVIII. says
that the Jews Paschal Supper ends not till near Midnight.
late in the night; and he had but little time to spare. But even of that
little, he bestowed what he could, in giving them such Instructions and
Comforts as he saw needful to leave with them. These we have, Ioh. XIV. which
Chapter concludes with our Savior's Words, that Grotius and Dr. Hammond
understand of his rising from the Table. Arise, let us go hence, verse. 31. Then
it seems most likely he sung a Hymn with his Disciples, as the Jews after their
Passover sing that which they call the great Hallel. After that, he departed
with them to the Mount of Olives, Matt. XXVI. 30. Mar. XIV. 26. St. Luke could
not but see how those two Predictions, of the Disciples forsaking, and St.
Peter's denying our Lord, are placed in those two Gospels after our Savior's
going out to the Mount of Olives; though they were spoken by him, before his
rising from the Table, according to that Evangelist's sure Information. He
therefore set them down in the order wherein they are here placed, in our
Saviors Table-Discourse to his Disciples. After which, he added what our
Savior said to them, as it seems, after his rising from the Table Luke XXII.
35 -- 38. The sum of it was, to let his Disciples know, what a surprising
change there would presently be in their condition. That whereas hitherto they
had been safe under his Wings, and he had provided for them, as his little
Children; (so he called them) now he was to be taken from them this night, and
according to the Prophecy touching the Messiah, to be reckoned among the
Transgressors. Esai LIII. 12. So that now they must provide for themselves; and
that not only against want, but against Danger, humanely speaking; their
Country of Galilee, whither they would think to fly, so abounding with Robbers,
that whosoever would live there, should rather sell his Clothes, than want Arms
to defend himself. His last Words, being Proverbially spoken, they did not
understand them, as it appears by their Answer, and he had not time now to
explain himself. Therefore breaking off this Discourse, he only said it is
enough. And so, as it follows, Luke XXII. 39. he went, as he was wont, to the
Mount of Olives: that is, he went thither now this Maundy Thursday Night, as he
had done every Night before since Palm Sunday. It was in his way to the Mount
of Olives, according to Grotius and Dr. Hammond, that he made those Discourses
to his Disciples, which are recorded Ioh. XV. and XVI. And probably it was at
his coming to that place that, as St. John tells us, XVII. 1. He lifted up his
Eyes to Heaven, and his Soul to God in that Prayer, for himself, and for his
Disciples, and all that should believe on him through their Word. v. 17. If in
the three first Gospels, where they speak of our Saviors going from his last
Supper (...), these Words be rendered, as Grotius would have them, toward the
Mount of Olives; then his walk at that time was no further than to the Garden
on the other side of the brook Cedron, Ioh. XVIII. 1. And there, as we read in
Matt. XXVI. 36. Mar. XIV. 32. he came to the place called Gethsemane; which,
according to Dr. Lightfoot, signifyes the place of Olive presses. It was, as
St. John there observes, verse. 2. a place that Judas was well acquainted with;
for Jesus oft-times resorted thither with his Disciples. And that was the
reason of his coming thither at this time. Our blessed Lord, knowing that his
Hour was now come, as he must not do any thing to hasten it, so neither would
he put it off longer. But with perfect Resignation to his Father, he came
thither, as he was wont, Luke XXII. 39. not doubting but that without his
telling him, Judas would soon come, and find him there. In the mean while, to
make the best of his time, our Savior retired himself to Meditation and
Prayer. To be Private, and yet not altogether without Witnesses, he took with
him Peter and James and John, the same that were with him at his
Transfiguration; Saying to the rest of his Disciples, sit you here, while I go
and pray yonder. Matt. XXVI. 36. Mar. XIV. 32. When he was at the place that he
had chosen for that purpose, having there before his Eyes the Terrors of Death,
together with the many things he was to suffer in his way to it, with all their
Aggravating Circumstances; all which things he saw now presently and
unavoidably coming upon him; these (not to mention other considerations) lay
extreme heavy upon his Soul: Especially being pressed upon it by him that has
the power of Death, even the Devil, who no doubt strove with all his Might to
overthrow him that was about to dispossess him of that Power, Hebr. II. 14. IV.
15. And though he had the Spirit given him without measure, Ioh. III. 34. which
was an abundant support to him in all other Trials, yet the Power of it seemed
to be suspended at present. He had complained some hours before, that he could
not pray without interruption. Ioh. XII. 27. Much more now, at entering into his
Agony, he began to be sore amazed, and very heavy. He confessed it to his
Disciples, in these Words, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death:
and therefore as if he had needed their help, he would have them stay and watch
with him. Matthew. XXVI. 37, 38. Mar. XIV. 33. 34. But God provided better for
him, in sending a holy Angel to comfort him, Luke XXII. 43. now in this most
needful time, as he had done before in lesser Trials. Matt. IV. 11. Ioh. XII.
28. That those three Disciples might not be disheartened by seeing him in any of
the three Fits, if we may so call them, of his Agony; he therefore every time
went forward a little; Matt. XXVI. 39. Mar. XIV. 35. And being withdrawn from
them about a Stones cast, Luke XXII. 41. there he suffered all by himself. And
having prayed vehemently to God; using every time the same Words, as St.
Matthew tells us, XXVI. 44. and having thus obtained strength to persist; then
he went to impart the same to his Disciples, stirring them up likewise to
prayer. His first Conflict was in the Verses last mentioned: In the next
following, we read how he fell on the ground, and lying there on his Face in
the profoundest Humility he prayed, that if it were possible the Hour might
pass from him. But when after this, he came to comfort his Disciples, he found
them fast a sleep; whereupon he could not but mind them of their late
Confidence; Especially Peter, that gave the ill Example to the rest. He
therefore asked Him particularly, Simon, sleep thou? could not Thou watch
with me One hour? He also exhorted them to watch and pray, as they had very
great need, to keep them from sinking under the approaching Temptations. Our
Savior seems to have been so much weakened with his first Conflict, that he
could scarce have gone through the Second; but that it pleased God to send his
holy ANGEL to succor him in it, as we find Luke XXII. 43. Together with this,
that Evangelist tells us a Circumstance of this Agony, which was not in the two
former Gospels: that his Terrors came so hard upon him, that his Sweat was as
it were great drops of Blood, falling down to the ground. Luk XXII. 44. Such
bloody sweats have been sometimes mentioned by Writers Grotius from Aristot.
hist. Animal. Lib. III.
; but it has been very rarely, as if it were only to show they are possible.
This being much the hardest of our Savior's three Conflicts, therefore St.
Luke calls this an Agony, as if there were no other. Verse 44. And he tells us
how our blessed Lord prayed in this, (...), more vehemently than before: not
but that he spoke the same Words before, Mar. XIV. 39. but it was now with
strong Crying and Tears, to him that was able to save him from Death. Hebr. V.
7. And there it is added that he was Heard, (...), so as to be delivered, tho
not from Death it self, yet from the Fear of Death, as Grotius understands it.
After this, when he rose from prayer, and came to his Disciples, he found them
sleeping for sorrow, as St. Luke tell us: Whereupon he said to them, why sleep
you? XXII. 45. St. Mark says, they wist not what to answer him. XIV. 40. St.
Luke adds that he said to them now, as we have seen he did before, rise and
pray, that you enter not into Temptation. verse. 46. The third Conflict being
after he was delivered from that Fear, was therefore so much easier than the
two former, that little more is said of it, but that it is called the third in
the two first Gospels: And St. Matthew tells us, that now again our Savior
prayed, saying the same Words. After which, he was so easy in his mind, that
coming to his Disciples, and finding them asleep again, he said to them, like
one unconcerned, sleep on now, and take your Rest, Matt. XXVI. 45. Mar. XIV.
41. St. Mark adds, (...) that is, according to Dr. Hammond, you are discharged
from any more watching. Our blessed Lord told them plainly why; because the
Hour is come -- Lo, he is at hand that betrays me. Immediately, while he yet
spoke, there comes a Band of armed Men, and Officers, from the chief Priests
and Pharisees, together with the Traitor Judas, who went at the head of them.
There were also chief Priests, and Captains of the Temple, and Elders, Luke
XXII. 52. that came a little after the rest. And though it was full Moon, yet
they had Lanterns, and torches, Ioh. XVIII. 3. to be sure that they might find
him, and not mistake the Person. But for that, Judas had given them a token,
saying, whomsoever I shall kiss, the same is He, hold him fast: (...), make
sure of him, that he may not escape. Possibly it was that which this covetous
wretch hoped he would do, after He had got his Money. But to make sure of that,
(as it seems, while our Savior was yet in the Garden,) he stepped up to him,
saying, Master, Master, and kissed him. Matt. XXVI. 49. Mar. XIV. 45. Our
blessed Lord, at his first coming in view, asked him with his usual kindness,
Friend, wherefore art thou come? Mattb. XXVI. 50. But seeing what company he
brought with him, Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man
with a kiss? Then, as St. John tells us, XVIII. 4 -- 9. Our blessed Lord,
coming forth out of the Garden, asked them that came foremost, whom seek you?
They answered, Jesus of Nazareth. Our Savior told them, I am He. which Words
were no sooner out of his Mouth, but they went backward, and fell to the
ground. When they were up again on their Legs, He asked them a second time,
whom seek you? They answered as before; and he told them again, I am he: If
therefore you seek me, let these go their way; pointing to his Disciples, who
were his particular care: and of whom he had even now said in his prayer to
God, of them whom thou gave me have I lost none. Ioh. XVII. 12. They that
came now to seize him, durst not touch those whom he had dismissd. But finding
all this while, he would do nothing for the saving of himself; they took heart,
and laid hands on him, and took him, as Judas had bidden them. Whereupon the
two Disciples who had Swords, thinking now was the time to make use of them,
they asked him, Lord, shall we smite with the Sword? Luke XXII. 49. One of
them, namely Peter, did not stay for an Answer; but forthwith drew upon Malchus
a Servant of the Highpriests, and cut off his right Ear. Ioh. XVIII, 10. That
this might not occasion more Bloodshed, our Savior first tied up the hands of
his Enemies, with these Words, Suffer ye thus far: and withal, having touched
the Ear of Malchus, he healed him Luke XXII. 51. Next, he bid Peter put up his
Sword, and leave him to drink the Cup that the Father had ordered for him. Ioh.
XVIII. 11. But withal, our blessed Lord gave him a Reprimend; telling him,
that his drawing the Sword against Authority was a Sin against God; and also
that he run into that Sin very needlessly; for Peter could not but think, that
if Jesus had thought fit to have a Guard, he could easily, upon prayer to his
Father, have had twelve Legions of Angels about him, instead of his twelve
Disciples. But then, says he, how should the Scriptures be fulfilled, that
have foretold that thus it must be. Matt. XXVI. 54. He also minded the chief
Priests, and all the Multitude with them, how daily and publicly he had taught
in the Temple; and yet all that while God had not suffered them to lay hands on
him: but the same Divine Providence had permitted it now. For, says he, This
is your Hour, and the Power of darkness. Luke XXII. 53. And the reason of it
was, that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled: Matt. XXVI. 56.
God having so declared, by Esaiah, Daniel, and others, that this was his
Decree, that Christ should suffer, says Grotius on this Text. Our Savior's
Disciples having heard what now he had said, had not the courage to stay any
longer: but, as he had foretold, they all forsook him, and fled. Matthew. XXVI.
56. Mar. XIV. 50. except only Peter, that staid till he had fulfilled what our
Savior foretold of his denying him; and St. John, who was the only man of his
Disciples that continued with him to the end. And it may be observed that John
was never questioned for it; which might show the other Disciples, as well the
Folly, as the Sin of their Desertion. Our blessed Lord being thus taken by his
Enemies, they bound him, according to Judas his Advice; and led him away, first
to Annas, who was father in Law to Caiaphas the High Priest Ioh. XVIII. 12, 13.
It seems that Annas sent him away presently to Caiaphas, verse. 24. who was more
especially concerned in this matter, not only by his Place, as being
High Priest the same Year, verse. 13; but also because the whole Proceeding
against our Savior was by his advice and instigation. verse. 14. The blessed
Jesus being brought to the Highpriests Palace, was followed thither by St.
Peter and St. John his Disciples, verse. 15. The latter of these being known to
the High Priest, not only went himself into the Palace after our Savior, but
understanding that Peter was kept out, he got him in also, by speaking for him
to a Woman that was the Doorkeeper verse. 16. But this very thing unexpectedly
brought that Trial on Peter, in which, by his First denial of Christ, he showed
the weakness of that Resolution, which he had so much boasted of but a very few
hours before; that though he should dye with him, yet he would not deny him.
For that very Maid that let him in, when she saw him afterward warming himself
at the Fire, being not without suspicion that he might be a Disciple of our
Savior's, asked him plainly if he was not one of them. He said, I am not. v.
17. After which, he went out into the Porch, and presently the Cock crowed Mar.
XIV. 68. The first Cockcrowing was in the Roman Account the beginning of the
fourth watch of the Night; that is, it was at three in the morning Censorinus
Cap. XXIV.
, and so it was in St. Mark's Account before mentioned. Mar. XIII. 35. This
might have made St. Peter remember his Masters Prediction: but it does not
appear that it did; for there he stood warming himself with the High Priest's
Servants and Officers, even till his second Denial. Ioh. XVIII. 18. The mean
while Caiaphas (as it should seem) having sent to call the Sanhedrin together,
was examining our blessed Lord, to prepare matters for them to proceed on at
their meeting. He questioned him concerning his Disciples, and also his
Doctrine, verse. 19; in hope to have got some matter to charge him with out of
his own Mouth. Our Savior plainly told him, that he had taught always in
Public, namely in the Synagogues, and in the Temple, verse. 20. where if he had
said any thing amiss, there were enough to witness it against him. verse. 21. He
referred him to Them, as being more proper for a Judge to examine, than him
that was the Party Accused. For this Just Liberty that our Savior used in
giving this Answer to the High Priest, he was sharply chastised by one of the
Officers that stood by; who not only reprehended him for it, but also
contumeliously slruck him on the Cheek verse. 22. whether with the Palm of his
hand, or with his Sandal, as the Word may rather signify v. Hesychius in (...).
His first rendering of that Wordis (...).
. Whereupon our blessed Lord answered him calmly, in these Words: If I have
spoken Evil, bear witness of the Evil; but if Well, why smitest thou me? Ioh.
XVIII. 23. His Reasoning was perfectly Good; but it was but thrown away on such
Dogs as these, Psalm. XXII. 16. that were for worrying any one they were set at
by their Master. And He whom these served, so thirsted for the Blood of this
Righteous Man, that he cared not which way he came by it. It was at Caiaphas
his House, after he could make nothing of his Examination, that his Officers
and Servants, the Men that held Jesus, thus mocked, and smote, and Abused him.
Luke XXII. 63 -- 65. All this is placed by St. Luke before the meeting of the
Sanhedrin for the Judicial proceeding against our Savior, verse. 66. The
Beginning of that Insolent Usage of our blessed Lord might be about half an
hour after three in Morning. For St. Luke says before this, verse. 58. that it
was after some short time from St. Peter's first Denial of Christ, that he was
tempted to it The Second time. It was while Peter was yet standing and warming
himself, that some of them that stood by, Ioh. XVIII. 25. namely a Maid, Matt.
XXVI. 71. Mar. XIV. 69. and a Man, as St. Luke says verse. 58. They, as St. John
says in the Plural, Questioned St. Peter, saying to him, Art not thou also one
of his Disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not, Ioh. XVIII. 25; And that
not being enough, he confirmed it with an Dath, that he did not know the Man.
Matthew. XXVI. 72. It was at some distance of Time, about an Hour after, that
another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a Truth this man also was with them,
for he is a Galilean, Luke XXII. 59. The two first Gospels tell us that Some of
them that stood by said to Peter, surely thou art one of them: for thy Speech
bewrays thee, Matt. XXVI. 73. Mar. XIV. 70. St. John adds this more
Particularly, that one of the Servants of the High Priest, being his Kinsman
whose Ear Peter cut off, said, did not I see thee in the Garden with him? Ioh.
XVIII. 26. Peter, finding himself now in extreme Danger, began to Curse and to
Swear, saying, I know not the Man Matt. XXVI. 74. Mar. XIV. 71. This being the
third time in our Saviors Prediction, immediately, whilst he yet spoke, the
Cock crowed Luke XXII. 60. Ioh. XVIII. 27. St. Mark tells us, this was the
Second time the Cock crowed. Mar. XIV. 72; and by that Token we know, that now
it was Piin. Not. Hist. X. 21. says, beside the Crowing of the Cock at the
beginning of the fourth Watch, he also crows again to give notice of Daybreak.
Daybreak. By this time, they that had our Savior in their hands, might have
tired themselves with abusing him. Howsoever it was, it appears they gave him
some intermission. And now our blessed Lord, being within hearing of St. Peter,
(for they were then below stairs together, Mar. XIV. 66, and perhaps without
Doors, Matt. XXVI. 69 -- 71.) could not but pity the poor man, that in fencing
for his life, run that desperate hazard of his Soul; and therefore Turning that
way, he looked on him with great Compassion. Which when Peter saw, it struck
him deep. And then he remembered those Words of the Lord, how he had said unto
him, before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. Luke XXII. 61. Whereupon
he went out, and wept bitterly. verse. 62. On Friday morning, as soon as it was
day, Luke XXII. 66. the whole Sanhedrin met: of whom St. Luke names the three
Orders, the Elders of the People, and the chief Priests, and the Scribes. He
tells us, that all these being come together, (...), they led up the blessed
Jesus into their Court, which was above-stairs, in Porticu excelsiore, as
Grotius says on this place. There at the very first they went plainly to work,
and showed they would stick at nothing that would make for their purpose; for
they sought false Witnesses against him, to prove something that would reach
his life, Matt. XXVI. 59. Mar. XIV. 55. But it seems, at first they found None.
Ib. And though afterward many came and offered themselves, yet they could make
nothing of it; for their Witnesses disproved one another, Matt. XXVI. 60. Mar.
XIV. 56. At last there came two false Witnesses, that thought to make Blasphemy
of those Words which he had spoken some five years before, John. II. 19. But
they reported them so differently, as we read in the two first Gospels, that
the Judges could not think that what these men said would give them a
sufficient (...). Hammond on Mar. XIV. 59.
color for a Sentence of Death. And therefore at last, the High Priest found
it necessary for him to return to the way that he begun with at first, to try
what he could get out of our Savior himself. For that end he Asked first, what
he had to say against the Evidence of the Witnesses now produced. But all they
had said being nothing in effect, our Savior would answer nothing to that
Question. Matt. XXVI. 62, 63. Mar. XIV. 60, 61. Then, as it follows in those
two Gospels, the High Priest asked him, art thou the Christ? There St. Luke
mentions XXII. 67. something which they had omitted; namely our Savior's way
of avoiding that question. He said to them, if I tell you I am the Christ, you
will not believe; and if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go,
verse. 67, 68. His meaning was, as Grotius and Dr. Hammond understand it, that,
if he should go about to prove it by Scripture; they would not Answer him, as
he had tried, Matt. XXII. 46. nor would they release him, though he was the
Christ of God, for ought they could say to the contrary. He told them what
would come of this at last, that after all they could do to him, He, the Son of
man should sit as their Judge at the right hand of the Power of God. Luke XXII.
69. Now they reckoned, if they could hold him to this, they had enough for
their turn. And therefore they all run into this Question, Art thou the Son of
God? They would have a Categorical Answer, He said unto them, you say that I am
verse. 70. Then they all said what need we any further witness? For we our
selves have heard of his own Mouth verse. 71. But all this having past in a
tumultuary way, they could do nothing upon it Judicially. And therefore to
proceed in form of Law, there being no Witness against him, the Chief Priest
was for putting him to his Oath. I adjure thee by the living God, that thou
tell us, whether thou be the Christ the Son of God. Matt. XXVI. 63. Now our
Savior heard the voice of Swearing, as they call it when a Judge thus adjures
Talmud Shebaoth IV. 5.
: and therefore he was bound by their Law to say the whole truth of all that
was asked him, or else he must suffer as guilty. Levit. V. 1. To this therefore
our Savior answered, thou have said it; as in St. Matthew; that is plainly, I
am, as it is in St. Mark's Gospel. XIV. 62. And not to depart from what he had
told them before, he added now, nevertheless, tho I stand here as a Criminal
before you, hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of
Power, and coming in the Clouds of heaven: meaning this of Himself, as the
Messiah is described in Dan. VII. 13. Our blessed Lord having thus owned that
he was the Messiah, the High Priest rent his clothes, as they used to do at the
hearing of Blasphemy 2 Kings XVIII. 37. XIX. 1. Now, he cried, what need we any
further Witness? Behold you have heard his blasphemy, what think you? By the
Law, Blasphemy was a Capital Crime. Lev. XXIV. 16. And so they all condemned
him, as being guilty of Death Matt. XXVI. 64 -- 66. Mar. XIV. 61 -- 64. Now
they found a great want of the power of Life and Death, that was taken from
them by the The Jews say that 40 years before the Destruction of the Temple,
Capital Judgments were taken away from Israel. v. Lightfoot Vol. I. page 265.
Romans. But in this matter they did not doubt to get Pilate to supply that
defect. The mean while they treated our Lord Jesus with the utmost spite and
contempt, as if he were the very worst and vilest of men. Matt. XXVI. 67, 68.
They that just before had Judged him Guilty of Death, came to him and spit in
his Face; and then in mockery, having covered his Eyes, they Buffeted him. and
bid him Prophecy. Mar. XIV. 64, 65. Their Servants went on with their inhumane
Sport, striking him with the Palms of their Hands, or their Sandals; and then
saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ; who is he that smote thee? The mean
while the whole Sanhedrin, having sent, no doubt, to know Pilate's pleasure,
when they should attend him with their Prisoner, to get Him, to put him to
Death. Matt. XXVII. 1. were now consulting together about the Accusation they
should bring in against him. They knew that to charge him, according to their
manner with speaking Blasphemous Words against the Holy Place, and the Law,
Acts. VI. 13. would signify nothing. And if they should charge him with that
which they had condemned him for, his making himself the Christ, Pilate would
not understand it: But they knew he would be touched to the quick with any
charge relateing to CAESAR: the Emperor that then was, Tiberius, being a most
jealous Prince, that would not endure the least seeming Neglect; especially of
them that were entirely his Creatures, as Pilate was. This was the reason why
they pitched upon that Ensnaring Question about the Lawfullness of paying
Tribute to Caesar; and put that to our Savior for this very End, that so they
might deliver him to the Governor Luke XX. 20. And though he escaped them then,
by giving them such an Answer, as showed how unjust it was in them, Now to
charge him with the same Crime: yet, to make sure work, they resolved that this
should be his Accusation. And so when the morning was come, Matt. XXVII. 1.
Mar. XV. 1. at or after (...) was after Sunrising. See LXX. Iud. IX. 33. II
Sam. XXIII. 4. II King. III. 22. So here Mar. XV. 1. Censorinus C. XXIV says,
vocatur Mane cum lux videtur solis. It must signify so in this place for it was
Day a good while since. Luke XXII. 66.
Sunrising, they took our Savior with them to the Judgment Hall, Ioh. XVIII.
28. or Pilate's House, as it is in the Margin. There went the whole Sanhedrin
together Mar. XV. 1. to give the more countenance to their Business. When they
were come thither, these bloody Hypocrites, that had just now Swallowed a
Camel, were presently straining at a Gnat. They held it a Legal pollution for
any one of their Religion to go into a Room among the Sinners of the Gentiles,
as they called them. Though there was no such thing in the Scriptures, yet
according to their Doctrine, it would have been such a Defiling of themselves,
Ioh. XVIII. 28. that after it they could not have eaten the Passover that
Friday Evening. On this Solemn Occasion, so great a part of that Nation being
there at Jerusalem together, Pilate could not but think it his best way to
Humor them in this: and therefore, upon their sending in their Prisoner to him,
Ioh. XVIII. 28. he went out to them, and demanded their Accusation. verse. 29 He
asked it in such a manner as showed he would willingly have declined this
Trouble. But they told him plainly, it was a Capital Cause; and therefore
properly belonged to his Cognizance. Our blessed Lord being now to be cut off
according to Daniel's Prophecy, and that Judicially, as it has been shown in
the Exposition: it was, as St. John tells us, XVIII. 32. so ordered by the
Providence of God, that he should be brought before a Roman Judge, to be
condemned by the Roman Law, to be Crucified, which was the very Death that our
blessed Lord himself had foretold he should suffer; Ioh. XII. 32, 33. He could
not have come to it otherwise. They began to Accuse him in these Words; we have
found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give Tribute to
Caesar; saying that he himself is Christ a King. Luke XXIII. 2. What they
called now perverting the Nation, they called afterward, verse 5. Stirring them
up; no doubt, against the Roman Government. And if that, and all they charged
him with, had been True; then he had been a Messiah for their turn, as much as
Barchochba was to the Jews in the next Age. But their Quarrel against our
blessed Lord, was only because he came in a low suffering Condition, as it was
foretold that he should, in Esai. LIII. and other such Prophecies of Scripture.
The things which they charged him with, being just contrary to what appeared in
all his Life and Doctrine, they could not pretend to bring any Proof of them.
But for that, there would be no need of any, in the way that they took. The
last thing in their Accusation being this, that he made himself a King, it was
their way to get Pilate to ask him the Truth of That. They knew he would own it
to Pilate, as he had done already to Them: and they reckoned his Owning of this
would be taken for Proof of all the rest. Pilate could not think, by any thing
he saw in the Prisoner, that they were in Earnest when they charged him with
this. However, since they would have it so, he did ask him, Art thou the King
of the Jews? Our Savior answered him, thou say. verse. 3. Which Words were
an Affirmation in the Syriac, that was his Native Language. But Pilate either
understood not the Idioms of that tongue; or would not believe a thing so
contrary to what he Saw in him. Therefore the chief Priests, seeing that would
not do, went on to accuse him of many other things Mar. XV. 4 But still they
offered no proof of any thing that they said. And the things they charged him
with, being palpably false, our blessed Lord heard them as one unconcerned. He
answered Nothing. At which Pilate marvelled, believing there was something
Extraordinary in it Mar. XV. 3 -- 5. To find the bottom of this, Pilate thought
fit to ask our blessed Lord by Himself, what the meaning might be of that which
they insisted upon, and he himself did not deny; namely, of his taking upon him
to be a King. For this purpose he took our Savior with him into the
Iudgement-Hall; and there he asked him a Second time, Ioh. XVIII. 33 -- 38
saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? Our blessed Lord desired to know his
Meaning in Asking him this: whether it was for his own Information, to know the
truth of his Doctrine; or whether it was to know what he had to say to that
Accusation. Pilate told him in the first place, verse. 35. he would know what he
had done to give Occasion for this Accusation. Our Savior told him plainly, My
Kingdom is not of this World. And as to his doing any thing that might give
Occasion for this charge, the contrary had sufficiently appeared, in his
Suffering himself to be delivered to the Jews, and forbidding any resistance.
Pilate asked him, verse. 37. Art thou a King then? in any sense? He would know
what our Savior meant by it. The explaining of that matter, so as to make
Pilate understand it, was not to be done in few Words; and there was not time
now for many. But as to the matters of the Accusation, Pilate was now satisfied
that there was nothing in Them: and therefore he went out again to the Jews,
and told them, I find in him no fault at all. Ioh. XVIII. 38. Luke XXIII. 4.
What followed on Pilates clearing our Savior, we are to learn from St. Luke:
who goes on with the Account of it XXIII. 5 -- 16. He tells us, the chief
Priests, having heard what Pilate said for the clearing of our Lord, were
therefore the more fierce in Accusing him. They said, he stirrs up the People,
teaching throughout all Iewry, beginning from Galilee to this place. No doubt,
by their mention of Galilee they would have it to be understood, that he was
one of that Sect which was very prevalent in that Country ever since the Time
of the Taxing, Acts V. 37. when Judas of Galilee See Dr. Hammond on Acts V.
Not: h.
took up Arms to oppose the paying of Tribute to Caesar. It seems very likely
that those Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices, were of
that Sect. Luke XIII. 1. If they were, then the destroying of them was doing of
Service to Caesar: and therefore Herod, being Caesar's Tetrarch of Galilee, had
so much the more reason to take it ill of Pilate that he should take this
Office out of his hands. This might very well be the occasion of the Enmity
that was between Pilate and Herod at this time, Luke XXIII. 12. Pilate knowing
that Herod was now at Jerusalem, on the Account of the Passover, did gladly
take this Occasion; both to get rid of this troublesome matter, by putting it
over to Herod; and also to let him see by this Instance how unwilling he was,
without a present necessity for it, to meddle with any that belonged to Herod's
Jurisdiction. And therefore as soon as he heard that our blessed Savior was of
Galilee; he presently sent him to Herod, that he might be Judge of this matter.
Herod could not but be glad at our Savior's first coming to him, because he
had been so long desirous to see him, in hope of seeing some Miracle done by
him. But he soon found how much he was mistaken in his expectation. Our blessed
Lord had something else to do, than to satisfy men's Curiosities. And
therefore, though Herod asked him many Questions, he Answered him nothing. Luke
XXIII. 9. Much less would he Answer the chief Priests and Rulers; who, having
followed him thither, verse. 10. Stood and vehemently accused him before Herod
and all his Court. It could not but be a sad Spectacle to see our blessed Lord,
as he stood there before them, so disfigured with the Barbarous Usage he had
newly received from those very men that were now his Accusers. And now to hear
them charge him with such Ambitious and turbulent Practices and Designs, to
make himself King of the Jews; it was a mere Jest to these Courtiers. And to
carry it on a little farther, they arrayed him in a Gorgeous Robe; and so sent
him back to Pilate in that Ludicrous Dress, without any other Censure.
Hereupon Pilate called together the chief Priests and the Rulers and the
People, to give them an Account of this matter. Luke XXIII. 13. It seems that
the People were now coming to Pilate with their Demand for the Release of a
Prisoner; which was a Favor the Governors had usually granted them against that
good Time of the Passover verse. 17. Matt XXVII. 15. Mar. XV. 6. Pilate, having
them and the chief Priests there together, told them, he had sent the Prisoner
to Herod, and found Herod was of His Opinion touching the Prisoner's Innocence,
as to any matter that could reach his Life. He therefore proposed it to the
People, that this might be the Man they would choose to have him Release to them
now at the Passover. Ioh. XVIII. 39. But withal, for the Satisfying of the
Priests, that they might not seem to have made all this Stir about nothing; he
offered that he would Chastise him first, before he Released him. Luke XXIII.
14 -- 17. The chief Priests were not at all pleased with this. And Pilate did
not wonder at it, for he knew they had delivered him for Envy Matthew. XXVII. 18.
But the People, being the Body whom he most studied to oblige, were by this
time engaged for the saving of another Prisoner. One Barabbas, that had been
taken in an Insurrection, wherein he had also committed a Murder; Mar. XV. 7.
for all this, had found Friends among the chief Priests. And they had secretly
moved the People to show Him this Favor. Mar. XV. 11. Pilate seemed not to have
so ill an Opinion of the People, as to think a Majority of them would be so
wickedly partial as to prefer so great a Criminal before an Innocent Person.
And therefore he ventured to join them both together in his Question. He asked
the People; Whom will you that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is
called Christ? Matt. XXVII. 17. Now the Chief Priests and Elders with all their
might persuaded the Multitude, that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy
Jesus. verse. 20. Whereupon, as St. Matthew goes on, when the Governor asked
them again, whether of the Twain will you that I Release unto you? Matt. XXVII.
21. They cried out all at once; saying, Away with this man, and Release to us
Barabbas. Luke XXIII. 18, 19. Ioh. XVIII. 40. Thereupon Pilate asked them, what
shall I do then with Jesus who is called Christ? They all cried, saying,
Crucify him, Crucify him. Matt. XXVII. 22. Luke XXIII. 20, 21. He said to them
the third time, Why? what Evil has he done? Matt. XXVII. 23. Mar. XV. 14. Luke
XXIII. 22. Then, hearing no Answer but a confused Noise, he declared to them,
as he had done before; I have found no Cause of Death in him, I will therefore
Chastise him, and let him go. Luke XXIII. 22. And having said this, he returned
with his Prisoner to the Judgement-Hall Mar. XV. 16. What the Chastisement was
that our Savior received there, we are told briefly in the two first Gospels:
Matt. XXVII. 27 -- 30. Mar. XV. 16 -- 19. for which reason St. Luke quite
omitts it. But St. John gives a fuller Account of this matter, and of all that
followed it, in Order, till Pilate's giving the Sentence of Death on our
Savior. Ioh. XIX. 1 -- 16. That Evangelist shows how Pilate strove, as much as
such an Obnoxious man could, to have avoided the giving of that Sentence:
Especially since his Wife had sent him an Account of her Dream, and thereupon
warned him to have nothing to do against that just Man. Matt. XXVII. 19. This
Message came to him When he was set down on the Iudgment-Seat. Ibid. And that
might probably be at the time, when he gave Sentence for that, which he called
Chastising him, whom a little before he had owned to be an Innocent Person. In
all our blessed Lord's accusation, the only thing that stuck with Pilate, was
his taking upon him to be a King. For tho he had explained himself, by saying
his Kingdom was not of this World; yet in Pilate's Opinion, that did not clear
him from being guilty of an innocent folly in affecting a Greatness that did
not belong to him. He might think it necessary he should be Corrected for this.
And therefore he condemned him to be Scourged; which among the Romans was
properly the punishment of Slaves. For the executing of the Governor's
Sentence, that being the Soldier's business, the whole Band of Pilate's Guards
were called together, and our blessed Lord was delivered into their merciless
Hands. No doubt they were acquainted with that which they were to Correct him
for, which could not but seem extremely Ridiculous to them, in one of so
despicable a Figure as he then made. It seems to have moved their Indignation
and Scorn to the utmost Degree: Which they showed, not only in Scourging him,
according to his Sentence, but also in Handling him afterward in a most cruel
and Insolent manner. First they platted a Crown of Thorns, and put it on his
Head; Then they stripped off his Clothes, and put on him a Robe of Scarlett
Matt. XXVII. 28. of Purple Mar. XV. 20. John XIX. 2. probably it was patched up
of both these together. And to make the Mock Royalty complete, they put a Reed
in his right Hand, and made him hold that for a Scepter. Matt XXVII. 29. Then,
as it were doing Homage, they bowed the knee before him, saying, Hail King of
the Jews. Matt. XXVII. 29. Mar. XV. 19. John XIX. 3. And to finish their Sport,
they spit on him: and taking the Reed out of his Hand, they (...). John. XIX. 3.
gave him several blows with it on his Head. Matt. XXVII. 30. Pilate seeing our
blessed Lord in this cruel Mockery of Royal Attire, having his Face all
besmeared with their Spittle, and his own Blood, had Reason to hope such a
Spectacle as this might have moved the Compassion of the People; especially,
since he that suffered all this, for ought that appeared to Them, was an
Innocent Person. And therefore he brought him forth to them, saying, behold the
Man, into what a miserable Condition you have brought him; and this for
Nothing. It seems not unlikely that this might have moved the People: but the
Chief Priests no sooner Saw him, but they and their Officers cried out, saying
Crucify him, Crucify him, Ioh. XIX. 6. Then the People also, following their
Example, were Instant with loud voices requiring that he might be Crucified.
Luke XXIII 23. But Pilats knowing these were set on by the Chief Priests,
applied himself to Them in particular: and told them, if they would have this
Man Crucified, they must do it themselves; For his part he found no fault in
him. Ioh. XIX. 6. They Answered him, we have a Law, and by our Law he ought to
dye, because he made himself the Son of God. verse. 7. By the Son of God, they
meant the Christ, as appears Matt. XXVI. 63. And it was true, that by their
Law, he that falsely made himself to be the Christ ought to dye Deuteronomy. XVIII.
20. But Pilate understood not the Language of their Scriptures. And therefore,
hearing that this Man made himself the Son of God, he understood by it that he
pretended to be of Divine Extraction and Lineage. And having likely heard of his
Miracles, especially of his raising of Lazarus, and of his last Public Entering
into Jerusalem; having seen also his unmovable firmness of mind in all this
Trial; and having heard from his Wife, what Dreams she had of him this very
day; and hearing this at last which the Chief Priests said of him; he was
afraid, as Grotius thinks, he might be indeed of such a Birth, as some of those
whom he worshiped were said to have been. And therefore taking him again into
the Iudgement-Hall, he asked him Whence art thou? Inquiring into his Birth and
Family. Jesus gave him no Answer, Ioh. XIX. 8, 9. for he saw as to himself,
that there needed none to this last charge, because it came without any Proof:
and he could do Pilate no good by any thing he could say at this time to his
Question. Therefore our blessed Lord gave him no Answer. Then Pilate asked him
in some kind of Anger, Speak thou not to Me? Know thou not, that I have
Power to Crucify thee, and Power to Release thee? verse. 10. It was true, he
had the Power of Life and Death in his Hands: but he could Act by it no farther
than God would give him leave. And our blessed Lord had often shown, that when
He pleased, no Humane Power could touch him. But it was the Will of God, that
the Messiah should be cut off, and Now the Time appointed for it was come:
which things the Jews might have known by their Prophecies, and it was their
Fault that they did not. This is what Grotius takes to be the effect of his
Answer: Ioh. XIX. 11. Thou could have no Power at all against Me, but that
it is given thee FROM ABOVE: Therefore He that Delivered me to Thee, has the
greater Sin. It was chiefly Caiaphas, and the Sanhedrin, that delivered him to
Pilate: and They were the Men that chiefly ought to have known who he was; as,
if they had been so disposed, they might have known by their Scriptures.
Therefore though it was a great Sin in Pilate, to do what he was now going to
do, against Law, and against his own Conscience: yet it was a far Greater Sin
in Them, that went against a far Greater Light, even that of Divine Revelation.
This touched Pilate so far, that, as the Text says, from thenceforth Pilate
sought more than ever to Release him. But the Jews, seeing that, cried out; If
thou let This Man go, thou art not Caesar's Friend. Whosoever makes himself a
King, he takes so much from Caesar, verse. 12. This amounted to a Threatening of
Pilate, with that which of all things in the World he most feared. He had been
guilty of so many Acts of Misgovernment, which would have been brought in open
View, upon any Complaint that should have been made to Caesar against him; that
he dreaded nothing more than This. And it appeard he was in the right; for by
such a Complaint he was Ruined within few years after. Therefore, as it
follows in the Text, When Pilate heard that Saying, he brought Jesus forth,
and sat down on the Iudgement-Seat verse. 13. And from thence having shown that
miserable Spectacle, to the People now, as he had done before to the Priests;
he said to them, Behold your King verse. 14. They no sooner heard it, but they
cried out, Away with him, Crucify him. Then Pilate asked them, shall I
Crucify your King? The chief Priests Answered him, We have no King but Caesar.
Ioh. XIX. 15. God has taken them at their Word: they have had no King but
Caesar's Successors ever since. But here St. John leaves us to the two first
Gospels. They tell us, that Pilate, when he saw he could prevail Nothing, but
that rather a Tumult was made: he took Water, and washed his Hands before the
Multitude: saying, I am Innocent of the Blood of this just Person, See you to
it. Then Answered all the People; and said, his Blood be upon Us and our
Children Matt. XXVII. 24, 25. And so it is to this Day, and will be till their
Conversion. Joel. III. 21. Then Pilate hearing this; and being willing to
content the People, Mar. XV. 15. he gave Sentence that it should be as they
required Luke XXIII. 24. And so he Released Barabbas unto them, and delivered
Jesus to be Crucified. Matt. XXVII. 26. Mar. XV. 15. Luke XXIII. 25. Ioh. XIX.
16. It was the Preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth Hour, Job.
XIX. 14. when Pilate sat down on the Iudgement-Seat, as was before mentioned.
St. John reckons his Hours the Roman way, as has been shown by my learned
Friend Short View of his Harmony. Prop. V. p. 116.
Mr. Whiston. And therefore, as to the Point of Time, his sixth Hour was the
same as ours is, at Six in the Morning. But then, the Romans dividing their
natural Day from Sunset to Sunset into four Watches, whereof each was of
three Hours, according to cap. XXIIX.
Censorinus; they called each of these Watches by the Name of that Hour at
which it begun. The Jews also reckoned their Watches in the same manner, as Dr.
Hammond shows on this Text. Only with this difference; that whereas the Romans
called every Watch by the name of that Hour at which it began; The Jews called
it by the name of that Hour at which it ended: So that the Space from six to
nine, which the Jews called the Third Hour, was the sixth Hour in the Roman
Account. But this was common to them both, that the name of the Hour at which
the Trumpet sounded, was continued the whole Space of 3 Hours till the Trumpet
sounded again. As for St. John's Word (...) about, which, as Mr. Whiston says,
may be taken any where within that Latitude; it seems most likely in this place
to be intended of the middle between six and nine in the morning. For there was
a considerable part of this Watch already spent, since Pilate entered upon this
Business: and yet, as it will presently appear in this Discourse, there
remained Business enough to fill up the rest of the Time till Nine in the
morning; which was, in the Jew's Account, the third Hour; and yet That, as St.
Mark tells us, was the very Time of our Savior's being Crucified. Mar. XV. 25.
It is also to be observed, that this whole Forenoon was, as St. John calls it,
the Preparation of the Passover; the Paschal Lamb being to be Killed about 3
this Afternoon, and to be Eaten after it was dark the same Evening. It seems to
have been toward Eight in the morning, when the blessed Jesus was condemned by
Pilate to that cruel and Ignominious Death. Luke XXIII. 24. After which, our
Savior was immediately by him delivered to his Soldiers, whose Office it was to
put his Sentence in Execution. The Suddenness of this was against the Roman Law
in all Ordinary cases: for by that Law some days of Respite were Generally
allowed the condemned Persons, to prepare themselves for their Suffering. But
here was Order given for present Execution. The Chief Priests could admit no
Delay, because the Passover was to be within a few Hours. And Pilate, having
yielded to them in the main Point, would not break with them about any less
matter: especially since there was an Exception in that Law for any one that
was to suffer on the Account of Sedition, which was our blessed Savior's case.
Therefore as soon as the Sentence was passed, the Soldiers were presently for
hurrying him away. And so putting an end to their mockery, they took off the
Purple Robe from our Savior, and put on his own clothes. Then having provided
a Cross on which he was to suffer, they laid that on his Shoulders, to make him
carry it Himself; as all those used to do that were to be Crucified, according
to the manner of the Romans. And thus our blessed Lord, bearing his Cross, went
forth toward the place of Execution. Ioh. XIX. 17. But it appears he could
carry it no great part of the Way, being so spent and disabled, that he was
ready to sink under the Burden. Therefore one Simon of Cyrene, who was then
coming out of the Country, happening to come in their way, the Soldiers laid
the Cross upon Him, and compelled him to bear it after Him. Matthew. XXVII. 32.
Mark. XV. 21. Luke XXIII. 26. St. Luke shows, that at that time there were many
of the Jewish Nation who differed very much in their Opinion of our Savior
from those of their Brethren, that had been all this morning crying out,
Crucify him, Crucify him. For as he there tells us, verse. 27. even Now when
he was going to suffer, there followed him a great Company of People, and of
Women, which also bewailed and lamented him. Our blessed Lord could not but
have a just Sense of their Compassion toward him in his present Condition. But
he had a much greater Compassion for Them, considering what They were to suffer
within a few Years, and especially the Inhabitants of the City of Jerusalem, of
whom there were many in that Company. For as the blessed Jesus himself was now
going to be cut off, and so to fulfill His part of Daniel's Prophecy, so he
Knew the next thing there foretold was to be fulfilled upon Them, in the
destroying of their City and Sanctuary. Then they were to suffer those Direful
Calamities, which were foretold so long since, even by Moses himself The Jews
do acknowledge the fulfilling of this Prophecy was to be at the Destruction of
their City by Titus. See Menass. ben Israel de term. vitae III. 3.
Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 49 -- 57. The best Office our Savior could do them at present
was to let them know what they were to expect, that they might not be
surprised, when these things should come to pass: and especially, the Women of
that City, whose Condition was most Pityable of all others. Therefore he turned
himself to them, and said, Ye Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for Me, but
weep for your selves and for your Children, For behold, the Days are coming, in
which they shall say, Blessed are the Barren, and the Wombs that never bare,
and the Paps that never gave Suck. No doubt he reflected on the 56, and 57th.
verses of that Prophecy, which speak of the tender and delicate Woman's eating
her own young Children for hunger secretly in the Siege: Which thing Josephus
tells us was most remarkably fulfilled in that Siege at which he was present.
Ios. de Bell. Iud. VII. 8. And there also in Chapter 17. he tells of above two
thousand men, among whom were two of the most bloody Zealots of all the Jewish
Nation, that had hid themselves in the Bottom of several Jakes, to escape the
Hands of the Romans. These no doubt were intended in those Words of the
Prophet's, foretelling of those that should Cry to the Mountains, and to the
Hills, to fall on them, and cover them from the Dreadful Judgments of God. He
bid them think by what they now saw, if God spared not the Green Fruitful
Trees in the Day of his Wrath, what the End must be of the Dry that are good
for nothing but the Fire. St. Luke also takes notice of other Company that our
Savior had, who as to outward things were in the same Condition with himself;
Namely, the two Malefactors, that were led with him to be put to Death. verse.
32. according to that Prophecy. Esai. LIII. 12. When they were come to the
Place called Calvary, verse. 33. in Hebrew Golgotha, that is the Place of a
Scull; there St. Luke leaves his Reader to the two former Gospels. Matt. XXVII.
33. Mar. XV. 22. And there, the First thing our blessed Lord was to suffer,
being that which David foretold would happen to the Messiah, (for he could not
say this of himself,) they pierced my Hands and my Feet, Psalm. XXII. 16. this
was fulfilled in their Nailing of our Savior's Hands and Feet to the Cross on
which he was to suffer. That was the Roman way of fastening all them that were
to be Crucified. But it caused such horrible Pain while it was doing, and much
more after it was done, that for the Supporting of them that were to suffer it,
there was given them before hand a Draught of that which was called the Cup of
the Condemned: that was only Vinegar and Gall, which was thought good enough
for the vilest sort of Criminals. And to them a great Favor it was, either to
hasten their Death, and so to put them the sooner out of their Pain, or to
Stupify them, so that they should be almost insensible of it. This Cup was
offered to our blessed Savior by the four Soldiers, that were his
Executioners, Ioh. XIX. 23. as he doubtless expected it would; being foretold
in one of the Psalms of his Passion. Ps. LXIX. 21. They gave me Gall for my
Relief, See Gusset. Comm. Ling. Ebraic. voce (...)
to ease my sufferings. David could not say this of Himself, but Prophetically
of the Messiah. And therefore our blessed Savior knowingthat thus it must be,
only showed his Obedience, in Tasting it. But that being done, he would not
Drink, because he would not use Art to avoid, or to abate, any thing of the
suffering which God had laid upon him for our Sins. St. Mark, as others have
observed, in his Gospel, has both abridged that of St. Matthew, and has added
such things as He, or St. Peter, judged to be of great Moment. And such
undoubtedly is that which he has in his Account of our Savior's suffering.
Mar. XV. 23. and they gave him to drink Wine mingled with Myrrh, but he
received it not. Myrrhed Wine was accounted a rich and delicate Drink among the
Romans Plin. Not. Hist. XIV. 13.
; and yet a large Draught of that Galen. de Simpl. Medic. facult. V. 19.
would hasten Death, or would stupify, as well as that of Vinegar and Gall.
Therefore it might very well be, that when our Savior had refused the former
Cup, those Friends of his that minister'd to him of their Substance might
prevail with the Soldiers to offer him this Draught, which they had provided
for that purpose. But, as our blessed Lord, though he Tasted of that Cup with
Gall in it for the fulfilling of a Prophecy, yet refused to Drink it, for the
Reasons before mentioned; So, having the same Reasons not to Drink of this
Draught, but not the same Reason to Taste of it, therefore he Received it not,
he would not take it into his Mouth. By this Time it was the Third Hour, Mar.
XV. 25. that is, it was Nine of Clock in the Morning. And now the four Soldiers
that were our blessed Lords Executioners, having done their Preparatory
Business, they Nailed him to the Cross, and so Crucified the Lord of Life. The
mean while other Soldiers did the like to the two Malefactors whom they
Crucified with him, One on the Right hand, and the other on the Left. Luke
XXIII. 33. The Lord Jesus they placed in the midst Ioh. XIX. 18. And so, as it
is observed, Mar. XV. 28 The Scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was
numbered with the Transgressors. Esai. LIII. 12. The four Soldiers had no
sooner finished their Work, but they were presently dividing the Spoil. They
parted his Garments among them. Matt. XXVII. 35. all but his Seamless Coat,
which they reserved to cast Lots for it afterward. This they did under the Eyes
of the blessed Jesus, who was then hanging on the Cross. And even there, amidst
all his sufferings, he Prayed for them that were the Authors and Instruments of
his Misery, as many of them as were capable of receiving Benefit by his
Prayers; He said, Father! forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke
XXIII. 34. And as his Prayers seemed to be more Particularly intended for the
Soldiers, so the Blessing of them came down, first, and that visibly, on the
Centurion, and those that were with him, while they were yet on the Place, as
it follows, Matt. XXVII. 54. Mar. XV. 39. Luke XXIII. 47. It was the Roman
manner, when any one was Crucified, to set up his Accusation written in a
Table, Nailing it up over his Head. Now it being charged by the Chief Priests
on our Savior, that he called himself King of the Jews: as Pilate, being vexed
at their pressing him with this, had, it seems to vex them, called him your
King, more then once; Ioh. XIX. 14, 15. So now to vex them more, he had it
written in the Table above mentioned, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.
It seems, before this was Nailed up, that many of the Jews had read it; as all
might that would, for it was written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; there being
scarce any of the Jews but understood one or more of these Languages. Hereupon
the Chief Priests, being disturbed, did, as it seems, hinder the setting of it
up for a while, till they had spoken with Pilate. And fain they would have
persuaded him not to write, the King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King
of the Jews. But Pilate did not fear their complaining to Caesar of This: and
therefore being, as Philo says, inflexible in his own Nature, and Angry with
them besides, he Answered them accordingly, what I have written, I have
written. Ioh. XIX. 19 -- 22. While this matter was in Debate, the Soldiers
expecting the Title, and having nothing else to do at present, sat down, and
watched him there. Matt. XXVII. 36. It seems to have been on that Occasion of
Pilate's giving our Savior the Title of King of the Jews, that their Rage,
which he had quieted a little before by Sentencing him to that cruel
Ignominious Death, now flamed out afresh, to that degree that they were for
punishing him More, if it were possible. They did what they could toward it, by
falling upon him in several Attaques, reviling, and scoffing, and insulting
over his Miseries. First we read how the People that stood Looking upon him,
and the Rulers also with them D^rided him. Luke XXIII. 35. wherein They
fulfilld that part of the Prophecy Psalm. XXII. 6. in which David says in the
Person of the Messiah, They that See me, laugh me to scorn. Next, They also
that Passed by reviled him, wagging their Heads, Matt. XXVII. 39, 40. Mar. XV.
29, 30. therein fulfilling the following part of the same Prophecy. But above
all the rest, the Sanhedrin, or a Commitee of them, (for they were of all three
Orders, Chief Priests, and Elders, and Scribes,) that attended there to set on
the People, had so much forgot the Sacredness, or even the Gravity of their
Profession, that they stood there mocking at him, and jesting among themselves,
Matt. XXVII. 41. Mar. XV. 31. Some of these Scoffers charged him with those
Words that the false Witnesses could not agree about; that he said, he would
destroy the Temple, and build it again in three Days: a plain Wresting of the
Words of that Prophecy of his Death and Resurrection, which was even now to be
fulfilled. Others scoffed at his Miracles, as if his saving others were
nothing, unless he did now save himself, And yet they could not deny he had
newly raised Lazarus from the Dead: and they very well knew he had foretold
that after three days he would rise himself. Matt. XXVII. 63. The Scoff they
all joined in was at his being called the King of the Jews, the King of Israel,
the Messiah, the Christ, the Son of God; these are several Words for the same
thing, and the Scoffers used some one Word, some another; all agreeing in this,
that if he were the Christ, he must come down from the Cross. But he had told
them often before, that he was to be lifted up, Ioh. XII. 34. but not once of
his coming down. And he was to prove his being the Messiah. not by his escaping
Death, but by his Resurrection from the Dead. The strangest of all their
Scoffs, was in these Words, He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he
will have him. Matt. XXVII. 43. Strange indeed, that they that saw his Hands
and Feet pierced, when he was Nailed to the Cross; and now he was hanging on
it, they could tell all his Bo^es; they that saw the Soldiers parting his
Garments; all which things they had read in that Psalm of the Passion Psalm
XXII. 16, 17, 18. should themselves use those Words which it is there foretold
some would use on that Occasion, Psalm. XXII. 8. A plain Instance of the just
Judgment of God upon them for their Obstinacy; that though they read the
Writings of the Prophets every Day, yet they fulfilled All that was written in
them of our Saviors sufferings. Act. XIII. 27, 28, 29. It is no wonder that
the Soldiers also mocked our Savior, when they saw it done by all those of his
own Nation. But these poor Heathens did it with some kind of Humanity. For,
coming to him, they offered him Vinegar. Luke XXIII. 36, 37. This being mingled
with Water was their common Drink See M^ill. in Ioh. XIX. not. XXXVI.
. And no doubt it was in compassion that they offered it to him: it was for the
asswaging of his Thirst, which could not but be very great, after his violent
Sweat^, and so much loss of Blood. The Soldiers at this time, having received
the Table with that Superscription before mentioned, were ordered to Nail it on
the Top of the Cross, above our Savior's Head. Luke XXIII. 38. Which being
done, they were now at Leisure to do what they had left undone at the time of
their dividing our Savior's Garments. They had then laid aside the Seamless
Coat, and now they cast Lots to know whose it should be. So Now they had
fulfilled the whole Prophetical verse, in that Psalm of the Passion, Psalm.
XXII. 18. where David says, not of himself, but the Messiah; They parted my
Raiment among them, and for my Vesture they did cast Lots. They had fulfilled
the former part of it before. Matt. XXVII. 35. Now the latter part also was
accomplished. Th^se things therefore the Soldiers did. Ioh. XIX. 23, 24. Of all
sorts of men, Jews, and Gentiles, that were present at our Savior's
Sufferings, there were none but had already taken their Turn in reviling and
scoffing at him, but only the two Thieves that were Crucified with him. But
they also having heard what the Chief Priests said of him, that if he were
Christ, he should now come down from the Cross; they cast the same in his
Teeth. Matt. XXVII. 44. Mar. XV. 32. But it was only one of them did this, as
we learn from Luke XXIII. 39. He said, if thou be Christ, save they self and
Us. The other hearing this, rebuked him for it; and told him how different
their Case was from Christ's. We indeed suffer justly, for we receive the due
Reward of our Deeds: but this Man has done nothing amiss. verse. 40, 41. It
appears by what this man said of Christ's Innocence, that he knew of his Holy
and Exemplary Life. He knew also of his Doctrine, and Miracles; So far as to be
thereby converted; though Probably not till since his committing those Crimes
for which he suffered. This appears by his Prayer that he made to our Savior:
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. verse. 42. It is clear that
he had such a Faith in Christ at this time, as some of his Disciples had not
till they were convinced of his Resurrection. Luke XXIV. 21. No wonder
therefore that he received this Gracious Answer to his Prayer: Jesus said unto
him, Verily I say unto thee, to Day shall thou be with me in Paradise. verse.
43. It was About the sixth Hour, when these things happened Luke XXIII. 44. And
when the sixth Hour was Come Mar. XV. 33. that is, when it was At noon the
Trumpet sounded for the Beginning of the third Watch. See Grotius on Matt.
XXVIII. 45.
NOON, there was Darkness over all the Earth until the Ninth hour. Matt.
XXVII. 45. Mar. XV. 33. Luke XXIII. 44. that is, it was dark from Midday till
Three of Clock in the Afternoon. This Darkness was over all the Land. Matt. and
Mar. Ibid. that is, not only over all Iudaea, but over all the Roman Empire;
or at least all the Eastern Part of it. For, according to Phlegon, (who lived
in those Parts, and was in favor with Adrian the Emperor,) there was this
Phlegon Trallianus, in the XIIIth. Book of his Olympiads, says, this happened
in the last year of the 102d Olympiad. Eusebius. Chron. and Chron. Paschale, and
Philopon. de Creat. II. 21. That Olympiad ended in the 19th year of Tiberius,
as Philoponus there shows: and some Months after April 3. AD. 33.
year the greatest Eclipse of the Sun, that ever was known. It was Night at the
sixth Hour of the Day, so that the Stars of Heaven were seen. We know that this
could be no Natural Eclipse, for the Moon was then at Full, as it must be at
the time of the Passover. But we are not concerned to enquire how it came to
pass, being very certain of this, that He that made the Sun, could take away
the Light of it, at what time, or in what manner, it pleased him. He did more
than this in Joshua's, and in King Hezekiah's, Days. It happened at that very
time, as the same Phlegon tells us, that there was in Bithynia so great an
Earthquake, that a great Part of the City of Nice was overthrown by it. No
doubt it was the same Earthquake that we read of in the three first Gospels.
They tell us, that at the time of this Darkness, the Vail of the Temple was
rent in the Midst. Luke XXIII. 45. It was rent in Twain, from the top to the
bott^m. Matt. XXVII. 51. Mar. XV. 38. and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks
rent, and the Graves were opened: and many Bodies of Saints which slept, arose,
and came out of their Graves, and went into the Holy City, and appeared to
Many. Matt. XXVII. 51 -- 53. But this last thing of Rising from the Dead, was
not till After Christ's Resurrection, as St. Matthew there tells us. It must be
so, for Christ himself was the First Fruits of them that slept. I Cor. XV. 20,
23. He was the First that rose into a state of Incorruption and Immortality.
This Darkness, and this Earthquake, being such things, as See Grot. on Matt.
XXVII. 45, and 51. who shows this both from Heathen Writers, and from
Scripture. He says, the Jews might now remember that Prophecy of Amos VIII. 9,
10. which he speaks of as being now literally fulfilled.
all Mankind look upon as Tokens of God's wrath, when either of them happens;
and the Jews finding them so accounted in their Scriptures; therefore the
coming of both these together could not but be very Dreadful to them by whom
they were both seen and felt at the same time. Especially it must have been so
to them that were there reviling and scoffing at that blessed Man, whom many
among them took to be the Son of God, and none of them could show any Cause of
his Suffering. They seem to have been so sensible of this, that they all
withdrew themselves, and went home one after another; or at least they forbore
giving our blessed Lord any farther disturbance; for we read nothing more of
them, during all the Space of Three hours that the Darkness continued. But on
the contrary, his nearest friends that, as it appears, were not suffered to
come within Hearing of him all this while, were now come up to him, and he had
the freedom of speaking to them, as they stood by the Cross. There are named
particularly, Ioh. XIX. 25. the blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of our Lord, and
her Sister Mary This Mary, being, as it appears, next of kin to our Savior,
was Mother to two of the Chief (...). James, who was the first Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Cleopas, Father of Symeon, who succeeded James in that See. She
is called by the Evangelists, Mother of James and Ioses. Matt. XXVII. 56. (...)
Mar. XV. 47. (...). XVI. 1. It appears that both those Sons were alive when
those Gospels were written. But now when St. John writ, James had been dead
thirty years. Ioses it seems was not living. But Cleopas was, or at least his
Son Symeon, for he was then Bishop of Jerusalem. And therefore she is here
called Ioh. XIX. 25. the Mother of Cleopas, not the Wife, as it is in our
Translation.
Mother of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene; and together with them John the
Evangelist, who speaks of himself, as he does always, in the third Person, and
calls himself the Disciple whom Jesus loved. It was an Extraordinary thing,
that these Women durst own any Relation or Friendship to our Savior, among so
many of his bloody and violent Enemies. It could not have been safe for them,
but that they kept at a distance, till now when their Enemies were frightened
away. Now when they were come so near him, as they showed their Affection in
it, so he showed his Care of his Mother, together with his Authority over Her
and his beloved Disciple. He bad her, that was now losing Him, take John
instead of himself, to be her Son: and bad John take charge of her, as his own
Mother. Which he tells us, he accordingly did. From that hour he took her to
his own home. verse. 26. 27. It may be observed of those two other devout Women,
that as they were the last that stayed with our blessed Savior at his Death, so
they were the First whom he appeared to after his Resurrection. Our blessed
Lord being now to have no more Communication with Mankind in this Life, applied
himself wholly to God in Supplications and Prayers. For which he had much more
Occasion now on the Cross, than he had in his Agony in the Garden the night
before. He was Now suffering the utmost of all that he then only feared. He
was now in a nearer view of all the Terrors of Death. His Spirits were spent
with so much Effusion of Blood; and Nature was now sinking under the burden.
His only Support being the supernatural Assistance of the Spirit of God, it
seems he had lost the Sense of that for the present; which made him cry out, in
the first Words of the two and twentieth Psalm, My God, my God! why have thou
forsaken me? But as he showed the firmness of his Faith in calling God by that
Title: So it appears he did not forget himself to be the Messiah of God, for
whom David made that Psalm in the Spirit of Prophecy. And God appeared to
Answer his Prayer, by a visible Token, in dispelling that Darkness, which had
now continued three Hours, as was before mentioned. It was at the Ninth hour
that the Darkness went off. Matt. XXVII. 45. Mar. XV. 33. That was the hour of
Prayer in the Temple. Act. III. 1. the Time of the Evening Sacrifice. After
which imediately followed the killing of the Paschal Lambs; And that held from
the Ninth hour to the Eleventh, as Josephus tells us, de bell. Iud. VII. 17. At
the Beginning of this part of the Day, namely at the Ninth hour, Jesus cried
with a loud voice saying, Eloi, Eloi, lamma Sabachthani, My God, my God etc.
Mar. XV. 34. The Words that he spoke were in the Syriac tongue, which was our
Savior's natural Language. And as Bp. Walton says, they were the Words of the
Jerusalem Targum of that Psalm. But some of them that stood by, when they heard
it, said, behold, he calls for Elias. Mar. XV. 35. Grotius thinks they were
Hellenists, such as understood not that Language, and therefore mistook the
Word Eloi for Elias. After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished, that belonged to his State of Humiliation, his Death only
excepted: to the end that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, he said, I thirst.
Ioh. XIX. 28. Thereupon one run, and filled a Sponge full of Vinegar, whereof
there stood a Vessel full, probably for the Soldiers use. And putting this
Sponge on a Reed, or Stalk of Hyssop, (which seems to have been a Shrub, or
small sort of Tree in that Country; l. King. IV. 33.) with this they put it to
our Saviors Mouth. Matt. XXVII. 48. Mar. XV. 36. Ioh. XIX. 29. Others, that
were in the same mistake, being pleased with this, for the asswaging of his
Thirst, that he might not die presently, said, (...) (Go on, so Grotius renders
it) Go on keep him alive, that we may see whether Elias will come to take him
down. Matt. XXVII. 49. Our blessed Lord did receive the Vinegar. Ioh. XIX. 30.
and so fulfilled the latter Part of that Prophecy, Psalm. LXIX. 21. In my thirst
they gave me Vinegar to drink; which was the last Prophecy to be fulfilled
before his Death. Our blessed Lord had no sooner Received this, but he said,
(...) Ioh. XIX. 30. Which Word may be rendered, it is fulfilled: And so by what
he said verse. 28. St. John, seems to have understood it of the fulfilling of
the Prophecy. It is rendered in our Translation, it is Finished: and so the
same word is used by St. Paul. II. Tim. IV. 7. Our blessed Lord had now
Finished his great Work, that he had undertaken. He had paid the last drop of
his Blood for our Redemption: and had nothing more to do, but to resign his
Soul to God. To show how willingly he did this, he cried with a loud Voice,
saying, Father! into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Luke XXIII. 46. They are
the Psalmist's words, Psalm. XXXI. 5. to which our blessed Lord added only the
Title of Father, which he alone could use in his own proper Right. And so in
perfect Obedience to his Father, he did, as it was foretold of him, pour out
his Soul unto Death. Esai. LIII. 12. He Bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost.
Ioh. XIX. 30. St John tells us in his next Words, verse. 31. that it was now the
Preparation of the Sabbath. He further tells us, that that Sabbath Day was a
High-day. So the Jews called the first and last days of their great Feasts.
Ioh. VII. 37. This was therefore the first of the seven days of Unleavened
Bread; which falling upon a Sabbath Day, was a High-day more than Ordinary. But
for this Preparation of the Sabbath, the Apostle is careful to distinguish it
from the Preparation of the Passover, mentioned before, verse. 14. That of the
Passover, as he there told us, was about the Sixth hour, which, as it was shown
before in page Lxvj. held from Six till Nine in the morning. But this
Preparation of the Sabbath, was not till three of the Clock in the Afternoon.
So it is expressly said in Augustus his Jos. Antiq. XVI. 10. p. 561. E.
Edict for the exempting of the Jews from giving Bail in Suits of Law; that it
should not be required of them on their Sabbath-dayes; nor on their
Preparations or Sabbath Day Eves, from the Ninth hour, that is, from three of
the Clock in the Afternoon. It was some three hours before our Saviors death,
that, as St. Luke tells us, XXIII. 44, 45. The Sun was darkened, and the Vail of
the Temple was rent in the midst; plainly showing, that the Eclipse, as Phlegon
calls it, and the Earthquake, came both together, as they have been placed
before in this Discourse. But it seems very likely that there was another Shock
of the Earthquake, at the time when our blessed Savior expired. For St.
Matthew not only places the Earthquake immediately after our Saviors death;
but also says, Thereupon the Centurion, and they that were with him watching
Jesus, when they saw the Earthquake, feared greatly. But that which struck them
most, was their seeing (...), (Matt. XXVII. 54 Luke XXIII. 47.) what happened,
in the Manner of our Savior's death. Mar. XV. 39. viz. that he So Cried Out,
and then immediately gave up the Ghost. St. Luke says; The Centurion seeing
these things happen together, Glorified God; Owned that this was certainly his
Work; and that He must be a Righteous Man, for whom God was so much concerned;
nay he must be what he owned himself to be, The Son of God. As that Word was
what made Pilate afraid, John. XIX. 8. so it did now the Soldiers, that had
thus ill treated so great a Favorite of God. But not only They, but all the
People that were come together to that sight, when they beheld (...), the
things that had happened, smote their breasts, and returned. Luke. XXIII. 48.
no doubt with sad hearts; thinking what heavy Judgments of God this Great Sin
was like to bring upon their Nation. But soon after, they that had been the
Authors of this, being still Zealous for the Externals of their Religion, were
concerned that the dead Bodies should not be suffered to hang upon the Cross on
the Sabbath day: Especially, that being a High day, as was before mentioned.
They therefore besought Pilate that the Bodies might be taken away. Ioh. XIX.
31. But to show that they meant the Condemnd Men no Favor in this, they desired
it might not be without breaking their Legs first, which was a Cruel way of
putting them out of their pain. Pilate ordered howsoever, that it should be as
they desired. So the Soldiers came, and brake the Legs of the first, and of the
other which was crucified with Him. verse. 32. But when they came to Jesus, and
saw that He was Dead already, they brake not his Legs: but, to be sure of his
being dead, one of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his Side, and forthwith
there came out Blood and Water. verse. 33, 34. Which, as is commonly observed,
was a sure sign that the Spear had pierced his Heart. St. John declares himself
to have been an Eye witness of this; against them that held that Christ died
not really, but in appearance; which was a prevailing Heresy in those days.
But withal he shows how wonderfully God orderd things, by taking our Savior
so soon out of the World, to make way for the fulfilling of two other
Prophecies of Scripture. One of them was, to show that in Him that great Type
of the Paschal Lamb was accomplished. In token whereof, as He Died at the same
Hour when the Paschal Lamb was to be killed; so according to the Ordinance of
the Passover, Exodus XII. 43, 46. it truly came to pass that not a Bone of Him
was broken. John. XIX. 36. The other was, that in Zechary's Prophecy of the
Conversion of the Jews, wherein it is said by Him whose Spirit spoke in the
Prophets, They shall look on Me whom they have pierced, Zech. XII. 10. So now
to put them out of doubt that he was Dead, his blessed Body was pierced, which
would have been Spared if he had been yet Living. St. John lays great weight
upon that which he Saw, of the fulfilling of both these Scriptures in our
Saviors Person. First, that He was the true Paschal Lamb, that was slain to
redeem us by his Blood. Rev. V. 6, 9, 12. VII. 14. XII. 11. That we may often
think of this, he minds us of it above twenty times more in that Book. The
other is, that the Jews shall know him to be their Messiah by that very Token
of their having Pierced him. Psalm. XXII. 16. Zech. XII. 10. That they would
use him so, was foretold in those Prophecies which their own Writers See
Pearson on the Creed p. 201. Edit. 1692.
have acknowledged to belong to the Mess^. They are now so blind they cannot
see it; But it will be otherwise at the coming of the Son of Man. Dan. VII. 13.
to their Conversion. Then they shall see Him whom they have Pierced, and all
the Tribes of Israel all the World over shall wail because of him. Rev. 1. 7.
Our blessed Savior himself said the same in effect, Matt. XXIV. 30. That then
shall be the fulfilling of these Prophecies. Even then, when he shall gather
his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. verse. 31.

The fulfilling of this Prophecy concerning Christ's Death, proved by Instances
out of the foregoing Account of the Gospel History.
THe Chief design of all this Discourse in relation to our present business,
has been to show how our blessed Savior understood and Explained that
principal part of the Angel's Prophecy, That after LXII Weeks the Messiah shall
be cut off: And also to show how it was fulfilled in his Person, so as to prove
beyond contradiction that He was the very Messiah spoken of in this Prophecy.
In Order to this, here are two things to be considered: First, what the Messiah
was to suffer; And Secondly, The time when it should come to pass.

First what He was to suffer, the Angel expressed in one Word (...) which is
properly rendered, he shall be cut off. But as the Reader will find in the
Explication of this Prophecy, it is to be cut off Judicially; either by Man's
Judgment, or by the Judgment of God. The learned Jews will find that the Word
(...) signifies so in forty places of their Scripture; and it is never used
otherwise in speaking of a Person, Affirmatively, as it is here in this
Prophecy. Now as to our blessed Savior's case, we are to show that He was cut
off Judicially both ways.

First, he was so by the Judgment of God, in being made a Curse for us, Gal.
III. 13. and that according to the Sentence of the Law; which says, He that is
Hanged is accursed of God. Deuteronomy. XXI. 23. The Jews know to whom they Apply this.

Secondly to be cut off by Man's judgment, is, according to the usual
practice, to be taken, and Tried for one's Life; and being found guilty, to be
condemned, and put to Death. And it must be to such a Death as the Law of the
Land has prescribed for such a Crime; as Particularly in the Roman Empire, for
any one of Servile condition, that was found guilty of any State Crime, by
their Law he was to be Crucified. Much needs not be said to show that this was
our blessed Savior's case.

Secondly, as to the Time when the Messiah was to suffer this, to be cut off
Iudicially, The Angel foretold it should be after LXII. Weeks. Dan. IX. 26. And
in the next verse before he says, there should be VII. Weeks, and LXII. Weeks,
from the going forth of the Commandment to build Jerusalem again, till the
Messiah the Prince. VII. Weeks and LXII. are LXIX. Weeks, that is, they are 483
years. And these are to be reckond from Nisan or soon after, in the 20th of
Artaxerxes Longimanus. So that after the End of these 483. years, was to be the
Death of the Messiah, as is shown in the Explication of this Prophecy. Now
these 483 being such years as were generally known in the place and Age in
which Daniel lived; Namely years of 360 days; let them begin from Nisan in the
20th year of Artaxerxes, that is, from April in the year 445. before Christ;
they will end in May, or very little later, in the 32th year of the Vulgar
Era, as has been already shown in the first set of Tables. And therefore, it
must be within the compass of a year after May 32, that the Messiah was to dye
according to this Prophecy: it must not be a whole Day after the LXII Weeks.

How our blessed Savior himself understood those Words, of his being cut off,
will appear by many Instances in the Chronological account, which are referred
to at the bottom of the Page. The first time we read of the Jews having
determined to page xx.
kill Him, was upon his healing one on the Sabbath. John V. 16, 18. That was at
the Time of Passover, in the 30th year of the Vulgar Era. The next year in
Galilee, for another such Sabbath-breach, as they called it, the Pharisees took
Counsel to page xxj.
destroy Him. Matt. XII. 14. But our Savior, knowing their design, did only
withdraw Himself, He made no Reflection upon it till the Weeks were Expired.
Then in the 32th year of the Vulgar Era, our blessed Lord upbraided the
Pharisees with their unbelief, not page xxiij.
discerning the signs of the Times. Matt. XVI. 3. Then He BEGAN to show his
Disciples, what He was to suffer, and by whom, with all the particular
Circumstances. The Jews having so long rejected their Messiah, because he did
not come as they would have him, in worldly Pomp, God had therefore ^ustly
given them up to their own lusts, which carried them on to the commit^ing of
that Great sin, in fulfilling all that which was written of Him. Act* XIII. 29.
Therefore now our blessed Lord, plainly tells his Disciples, how every thing
should happen as God had page xLiv.
determined, Luke XXII. 22. and how page xxix.
all things that were written by the Prophets, should be accomplished. Luke
XVIII. 31.

It was at three several times that our Savior declared these things to his
Disciples; without any great variation; only the latter Declarations were
fuller and clearer than the former. The first time was soon after the Expiring
of the LXIX. Weeks page xxv.
Matthew. XVI. Mar. VIII. Luke. IX. 22. The second time was presently after his
Transfiguration xxv.
Matt. XVII. Mar. IX. Luke IX. 44. The third time was at his going up from
Jericho to Jerusalem page xxix.
Matt. XX. Mar. X. Luke XVIII.

The things that He foretold at those several times, being here summed up
together, it may be observed that He spoke of every thing in the same Order in
which it happened. Which shows that throughout the whole Course of his
sufferings, He saw before him every step he was to make, even to the End of his
Life: so truly He said, The Son of Man goes, as it is written of him. Matt.
XXVI. 24. In summing up the things that our Savior foretold of himself, it
shall be noted, for the shortning of this Work, in what page of the
Chronological Account it may be found, when, and how, every thing was Fulfilled.

First our Savior told them page xxxj.
He must go up to Jerusalem. (He could not dye but in that place. Luke XIII.
33.) There he must be betrayed into the Hands of Men, namely, to the Chief
Priests and Scribes. Accordingly Iuda^ page xxxvij.
bargained with them, and page Lij.
delivered Him to them.

He foretold that he should suffer many things of the Elders, and Chief
Priests, and Scribes; that is, of the whole Sanhedrin: and that they should
Condemn him to Death. How he suffered in Caiaphas's House, page Live.
before the Meeting of the Sanhedrin, and how afterward by the Sanhedrin page
Lvj.
at their Meeting, and how they condemned him, may be seen in the pages here
quoted. It follows that they should page Lvij. Lviij. etc.
deliver him to the Gentiles, that is, to the Romans, who had then the Power of
Life and Death: and that he should be mocked by them, and spitefully entreated,
that they should page Lxiij.
scourge him, and spitt upon him; and that being page Lxv.
rejected by the Elders, Chief Priests and Scribes, he should be page Lxviij.
Lxix. Lxx.
killed: That must be by the Romans; So it follows, that the Gentiles should
crucify him. There is a Prediction after all these, that the third day he
should rise again. But that is beyond our present purpose.

We have seen how the chief Matter foretold in this Prophecy, namely that of
the Messiah being cut off, was Understood by our blessed Savior; and how it
was Fulfilled in his Person. We are next to consider the Time here prefixed for
the fulfilling of it. The Time is expressed in these Words, viz. after those
LXII Weeks; which, as the Words have been just now explained, must fall within
the Year after May, June or July in the 32d Year of the Vulgar Era. We cannot
but be greatly concerned to know how our blessed Lord himself understood this.
And it is our business to show others, that he was the Messiah, by his being
cut off at the time spoken of in this Prophecy.

Our blessed Lord himself, as has been shown in the next foregoing Discourse
page xxiij.
understood that the LXII. Weeks were expired within some short time after the
last Passover before that on which he was to be Crucified. The Passover now
spoken of was on the 11th of April in the Year of our Lord. 32. For it was soon
after this, that our blessed (...)


