The Latin GRAMMAR. OR, A Guide teaching a compendious way to attain exact
Skill in the LATIN TONGUE, FOR A proper Congruity and elegant variety of
Phrases in Prose and Verse. Published for the Common good in continuation of a
former Guide, teaching to read English rightly, and Write accordingly. By
Richard Lloyd.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Roycroft, for the Author, Anno Dom. 1653.

The Latin Grammar. OR A Guide, teaching a compendious way to attain exact
skill in the Latin Tongue, etc.
Of Grammar.
GRammar is a Series o^ rules directing to write and speak congruously, whence
the true meaning of words may be cert^inly known. And it has two parts,
Etymology and Syntaxe.

Of Etymology.
Etymology does teach the affectious of words, specially such as concern the
variations of parts of Speech.

Of parts of Speech.
The principal parts of speech are three.

1 Nouns that betoken things.

2 Verbs that betoken a doing or suffering of the things.

3 Adverbs that signify some circumstance belonging to the things, or to the
doing or suffering of them

All regular Nowns and Verbs are variable by proper affections, But Adverbs are
invariable savi^g b^ common accidents.

Of common Accidents.
The common affections equally belonging to all parts of Speech are two, the
form and figure.

Of the Form.
The form does consist in the signification of wor^s for which they were
ordained.

Of the Figure.
The figure does consist in the origination of words, distinguishing them as
Primitives and Derivatives.

Of a two fold form or signification of words.
The signification of Words is either genuine and literal, according to their
original institution, or Tropologicall and translatitious with Anologie to the
literal for words change sense each with other proportionably to the bonds of
union, or marks of opposition known between them, wherefore in a consentaneous
sense any part will denominate the whole, or the whole any part having
essential union each with other by a Trope called Synecdoche, likewise the
cause will denominate its own effect, or a subject, its own adjunct, and
contrariwise, having natural union amongst themselves, by a Trope called
Metonymia, others having a Relative union (as they resemble) so accordingly
they may denominate one another by a Trope called Metaphora. Lastly; in a
di^entaneous sense when the gesture and pronunciation of the speaker, compared
with a known condition of the thing or party spoken of, do evidence a
contrariety between the words and meaning, it is by a Trope called Ironia.

Of the Tropologicall form or borrowed sense of words.
A Trope does modifie the sense of words in proportion to their native use
instituted either, 1* For supply where proper words are wanting, or 2 To
civilize proper words which seem offensive, or 3 When the words are decent to
beget variety the main object of delight. And it should be regulated with
ingenuity, perspicuity, and moderation, for Jewels are not to cloth the body,
but to adorn some eminent parts thereof; besides that the best things growing
common become contemptible, in fine when the literal sense of words, with good
Authors, does breed absurdity, the Trope must rectify it. And there is no such
Author without Tropes, nor any student that can attain their meaning, without
previous skill therein as principles.

Of Synecdoche.
By Synecdoche either the Genus that is common and universal, does give name
unto the Species, being some particular comprehended under it, as Atrides, for
Agamemnon, whereas Atreus had another Son, Cytha^aea, for Venus: Nequam for
Diabolus. And thereto belongs any other Nown, used by the figure Antonomasia,
Orator for Cicero, Poeta for Homerus, Urbs for Roma, quadrupes for Equus,
mortalis for Homo, ventus for Auster, ne creed colori, for pulchritudini, bello
virtus dignoscitur, for spectatur fortitudo, uteris authoritate intemperantius,
for iracundius, semper ebrius, for saepe. And contrariwise the species does
give name unto the genus, as Anglus perit, for Angli, the singular for the
plural, Cato, Curii, for sapiens, frugales, Boreas for ventus, pontus for
Mare, nectar for Vinum, Charta, Papyri ^audex, for membrana, fides Punica, for
fallax, aut afflicta, omnium gemitu triumphas, for gaudes, vivit bacchanalia,
for Intemperanter, parum abest, for nihil aut non. The finite for infinite, or
else the total, or integrall does give name unto the part or members, as
Catone sepulto, for Catonis corpore, bibit Ara^im, for aquam, prosternit
silvam, for Arbores, Graeci, for Argivi, tertium portu pe^egit annum, for
Hyemem, mendicant ostiatim, for ad Ostia divitum, vellet dimicare viritim, for
singulatim. And contrariwise, the part does denominate the whole, animaque
litavit, for homine, arbiter est oculus, for oculatus, aes for nummus, ferrum
aut mucro, for gladius, pi^us, prora, puppis, for Navis, imen, Janua, par^es,
tectum, for- Domus, maenia, for Vrbs, te septima portat omnibus errantem ter
ris et fluctibus aestas, for annus, quiescit, for dormit momentaria caecitate
percussus, for subita, pedetentim venit, for tarde.

Thus whether the whole does name the part, or a part the whole, either-way
they advance each other; the whole naming a majori, does ascribe its entire
worth and honor to the part thence named, the part naming ab insigniori, does
nobilitate the whole by its eminency, without which none should denominate.
Wherefore we call a Fool stultum caput, not calcaneum, because the heel is
incapable of discretion. And a devout person pium pectus, not cerebrum, the
seat of affection, complying mostly with devotion. Last, this trope has
precedence before the rest, as grounded on the nearest bond of union, to wit,
the inward causes of matter and form, and is seconded by Metonymia, grounded
on the outward causes.

Of Metonymia.
By Metonymia, the external cause being the 1. efficient, 2. instrument, or 3.
end, is put for the effect. 1. Ae^neadae for Aeneae posteritas, Lucanus legitur
for poema. Aethiopes multum monstrant in corpore solemn, for nigredinem;
praeceps ira insolens victoria, and most epithets; jugulat for occidit, segnius
inslat for tardius. 2. Lingua for sermo, manus for scriptura, arma for bellum.
3. Justitia for patibulum, aris imponit honorem, for victimam. And contrariwise
the Effect is put for the Cause. 1. Garminibus metus omnis abest, for poetis,
Libycae clades, for Scipiadae, expalluit for timui^, sudavit for laboravit. 2.
Direxit vulnera for tela. 3. serta legunt for flores. Onom^topoeia does belong
to a Metonymie of the effect, as bomhus apum for id soni. The subject also does
give name unto the adjuncts taken largly, whether inherent therein, or adhering
thereto, which way are used, 1. The seat for quality non tibi plus cordis sed
minus oris inest, for prudentiae, verecundiae. 2. The continent for the thing
contained, focus for ignis, poculum ebibit for vinum, specially places for
inhabitants or things done therein. Africa belligerat, for Africani, carcer for
captivi, sunt pleni ruris for rusticitatis, forum for lites, id rostra docent,
for concionatores, tibi militat ether, for fulgura cum tonitribus. 3. The
chief Authors and Owners for things pertaining to them. Junoni templum struxit
Sidonia Dido for structurae author erat praecipua. Acheloia cornua fregit
Hector, for Dux cum exercitu, so Advocatus for cliens, proximus ardet V
calegon, for domus. 4. Things for time proper thereto, tertia messis erat for
annus. 5. The thing signified for the sign. Orphea constituit medio sylvasque
sequaces, for imagines caelatas pallida luna pluit for pluviam prae monstrat,
populi cor impingua for impinguatum renuncia. Hereto belong sacramental
phrases, but Sacraments are of a higher nature, morally exhibiting, like Seals
and earnests, a present right with assurance of a future full enioyment. 6. The
Antecedent for the Consequent, tegit pedes for alvum exonerat; fuit Ilion
ingens gloria Dardannium for desiit esse, tunc messis in herba for ver, so
messis in umbra for hyems, muner a non sperno for accipio, preces exaudiuntur
for Conceduntur. Some call these instances Litotes, some call them Metalepsis,
and both such and other Examples denominating all the Company by the chief
Actor, have near affinity with Synecdoche of the part, as contrary-wise Curii
for frugales have affinity with a Metonymie of the subject for the adiunct
quality. Likewise the adiunct does give name unto the subject. 1. Virtues,
Vices, and other properties, are set for things endued therewith, patientia
vincit for patiens, scelus for scelestus, iussit potestas for magistratus,
artem terra quaevis alit for artificem, A Cyathis for Promus. 2. V^na coronant
for pocula, comburunt^r lites for fora, Mean putas vestris includere ^udis for
^i^cis, frigus opacum quod umbraculis adiacet. 3. Luget Parnassus for Musae,
hic passim insanitur for ab omnibus vicinis. 4. Capiunt oculis and pectore
noctem, for somnum, fundit ab antris Aeolus armatas hyemes for procellas,
solstitio defend pecus for astu. Autumno gravidae vites for vuis, nulla
infaelicior aetas for nullius aetatis homines. 5. Vrina sana for sanitatem
indicans, sceptrum, fasces, pupura for princeps, claves for Ecclesiastical,
gladius for civil government, pubes, lanugo for iuvenlus, toga for pax
subscripsit for assensit. 6. Multa desiderantur for desunt. Lavinaque venit
littora for ita postmodum vocata, scenam calefecimus for implevimus, speluncis
abdidit atris for profundis, which last Metonymies are as more remote so far
more elegant: but the former between causes and effects are more familiar,
because more natural.

Of Metaphora.
By Metophora words change their sense according to the likeness of the thing
spoken of, to the things which properly they do betoken, and that ample ground
does make this trope more capacious then any other; as Corvus for nocens,
Columba for innoxius, legis habena for potestas. Fulmen fortunae for impetus,
ferreus est precibus for inexorabilis, lae ta seges for uber, aurea Phaebe for
ruhicunda, vites gemmant for germinant, laterem lavat for nugatur, ramos
compesce fluentes for excrescentes, fluxae vires for minutae, Hebraei ab Hebero
flu^n^, for oriuntur, men's fluctuat for dubitat, Lent venit for cunctanter, id
lent fert for patienter, lent agit for remiss, lent rem probat for diu,
which is derived from lentus, properly signifying viscous or clammy.

This trope as it is more copious then any other, so it is more useful to
unmaske the nature of things, to excite accordingly either love or hatred
thereunto, and to accomplish both with grace, or without offense; therefore it
is familiar in Adages or Parables of the wise, but it will require these
cautions following.

1. That it does not admit more disproportion then proportion, as Caeli
fornices, being neither large enough, nor circular.

2. That it be not too far fetched, Syrtis patrimonii.

3. That it be not too obscene, as stercus curiae.

4. That it does not imply a contradiction, ferreus in studiis puerest.

5. That it be not devious from it self, exundat and ardet amore.

6. That it be not too familiar a condition, requisite to all tropes, because
they must be rarities.

Lastly, those Metaphors be most emphaticall, which add life or reason to
inanimate or senseless things, as Pontem indignatus Araxes, and having a
double analogy they be reciprocal, as auriga navis, or gubernator ^urrus, but
terminating in a simple relation they cannot be converted, as vulpes may be set
for callidus, but not contrariwise callidus for vulpes, except it be by another
trope, called Synecdoche generis.

Of Ironia.
By Ironia words are carried from their own to a clean contrary sense, which
is understood by the expression and contradiction of such words, to the things
which literally they betoken. Scilicet hac vitam servatam dote rependis, for
ingratitudine Me duce Dardanius spartam expugnavit adulter, for minime gentium.
Id facinus in laud ponas egregia, for ignominia; Credo quam innumerabiles
hostium copias in Italia fudisset, for nullas: so Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua
carmina, as admodum inculta. Sic, idem iungat vul^es and mulgeat hircos, for
ineptias agat; which two last are called Astismus: En agros metire iacens, and
Satia te Sanguine Cyre, both called Sarcasmus. These examples, Midas pauper,
for Cui sua desunt bona: or Codrus dives, for qui nil cupit, are not Ironies,
but Metonymies of the consequent; dare classibus austros, for classes austris
is Hypallage; de tuis nildicam periuriis, or ut praeteream tua latrocinia, are
Apophasis and Paralipsis, Lucus qui non lucet, Parcae quae non parcunt, Euxinus
for Axenus are Antiphrasis; all which resemble this trope, but are especially
different from it.

Lastly, it is used most in merriments, and sometimes in grave, but sharp
reproves of faults, no less odious then notorious.

Affections belonging to the former tropes.
Metalepsis is a graduall progress of sundry tropes in the same word,
Stratoque super discumbitur ostro. Hinc movet Euphrates, illinc Germania
bellum: Post aliquot mea regna vid^ns mirabar aristas.

Allegoria is the continuation of the same trope in sundry words, nostros
habemus Curios, Mamercos, Marios, rete accipitri non tenditur neque milvo ne
charta nos prodat pertimesco, sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus, Contrahe sam
vento tua turgida vela secundo.

Filiolas Cadmi profert Nilotis Arundo,
Quas serit e Cnidio distillans sepia nodo.
Which last is called Aenigma.

Catachresis is an usurpation of words enforced from the received to an
improper sense, faciesque simillima lauro, Vltores sperate Deos, tibi laeta
minatur, Vir gregis, aut acres tendunt arcus, minuto sunt anime, Capitis nives.

Hyperbole does amplify or abate the sense of words used unequally to their
true meaning, not to deceive, but to level the uneven opinion of the hearers,
by such means rectified, and the first sort is called Auxesis, the last
Meiosis: Gigantes for proceri, Nani for pusilli, Mons for verruca, Parricidium
for homicidium and contrariwise nusquam tuta fides, for apud paucos, the
indefinite for the finite, all Hyperbolicall Synecdoches, which some Authors
think to be Catachresis Venere formosior, pice nigrior, sublimi feriam sydera
vertice.

Every affection does in some sort belong to all the Tropes, but the Irony is
least affected with them. Metalepsis is most familiar to Synecdoche and the
Metonymie, even as the Allegory to the Metaphor, Catachresis with good Authors,
does only affect the speech intended for the rusticks. And otherwise does
resemble the speech of Rusticks for the most part in Comoedies.

Tho common affections of Nouns and Verbs.
There be three affectious common to Nouns and Verbs, to wit Number, Gender,
and Person, whereof the Number does equally belong both to Nouns and Verbs, the
other two unequally, for the Gender is more peculiar unto Nouns, and the Person
unto Verbs.

Of the Number.
There be two Numbers, 1 The Singular belonging to one as Pater obijt. 2 The
plural pertaining to more then one, as liberi lugent.


Exceptions.
Two Substantives singular with a Coniunctive Adverb called a Copulative, or
one Noune Collective, or a Pronoune Distributive singular, referring to a
society is equivalent to the plural, speaking implicitly of many: And Verbs or
Adiectives referring thereunto, will agree with the more worthy Person or
Gender, the former in both being accounted worthiest, saving that the Neuter
stands for the worthier Gender after copulates that betoken things inanimat,
as Virga and Baculus nos consolata sunt, gens armati perimus, vestrum aliquis
adeste, utraque suo delectatae studio, aliud de dignantur. Likewise Verbs
singular called Impersonalls, are equivalent to the plural, by virtue of the
oblique construed with them, as nos docere oportet, vobis discere non luber^ab
omnibus aut luditur aut cessatur.

Lastly, Nouns proper or common, being only plural, referring in Apposition to
other Substantives singular, are equivalent thereunto, and speak but of one, as
Vrbs Athenae, Bacchanalia, festum infame, Circenses, curule certamen, Aeneides,
Virgilij poema. Tu mihi deliciae, Ars inopis divitiae.

Where may be noted that any Substantive of a continued signification, speaking
of the same thing, must be put in the same case, Phoebe nutrix nos amat alumnos.

Of the Gender.
The Gender does distinguish Nouns betokening Male or Female, physically by
their sexes, but otherwise does Gramatically differ sexies, Nouns having
commonly like Declension, and constantly a like construction unto those which
have proper sexes.

The distinct Genders are only three, 1 Masculine, as Spado, sermo, 2 the
Feminine, as Vulpes, Nubes. 3 The Neuter, as scortum slagitium.


Annotations.
A Noune cannot be of any more then one of the said three Genders in the same
Sentence or Construction. But otherwise many Nounes by their termination and
signification, may be some of the two first, and others of all three Genders;
and of this last sort are all Adiectives, which if they have three diverse
endings, as bonus bona bonum, the first as bonus is Masculine, the second as
bona, is Foeminine, the third as bonum, is Neuter; or having two several
endings, as dulcis dulce, the first as dulcis is Masculine or Foeminine, the
second as dulce is Neuter; or having but one ending, as faelix, dulcibus,
bonis, then such are of all three Genders, called the Common of three.

Substantives physically betokening both Sexes, he and she, under the same
ending, as such by signification are both of the Masculine and Foeminine
Gender, called the Nounes of the Common of two, but notwithstanding in the same
Sentence, or in a continued Construction they keep constantly to one Gender, as
Parens de quo dubitatur Africanus est.

Other Substantives having no reference to distinct Sexes, are called Nounes of
the doubtful Gender, being either Masculine or Foeminine, upon the authority
of approved Authors who use the same promiscuously only in a continued
Construction, but not in the same Sentence, as nullus est dies qua literas non
scribo. Appellatives of Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, as vulpes, hirundo, passer,
aquila, Cetus, specially those least conversant with man, though having
distinct Sexes, yet keep constantly to one Gender, most agreeable to their
termination, and are called Epicoenes.

Exceptions.
Some such Nouns betokening domestike creatures, and having a Termination that
is not constant to one Gender, be of the common of two, as Bos, Sus, Canis, and
such like: And others of like sort, not having reference to any sex, are
doubtful as Grus, Bubo, with such others.

Of distinct Genders known by general RVLES.
The proper Gender of any Nouns may certainly be known by their signification
or termination, and sometimes by combination of both together.

Of Genders known by signification.
Nouns Physically betokening a certain sex, if Male, are Masculines, as Galba,
if Female are Feminines, as socrus, but filius is Masculine, and filia
feminine, both by signification and by termination.

All proper names, and many common Nouns referring to more known Appellatives
will imitate the same, as in signification, so likewise in Gender, some few
excepted, that follow the Termination constant to a certain Gender.

Of Masculines following the more known Appellative.
The more known Appellatives being Masculines, do for the most part
communicate the same Gender to all proper names, or less known Appellatives
subordinate ther^unto as Deus, Pan Angelus, Gabriel, Diabolus, Sathanas,
fluvius Orontes, but Averna, Gadir, be Neuters by the Terminations, constant to
that Gender, Mons, Ossa, but Aetna, is feminine, referring unto Rupes, Ventus,
Lybs, but Ornithiae, is feminine, Lapis, Adamas, but Marmor is Neuter, and
Chrystallus feminine, referring unto Gemma, Piscis, Labrax, but Auxumae is
feminine.

Of Feminines following their Appellatives.
The more known Appellatives being feminines, do in like sort transmit their
Gender to their respective less known Appel^atives, or to proper names
belonging thereunto, as Dea, Juno, furia Alecto, mufa Clio, regio Persis,
insula Cyprus, Urbs Pergamus, but Gabij, Hippo, Acragas, are Masculines Bactra,
Lugdunum, Hispal, Proeneste, Argos, Tibur, Zeugma, be neuters: Herba Baccharis,
but Helleborus is Masculine, Arbor Pinus, but Pinaster is Masculine, navis Argo
comaedia Eunuchus, fabula Thyeste^, but in these last Examples Synthesis does
sway the Gender.

Of Neuters known by signification.
Any part of Speech taken materially for the elementary parts of the word, are
of the Neuter Gender, as Amicitia, for Amicitiae vocabulum, Etymologice
sumptum, dictum est ab amo. Or taken figuratively, as the Verb or Adverb
instead of a Substantive by Enallage, as scire tuum ^ihilest, for scientia tua,
Cras aliud veniet, for Crastinus alter; And such are all Aptote Substantives,
as Tempe, fas, Halec, virus, sinapi, eornu, nihil, her, frir, pondo, Chaos,
Hippomanes, pascha, with other exotic, or peregrine words, referring to no
Physical sex, either male or female.

Of Genders known by termination.
Nouns Regular, that do not refer either to a Physical sex, or to a more
known Appellative, are best discerned in their proper Gender, by their
Declensions, where accordingly their proper Gender shall be specified.

Of Persons.
There be three Persons in both Numbers, both of Nouns and Verbs distinguished
each from other: The first Person, as the speaker singularly, ego doceo:
plurally, nos Docemus, ^he second Person is spoken to, singularly, tu disces,
plurally, vos discetis. The third Person is spoken of singularly, ille
advertat, plurally, illi advertant. And all Nouns whatsoever be of the third
person, whether Substantives (not apposed to ego, nos, tu, or vos) or
Adiectives that have not the same for their Substantives. Moreover, ego, nos,
tu, and vos, are commonly understood with Verbs, being never expressed but by
way of restriction or amplification notified by Conjunctions exceptive or
Demonstrative, as in the Syntax will be instanced.

Of Enallage.
By Enallage any part of Speech or their affections may be changed one for
another; populum late regem, for regnantem; Criminibus terrere novis, for
terrebat, Which with other variations, by Tropes and Synonymes, are very
useful for copiousnesse and elegancy of expression, and are most necessary to
gain or advance good skill in Poetry, as the meetest helps to prepare Phrases
for metricall forms. Moreover Enallage has obtained sundry names in sundry
respects, being called Antimeria, when it changes parts of Speech, or
Antiptosis, when it changes Cases, or Heterosis changing Genders or
Declensions, or Alloiosis changing other affections.

Of literal and genuine forms of NOVNES.
The Genuine forms commonly called the kind of Nouns are two, the Substantives
and the Adi^ctives, distinguished each from other three ways.

1 The Substantive has a, or the before it, because understood of it self,
and it answers to the Question who or what, for clearing the sense of all
other parts of speech joined therewith in structure. But Adiectives have no
such sign, because of themselves, they have no perfect sense, but in reference
to their Substantives. And therefore Adiectives agree with their Substantives,
in Case, Gender, Numb^^, and Person.

2 The Substantive has but one Gender, or two at the most, but Adiectives have
all three Genders.

3 The Substantive regularly, has but one ending in the same Case, but all
Adiectives have two endings, in some Cases, and some Adiectives in some Cases
have three diverse endings.

Plus, and quid with its compounds, as quicquid, aliquid, and the like, are
always put Substantively. And such are sometimes other Adiectives of the
neuter Gender, having quiddam, or negotium, or verbum, -- in the Hebrew, or
Chrema in the Greek Idiome, understood therewith, as triste senex miles, turpe
senilis Amor, horrida narrant. Likewise other Adiectives of the Masculine or
Feminine Gender, have known Substantives to be supplied therewith, as omnis
amicus, supply homo, Pinguis Ferina, supply caro, una triremis, supply, navis,
meus natalis, supply, dies.

Of the variation of parts of Speech.
Substantives may be changed unto Adjectives, or contrariwise, and either of
them to Verbs, or Adverbs, as Ingenium Herois, heroicum ingenium, or ingeniosus
Heroes, pro dotum copia, or co piose dotatus, aevo quolibet locoque, or semper
et ubique, clarescet, or audiet clarissimus, or clarissime.

The forms or kinds of Substantives.
There be two kinds of Substantives.

1 Proper names belonging definitly to one, as Homerus. Or 2 Nouns Appellative
and common, belonging indefinitely unto any of the same rank or condition, as
Poeta belonging equally to any of the Poets.

The variation of Nouns proper or common.
Proper names by Tropes put on the nature of Appellatives signifying in a
borrowed sense, not the persons, but their conditions, as Hydra for Clades,
Metaphorically, Nero, for Tyrannus, Synecdochically, but such are used more
commonly in the plural as Aristo^eles for Philosophi, Alexandriae, for V^bes
imperatoriae by Synecdoche of the species, Caii, Decii, Fabricii, for ipso^um
Liberi, by a Metonymie of the cause, the Authors giving names unto their
families.

Appellatives are contrariwise used for proper names Antonomastically as Clades
Lernensis, for Hydra Lernaea, Tyrannus, for Nero, Philosophus, for Aristoteles,
Atrides, for Agamemnon.

Proper names, or Appellatives may be changed one to another by Synonyms.

Paraphrastically.
Aegyptus for tellus que faecundissima Nilo, Pluviae inscia regna, Arvum
genitale Canopi, Deorum prodigiosa parens.

Adulator: Qui vendit fucum fumumque, Morbus amicitiae, Mancipium ventris.

Proverbially.
Qui captat ficum, Cauda blanditur, Sermonem sesamo condit, Rosas loquitur, Qui
Vulpe b^nignior audit, Et pellax patulas oleum distillat in aures.

Emblematically.
Chamaeleon quemlibet ^olorem imitans, Corvus cadaverum oculos effodiens,
Cervus et fistula, Apis in ore mel, sub cauda spiculum gerens, Lupus asinum
titillans.

Aenigmatically.
Placentinorum potius quam Veronensium soboles.

Tropologically.
Assentator by Synecdoche of the part; Parasitus, by a Metonymie of the
adjunct, Palpo, Metaphorically fautor et fo or Ironically.

The forms or kinds of Adjectives.
Adiectives are of three sorts or kinds.

1 Nounes betokening for the most partisome quality.

2. Pronouns, Notifying always the quantity.

3 Participles, signifying an Active or Pasive power, capable of intension, and
thereby distinct from any act or passion* which has always some
adsignificance of time, proper to the Verbs, and inconsistent with intension.

The several kinds or Forms of Pronounes.
Pronounes considered at large, are of two kinds, either Demonstratives when
joined with their Substantives, they show a thing not spoken of before: or
Relatives, when referring to their Substantives, construed in a former
Sentence, and then called Antecedents, they rehearse a thing spoken of before.

Annotations.
The Pronounes considered strictly in their distinct forms of quantity are
either, 1. Finite and singular, as Ego tu sui ille ipsei hic is and iste, or 2.
Indefinite, being either. 1. particular, as non-nullus quidam aliquis, or 2.
universal, as omnis nullus. All which are called Redditives when they answer
to qui or quis, the Interrogatives. And quis or such other desisting to be
Interrogatives become Redditives, admitting diverse forms suitable to their
structure.

These Possessives meus tuus suus noster vester Homericus Ciceronianus, and
such like answering to the Interrogative Cuius may be sorted with finite
Pronounes.

Other Possessives referring not to peculiar persons, but unto Countries, as
Atheniensis Romanus Cres Libs Arpinas nostras vestras with such other,
answering to the Interrogative Cuias, may suit with the Indefinite; In which
rank may be placed likewise all the rest that follow.

The Cardinal Pronounes, as unus duo tres quatuor, and the rest answering unto
Quot.

The distributives, as bini, trini or binarij, ternarii, and the rest answering
to Quoteni.

The multiplicatives, as duplex triplex, etc. answering unto Quotuplex.

The Ordinals, as primus secundus tertius, etc. answering unto Quotus.

The Proportinals, as duplus triplus, etc. answering unto Quotuplus.

The Temporals as biduanus bimestris biennis, answering to Quotennis.

The Frequentatives and Diminutives, as multus nimius paululus, answering unto
Quantus.

The Comparatives and Superlatives, as doctior and doctissimus, answering unto
Qualis.

Ego tu sui, being always Substantives, have a property to be constant to
their dictinct persons, but any other will admit of any person agreeable to
their Substantives; as sui Caesarem defendamus, or defendite servi Sui and
suus, are called reciprocals, because they have immediate recourse to a
precedent Substantive, either in the same Sentence, as trahit sua quemqu^
voluptas, or quisque sua voluptate trahitur, or in a former sentence reducible
to the same, as vule nulier u^ ipsa and omnia laudentur sua: or vult sese ac
sua laudari. Hic, iste, and ille when they refer to three, hic does point at
the last and nearest; iste at the second nearest, ille at the first and
furthest. And commonly hic and ille are limited in like manner, when they
refer to two. But ille and iste compared together, Ille r^ferreth to the
best, and Iste to the basest.

Of the variation of Pronounes.
Pronounes have much affinity with Adverbes, and are commonly interchanged
therewith, whether Interrogatives, as ubi, for quo die aut loco; or Redditives,
as hactenus, for usque ad hunc diem au^ locum; or Collectives, as perimus una,
for omnes; or Distributives, as deferimus singulatim for singuli; or Numerals,
as Nummi dividuntur hipartito, for in duas parts, and by way of equivalence,
Castra simul expugnantur ter quina, for quindecim. Distributives passing for
Cardinals, with Substantives that have no singular. Adverbes likewise supply
Diminutives and Frequentatives, either by apposition, as parum argutus, non
satis facundus: or by composition, as subargutus, non perfacundus, for
argutulus, haud facundiosus. More instances of remission, or intention, follow
in the compounds of prepositionall Adverbes. And it may be noted, that all
Pronounes, as implying, a quantity may be used partitively, yet such as have
not that sense properly, but adventitiously, will not admit the structure of
the partitives regularly; for it may be said, facundiosus oratorum, but satis
facundus, or perfacundus oratorum, will be a barbarism.

A Relative may be put to substantives of continued signification; as fucos
arcent ignavum pecus, or qui sunt pecus ignavum, or qui sunt ignavi. And it
must necessarily be supplied with Vocatives after Obliques of the second
person, or their Possessives: as Do tibi Maeri meum vinum, bibo Maeri tuumque,
for qui es Maeri.

Relatives will change the Participle of the present Tense, to the Indicative;
as sat luit desipiens, or qui desipit, and Participials in bilis, or Futures in
aus, to the Subjunctive, as p^trem reperies exorabilem, or exorandum, or qui
exoretur. And sometimes they are changed to Conjunctive Adverbes causall; as Te
felicom arbitror, qui, or quoniam probus audis Sometimes they cease by
repitition of the Antecedent, with si dum cum quia qu^mvis: as sat prosecisti,
cu^ (or cum tibi) Cicero placeat; Scelus admittis quod (or quamvis seelus)
abhorres. And if both Sentences be Negatives, by changing the last to nisi, as
null^s homo miser, quem non (or nisi hominem) Deus odit.

Interrogatives may be changed to their Redditives, with Number or such like
Adverbes; (as quot, or an, utrum, nunquid lot) cahortes duxisti, Quam paucas
(or nonne paucas) reducis.

These resolutions young Scollers should be trained to make readily, as their
certain Guide to find out the structure of Interrogatives, at far distance
from the words, whetherto they do refer.

Likewise Relatives for the same end may be changed to Demonstratives, as
Stolidum reo^, quem tam dilucida nedum intelligere constat; or si consta^ eum
nedum intelligere tam dilucida.

The figure of Nounes.
By the figure Nounes are either primitive, as the originals not exceeding
ordinarily one or two syllables, as sors tristis, or Derivatives, as descending
thence, which if they come but of one original, are called simples, and if
from two or more, they are called Compounds.

Of simple Nounes derivative.
Nounes simply derivative, are either Verbals, as suadela suasorius, or
adverbialls, as internus extraneus, or Denominatives coming either from proper
names, being patronymicals: as Hectorides Phoronis, being Gentiles, as Macedo
Libyssa: or from Appellatives, being Possessives, Frequentatives, Diminutives,
Comparatives, or Superlatives, as herbarius, herbosus, herbula herbaceus,
herbidior and herbidissimus.

The several endings of Nounes verbal.
Substantives end in a, antia arium arius Scriba iactantia auctarium
emissarius, ber. bra. brum. bula, bulum, tuber scatebra ventilabrum fabula,
stabulum, orum culum, fulcrum, vinculum, and by syncope v^nclum do. uredo ela,
entia, es, eus, suadela, sapientia, teges abigeus, ^go, imago, for imitago, ta,
il, i will, io, is ius, furia, pugil, cubile, legio, messis, genius, lum, jaculum;
men, mentum, mes, monia, solamen, alimentum, fomes, alimonia, na. number, nus,
urina regnum colonus. or, dolor, trina, true. trum, trus, tum, doctrina tonitru,
aratrum, tonitrus, viretum, ver, ul, ulis, ultus, ur, us, cadaver, consul,
curulis, tumultus, fulgur, mergus, ex. ux. vindex, dux. Supine Verbals end in
sio. sor. so^ium, sum, sura, sus: as censio, censor, censorium, p^nsum,
censura, census: tio. tor. torium, trix. trum, tum, tura, tus. lectio, lector,
tentorium, motrix, lectrum, tectum, lectura, lectus. xamen. xio. xor. xorium.
xum, xura, xus. flexamen, flexio, ^ixor, frixorium, frixum, flexura, nexus.

Adjectives end in arius, actuarius, bilis, bris, bundus, flebilis, lugubris,
palabundus, cer, cris, crus, culus, cundus, cus. volucer, volucris, ludicrus,
ridiculus, iracundus caducus. dis, dus, viridis, pallidus, er. es. piger,
deses, ilis, itius, jus, vtilis, for vtibilis, fictitius, anxius, lus, nus,
orius, rus, vlcus ivus, us, uus, ax. ox. pendulus, plenus, oratorius, avarus,
biulcus, sativus, probus, cae duus, tenax, praecox.

The several endings of Nounes adverbiall.
Adverbiall Adiectives end in aneus, arius extraneus, contrarius, cus, anticus.
er. ernus, erus, exter, externus, or exterus, gnus, benignus, in quus,
propinquus, ius nimius, dinus, tinus, perendinus, diutinus, and such like of
time, and mediastinus of place, except such Nounes are compounded with tenus.

Sundry endings of Denominatives from proper Names.
Patronymicks Masculine, end in ades, ides, ion; and Plural in adae, or idae,
Anchisiades, Iliades, Maenetiades Atlaentiades, Aeacides, Pelides, Japetion,
Oedipodion, Aeneadae, Romulidae, Aegidae. Foeminines end in as, ine, is, one.
Thestias, Ilias, Pelias, Phaetontias, Nerine, Adrastine, Acrifione, Nereis,
Inachis, Latois; whereto may be added Masculines in ta, as Donatista, Jacobita,
and such other, denominating Sectaries from their first Authors.

Gentile Sustantives have for endings an, ar, as, ax. Acarnan Car Arcas,
Nostras, Thrax. ens. er. es, essa, Laurens, Ser, Cres, Cressa. ibs. idae. ins.
ir. is. issa. ix. Libs, Numidae, Tyrins, Trevir, Samnis, Aethiopissa, Cilix. o.
on. ops. os. ox. Brito, Lacon, Aethiops, Tros, Capadox. ta. tes. it is.
Israelita. Spartiates, Spartiatis. ur. urs. us. Ligur, Tiburs, Anglus, is,
yssa, yx. Libys, Libyssa, Japyx.

Gentile Adiectives Possessive have terminations, anus, arius, aticus, Romanus,
Dardanarius, Apolloniaticus. ensis, enus, eius, eus. Atheniensis, Abydenus,
Aetneius, Maroneus. iacus. icus, ius inus. Aegyptiac^s, Aegypticus, Aegyptius,
Agrigentinus.

Adjectives ending in alis, anus, aris, filialis, montanus, familiaris, ber.
bris. cer. cris. cus. saluber, muliebri^, alacer, alacris, magicus, ensis
ernus. eus. castrensis, paternus, meus, aureus, inus, itimus. ius, ivus.
vicinus, legitimus, regius, festivus, ster, stis, stris. stus. uus. noster,
caelestis, campestris, honestus, tuus, annuus. All which respectively may be
possessive.

Frequentatives end usually in tus. idus. lentus. licus. lus. orus. osus.
fortunatus, herbidus, violentus, famelicus, nubilus, Vxorius, piscosus.
Diminutives being both Substantives and Adjectives, notefying always an
abatement, and that often with indignity, and sometimes with flattery, and
seldomest with modesty, do end in ella. ellum. ellus. opella, flagellum,
cultellus, or illa. illum. illus. mammilla, sigillum, pugillus, tantillus, ola.
olium. olum. olus- filiola, epistolium, ingeniolum, filiolus, ula. uleus.
ululus ulum. ulus. adolescentula, equuleus, homululus, frustulum,
adolescentulus, ridiculus, senecio, homuncio flosculus, dicaculus,
grandiusculus, ramunculus, sio. ster. pusio, Grammaticaster.

Materials end in aceus. alis. arius. aticus. hordeaceus, aqualis, aquarius,
aquaticus, etus. eus. cus. inus. ius. itius. querc^tus, querceus, quercicus,
quercinus quercius, lateritius, gnus abieguus, if it be not compounded with
genus, ^a^us. quernulanus, or querqueculanus, neus. nus. querueus, quernus.

Comparatives end constantly in or, and Superlatives in mus, as prior, primus,.

Of forming Comparatives and Superlatives.
Adiectives whose signification may increase or be diminished, being put
absolutely without excess, as durus hard are called Positives, or somewhat
exceeding the positive in a proportion, between two having the English ending in
er or the sign more set before it, as harder or more hard be called
Comparatives, or surpassing all others of like kind, having the English ending
in est, or the sign most before it as hardest, or most hard, be called
Superlatives.

Comparatives and Superlatives are both formed from their Positives ending in i
whereto the Comparatives add the termination or. and the Superlatives add
ssimus, so duri makes durior and durissimus, likewise tristi makes tristior
and tristissimus.

Exceptions.
Positives that end in er and ur apocopated have rimus put thereto, in forming
the Superlative, as niger nigerrimus, celer celerrimus, matur maturrimus, And
some few that end in lis, change that to llimus, as humilis humillimus, so
facilis and similis with their Compounds and with some Authors, gracilis,
agilis, docilis, but with others these three last keep the General Rule, and
all Adiectives besides, which end in lis, as nobilis nobilior nobilissimus.

Of irregular Comparatives and Superlatives.
Some Adiectives are used only to one of the three former degrees in
signification, as for example. To the Superlative only maximus, minimus,
optimus, pessimus,. To the Comparative only mayor, minor, melior, peior. To
the Positive only, as all Nounes either incapable of intension and remission,
being extremes; as aeternus, mom^ntaneus, praecipuus, gregarius; or equal in
their condition; whether first of nature, being Nounes material, as faginus;
or fignifying the species of time or place, as bimulus, diurnus, meridionalis;
or being derivatives from proper names, as Paschalis, Eous: or of relation, as
all Pronounes being pronominally taken for tuissimus, as patruissimus, and
Neronior is used for tibi simillimus, deposing the proper sense, or of
adsignificance, being Participles of the first Future, never admitting a
comparison, because they never fail to signify an express time. But
Participles of the second Future, are used only to the Superlative, and that
with late Writers, not with Classick Authors. And Participles of the Present
and the Preterrenses, when they desist to signify time, do become Nounes, and
admit Comparisons; as amans, amantior, amantissimus, doctus, doctior,
doctissimus.

Other Adiectives are by use unmovable, which end in ar. or ur. bundus crus.
cus. eps. es. eus. ius. lus. mus. ster. stus. uus. seldom admitting a
Comparative, or Superlative degree, saving by a supplement of magis, and
maxim, or such like, answering to more and most, the signs thereof in
english, as the Positive dispar, has for Comparative magis dispar, for the
Superlative maxim dispar, and so in the rest.

Some Adiectives want the Positive only, as plus plurimum, deterior
deterrimus, magnificentior magnificentissimus and such like Compounds of dico,
loquor, volo.

Some want Comparatives only, as consultus, diversus, falsus, fidus, inclytus,
invictus, invisus, invitus, meritus, novus, nuperus, pius, sacer, strenuus.

Some Adiectives, want only the Superlatives, as adolescens, ingens, iuvenis,
salutaris, satur, senex, taciturnus, and proximus, imitating a Positive does
make proximior only.

The variation of Comparatives and Superlatives.
Comparatives or Superlatives leaving the nature of Partitives, are used
absolutely for Positives; as celerior celerrimus, or celerius celerrime, huc
advolasti, for celer, or celeriter.

Likewise Comparatives may take the place of Superlatives, as multo
praestantior omnibus ille, for praestantissimus omnium. And contrariwise
Superlatives may take the place of Comparatives, fidissimus ille duorum, for
fidelior.

Superlatives may be changed and diversely rendered, either by Adverbes of
intension put unto the Positive, as apprime doctus, perdite nefarius,
nequicquam infaustus, undique probus; or by Adverbes of remission with a
Negative, as haud parum, or mediocriter letus, or with Adverbes of likeness,
referring to singularity, as alous vt nix, or tropologically, when proper Names
or some Appellatives stand for Adiectives; as Theseus, for fidissimus, decus
and tutela Pelasgum, for incly^^ssimus, and such others.

Some Positives have the force of Superlatives affirmatively, as princeps
omnium: or negatively, nulli secundus; or any Positive construed with a
Genirive plural of its own Substantive, as impiger fluminum, nigra lanarum.
Superlatives may be expressed by Hebraismes, as putum putum argentum, flos
florum, sapiens consiliariorum, vir sanguinum, populus electionis, dulcis prae
nectare, excelsus supra Gentes. Superlatives may be employed in Paraphrases, as
vir, si quisquam alius, bonae frugi, impertum obtinens, nulli cedens, parem
nusquam inventurus, palma dignus, nullum non supera^ns, and such others.

Of Compounds.
Compounds come either from entire words, whether two rects and both
Substantives, as jusjurandum; or two rects, the one a Substantive, and the
other an Adiective, as respublica, or both rect Adiectives, as alteruter; or a
rect and oblique both Substantives, as paterfamilias, or oblique and rect, both
Adiectives, as levidensis; or oblique Substantive, and rect Adiective, as
jurisperitus, or two rects Adiectives, with an Advebe, as unusquisque where all
rects are only variable, and the rest unmovable. Or Compounds come from words
impaired, commonly the former, as grandaevus, sometimes both, as aprugnus:
Sometimes words compounded be of diverse tongues, as epitogium, parisyllabicum
ambactus: Sometimes the simples are ob^olet saving in composition, either both,
as completus, or the former as difficilis vesanus, or the latter, as desensio,
and such are all encliticals, as egomet, tute, idem quidam, quispiam, quicunque
hicce, suapte. Some for euphony take increase of letters, as reditus, and some
change the first Vowell of the latter simple, as inimicus, pertinax. Moreover
Compounds with Classick Authors, are much more in use then the simple words,
both as more significant, tending to brief descriptions, and as affoording
more variety in the resolutions, whereof the first is found in composition of
Nounes and Verbes, instanced in the variation of Substantives, and the other in
Composition of Nounes or Verbes, with prepositionall Adverbes, which will be
instanced in that place.

The peculiar affections of Nounes.
Affections proper unto Nounes, are three, Case, Declension, and Gender.

Of Cases.
Cases are diverse endings of Nounes in either of both numbers, being regularly
four, the Nominative, Gentrive, Dative, and Accusative.

Of the Nominative.
The Nominative called also the Rect, in opposition to al other Cases, called
Obliques, goes before a Verb Personal, which does agree therewith in person
and number, or else comes after a verb substantive in apposition to the
Nomnitive going before it, as necessitas est artium magistra.

Annotations.
Some Greek Nounes are found irregular, being redundnant in the Nominative
singular of some Declensions by casting away s. as Thomas, Thoma, Crhyses,
Chryse, in the first, Orpheus, Orpheu, in the second, Oedipus, Oedipu, Aias,
Aia, Pallas, Palla, Alexis, Alexi, Paris Pari, Simoeis Simoei in the third. All
which are proper names, and some Latin Nouns Appellatives, cast away us. as
from meus, being with old Authors mius comes mi, from genius, geni, from
filius fili, and from all proper names, as Caius Cai, Georgius Georgi, Aemilius
Aemili, and such like. And all other both proper and common Nouns of the second
Declension ending in us ( Deus only excepted) will change us to e. imitating
therein Nouns of the third Declension in the Greek, as optime Feste nequaquam,
ins^nio

Lastly all Nounes in such redundant Terminations being rectes, because they
are never derived from the Genitives, are only of the second person, singular
spoken to, and therefore called Vocatives to distinguish them from the regular
Terminations, which are used indifferently for any of the three persons.

Of the Genative.
The Geniti^e so called, because thence are ^ormed all other Obliques and
Derivatives, may be known in English by the sign of before ^t, or by the
encliticall s. added thereunto, and ^n latin by being the latter of two
Substan^ives, that have diverse significations, as Di^cipuli Magister, the
Master of the Scholar, or ^he Scholars Master. But the Genitive con^trued with
adiectivall Nouns or Verbs have the ^o^mer Substantives understood, being
easily to ^e supplied, as the more known Appellatives, referring to their
subordinate species of place, time, praise, price, crime, punishment, order,
measure, or some peculiar respect, as vivit Romae, supply Urbe, abest bidui,
supply spacio vel itinere, ejusmodi est probitatis, supply Virtute, venalis
teruncii, supply precio, reus furti, supply, crimine damnatus exilii, supply
poena, poetarum doctissimus, supply ordine, or numero, liber sex digitorum
crassus, supply mensura, inops fide, promissorum dives, rerum suarum satagit,
alienarum immemor, supply ratione. Moreover Genitives being the latter of two
Substantives, are often changed to the Datives, as filius Heri, or Hero.

Of the Dative.
The Dative is construed with any part of Speech, being either put
acquisitively with reference to the end or object, having in English the signs
to, or for, as obviat, or venit obviam, or obvius mihi, or else Ablatively with
reference to some cause, part, or specifical circumstance, having the signs
from, through, in, with, by, and after the Comparative degree, the sign then,
being the English of prepositionall Adverbs expressly put thereto, o^ otherwise
understood therewith, as ab Italia discessit, quia prae ebrietate bacchabatur,
postmodum Athenis exceptus, herbis sanatus est a Medico, sociis omnibus sobrior.

Annotations.
The Ablative in regard of a redundant termination found only in the singular
not of all, but of some Declensions, has passed for a distinct latin case
(which the Greek, a mother tongue unto the Latin has never owned) And
therefore it were more equal to account the same a redundant Dative by the
same law, whereby the Vocative is concluded to be a redundant Nominative. For
to make either of them a distinct case, would require the same to have a
distinct ending in both numbers and all Declensions, according to an equal
Rule required alike in every Case, wherein both these redundants fail.
Moreover (as the Nominative is frequently used to the second Person (for a
Vocative) so the regular Dative is often used promiscuously for the redundant
Ablative, as proximus Regi, or a rege, id mihi, or mecum commune, ali^nus
ambitioni, or ambitione, oratori, or ab oratore diversus est Poeta, tibi or a
te fama petatur, Virgilius Homero comparatur, or cum Homero, formido tibi, or
de te, robori, or robore fidens, tibi, or tecum certabo, vitia haec insunt
amori, or in amore, vosmet eripite slammae or slamma, with many more.

Of the Accusative.
The Accusative called in Greek the Causative, as pointing ordinarily at some
cause, follows a Verb transitive, bring the Active or Deponent, or a Verb
neuter being o^ the same signification with it, or else goes before an
infinitive mood, as veritatem tueri, haud eam labectare Judicis est, villicus
provectam aetatem vivens, suam senectutem o^iari dedignatur.

Otherwise the Accusative construed with Verbs neuter of different
signification from it is Ellipticall, having understood therewith either an
infinitive of some Verb Transitive, or more commonl^ some prepositionall (...),
as Id possumus, supply agere, quod probos ^ece, for apud probos, but most
usually the Prepositions serving thereunto are expyesied therewith, as per mare
veniunt in Britannian.

Of Declensions.
All variable Nounes are ranged according to their mutual Analogy among
themselves, to five distinct forms, and thence are called Nouns of the first,
or second, or third, or fourth, or fifth Declension; for the Declension is a
distinct form or way of varying Nounes, according to their several Cases or
Terminations.

Annotations.
Nounes of the two first Declensions are parisyllabicall, having like number of
Syllables in all Cases, save in the Genitive plural of both, and in the Dative
plural of moveable Substantives, in the first only, as dearum, deabus, deorum.

Nounes of the three last Declensions are imparisyllabicall, taking the
increase of a Syllable in sundry oblique Cases, which increase some Nounes of
the third Declension have in all the obliques thence.

Nounes both Substantive and Adiectives of the Neuter Gender, in the Nominative
and Accusative, both singular and plural, of any Declension do end alike, and
in the plural do end only in a, few Pronounes excepted, as hoc, quod, ambo,
and duo, being all irregular, whereof in the Heteroclites,

Nounes of the third Declension, whether Masculines or Foeminines, or both, end
alike in the Nominative and Accusative plural. And Nounes of the fourth end
alike, not only in those two Cases, but also in the Nominative and Genitive
singular; and Nounes of the fifth end alike in the Nominative singular, and in
the Nominative and Accusative plural. And Nounes both of the first and fifth
end alike in the Genitive and Dative Singular.

Lastly, it is of most concernment far above any other, that Scholars be
well versed, and very perfect in the Declensions of Nounes and Conjugations of
Verbes; the only parts of Speech variable by proper affections: And for that
purpose the distinct Termination proper to every Case of each Declension,
should be made familiar to them, that by casting of the same from any Oblique,
the word then having for its last bound the Characteristicall letter, which is
always that next preceding the termination of the Nominat^ve; Learners may
with ease change the termination of such Obliques to the proper ending of the
Rect, or Nominative in the same Declension, as for instance; filiabus, by
termination is a Dative plural of the first Declension, take thence abus, and
the word does end in i, being the Characteristicall, then put thereto a, the
termination of the Rect in that Declension, and it will be filia, which any
Novice may decline accordingly, but without such certain prescript to find
out the Rect, he will fail therein. So pueros by termination is an Accusative
plural of the second Declension, take thence os, and the word will be puer,
whereto us the proper ending of the Rect in that Declension should be added,
were it not apocopated, so from fab'ros, take away os, it will be fab'r, and
being no proper ending, it may be understood that such words are syncopated in
all the Obliques, whence e, the middle Syllable is cut off, and must be
restored to the Rect, making it faber. In the third Declension, affording
greatest difficulty in such Nounes, as do increase in the Genitive singular; a
recourse should be made to the sundry endings of Rects therein, and good notice
taken of the sundry endings of the Genitive singular, belonging often to the
same ending of the Rect, and by a reduction of the terminations of other
Obliques, to the termination of that Genitive, the Rects proper ending will
soon be found by Analogy with particular instances in that Declension, as for
example; in partibus, change tibus, a termination of the Dative plural to it is,
an ending of the Genitive singular, and by rule partis must come from pars; so
in remigum, laticum, change gum, and cum, to gis, and cis, both by rule come
from ex. the proper ending of the Rect, changing e, to i, and in limits,
change tes, to it is, and limitis will come from the Rect limes, changing
likewise e, to i, and casting away s: in vulnera, change era, to eris, and by
rule vulneris will come from the Rect vulnus. And in words of the fourth and
fifth Declension the former Rules will serve.

Of the first Declension.
Latin Nounes of the first Declension do end only in a, being by termination
Foeminine, and are declined as in the Example fo^lowing.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Und-a. ae. ae vel a. am. Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. ae. arum. is. as.

Annotations.
Greek Nouns Substantive of this Declension end in as, and es, which in Latin
will both end in a. and others end also in e. And hebrew Nouns end in am, or
as, which latine-like will end in amus, as from Abraham, or Abrah^s, Abrahamus.
And all be declined as in examples following.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Satrap-as vel a. ae ae vel a. am vel an. Athlet-es vel
a. ae. ae vel a. am vel en. Epitom-e es. e. en. Ad-am vel as. ae. ae. vel a.
am. The plural as in Latin Nounes.

Substantives of this Declension answering to the first or second in the Greek
may be of any Gender, except the neuter, for Greek Nouns ending in e are
feminines, as Epitrope; or ending in as, or es, or made thence to end in a be
Masculines, as tiaras and tiara, planetes and planeta, or Nouns that end in a,
and do betoken humane conditions belonging to both sexes, are of the Common of
two by signification, as advena, verna; or referring to noe certain sex may be
of the Doubtful gender by authority, as Talpa: or being Appellatives of bruit
creatures, may be epicoenes, as vipera, Simia.

Of the Genitive Singular.
With old Authors, Nounes ending in a vowell before a, or ending in ra, or na,
have the Genitive singular in as Greek-wise, as dux vias, for viae, impetus
auras, filius Latonas: And old Poets have changed ae to ai. as Aulai, Pictai,
Geryonai, for aulae, pictae, Geryonae.

Of the Dative singular.
The Dative singular is constanly redundant in this Declension and in none
other besides this.

Of the Genitive plural.
The Genitives plural of Nouns Patronymick, and Gentile, and Nouns compounded
of colo, and gigno are often Syncopated, as Aeneadum, spartiatum, Caeli^olum,
Terrigenum, the two first of these ending Greekwise in the common tongue, being
Parisyllabicall in all cases, as Aeneadae, Aeneadon, which by the Boeotick or
Aeolick dialect may end in a on as Aeneidaon And Latin Nounes do imitate the
same Dialect, having r. inserted between a and um, as in Aenidarum.

Of the Dative plural.
Some moveable Substantives ending in us of the second, and in a of this
Declension, have therein a redundant Dative plural, as nata makes natis,
common to it with natus, and natabus proper to it self, for distinction of the
Genders, as the Nounes redundant in the rect distinguish persons.

Of Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions.
Some proper names are redundant, being of this and the second Declension, as
Hierosolyma Hierosolimae, and Hierosolyma Hierosolymorum. And some Appellatives
are of this Declension in the plural, and of the second in the singular, as
epulum epuli, and epulae epularum. Others of this, and the third; as Pascha
Pasche, and Paschatis, Orontes Orontae and Oro^tis, Chalcas Chalcae and
Chalcanvis.

Of the second Declonsion.
Latin Nouns of the second Declension, end constantly either in um. being all
neuters, or us. or in ( er and ur) having us apocopated, being Masculines by
termination, except few such being feminines, and all be declined, as in the
example following.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Ov-um i. o. um. Alv-us vel e. i. o. um. Puer i. o. um.
Li-ber bri. bro. brum. Plurialiter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. a. orum. is. a. i. orum. is. os. i. orum. is. os. bri.
brorum. bris. bros.

In this Declension vir with all Substantives ending in er and Adiectives
ending in er and ur, have us apocopated, and both Substantives, and Adiectives
ending in er, not having a vowell, or half vowel going before er. be for the
most part syncopated in all the obliques, as vir for virus, viri, viro, miser
for miserus, miseri, misero, satur, for saturus. saturi, saturo, but faber, for
faberus, fabri, fabro, and sacer, for sacerus, sacri sacro. Some are excepted,
as adulter, presbiter, socer, alter, asper, celtiber, gibber, lacer, liber (the
Adiective) prosper, dexter, making dexteri or dextri, and all Compounds of
gero, and fero, which are never syncopated, as armiger, armigeri, stellifer,
stelliferi. Moreover all Adiectives in the second termination being feminines,
are of the first Declension, but in the first and third being Masculines and
neuters are of this Declension, and are thus declined.

Singulariter.
Procer- Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. us vel e i. o. um. a, ae. ae vel a. am. um. i.
o. um. Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. i. orum. is. os. ae. arum. is. as. a. orum. is. a.

Some Pronouns in the Genitive singular do end in ius, and some in jus. and
both in the Dative end in i. as unus una unum, unius, uni, being otherwise
regular, as also totus, solus, and alter, uter, ullus, with their Compounds,
but ille ipse iste, with is ejus ei, qui cujus cui, and hic hujus huic are more
irregular, whereof in the Heteroclits.

Annotations.
Greek Nouns of this Declension in the Nominative singular end in os. on.
(...)s. and eus. and are thus declined.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accusa. Byss-us vel e. i. o. um. Barbit-on. i. o. on.
Ath-(...)s. (...). (...). (...)n vel (...) Thes-eus vel eu.ei.v.eos.eo v.ei.eum
v.ea. The pluralls as in Latin.

Substantives of this Declension answering to the third and fourth of the
simple, and to the third of the contracts in the Greek, may be of any Gender
except the Common of two; For besides Masculines most usual in this Declension
of Nouns both Greek and Latin, ending in os, or in us, many Greek Nouns
changing os to us, and few latin Nouns in us, are feminines, as for instance.

Antidotus costus methodus byssusque papirus
Nardus and hyssopus dialectus eremus and arctus
Graeca, latina colus vannus domus alvus humusque.
Likewise pampinus is doubtful, and elephantus, epicaene. And Symbolon, with
all such other Greek Nounes are Neuters.

Of the Genitive Singular.
The Genitive Singular ending in ij, is often apocopated, as tua cura peculi,
for peculii.

Of the Nominative Plural.
The Nominative Plural with some old Authors, does end in ei. as captivei, for
captivi.

Of the Genitive Plural.
The Genitive Plural is often syncopated, but mostly with Poets, as Chara deum
soboles, for deorum, but it happens very seldom in the Neuter Gender, as
duellum, for duellorum.

Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions.
All Adiectives of three diverse endings are redundant, being of this and the
first Declension; as bonus bona bonum, some Nounes are of this and the third
Declension, as sequester, sequestri, and sequestris, glomus, glomi, and
glomeris, vesper, vesperi, and vesperis, polypus, polypi, and polypodis.
Perseus, Persei, and Perseos. Other Nounes are redundant in the Genitive
plural only, as Bacchanalia, Bacchanaliorum, and Bacchananum: ancilia,
anciliorum, and ancilium; And so sponsalia, vecligalia. Others are redundant in
the Dative plural only: as poemata, poematis, and poematibus, or poemasi.
Other redundants in the Singular be of this, and in the Plural of the third
Declension: as iugerum, iugeri, and iugera, iugerum, iugeribus; being both
formerly Nounes moveable, but now obsolet, saving that iugeris, and iugere, of
the Genitive and Dative ablativall singular be still in use.

Of the third Declension.
Nouns of the third Declension do end in three Vowels, a e o. and in seven
Consonants, c l n r s t x. Amongst which the Terminations a e c t. and both us,
and or, increasing short in substantives, and us increasing long in
Monosyllables; and al Adjectives of the Comparative degree, be always
Neutrals. And al. el. en. ar. ur. be mostly Neuter endings, but admit
Exceptions, Aus. or is. or us. increasing long, or os. making otis. are always
foeminine by Termination: And for the most part such are Substantives that end
in as. or is. or x. or s. with another Consonant, and Polisyllables Derivative
in o. and Parisyllabicals in es. but some of such endings admit Exceptions, Or,
and os. making oris. be always Masculines and ordinarily dissyllables
primitive in o and Impatisyllabicals in on. and es. and er. being syncopated,
the several^ Exceptions to this last, and to the former Genders follow next
after the forms, by which such Nounes must be declined, as in these Examples.

Nav-is. Lau-s. Pect-us. Faelix Trist-is
Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Turr-is. is. i. vel e. em. vel im. Lau-s. dis. di vel
de. them. Pect-us. oris. ori vel ore. us. Fael-ix. icis. ici vel ice icem and
ix. Trist-is and e. is. i. vel e. em and e. Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. es. ium. ibus. es. des. dum. dibus. des. ora. orum.
oribus. ora. ices and icia. icium. icibus. ices and icia. es and ia. ium. ibus.
es and ia.

Annotations.
Nounes of this Declension answering to the fifth of the Simples, and to the
first, second, and fifth of the Contracts in the Greek, have all seven
Genders, and some few exotic, either Greek Appellatives, or Hebrew proper
Names, have two more Terminations, the one in y. the other in id. as moly
molyos, Neuter by Termination, David, Davidis, Masculine by signification,
declined regularly like the rest.

A. and e. in this Declension are terminations of Nounes Neuter only; as
problema problematis, cubile cubilis maenia maenium. O. in Nounes Primitive of
two Syllabls, is a termination Masculine: as ordo ordinus, sermo sermonis; and
in these Nounes of many Syllables, pugio pugionis, scipio titio, senio ternio.
But caro, carnis not increasing is Foeminine, and so is grando grandinis, with
all Derivatives of many Syllables ending in do, and go; as dulcedo dulcedinis,
prurigo pruriginis, except harpago harpaginis, a Greek Noune* Masculine.
Likewise derivative Verbals, and Denominatives, ending in io, be Foeminines;
as lectio lectionis: so legio, concio, with communio, ditio, talio, rebellio,
perduellio; lastly, Hiericho Hiericbuntis, by signification is Foeminine: But
bubo bubonis, is of the doubtful Gender, and hirundo hirundinis, an Epicoene.

c. and t. are endings of Neuters only, as caput capitis, lac lactis; halec is
an Aprote; for halecis does come from halex a Foeminine.

Al, and el, are Neutrall endings; as mel mellis, animal animalis: but sal, in
a different sense is Neutrall, or Masculine, in the Singular, but masculine
only in the Plural, used for facetiae.

Il. ol. and ul. are Masculine endings, as mugil mugilis, which with old
Authors was Parisyllabicall, sol solis, exul exulis: which last is accounted
common, but good Authors say exulem and vagam reduxit, or vagam ab exilio, not
vagam exulem.

An. in. on. are Masculine terminations, as Paean Paeanis, Evan Evantis,
Delphis or Delphin, Delphinis. Xenophon Xenophontis, by signification and
termination Masculines: and agon agonis, canon canonis, by termination only:
But Sindon Sindonis, is Foeminine, and halcyon halcyonis, aedon aedonis
Epicoenes.

En. is a Neutrall ending, as lumen luminis, but pecten pectinis, ren renis,
and splen, lichen, lien, are Masculines.

Ar. and ur. be Neutrall terminations, as calcar calcaris, being formerly
Parisyllabicall, hepar, for hepas, by antithesis, hepatis: far farris, for
difference from faris, fatur, murmur murmuris, ^ecur iecoris, and iecinoris, by
Epenthesis, or from an obsolet iecinus, but salar salaris, and furfur furfuris,
be Masculines, turtur and vultur Epicoens.

Er. is a Masculine termination, as imber imbris, alacer alacris, pater patris,
campester campestris, with many more both Substantives and Adiectives,
syncopated in all Obliques, after b. c. t. ether aetheris, crater crateris,
puber, and pubes by Antithesis, puberis, except it er syncopated, for itiner
itineris, ver veris, cadaver cadaveris. And cicer, laser, spinther, piper,
papaver, Neuters, with sicer, laver, which as Herbs be Foeminines by
signification: But linter lintris, clyster clysteris be of the doubtful
Gender, and passer passeris an Epicoene.

Or. increasing long is a Masculine ending, as, honor, and honos by Antithesis,
honoris, but arbor arboris, is Foeminine, and cor cordis Neuter, with ador, or
ados adoris, aequor, marmor, and all others increasing short.

Yr. is a termination of Greek Nounes, being the common of two by
signification; as martyr martyris.

As. a termination of Nounes increasing, is Foeminine; as pietas pietatis,
lampas lampadis, except vas vadis, and as assis, which with all ponderals
derived thence, as bes bessis, semis, or semissis, semissis, decunx decuncis,
dodrans dodrantis are Masculines, so are likewise Gigas gigantis, and mas
maris, by signification; but vas vasis is Neuter.

Aus. is a termination Foeminine: as laus laudis.

Es. is a termination Foeminine of parisyllabicall Nounes, as nubes nubis, and
a Masculine ending of imparisyllabicals, as pes pedis, terms termetis, fomes
fomitis, lebes lebetis; but Chremes making Chremis, and Chremetis, is by
signification Masculine, so are abies abietis, Ceres Ce^eris Foeminines, aes
aeris is Neuter, vepres vepris, palumbes palumbis, and ales alitis are of the
doubtful Gender, and vulpes Epicoene. Nounes plural only that end in es, do
analogically keep such Gender as they should be of, were they regular, and had
the singular, as ambages Faeminine, and natales Masculine, because ambages, and
natalis their singulars would be such.

Is. of Nounes increasing, or not increasing, is mostly a termination Foeminine
as navis navis, lis litis, cuspis cuspidis, genesis geneseos or genesios,
charis charitos, so Themis making Themis or The^idis, or Themissis, and Salamis
or Salamin S^laminis, are by signification feminines, likewise Simoeis
Simoentis, ^s by signification masculine. Some imparisyllabi^alls increasing in
dis nis and ris are masculines, as ^pis lapidis, Aeneis Aeneidis or Aeneidos,
sanguis san^uinis, glis gliris, vomis for vomer vomeris. And few
^arisyllabicalls.

Mascula sunt piscis, fascis, sic mensis et orbis.
^t corbis sentis vectis sic vermis et axis.
Et fustis postis torris velut anguis et unguis.
Quaelibet in quis lis demum claudentia nisve.
All Adjectives ending in is are of the Common two, as tussis, likewise Scrobis
scrobis or scrobs scro^s, is of the doubtful gender.

Os making otis will be feminine, as Cos cotis, dos dotis, and making oris,
masculine, as flos floris, but os oris, and os ossis, with epos epeos, and such
Greek words be neuters. Heroes herois, is by signification Masculine, and so are
custos custodis, sacerdos sac^rdotis, of the Common of two; us increasing
short, is a termination neutrall, as corpus corporis, vulnus vulneris, or
increasing long in Monosyllables, and Nounes of the Comparative degree, as ius,
iuri, melius melioris, but mus muris, lepus leporis, ligus or ligur liguris, be
Masculines by signification, pecus pecudis, is feminine, if pecudis be not a
parisyllabicall. Any other Nounes increasing long are feminines, as incus,
subscus, palus paludis, tellus telluris, virtus virtutis, so opus opuntis is
feminine by signification, and likewise grus gruis of the doubtful Gender.

Is is a termination feminine of Greek Nounes, as Chelys Chelyos, Chlamys
Chlamydis or Chlamydos. But Gortys or Gortyn Gorlynos, is by signification and
termination faeminine.

S. with another consonant next it in the end of Nounes is a feminine
termination, as trabs or trabes trabis, glans glandis, pars partis, hyems
hyemis, stips o^ stipis, stipis, fron^ frondis or frontis, pulls pultis, and
Tiryn^ Tirynthis feminine by signification. But fons fontis, ^^ons, pons, dens
and Hydrops Hydropis, Chalybs Chalybis, Gryps Gryphis are masculines. And
princeps principis, auceps aucupis of the common of two by signification, adeps
adipis, forceps forcipis, of the doubtful Gender, concors concrod^s, caelebs
caelibis, anceps ancipitis of the common of three.

X. Being the termination of Nouns is feminine (...) pax, pacis, nex necis,
carex caricis, nix nivis, filix filicis, nos noctis, lux lucis, obsolet frux
frugis, styx stygis, coccys onix onych is. But these grex gregis, remex
re^igis, and thorax thoracis, caudex or codex codicis, podex, culex, pulex,
mu^ex, ramex, rumex, apex, latex frutex, pollex, vertex, calix, volvox, tradux,
bombyx are masculines, and so is Hylax Hylactis by signification; but senex
senis for senecis is of the common of two: And lim^x limacis, imbrex imbricis,
varix va^icis of the doubtful gender, so ^udax audacis, tr^^lex triplicis,
f^elix faelicis, velox velocis, trux trucis of the Common of three.

Of the Dative singular.
The Dative singular of some Nounes in this Declension is regular, ending only
in i, and those not only Greek, as poesis poesi, but also latin, being either
proper names as Cha^ybdis, Opis, Fabaris, Syrtis, or Appellatives, as buris,
amussis, strigilis mare, or the two last endings apocopated, as mugil, vigil,
animal, calcar, par, september, memo^, and most Adjectives except these that
follow which have a redundant Dative in e. to wit, all Participles not made
Nouns participial as n^cens, not innocens, or such as are defective in the
neuter as Senex, Juvenis, or that increase short, as deses, uber, vetus, or
that increase long, being made proper names, as Clemens, Faelix.

Many Substantives have the redundant Dative in e. to wit Nounes syncopated, as
caro venture, and collis turris, with such like doubling l. and r. so apis nubes
dogma grando sermo lac sal splen far mas virtus caput lex, but victrix and such
nounes verbal taken adjectively, may be used indifferently.

Of the Accusative singular.
Substantives in the Accusative singular end only in im, whose Datives end only
in i. and other parisyllabicals end either in em or im; whose Datives may take
or leave the redundancie, as navis, puppis: but all the rest being no neuters,
both Substantives and Adjectives end only in em, except Greek Nounes which have
for their terminations in, as genesin, some in, or a, Erinnyn or Erinnyda, and
some em or a. as aetherem, or aethera, and latin Nouns Greekwise as cassidem
or cassida.

Of the Nominative and Genitive plural.
All Adjectives or Substantives neuter increasing short, and monosyllable
Substantives that end in us increasing long, make the Nominative plural in a.
and the Genitive plural in um as caeliba caelibum, so vigila participa votera
memora impota dogmata crura. Other monosyllables make the Nominative likewise
in a. but the Genitive in ium, as corda cordium, ossa ossium. And all other
netuers not increasing, increasing long, whether of Substantives or Adjectives,
make ia, and ium, as retia retium, so vectigalia laquedria omnia folicia,
excepting nounes of the comparative degree, as meliora meliorum.

Substantives of other Genders in the Genitive plural end in um, either
increasing short or syncopated as sanguinum, fratrum, salub^um, volucrum,
campestrum, or not increasing, that have a vowell next before um pum or tum, as
canum opum vatum, or increasing long with a vowell next before cum dum gum number
^rum tum, as radicum, paludum, legum, leonum, rumorum, civitatum, and the rest
end for the most part in ium, as Vrbium fascium vadium salium carnium marium
mersium litium. Genitives plural of some nounes that end in ium, are
syncopated as sapi^ntum caelestum boum. Some admit Epenthesis as alituum
caelituum, some end Greek-wise, as haerese^n.

Of Datives plural.
The Dative plural of some greek nouns end in asi, as dryasi for dryadibus.
And likewise bos will make bubus, and bobus for bovibus.

Of Accusatives plural.
The Accusatives plural end sometimes in eis, of Substantives and Adiectives
feminine, that end in the genitive plural in ium, as parteis omneis, being an
Archaisme, and sometimes the Adiective is contracted, as omnis for omn^is. And
in greek nounes that Case does end sometimes in as greek-wise as rhetoras for
rhetores.

Nounes redundant being of this and other Declensions.
Some Nouns redundant are of this and the fifth Declension, as requies
requietis and requ^ei, so fames famis and famei; some are in the singular of
this, in the Plural of the second, as vas vasis, and vasa vasorum, from vasum
now obsolet.

Of the fourth Declension.
Nounes of the fourth Declension end in us, being for most part Masculine
verballs, few other Nounes in us are feminines, and all pluralls in ua ^euters,
being derived from Aptotes singular in u; the Nounes variable are declined as
in these examples.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Curr-us us ui vel u um Corn-u u u u Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. us uum ibu s us ua uum ubus ua

Annotations.
Substantives of this Declension answering nearest to the fourth of the
contracts in the Greek, may be of any Gender, having the Common of two an^
Epicoene. Some Greek proper names of this Declension have a third termination
of rects in o. as Clio, Clotho, Gorgo, Jo, Mantho, Sappho, all feminines by
signification, and are declined as in this example.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Ecch-o us oi o.

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. us

Some few Appelatives are likewise feminines, as porticus acus tribus manus
colus domus ficus, and the plural idus, likewise penus specus be of the
doubtful gender.

Of the Genitive singular.
The Genitive singular of this Declension with old Authors did end sometimes in
i. as fructi for fructus copia, so tumulti, ornati. And sometimes in uis as
del^ium anuis, for anus. And the Genitive plural is often syncopated, as
Currum.

Of the Dative singular and plural.
Some Poets have used the Dative singular only in u. as parce metu. Moreover
the Dative plural of arcus artus lacus partus spe^us tribus veru do end only
in ubus, but cornu genu portus do end both in ibus and ubus, and most other
Nounes in ibus only.

Of Nounes redundant, being of this and other Declensions.
Nouns redundant are of this and the second Declension, as Domus domi, for any
dwelling place, and Domus domus for an edifice, ficus fici for the Tree, and
ficus ficus for the fruit, colus coli for the Instrument and colus colus for
the work: others are of this and the third, as penus penoris and penus.

Of the fifth Declension.
Nouns of the fifth Declension end only in es, being feminines, and are thus
declined.

Singulariter.
Nomi. Genesis Dat. Accus. Aci-es ei. ei vel e em.

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. es erum ebus es.

Annotations.
The fifth (having no affinity with Greek Declensions, as the redundant Dative
has none with Greek cases) is a latin Declension of Nounes descending mostly
from other Declensions, either the first, as from mollitia mollities, from
desidia desidies, from Barbaria Barbaries, or the second, as from alluvium
alluvies, or the third, as from plebs plebes, or the fourth, as from acus acies.

And Nounes of this Declension be feminines, as most usually derived from such,
except dies of the doubtful Gender in the singular, and masculine in the
plural, and meridies only masculine: furthermore dies with effigies facies res
species and acies are entire in the plural. But the rest have only the
Nominative and Accusative plural, or entirely want that number, as betokening
virtues or vices, whereof in Nounes Anomalous, remaining only to be handled.

Of the Genitive and Dative Singular.
Dies with good Authors is found in the Genitive, as paena dies for diei, so is
die apocopated, mercatus die septimi. And Dii syncopated, laetiliamque di^, but
this last may come from dius obsolet, whence are diu and most Derivatives that
are in use, likewise the Dative singular in other Nounes is often contracted, as
res commissa fide, for fidei.

The termination of Nouns being the Common of two.
Sus canis exul homo vates bos author and infans
Duxque pugilque parens princeps cum vindic^ Martyr.
Bifronsverna senex, quaevis Gentilia, ut Arcas.
The termination of Nounes* the Doubtful Gender.
Grossus adeps limax varix specus anguis et imbrex.
Barbitos atque dies tradux scrobs cum grue linter.
Masculines seldom Feminines.
Bubo cinis cortex ales cum cardine margo
Atquerudens et onyx python cum calce, pede imo.
Feminines seldom Masculines.
Halcyon et forceps natrix lynx talpa cupido.
Of Nounes Anomalous.
Nounes Anomalous are ra^ged to four sorts, that is to say, to redundants,
defectives, heterogeneous and heteroclitous, whereto may be added Heteroeidous,
such as have diverse forms, proper to the Pronouns, and Hete^oschematous
belonging unto Compounds* all notified all^eady in their distinct places.

Of Nounes Heteroclit.
Nounes Heteroclit swarving mostly from the regular, and very needful to be
known, as very usual, are these that follow, ego tu sui is iste ille ipse hic
qui ambo and duo, the three first being totally irregular, and the eight last
only in part, are declined as in the following instances.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. Ego. mei. mihi vel me me Tu. tui. tibi vel te te.

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. nos nostrum vel nostri nobis nos vos vestrum vel vestri.
vobis vos.

Singulariter and Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus caret sui sibi vel se se.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. is eo eum ca ejus ei vel ea eam id eo id.

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. ii vel ei eorum iis eos eae earum vel eas ea eorum eis
ea

Singulariter.
Is It Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. e o um a ius i vel a am ud o ud

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. i orum os ae arum is as a orum a

And in like manner be declined ille and ipse, saving that ipse makes the
neuter ipsum.

Singulariter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. hic hoc hunc haec huius huic vel hac. hanc hoc hoc hoc

Pluraliter.
Nom. Genesis Dat. Accu. hi horum hos hae harum his has haec horum haec

Singulariter.
Qui quo quem Quae cuius cui v qua quam Quod quo quod

Pluraliter.
Qui quorum quibus Quos Quae quarum queis quas Quae quorum vel quis quae.

Pluraliter.
Du -- Nom. Genesis Dat. Accus. o orum obus os ae arum abus as o orum obus o

And in like manner Amb -- o ae o
etc.

Number and en compounded, or ne si and alius apposed to, or compounded with quis,
will change quae both singular and neuter plural to qua:number; en, si, and ne
are scarce compounded with any other Case besides the Nominative and the
Accusative; but alius is compounded with quis in all Cases, and quae or quod
may be apposed thereunto.

Se may be doubled in the Accusative and quis in that and other cases, as in
the Nominative quisquis quicquid, in the Dative Ablativall quoquo quaqua
quoquo, and in the Accusative quicquid.

Isle and hic are compounded together in the Nominative, istic istaec istoc and
istuc, in the Dative Ablativall istoc istac istoc, in the Accusative istunc
istanc istoc or istuc. And ecce with eum and came eos and eas, eccum eccam eccos
eccas. And en with illum illam as ellum ellam. Lastly, quis in the Nominative,
and qui in the Dative ablativall being separate, are of the Common of two.

Of Nounes heterogeneous.
Some Nouns with the number change their Gender, as in the following instances.

Masculines in the Singular, Neuters in the Plural: as avernus averna,
Pangaeus Pangaea, where the Neutrall Adiectives may be put Substantively, or
refer to known Appellatives, the first to flumina, the last to arva, or iuga.

Masculines in the Singular, Masculines and Neuters in the Plural; as iocus,
locus, ioci, or ioca, loci, or loca, both being with old Authors Neuter in the
Singular, but now grown obsolet.

Feminines in the Singular, and Neuters in the Plural; as carbasus carbasa,
the Neuter Singular being now obsolet, and the Masculine Plural: Neuters in
the Singular, Masculines in the Plural, as caelum eaeli, and caeli caelorum,
neither Singular of this, nor Plural of that being in use.

Neuters in the Singular Masculine, and Neuter in the Plural: as fraenum
fraeni, and fraena, rastrum, rastri and rastra, the Masculines Singular being
obsolet.

Neuters in the Singular, Feminines in the Plural: as delicium deliciae.

Neuter in the singular, common of three in the Plural; as plus, pluris,
plures and plura. In all which Examples it would be an easier way to account
such Nounes defective in the number, which they want, whereby all the
Heterogeneous vanish, as needless encumbrances to young Students. And upon the
same account may be justly banished the combination of Nounes defective: as of
Jupiter with Jovis, supellex with supellectilis, and such others, which ought
not to pass so, else by the same Law all Compounds of such defective Simples
should retain like Obliques: but Marspiter will not make Mars Jovis; neither
does Dijovis come from diespiter, but diespitris.

Of Nounes defective in Declension.
All Aptotes spoken of in the Genders are defective.

Of Nounes defective in the singular Number.
All the Cardinal Nounes of number, ( unus excepted) are defective in the
Singular: as duo tres quatuo^, ducenti, millia; Distributives, as singuli
gemini, bini, trini, or t^rni: but such are used of Poets in the singular,
terno consurgunt ordine remi, yet in a different sense.

Nounes implying a Dignity do commonly want the Singular, whether proper Names
of Towns, Gabij, Th^bae, Pergama: of Feasts, Floralio: of Games Apollinares,
Pythia: of Books, Biblia; or Appellatives, superi, lares, Penates, Caelites,
proceres, primores, magnates, sori, fasces, natales, maiores aedes nuptiae
munia: or betokening terror, as manes parcae lemures, inseriae: or plenty,
divitiae opes blanditiae, sales, and facetiae, in the same sense, or at least
variety idus, calendae, sorts, dirae, lactes, bellaria.

Of Nounes defective in the Plural.
All proper Names (unless they are Plural only, as in the former rule) or
taken Appellatively, ^ot for the persons, but for their conditions instanced in
the variation of Substantives, are only singular: as Jda Tagus Lelaps. Some of
these admit of both numbers, but in a double sense: as Pergamus, a Town in
Asia, and Pergama, the Trojan-turrets, or in a double notion, as Argos an
aptote, and Argi variable.

Appellatives also want the Plural, being abstracts, as gloria lux, and in
particular such as betoken Virtues or Vices, whether moral, as fama pudor
indoles culpa labes: or natural, as salus contagio podagra fames sitis vita
mors lethum: specially such as end like desidia, sapientia ignavia materia
pietas fortitudo, Or Names of peculiar Ages, as pubes senium: Or Names of any
Office of Persons, or property of place or time, tribunatus tablinum iustitium:
or Names of Plants or Fruits, bacchar triticum siligo: or of Liquids and
things measurable, pix lac oleum butyrum saccarum: or of Metals, aurum argentum
ferum, aes for era the aptote Plural and such others, betoken things
materiat, not the bare matter. Or Nounes collective or Distributive, having in
the singular a force of Plurals, as vulgus, plebs, proles alter nemo.

Lastly Names of things individual, as mundus phaenix, sol ignis, for soles,
and ignes signify days, or heates; so vesper oriens ver, hyems meridies unus:
we read unis vivunt legibus for ijsdem, but oftener proceres uni, for soli.

Of Defectives in Cases.
Monoptotes being only rects, Jupiter, supellex, for supellectilis is a
regular Adiective, exspes, macte singular, and macti plural, being only
Genitives, as nauci dicis cuiusmodi, which may be an Aptote Adiective,
impraesentiarum which may be an Adverb, being only Datives Acquisitive,
ostentui, dispicatui, divisui inductui, or Ablativals ambage impete injussu,
natu, and diu noctu astis imprimis ingrat^is, which may be Adverbes, being
only Accusatives, eccos ellas inficias, inferias.

Diptotes being Nominatives and Accusatives, dica dicam, and all Aptotes,
excepting such as end in u. likewise suppetiae suppetias with parisyllabicall
Plurals of the third Declension; as grates, and many Plurals of the fifth, and
hyemes for colds ^r storms: and rura fora ora man^, taken indefinitely, not
particularly. Being Rects and Ablatives, fors forte; being Gen^tives and
Ablativalls, spontis sponte, verberis verbere, iugeris iugere, repetundarum
repetundis: Being Accusatives and Ablatives, as dictum dictu, and all Supinalls.

Triptotes wanting Rects, Jovis, sui (the Primitive) and dapis, frugis,
ditionis, precis, vicis, opis, sordis, primoris: or wanting the Genitive, as
nemo quisquis istic faeces vices; or wanting the Dative, as plus tantundem.

Of Defectives in Gender and Person.
Pauper dives iuvenis, and such other want Neuters, caetera caeterum does want
a Masculine, satius is neuter only, Ego nos tu vos have each but one Person.

Of Nounes redundant in Gender.
All Nounes Epicoene by synthesis, or, of the doubtful, or, of the common of
two, or of the common of three; as elephantus bubo parens faelix, be redundant
in Gender, because they do by signification belong to many, though by
construction they refer certainly unto one Gender, whereof already.

Of Redundants both in Genders and Declensions.
Some Adiectives do abound, as in Declension, so in Gender, being of two or
three diverse endings; as inermis, or inermus: so bijugis, enervis, magnanimis,
effraenis; and with some Authors, insomnis proclivis, illimis, enormis,
imberbis, insormis, hilaris, end also in us. And with some Authors procerus,
and benignus, end also in is.

And moveable Substantives will abound as in Gender so in Declension, sponsa
sponsus, admonitum, admonitio admonitus, cassida cassis, baptismus baptisma,
alluvium, alluvio alluvies, abacus abax, gryphus gryps, pavus pavo, hebdomada
hebdomas, mulctra mulctrale, involoc^um involucre, occipitium occiput,
praesepium praesepe, tonurum tonurus, delphinus delphis, or delphin, with many
more.

Other Substantives abound in Gender but not in their Declension; as baculus
baculum, tapes tapete, and such other. And other Nounes are redundant, either
in case alone, or in Declensions only notified in their proper places.

Lastly, besides these Anomalies of Nounes in the direct motions by cases, and
in the indirect motions by Genders, there is another transverse motion of
Adiectives made by comparisons which is anomalous and irregular, spoken of
already in the various Figures of Nounes.

Of Verbes and their forms or kinds.
Verbs like Nouns are of two kinds, being either Substantive betokening to be,
or Adjective signifying to do, or suffer.

The kinds of Verbes Substantive.
Verbs Substantive may be distinguished as they signify either. 1. Truth of
being, as sum fio existo evado maneo nascor orior efficior tueor constituor
vivo, or 2 the hope of being as rogor poscor exoror designor: or 3, the opinion
of being, as audio, for vocor credor dicor habeor existimor videor: or 4 the
experience of being, as arguor cognoscor inscribor.

The kinds of Verbes Adjective.
Verbs Adjectivall have four kinds, being either Neuter, Active, Passive, or
Deponent; the two first ending in o, and the two last in or.

Of Verbes Neuter.
The Verb Neuter betokneing either to do, or suffer is intransitive or
absolute, having a signification in it self complete, either Actively in Verbs
of gesture, as discumbo surgo sto venio discedo mingo, nubo with their
Meditatives, micturio nupturio; or Passively in Verbs inceptives and their
Primitives, as caleseo and caleo, and in many others, as aegroto vapulo veneo
liceo fio with its Compounds.

Of Verbes Active.
A Verb Active having of it self an imperfect signification, is always
transitive to a sufferer, either person or thing; as pater amat filium and ejus
indolem, and some are transitive only to the thing of the same signification
with themselves, ^s gaudium gaudet, alienum arat sundum, bibit vinum, canit
hymnum.

Of Verbes Passive.
The Verb Passive has also an imperfect sense without recourse unto the Doer:
for correlatives reflect upon, and withal interpret each another: as amatur a
patre filius, eadem contilena canitur.

Of Verbes Deponent.
A Verb Deponent laying aside the transverse motion from or, to o, does in the
passive termination retain the three former significations, in that respect
called also a Verb common: as rarius osculor, used absolutely for a Verb of
gesture, osculor te, used transitively, referring to a sufferer, osculor a te,
used passively reflecting upon the doer.

Few Verbs will equally share in all three senses, but any Deponent will admit,
as in the Participle of the second Future, a passive sense and structure, so in
all other Moods and Tenses an active signification and construction: as pauca
tibi sunt loquenda, or pauca loquere.

The variation of the forms or kinds of Verbes.
A Verb Substantive and an Adjective construed together, will both be changed
into an Adjectiveall Verb; and contrariwise, as art oration excolitur and
splendescit, or exculta est and splendida.

A Verb Neuter of gesture may be made a Passive in the third person singular
only, and contrariwise, as audita virorum clade flebant saeminae, or fleba^ur
a saeminis; but such Ablatives of the Doers are seldom expressed, and the
precedent Ablative of the thing or cause, called the absolute, will be
resolved to a Nominative: as virorum clades quum a faeminis audiretur, flebatur.

The Verb Active may be turned to a Passive, by making the Accusative of the
sufferer a Nominative, and the Nominative of the Doer an Ablative of the person
or of the thing, with ab the prepositionall Adverbe serving thereunto, or to a
Dative of the person put acquisitively, specially with Poets, as virtutem nos
colimus, tu samam petas, or Ab nobis colitur virtus, tibi fama petatur, so Tu
canas hymnum, nos fundum arabimus, or hymnus a te canatur Ab nobis arabitur
sundus.

Verbes Deponent are invariable to any other kind, both as defective in
Figure, and as participating in the sense or form of the other three.

Of the Figure of Verbes.
By the figure Verbes are either primitive, being originals, as do curro caveo;
and such like Active or Neuter verbs in o. or else they are derivative, as
descending from a primitive: whether simply from one, as cursito, or
compoundedly from two or more, as reddo.

Of Verbes simple.
Verbs simple a^^ of three sorts, denominative, verbal or adverbiall.

Of Verbes denominative, and their variations.
Verbes denominative are either Apparatives; as aquor frumentor l^gnor,
pabulo^, resolved by suppedito aquam, etc. Or Imiatives, as adolescenturio
cucurio, ligurio, prurio, scaturio, Syllaturio, patrisso, aegresco, calvesco,
canesco, puerasco, vilesco, silvescit, vesperascit, graecor, irascor, ruslicor,
vulpinor; resolved by adoles^entem ref^ro, etc.

Of the Verbal derivatives.
Verbal derivatives are of five sorts. 1. Frequentatives, 2. Diminutives, 3.
Desideratives, 3. Inchoatives; and 5. all Verbes in or, derived either from
known Verbes in o, being Active, as doceor, from doceo, or Neuter, as curritur,
from curro; or from supposed Verbes in o. and such are all Deponents, as
fateor, from supposed fateo.

Of Frequentatives and their variations.
Frequentatives or iteratives be all of the first Conjugation, and for the most
part derived of the Supine by changing um to o. as tracto tonso nexo, commentor
sector syncopated, grassor amplexor. And in the first Conjugation by changing
atum unto ito, if the Supine be a Polysyllable, as of clamatum clamito, else if
it be a disyllable, it keeps a. as nato. Some frequentatives join both the
precedent forms together, as of dictum dicto, and from dictatum dictito, so
from pulso pulsito, and pulto syncopated. And some verbs of the third
Congugation in the second person singular cast away s. taking to in the place
of it, as agito stuito fugito, quaerito, the last syllable save one being short
in all simple frequentatives, being polysillables, and all be derived from
Verbs Active or Deponent, being of the first or third Conjugation, and may be
resolved by the Adverb saepe or the verb soleo, as saepe quaero, or quaerere
soleo, etc.

Of Diminitives and their variations.
Diminutives being of the first Conjugation, have the Terminations following
albico can^illo sorbillo pullulo pitisso dormito, they are derived from Verbs
of all four Coniugations, and may be resolved by aliquantulum put unto the
Primitive, or by sub and such other compounded with it, as aliquantulum albeo
or subalbico.

Of Desideratives and their variations.
Desideratives or meditatives take both formation and signification, from the
first future ending in rus as cenaturio pransurio esurio iturio; and they are
derived usually from Verbs Neuter of any Conjugation, and will continue
Neuters, and may be resolved, ca^nare cupio. And suitable thereto in sense are,
viso accerso arcesso incesso lacesso facesso capesso, etc. for vid^re accire
appeto.

Of Inchoatives and their variations.
Inchoatives or Augmentatives are of the third Conjugation, and derived from
Verbs neuter of all four Coniugations, by adding co to the second person
singular, as labasco hisco for hiasco claresco putesco from obsolet puteo
miseresco, tremisco reminiscor fruiscor and fruniscor o^dormiscor resolved by
incipio laba^e, or pergo clarere.

Of Adverbiall Derivatives.
Verbs derived from Adverbs be all of the first Conjugation, as intro satio
supero, and are reducible only to their Primitives, or otherwise variable by
some synonymes.

Of Verbs compounded.
Verbs of more then one original are compounded of Verbs with Nounes, as
belligero multiplico, of Verbs with Verbs, as calefacio calefio, and actito may
come of actum ito, of Verbs with Adverbs, either absolute, as benefacio
satisfacio, or prepositionalls either inseparable, as confe^o diduco discedo
removeo s^cerno, or seperable either one, as defetiscor, or two as indefessus,
or of obsolet Verbs with such whether Latin, as renideo conniveo adipiscor
aspicio deleo elicio expedio extinguo off^ndo, or Greek as excello expleo induo
experior.

Of alterations in words by composition.
A syllable is sometimes inserted in the compound, as in concipilo reciproco
recupero, Sometimes a letter only as in comburo redimo, both for Euphonie.
Sometimes the simples are impaired, either both as aucupor cogo malo, or the
Verb is only entire, as, possum credo trano ampu^o aufero assero, or only
maimed, as prebeo dego pergo. And in some Compounds both are entire, as
manumitto satisdo. Some Verbs in composition change a. to u. as consulo insulto
exculpo inculco. Some change o. to u. as occulo, some cast away a. as excludo
percutio diluo, some change a. to e. as gradior making egredior, so patior
fatiscor damno lacto sacro follo arceo tracto partio scando patro candeo carpo
spargo pario, so compesco dispesc^ those two from pasco, some Verbs change the
first vowel into i. through all Moods and Tenses as caedo making p^aecido
praeci^i, so laedo egeo quaero tene^, cado cano salio except in consulo, so
patior rapio sapio statuo tango taceo and placeo, except in complaceo and
perplaceo, so habeo except in posthabeo, so maneo compounded with e. in pre and
pro, so pango saving in composition with circum de ob and re. Other Verbs
change the first vowell into i. in all Tenses, except the preter tense, and
such other as be derived thence, as fateor making confiteor, but confessus, so
capio frango iaeio premo and emo, except coemo, so rego except pergo surga, so
ago, except perago satago dego cogo, so facio compounded with prepositionall
Adverbs, so lego compounded with e de con inter di and nec, which three last
make intellexi dilexi neglexi, but all other like the simple. Lastly by
composi^ion, some change the figure only, as, verto revertor, some only the
Conjugation, as do das, making addo addis, some both, as sperno making
aspernor, some change the conjugation and form, as candeo making accendo, some
the form and figure, as sacro making execror, some all three together, as
frango making suffragor.

Of the proper affections of Verbs.
The proper affections of Verbs are four, Moods, Tenses, Persons and
Coniugations.

Of Moods.
Moods are distinct ways of using verbs in the same sense and structure being
seven. The Indicative, Imperative, Subiunctive, Participle, Infi^itive, Gerund
and Supine.

Of the Indicative.
Verbs of the Indicative, whence all other Moods are formed, either ask a
Question or give a reason of doing or suffering, as Quo vadis? Oxoniam peto.

Of the Imparative.
Verbs Imperative either 1 Command by authority, or 2 Advise as a duty, or 3
Grant to importunity, or 4 Crave as curtesse. 1. Paeni Sicilia excedunto. 2.
Fraus omnis abesto. 3 Re^tuas tibi habe. 4. Dil caeptis aspirate.

Of the Subjunctive.
A verb Subiunctive does commonly interpret another principal verb, being
always the Indicative or Imperative, and therefore has a precedent
Coniunctive adverb causall or conditional put thereto, or employed therewith,
being familiarly resolved to the Infinitive, as, Jubeo valeas, or ut valeas, or
te valere, so cave facias, or ne facias, or cave facere.

Otherwise the Subiunctive by Enallage stands for the Imperative, called
either permissive and potentia^l resolvible to the Infinitive with possum volo
debeo, or with the Impersonalls, licet libet oportet, as vitiis aeque omnibus
abhorreas, or te vitiis aeque omnibus abhorrere oportet. Or else an Optative
being then joined with an Adverb of wishing and resolvible to the Infinitive
with quaeso, precor, opto, as utinam dictis Al^ane maneres, or te dictis manner
opto.

Of the Participle.
The Participle an amphibious kind partaketh with Nouns in Declension, by Case
and Gender, and with Verbs in Conjugation, by tense, signification, and
construction; and with both in number and person. Wherefore the two futures,
retaining constantly both tense and structure, are constant Moods of verbs, as
Mulier Graios visura Penates: or Cui Graiorum Penates visendi The present and
preterperfect tense then only are Moods, when they keep express mention of
time, and the same structure, as vinum amans, or qui amat, segnitiem exosus, or
qui odit polenta pransus, or qui pransit. Else words of either tenses become
Nounes, desisting to be Moods of verbs by deposing the tense and structure, as
Vini amans, or amator, which always happens when such words admit a
different Figure from the verbs whence they ate derived, either by composition,
as, impatiens operis, indoctus lyrae, or a Comparative intension, as, quanto
reverentior ille deorum, tanto sit reliquis ornatior, unus habetur prae
reliquis long cultissimus.

Of the Infinitive.
Verbs of the Infinitive Mood are construed regularly with adiectivall nouns or
verbs, as miles audax est, or audet occidere et occidi. But irregularly and
figuratively by Enallage, they sometimes stand for a Nominative Aptote, as,
humanum est irasci, sometimes for a Genitive of the Gerund, as, m^tere tempus
erat, for metendi, sometime for the Indicative, as, Tum pius Aeneas as humeris
abscindere vestem for abscindebat, or Elliptically another verb may be
understood therewith, as abscendere caepit.

Of Gerunds.
Gerunds being the second future put Substantively are used in the singular
number only, to express the administration of affairs. And being Genitives are
accordingly construed with a former Substantive either expressed, as, vivendi
ratio, or understood with adiectivall nouns or verbs, as, Id fecit assentandi,
potius quam quod gratum haberet, supply causa, which construction is sometimes
found of Gerundivalls, as, Instituitur imperium reipublicae augendae, supply
gratia. And the Genitives of Gerund, are sometimes used for the Gerundivalls by
Enallage, as licentia diripiendi pomorum, for diripiendorum pomorum, sometimes
also by Enallage the Infinitive does come in place thereof, as, Non datur ad
Musas currere lata via for currendi.

In the Dative acquisitive Gerunds are construed either with verbs, as, operam
navat exorando nec flendo modum facit, or flendi, where the latter of two
Substantives is changed to a Dative; or with Adiectives, as, tundendo inhabile
ferrum, scribendo papyrus inutilis, and the Adiectives are sometimes
understood, as, Non sunt aes alienum solvendo, supply pares, idonei, and such
like.

In the Dative Ablativall Gerunds are construed with prepositionall Adverbs,
expressed or understood, as, in judicando criminosa celeritas, cantando
rumpitur anguis.

In the Accusative Gerunds are construed with Prepositions constantly
expressed, as, locus ad agendum amplissimus.

The Nominative is commonly a gerundival, keeping the construction of the
passive voice, as, vobis bibendum aut abeundum, where the Acquisitive is
commonly understood, But by a Grec^siue seldom used in the latin, it will
admit Cases of the verb, as, armorum si nobis carendum, pugnent alii, amicos
tibi demerendum, resolved by oportet, aut opus est amicos te demereri, or ut
demerearis.

Of Supines.
The Supine so called, as regardlesse of affections, belonging thereunto, is
construed with verbs of motion, notifying the term or end thereof, as, tui
misertum venio, Graiis servitum matribus ibant, scitatum oracula missi, coctum,
non vapulatum conducti sunt, ire with the first, and iri with the last being
understood, nolo Uxorem filio datum, aut has litteras sibi renunciatum iri, de
injuriis questum itur, Legantur socios rogatum, resolved, rogaturi, rogare, or
ut rogarent socios.

The Dative Ablativall of the Supine may be construed with verbs of motion like
other Substantives, but is no Mood of a verb, for it admits no casual word
thereof, as, redit venatione, or venatu ferarum, not feras. And moreover will
be construed with Adiectives, which construction the Supine will not admit as
facile mirum arduum fas opus, turpe factu, or fieri, not factum or facere or
factum ire.

Lastly but few Deponents will form this Ablati^all as, dignum imitatu.

Differences of the seven Moods.
The Indicative and Subjunctive are definite in time, person, and number, and
likewise the Imperative in all three, but notwithstanding it is defective in
time present or past, nor liable to command or counsel, and also in the first
person, for all men do allow themselves full liberty. The Participle is
indefinite only in person.

The Infinitive in Person and Number. Gerunds and Supines, are indefinite in
all three making no express mention of time, person or number, though Gerunds
do participate with second futures, and both Gerunds and Supines are singular.
Lastly, either of both admit a signification promiscuously Active or Passive,
being resolvible to either voice, but the Supine more commonly to the Active,
and Gerunds to the Passive, whence they are derived.

Of the variation of Moods.
The future of the Indicative is used for a most binding Imperative, as non
occides for ne occidito, but specially the Participle of the second future, as,
vincendum tibi aut moriendum, for aut omnino vince aut porsus morere, or in
Hebraisme moriendo morieris.

Participles of the present, or the Gerunds notifying the efficient cause, are
resolved to the Indicative with dum cum quia si postquam, as defetiscor
ambulans, ambulando, inter ambulandum, or dum ambulo, but the Participles of
the present or pretertense put in the Dative ablativall, called the absolute,
are resolved to the Subjunctive, as Imperante Augusto, or cum imperaret, boste
superato, or sisuperetur And so are Gerunds notefying a final cause, conductus
ad accusandum, vel ob absolvendum, or ut accuses aut absolvas. And all Gerunds
are familiarly changed to Gerundivalls, differing only each from other, in that
Gerunds notify rather the office then the time, and Gerundivalls notify the
time rather then the office, as, nos Gramaticam docendi, vos illius ediscendae
cura tenet.

The Infinitive will be changed to the subjunctive with ut after verbs of
command advise entreaty or suffrance, profit, etc. as iubeo moneo rogo sino
decet licet oportet refert expedit, etc. as volo te abire, or ut abeas: And to
the Indicative with quod after verbs of common or particular sense, or of
passions arising thence, as, intelligo dubito reor audio video spero metuo
gaudeo mereo iuvat dolet arridet allubescit displice^, etc. as constat te
valere, or quod vales, which variation is necessary to be known for finding the
structure of the Accusative between two verbs, whether it follows the Verb
Personal or comes before the Infinitive. Other variations are instanced
formerly in the several Moods.

Of Tenses.
Tenses directing when things do or suffer are five.

The 1. present notifying the time now with the signs do or am.

2. The Preterimperfect tence, the time searse past with signs did or was.

3. The Preterperfect tence the time lately past with signs have or have been.

4. The Preterpluperfect tence the time long since past with signs had or had
been.

5. The future a time to come with signs shall and will, or shall and will be,
or with the sign hereafter, and it is called the promising tense.

Of forming Tenses.
What Cases are in Nounes, the same are Tenses in Verbs all descending from the
second person singular of the present in the Indicative, as the obliques from
the Genitive singular, partly by changing in the Preterperfect tenses, and
Supines of some Verbs in the three last Coniugations, the Characteristicall
letter, which is the next before as es and is, and partly by adding to the
Characteristicall in other Tenses, as in the examples following.

The Preterimperfect tense of the Indicative and Subiunctive changes as es and
is, in the three first Coniugations of Verbs in o; and aris eris of Verbs in or
to ^bam ebam arem erem, and abar ebar, arer erer, and is or iris of the fourth
Conjugation to iebam iebar, and irem irer, as of amas amabam amabar, amarem
amarer, of doces docebam docebar, docerem docerer, of legls legebam l^gebar,
legerem legerer, of aud^s audiebam audiebar audirem audirer.

The future of the Indicative changes as and es to abo and ebo, and aris eris,
to abor and ebor, but is of the third to am ar, and of the fourth to iam iar,
as of amas amabo amabor, of doces docebo docebor, of l^gis legam legar, of
audis audiam audiar. Aed in the Imperative the future changes as to a, or ato,
and aris to are or ator: es to e, or et^, and eris to ere or etor is of the
third to e or ito, and eris to ere or itor; and is of the fourth to i or ito,
and ir^s to ire or itor, as of amas ama amato, and ama^e amator, of doces doce
doceto and docere, docetor, of legislege legito, and legere legitor, of audis
audi audito, and audire auditor.

The present of the Subiunctive changes as of Verbs in o, and aris, of Verbs
in or to em and er, as of amas amem amer, es, to eam and ea^ as of doces doceam
docear; is of the third to am and ar, as of legis legam legar, but is of the
fourth to iam and iar as of audis audiam audiar. And in the Infinitive changes
as to are, and aris to ari, as amare amari, and es to ere and eris to eri, as
docere doceri, and is of the third to ere and eris to i as legere legi and is
of the fourth to ^re, and iris to iri, as audire audiri. And in the Participle
changes as to ans, es to ens, and is of the third to ens but is of the fourth
to iens, as of ama amans, of doces docens, of legis legens, of audis audiens.
And from the Participle of the present is formed the Participle of the second
future by changing s to dus, as of amans amandus, of docens docendus, of legens
legendus, of audiens audiendus.

The Preterperfect tense in the Indicative of Verbs in o for the most part
changes as to avi, and that to atum, as of amas amavi amatum, es to ui and
that to itum, as of mones monui monitum, is of the fourth to ivi and that to
itum, as of audis audivi auditum, but is of the third to i. and that to tum or
sum or xum, as of emis emi emptum, of visis visi visum, of figis fixi fixum.

Where may be noted that the Supine in the first Conjugation does end only in
tum, in the second and fourth may end in tum or sum, and in the third may end
in tum or sum or xum. And from the Supine are formed the Participles of the
Preter tence, and of the first Future, that by changing m. to s. as from emptum
is made emptus, this by changing m to rus, as from emptum empturus. And all
Participles may be known by their Terminations both in Latin and in English,
the present in Latin ending always in ans or ens, as amans monens, and in
English ending in ing, as loving, warning, the second future in Latin ending
always in dus, and englished like the Infinitive of the Passive voice, amandus
like amari to be loved, the preter tense in Latin ending in tus sus or xus,
and in English in t. or u. or d. emptus, visus, fixus, bought, seen, fixed; the
first future in Latin ending in rus, and Englished like the Infinitive of the
Active voice, as empturus like emere to buy: furthermore the present is
declined like Adjectives of one Termination, and the other three like
Adjectives of three diverse endings, as amans amantis, but amandus amanda
amandum, so amatus and amaturus.

Lastly from the Preterperfect tense of the Indicative is formed the
Preterpluperfect of the same Mood, and the Preterperfect and Future, of the
Subjunctive by changing i to eram erim ero, and the Preterpluperfect of the
Subiunctive and Infinitive by adding thereto ssem and sse, as of legi comes
legeram legerim legero and legissem legisse.

Of Tenses proper to every Mood.
Verbs that end in o. have in the Indicative and Subiunctive all five tenses,
and verbs in or have in the Indicative the present, the imperfect and the
future, but in the Subiunctive the present and imperfect only.

The Imperative of Verbs in o and or has the future only.

Verbs Active have two Participles, the present and first future, and Passives
have the other too, the Preter tense and second future. Deponents, and many
Neuters have all four Participles, but the Pretertense of neither will admit
of a Passive signification or construction, which are in both accustomed to the
second Future, as, stadium equis currendum, haud viris ingrediendum:
Par^iciples of the present first future and Preter tense in both voices will
retain the construction usual to other Moods, but the Preter tense of Neuters
in o. are ordinarily made Nounes participiall, and of the Neuters passives do
keep always the Passive sense and structure, as, Pugnatum est ab Hostibus:
Gerunds and Supines have no express mention of Tenses, and in other moods the
Tenses lacking are supplied by circumlocution.

Verbs in or by the Participle of the Pretertense, with sum or fui, supply the
Preter tense; and with eram or fueram, the Preterpluperfect tense; and in the
Subiunctive, with sim or fuerim supply the Preter tense, with essem or fuissem,
the Preterpluperfect with ero and fuero the Future. And in the Infinitive with
esse or fuisse supply the Pretertense with the Supine, and iri, or second
future, and esse supply the Future tense*

Verbs in o, and Deponents in or, in the Infinitive Mood, by the Supine, with
ire and first Future with esse, or rather with fore supply the Future, and when
the first Future of the Participle is defective, fore will stead the same, as,
Quos terres, hos oportet fore ut timeas, for te timiturum. The instances of
these former rules will follow in the Examples of the several Coniugations.

The proper affections of some Tenses.
Verbs in o. of the first and fourth Conjugation in the second person singular,
and the second and third plural of the Preter tense, in the Indicative, and in
all persons of both numbers in all other tenses derived thence may be
Syncopated, as, amasti amastis amarunt amaram amarim amaro amassem amasse, so
audisti audistis audierunt audieram, etc. ^nterii, and perii are Syncopated in
all persons saving the first plural and in Imitation thereof, some Verbs of
the thir'd Conjugation, as, petii, etc. And other Verbs are Syncopated mostly
of i Poets in the second person singular, as extinxti dixti for dixisti. Edim
duim ausim axim faxim for ederim dederim auserim egerim fecerim, likewise
surpucram for surripueram, submossem for submovissem, produxe for produxisse,
divisse for divisisse. And the future of the Subiunctive is changed with old
Authors, amavero to amasso, prohibuero to prohibesso, petivero to petesso, with
such like in the three first Coniugations* and in the Infinitive for
levaturumesse levassere, etc.

Verbs in or whether Passive or Deponent in the Infinitive of the present tense
will Paragogically take er thereto, as, monstrarier optat, caepit dilabier
orbis.

Participles of the second future in the third and fourth Conjugation admit
Antithesis, as faciundus experiundus for faciendus experiendus. Others of the
first future are often irregular, as, sonaturus for soniturus, nasciturus for
naturus, pariturus for parturus. And others of the preter tense like the Supine
are Syncopated, as, pinsitus and pistus, potatus and potus.

The variation of Tenses.
The Preterpluperfect tense of the Indicative is used often for the future, as,
perieras nisi fugisses, for periturus eras. And the preter tense for the future
of the Subiunctive, called with some an exact tense, as, molam si le redemerim
for redemero. Lastly the Present and Imperfect tense thereof pass for a future
called the simple, nil refert si post cladem sapias or saperes, for sapies.

Of the Number and Persons of VERBS.
The Numbers equally belonging to Nounes and Verbs being two, the singular and
plural, are spoken of already as also the three Persons, which being more
genuine to Verbs, as Gender to Nouns, must like the Genders be understood
Physically, and strictly where the nature of things afford it, that is when
rational creatures are spoken of, and otherwise may be taken at large
Grammatically, being three in both Numbers, whereof before.

In the language taught of God, the third Person being the radical has
precedence, and the first as does become Civility, speaking of it self, is
last in place.

The future used in that tongue for the Imperative begins with the first
Person, implying that who make Laws, should first take them; but as Jews and
Gentiles are used ordinarily in opposition, so is their form of speaking, all
Nations constantly beginning with the first Person in both Numbers of all Moods
and Tenses, leaving the next place flatterers like to the second person spoken
to, quite neglecting the third Person spoken of, as abject.

Of the CONJVGATIONS.
As Tenses answer unto Cases, so do Coniugations of Verbs to Declensions of
Nouns, being four distinct ways w^ereby a^ regular Verbs end uniformly in the
same Voice, Mood, Tense, Number and Person.

The Conjugation of every Verb is known by the termination of the second Person
singular in the present tense of the Indicative mood, where all Verbs ending in
as, or having a. in aris long, are of the first Coniugacion. And such as end in
es, or have e. in eris long, are of the second. And such as end in is short, or
have o. in eris short b^ of the third: And such as end in is long, or have the
first i. in iris long be of the fourth.

Annotations.
It may be noted that all Verbs of the second Conjugation do end in eo and eor,
but beo calceo enucleo meo laqueo creo screo nauseo be of the first
Conjugation; and eo queo veneo, be of the fourth.

Likewise all Verbs of the fourth Conjugation except those three last mentioned
do end in io, which ending few of the first Conjugation have, as faucio repudio
hio concilio satio, but many of the third end in cio dio gio pio rio tio, as
facio fodio fugio capio pario percutio.

Some Verbs admit of two Coniugations, being either commonly of the first and
seldom of the third, as, lavo lavas lavavi lavatum, and lavis lavi lavitum, or
by Syncope lautum and by Antithesis lotum, sonosonas and sonis sonui sonitum,
so tono tonas and tonis tonui tonitum; Or commonly of the second, seldom of the
third, as strideo strides, and strido stridis stridi, fulgeo fulges, and fulgo
fulgis fulfi, but tergeo terges, and tergo tergis tersi, are both common,
ferveo ferves, and fervo fervis fervi, sorbeo sorbes sorbui sorbitum, and sorbo
sorbis sorpsi sorptum, tueor tueris tuitus, and tuor tueris tutus, oleo oles
olui oletum to grow, and olo olis olui olitum to smell. Or commonly of the
second, seldom of the fourth, as, cieo cies cievi citum, and cio cis civi
citum, the last being most usual in composition, as the first being simple. Or
commonly of the third and seldom of the fourth, as, fodio fodis fodi fodere,
and fodire fossum, orior oreris, and oriris ortus, and such other.

Many Verbs being the same in Theme do differ as in signification, so either in
Conjugation only, as, aggero appello compello colligo consterno deligo effero
fundo mando obsero volo. Or likewise in quantity, as dico lego with their
compounds, being all both first and last of the first and third Conjugation.

Sum with his Compounds are wholly irregular among Verbs, as, Ego tu sui among
the Pronouns. But fui conjugated with sum has ^ll tenses regular which are
derived thence. And both sum and fui do require in order to be first declined
by themselves, as helps expedient to form in the Infinitive the future tense
of all other Verbs ending both in o. and or. And in the Indicative the preter
tense of Verbs only that end in or, and of all other tenses that are derived
thence, which being otherwise Defective are to be supplied by sum and fui,
joined with the Participles of such Verbs, whereof before.

Examples of Verbs to be declined.
Sum es fui esse ens futurus to be.

So, Absum abes abfui abesse absens abfuturus.

The Indicative Mood and present tense Singular.
Sum I am, es thou art, est he is.

Pluraliter.
Sumus we are, estis ye are, sunt they are*

The Preterimperfect tense Singular.
Eram I was, eras thou wast, erat he was.

Pluraliter.
Eramus we were, eratis, ye were, erant they were.

The Preterperfect Tense singular.
Fui I have been, fuisti thou have been, fuit he has been,

Pluraliter.
Fuimus we have been fuistis ye have been, fuerunt vel fuere they have been.

The Preterpluperfect Tense singular.
Fueram I had been, fueras thou had been, fuerat he had been;

Pluraliter
Fueramus we had been, fueratis ye had been, fuerant they had been.

The Future Tense singular.
Ero I shall or will be, eris thou shall or wilt be, erit he shall or will be,

Pluraliter
Erimus we shall or will be, eritis ye shall or will be, erunt they shall or
will be.

The Imperative and Future singular.
Es, or esto, be thou hereafter, esto be he, or let him be hereafter.

Pluraliter,
Este, o^ estote, be ye hereafter, sunto be they, or let them be hereafter.

The Subjunctive and Present Tense singular.
Sim, I may would or should be, sis, thou may would or should be sit, he
may would or should be,

Pluraliter.
Simus, we may would or should be, sitis, ye may would or should be, sint,
they may would or should be.

The Preterimperfect Tense singular.
Essem, or forem, I might would or should be, esses, or fores, thou might
would or should be, esset, or foret, he might would or should be,

Plura^iter
Essemus, or foremus, we might would or should be, essetis, or foretis, ye
might would or should be, essent, or forent, they might would or should be.

The Preterperfect Tense singular.
Fuerim, I might would or should have been, fueris, thou might would or
should have been, fuerit, he might would or should have been.

Pluraliter
Fuerimus, we might would or should have been, fueritis, ye might would or
should have been, fuerint, they might would or should have been.

The Preterpluperfect Tense singular,
Fuissem, I might would or should had been, fuisses, thou might would or
should had been, fuisset, he might would or should had been,

Pluraliter
Fuissemus we might would or should had been, fuissetis ye might would or
should had been, fuissent they might would or should had been,

The Future Tense singular.
Fuero I may would or should be hereafter, fueris thou may would or
should be hereafter, fuerit he may would or should be hereafter,

Pluraliter
Fuerimus we might would or should be hereafter, fuerit^s ye might would or
should be hereafter, fuerint they might would or should be hereafter.

The Participle Mood.
The present tense ens being, or essens obsolet, whence does come essentia, the
being.

The Future Tense, futurus about to be.

The Infinitive Mood.
The present, esse to be.

The preter tense, fuisse to have been.

The future fore, or futurum esse to be hereafter.

Annotations.
As Sum has been declined, so may be formed Possum, compounded of potis and
sum, and poteram, of potis eram, potui of potis fui, potueram of potis fueram,
potero of potis ero, possim of potis sim, possem, of potis essem, potuerim of
potis fuerim, potuissem of potis fuissem, potuero of potis fuero, posse of
potis esse, potuisse of potis fuisse. So Prosum proderam profui profueram
prodero, with the rest compounded thence.

Examples whereby may be declined Verbes active and passive.
Am- o as avi. atum aturus ans or aris atus andus Mon- eo es ui. itum iturus
ens eor eris itus endus Leg- o is i tum turus ens or eris tus endus And- io is
ivi itum iturus iens ior iris itus iendus

Examples of Verbes Neuter and Deponent.
Pugn -- o as avi atum atutus ans andus Rix -- or aris atum atus aturus ans
andus

Examples of Verbs both in o. and or. declined throughout all Moods and Tenses.

The Indicative Mood and Present Tense.
Singulariter. Pluraliter Laud -- o as at amus atis an^ or aris vel are atur
amur amini antur Cens- eo es et emus etis ent eor eris vel ere etur emur emini
entur Fig- o is it imus itis unt or eris vel ere itur imur imini untur Pol --
io is it imus itis iunt ior iris vel ire itur imur imini iuntur

The Preterimperfect Tense singular.
Laud- abam abas abat abar abaris vel abare abatur Plur. abamus abatis abant
abamur abamini abantur Cens -- ebam ebas ebat ebar ebaris vel ebare ebatur
Plur. ebamus ebatis ebant ebamur ebamini ebantur Fig -- ebam ebas ebar ebar
ebaris vel ebare ebatur Plur. ebamus ebatis ebant ebamur ebamini ebantur Pol-
iebam iebas iebat iebar iebaris vel iebare iebatur Plur- iebamus iebatis
iebant. iebamur iebamini iebantur.

The Preterperfect tense singular.
Laud- avi avisti avit atus sum vel fui atus ea v. fuisti atus est v. fuit.
Plur- avimus avistis averunt vel avere ati sumus v. fuimus, ati estis v.
fuistis ati sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Cens- ui uisti uit us sum v. fui us es v.
fuisti us est v. fuit. Plur- uimus uistis uerunt vel uere i. sumus v. fuimus,
i. estis v. fuistis i. sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Fi- xi xisti xit xus sum v. fui.
xus es v. fuisti. xus est v. fuit. Plur- ximus xistis xerunt vel xere xi sumus
vel fuimus. xi. estis v. fuistis xi sunt fuerunt vel fuere. Pol- ivi ivisti
ivit itus sum v. fui itus es v. fuisti itus est v. fuit. Plur- ivimus ivistis
iverunt vel ivere iti sumus v. fuimus iti estis v. fuistis iti sunt fuerunt vel
fuere.

The Preterpluperfect tense singular.
Laud- averam averas averat atus eram v. fueram, atus eras v. fueras atus erat
vel fuerat. Plur- averamus averatis averant ati eramus v. fueramus ati eratis
v. fueratis ati erant vel fuerant. Cens- ueram ueras uerat us eram v. fueram us
eras v. fueras us erat vel fuerat. Plur- ueramus ueratis uerant i. eramus v.
fueramus. i. eratis v. fueratis i. erant vel fuerant. Fi- xeram xeras xerat xus
eram v. fueram, xus eras vel fueras xus erat vel fuerat. Plur- xeramus xeratis
xerant xi eramus v. fueramus. xi eratis v. fueratis xi erant v. fuerant. Pol-
iveram iveras iverat itus eram v. fueram, itus eras v. fueras, itus erat vel
fuerat. Plur- iveramus iveratis iverant iti eramus v. fueramus, iti eratis v.
fueratis iti erant vel fuerant.

The Future Tense singular.
Laud- abo abis abit abor aberis vel abere abitur Plur. abimus abitis abunt
abimur abimini abuntur Cens- ebo ebis ebit ebor eberis vel ebere ebitur Plur.
ebimus ebitis ebunt ebimur ebimini ebuntur Fig- am es et ar eris vel ere etur
Plur. emus etis ent emur emini entur Pol. iam ies iet iar ieris vel iere ietur
Plur- iemus ietis ient iemur iemini ientur.

The Imperative Mood and Future Tense.
Sing: Plur. Laud- a vel ato ato ate vel atote. anto are v. ator ator amini v.
aminor, antor. Cens- e vel eto. eto ete vel etote. ento ere v. etor. etor emini
v. eminor. entor Fig- e vel ito. ito ite vel itote. unto ere v.itor. itor imini
v. iminor untor. Sep- i. vel ito ito ite vel itote iunto ire vel itor. itor
imini v. iminor iuntor

The Subjunctive Mood and present Tense.
Sing. Plur. Laud- em es et emus etis ent. er eris v. ere etor emur emini
entur. Cens- eam eas eat eamus eatis eant ear earis v. ear eatur eamur eamini
eantur. Fig- am as at amus atis ant ar aris v. are atur amur amini antur. Pol.
iam ias iat iamus iatis iant iar iaris v. iare iatur iamur iamini iantur.

The Preterimperfect Tense.
Sing. Plur. Laud- arem ares aret aremus aretis arent arer areris v. arere
aretur aremur aremini arentur. Cens -- erem eres eret eremus eretis erent erer
eretis v. erere eretur eremur eremini erentur. Fig- erem eres eret eremus
eretis erent erer eretis v. erere eretur eremur eremini erentur. Pol. irem ires
iret iremus iretis irent irer ireris v. irere iretur iremur iremini irentur.

The Preterperfect tense singular.
Laud- averim averis averit atus sim v. fuerim atus sis v. fueris atus sit v.
fuerit. Plur- averimus averitis averint ati simus v. fuerimus, ati sitis v.
fueritis ati sint vel fuerint. Cens- uerim ueris uerit us sim v. fuerim us sis
v. fueris us sit v. fuerit. Plur- uerimus ueritis uerint i simus v. fuerimus i
sitis v. fueritis i sint vel fuerint. Fig- xerim xeris xerit xus sim v. fuerim
xus sis v. fueris xus sit v. fuerit xerimus xeritis xerint xi simus v. fuerimus
xi sitis v. fueritis xi sint v. fuerint. Pol. iverim iveris iverit itus sim v.
fuerim itus sis v. fueris itus sit v. fuerit. Plur. iverimus iveritis iverint
iti simus v. fuerimus iti siitis v. fueritis iti sint v. fuerint.

The Preterpluperfect Tense Singular.
Laud- avissem avisses avisset atus essem v. fuissem atus esses v. fuis atus
esset v. fuisset. Plur. avissemus avissetis avissent ati essemus v. fuissemus
ati essetis v. fuissetis ati essent v. fuissent. Cens- uissem uisses uisset us
essem v. fuissem us esses v. fuisses us esset vel fuisset. Plur. uissemus
uissetis uissent i essemus v. fuissemus i essetis v fuissetis i essent vel
fuissent. Fi- xissem xisses xisset xus essem v. fuissem xus esses v. fuisses
xus esset v. fuisset. Plur- xissemus xissetis xissent xi essemus v. fuissemus.
xi essetis v. fuissetis xi essent v. fuissent. Pol. ivissem ivisses ivisset
itus essem v. fuissem itus esses v. fuisses itus esset vel fuisset. Plur-
ivissemus ivissetis ivissent iti essemus v. fuissemus iti essetis v. fuissetis
iti essent v. fuissent.

The Future Tense Singular.
Laud- avero averis averit atus ero v. fuero atus eris v. fueris atus erit vel
fuerit. Plur- averimus averitis averint ati erimus v. fuerimus ati eritis v.
fueritis ati erunt v. fuerint. Cens- uero ueris uerit us ero v. fuero us eris
v. fueris us erit vel fuerit. Plur- uerimus ueritis uerint i erimus v. fuerimus
i eritis v. fueritis i erunt v. fuerint Fig- xero xeris xerit xus ero v. fuero
xus eris v. fueris xus erit v. fuerit. Plur- xerimus xeritis xerint xi erimus
v. fuerimus xi eritis v. fueritis xi erunt v. fuerint. Pol. ivero iveris iverit
itus ero v. fuero itus eris v. fueris itus erit v. fuerit Plur- iverimus
iveritis iverint iti erimus v. fuerimus iti eritis v. fueritis iti erunt v.
fuerint.

The Participle Mood.
The Present Tense Laud-ans, Cens-ens, Fig-ens Pol. iens. The first Future
Laud-aturus, Cens-urus, Fi-xurus. Pol. iturus. The Preter Tense Laud-atus,
Cens-us, Fi-xus* Pol. itus. The second Future Laud-andus, Cens-endus Fig-endus,
sep-iendus.

The Infinitive Mood.
The Present Tense Laud- are Cens- ere Fig- ere Pol. ire ari eri i iri. The
Preter Tense Laud- avisse Cens- uisse Fi- xisse Pol. ivisse atum esse vel
fuisse. um esse v. fuisse xum esse v. fuisse. itum esse v. fuisse. The Future
Tense Laud- atum ire v. aturum esse: Cens- um ire v. urum esse Fi- xum ire v.
xurum esse. Pol. itum ire v. iturum esse atum iri v. andum esse. um iri v.
endum esse xum iri v. endum esse. itum iri v. iendum esse*

The Gerundivall Mood.
Laud-andum. Cens-endum. Fig-endum. Pol. iendum.

The Supine Mood.
Laud-atam. Cens-um. Fi. xum. Pol. itum

ANNOTATIONS.
Students should be made exact in all the proper affections of Verbs, as before
has been required in the like affections of Nounes, for as more variable, so
they are more difficult, and call for greater diligence, but Verbs chiefly,
which will more exercise Learners to find out the Theme then Nounes, because
the Characteristicall is oftener changed therein; besides that many instances
thereof must have recourse to sundry distinct heads before they are resolved to
their Themes, as for example, from Juncturus, cast away the Termination proper
to the first future, and instead thereof, put to m, and it will be iunctum, the
Supine whence it is formed: Then it may be remembered that ctum in the Supine
comes from xi in the Preter Tense, as iunctum from iunxi, again xi will come
from gis in the present, so iungis makes iunxi, that iunctum this iuncturus;
from hauserimus cut of erimus and put i in place thereof it will be hausi
whence it is derived, as this from hauris. In censeremini* change the second
Person Plural to the first singular censerer, this to censeris, and by a
graduall regresse it leads unto c^^seor, according to the precedent Rules of
forming Tenses in the several Moods. So Legitote comes from lege, this from
legis, audietis comes from audiam, this from audis, so docendus from docens,
this from doces, and so in the rest.

Exceptions to the General Rules for the forming of Preter Tenses and Supines.
Verbs of the first Conjugation ending in bas, cas, mas, nas, pas tas, change
as to ui, das makes dedi, stas steti, juvas iuvi, And all in the Supine end in
tum.

Verbs of the second Conjugation making bes, psi, ges, xi, ies ievi, les levi,
ves vi. In the Supine end all in tum. But making des, di, or si, lces* and
lges, lsi, and rges rsi, nes nsi, res si. And the Depouent teris making ssi in
the Supine end all in sum.

Verbs of the third Conjugation making bis, by bui, or psi, cis ci, cui, or xi
scis, vi, or scui: few Verbs making dis, di. Likewise other Verbs making gis,
gi, or xi, his, xi, lis lui, mis mui, or psi, nis, ni, vi, or ui, pis, psi, pi,
pui, or pivi, quis, qui, or xi. ris, rui, vi and ssi sis, ui, ivi, or ssi,
apoopated. And some making it is, ti, vis, vi, or xi, ui, xis xui, in the Supine
end in tum.

Other both Deponents making beris, psi, and Verbs in o making rcis rsi dis di,
or si rgis rsi, llis, llui, li or si, mis, ssi, rris rri, it is ssui, rtis, rsi.
in the Supine end in sum.

Other Verbs making gis, his, ctis, or uis, xi, and xis, xi, or xui end in xum.

Verbs of the fourth Conjugation making cis cui, or xi, lis lui, nis ni, pis
psi, it is rui or ri: in the Supine end in tum.

Other both Deponents making diri^ di, or Verbs in o making bis, psi, cis, si,
ris, si, it is, si end in sum.

Examples of the former Exceptions, in Verbs of the first Conjugation.
Cubas does make cubui cubitum, but thence come cubatio and cubatorium, all
Compounds thence with interposing m. will be of the third Conjugation, as,
decumbis decubui decubitum, and accubo, incub^, occubo, recubo, may take m or
leave it.

Necas necavi or necui necatum, or nectum, but the last is scarce used, saving
in Composition, secas secui sectum, has secaturus, applicas, explicas,
implicas make ui or avi, itum or atum, but plicas makes only avi and atum,
micas micui does want the Supine, but emicas emicui has emicaturus, and
dimicas has dimicui, or dimicavi dimicatum, fricas fricui frictum, but
defricas defricui, or defricavi defrictum, or defricatum, Das dedi datum, so
circundas, pessundas, satisdas, venundas: but all other Compounds thence are of
the third Conjugation, as, condo condis condidi conditum, and abscondis
abscondidi, or abscondi, absconditum, or absconsum, domas domui domitum, but
from edomas comes edomatio.

Sonas sonui sonitum, whence comes sonabilis, and sonaturus.

Crepas crepui crepitum, and increpas increpui increpitum, whence comes
increpatio, discrepas discrepui; and discrepavi discrepitum, and discrepatum.

Vetas vetui vetitum, whence comes vetaturus, stas steti statum, but astas
astiti astitum, and so all Compounds thence, saving that Supinall Derivatives
love best the regular way, as, praestaturus praestatio praestabilis, Juvas
Juvi, whence does come iuvamen; so adiuvas adiuvi adiutum; Liguas, nexas, wih
many more want the Preter Tense, and therewith the Supine derived thence.

Examples of exceptions in the second Conjugation.
Sorbes sorbui sorbitum, and thence sorbitio, but absorbes absorbui and
absorpsi absorptum.

Misces miscui mistum, syncopated* and by Antithesis, mixtum, mulces, mulsi
mulsum, luces luxi without Supine.

Suades suasi suasum, but seeds sedi sessum, spondes spospondi sponsum, strides
stridi without Supine, audes ausi, obsolet ausum, gaudes gavisum, by
Epenthesis, whence gavisus sum, The Preterperfect Tense supplied by
circumlocution, and ausus sum, with audeo.

Indulges indulsi indulsum, and indultum, from obsolet indulxi, fulges fulsi,
turges tursi, both want Supines, terges tersi tersum, mulges mulsi mulctum,
from obsolet mulxi, so auges auxi auctum.

Fles stevi fletum, nes nevi netum, cies cievi citum, vies vievi vietum, oles
olui olitum, but exoles, and some other make olevi oletum, reris ratum, tueris
tuitum, soles solitum, from solui, obsolet for which solitus sum is in use.

Manes mansi mansium, but emines eminui, and the rest so formed want Supines.

Torques torsi torsum, and tortum from torquitum, obsolet syncopated, from
both, torsio and tortilis, Haeres haesi haesum and hesitum, by Epenthesis,
torres torrui tostum for torritum, by Syncope and Antithesis, so misereris
misertum, Syncopated, and censes censui censum, for censitum, fateris has
fassum, as if it were from fates fassi.

Moves movi motum, but cave^ cavi cautum, and faves favi fautum, by Epenthesis.

Cales, cares, coals, doles, lates, lices, noces, pares, places, taces, vales,
with their Compounds change es to ui and that to itum, but all other Neuters
making ui in the Preter Tense want the Supine.

Aves mederis maeres vides nives want the Preter Tense and Supine, but the
Compounds of nives have nixi and nictum.

Examples of the Exceptions in the third Conjugation.
Bibis bibi bibitum, lambis lambi wanting a Supine, decumbis decubui decubitum,
scribis scripsi scriptum, laberis lapsum, as if it were from labis lapsi.

Icis ici ictum, parcis peperci parcitum, and parsi parsum, dicis, dixi dictum,
from obsolet lacio elicio does make elicui elicitum, but all other Compounds
thence make lexi and lectum, noscis novi notum, but nosciturus and agnovi
agnitum, eognovi cognitum, pascis pavi pastum, but compescui compescitum, and
dispescis dispescui does want the Supine, adipisceris adeptum, as if it were
from adipis adepi, and that from the obsolet simple apo, whence comes aptus,
comminisceris commentum, as if it were from cominis comini, expergeris
expergitum, and experrectum, as if it were from expergis expergi or experrexi,
itasceris iratum, as if it were from iras iravi, nancisceris nactum, as if it
were from nancis nanci, oblivisceris oblitus, from oblivis oblivi, pacisceris
pactum, as if it were from pacis paci, profleisceris profectum, from proficis
profeci, defetisceris defessum, as if it were from defeteo defetis defessi,
ulcisceris ultum, for ulcitum, as if it were from ulcis ulcivi, claud^s clausi
clausum, edis edi esum, but comedis comedi comesum, or comestum, graderis
gressum, as if it were from gradis gressi, so cedis cessi cessum, findis fidi
fissum, cadis cecidi casum, whose Compounds want Supines, occasum and recasum,
with incasurus, being excepted, pedis pepedi peditum, tendis tetendi tensum,
and tentum tundis tutudi tusum, and tunsi tunsum, pandis pandi passum, for
pansum, by Antithesis.

Fugis fugi fugitum, regis rexi rectum, frigis frixi frixum, and frictum,
frangis fregi fractum, pungis pupugi and punxi punctum, vehis vexi vectum, but
convehis convexi convectum and convexum.

Alis alui altum, for alitum so colis colui cultum, excellis excellui excelsum,
vellis velli and vulsi vulsum.

Gemis gemui gemitum, premis pressi pressum, comis compsi comptum, the labiall
m affecting the cognate^ (p) for its companion, so emis emi, and of old empsi
emptum, sinis sivi has no Supine, situs is used for positus by Aphaeresis,
spernis sprevi spretum, by Metathesis, for spervi spertum, so decernis with
such other Compounds, crevi cretum, for cerni, the simple does want the Preter
Tense and Supine likewise, temnis wants both, but contemnis contempsi
contemptum, gignis genui genitum from obsolet genis, ponis posui positum, canis
cecini cantum, but succinis with some others make cinui centum, strepis strepui
strepitum, rumpis rupi ruptum, carpis carpsi carptum, sapis sapai or sapivi
sapitum, coquis coxi coctum, linquis wanting Preter Tense, and Supine has
Compounds that make liqui lictum, loqueris locutum, sequeris secutum, as if it
were from loquis loqui, sequis sequi, Teris trivi tritum, by Metathesis,
moreris making mortuus, for moritus, whence is moriturus, likewise oreris
ortum, whence is oriturus, quaeris quaesivi quaesitum, quereris questum,
Syncopated, seris sevi satum, but conseris consevi consitum, with such other
changing in the supine a to i, conseris conserui does make consertum, the first
coming from the Greek Verb speiro, the last from eiro, geris guess gestum,
verris verri versum.

Arcessis arcessivi being of the fourth Conjugation now obsolet, and by Syncope
arcessii, by Apocope, arcessi, pinsis pinsui pinsitum pinsum and pistum
Syncopated, depsis depsui, whence comes depsititius, and visis visi, without
Supine.

Flectis flexi flexum, plectis plexi to punish, plexui, to fold, have plectum,
and piexum, pectis pexi and pexui pexum, and pectum, or pectitum, by
Epenthesis, metis messui messum, mittis misi missum, vertis verti versum,
stertis stertui Supinelesse, niteris nisum or nixum, uteris usum, pateris
passum, from obsolet patis passi, vivis vixi victum, solvis solvi solutum.
Statuis statui statutum, ruis rui ruitum, but diruis dirui dirutum, with such
other, casting away i from the Supine resumed in the first Future, as,
diruiturus, frueris whence fruitus, and by Epenthesis fruintus, by Crasis
fretus; likewise fructus, as if it were from fruis fruxi, struis struxi
structum, fluis fluxi fluxum; whence also come, fluctus and fluitus, luis lui,
and of old luvi, whence is diluvium, so pluis plui and pluvi whence is pluvia,
both wanting Supines, but having Derivatives thence, as, luitu^us.

Texis texui textum, nexis nexui nexum, etc. Calueris whence is calumnia with
cluis, furis, reminisceris, vesceris, vergis, metis, tollis, ambigis, liqueris,
with many other want Preter Tense and Supine.

Examples of the Exceptions in the fourth Conjugation.
Cambis campsi campsum.

Sancis sanxi sanctum, and san^ivi sancitum, farcis farci fartum, and sarcivi
farcitum; and farctum, and fartum Syncopated, raucis rauci rausum, amicis
ami^u^ and amixi amictum.

c Ordiris orsum, as if it were from ordis ordi and orditum, as from ordis
ordivi.

Salis salii and salui saltum, but exilis exilii, or exilui exultum, with such
other Compounds changeing a of the simple Supine unto u, Venis veni ventum.

Sepis sepsi septum, and sepivi sepitum, whence is sepimentum, sepelis sepelivi
sepelitum, and sepultum, by Syncope and Antithesis.

Hauris hausi haustum or hausum, whence is hausurus, aperis and operis, make
perui and pertum, and all other Compounds peri and pertum, from paris peperi
partum, changing a to e, Sentis sensi sensum, metirismensus, but demetiris
demensus and demetitus.

Feris with some other want Preter Tenses and Supines, Compertum est, the
Impersonall Passive has only a Preter tense, and such as are derived thence.

ANNOTATIONS.
Some Verbs in o, as do, sto, and others of the second and third Conjugacion
will Greek-wise double the first Consonant in the Preter tense for the most
part with e, and in some Verbs with i, o, and u, as ded^, steti, didici,
poposci, cucurri, pupugi, which six commonly have the same syllable doubled in
their Compounds, as addidi, constiti, changing e, to i, perdidici, de po posci,
praecucurri, repupugi, but all other Compounds from simples doubling the first
syllable, reject any such increase, as pendes has pependi pensum, but dependes
dependi depensum; Likewise the former Verbs both simple and compounds cast of
the increase in Supines, so cucurri cursum, and praecurri praecucursum.

Diverse Verbs concur in the same Pretertense, and others in the same Supine,
as, fulges, and fulcis make fulsi, luces and luges luxi, paves and pascis pavi
Likewise manes and mandis make mansum, tenes and tendis tentum, vincis and
vivis victum, verris and vertis versum.

Many Verbs compounded have a Preter tense, or Supine, or derivatives thence,
whose simples are therein defective, And contrariwise: as from liquas defective
in the Pretertense and Supine come liquamen liquatio liquabilis and deliquatus:
So from nuis nuinutum numen being regular, there be compounds defective, as,
abnuis, and moreover irregular supines have many derivatives from the regular
wanting, as, adiuvamen adiuvaturns, from adiuvi adiutum, whereof more instances
are in the several Coniugations: Some Compounds with changing the first vowell
of their simples differ hence in the Preter tense, and others in the Supine. So
emines has eminui from manes mansi: thus cantum, captum, carptum, factum,
fartum, iactum, partum, raptum, sparsum, change a, to e, as concentum deceptum,
with many other changes notified in the Conjugations.

Of Verbs Anomalous.
There be three sorts of the Verbs irregular, the Heteroclitous the Redundants,
and the Defectives.

Of Hetereclites.
Verbs swarving from the regular Coniugations (besides Sum) are these
following, volo and his compounds, making vis vult volumus vultis, for volis
volit volimus volitis, and noli for nole nolito, velim for volam, vellem for
volerem, vellefer volere, so fers fert fertis, for feris ferit feritis, fer
ferto ferte fertote, for fere ferito ferite feritote, ferrem far for fererem
ferere, from fero; being both of the third Conjugation. Likewise fierem fieri
for firem fire from fio of the fou^th conjugation. Where may be noted that
facio being defective in the figure to be made a passive has the neuter fio,
instead thereof, not only in the simple, but also in all compounds which keep
facio entire, as, calefacio calefio, but other compounds changing a, to i, will
be made passives, as, afficio afficior Likewise the neuter, E^* as it has all
three persons will not be made passive, but Compounds thence being Verbs Active
will form a Passive voice, as, adeor, ambior, which last does form all tenses
regularly, but Eo in the Preter imperfect tense makes Ibam for iebam, and ibo
for iam in the future. And so do other compounds thence. Likewise iens out of
use does make euntis, so abiens with other compounds thence in use make
abeuntis. Queo and nequeo make also quibam and quibo, whence are (though
seldom) found queundus quitus and nequitus. Edo has es est and estis
redundant with edis edit and editis, so ede edito edite editote, or es esto
este estote, so ederem or essem, edere or esse. Lastly dic duc fer and fac are
apocopated with all compounds thence excepting such from facio which change a,
to i, as afficio making affice.

Of Redundants.
Redundant futures being Imperatives or Infinitives of Verbs in o, and or,
(except fito and scito, with all compounds thence as calefito, rescito,
admitting no redundance) And the second person singular of Verbs in or,
redundant in the Indicatives present, preterimperfect and future tense, and in
the Subjunctives present and preterimperfect tense together with Verbs
redundant in Conjugation are notified in their proper places. Other Verbs
redound in form or sundry senses according to their sundry structure, being
either Active or Neuter, as audio vocem, or been audio fastidio te, or tui, Rus
habitat, or secum, offendit gemmam, or caespite, co^unt societatem, or una,
glacies aquam durat, or durare nequit, incipit diem, or a die, vos man mus, or
vobiscum, huc ruit, or ru^t, aeris acervos, sufficit ira animos, or dies non
sufficit, virtus aetatem superat, or ^e dum superat, terram vertimus, or res
been vertit. Nos, quoties variant animi, variabimus artem, me mi^e^um occidis.
Occidit spes nostra, Rem ad Senatum re^ert, or de his rebus refert, sapit
culinam, or ad Genium, omnino depereat, qui opes deperit. Nugas non moror sub
dio moraturus.

Other Verbs are Active or Neuter and Deponent, as comito and comitor, so
comperio, fabri^o, impertio mereo munero populo punio: Likewise assentio,
vergo, lachrymo modero vago.

Of Verbs defective in Moods.
The Verbs called Impersonalls have no Imperative mood, but instead thereof are
used to the Subiunctive. And both they and other Verbs spoken of before want
Supine, Gerund, and Participle Moods; for such of that kind as they do retain
become Nounes, admitting no cases of their Verbs, as, vis paenitendi for
paenitentiae, id nego liciturum, for legitimum sore.

Of Verbs defective in Tenses.
In the first Conjugation Verbs Denominatives and diminutives, besides others
spok^n of already do want the Pretertense, and Derivatives thence together with
all their compounds, as, cortico, cornicor sorbillo pitisso. And d^cortico, etc.

In the second Conjugation most Verbs neuters want the Pretertense, and other
Derivatives thence, as aveo, clueo, denseo, flaveo, glabreo, liveo, with others
before mentioned.

In the third Conjugation all Verbs inchoative or augmentative ending in sco,
as augesco, with others before notified want also the Preter tense, and its
Derivatives.

In the fourth Conjugation few Verbs do want the Preter tense excepting
meditative, whereof two only have it, to wit, parturio parturivi, and esurio
esurivi esuritum.

All Verbes in or of any Conjugation, and Verbs neuter passive want the Preter
tense, saving in the Participle Mood whence the rest are supplied by
circumlocution as has been aforesaid.

Verbs in o and or want the Future in the Infinitive as it is before instanced,
suesco and soleo want all futures, as repugnant to their signification.

Of Defectives in Person.
Dor and for be never used saving in composition as, addor affor and the first
person both singular and plural, is defective in all Verbs of the Imperative.
Likewise Verbs called Impersonalls, are never used in the first or second
Person of either number or in the third plural, except only few Verbs neuter
with a Nominative of the thing, as, libet, licet, liquet, decet, pudet, taedet,
piget, paenitet miseret oportet, all of the second Conjugation, but in other
Coniugations, or in any of the passive voice, such Verbs are never used in the
plural, as benefit, malefit, satisfit statur sedetu^, curritur, itur, and
others in the Preter tense only, and Derivatives thence, as, puditum, pigitum,
libitum, licitum, pertaesum benefactum est vel fuit.

Other Verbs are most improperly called Impersonalls being found familiarly to
be Verbs Personal, though more frequently used to the third person, as
delectat, attinet, accidit, etc. dapibus te delectas, or tu delectaris. And
such are Verbs of exempt power, as, fa^ste dies vesperascis murmr saevo
verberibusque tonas: which are indeed more commonly read in the third Person
singular, the rect being usually understood, as, ^lucescit supply dies
fulminat, supply Jupiter, pluit, supply Caelum.

Of Defectives in several affections.
All Verbs are defective being used adverbially, whether as Adverbs of
entreating, as* te quaeso, or quaesumus, so vos amabo, sodes for si audes, or
as Adverbs of exhorting, age agedum, or of shunning, as lites apagite, or of
granting, as dextram cedo, for cedito and cette for cedite. Likewise sis
sultis, for sivis si vultis, with their compounds, apagesis capsis cavesis,
vide sis, or of explaining, ilicet, scilicet, videlicet, for ire, scire,
videre, licet.

Other Verbs are also defective in sundry affections, whether they be of
rejoicing, as, ovat ovans ovatus, or of greeting: ave aveto avete avetote,
avere. Salvebis salve salveto salvete salvetote salvere. valebis vale valeto
valete valetote valere, or of affirming, aio ais ait aiunt, aiebam aiebas
aiebat aiebatis aiebant, aias aiat aeiatis aiant aiens, inquam inquis inquit
inquitis inquint, inquiebam inquiebas inquiebat inquiebatis inquiebant,
inquisti inquistis, inquies inquiet inque inquito, inqutas inquiat inquiatis
inquiant inquiens.

These Verbs of the preter tense have the rest derived thence, fui tuli senui
odi caepi memini, etc. moreover odi has osurus, and exosus perosus, Caepio and
caepiam are seldom used but caeptum and cepturus, from caepi are very common.
Memini has memento and mementote with the Supine, mentum, whence is mentio:
defit for deest has defiet defiat defieri, Iufit for incipit, is single, going
alone, ausim from absolet ausi of andes, duim from dui for dedi, axim and faxim
from axi faxi, for egi feci, factus faciendum from absolet facior, latum latus
laturus from ^lao a Greek Verb.

Lastly it should be remembered what was before advertised in the Nounes, that
no simples be joined in Conjugation that are not formed a like in composition,
as, Sum may be coniugated with fui forem fore, because absum has abfui abforem
abfore fio has factus and faciendus, because tepefie has tepefactus and tepe
faciendus, fero has tuli and latus, because defero has detuli, and delatus,
which forms other Verbs will not imitate.

Of ADVERBES.
The Adverbs (being invariable, saving by a different figure) is so called
because it refers to some other word, whether Noune, Verb, or other Adverb
for a clearer declaration of their meaning in sundry circumstances, as, Vos
autem sociosque omnes Dii quam diutissime conservent incolumes.

The forms of Adverbs.
There be three kinds of Adverbs.

1. Some absolutely significant of themselves vulgarly called Adverbs

2. Some respectively significant, as uniting words or sentences called
Conjunctions.

3. Some merely subservient to oblique cases of the Substantives, notifying
either rest, wherein resideth some Act or passion, or motion whereto, or whence
the same do tend.

The kinds of absolute Adverbs.
1. Adverbs are 1 Some Interrogatives asking a question that concern either 1.
the being, as, Number nunquid an utrum, and the encliticall Ne. or 2. The cause,
as quare quapropter quamobrem, quid ita, quidni, quin for cur non. or 3. The
place, quo, quorsum unde utro qua. or 4. The time, quando quandiu quousque
quoad ( and ubi an Interogative of place and time) or 5. The number quoties: or
6. The quality, as qui quomodo, or 7. The quantity, as quam quantum quantopere.
All which except the first desisting to be Interrogatives become Indefinites:
and many of them will be Relatives answering to some precedent Adverb, as Tunc
sapis quando siles; ubi sunt amici, ibidem opes.

2. Some requiring an attentiveness, as en ecce, and sometimes heus.

3. Some inviting, or therewith exhorting, as ehodum eia euge agedum.

4. Some affirming, or therewith interpreting, as nae etiam ita quidem certe
profecto sane plane maxim quippe nempe nimirum scilicet videlicet.

5. Some used in swearing, as Pol Edepol Ecastor Mehercule Mediusfidius, for me
Dios filius, etc.

6. Some be of doubting, as forte forsit forsitan forsan fortassis fortasse si
nisi.

7. Some are for uniting, as pariter simul aeque una.

8. Some for severing either with choice, as potius immo satius magis, or
without choice, aseorsim secus aliter singulatim virit^m bifariam vnice
duntaxat solum tantum modo solummodo.

9. Some are of wishing, as Utinam si o si.

10. Some of forbidding, as ne neutiquam nequaquam.

11. Some used in denying, haud nihil, or nil for non, nec neque nequidem, or
parum minime; or those used in forbidding.

12. Some are of quality, Splendide fortiter falso, raptim incassum frustra
perperam, and Greek-wise, lugubre torvum acerba recens.

13. Some of quantity either with remission, sensim belle vix aegre paululum
modicum, or with intension, satis valde adeo sane quod, nimis ferme fere pene
prope propemodum prorsus omnino penitus multum magnope^e; and such in
Comparison may respect either only quantity, as minus minime magis maxim, or
quality and quantity together meliuscule doctius doctissime.

14. Some are of likeness or proportion, quasi ^eu sic sicut sicuti tanquam
iuxta prope ut uti velut veluti quemadmodum tanquam all relatives and aeque
perinde, answered by arque or acsi, so quam to which last ante or prius often
refer, and either of both may be Elliptical in some structure, as altero die
quam mortuus est febricitavit, for antequam.

15. Some of place, signifying either, 1 In or at a place, hic illic istic
ubique vbivis ubicunque alibi uspiam humi domi, etc. whereto may be added
according to their several senses, Juxta prope answering to procul, so infra
supra intra extra pone, o: post, and ante, or coram, foris, and intus, or 2. To
a place, huc illuc istue, eo quo aliquo quocunque int to for as peregre, or 3.
Cowards a place, quorsum sursum deorsum introrsum retrorsum or 4. From a place,
hine illinc inde unde aliunde caelitus funditus radicitus inferne superno
desuper cominus eminus, or 5. By a place, as hac illac istac ea qua qualibet
quacunque recta, where with may be supplied via.

16. Some of time either finite, nunc tunc tum mox jamjam illico hodie cras
heri pridie postridie perendie nudiusterti ^s for nunc est dius tertius, donec
quousque quoadusque quoad ejus quandiu quamprimum antequam: or indefinite,
iampridem dudum olim quando aliquando mane sero luci vesperi semper indies
iugiter nunquam tandem cito nupor.

17. Some equally belong both to time and place, usque procul post quo hactenus
ubi unde.

18. Some betoken time and quantity: sepiuscule.

19. Some place and quantity longiuscule.

20. Some are of number either finite, semel bis ter decies centies millies so
millies bis or bis et millies, or indefinitely of number and time, toties
quoties crebro saepe raro iterum rursus.

21. Some of order with time or place, primo secundo, etc.

22. Some of passion called Interiections, because inserted as thort
Parentheses importing commonly by unperfect sentences some sudden motions of
the mind tending either to a wonder Infandum immane phy papae hui, or 2. joy
evax io. or 3. Laughter ha ha he. or 4. Scorn hem vah proh; or 5. fear, as
atat; or 6. Sorrow, hei heu eheu hoi ah. or 7. Threat vae malum. or 3. Silence
aust.

Of Adverbiall Constructions.
The imperfect sense accompanying Interjections may be made up to a perfect
sentence in the first sort of them, by fide maius est. In the second by
plaudite, in the third by quis abstineat cachinno. in the fourth by sordet
enim, or facessat, in the fifth by caveatur: in the sixth by res est lugubris.
In the seventh, by, imprecor. In the last by obmutescite, where may be noted
that some Interiections, as infandum immane, malum, are Substantives, wherewith
est should be supplied hei and vae stand for Substantives Aptore with a Dative
Acquisitive, as hei or vae mihi, for meus dolor est. And others leave the
sentence annexed to be finished with known supplements, as, hem tibi Davum,
supply affero; ehodum ad me, supply accedito eheu conditionem magistratus
administrandi, supply defleo, proh Deum atque hominum fidem, supply obtestor,
where Verbs of the same signification are easy to be found.

Adverbs of place, time and quantity being made Nounes Aptote, are construed,
the two first with Genitives of their own signification, the last with any that
may be their Substantives, being pronominall Adjectives, as nusquam loci, tunc
temporis, for nullo loco eo tempore, parum lucri, multnm laboris, for parvum
lucrum multus labor.

Other Adverbs admit the cases of their Primitives, as dixit optime omnium,
supply numero, because we say optimus omnium, quo familiarior eo reliquis
fidentius accedit, propius fertur nunc a terris, nunc ad caelos, castra propius
urbem moventur, proxime, or pro ximius Pompeium sedebat, Tibi similiter vivit,
utisiter nulli, nedum naturae convenienter.

The kinds of Conjunctive Adverbs.
Coniunctive Adverbs are some mere Copulatives either 1. Joining both words and
their meaning, as, et que encliticall, quoque ac atque nec neque cum or tum
with tum non modo sed eriam. Or 2. coupling words but severing their
signification, as ve encliticall, vel aut seu five.

2. Some mere Adversatives, sed at ast autem tamen vero verum atquiquin
alioquin caeteroquin nisi praeterquam.

3. Some Adversatives, but withal concessive, etsi tametsi etiamsi quanquam
quanvis licet esto.

4. Some Discretibes, saltem vel ad minus certe ut minimum.

5. Some Causalls, nam namque enim etenim, ut quid quum quoniam quandoquidem ne
non inquantum quatenus siquidem.

6. Some conditionalls, si sin modo nisi dum dummodo.

7. Some Illatives, Ergo ideo igitur quare itaque proinde idcirco quapropter
quamobrem.

8. Some Comparatives, as all Adverbs of likeness.

9. Some Electives, immo potius magis non adeo ut, secus or aliter quam non
aeque ac, etc.

10. Some Continuatives, praeterea nec non itidem porro caeterum insuper ad
haec.

11. Some Ordinative, primo deinde demum denique, etc.

12. Some Completive, nam quidem equidem profecto certe aurem.

ANNOTATIONS.
The Conjunctive Adverbs have no share in regence of Cases, Moods or Tenses,
whose construction wholly depends every where upon some other regents, as in
the following instance. Noster patriae gue tolius, extraneis tamen haud aeque
patronus, Romae ac Venetiis nauci, aut pro nihilo habetur, non secus acsi de
fraud vel furti reus esset: where may be noted, that Moods and Tenses must be
suitable to the matter spoken of without reference to such coniunctive
cementaries: And subsequent Moods must be regulated by the precedent in every
period, as has been instanced in the variation of the Subiunctive, Optative,
Potentiall, and Infinitive; else they need no guidance.

The kinds of Prepositionall Adverbs.
Prepositionall Adverbs commonly attend acircumstance of time or place or
persons set instead of places, or else do accompany Nouns that signify
either a part, or an entire cause, whether of the person or of the thing, or
otherwse a qualification of the thing. And it is proper for the prepositional
Cumlike a Copulative to join causes, but for absque sine praeter, to sever
causes. The same Prepositions will differ in signification as the cases differ
whereon they attend. And moreover they will differ in their sense by apposition
to, or composition with words of different senses, as in the examples following.

Prepositions serving to the Genitive.
Ergo tenus
Virtutis ergo for gratia, Cumarum tenus, for usque ad earum terminos.

Prepositions serving to the Acquisitive.
Obviam praesto propius.
It obviam hostium conatibus, for contra conatus, nec ullum est mantellum
obviam fucis, for pro fucis, praesto sum tibi, for juxta te sum, propius
accedit urbi, for ad urbem.

Prepositions serving to the Dative Ablativall.
A ab abs absque sine cum ex e de prae pro coram palam procul.

A Scipione superatus est referring to the agent. A rationibus a studiis, a
pugione, a secret^s, supply, praefectus officio: Ab Romuli gente. supply, ortus
a Cumanis rediit, for a Cumis, a millibus passuum te praestolatur, for millium
iutervallo a verberibus impunitas for quantum ad verbera, a frigore myrtos
defend, for contra frigus, Catonis a morte, for post mortem, Abs te stetit
Senatus, for pro te, pastor ab Amphriso, for Amphrysius. Absque metu, for hoc
amoto, sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus, or iis deficientihus, cum fratr^
Quirino Rhemus iura dabant, for Rhemus et frater, Summa cum humanitate nos
excepit, for humanissime cum boste pugnatur, for contra hostem, benefaciendo
secum c^rtant, for inter se. Ex auro integrum vas, for omnino aureum, usually
referring to the matter, ex illo tempore celeberrimus, for post id tempus, vox
e caelo, for a cielo audita, ex usu, or commodo, or dignitate nostra, for ad
usum, etc. Illud est e republica, for pro Republica, ex Platonis sententia, for
seeundum cius sententiam. De Senatu audivi, for a Senatu, de moribus oration,
for circa mores, or quae in iis versatur. Prae amore misera, for per amorem,
prae oculis, for ante oculos: Caeleri prae te uno viles, for praeter te unum,
or tecum collati, And the case of a Demonstrative may be Ellipticall, as res
omnes relictas habeo prae quod tu velis. Pro amicitia feci, for amicitiae
causa, pro maenibus stat, for ante maenia, pro concione venit, for
concionaturus, pro viribus egit, for impensissime pro Praetore, for Praetoris
vice, pro Turribus adstant, for Turrium tutela, habetur, pro vidua, for tanquam
vidua, sanequam pro ec ac debui moleste tuli, for non prout debui, pro
facultate, for secundum vires.

Coram nobis, for nostri presentia, coram Senatu, for in eo. And Coram
differs from ante, as properly importing nee^nes; whereas ante admits
distance. It differs likewise from palam, that being determined by its case
to certain persons, this being used indefinitely to any persons; As palam
populo, for quolibet adevrtente.

Procul urbe, for ab urbe.

Prepositions serving to the Accusative
Apud penes ad adversus ante pone post circum citra, intra, trans, ultra,
extra, intra, infra, supra, praeter ob contra, erga, iuxta, prope secus
secundum prater.

Apud forum agitur, for in foro; apud me aliquandiu sore cupio, for solus, apud
Mantuam, for prope illam, apud nos frugum copia, for nobiscum, nos penes sunt
divitiae, for sub nostro dominio. Thus apuc, and penes differ, the first noting
presence, the last possession.

Ad tribunal se Iudex confert, for intra tribunial litigator se recipit ad
tribunal, for usque ad, or ante. Ad balneas moritur, for a pud eas, ad
exercitum manet, for in co. Ad haec tempora riv^^surus, for circum haec,
tendens ad sydera palmas, for sydera versus, haec nihil ad nostras arts, for
prae nostris, or cum nostris comparata, non nisi ad tres annos peragatur, for
post tres annos Panditur ad nullas ianua, nigra preces, for ob, or propter
nullas. Ad Judicis pedes procidit, for ante pedes. Ad mea mala hoc accessiit,
for praeter alia. Ad eius arbitrium, for iuxta suum. Ad speciem magnificus, for
secundum spect^m. Ad multam noctem, for sero noctis. Ad Cyathos, supply
delegatus, mulieres ad unum perosae, for simul, or una. Comaedia ad verbum
translata, for exact. Ad summam, for deniqne.

Adversum hosts, for contra illos, adversus amicos tendit, for erga ipsos,
domum versus, and such like, have aa constantly employed with them, which
sometimes is expressed. Ad Tiberim versus; but in more commonly, versus in
utramque partem, quoquo versus, are both absolute Adverbs, like sursum versus,
save that the first stand for Aptotes.

Ante Comitia vel Senaculum aut Senatores, referring to time, place, and
persons, and with Adverbs of time, it is often Elliptically understood, pridie
Calendas, for ante Calendas.

Pone castra, referring only to place, for post ea, se post Cratera tegebat,
for pone cratera, post tres annos, for totidem peractis, post Regem secundus,
for a Rege, post nummos virtus, for ^un mis virtuti praepositis Circum theatra
referring to place only, circi^er meridiem, for propeillum, referring to time,
quindeci^ circiter dies, referring to time and number, circa nos aut urbem, aut
id tempus, referring to persons, place, and time.

Cis Alps aut Padum ^itra montes aut flumina, the first being used to proper
names, the last to Appellatives, both answering to their opposits trans and
ultra, the three last referring with place to time and agents.

Citra calendas, for ex hac part calendarum, or ante calendas, ultra calendas,
for post eas, or ex altera part, ^itra ius, for laeso jure, ultra famam, for
famam superans, citra vel intra, ultra vel extra modum, for vix or nimis
moderate, the first used for remission, the last for intention, extra io um for
sine ioco nullus extra te adfuit, for praeter te.

Inter nos lis haec est, for haec nostra lis, inter ludos, for dum ludi
celebrantur, fabulantur inter caenandum, for ^nnantes, diligunt alii alios
inter se, for invicem, or mu^uo, infra dignitatem, for nulla dignitatis habita
ratione infra sex dies, for ante sex dies, infra tectum, for in aedibus.

Supra morem, aut iustum, for amplius more, supra ca^ut nobis imminet
periculum, for prope, commonly importing Aearness so differing it from supe^,
which may imply a distance. Propter vos aut vestram amicitiam, for vestri
gratia, propter humum volitat, for prope humum, propter scelus vapulat, for
sceleris merit^, obstultitiam paenas luit, for propter, ob Romam legiones
duxit, for ad Romam, ob oculos versatur, for ante oculos.

Urbs contra Thebas sita, for e Thebarum regione contra praedones expeditio,
for adversum eos, pietas erga parents, for iis ita demerentibus.

Juxta aequor, for prope illud, juxta famulas operam navat, for una cum usdem,
adsum iuxta te, for tibi auxiliaturus, iuxta, for apud Capuam, iuxta Varronem
doctissimus, for secundum, or post Varronem.

Prope id opidum, for iuxta illud. Secus aquarum decursus, for prope illos,
Secundum naturam, for n^turaliter, secundum voluntatem, for iuxta illam,
secundum aurem vulneratus, for prope aurem, Me^ secundum patrem haereditas, for
post patrem. Praeto^ secundum me decrevit, for pro me, proxime ac secundum Deos
homo praestantissimus, for Diis tantummodo minor, imago secundum q^ietem mihi
obversabatur, for in somno, secundum officia deliberatur, for de officiis or
fuper ea.

Per diem operor, for toto die, per Eboracum proficistor, for Urbem transeo,
via secta per ambas, for inter ambas, per Deos, for iis testibus et vindi^ibus,
pe^ patriam obsecro, for eius gratia, per me certior fies, for mea opera, per
aetatem licet, for ^tate non obstante per gratiam bonam abiit, for cum gratia,
per me tadas, for mea venia per ludicrum, for iocose, quae dam sunt pre se
amabilia, for ex sua natura, or pro sua virtute, per speciem, for nequaquam re,
per otium feci, for ^tiosus, per ebrietatem lites oriuntur, for ab ebrietate,
per id tempus, for circa illud, per fas and fidem deceptus, for violata fide,
per te stat ut hae fiant nuptia, for ti^^ potestate: Praeter for ultra haec,
vobis alia obijciebantur multa, praeter nostros mores atque leges, for contra,
praeter oculos Domini sua dirip^ebantur bona, for ante oculos, praeter, for
supra modum, omnes tuti praeter ducem, for nisi dux, or hoc uno excepto.

Prepositions serving both the Accusative and the Dative Ablativall.
In sub subter super clam tenus.
In vos benevolentia, for erga vos, in rebels pugna for contra rebels,
appulit in portum, for ad portum, iusticium in duos menses indicitur, for
quandiu duo praetereant. In os laudat, for coram, or in conspectu. In vos fiet
exemplum, for vestro scelere coercito. In ^ucem bibit, for usque ad diem,
vertuntur in cine es, for fiunt cineres in dies crescunt, for usque, or iugite
fert pisciculos in caenam, for pro cana, recipitur in forum, for intra forum
vivit in diem, for non amplius die. In tempore venit, for opportunus, mediis in
milibus ardet, for inter mill. In numero aut honor habitus, for honoratus. In
manu stat victoria, for ad libitum.

Sub tecta referto sarmenta, for infra tecta. Sub lucem redeunt, for circiter
lucem, sub id tempus, for por illud, sub horam pugnoe, for ante horam, sub
umbram properat, for ad umbram, sub iugum missi, for captivi.

Sub adversa quercu, for pone quercum sub terris posuere domus, for in terris
sub montibus Idae, for iuxta montes, sub illo tempore, for eodem, sub corona,
for coronati, sub dio, for fine tecto, sub manu, for in promptu, sub die movet,
for tarde, sub vinea iacont, for tuto, sub umbra, for simulate.

Subter, for infra praecordia subter, for sub testutline, super Caram utas, for
ultra ^llos. Super somnam for Cubili praefectus, nocte super media, for circa
mediam, multa super Priamo rogitans, for de Priamo, hunc super ipse sua molitur
laud laborem, for pro sua laud, fronde super viridi, for in viridi, clam, or
clanculum patrem ea fecit, for patrem ea celavit, clam uxore for hac inscia,
Tanaimque tenus descendit ab Euro, for usque ad Tanaim, capulo tenus, for prope
capulum pube tenus, for donec ^ubesceret.

^rocul prope clam palam versus and usque, have other Prepositions construed
with them before their cases, which are therefore supposed to be understood
being not expressed, and they are in that respect accoun^ed absolute Adverbs.

Quaenam praeposition^s quibusque inserviunt casibus.

Propiero^ adversus citra cis circiter extra.

Post apud ante secus iuxta supra versus ad intra.

Erga ^er ul^ra penes contra prope pone secundum.

Infra inter circum praeter trans aduce quarto.

Abs tenus absque palam prae ex de pro cum sine coram

Ablato: des clam super in sub subter utrique.

Quo petit ad, sic usque, procul long a, prope utramque.

Usque penes versus tenus, aut Pronomine iuncto

Septeno cum, cuique suos praeponito casus.

Obviam habet socium praesto propiusve dativum.

Aurium et add tenus, patri^m plerunque dualem.

Denique pro causa patri^m vult quemlibet ergo.

Annotations.
The Prepositionall like the Conjunctive Adverbs have nothing of regence, but
are only servile, yet con as such are very useful, because without
conjunctions, no sentences can have either a Consummation in themselves, or a
Continuation from each to other. And Prepositions afford much of compendious
and various elegance as by apposition instanced already, so by composition, as
in the following instances.

A ab abs (which with the rest next following, are separable Prepositions) do
in composition signify either privation, as amens absimilis abstemius, or
separation, avulsus, abactus, abstractus, or intension, abnegatio, absolutio.
Where a is used in Latin words only before m. and v. ^ut in exotic words
before x and z. Ab is used before any vowell, and before b. d. f. h i. l. v.
se;ldome before m and p. always before r. and s. And for Euphoni^ ab is
changed into au in auferens and aufugiens.

Abs is used before c. q. t. And both these and all other separable
Prepositions have like places in Apposition as they have in Composition Ad
compounded does signify an increase, accumulatio approach accessus
assimilatio. And it is entire in Composition with any vowel, or with b. d. h.
i. m. v. except ahbrevians. But d is cut off thence before words that begin
with c. f. g. l. n. p. r. s. t. leaving them doubled in recompense of the
loss. These are excepted, adsuturus, adlubescit, agnitus, adsunt. Likewise d.
before q. is changed into c. ac^uiesco.

Ante compounded notes a precedence in time, place, or some other condition,
antolucanus, anteambulatio, antefere, and being always entire, it goes before
a. c. e. f. g. l. p. s.

Circum referring only unto place being compounded, is entire before a. e. h.
m. o. p. And commonly does change m to n before c. d. f. g. i. l. q. m. s. t.
v. But m. is cut of before i. as in Ci^^uitus. Con^^ a compounded does signify
opposition, as, contradico contraliceor, contradico, or over against
contrapositus, contrastans, contraveniens. And it is every where entire, and
only before such letters as are in the former instances. De compounded notes
detraction, deoorticor, descent, defluxus, deficience, dedisco local motion
deambulo, or is privative, delumbis, or active with intension deamo, with
remission; defervesco or negative, demens dedecus, or Demonstrative delatio.
And is found entire before all the letters wherewith Latin words begin, but
seldomest before q. and u. as dequestus deust^s.

^. or ex compounded fignifie privation, elinguis, or intension elusus
exoratus. And it is used for extra, exclusus, moreover E. is used before b. d.
g. i. l. m. n. r. v. But Ex before all vowels and c. p. q. t. which before f.
casts away x. recompensed by doubling f. as effraenis. And s. after x. is cut
off without recompense, as exanguis, in exspes, it is preserved for a
difference from expes.

In compounded signifies, non, inutilis, intra, ingressio, contra insultatio,
valde, incanus, supra, imminens, fi^e, iniussu, public, indictum, local
motion, importatio. And it is entire before vowells, and c. d. f g. h. i. n. g.
s. t. v. Before b. m. p. the letter n. is changed into m. imberbis immortalis
impar. Before l. and r. it is cut off, and the letter following is doubled, as,
illaesus, irrisio. Inter compounded signifies middlenes, interpositio,
privation interitus, intension interdictum. And it does remain entire in
composition before all letters wherewith Latin words begin, except intelligo,
and such others changing r. unto l.

Intro in composition does keep constantly to the same sense, and is entire
before c. d. e g. i. m r. s. v.

Ob compounded does stand for parum, as oblongus, for contra as obiectum, for
circa, as obsessio, for coram, as obveniens. And it is found before all letters
for the most part entire, except in opprobrium, and ocquiniscens, where b. is
changed to p. in the first, and c. in the last, and such others: but in omissus
and opertus it is cast away.

Post compounded referring only to succession of time place or some other
circumstance does remain entire, going before words that begin with a. e. f.
g. h. i. l. m. p q. sc. v.

Per compounded signifies valde, permodestus, periniquus, or non perfidus, or
trans perspicuus, or nimium pertinax. And it does remain entire before any
letter, wherewith Latin words begin, saving in pellectus and pellucidus.

Prae in composition does signify ante, praefatio, super praefectus, maxim
praeclarus praepotens, immature praecox. In some Compounds it does not alter
the sense of the simple words, as in praecinctus praeut, and it is entire
before all letters that begin Latin words.

Praeter compounded is constant to the same signification, and does remain
entire before a. d. e. f. g. i. l. m. n. p. q. r. v which only it will precede,
and no other; praeterbitans has b. for Euphony.

Pro in composition is used for ante, providus, or procul, prophanus,
prohibitio propuduum, or super, prominens, or ultra, progressus, or palam,
promulgo, or valde, procurvus, or long, protentus. And it is always entire,
and goes before all letters except b. e. o. q.

Sub in composition does signify parum, subiratus, or infra, subiectus, or
repent, subitus, or vicissim suffectus, or clam, surreptus, or super sublimis,
or post subsequor. And it goes before all letters, except q. and is commonly
entire: only before c. f. g. m. p. r. the same are doubled in steed of b. cut
off, as in succedens suffugium, suggestio, summissus, suppositio, surreptus,
but suscipiens, suspirans, sustollens, may be compounded with sus for sursum.

Subter in composition is used for clam, subterducens, for infra subterfluens,
subtorlabens, and is never impaired or compounded with any other letters.

Super compounded has the signification of a^plius, superadditus, of diutius,
superstes, of sursum superveniens. And it is never impaired, being compounded
with all letters except b. and q.

Supra in composition refers only to a place, and goes only before d. p. s.
being ever entire. Trans compounded does likewise refer to place only, and is
always entire going before a. c. e. f. g. i. l. m. p. q. t. v. But it casts
away s. before another s. as in transumptus. Likewise both s. and n. before d.
i. u. as in trado, traijcio, trano.

Prepositions inseparable so called, because they are never used a part in
apposition are six: Am or oftener a^ for amphi, Con, for cum, di for dis, Re for
retro, se for seorsim or sine, ve for vi or vae, always and only used to
composition, except in few Archaismes, as am terminum, for ad: Am compounded,
refers only to place, or somewhat equivalent thereunto, and goes before p.
as amputans. But an goes before c. h. f. q. ancisus, anbelo, anfractus,
anquiro, and amb^ before a. e. i. u. ambages, ambesus, ambigens, ambustus, or
amb^ before d. as amb idexter ambidentes.

Con compounded does stand for simul, commensalis, for contra, contendo, for
valde, conc^tio concrepitus. And it is entire before c. d. f. g. i. n. q. s. t.
v. before b. p. and l. m. r. the letter n. is changed, as in these instances,
combibo, compareo, colligo, commuto corrigo. And before h. or any vowel, n. is
cut off without recompense, Comedo alone has m. instead of n. for Euphony.

Di or dis compounded stand for non, difficili^, for seorsim, discissus, for
contra, dissensio, for valde dispereo, for ordinate, dispositio. Moreover Di is
used in composition before words that begin with d. g. l. m. n. r. But dis
before b. c. i. p. q. s. t. and before f. the same is doubled in recompense of
s. cut off as in diffid^.

Re in composition is used for retroe recessus, for ^ursum, recognosco, for
reciproce, redamo, for adversum reluctor, for valde, redundo, for procul,
remotus, for non reclusus. And sometimes it adds nothing to the signification
of the simple, recaleo. And it is put before b c. d. f. i. l, m. n p. q. s. t.
v. but before h. and a. e. i. o. u. it will take d. for Euphony redhibeo
redactus, redemptus, rediens, redolens, reduncus, and reunctor, reunio,
reedifico without d. In reddo for rem, do, d. is doubled for a recompense of m.
cut off, so Re is never impaired.

Se compounded does note a separation, seiunctus privation, securus, socors,
deviation seductus. And it comes in composition before c. d. g. i. l. m. p. v.
being always entire.

Ve in composition does signify intension, vehemens, diminution vegrandis
vecors, privation vesanus, veiovis. And it goes before c. d. g. h. i. p. s.
being every where entire, vetus for vae atas is contracted.

Annotations.
Some Prepositions will not be compounded at all as, absgue adversum apud
circiter citra coram erga, intra, iuxta penes, pone, secundum, sine, ultra,
being always separable.

Others have Compounds but very few, as, quoci^ca circum circa, cisalpinus,
cispadanus, perclam mecum, quibuscum, extraordinarius, extrinsecus, infranares
propalam, propemodum, propterea, praeter, propter, supradictus, hactenus,
quadantenus qu^tenus quoquo versum retrorsum, usque, quoque.

Many are found seperable from their cases, becoming absolute Adverbs, some
commonly, as ante citra circum circiter clam, coram, contra, infra intra,
iuxta, palam, pone post procul, prope, secus, subter super supra ultra, some
very seldom, as prae propter and tenus thus: (having much affinity with
Pronouns) Adverbialls will admit of diverse forms in diverse structures.

Of the figure of Adverbs.
Adverbs by the figure are some Primitives being many Monosyllables, as nunc,
mox, iam, cras, sed, vel praclam, ad per, etc. And others Derivatives, which
may be Pronominall Monosyllables, for they descend from any part of speech, and
from Nouns or Pronouns in any case, hic quod recens penitus, facile, potius,
plurimum, acerba, horrida, in the Nominative or Accusative, humi, domi, nauci,
in the Genitive, tempori, luci, vesperi, in the Acquisitive, hac forte repent
subito recta, noctu, hodie, in the Ablativall. All which have the same both
termination and signification with their Primitives. Others differing in
Termination from their Primitives being of the first or of the second
Declension will end in atim itus iter itim im, or e. as summatim, medullitus,
ostiatim, humamtus, humaniter, viritim, enixim, caesim, raptim, male. Being of
the third, they end in atim enter tim ter no, as generatim, vehementer, partim,
segniter, omnino.

Derivatives by comparison follow the rules of other Adjectives, being the same
with Adjectives neutrall, as minus, minimum, or Superlatives may endin e. or ^.
novissime, postremo, both Comparatives and Superlatives may be derived from
Prepositions prae prius, primo, so extra exterius, extreme, infra, inferius,
infime, etc.

Of Compound Adverbs.
Adverbs are compounded some like Pronouns with syllabical additions, as
tandem, ubinam, uspiam, paulisper, hi^ce, hiccine. Some with precedent
Substantives, dextrorsum, pedetentim. Some with subsequent Substantives,
tantopore illico perendie, saepenumero.

Some with subsequent Adiectives, denuo praeterea. Some with subsequent Verbs,
Vbivis quolibet. Some with two Verbs, scilicet videlicet, Some with two
Adverbs, tantammodo velut protinus dein. Some with three originalls, deinde,
aliquantisper, quamobrem, nudiustertius.

THE TRUE REASON OF A RIGHT SYNTAX.
THe Syntax is a congruous and orderly disposal of all the parts of Speech,
requiring with congruity of words a meet placeing of the same in Prose or
Poems. And it is two fold, Analogicall in the simple and common custom of
Construction, or Anomalous, when swarving thence, it has for Authority the
constant practice of approved classick writers* And this last does figurat
either the Construction of simple sentences, or the elocution of the whole
speech.

Of Analogicall Construction.
The Analogicall Construction is two fold, by Concordance, or by Consequence.

Of Concordance.
By Concordance a Substantive or any part of Speech put Substantively having a
regent power will require any Noune or Verb depending thereon to agree
therewith in its proper affections. Tum capitale nefas operosa diluit art vir
nequam.

Of Consequence.
It was a common error generally received, that every oblique did belong to a
certain regence of some particular part of Speech, which mistake has
multiplied Rules, and thereby stunned al young Students without cause; for the
structure of oblique Substantives (which are no Appositions*) do not depend
upon the regence of any part of Speech, but upon a consequence, or in pursuance
of a certrine sense and meaning of the precedent leading word, what part of
Speech soever it be, as in that respect indifferent to the structure of any
oblique. Wherefore either Verb, or Noune, or Adverb, standing for a guide, as
it, shareth in the same signification, so it will be joined to the same
oblique, in construction, as Hostibus occurrite, or obvii, or obviam ite.

Sometimes several oblique Substantives referring to the same leader for
limitations of several circumstances make with it one predicat answering to a
rect Substantive precedent, as to the Subject. Sponte domi trepidante manu sibi
detrahit ostrum.

Of Anomalous Construction.
The Anomalous construction is made by six figures altering the ordinary Syntax
of words, to wit, by Enallage, Hypallage, Ellipsis, Pleonasmus, Zeugma, and
Syllepsis, whereof the two last belong only unto Concordance, the fourth only
to a Consequence, and the three first may concern either of both.

Enallage is a figure that changes parts of Speech and their affections each
with another, whereof before in the Etymology. Hypallage does transfer
Substantives or Adjectives, being the same, or different Cases, and sometimes
different Genders having some mutual dependence amongst themselves each to the
others place, as Pectus quoque robor a fiunt, where Robora the last of both
rects does stand for regent, and pectus put in Apposition thereto is taken
collectively for all parts of the breast. So Amantium irae amoris est
redintegratio, where id may be Elliptically understood with irae a Genitive
Singular, else, as a rect of a Noune plural only it may be apposed to the
regent Singular. Likewise praeclarae virtutis homo, for precla^us virtute. Auri
sacra fames, for sacri. Solstitium pecori defend, for Solstitio defend pecus,
date-classibus austros, for classes austris. In nova fert animus mulat^s dicere
formas, for corpora in novas formas mutata.

^llipsis does figurate the construction, when some word that is very obvious,
but wanting, must be supplied, having common instances in most Rules.

Eleonasmus is a redundance of words, where some may be spared, were it not of
purpose to make the sentence more remarkable, as abstinet a Vino, pridie eius
diei, or calendarum, ubi gentium quo terrarum abiit, nusquam loci invenitur tua
solius culpa est hisce oculis egomet vidi meis auribus audivi, sic ore locutus,
vitam voxit improbam, morte obii^ repentina, rebus gaudens secundis laetatu,
berbae sub sibi succo victitant.

Zeugma does figurate the concordance, when a Verb or Adiective agreeing with
the nearest regent Substantive, is to be supplied in a congruous number,
person, case, and gender, with all other regents having respect thereto,
whether set before or after without any Copulatives or with them, as Ego de
patre, Tu de liberis, omnes de Bello percontati sunt. Socus and Class relicta.

After Adverbs of exception or comparison, the Verb or A^iective will best
agree with the remotest regent. Cui nemo nisi mulieroulae indignatus esset. Ego
sicut faenum lotus laresco.

If a Verb or Adiective be placed with a regent Noune of multitude, having
parts that follow wherewith it may be supplied, or if the same be placed with
any part being understood with the rest then it is called Prolepsis, as Populus
vivit, al^i in penuria, in deliciis alii. Impliciti laqueis nudus uterque
iacet, where the Distributive uterque must be resolved to the parts, Mars
nudus, Venus nuda, being an implicit Prolepsis.

Syllepsis does affect the concordance, when many regents copulated whereof
some or all be singular do govern a Verb or Adiective plural agreeing with the
worthier regent in Person or Gender, the first of both being worthiest, and the
second next in dignity, as Tu and Uxor estis valetudinarii. Ego, filia tum
servitiis omnibus moribundae sebricitamus. So the Preposition cum with the
Ablativall case does often take the place of a rect and copulative, Juradabant
Rhemus cum fratre Quirino, for et Frater: But in prose the Verbs or Adiectives
would best agree with rects, being seldom altered by the oblique, except it be
with Poets, and that harshly if the oblique be a Pronoune, as Divellimur inde
Iphitus and Pelias mecum: In things without life the neuter commonly passes
for the worthiest Gender Divitiae Decus honor omnia in oculis sita sunt. And
sometimes in living things, Judaei suem leporem aut cygnum gustare nolunt, quae
tamen alunt lueri gratia: sometimes when the Copulated regents concur in the
same Gender, the Adjective does agree with them. Grammatica olim and Musica
iunctae sunt. Sometimes the copulated being adjuncts of men, whatsover their
own Gender be, will admit of adjectives Masculine. Inventus praecipueque
mancipiae morigeri sunto, which is a Metonymie.

Many Adiectives Singular copulated may agree with a Substantive plural: Magna
minorque ferae, Colores albus, ater and viridis in Iride spectantur, which are
an implicit Prolepsis.

Lastly, if diverse regents are included in a Collective or Distributive, which
may be resolved to hic and ille, alter and alter, being equivalent with a
Copulate, and the Verb or Adiective does agree with them only in signification,
not in their proper affections of Number and Gender, then it is called of late
Writers Synthesis, Tota Gens in seipsos armati, uterque deluduntur, Terrae
Titania proles fulmine deiecti, for Titanes, hoc pecus omne meum multae quoque
montibus errant, where Oves or Caprae, a specificall kind must be supplied from
the general word pecus. Servitia repudiavit qui catervatim concurrebant, by a
Metonomy of the adiunct. Latium and Capua multati sunt agro, for Latini and
Capuenses, by a Metonomia of the Continent. Vos o Calliope placidas praebete
Canenti, for Musae quarum ipsa dux erat, by a Synecdoche of the species, Capita
coniurationis crucibus affixi, by a Metaphor. Other examples pass under the
name of Synthesis where some known Appellatives are understood Elliptically, as
plus quam duo millia caesi, where hominuns should be supplied, Rex tibi
praecipimus, for Ego cum P^oceribus, nobis praesente, for Praeside cum
Assessor^bus. Other instances having no equivalence with a Copulate, cannot be
a structure by Synthesis, but by plain Ellipsis, as in Eunucho sua, where must
be supplied Comaedia, Praeneste sub ipsa, suply Urbe, Centauro, in m^gna,
supply Navi.

The Concordance of continued Substantives.
A regent Substantive will require any other Substantives in a continued
signification commonly called Apposition, be they few or many to agree with it
self always in person, and regularly in Case and Number, as Authorem perdis
scelerum origo and fome^, otium, fatis authoribus istaec tot mala contingunt:
where the latter continued Substantives declare the nature of the former;
sometimes by adding property, as in the former instances, sometimes by clearing
an ambiguity, as Leo sydus caeleste, sometimes by restraining generality, as
Ludi Consualia.

The apposed figuratively may be a Genitive with a regent of any other case by
Antiptosis, as Urbs Antiochiae, for Antiochia, transit flumen Rheni, for
Rhenum; And it must be a Genitive, with a regent possessive standing for the
same Case of the Primitive by Enallage, as Tuum oculat testis indicium elevari
nequit, for Tui indicium.

Likewise the apposed may be of a different number, which being plural only,
will agree with a regent singular, as, Egot uae deliciae. And contrariwise
Parisii Metropolis, or being a regular Noune plural may agree with a regent
collective singular, as, Senatu patriae praedonibus And contrariwise, sunt
pecus igaavum fuci. Or with many regents singular copulated, Philippus and
Maria Reges Angliae. And contrariwise, Servitia famulu^ cum famula vili
acquisivit.

Lastly, the apposed being moveable Substantives must accord in Gender with the
regent, Ensis victor, hafla vel ferrum victrix, the Neuter agreeing best with
feminines of nouns unmovable to the neuter. A Nominative after an Indicative or
the Accusative standing instead thereof after an Infinitive of Verbs
Substantive, having the nature of definitions, are apposed to their defined
regents in a continued signification; for no word can be governed of any more
then one regent in the same respect, as, Honor est virtutis calcar, nuptiae
dignoscuntur hon^stior conditio quam iucundtor, Musae habentur, literatissima
Cohors. Ego salutor matris deliciae. Ars vocatur inopum divitiae la^d bus
arguitur vini Bacchator Homerus. Vos mallem amicos esse quam haberi. Circenses
curule certamen vocari constat, where the verbs Substantive do constantly
accord with regents, but Participles signifying to be esteemed, or called, or a
Relative, joined with other Moods reduced thence, may indifferently accord
either with the regent or with the apposed Substantive. Passim clarescit
Lutetia vocata, or voca^i Parisii quae vocatur, or qui vocantur Parisiii, quam,
or quos vocant Parisios. And if both be Appellatives that betoken things
inanimate, then such Participles do commonly accord with the apposed, Paupertas
visum est onus, omnis error non est habenda stultitia. And they constantly
agree with the apposed, when both refer to Men. Opibus congerendis student
Gens universadicti Veneli, or, quos vocant venetos, Proles Aeneia condidit
Albam, qui fertur Julus, or by variation, Cui nomen Julus, or Juli, or Julium.
Likewise such being apposed, require a concordance of any Adiective following,
Fulmina belli Scipiadae caesi. Lastly, an Apellative apposed to a proper name
will requi^e the regence. Apiolae Latino um opid^m captum est, Bihlia sacer
co^ex e^^ assiaue revolvendus.

Moreover Datives construed with, dabis, dato, datur, libet l^cet, expedit
aequum necesse opu est, and such other as they take the place of Accusatives
before the Infinitives of Verbs Substantive or passive of esteem or calling, so
they admit the Appositions following the said Infinitives to be either Datives
or Accusatives answerable to the Accusatives to be supplied from thence. Do
tibi dum bonus es, justo sanctoque videri, a quum est piis censeri innoxiis,
non datur vobis haberi civibus, or cives, mihi neo libet nec licet esse
negligenti, or negligentem, where vos from vobis, and me from mihi, should be
supplied with Cives and negligentem.

The Concordance of Adjectives.
Adiectives whether Nouns, Pronouns or Participles agree with their
Substantives, being of the same sentence with them, in Person, Case, Gender,
and Number: vos omnes habiti, estis infidi, but a Pronoune Relative being of
another sentence, may be of another Case, then the Antecedent Substantive,
which is to be supplied therewith. ^aeta^ies quam nulla potest involvere Nubes
for quam diem, and any Participle wherein a Relative is included must have the
antecedent substantive supplied Coguntur Superi, renuit mora nulla vocatos,
Supply, Superos, and sometimes to avoid ambiguity, the Substantive is repeated
with a Relative to clear the sense. Laus est virtutis merces quam mercedem
ventosi tan^ ^mmodo a^petunt, and the Substantive is often repeated without
necessity, diem scito esse nullam quo die pro ^^^s non agam. Sometimes the
regent Substantive is transferred from the principal sentence and made the
same Case with the Relative, changed to a Demonstrative by Antiptosis. Quam
struo domum vestra erit And a Relative plural construed with a partitive
Singular, may be changed from the Genitive, and made the same Case with it.
Nubium flatus varii quibus al^o sinduntur alio perrum unlur, or qui alius cas
findit alius perrumpit, being Prolepsis. Sometimes the Relative is put in the
Antecedents Case Greekwise, Aliquid little scribe quo^um for quae consuevisti.
Sometimes the precedent Verb is to be supplied therewith. L^g^m edicito quam
tibi videtur, supply edic^adam esse.

Sometimes qui is used for qualis, and being plural, referring to an
Antecedent Singular, the antecedent must be understood specifically, not
individually. Eunuchum deperit quibus Reginae tantum utuntur. Qualis and
quantus: being Relatives agree always with the latter Substantive. Tales viros
esse putas, qualis famina. Tanta tibi sides, quanta opes. And such Relatives
may be changed unto Adiectives with Comparative Adverbs, tam and quam, as tam
optimum oleum quam acerbissi^a erit olea, for tale obeum qualis olea, Sol
tantus, quanta on^rus rota, or Sol tam magnus quam ^ota.

Adiectives used Adverbially are englished after Verbs Active or Neuter,
betokening quality, time, or posture. And answering to a precedent regent
Substantive Oxoniam petit ^ibens and frequens, for libenter and frequenter.
Oportet nos matu^inos agere, for mane, saltat subrius, ^bit cubitum inc^^natus,
incedit rectus, do^mit supinus.

Distributives being plural only are properly joined with regents that want
the Singular: Singuli proceres, binae literae, t^rna castrae. Pronounes
partitive have much affinity with Substantives, for as regents they require a
concordance of finit Verbs in person and number, and of Adiectives in Case,
Gender, Person and Number. Nullus superum spernetur inultus, supply with
Superum numero, or consortio, where the principal regent being the Genitive
plural does always leave an impresse of its own person and Gender in the
partitive.

The partitive being a Superlative placed between two Substantives of a
continued signification may agree with either of them, but more properly with
the regent. Inedia frangitur Leo animallum fortissimus, or fortissimum, or
Animal fortissimum, being then indefinite.

The Genitive of the principal regent after Superlatives may be changed to the
Accusative with ante. Rosa ante alios stores suavissimus, or to the Accusative
with inter, or to the Ablative with e. de. ex. after any partitive, Natu
maximus vestrum inter vos e. or de vobis, Manuum, or e manibus, or inter manus
dextra est fortior, Zonarum, de Zonis, or inter Zonas media. Hoc operum mihi
creed tu^rum, or ex operibus, or inter opera. Ego fratrum, or e fratribus
superstes, nigra Lanarum coloribus inepta, Craesus divitum, u^us, solus, or
such like being Ellipticall. Other instances are Graecismes. Degeneres canum,
improbi hominum, Sociorum opportuni, acer equorum, used for Superlatives.

The Partitive Superlatives may refer to diverse or contrary kinds. Sic ego
sum rerum non ultima Sexte tuarum, rerum omnium mors est extremum, bona
existimatio est omnium prima, hominum est malorum optimus bonorum pessimus. And
sometimes the regent is repeated with the Partitive, as the Antecedent with the
Relative, Oculorum dexter oculus caecu^^t. Lastly, the principal regent may be
a Genitive singular being a Collective. Pompeii sanguinis unus, ^uventutis
pessimus.

The same Pronouns desisting to be Partitives agree with their Substantives, in
all four affections like other Adiectives, Vnus hostis, alter amious est,
utrunque spe^nis.

Substantives Greek-wise are used for Adiectives being no Appositions. Dat
marem strepitum, for masculum, habet heroas sensus, amat iuvenes ^ocos, Romula
tellus. Qu^m populum late regem cognevimus.

Any Adiective Neutrall in either of both numbers, may be put Substantively,
quiddam, negotium verbum, or Chrema being understood, varium and mutabile
semper faemina, and such may be Substantives to any other Adiectives, as mala
sunt ferenda, but more commonly the Pronouns. Omne rarum charum pau^a his
similia, and such may be understood with Participles that form the Preter
tense of the Infinitive, nocet esse locutum, supply id. Lastly Pronouns of
quantity being Neuters Singular, are usually construed with a Genitive of any
Substantive, wherewith otherwise they should accord in all proper affections
thereof like other Adiectives. Minus tristitiae, extremum luctus, dimidium, or
d^plum pecuniae, plus doloris id noctis, etc. for minor tristitia, etc. And
such a Genitive is sometimes Plural, not only of Nounes that want the
Singular, as istud divitiarum, but also of the regular, after Partitives, as
tantum nummorum. Other examples imitating the same structure be Graecismes,
Opaca locorum, amara curarum, cuncta terrarum, abdita rerum, ardua montium.
Lubrica vallium. And such are these Genitives singular standing for
Collectives. Telluris operta, belli acuta, famae inania, fortunae ineerta. But
omnia sunt hominum tenu^ pendentia filo, for humana omnia, is Enallago.

Any word taken Technically will be an Aptote, and may be either put in
Apposition with another Substantive, as Lactea nomen habet, or stand for a
Substantive to an Adiective. Istud Anticomarita. So may Verbs stand for Aptote
Substantives in the Indicative, non habemus salem quod in te est, In the
Subjunctive aequum est ut suum cuique reddas, In the Infinitive: Suadere
molestum est. Likewise Adverbs are used for Aptote Substantives. Nuper
praeteritum mox futurum, nunc tantummodo nostrum est. But Adverbs of quantity
standing for Partitives with a Genitive plural, leave the concordance of
Adiectives in Gender and Number to the Genitive being the principal regent, as
due thereto from themselves if they were variable, partim signorum erepta sunt,
bombardarum displosae, plusquam quinquaginta militum occisi, for quedam signa
nonnullae bombardae quinquaginta milites, by Enallage. Lastly, two Aptotes
singular, as a Copulative require an Adiective plural, frigere and calere sunt
contraria.

Some Adiectives are set alone, the common Substantive being understood.
Vescimur bubula, supply carne, Laborat tertiana, supply febri, perfunditu^
calida, supply, aqua, aeris centeni, supply, Nummi scribitur in duo decim,
supply Tabulis, venit ex Tuscu^ano, supply, agro, docet togatam, supply
comaedi^^. Pronominall and Participiall Adiectives do usually accord with a
Genitive of the Primitive understood in the possessive, by Eunallage of the
form and Figure. And likewise the Relatives have often the same concordance
with the former: Accomodatissimum stomacho est lac caprium quae fronde
vescuntur, mea nil refert qui sum innoxius, sua ipsius laud quantus erat, or
sua ipsorum laud quanti, tua est unius, or solius culpa, nostra duorum, or
paucorum sententia quot quot adsumus, damnatur, vestra cuiusque plurium, or
omnium spes quota suit, tota cecidit, tunc tua defuncti molliter ossa cubent,
nostros vidisti flentis ocell^s, by Enallage of Figure and Number. And if a
Participle does precede, the possessive should not follow but the Primitive, as
maternae lugentis lachrymae, or lugentis matris lachrymae id suaserunt.

The Concordance of Verbs Personal with Rects.
A Verb Personal does agree with a regent Nominative, in Number and Person,
as, Nemo semper sapit. And whereas some Tense in the Passive and Deponent
voices, be formed by the Participle, The same must likewise accord with the
Rect, in Case, Gender, Number and Person, as other Adiectives. Litterae alihi
honorandae nobi (cum illiberaliter aspernatae sunt. In such grecismes, as, Haec
errata condonabitur. Nounes that seem to be the Rects are plain Accusatives
thus to be made entire, Quantum ad haec errat a condonahitur. Any part of
speech by Enallage may be made an Aptote, and as the Substantive to an
Adjective, so likewise the Nominative to a Verb Personal, being commonly
singular, as before said. But Adverbs collective or partitive construed with
Genitives plural will govern Verbs plural, as, Abunde fabularum historiis
admixtae sunt, for fabulae quam pluririmae Testium partim sunt oculati, partim
auriti, for quidam testes. And the Verbs are always plural when the principal
regents betoken living things. Else if they signify things inanimate, joined
with Adverbs or Pronouns partitive, they will admit a Verb singular, as
plurimum, or satis leporum and facetiarum omni sermon fusum est. Of two Rects
singular copulated, or one Collective singular comeing before a Verb or
Adiective plural in Syllepsis and Synthesis. And of Verbs or Adiectives
agreeing with the nearest Rects or Substantives, whether of diverse, or of the
same kinds, as parts of the whole in Zeugma and Prolepsis. The Rect being the
first or second person singula or plural is never expressed, but to notify
some distinct property, either in a common Act or passion resolvible to
Pronouns of diversity, or to Conjunctions exceptive, both with Negatives. Quod
ego in laud pono tu vertis vitio, for alter nullus, nos seria quaerimus vos
ludo indulgetis, for praetere a nulli, or nemo nisi vos, or praeter vosipsos.
Or in a singular Act or passion resolvible to a Pronoune demonstrative or
individual, or to a Superlative Adverb absolute or Prepositionall, Nos colimur
Domini Servi sordescitis ipsi, for nos soli, or vnici, so ^os p^aecipue, or
prae ali^s. Otherwise the first and second person in both numbers are always
understood. Quid facis ignoro, nitimur in vetitum, discite iustitiam moniti.

Likewise a Rect of the third person being a Relative, except qui, is
understood after Adverbs coniunctive or disiunctive, or a Negative in place
thereof. Ni^edula lucet, ac splendescit, friget vero, non calet. Sometimes the
coniunctive Adverb is not expressed, but may be supplied by a resolution of the
sentence. Voce faucibus elapsa, reverti n^quit, or si vox faucibus elaberetur,
nequit Reverti. Quas tibi do literas, raro displicent, is a figurative
structure by Antiptosis.

The Relative Qui must necessarily be supplied with any Vocative after obliques
of the second person, or any possessives derived thence to make the Syntax
entire and perfect. Vestra Judices sententia stabit, for qui estis Judices; and
by variation, vestra Judicum sententia stabit, or vestra Judiciaria sententia.
Te pater obsecro, for qui es pater, or by variation, te patrem oro, resolvible
in the same manner to qui es pater, but not by necessity, as in the former,
that being Ellipticall, this a perfect structure. Rects that betoken men are
commonly understood, specially with est, fertur, ferunt, dicunt, aiunt,
praedicaut, clamitant, tradunt, prohibent, and such others.

The Rects are likewise understood with Verbs of exempt power instanced in
their Etymology, Saxa pluunt, signifying the Stones drop or sweat, is a
Regular sentence, but saxa pluit, the Cloud does shower Hail, is Ellipticall,
where Nubes should be supplied. The Verb Substantive is commonly understood,
as, quot homines, tot sententiae, rari quippe boni, mi^um, immane, quantus
quantus, etc.

Sometime a Verb Adiective is understood. Ego continuo mecum, supply cogitabam,
recte tu quidem and vere supply loqueris, which is familiar in Dialogues.

Such Verbs are likewise understood in Proverbs Sus Minervam, supply docet,
Cantharus pillulam, supply sapit.

By the Figure Apostopesis, Verbs are omitted, having sometimes a known sense
of indignation. Quos ego, supply puniam, or of derision, Tune illam cantando,
supply antecellis. Sometimes a concealed sense either of obscenesse. Tu autem
sed Hircum oles or of some other odiousness, Novimus and qui te, supply
viderunt. And of other imperfect sentences accompanying Interiectionall
Adverbs, it has been spoken already in their Etymology.

Lastly Genitives of some proper passion or affection joined with Accusatives
of the person, being construed with the Verbs Impersonall, pae^itet, taedet,
miseret, pudet, piget, seem to take the place of Nominatives by A^tiplosis, as,
avaros impendii taedet, for impendium, else some Pronoune Demonstrative is to
be supplied, with such as id, or tantum impendit taedet. And the same will
fitly answer to the Question what, a Charactaristicall note of Rects to Verbs
and Substantive to Adjectives. And moreover such Genitives may be changed to
Infinitives, the usual Rec^s of all Impersonalls, as tanti laboris nos nil
paenituit, or Nos nil paenituit tantum tolerasse labo^em. In like manner is
used Platonis mihi in mentem venit, supply, dictum, Civitatis refert, supply
bonum.

Of Construction by consequence in General.
The Genitive is construed always with a former Substantive, and if it be not
expressed, it must be supplied by Elipsis: The Acquisitive may be construed
with any part of speech, having a sense suitable thereunto. But the guide or
leading word is Ellipticall being a Substantive with two Datives after a Verb
Substantive, or an Adiective with a Gerundivall Dative, whereof in their proper
places. Ablativals with many Accusatives are usually construed with
Prepositions, which if they be not expressed, are always to be supplied with
any Ablativals and with all Accusatives, being no sufferers.

All the Obliques being Ellipticall are likewi^^ called Synecdochicall Cases,
because they ^^^ctually note that part wherein some proper (...) or affection
does reside, whereof particular (...) is given in the particular Syntax of
every Ca^^

Prepositions in the Compounds do often refer to their proper Cases, Oppido
abuns transiit Rhenum, which are sometimes repeated with their Cases; Ad
consilium accersunlur Jurisperiti cum legibus collaturi. And sometimes they are
transferred from Compounds to their Cases, by the figure Tmesis, sub amplexus
ibit amica tuos, for subibit. Moreover ex and prae in Compounds, have the force
of extra and praeter, egreditur urbem, excedit modum, praevertitur Hebrum.

Derivatives are construed with the same Obliques, as their Primitives, when
they continue the same sense, not swerving thence. Epulum saluti satis
commodule apparatur, or sat commoda, or quae sat commodet, optimus, or Optime
ommum dixit, reliquis melior aut melius audit, propior, aut propius, aut
proxime nobis aut a nobis, aut nos, aut ad nos sedet; whereof before in
Adverbes, so Justitia est legibus obtemperatio, nil tibi hanc rem curatio est,
domum reditionis spe sublata, Catonis de hoc vitio sententia decretum aut
opinio stabit, Tuum hominis probi pectus perspexi.

Some Nounes in the same signification have sundry constructions, as pater
mihi, or mei, or meus, doctissimus ominum, or ante, or inter omnes, or ex
omnibus poeta dignus avis, or avorum, vacuus irae, or it a, or ab ira, sumus
pares aut aequales nobis, or inter nos, stercus agro vel ad agrum utile, Murus
triginta pedibus, pedes, or pedum longus. Some Nounes admit of various
structures, but in various senses. Aer est omnium commune, where the Guide is
put Substantively; or omnibus communis, where it is put Adjectively with
relation; or communis inter omnes, or nobis cum omnibus aliis: by virtue of Con
most familiary used in composition to this last structure. In like sort Regum
secundus, the Guide being Partitive, secundus Regi, or a Rege, being an
Adiective of Diversity; So farti admissio idem est ac ipfum furtum, the Guide
being construed with a Copulative: or idem furto, as an Adjective of likeness,
or idem cum furto, in a Comparative sense: So vir consilii alienus, for expers,
ambitioni alienus, for inhabilis, maiestate alienus, for vacuus, vir gravis
paci, for molestus, gravis authoritate, for pollens, similis tui; referring to
internal qualities, similis tibi, referring to external parts. Some Verbes
also in the same sense admit of diverse structures, as dono impertio aspergo
insterno induo exuo prohibeo interdico, and such others are construed with
Acusatives of the Person, and Ablativals of the thing* or Accusatives of the
thing, and Acquisitives of the Person: dono te munere, or tibi munus, etc.
Others are construed with an Acquisitive or an Accusative, praestolo antecedo
anteeo antesto attendo illudo insulto tibi, or te, etc. So libido nobis, or nos
incessit, morti, or mortem occubuit, tecto, or tectum subiit, eloquentiae, or
ad eloquentiam hoc conducit. Others are construed with Acquisitives, or
Ablativals, consentio tibi, or tecum, dissentio tibi, or a te, acquiesco
sententiae, or sententia. Others with other Cases, loquor tibi, or ad te,
admoneris errati, or erratum, or de errato, comparamur aliis, or cum aliis, or
ad alios, or inter alios, interest vestrum Judicum, or vestra Judices,
supersedeas exemplorum multitudini, or multitudine, or multitudinem. Others are
construed with Acquisitives of the Person, or Accusatives of the Thing, medicor
tibi morbido, or tuam morbum, condono peccanti, or peccatum, or condono te
peccatum. Tempero, moderor, with such other, having Rectes of the Adiunct are
construed with the Acquisitive, but having Rectes of the Subject are construed
with the Accusative. Officium moderatur nostro consilio, but nos moderamur
consilium officio non ex libidine, Pudor temperat nostrae orattoni, or nos
temperamus orationem pudore.

Most Verbes with change of significations will vary in their Constructions:
Accedo tibi, for assentior te accedo, for adeo, abhorruit sce^us, for odit
perpetratum, abhorruit a scelere, for devitavit perpetrandum, ausculto tibi,
for obedio ausculto te, for audio aemulor te. for imitor aemulor vobiscum, for
certoae,-mulor malorum faelicitat^, for invideo, Caveo tibi, for provideo,
caveo te, for fugio, coveo a^te, for metuo, Caveo pignore, for securum facio,
consulo tibi, for prospicio, consulo te, for consilium pet^, consulo in
Commune, for statuo, de commodis consulo, for moneo; and senatores consulunt
put absolutely, contingit mihi, for accidit, contingo te, for ^ango, doleo tuam
vicem, or de tuis rebus adversis, or ob res adversas, but dolet mihi caput* the
Verb referring transitively, to others miseries, but Intransitively to our
own.

Do litteras tibi ut nuncio, do ad te ut amicum, socius deficit mihi, for
deest, deficit me, for destituit, deficit a me, for desciscit, deficit ab
adiutore, for dissidet, deficit in hostem, for mutatur, alimento deficit herba,
for caret, faeneror pecuniam tibi Sc. usuram daturo, or abs te Sc. usuram
recepturo, irae indulget, for non obstar, iram indulget, for fovet, formido
metuo timeo vobis, or de vobis ut amicis, formido vos ut hosts, or a vobis ut
hostibus, impono tibi praestigiis ut veterator, impono te humeris ut Baiulus,
prospicio saluti Sc. tuendae, prospicio periculum Sc. futurum, in me recipio,
for promitto, me domum recipio, for confero, me stupentem recipio, for ad me
redeo, refero tibi ut noscas, refero ad te ut decernas, refero tuos mores, for
imitor, nostra refert, for ad nos spectat, officio renunciat, for discedit,
Praetorem renuncio, for promulgo, vacat studijs, for operam dat, adineptias
vacat, for otiatur, culpa vacat, for caret. And many others whereof beore in
the redundant forms of Verbs.

The Construction of Genitives Regular or Ellipticall.
The Genitive is always construed with another Substantive, which if it be
expressed has a Genitive in some sort a cause thereof. But if it be
understood, being usual after Adiectivall Nouns or Verbs of passion, then the
Genitive does denote the cause of such affection, Ratione, or Causa, being to
be supplied therewith, as the former Substantive. And some Genitives of Nounes
that betoken a specificall place or time, have a more General known
Appellative understood therewith, whereof particular instances were given
before in the properties of that Case.

A Genitive of the person or thing construed with a Rect or oblique, may be
changed to a Dative, but more properly a Genitive of the person, as Patri
domus, ecquid tibi causa doloris, exitio nautis est mare, mihi fascinat Agnos.
Sunt oculis tenebrae per tantum lumen abortae. Suo sibiiure abluntur amnes. In
this last example, sihi is Pleonasticall, which is familiar to it, and also to
mihi and tibi. Two Datives of the thing with Sum, or one of the Thing, and
another of the Person, with do, duco, habeo, relinquo, tribuo, verto, venio,
and such like are usually construed, both in Verse and Prose, otherwise the
Dative of the person, with Substantives of other Cases, are more familiar in
Poetry, and the same is ordinarily a Pronoune as in the following instances.
Rex pius est Reipublicae ornamento: where may be noted that Sum, the Copula
like the Conjunctions does never stand for guide, that office in such structure
belonging to Author Instrumentum via, or causae understood Elliptically, and
thus supplied. Rex pius est Author* aut causa ornamento, aut ornamenti
Reipublicae Arts sunt Senectuti subsidio, aut Senectutis instrumenta subsidii,
aut subsidiaria instrumenta. But in structure with other Verbs, the Dative of
the thing, does refer unto the Verb, and the Dative of the person does
refer to the former Dative, as the latter of two Substantives, having the
place of known Genitives. Virtutem bonis vitio vertunt improbi, for bonorum
vitio ne ipsis probro vitium ducatur, for ipsorum probro, altisque ludibrio
habeantur, for aliorum ludibrio.

Any Genitive being the latter of two Substantives, or a Dative in place
thereof, having no Epithet construed with it may be changed to an Adjective
Possessive derived thence, signifying* Persons, Places, Times, Matter, Art,
Sect, or some property, as Tuo hoc futurum est commodo, for tibi commodo, herba
est hortensis, or horti, vestis Hyemalis, or Hyemis, vas vitreum, or vitri, lex
Grammatica, factio Romanensis opus mire artificiosum, for mirabilis artificii,
for Genitives will admit of such Epithites only as may be changed into
Adverb^ with a Possessive.

In property of speech, the Pronouns possessive meus tuus suus noster and
vester, should be used with Nounes of affection, as, amor, odium, cura,
neglectus, etc. when such affections are Transitive passing from the person.
Otherwise the Genitives of the Primitives, mei tui sui nostri and vestri are
more proper, when such affections are Passive, resting in the person, as, Tuo
favet desiderio, for qui desideras, but tui favet desiderio, for qui
desideraris: which Laws are seldom observed in the Pronouns, and much less
in other Possessives, or Primitives, whereas it would much clear the sense to
be strictly observed in both kinds.

The Gerundivall Genitive has sometimes construed with it a Genitive plural of
such nouns as otherwise would be a Substantive thereunto being made a second
future, as, licentia diripiendi Pomorum, for diripiendorum pomorum.

A Dative of the person, is always construed with a Gerundivall Rect, as
properly belonging to the second Future, whence the Gerunds are derived.
Vigilandum est custodi, not Custodis. And it is commonly understood* being
Pronominall, as, discendum est aut vapulandum, supply, vobis.

A Genitive of a Substantive joined with an Epithet of eminency, for praise or
dispraise, may be changed to an Ellipticall Ablative. Judex maximae
integritatis, or maxima integritate, supply, affectus, imbutus, indutus,
insignis, praeditus, etc. And both Cases may be changed by Hyppallage, Judex
maximus integritatis, supply laud, or Dote, or maximus integritate, for pro
integritate, so mulier multae impudentiae, or multa impudenttae, supply,
infamia deliquio, etc.

Sometimes an Epithet is supplied by a Pronominall Rect of the Verb
Substantive, referring to a remarkable antecedent, that has full force
thereof. Pater qua est indulgentia facile exoratur p^rduellis in gratiam
restitui nequit, eiuscemodi est malitiae, which may thus be made entire
structures, qua est indulgentia, supply, insignis, or pro qua est indulgentia,
so eiusmodi est malitiae, supply, reatu, or pro eiuscemodi malitiae reatu, or
culpa.

The Genitives of proper names betokening persons, are sometimes construed with
former Substantives understood Elliptically being known Appellatives referring
thereunto, as itur ad Vestae, supply, templum, Deiphobe Glauci, supply, Uxor
filia sorer, serva, with such others.

The Genitive is sometimes construed with a Primitive Elliptically understood
in the Possessive Tua Magistri dogmata, for tui Magistri, whereof in the
concordance of continued Substantives.

The Genitive of time is found Ellipticall, sometime, but very seldom, abest
bidui, supply, spatio, militiae natus, Belli ^ccisus, supply, tempore. Proper
names of Towns or Cities, and sometimes of Islands, being of the first or
second Declension, and singular number, are Genitives Ellipticall, when ought
is signified to be done, or happen either in them or at them. Strabo natus
Cretae, supply, insula, Gnosi, supply Urbe non Gortynae, supply, Oppido. And
such are, humi, and domi, being Appellatives, if the first be not an Adverb,
for it never admits any Epithet in such structure, as, Co^pora fundit humi,
not humi gelidae. But Domi will admit meae, tuae, suae, nostrae, vesteae, al
enae, and none other, as, Non altenae vescuntu^, quam meae and patris Domi, not
Domi paternae, supply, mensa, or sub tecto.

Genitives of the Person construed after the Verb Substantive, and referring to
a property whether external of fortune, or internal of manners, are put
ELLIPTICALLY,

Some Substantive of a continued signification being to be supplied with them,
so in the first kind, the Rect precedent should be repeated, as Ovis nigra est
Melthoei, supply, Ovis. And in the second kind proprium may be supplied. Or in
stead thereof when it is spoken of ought that is good, officium, or if spoken
of any thing that is evil, then, mos or consuetudo may be supplied. Pastoris
est oves tondere, furis deglubere, supply, proprium, hominis est errare, supply
Mos, Christiani est resipiscere, supply, officium, where may be noted, that
mei, tui sui nostri vestri, The Genitives of Pronouns primitive, will not admit
such structure, but must be changed to the possessives, meum, tuum, suum,
nostrum, as, docere meum est, discere vestrum, supply, officium, And any of the
former may be made a Possessive, as, Ovis Melibeta, tondere pastorale, errare
humanum, supply, quiddam, or such like. Likewise refert interest, or in the
same sense est will not admit any Genitive of Pronouns Primitive, but instead
thereof, an Ablative of the possessives is familiarly construed with them,
causa or vice being to be supplied. Tua judicis refert, supply, vice. And other
Genitives either of the Person or thing will join thereto in structure; Ut
recte agant omnium est, ut boni regnent interest Reipublicae, where officium,
with the former, and bonum with the latter kind of Genitives should be supplied.

Genitives of the measure construed with Nouns of quantity are Elliptical.
Trabs sex pedum longa du^rum lata vnius crassa, supply, pro mensura, if the
structure is not otherwise regular. Verbs of esteem value or concernment, as
sum or fio standing for aestimor addico condico, sto, consto do distraho emo,
redimo, mercor, veneo, vendo venundo, liceo licito, taxo, habeo, duco, pendo,
puto, facio, consulo, and refert interest, or in the same sense with both, est,
are construed with these Genitives of Substantives, flocci, nauci, pili,
teruncii, and assis nihili, or of Adiectives put Substantively, huius tanti,
quanti, with their Compounds, aequi, boni, pluris, minoris, plurimi, maximi,
and magni, parvi, with all which precio is understood Elliptically. Pluris est
oculatus testis quam auritus, so tanti passim fit pecunia, supply, pretio,
which may be an Hypallage, for tant o pretii, or with supply of res, or quidda,
for a continued Substantive, it may be made, tanti pretii fit pecunia, supply
res. Genitives of the crime or punishment are Ellipticall, being construed,
either with Nouns that signify Guilt or Innocence, as, reus noxius conscius
affi^is immunis pu^us insons, or Verbs of accusing, condemning, or acquitting,
as accuso alligo arc^sso arguo astringo cito convinco defero deprehendo increpo
insimulo interrogo postulo damno condemno iudico teneor absolvo libero purgo
with which crimine or paena are Ellipticall, as reus furti, conscius homicidii,
purus sceleris, insons caedis, supply, crimine, so reus capitis, immunis
verberum, supply, paena, accusaris periurii, supply, crimine, damnaris dupli,
absolveris peculatus, supply paena, where may be noted that castigo condono
corripio culpo excuso mulcto plecto punio reprehendo vitupero, are construed
with Accusatives of the crime or punishment, as culpo discipuli oscitantiam,
not Discipulum oscitantiae.

Nouns or verbs betokening affections of the mind, as Remembrance, Care,
Knowledge, Certainty, Boldness desire hop^, or what is contrary thereunto, are
construed with Genitives Ellipticall having ratione causa or gratia, understood
with them, as praesagus mali, immemor sui, improvidus Belli, indoctus ^ilae,
dubious v^ri, fidens animi appetens vini cupidus aurisecurus armorum intrepidus
procellae laetus bonorum certus vincendi, or victoriae, so discru^ior mentis
erubesco fortunae fastidio vestri vestrarumque ineptiarum fallor mentis gaudeo
voti miror iustitiae indoluit successorum paternae veretur irae miserescit
infaelicis re^um satagit suarum oblivistitur meritorum meminit iniuriarum,
demum recordaturus vindictae.

Likewise such Adiectivall Nounes or Verbs, as signify Plenty, Power,
Worthynesse, or the contrary, are construed with Genitives Ellipticall, as
inanis vacuus, or expers irae, dives auri plenus amovis lactis abundans tutelae
indiget operae paucus c^pax artium compos voti inops m^ntis, impos rationis
potitur voluptatum urbis, or homo ind^gnus avorum, Cura tuae virtulis digna,
Immunis B^lli fuit and liberrima Legum Roma, these last examples be graecismes
and mostly used by Poets. Moreover Nounes either of affections with Genitives
being their fears, or of plenty, worth and power with Genitives, signifying the
parts affected, may both be reduced to a Genitive or Ablative of the property
belonging to praise or dispraise by Hypallage, as vir anxius mentis, or anxiae
mentis, or anxia mente, so multus cibi or multi cibi, nullus fidei, or nullius
fidei bea^us oerebri, or beati cerebri, infelix fortunae, or infaelivis
fortunae, amplus nasi or ampli nasi, integer vitae, or integrae with such
others.

Lastly, Nouns of likeness, property or community are construed also with
Ellipticall Genitives: instar habet meriti. Iambus Choraei par est, Domini
similis vitium non S^nectutis, proprium, sed etiam Juventus commune. All which
like consors: socius affinis Compes, with many more, may pass for
Substantives, and as such admit of Datives instead of Genitives, so tui
studiosus m^i necessartus suorum liberalis alienorum profusus vitiorum fugax,
laborum patiens, alearum doctus, scelerum conscius, are construed with
Genitives as the former, but such will not be changed to the Datives. And it
may be noted that Nouns or Verbs, of Desire, hope, care, knowledge, may in
place of Genitives be construed with the Infinitive or other Moods reducible
thence, as cupidus divitiarum ^itescere ditescendi, or u ditescat. And those of
worthability or boldness may in place thereof be construed with Accusatives,
and the Preposition ad: Or with the Infinitive. Virgo tuae formae, or ad tuam
formam digna, nubere, or quae nubat tibi digna, so impar tui congressus, or ad
tuum congressum, or tecum cougredi, or ad congrediendum, audax facinoris, or ad
facinus, or ut faciat.

Construction of the Acquisitive regular or Ellipticall.
Nouns or Verbs signifying honor, favor, profit, pleasure, ease, yeeldance,
obedience, trust, promise, performance, command, discovery, neernesse,
likeness, or what is contrary thereunto, are construed regularly with
Acquisitives of the thing or persons notifying the scope of such relation, Id
prudentiae consentaneum, tibi maxim decet: wherenote that the Accusative after
decet or oppor^^t do either precede an Infinitive expressed or understood, or
otherwise is Ellipticall, as has been instanced in that case. Nemini amicus,
faves voluptatibus saluti noxiis, res adversae bonis prosunt iis non obsunt. In
Which sense, iuvare laedere, and offendere, are construed with Accusatives, so
Superioribus supplicamus, authoritati alienae intercedentes, tali nunquam
supplices. In which sense, precor obtestor oro imploro obsecro quaeso, are
constiued with Accusatives. Ars alteri facilis and iucunda est, alteri
displicet, quatenus ipsi difficilis, tibi fidus tuae probitati non diffido
nobis moriger iusso parebis, decretum nobis nunciavit, nulli mandavit, ut
vectigalia Caesari solverentur, pertinacia est constantiae vicina similis
propinqua finitima, vel saltem non contraria, hoc alienissimum est, or dissidet
tuae arti and personae.

Regular acquisiives are also construed with all compounds of Sum, except
Possum: Or with other Verbs compounded with satis been or male, or with any
Verb compounded with prae, ad con sub super ante post ob in and inter, when
such Praepositions do not refer to their proper cases, as if they were not
compounded. Est and suppetit, for adest, and videor, for appareo, be construed
also with such Acquisitives velle suum cuique est, mihi rerum suppetit usus,
tibi videris optimus.

Acquisitives of the person, are commonly construed with Verbs Active of taking
away nummos abstulit eripuit exemit subtraxit furatus est mihi. Or of the thing
with Verbs Neuter of forbearance, parcit vacat abstinet supersedet cessat
cedit, or discedit certamini.

Participialls in bilis, and Participles in dus, are construed with
Acquisitives only: nullo penetrabilis astro lucus erat. Visa mihi soror est
visendaque denuo nulli. Other Moods of Verbs passive are construed with
Acquisitives of the person, but very seldom: Ego non intelligor ^lli.

These Adjectives, par aptus utilis idoneus facilis with their Compounds, and
natus promptus paratus expeditns alacer ferox ardens vehemens, may by variation
chang the Acquisitive to an Accusative with ad, or to an Infinitive, or any
other Mod reducible thence, vir idoneus Bello, or ad Bellum, Belligerare ut
Belligeret, or ad Belligerandum.

Ellipticall Acquisitives were noted in their proper places. Constructions of
Ablativalls regular and Ellipticall.
Ablativalls are regularly construed with some Prepositions serving thereunto.
And such are all Appellatives and proper Names of Countries, and commonly of
Islands signifying the place whence motions rise, or wherein or whereat they
rest as, veniens ex ur^e discessit ab Italia, uxorem in Lemno ducturus.

But proper Nouns of Towns and Cities being of the third Declension, or being
pluralls only of the first or second Declension in the same signification as
the former are Ellipticall Ablativalls, and so are ruri or domo signifying from
a place, not at or in it, domi hodie mansurus domo eras discedam est mihi far
modicum, rure or ruri: such Ablativals ending anciently in i. as tempori and
vesperi, r^gnavit Amyclis Lacedaemone natus.

Ablativalls of time are regular, whether it be articulate time answering to
the Question when, de luce vigillat, sub nocte dormit, or be a continuat time,
answering to the Question how long, pacem pollicetur pro triginta diebus ab
annis triginia natus, but more commonly both are Ellipticall without
Prepositions, and the articulate is more familiarly the Ablativall, but the
continuate an Accusative.

Ablativalls of the person construed with Verbs Passive in any Moods besides
the Participle, are commonly regular, qui vult ab improbis laudari a probis
culpabitnr, and they are constantly such with the Neuter Passives, Vapulo,
vento exulo sio, and the Compounds of it, benefit a Deo, or any impersonall
passive, Regnatur a multis, and mostly with, Verbs of asking receiving, or
taking away, as vemam oremus ab ipso, ab ora^ulo audivi ab hostibus misere
acceptus, e vita, or de medio tollitur, and with Nounes or Verbs of neernesse
or distance: Nobiscum aequales, or collati, ab aliis discrepant, or snnt
dive^si, which three last may be changed to Acquisitives; id vitio assine
dissidet pietati exuit mihi vestem.

Ablati^alls are sometimes, but seldom used regularly, with Verbs or Nouns of
plenty, or emptiness, Liber a metu vacat a nego^iis: but they are commonly
Ellipticall, as opibus abundat. And such Ablatives by variation may be made
Rects, and the Rects Acquisitives, as opes illi abundant. Moreover such
Ablativalls may be changed into Genitives, whereof before in that construction.
But these Verbs emungo, fraudo, levo, orbo privo spolio viduo, are constant to
Ellipticall Ablatives, without variation, and such are pluit, sanguine, carne,
lacte, and captus, or cassus oculis.

Ablativalls of Price are very seldom used regularly as litterae pro nihilo
habentur, but are usually found Ellipticall with Nounes or Verbs, as auro
venalis, carus obolo vilis ass obsonatus dram. Likewise magno parvo vili
paululo minimo nimio dimidio duplo, with such are put Substantively, danda
magno accepta parvo ducuntur.

Ablativalls betokening particular crimes, or utroque alio altero nullo ambobus
plurimis, referring to crimes, are used regularly with Nouns or Verbs, as
Uxorem accusavit de pudicitia and veneficio de ambobus, or de altero damnata
est de rapina and homicidio reus ageris; but other Ablatives of crimes or
punishment, are commonly Ellipticall, and may be made Genitives, whereof before
in that construction.

Ablatives with the Preposition de are construed with mereor, and ago ambigo
celo certo cogito dico loquor glorior iudico qnaero statuo tracto, and such
other. Or with Substantives having the same sense, as liber lis sermo
sententia, etc. or with Nouns or Verbs of affection, and such may be changed to
a Genitive instanced in that construction.

Ablatives with e.de. or ex, are construed regularly with Nouns of the
Comparative or Superlative degree being put partitively instanced already in
their concordance. But when Ablatives betoken the measure of excess, or the
part exceeded with such Nouns or Verbs, they are Ellipticall caeteris multo
doctior, ab iis virtute superatur.

And such are Ablatives of the measure after Nouns that betoken quantity, Liber
tribus digitis crassus. And such is the Ablative in this example, It clamor
caelo where tenus may be supplied. And contrariwise a Pronominall Ablative is
sometime to be supplied with tenus. Est aliquod prodire tenus for eatenus, or
hactenus. And otherwise Caelo may Greek wise be put for caelitus.

Ablativalls of the integrall part or matter, be always regular, homo constat
ex animo and corpore, vas integrum ex auro, and sometimes of the efficient with
Verbs Neuter, prae timore siluit, but always with the Passives: a patre
diligimur. And sometimes of the manner, cum luctu loquitur. And ordinarily the
Gerundivall Ablatives, ex defendendo quam ab accusando uberior gloria
comparatur. Other Ablatives of the cause or instrument, or part affected, or of
the manner, or such like adjunct, or circumstance are Ellipticall, being
construed with Nouns or Verbs. Natura parens imperio tyrannus quisque deterior
est licentia miles ense validus Consilium specie laerum officio durum eventu
luctuosum aeger corpore sanus mente natione Britannus aetare provectus ingenio
tardus moribus severus nomine Gramaticus rebarbarus, vinces veritate digito
compesce labellum onusti crapula relevandi sunt abstinentia, mente, ac artibus
contremescunt, tuo solius ductu nobis haec mala creantur; where may be noted
that Ablatives of the cause or part may be resolved to the Rects, and of the
manner to Adiectives or Adverbs, and of either kind, otherwise, as in the
following instances; veriloquus qui, or quoniam verum loqueris vinces, or
veritas vincet digitus labellum compescat abstinentes crapulam relevabunt, rem
peregit mira celeritate, or celerrimus or celerrime, men's and artus sibi
contremiscunt te solo duce, or quum tu duceres, or a te duce mala haec
creantur; where the Ablative called absolute may admit a Preposition: Auro
loquente pollebis, for siloquatur aurum, or pro auro loquente. Concurrunt aegri
audito medicum venisse, for ab adventus rumore, or quando adventus fama
crebrescret, so ulceribus resecandis or dum secarentur, or de futura ulcerum
lectione contristantur. Te convalituro, or post quam convalesces, or de tua
valitudine gratulabimur senecta aetate, or quamquam senesceret, or in senectute
literas didicit. Thus all such called ablatives absolute are Elliptical, but
may admit of Prepositions with them: Ablatives of the same, or of a cognate
signification construed with Verbs neuter, or with neutrall Deponents are
always Ellipticall. Vita vivit longissima recta ibat via sua fidunt sapientia
morte moritur carne vescitur officio fungitur viribus nititur, urbe, or urbis
potitur seipso fruetur bonis laetatur sese dignatur honor, or se putat dignum
cultu, or coli, pec unia tibi utendum est, or tibi usus, or opus est id solum
emas non quo est opus sed quod necesse, where opus and necesse differ in sense
and structure, but with acquisitives they ioyn in both, id minus mihi necesse,
aut opus est.

Ablatiues are Ellipticall construed with Verbs of forbidding, as arceo veto
interdico prohibeo, or with Verbs of affecting, as prosequor afficio, praeditus
imbutus, aqua interdico, amore prosequor; virtute praeditus literis imbutus.
And such are Ablatives, construed with natus, prognatus, satus, cretus,
creatus, ortus editus, as nate Dea. And such are the Ablatives, mea, tua, sua,
nostsa, vestra, construed with refert interest, and est whereof before in the
structure of the Genitives.

Constructions of Accusatives regular and Ellipticall.
Nouns that imply some suffering, and bound a transient action are only regular
Accusatives construed with Verbs Active or Deponent, or with Verbs neuter,
having a cognate signification with such Accusatives, as voluptatem cepi, or
voluptas me cepit, pacem ambiens litem sortior. These examples, dul^e canit
horrendum sonat multa garrit bacchanalia vivit, are neuters put adverbially
Greekwise, and seldom used save in Poetry. But the rest that follow are Nouns
and Verbs of the same sense. vi^am vivit, iter currit sanguinem sitit nefas
peccat aves ea v^scuntur quae rapiunt pedibus mea bona uteris patria commoda
potitur officium functus estfa^ ut amorem fruar allium olet paternam vocem
sonat. All which joined with some Epithets, are more familiarly read in the
Ablative, whereof before in that construction. But Hircum olet, hominem sonat,
are Metonymies of the subject for the adiunct, and therefore cannot be made
Abiatives till they are reduced to a cognat sense, as Hi^ci faeto^^ olet,
humana voce sonat And such are, pert^ su^ Ignaviam, for Ign^vi^ sordibus, so
auri scrupulus argenti denos valet, for Denorum pr^cio.

Some Verbs Active with an Accusative of the person admit another of the thing
in a cognate signification to their own, and such are, Induo doceo moneo
hortor suadeo consulo celo taceo percontor postulo rogo flagito posco peto oro
obsecro, as ind^o, or exuo te vestes, doceo te literas, id ipsum nos monuisti
quod cogitabamus, fames nos talia suafit multa vos hortabar amicos hanc rem
consulam, id parents celo vos sensum taceo hoc illos percontor pacem te
poscimus, te veniam oramus, vitae rationem vos postulo sententiam vos rogo
alimenta vos posco, whereof induo will change the Accusative of the person, to
an Acquisitive, or of the thing, to an Ablative, docoo, moneo, consulo,
percontor, celo change the Accusative of the thing to an Ablative with de,
postulo, and the rest change the Accusative of the person, to an Ablative with
ab. And all of them retain the Accusative of the thing being made passive,
which does make it probable, such cases are Ellipticall, having ad circum iuxta
secundum, or such like understood with them, because they do not determine a
transient action, requisite to regular Accusatives, as aforesaid. Moreover the
Accusatives of the thing being mostly Pronominalls, when they have not the same
signification with the leading Verb must not be used otherwise then as they are
warranted by good Authors in their practice or use thereof.

These examples, Reges vos turba creavit, Te virum pr^esta Tyrannidem
latrocinium vocamus, ar^ Accusatives of continued, not of diverse significations.

Accusatives construed with Verbs or Adjectives of profit, likeness,
neernesse, inclination, or the contrary are construed regularly with ad the
Preposition, and may be changed to the Infinitive, or to the Acquisitive
instanced in that construction.

Accusatives of Nouns Appellative, or proper names of Countries, and commonly
of Islands, notifying the place, whereto a motion tends, are regularly
construed with ad the Preposition. Profectus ad Galliam mox ad ur bem exinde ad
forum se contulit. Denique ad Samum concessit. But proper names of Towns and
Cities in that signification are constantly Ellipticall. Athenas and Megara
migravit. And sometimes proper names of Islands. Cyprum profectus est. And
seldom of Countries, as, Italiam petijt, so proxime Hispaniam, and such like
have ad understood with them Elliptically.

The Accusatives of Rus and Domus in both numbers are Ellipticall in the same
sense, Nuperrime domos and ru^a sua redierunt. And such are names of Nations
used for the Country, and of special actions used for the place, wherein they
are done, both being Metonymies, the first of Inhabitants contained for the
continent, in the last of adjunct acts for the place where they are acted.
Mauros veniunt, for Mauritaniam, it inficias exequias suppetias, or Cubitum
venatum, and such like Supines. But Accusatives may be regular, if the motion
reach not to the Town, but near it, or the proper names of Towns have
Epithets with them. Ad Capuam venit, for ante juxta, or prope, Hoc iter ad
doctas proficisci cogor Athenas.

Nounes that answer the question how far determining the space or intervall of
place indefinitly like those that refer to particular places by the question
whether are Ellipticall Accusatives after Verbs of motion, vix pedem aut unguem
latum hinc discessit: And sometimes they are regular, per stadium Olympiae
ingreditur Milo, surgit tres arbor in ulnas. And sometimes they are Ablatives
after Verbs that have no express mention of moving; abest hinc quingentis
millibus passuum. And such are measures of length, breadth, or thickness,
umbratres ulnas longa, which may be made Ablativalls, or Genitives Ellipticall
instanced in those constructions.

Nouns that betoken a continual time, are commonly regular Accusatives; per id
tempus, intra sex annos. And sometimes are Ellipticall, puer id aetatis,
majorem vitae partem infaelix. And sometimes they are made Ablatives, docuit
nos quatuor annis. And very seldom Genitives instanced in that structure.

Nounes that betoken the part affected with a property or passion construed
with Adjectives or Verbs, either Neuter or Passive will be Ellipticall
Accusatives, being Graecismes. Os vocemque Deo similis sed caetera dispar,
dolet caput, redimitus tempora lauro. But latinewise, such Nounes will properly
be made Ellipticall Ablatives instanced in that structure.

Of the due placing of Words in sentences.
An orderly disposition of words in sentences does require a four fold
circumspection.

1. That some sentences or parts of speech accustomed to certain places be not
removed thence without good warrant.

2. That warrantable elegancies may be preferred before vulgar postures.

3. That an Euphony be preserved in both.

4. That the perspicuity of sense be not impaired by any.

1. Of sentences and words designed to certain places.
1, In prose the continued sentences, or Ablatives called the absolute, do
commonly begin the periods.

2. Pronouns Relative, or conjunctive Adverbs, do usually begin such sentences
as are continued.

3. Adverbs of exciting, forbidding, showing, or wishing, and any
Interrogatives pronominall or adverbiall, being no Encliticalls should
ordinarily begin the principal sentences.

4. Moreover in every sentence customarily Adjectives are placed before their
Substantives, the Antecedents before reciprocalls, all kinds of Adverbs before
the words whereto they should refer, excepting some notified in their proper
places; And finite Verbs are placed last, But in verse, all the former Rules
will admit variations, being then authorized, when they are used with approved
Poets, whose practice is the best guide therein.

2. Of Elegance in some postures swarving from the Vulgar.
Verbs finite whether those called Impersonall, or the Neuters referring to
sundry causes, will best beseem the first place, dedecet viros muliebriter
rixari, vigilat Dominus and servi: deflorescit formae dignitas, aut morbo, aut
vetustate. Some Adverbs are placed elegantly after the words which they do
limit, mitigati admodum sunt eorum animi, postquam diu nimium disputassent,
impense cnpiunt, sed consulunt parum, non succedit quod faciunt sedulo, futura
prospicit longissime, so commonly the final Polisyllables will smooth the
sounds of sentences and make the Adjectives at last grateful, nihil isthoc
visum est molestius, quod ipse facit, non putat injustum, and specially when
such have before them some Parenthesis, parentum dilectio est (me judice)
maxima, such are dissyllabicall Adjectives, specially Pronouns after
Substantives of many syllables, inter oratores bonos raro convenit, facultas
nulla tibi dabitur, and the Genitive is handsomely seated between the Adjective
and its Substantive, or a Preposition, and the case whereto it serves,
sagacissimus naturae in^agator Aristoteles, omnes omnium charitates patria
complectitur, ad illius temporis incommoda hoc accessit. Proper na^es being
Polysyllables placed first grace the sentence, else are disgraced, except an
Epithet of praise or dispraise does lead them. Neoptolemus cognominatur
Achillis fillus, or Nobillissima Achillis proles Neoptolemus cognominatur, qui
tyrocinium in Bello adolescentulus posuit, where the principal, not the
continued sentence does lead the rest. And if continued sentences be but short,
the subject of the principal whereto they refer should lead them, Spiritus,
qui densatur hy^mali frigore, in nebulam quasi concretus c^rnitur. Last Prose
placed versewise, or verse placed prosewise will lose their elegance.

3. Of Euphony requisite in placing words.
The good sound of words joined in composition, are the best patterns of
Euphony in words joined by Apposition, with this caution, that letters sounding
well being doubled between words compounded, have ill sounds between words
app^sed, wherefore the former may not usually and in the same letter, or in
another of a cognate sound, with that which does begin the next word after. Nor
in any wise may the same syllable end the former, and begin the next word
after, for that has near Alliance unto stammering.

2. The same word repeated, without a figure cannot sound well, and therefore
it should be supplied by a Relative or a Synonymy.

3. Homoteleutons, being figures should be used accordingly as rarities.

4. Sandy or loose words that will not concatenat like untunable feet, ending
every where with the words in verses, will make sentences have flat and jarring
sounds. In fine, the advice of judicious ear in this Office will be of singular
steed.

4. Of clearing the sense of words in every posture.
As the former Rules conduce thereto, so likewise it will much avail for
perspicuity of sense in words. 1 To preserve in sentences a natural order by
placing the whole before the parts, and causes before effects, and the
worthiest before less worthy; Omnis familia, parents, liberi, servitia,
indefessis laboribus victumquae ritan^. 2. To shun the multiplying of
Relatives, answ^ring either to single or to sundry Antecedents, and in stead
thereof, either to repeat such Antecedents, or to use Distributives, specially
when the Antecedents are of the same Gender and number, as, Socordes ab ignavis
discrep^nt, deficiunt enim socordes prospiciendo, ignavi fortiter agendo, h^
fortitudine, illi consilio carent.

3. To use Laconisme will conduce thereto, for prolixe sentenees will tire the
Auditors understanding and with all beget obscurity.

4. Lastly, to distinguish words by accents according to the Rules thereof
specified in their proper place, and to give all sentences proper points
regulated before in the Rules of Art for writing.

The FIGVRES of ELOCUTION
FIgures swarving from the common course, but having Authority from the most
learned in the Latin tongue, do belong

1. Some to Elementary parts of words, being Letters and Syllables.

2. Some to entire words consisting either in their sense being Tropologicall,
or in their Etymology changing the parts of speech, and their affections.

3. Some to sentences having Anomalous Syntax, all which are handled in their
proper places.

4. Some to the whole speech being dressed up with artifice of Oratory called
Elocution. Wherefore as Trops advance and quicken the sense of words, so the
figures of Elocution heighten sentences for a subtle and secret operation upon
men's Judgments and affections, either 1. To persuade them to assent, or 2. To
introduce a prejudice of their dissent, or 3. To amuse them, and so to suspend
their resolutions.

The Schems or figures of Elocution, being very numerous, may be reduced to
five kinds, proper to so many offices complying with the principal seats of
Oratory to wit.

1. Some being used exegetically to clear the sense meet for the Narrative
part.

2. Some used Apodictically fitting the seat of Arguments in Confirmations.

3. Some used Catasce^astically mustring a number of Conjectures, where the
weight of a sollid reason fails peculiar to Amplifications.

4. Some used Analeptically, repeating words or sounds with Glosses to make
things spoken of more heeded as more concerned suitable with any place where
the matter is weighty, and the hearers dull.

5. Some Pathetically agreeing with any place requiring indignatoin or
compassion, wrought by a previous passion in the orator. And in each kind the
most useful are selected, and the rest declined.

Of Figures serving to Narrations.
In the narrative part the office of a figure is either, 1. To distribute the
matter handled to its several branches; so making way to remove what is
unconcerned. And there to will conduce Merismus, etc. or 2. To determine the
question positively, whereto serve Brachyepia, etc.

Of distinguishing.
Merismus does orderly dispose the whole controversy to sundry parts, of
purpose, to insist upon the point concerned. Delatori lubentissime ignoscatur,
aut ob mandatum coacto, aut ob ^gestatem querulo, aut ob pietatem spontaneo,
s^d malicioso, qui data, opera male agit, nemo bonus indulgeat. Palindromia
has some affinity therewith, making diverse words of several Relations answer
orderly each unto the other.

Pastor arator, eques, pavi, colui* superavi, C^^ras, rus, hosts, fronde
ligone manu.

2. P^radiastole does distinguish things that seemingly are like by clear
unlikelinesse.

Virtutem fortuna premit, non obruit illam.

Iniquum est pro astuto sapientem, pro audaci fortem pro illiberali fr^galem
haberi, iniquissimum vero subdolos nuncupari prudentes, confidentes magnanimos,
sordidissimos quosque bonae frugi viros, virtutes enim vitijs admixtae a
potiori jure denominantur, vitia, vero ab virtutibus alienissima earum titulis
non sunt dignanda.

3. Amphidiorthosis, used also to distinguish, does preface to a future offense
and therewith salve it.

-- horrida narro,
Inculpanda tamen, quia pro re sermo paratur*
Homunciones autboritate exutos hominem vincere est facinus, Civem incarcerare
scelus, necare nefas, in crucem toilere ecquid est insolentius? Prob malum,
quid dic^m? Principem ^olli, jugulari, subsannari, Parricidio plus est,
Theomachia est.

4. Aphorismus or Metanoia does likewise recall a word and rectify it.

Heu Cives, si forte licet vos dicere Cives.

Haec est ultio sceleris, nisi forsan aequo durius loquor, nam sceleris est
prohibitio, non ultio.

5. Anaclasis, Antimetabole Chiasmus Diallelon Enagonion used to the same
office determine things with a difference from the vulgar sense.

Qui sapiunt regnant, pax est opulentia regni.

Cum senibus puer est, cum puerisque Senex.

Aliorum sapientiae fortuna, aliorum fortunae sapientia non suppeditat. Edendum
ut vivas, non vivendum ut edas.

6. Antithesis, Enantiosis, Synrcists, notify different events of different
causes.

Ille novo veterum vagus est errore locorum.

Amicos parit obsequium, hosts veriloquium, donorum antehac profusos,
postmodum egenos fore oportet. Alter dandobenignus, alter accipiendo astutus.
Quam opportuna erat expugnantibus civitas, tam inexpugnabiles erant civium
animi. Ego plector, quod tu peccasti, nos meruimus, quae praemia vos repor^atis.

Of Defining.
1. Brachyepia, Characterismus, Enargia, Hypotyposis, will exactly describe as
it were peece-meale persons, facts, time or place.

Crine ruber, niger re, brev^s pede lumine luscus,
Venit hyems, teritur Sicyonia bacca tra^etis,
Glande sues redeunt laeti, dant arbuta silvae.
Amicitiae, consuetud^nes, vicinitates, clientelae, ludi, festique dies, quid
haberent voluptatis, carendo magis intellexi, quam perfruendo

2. Hypomone, or Paradoxon will decline the vulgar opinion, and introduce some
unexpected decision of the thing in hand.

-- Verus amicus
Nec prece, nec pretio, sedenim virtute paratur.
Scientiam habet, non ut sciatur quo quidnam levius* aut inanius; non ut ipsam,
vendat, quo nihil est vilius, sed quo in suam inspiciat vitam.

3. Antistasis, or Analepsis, will serve to the same office.

Una salus victis, nullam sperare salutem.
Perijssem, nisi perijssem.
2. Of Figures proper to confirmation.
In Argumentative Topics, Figures have recourse to essential causes,
specificall properties and necessary consequences, ranged for proof of what is
propounded, whereto comply Aitiologia, etc. or for disproving of the contrary
suitable with Antistrophe, etc.

Of Prooving.
1. Aitiologia in some respect called also Apophasis, does confirm what was
propounded by some concludent reasons.

An mihi cantando victus non redderet illum,
Quem mea carminibus meruisset fistula, caprum?
Grassatori jure licet eripere vitam, qui eriperet alienam. Apophonisma does
imply a reason for answer to a supposed doubt, fac velis perfici^s. Litterarum
sunt radices amarae sed fructus dulces.

2. Synathroismus is a Series of causes concurring to the same effect. Multa
simul ab ultione laesum revocant, officium, consuetudo, tempus, existimatio
periculum, religio, which with several conjunctions set between them is called
Polysyntheton, or without any such as in the former instance is called
Asyntheton or Dialysis, being much more elegant as noting each cause apart
sufficient.

3. Synonymia differs from the former, notifying not diverse causes, but
different circumstances of the same cause. Otium, quies, tranquillitas, pax
demum adest inopinata, pugnavit, vicit, triumphavit.

4. Synoiciosis or Sysceuasis will elgantly express how contrary causes may
produce the same effects.

Par meritum gratesve pares poenasve reposcit.

7. Illiberalis and profusus sunt aeque inopes, aeque infames, alter qui
suisrebus uti nollet, alter qui suas res dissiparet, ideoque pari poena sunt
afficiendi.

Of disproving.
1. Antistrophe does retort a reason used to disprove what it should have
proved.

An quisquam perimit vivum, conditque peremptum!
Festinusve fugit lethalem vindicis iram.
Bella est haec accusatio, qua me litigij postulas, eademque opera mihi litem
intendis.

2. Prolepsis, Antiphora, or Procatasceue, do prevent objections, stealing to a
good esteem by a seeming ingenuity, laboring withal to avoid or abate a
prejudice.

-- Scio me Danais e Gentibus unum.

Testem produci vult adversarius, fateor nullum affore, praeter suam ipsius
conscientiam, commotus enim lachrymis, quod petebat dedi, solus, soli, sin haec
negabit, vobis satisfactum esse de utriusque veritate oportet. And the reasons
given are called Prosapodosis.

3. Epitrope, does neglect what is objected, as impertinent were it granted.

J, sequere Italiam, ventis pete regna per undas. Esto Rex, Tyrannus,
Sacrilegus, prae multis unum malumus. Profundat, perdat, pereat, nostra non
interest.

4. Exuthenismus does add unto the former some scorn or sharp reproof then
called Epiplexis, or Epitimesis, or Schesis.

Egregium facinus, miscebat graeca latinis.
Indignum est Italos Trojam succendere flammis,
Quid face Trojanos atra vim far Latinis?
Dux vester bolliger at calamo, militat dolo, expugnat nummo. Egote armatis
ejeci, non dejeci, una litera tantum latet facinus*

5. Alloiosis distinguishing between persons or their facts by different
circumstances does accordingly excuse or aggravate crimes.

Quod licuit ^ueris, licet aetatique senili?

Aliud est vivere in aequa Civitate ubi lex v^let, aliud sub unius imperium
devenire, ubi singularis potestas regnat, i^lic lege fretos libertatis
meminisse, hic unius potestati traditos quotidianam commentari subjectionem,
opus est.

Homicidium aliud est a furioso, aliud ab ebrioso perpetratum illud condonatur,
ut involuntarium, hoc capitale judicatur, ut voluntarium, eodem censu (cum
ebrietate istius causa) numerandum, ebrius adhaec duplici tenetur crimine,
scilicet ebrietatis and homicidij.

6. Anancaion has the same office with the former, in preventing prejudices
caused by necessity, nihil valuit pro fratre deprecatio, cum judicaret Tyrannus
cujus crudelitas omnem naturae necessitudinem extinguebat, verum enimvero
quamvis auxilium a fratris periculo violentia submovisset, quod potui, feci,
nempe calamitatis particeps eram.

3. Of Figures meet for Amplifications.
To the seat of amplification do belong figures that comply with conjecturall
proofs by circumstances of time, place, persons, but specially of facts
considered in the circumspection of their possibility, lawfullnesse, honor,
profit, pleasure. 2. In their estimate from authority of the wise, and practice
of the best. 3. In their comparison with, or contrariety to other facts, of
which sort are Auxesis, etc.

1 Auxesis does extenuat, or else aggravate facts be they good or evil by
their several adjuncts.

Templa Deum, feslique dies, sacra Concio furtum
Nil prohibent, nedum remo^atur Anathema dirum.
Dum restituuntur ad integrum damnati, solvuntur vincti, reducuntur exules,
promoventur perduelles, rescinduntur leges, Ecquis Rempublicam ruere non
intelligat? And the several progress of virtue or vice, does give this figure
the name of Exallage.

2. Dinosis does specially expose the heynousnes and horror of vices. Haec una
^jus est stultitiae, ut nullus hominem, ejusmodi furoris, ut nullus faeminam,
ejusmodi crudelita^is, ut nullus matrem appellet, quoe fuit uxor G^neri,
Noverca fili^ filiae pellex

3. Icon or Homoiosis does illustrate things by some similitude whih if eall
and of fact, is called Paradigma, if imaginary and feigned, is called Parabole.

Qualis populea moerens Philomela sub umbra.
Amissos queritur ^aetus.
Orpheus in sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion.
Quod natura tranquillum est, ventorum procellis, mare conturbatur, Talis est
exercitus, ubi seditio concitatur; Qualis in mundo Phoenix redivivus, Talis
imperio Aristides restitutus.

4. Epiphonema is a quick short inference from what was said before, intended
for applause to all the rest.

Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum.

Scilicet aliam nollent libertatem, quam per mortem, such will handsomely close
an Epigrame.

4. Of Figures repeating words or sounds.
1. Words are repeated sometimes together, if in the same sentence, called
Epizeuxis, if in diverse called Anadiplosis; and this last continued called
Climax.

2. Sometimes asunder, either in the beginning of diverse sentences, called
Epanaphora, or in the end thereof called Epistrophe, or in both places called
Symploce.

3. Sometimes in the beginning, and end of diverse simple Theses called
Epanalepsis, or only in the end of Mixttheses called Epanodus.

2. Sounds are repeated by Paronomasia, Polyptoton, Homoioteleuton, Oxymeron.

Of Words repeated.
1. Epizeuxis, Diplosis, or Protrope does repeat the same word together in the
same sentence, with some additionall explanation put unto the latter; wherewith
inquam may be supplied.

Ah Coridon Coridon quae te dementia ce^it?
Vos hortor socij, nunc nunc insurgite remis.
Adeste, adeste sceleris ultrices. Likewise Diacape, or Diastole inserting a
word between, is accounted a species of the former.

Duc (age) duc ad nos.
Excitate (si potestis) excitate ipsum ab inferis.
2. Anadiplosis, or Palinlogia does repeat continuatly, the same word, but as
of diverse sentences closing the first, and beginning the next, and having
otherwise the same modifications as the former, it is mostly used in Verse, or
being more continued, is called Gradatio.

Deiphobum vidi lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora manusque ambas.
Hic tamen vivit, vivitlimmo in senatum venit.
Imperator vivat, vivat and vincat, vincat salvusque redeat.
3. Climax does sometimes differ from the former, that repeating always
together the same individual word; but this repeating often, the same only in
the Original, or inserting some other words between the same Numericals.

Quod libet, idque licet, sibi, quod licet, id satis audent,
Quodque audent, saciunt, faciunt, quodcunque molestum.
Nos praestat in^pia, diligentes, diligentia opulentos, opulentia protervos,
protervia deinde inopes, in gyrum circumquaque versos. Epanaphora, or Epibole,
does repeat words asunder in the beginning of diverse Sentences.

Hic gelidi fontes, hic mollia prata Licori,
Hic nemus, hic toto tecum consumerer aevo.
Ego quaestoribus int^rminabar, ne stipendio sumptum facerent, Ego armentarijs
patefaciendis obstabam, Ego arma ^sfer^i prohibebam. And some use Synonymies
instead of the same words repeated. Dolui clandestinum hostem intra mu^os
impune vagari, aegre ^uli vestri omnium facilitatem unius fallacia tentari, me
commovit in accipienda injuria plurimorum laetitiam ostentari. Some range
therewith Diaeresis, distributing as to the same, so to sundry Subjects
several properties

Nocte leves stipulae inclius, nocte arida prata
Tondentur, noctis lentus non deficit humor.
Spumat aper, fluit unda fremi leo, sibilat anguis. Spirant venti, florent
prata, frondes^unt nemora, mitescunt fructus.

5. Epistrophe does contrariwise repeat the same word at the end of diverse
sentences.

-- Gravis est Cantantibus umbra.
Juniperi gravis umbra, nocent and frugibus umbrae.
Primo ad Belligerandum nos impulit Philippus,
Denique calamitati nostrae succensuit Philippus.
6. Symploce does comprehend both the former, repeating the same words, in the
beginning and end of diverse sentences.

Quam been Caune tuo poteram nurus esse parenti.
Quam been Caune meo poteras Gener esse parenti.
Quis legem tulit? Rullus! Quis populum in tribus distribuit? Rullus. Quis
december viros creavit? Rullus. Some call the same Coinotes.

7. Epanalepsis does repeat sometimes one, but oftener many words that begin
simple Theses at the end thereof, placeing between some forcing reasons that
move thereto.

Victus amore tui, cognato sanguine victus.
^hosphoreredde diem, quid gaudia nostra moraris,
Caesare venturo, Phosphore read diem.

Huc pater O Lenaee, tuis hic omnia plena.

Muneribus tibi pampineo gravidus Autumno floret ager, spumat plenis vindemia
labris.

Huc pater o Lenaee veni.

Libentissime profiterer, vos esse homicidas, si faret integrum, libentissime
profiterer.

8. Epanodus does repeat at the close of periods (having mixed Theses) sometimes
one, and sometimes two words of the last sentence returning to a particular
account of such as are repeated.

-- Divellimur inde
Iphitus and Pelias mecum, quorum Iphitus aevo
Jam gravior.
Crudelis matter magis, an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crude is tu quoque matter.
Demophoon ventis and verba, and vela dedisti.
Vela queror reditu, verba carere fide. Gratiam, qui refert, habet, et qui
habet, in eo quo^ habet, refert.

Of sounds repeated.
9. Paronomasia in Nouns, and Paromoion in Verbs, will descant upon resemblance
of words that sometimes have like sense, sometimes quite unlike, this called
Antiphrasis that Ploce.

Ille Chrysostomus potuit Ch^ysostomus esse.
Verba parant oneris tantum nil instar honoris.
Liber ab erroribus parum liber veritatumque illiberalis, ut oremus, non ut
aremus, instruit Philosophia. Tantum amari affert amari, rudibus ferri color
videtur rubidus.

10. Oxymeron does notify concurrent juncture of two contraries predominant in
the subject: And it differs from the former consisting of words having
diverse both forms and figures but words here have always the same sense
oppositly, and either one is derived from the other or both descend from one
same Primitive.

-- Discors concordia faelibus apta est
His ut quaeque pia est, hortatibus impia prima est.
Neve foret scelerata, scelus fa^it --
Cum ratione insaniunt.
11. Polyptoton does figurat the speech when the same words in diverse sentenses
vary their affections either proper or common.

Hic pater, hujus opem poscas, huic justa refertor.
Gratia, fac redames hunc toto pectore dignum.
Cedere jussit aquam, jussaque cessit aqua.

Pulchra est virtus, pulchrum est virtutem colere, pulchri sunt virtutis
cultores, pulcherrime consu;latur virtuti colendae.

12. Homoi^telenton accompanied with Ilocole^ closing short sentences with like
sound are very plausible if they be not too common.

Non est dives, qui absque modo utendi, aut fine cupiendi, nummos auget, nullos
possidet, mulium enim appetere egentis est indicium, sicut nihil pa^cere
egestatis est initium.

Aliud est benefacere, aliud injuriam non infer* inde benevolentiam
cuncilies, hinc odium vites.

5. Of Figures expressing or exciting passion`s.
Passions figurate the speech either. 1. With some question of much concernment
called Erotema, or 2. With diverting the speech another way called Apostrophe.
or 3. With personating somewhat in a mere imagery called Prosopopia. or 4.
With consulting the present Auditors ^^lled Anacoinosis. or 5. With the
speakers ^^eration with him self called Aporia. o^ (...) with some wonder at
an unexpected strangeness called Ecphonesis. or 7. with seeming fear of
prejudice called Aposiopesis. or 8. With indignation where no fear stops,
called Aganactesis. or 9. With execratious when rage has freedom called Aria.
or 10. With imploration of pity when all other means do fail called Decsis.

1. Erotema does prejudge the matter or rather out dare a contrary judgment.

-- Anulla putatis
Dona carere dolis Danaum; sic notus Ulisses?
Quis erat armorum sensus, quae tua men's oculi ma^us? quis ardor ille, quid
cupiebas. quid optabas.

2. Apostrophe does by way of confidence in the cause appeal from the Judges
present to the practice of most grave eminent persons, so engaging the present
judicature to assent for fear of dishonor in dissenting from such gravity; Te
nunc all^quor (Affricane) cujus nomen Civitati est splendori, nostra si
audivisses crimina quanti penderes? Some call this Figure Cleticon, or
Cataphora. And Metabasis, Metathesis, or Metastasis have some affinity
therewith, being all used to digression.

Prosopopia does differ from the former, that speaking to persons absent, this
speaking unto any thing, personated, as if they were rational, and present, or
otherwise making such things to speak.

-- Quae non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames --
Hos^e mihi fructus, hunc fertilitatis honorem.
Officijque refers, quod adunci vulnus aratri,

Rastrorumque fero, totoque exerceor anno.

Pijssima vitae dux Philosophia, nobis Clientibus tuis hac angustia consule
tristissima. And it is called of some Mimesis, or Ethopo^ia.

4. Anacoinosis does seem to take advise, but intends to convince the
Auditors that the cause is good, if it were their own.

Sit tua res eadem, quidnam rationis inires?

Quem virum aut heroa putatis eximia Clius celebrare posse praeconia, quae nec
poetarum carminibus, nec annalium monimentis, aut prudentum judicijs, pro
meritis expendantur.

H^ccine mihimetillicita, vobis licere velletis? libere loquimini.

5. Aporia is used when we reason with our selves consideratly about some
doubtful matter.

Quid faciam! nolo sudare, rogare pudebit.
En quid agam, rursusne procos irrisa priores
Experiar --
Both this last and former be species of Dialogismus.

6. Ecphonesis does break out at the strangeness of some unwonted accident
either good or evil.

O pietas! O prisca fides, miranda virorum!
Heus! etiam mensas consumimus, inquit Ioles.
Ecquis non amentes Camillos, Curios, Fabios, pronunciaret.
7. Aposiopesis and Paralipsis do sufficiently hint, what they profess to
pass in silence, for avoiding danger, envy, or other brand of immodesty.

Insidias taceo, velut ac tua surta, rapinas.
Quid memorem portus, Lucrinoque addita claustra?
Impari periculo ad judicium venimus, sed mihi quidem; nolo tamen quicquam
ominosius proloqui.

Protome has near affinity therewith. Ne nimis urgeam, ad me revertor.

8. Aganactesis lets loose the reins to passion where no fear does bridle it.

Cantando tu illum, aut unqua ni tibi fistula Cera.
Juncta suit --
Vos feram populi faeces: indesinenter feram? aut ferendo insolenliores
efficiam. Quae mal^m dementia!

9. Ara, Catara, Diabole Add Curses to raging fury.

-- pro talibus ausis
Dij quibus est pietas grates persolvere dignas
Curent. --
Sed non ante datum cingetis maenibus urbem,
Quam vos dira fames, nostraeque injuria caedis,
Ambesas subigat malis absumere mensas.
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.
1. Deesis does adjure some mercy by that which is accounted with men most
sacred.

Per superos, atque hoc Caelum, te posco favorem.

Obsecramus pro patria, deorum sacris parentum monimentis, vestrorum liberate,
vestro ipsorum honor, nos miseros quam primum metu liberate.

The method of this Grammar, and how to make thereby good progress in the
Latin Tongue.
1. IT may be understood that common concernments (equally belonging to this
Grammar with the former made for English) are not here repeated, but left to be
remembered or learned thence.

2. Wherefore to begin with what is peculiar hereunto, it may be noted that the
method of this Grammar is Syntheticall composing Analyticall Rules of
Etymology with results of Structures framed thence.

This composure is made for the reasons following. First, because the Syntax
with the proper signs of each affection, belonging to the parts of speech, are
the specificall differences whereby such affections must be defined.

2. Next the placing of the Syntax in the same Rules with those several
affections are infallible guides, whereby green wits, may with ease find out
the structure, which otherwise would perplex them.

3. Likewise the composure of both together, does confer unto compendiousnes,
the only way to advance young Scholars being encouraged to proceed when they
have easy taskes.

4. Moreover it is necessary to abridge Grammars, because they are to be often
repeated as the only means to gain proficiency for childrens progress is a
product in very few of ingenuity and industry, but in most youths of a
customary practice growing into an habit.

4. This Grammar so much as is printed in English letters with examples thereto
belonging should be read twice or thrice within Book, and afterward so often
without Book by young beginners: who from thence forward should be made
acquainted with the method and meaning of all the Rules, wherein the Masters
constant diligence will be necessary. And furthermore they should be made to
read deliberatly the Annotations annexed to the Rules, as good helps to
understand them better, for both are needful preparations to the reading of
Latin Authors:

5. Lea^ness thus enabled to take lessons should be taught to expound and
examine the same themselves, by few plain rules as certain guids, for instance.

1. They should look out first the principal verb.

2. Next they should search out the Rect or Nominative, whereon that Verb and
the rest depen.

3. Last, they should orderly dispose all circumstances, placeing the object
after neuters, the sufferer after Transitives, the agent after passives, and
ranging with all the premises such other respective limitations as belong
thereto; ^ll which are discernable in the Latin, by the concordance or other
structure, and in English by good sense in every sentence, the necessary
sequel of true expositions, as in example.

-- Heu Divos temnere discant
Vt moniti per vos mox omnes caede luetur.
To scorn the Gods ah shall be purged with blood,
That all men warned by you may learn for good.
6. Thus youth for ease may begin with Janua Linguarum, learning thence by
heart a Latin and English sentence to be rendered without Book, first entire,
and asunder as before; next word for word together, a Heu ah, temnere to
scorn, Deos the Gods, luetur shall be purged, caede with blood, etc. So
keeping close to the signs of all affections, as good helps at the first assay
to know them and their structure. Then without loss of time, they themselves,
should give account of every word, both in their several affections, and in
their Syntax by Grammar Rules in the proper words thereof, as follows.

7. Mox (by the part of Speech) an absolute Adverb (by form) of time (by
Figure) primitive by construction) as a circumstance referring unto Discant.

Discant, a Verb adjectivall neuter of complete sense betokening to do
primitive by proper affections) of the third conjugation and subjunctive mood
interpreting another principal Verb and present tense, speaking of the time
now, but with (may) a Potentiall sign shareth with a continued future, called
the simple and the third person spoken of and plural number speaking of many
it agrees in Person and Number with the Rect omnes.

Vos a Pronounce Demonstrative primitive of a finite quantity (by proper
affections; irregular in Declension, the plural number and Accusative Case
having per a Prepositionall Adverb primitive expressly serving thereunto,
besides that it refers as the agent or term whence to moniti.

Moniti, a Verb Passive of imperfect sense, having reference to the Agents,
derived from the Active moneo the Participle Mood and Preter tense, speaking of
Time past, the second Declension. Rect plural Masculine Gender by termination,
agreeing with viri an Ellipticall Substantive answering to the Question who.

Omnes, A Pronoune Demonstrative Collective, of indefinite quantity, Primitive
of the third Declension, a Rect plural of the Common of two by termination,
but Masculine by construction, agreeing likewise with the same viri understood.

Vt a Conjunctive Adverb causall, Primitive, referring also unto discant.

Caede a Noune Substantive Primitive of the third Declension, an Ablative
singular feminine gender by the termination es, not increasing, construed with
luetur, as the cause, and of the same signification, therefore the Preposition
is Ellipticall.

Luetur a verb adjectivall passive, derived from the Active luo, and that from
lavo syncopated, or it has affinity therewith, the third Conjugation
Indicative mood future tense speaking of the time to come with sign shall the
third person singular, agreeing with the Rect temnere.

Divos a Noune Substantive derived of Deus the second Declension Accusative
plural and masculine gender by the termination us, it follows the verb
transitive temnere.

Temnere a verb Active transient to a sufferer for completing the sense
thereof, primitive the infinitive mood present tense by Enallage standing for
Rect Substantive Aptote singular that goes before luetur, and answers to the
question what.

Heu an Interjectionall adverb of sorrow primitive, and a circumstance
belonging to luetur.

8. It may be noted, that words which end in exposition must begin at
examination, in a retrograde course, for usually the word following does
refer to former guide, saving that it is a property of Interrogatives
Relatives conjunctive and prepositionall adverbs to precede inexposition all
subsequent guides. Likewise it must be remembered that beginners should be used
constantly to vary every Noune according to a proper example in their own
Declension, and every Verb according to their proper terminations, with Analagy
to the same Conjugation. And for finding the Rect of Nouns and theme of verbs,
youths may take directions, page 39. and 105. or advise with Dictionaries.

9. In this progress to facillitate all the rest Learners should be made to
repeat by parts all the Grammar at least once every week, giving as aforesaid a
just account of the method and meaning of all Rules therein, and moreover
should be made to get by heart the first Dictionary in the Janua reading over
the next often and deliberatly, so as they may be ready to give English for any
Latin word therein; and contrariwise Latin for every English, which will
furnish them with good abillity to expound all other Latin Authors, and
besides to discourse in Latin, whe^eof more follows.

10. When such performances grow habitual, the proficients need not decline
all variable words, or to account for common structures, but in both, to
expedite the hardest, and to notify in every Syntax the true reason of it,
wherein they should be then well versed, and lastly to distinguish what is
regular, and what is figurative, either in Orthographie by a Metaplasmus, or in
the sense of words by Tropologie, or in the parts of speech and their
affections by Enallage; or in the structure by other Anomalies specified in the
true reason of a right Syntax.

Nor is it requisite that Learners be tied to the signs of parts of speech,
and their affections, when such and their Syntax are known without it; provided
that such without impair of the Authourss meanin improve their own
Translations, whether made less or larger, as A rationibus delega^us pro sua
sibi p^ritia inter calculandum ^ibi adesto* Let a well skilled Auditor help the
at accounts. Sus ad lyram. The bruit that is undisciplinable, will never
attain to make good Music, and for their honor Scholars should be elaborate
to advance their mothers tongue; for every language has its idiomes and some
elegancies proper to it self.

12. The next task in a due procedure, should be to strive for a luxuriance in
the tongue, which the Scholars learn, and that is only gained by due
variations of the sentences, a peculiar product aimed at in this Grammar: First
as of concernment to find out the proper structure when it is ambiguous.

Next as of unavoidable necessity to prepare Phrases for Poetical measures.
Likewise as of ornament unto Prose by access of copiousnesse. Last, as of
special use in the practick of all structure, when Masters to confirm their
Scholars judgment, and to perpetuat the same in lasting memory, do appoint
them to vary the choicest Phrases in their Lessons, so teaching them to use
what is good, not (as it is properly termed) to make Latin, a base Coin of
their own stamp, no better then Barbarism Solaecismes, or at best a
Neoterisme, or Idiotisme of their own tongue.

13. When youths are habituated in variations, and for that purpose have stored
their note books and memories with variety and choice of phrases, they may be
encouraged to constant exercise of the same in familiar discourses among
themselves, and no sooner should they be allowed customarily to speak in
Latin, then they are enabled to speak Latinly. At which advance Youths need no
more to manage a common calling, for then they are fit for any office, saving
of a perfect Orator, which is not to be aimed at by a vulgar wit, but by an
heroic Genius to be discerned by these ensuing arguments.

14. Can Scholars intend their learning all the School time, that will
suffice only for the precedent progress.

Can they abate their recreations, if need require some meals, that comes
toward it, but not home, being for the most part desultory.

Do their studies aim at Honorable Eminencies?

Are they predominant to all other affections, whether of profit or pleasure?

Will they admit of no vacations, but still insinuate themselves, at all urgent
intermissions?

Are they insuperable in all obstructions?

Do such Students resolve to attain their designs or perish with them? If thus
affected, they are in possibility to prove competent Orators, either for God,
as Churchmen, or for Princes as Ambassadors, or for the people as their
Advocates, or for Schools or Universities, as the Professors. But who leap
furthest, use first to stoop; And so must these begin with the lower step, and
proceed by degrees and ordinary means.

15. Such then may first be exercised in short and easy simple Themes, for
displaying the splendour of any Virtue, or discovering the filth of any Vice,
for which use Scholars should before hand by the direction of their Master, be
well stored with common places gathered, and Alphabetically ranged for more
readiness: And as a supplement when their stock proves ^canty, they may be
tutoured to make use of Lycosthenes and other Authors; borrowing thence some
choice Apophthegmes or similitudes the most proper Topics useful for
beginners.

16. Learners may be taught therewith to make by turns some Epigrams, provided
they be first taught the Laws of Poetry, and with reading Poets be well
exercised to scan their Verses, and give account of feet and quantity, after
which preparation they may be trained, first to make Adonicum and Almanium or
Glyconium and Pheretratium, or Partheniacum, and Archilochium, which are the
shortest Verses, and each couple a just proportion of Maeonium the chiefest of
all the rest* And if children cannot thrive or speed at such assayes; To tune
green wits they may be used to place words in Verses being before displaced,
as Quis aurum oblatum nisi inops mentis respuit. And when their phansies are
possessed with a true Poetical Idea, they may be exercised in simple Thems
taken from Buclers Thesaurus, where they have for matter a competent variety of
Poetical Phrases prepared for Verses, and if they will not suffice they may be
further guided to use sentences taken from Palingenius, Flores Poetarum or such
other, (not engrossing entire Verses, until they are accstomed to a poetical
style, for then they may be instructed with ease to change Comaedies into
Verses, as choice matter for a satire, and well prepared for the form, and
with a new form Apophthegms will afford convenient matter for other Epigrams.

17. After good proficiency in the former exercises, Scholars may proceed to
more elaborat tasks upon mixed Thems, whether indefinite, as an potior vit^ est
caelestis; or else finite called Hypothesis, as an Philosopho potior est
caelibatus; But in discretion the Master should propound no other Quaestion to
his Scholars, then from their former reading, they may find competent
previous matter for their invention. Or what is therein wanting he should
supply, either by suggesting to them proper arguments, or by directing them to
learned Authors that minister such upon the same subject. Else their
Declamations must prove jejune to say no more.

18. Lastly, to declaime with credit, will require good form as well as matter
and in both a figurative Elocution. The last is epitomized in the next
foregoing subject. And the first is summarily handled by Apthonius, and in
Farnabies, Judex Rhetor tus. But all three are ministered amply and
magnificently by Causinus in his Book de Eloquentia where the precepts need to
meet with juncture of Diligence, Wit, and Memory, or cannot be converted into
practice, and who are not content therewith, having abilities fit to be
Suadelas, Mi^ions may learn of the Master Orator, Cicero de oratore perfecto.

But alas the melody of an Orpheus that was wont to allure both Birds and
Beasts to sing in concordance, and dance compliance is now grown useless,
because outvoyced by Drums and Guns, that stunned her Clients, and when they
pause the whisling fluits do play, and pretend to Oracles, but prove Sirens.

FINIS.

