Considerations Touching the True way to suppress POPERY IN THIS KINGDOM: By
making a Distinction between Men of LOYAL and DISLOYAL PRINCIPLES In that
COMMUNION.

On occasion whereof is inserted an Historical Account OF THE REFORMATION Here
in ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the West end.
1677.

A PREFACE.
THE Reader will find this Book to be of a mixed nature, and in some places of a
different style; as being composed at distant times, and by two several hands.
One part of it is a Proposition for securing the Civil State against the danger
of Popery, by making a distinction between them of the Roman Communion. The
other part, which is inserted into the former, concerns the chief and original
controversies between ours and the Roman Church.

For that Part which belongs to the Civil State, it was most of it printed
about a year since, as appears by several Instances P. 44. these ten years. P.
50. March was twelve month. P. 66 M. Luzance 's case.
, of which the Reader is desired to take notice, that there may be no mistake
in the timeing of some things.

The Model of this Part was drawn up by a worthy Gentleman, who thought it a
design, not only agreeable to his known Moderation, but really Practicable; and
likely to be exceedingly beneficial toward the safety of this Kingdom at home,
and the honor of it abroad; to which nothing would more conduce, and yet
nothing is more wanting, than some kind of general unity of the English Nation
within it self.

But what is here said on this Argument, the Reader is entreated to interpret
with the same candor with which it was intended. For the things proposed being
only spoken Problematically, it cannot be expected they should be delivered
with great exactness; and it is but reason that every little expression should
not be called to a severe Account, in a Treatise, where the whole design it
self is not imposed, but only offered to be fairly considered.

If any one think that even this is a boldness, which private men should not
allow themselves, in matters which belong to the Government, the Author could
wish all men were of that mind, though it put him to the cost of an Apology for
himself in this particular. But he is not so ignorant of the Age we live in, as
not to know that this Liberty is commonly taken; and that none is censured for
it, that does not much exceed the bounds of Modesty. And if others can extend
this Liberty so far, as to write Books that tend directly to disturb the
public settlement; he does not see what need he can have for an excuse for
writing that which can have no other end but to promote it. To speak plain, he
has seen diverse pieces of late, whereof some go about from hand to hand, to
dissuade men from taking the Oath of Allegiance; others, and those not a few of
late years, have been printed and sold publicly in behalf of a General
Toleration. What is, if this be not, to assault the public settlement? and
either to force our Governors to alter it, or to set the people against them
for continuing it? Not to mention the Reproaches that are thrown upon the
Memory of them by whom the settlement was made. Whereas, here, is no design to
alter any thing of it, any farther than may be needful to make it the more
practicable in our times. To a people that is always prone to Compassion, and
of late so much discomposed by a Civil War, no doubt the extreme severity of
Laws is likely to hinder the Practicableness of them. And it is not the
Severity of Laws, but the Practice, that tends to the Security of the State.
And therefore the Alteration here proposed is so far from having any Reflection
on the Wisdom of our Legislators in former times, that there is no reason to
doubt that they would have made it themselves if they had lived in our present
Circumstances. If the Author commit any error in judging thus; he is not
obstinate in it, but submits this together with the rest to the Judgment of
wise and good men; and especially to the Public Wisdom, which must be
Acknowledged to be the most proper, and it were well if it were the only Judge
in these matters.

The other things Chiefly from p. 80. till the Conclusion.
contained in this Book were added by another Person; who, being well persuaded
of the usefulness of the foregoing design, was desirous to Improve it to
farther Advantage. And therefore he thought it would be an useful Labor, and
prudent Counsel; not only to render the Civil State easy to the peaceable
Romanists among us, but to make them also well disposed to our Church, as well
as State. He is of opinion, that, if many of their Nobility and Gentry, and
some of their moderate Clergy, shall once come to live amicably with us, on the
terms here mentioned, or on any other that shall be thought more discreet and
seasonable; they would by degrees suffer themselves to be calmly instructed in
the Justice of our Cause, and they would without Prejudice examine which side is
to be blamed for the Divisions between us. And then he doubts not but many of
them would in time discover how much they have been misinformed concerning the
State of our Differences.

To this purpose, hoping to find the most Ingenuous of their Laity, and even
some of their well-meaning Priests, in good humor, while they are reading a
Book which pleads something in their favor; he has taken this opportunity to
give them some light into the occasion and progress of the first breach between
us and them. This he knows to be a Subject, in which the Generality of their
Laity and Clergy are most confident, and seem most to triumph. But they are
much mistaken in matter of Fact; as here the Reader will see it evidently
proved, out of Unquestionable Records, and Impartial Writers, many even of
their own side. From whence it will appear that the whole business of the
Schism was begun and continued on the Popes side for their Secular Interests
and Passions; whilst the Reformation, on the part of our Church and State, was
managed all along with great Justice and prudent Moderation.

After all that has been said, it is more than possible, that of one sort of
men, there may be some (I hope not the wisest among them) who upon other
Accounts may take offense at both Parts of this Book.

In the Political part, perhaps offense may be taken at the Liberty of this
Proposal; as seeming too favorable to them of the Roman Communion, without the
like Consideration for any other Dissenters. But the favor here proposed in
behalf of the Romanists, is not more than they enjoy among Protestants abroad
at this day: nor so much as the Generality of those who are most zealous
against them have thought fit heretofore to allow to persons differing only in
opinion. They did not think it fit that even Heretics themselves should suffer
any Capital Punishment, barely upon Account of their Opinions, how dangerous
soever they might be to men's Souls. Some, even of themselves, have written of
late that no punishment should be inflicted on men for opinions that are not
dangerous to the State. They who are of this mind have no reason to take
offense at this Book, because the favor desired in it is for Persons as
Innocent in that Respect as themselves. And for them that think Errors are
punishable by the State, on Account of the hurt that they do to men's Souls;
they will not find so great occasion of Offense as they may possibly expect.
For the Author does not plead for any other Exemption of Roman Catholic, than
such as will leave them still liable to as much severity, as themselves, if
they are obnoxious to the Laws, can think fit to be inflicted on men barely for
Differences in Opinion. Here is nothing proposed for their Exemption from any
Incapacitating Laws, or from the Penalties against saying Mass publicly, or
against their endeavoring to make Proselytes; which last thing is Death to
Roman Catholics, and not at all penal to any other. These things being
considered together, their Condition will not be to be envied by any other
Dissenters, if they should have all the favor that is propounded for them in
this Book. But the Common Protestant Religion will be better secured by it,
which ought to satisfy any one that pretends to that Name.

For that Part which concerns the Controversies, it is suggested by another,
(which otherwise the Author could scarce have expected,) that some may think
him too favorable to the Romish Opinions, or too much unconcerned for the
Defense of other Protestant Churches. He does not see how any one, that minds
what he reads, can suspect him of favor to the Principles of the Roman
Communion; having given sufficient reason, why he cannot embrace them, without
losing his hopes of Salvation. In the managing of the Controversy, if he seem
not to write in the Defense of any other Reformed Church; his Answer is, that
he does not write to the Adversaries of the Reformed Religion, in any other
than in his Majesty's Dominions. And if his Defense of our Church be
sufficient, it will overthrow that Infallibility of the Roman Church, by which
she pretends a Jurisdiction over all others, and by which alone all her
particular Impositions are Justifiable. Which will afford an easy Apology to
other Churches who do not think themselves obliged to submit to those
Impositions.

THE CONTENTS.
THat there are many false Notions of Popery Page 1. Wherein the true Notion of
it consists 2. Viz. Chiefly, in owning the Popes pretended Authority; and
consequently, in submitting to his Terms of Communion 3. This proved, I. In
that all the other points of Popery were established by this pretended Authority
5. II. The owning of it is that on which the Papists chiefly insist 7. III. It
is the most hurtful to Church and State 13. And therefore worst in Construction
of our Laws 18. That there is therefore a real difference between Papists 24.
For that they are not properly called so that deny the Popes Supremacy 25. And
they that own it in spirituals only, are less perfectly Papists than they that
own it both in Spirituals and Temporals 26. That accordingly to distinguish
between them by Laws is the only true way for the suppressing of Popery 27.
That undistinguishing Severity is not the way. For I. It is a way that being
taken would not be effectual 28. II. It would not seem Just and Equal 33. III.
It would be against the Interest of England 42.
And would promote the Roman Interest Pgae 49. A Toleration of all Sects among
us would be most pleasing to them at Rome 52. But next to it, an
undistinguishing Severity against all Roman Catholics 57. That to distinguish
between such of them as will give Security to the State and such as will not I.
Would be an effectual way to suppress Popery 61. II. That it would be Just and
Equal 71. III. That it would be for the Interest of England 76.
It would cause many to fall under the Pope's Censures 78. And thereby give
them occasion to consider How groundless the Pope's pretense is to an Authority
over us 81. How justly it was thrown out of England by K. Henry VIII. 90. And
afterward by Q. Elizabeth 108. The Iustifiableness of the Reformation 111. If
it should fail of this Effect, yet it would make them sure to our Civil
Interests 133. Objections against this way of Discrimination as not being
Practicable 135. I. The Roman Church and Court are all one in their Principles;
being obliged to own the Popes Authority 137. 1. in Spiritual things 138. 2.
and also in Temporals 144.
Answer to this Objection 150. II. They have ways to elude all the Assurance
they can give us 152. Answer to this Objection 154. III. We can have no
Assurance of their Constancy 158 Answer to this 158 Conclusion 160.
The Reader is desired to take notice that the Quotations out of L. Herbert's
History of K. Henry VIII. were taken at distant times out of two Books of
different Edition^, and not Paged alike; and that this was not observed, till
those sheets in which the Quotations are had past the Press.
The ERRATA of any Moment are to be Corrected as follows.
Page 2. lin. 13. (anciently famous) p. 14 l. 25. of this. p. 17. l. 31. And
yet that. p. 29. l. 14, 15. no Parenthesis. p. 46. l. 33. in the margin Ib.
ann. 1602. p. 276. p. 47. l. 1. in the margin put out the same words. ibid. l.
24. dependence on the. p. 53. l. 33. undistinguishing execution of Laws, p. 58.
l. 33. convince such a one that all his. p. 64. l. 9. in their streets. p. 67.
l. 27. pretense to the. p. 81. l. 6. Christ, he. p. 84. l. 14. Churches Epistle
to. p. 85. margin, last line, Anno 445. p. 91. l. 8. in margin. Schism. p. 103.
b. Edit. 1585. p. 92. l. 19. he would never. l. 15. in marg. L. Herb. Anno
1529. p. 271. l. 26. in marg. the First. l. 29. Pallavic. Hist. Conc. Trent.
II. 15.5. p. 94. marg. l. 4. Camd. Ib. p. 1. and 2. p. 94. l. 20. delays, and
either. p. 100. l. 2. Three. p. 101. l. 28. and 29. (to use his own words) p.
102. l. 12. large an account. p. 104. l. 29. Particularly should begin a
Paragraph. p. 107. l. 30. had his Traitorous. p. 113. l. 26. in marg. Camd.
Eliz. p. 13. l. 29. in marg. she put out. p. 115. l. 30. pass without any.

Considerations About the true way of Suppressing POPERY IN THIS KINGDOM.
AMong the ignorant Vulgar, there are many false and wild Notions of Popery;
some of which being admitted to be true, would render the Church of England,
and all other Reformed Churches Popish. All Churches and Sects are Popish
according to some men's Notions of Popery.
Other Notions of it would in like manner stigmatize all those Famous Churches
in the more remote parts of the World, which have not been in Communion with
the Pope these eight hundred years. And others, in the last place, would no
less deeply brand those who are most given to asperse others, even the wildest
of Phanaticks and Enthusiasts themselves, as being Popishly principled.

If it be, as sure it is, very absurd to charge Popery on those eminent Eastern
and Western Churches, which ever since the Separation of the one, No Rites nor
Doctrines common to other Churches, which are not in Communion with the Pope,
can be Popish, but in a false Notion of the word.
and the Reformation of the other, have purged forth, and kept themselves free
from all that which is properly Popish; and have therefore been anathematized
by the Pope himself, and excluded from the Communion of all those Christians
which hold him for their Ecclesiastical Head: It must also be no less absurd to
charge with Popery those Tenets of Belief, and Rites of Worship (however false
and unnecessary in themselves) wherein the Roman Catholic Churches differ from
the English Protestant, and other Churches of the Reformation; but agree with
those anciently famous Patriarchical Churches; and almost with all other in the
remote parts of the World.

Having thus, how briefly soever, said what may be sufficient, to exclude the
many, both incongruous and injurious Notions of Popery; which also would be
insignificant, if they were admitted, I shall in the next place endeavor to
set forth the only true, proper and significant notion of it.

And yet if I be not much deceived, 'twill be no hard matter to fix upon, and
show wherein this only right Notion of Popery does consist. The very derivation
of the word, and obvious reason of the thing, necessarily imported thereby, may
assure us, it cannot in a few significant words be described to be either less,
or more, or any way other, The true Notion of Popery described.
than An undue adhaesion to the Bishop of Rome, in Principles or Practices
falsely pretended to be Christian.

I say, To the Bishop of Rome, because he it is that has for many Ages past,
appropriated to himself the name of Pope, which was formerly common to all
Bishops; as every one knows that has been conversant in the Writings of the
Fathers.

I say also, An undue adhaesion in Principles, etc. for it is, supposed to be an
ill thing that is to be suppressed. Now it is not ill to confess the Apostles
Creed, or to do any good thing that he does; but to follow him, or to join with
him in any thing that is evil; that is chiefly, to assert an undue Power or
Authority in the Pope, such as that which he assumes to himself over the whole
Christian Church; and consequently, to embrace and to practice those Errors
and Corruptions (whatsoever they are) that by virtue of that usurpt Power and
Authority, he imposes on all those that are or shall be in Communion with him;
and excommunicates all that will not come to those terms; not so much for their
Aversness to those Doctrines and Practices, as because they will not submit to
his Power and Authority.

Though I must withal observe here, as consequential to my former Observation
of so many false Notions of Popery, that laying aside its Capital Error; (
viz. That which directly asserts the pretended universal Power of the Pope) it
is no necessary evil of any inferior, subservient Errors or Practices, at
least, of any of those which are not peculiar to the Roman Church (how false or
vain soever they be in themselves) but the unnecessary embracing them out of
pure submission to the usurpt Authority of the Roman Bishop, now styled Pope,
and the only Pope of the World, is it, that in any right sense of the word,
renders them truly Popish. And this I must acknowledge to be so, whether we
regard the Derivation of the word, or Reasons of the thing it self. I mean,
those Reasons which evince the only proper significant Notion of Popery, to be
that which I have given before in the fewest words I could well fix upon to
define or describe it.

What those Reasons are, we have, as to one part of them, seen already (by
seeing that if Popery be taken otherwise, all Christian Churches in the World
must be confessedly Popish;) and as to the other part also, we shall now see.

For now I am to show, that even by the judgment of such as ought best to
understand their own Doctrine, Of the Pope's Authority over all Christians.
the very chief thing in Popery, is the owning and asserting the Papal
Authority. Without question, there is nothing which they have more driven at
from the beginning, or which they now more eagerly contend for in the Roman
Church, and especially the governing part of it; as it were easy to show in
many instances; but a few will suffice, because the matter is so well known to
all men of Reading and Experience.

To begin with the Original of Popery. There is nothing more certain and plain
in Church History, then that the primitive Christians, being generally Subjects
of the Roman Empire, had a very great respect for the Bishops of Rome, because
that was the Imperial City. And yet it is as plain, that those Bishops had no
Authority or Jurisdiction out of their own Province, This Authority was the
first thing in Popery.
that is beyond the suburbicary Region of Italy, till after the Division of the
Roman Empire into Eastern and Western. It was not long after that division, and
chiefly upon the weakness of the Western Empire, that that Power, which we now
call the Papacy, grew up. As the Empire decayed, so by degrees it increased and
gathered strength; the design being at first, not to set up a new Religion, but
a new Monarchy in the place of the old then expiring. The Caesar's having made
Rome their seat of Empire for so many Ages, and being at last driven out by the
barbarous Nations, it seemed as if the Genius of the place had inspired the
Roman Bishops to perk up, and to erect a new Empire in the stead. Which was no
hard thing for them to do, being assisted with all manner of advantageous
circumstances.

Having learned from their Predecessors, to derive their descent from St.
Peter, how truly, it matters not, this gave them color enough to take upon
them to be all that he was. Their See, their Traditions, their Dictates, were
all styled Apostolical. The Popes Title was then, His Apostleship; for His
Holiness was too Vulgar in those days. Whatsoever Pre-eminence or Power those
Caesar's by their Laws, or their Subjects the Christian Bishops in their
Councils had given them, as being Bishops of the Imperial City, when they had
gained the City wholly to their Devotion, and made their party among the
barbarous Nations, they scorned to hold it any longer by gift. All that had
been so given them, and whatsoever they grasped more, they held it Iure Divino,
as being Heirs and Successors to St. Peter. By this means having shook off
their Obligation to Canons and Laws, they took upon them to be as Infallible as
St. Peter was; whose very name they did not stick to usurp when they pleased,
as if Christ had spoken to them, whatsoever he said personally to Cephas. And
whosoever objected (as some always did) that those Pretensions were new, and
that there is no ground for them in Scripture, they could then face them down
with those things which now they do not love to hear of; namely, with forged
decretal Epistles, or Councils, or Fathers, or with pretended Revelations and
Visions, or with counterfeit Miracles. For all which they had those at their
beck, who (though ignorant enough otherwise) had more learning and skill to
forge such things, than others had at that time to disprove them.

Thus in a blind Age (nay many Ages together) when this part of the World was
conducted and governed in spiritual things by one-eyed men, for the Popes
themselves were no better, it is no wonder that the generality of the people
ran into so many Errors as they did, All other Popish Errors were brought in
by it.
to the great hurt and scandal of the Christian Religion. And though it is
charitable to believe, that at first there was no design to have those Errors
obtruded on the Faith of Posterity; yet appearing to be such, as might be of
great use for the wealth and greatness of the Clergy, who were strongly
attached to the Roman See, nay some of them to the Advancement of the Papacy it
self: the Pope had great cause to look kindly upon them, and to wish they were
no Errors, but Catholic Doctrines (and if he pleased to have them such, who
durst say they were otherwise?) When they had once received that public
countenance from him, he had much greater cause to continue it, and by all
possible ways to keep them in possession of that esteem which those dark times
had given them. And that not only for affection, as before, on the account of
their usefulness to himself and his Clergy; but for fear that if these Errors
were detected and brought in disgrace, it might reflect on the Infallibility of
the Roman See, and might give men occasion to look farther, and to examine the
whole Fabric of Popery; which being searched to the bottom, it could not but
appear, that the Fundamental Error was that which gave the Pope such a Power
and Authority over the whole Christian Church.

This was truly the cause why such care was continually taken in all the latter
general Councils (for so the Pope was pleased to call those Conventions of his
Vassels, This Authority is the chief thing in Popery.
in which nothing passed but what he pleased) to establish those popular
Errors as they grew up, and to put them out of question by their Canons and
Decrees. Whereas the great capital Error was never defined, but supposed, and
passed (as all Fundamentals do) by such a general consent, as is stronger than
all positive Laws whatsoever.

It passed thus for many Ages, till upon occasion of that long Schism, when for
about fifty years, the Western Church carried double, a Pope and an Antipope,
that rid Cursing and Damning one another, the Council of Constance being met to
judge which was which, deposed both, and began to set bounds to the Papacy. It
was followed by the Council of Basil; which presuming to do the same, and being
likely enough to have gone farther; the Pope that then was, called an opposite
Council, and therein settled his Authority by a Law. It was the Council of
Florence, which though not acknowledged by many Roman Catholics abroad, and
particularly, not by the generality of them in France: Yet since I write this
to English men, I shall show what they of our Nation thought of it, at the last
Revolution to Popery; from whence we may take some kind of measure, and guess
what many would be at again. It was declared by the Cardinal Legate, Poli.
Reformatio Angliae decr. 1.
with consent of his Synod at London, that the cause of all the evils in this
Church, sprang from hence, that departing from the Unity and Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, we had relinquished the Authority and Obedience of the Pope
of Rome, Christ's Vicar, and the Successor of Peter. The denial of this
Authority, was declared Ib. decr. 2.
to be the chief Error of Protestants. To correct which, they thought fit to
set forth the true Doctrine, as it was delivered in the Eighth General Council
at Florence, held under Pope Engenius IV. of happy memory, in these words: We
declare, That the holy Apostolical See and Pope of Rome, holds the Primacy over
all the World; and that the Pope of Rome is the Successor of St. Peter, the
Prince of the Apostles, and is the true Vicar of Christ, and Head of the whole
Church, and Father and Teacher of all Christians; and that to him, in St.
Peter, our Lord Jesus Christ gave full power to feed, rule and govern the
Universal Church.

Since the Council of Florence, there have been only two pretended General
Councils; namely, the fifth Lateran, and the Council of Trent; both which were
acknowledged by that Synod of London above mentioned. The fifth Lateran Council
was called by the Pope, for no other end, but that he might be able to write
their Approbation in the style of those Bulls which he should publish for the
greatness of the Papacy. In the first of those Conc. Lateran. V. Sess. 2.
Bulls, he damned the Pisan Council, which the French King had assembled
against him. In the second, Sess. 3.
he laid an Interdict on the whole Kingdom of France, and ordered the Fair of
Lions to be removed from thence to Geneva. In a third, Sess. 4.
he annulled the famous pragmatick Sanction, the Palladium of the French
Church. And so went on, till having brought the French King to his terms, his
next Bull Sess. 11.
was, to set himself above all General Councils; and to declare, That all
Christians, sub necessitate salutis, under pain of Damnation, must be subject
to the Pope of Rome, according to that Luciferian Constitution of Boniface
VIII, which he mentions and approves, and confirms. All this he does with
consent of that Council. The Council of Trent, which came last, and pinned the
Basket, not only took care to leave the Pope in full possession of this usurped
Power, by declaring, Conc. Trident. Sess. 25. decr. de Reform. c. 21.
that no act of theirs should infringe it, and by making him Judge and
Interpreter of all their Decrees; but also confirmed it to him, as much as in
them lay. For they ordained, Ib. c. 2.
That in every Church of the Roman Communion, at the first Provincial Synod
after that Council, every Member thereof, should promise and profess true
Obedience to the Pope; and that all that were preferred for the future, whether
to Bishopric, Dignity, or Cure of Souls, should promise and swear the like
Obedience, in such form as the Pope should prescribe. Whereupon Pope Pius IV.
made that Ib. in Contin. decr. 5.
form of Profession of Faith, that is every where taken at this day; whereof
one Clause is, I promise and swear true Obedience to the Pope of Rome,
Successor to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

Beside these public Acts, which have a general influence on all parts and
Members of the Roman Communion; there is a special tie on the governing part of
it (if not by their interest) by another Oath, which is taken by all
Archbishops, Bishops and Abbots at their Consecration. The form of it is
prescribed in the Roman Pontificale; to which I refer the Reader that would see
it at large. There he may see how all Church Governors of that Communion, bind
themselves to the Pope, to be his Liege-men and Subjects, his Counsel-keepers,
his Spies and Intelligencers, his constant Correspondents, his Factors, his
sworn Servants, in express terms, To the utmost of their power to persecute and
impugn all Heretics, Schismatics and Rebels against the Pope (their own
natural Prince, Parents, Kindred, and Friends not excepted.) I wish every
Protestant (who is in their sense an Heretic, etc.) would be pleased to read
that Oath, and then judge what he is to expect from any of these men, unless he
knows they are such as will be perjured for his sake.

It was surely not without cause, that Cardinal Bellarmine called the Doctrine
of the Pope's Authority over all Christians, Caput Fidei, the Head of the
Catholic Faith. I have shown that it is so in their sense of the word
Catholic. A Doctrine that is the only Fundamental of Popery; the Foundation
whereof was first laid in the Papal Authority, and the whole Building of Popery
in other points, has been raised in favor to it. A Doctrine that has since
been secured and confirmed by Canons of Councils, and by the Oaths of all their
Clergy. A Doctrine to which the Leaders and Guides of their Church, are sworn
to sacrifice all that is dear to them: And which way the Guides go, there is no
fear but the Laity will follow them with that blind Obedience, which is
peculiar to them in the Roman Church.

And therefore whatsoever Notion we have of Popery in other things, Obedience
to this Authority the only sure property of Roman Catholics.
the Pope himself is not so fond of them, but that to gain the point of
Authority, he can either connive, or abate, or part with them wholly, if he
pleases: Though no doubt he never does it, but insidiously, as well knowing,
that whatsoever Concession he makes for the establishing of his Authority, he
may afterward annul, and will do it when soever he pleases.

But that the owning his Authority, is the thing which makes a Catholic in his
sense, and that only, it appears by sundry Instances abroad; but none more
memorable then those which we have had here in England. Where King Henry VIII.
having cast off his Obedience to the Pope, was therefore judged a Heretic; and
underwent the worst that Rome could have done to him, if he had rejected all
their Errors together; and yet he asserted all the rest, and imposed them with
the utmost severity. He was a through-Papist in all points, but only that of
Obedience; in comparison whereof, all the rest are but talk. That is the
business, as we are taught by this example. And we are not a little confirmed
by the proceeding on the other hand, with his daughter Elizabeth; who being as
much a Protestant as any is, or can be at this day; and having so settled
Religion in her Kingdom, that it had scarce been in her power to have altered
it, how and when she pleased; yet if she could but have been brought to
acknowledge the Popes Authority, to which she was courted by all possible ways,
how gladly would his Holiness have received her? and abated for lesser things,
that is, for all things else; if it be true, that the Pope would have allowed
her the English Liturgy that then was, and the Communion-Service, as it was
generally reported he would: Camd. Eliz. anno 1560.
And we have the more cause to believe it, because we hear of the like offers
prepared for us, in order to persuade the restoring of Popery in our days.

I conceive it is sufficiently proved, that the chief thing in Popery, is the
Doctrine which asserts the Popes Authority over all Christians. I shall add,
It is also the worst thing in Popery.
that it is the worst of all the evils which Popery contains, the most hurtful
and mischievous both to Church and State; which being proved to my hand in
sundry Learned Discourses within these few years, I shall not need to say much
on this head.

Yet I cannot but mind the Reader of that which is most notorious, and which
every one knows, that has read over almost any History of these last Eight
hundred years. For about so long since it was, that the Church received the
greatest Wound that ever was given it, a Breach not to be repaired, a Schism
that reaches throughout the whole Universe. So long a time the Western Church,
that is, the Western part of Europe, has been a Church by it self; having
broke off all Communion with all other Churches in the World, that is, with all
the Asian and African Churches, and all those in the East and North parts of
Europe. Instead of that Love and Peace which Christ left as his Legacy among
Christians, there has been for so many Ages nothing else but Banning and
Cursing between them. As the Pope yearly curses all those Christians that are
not of his Communion; so he and his are yearly cursed by the four ancient
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem; and by all the
Christian Churches depending on them, except those few whom he has conquered,
or bought, or otherwise gained by his Missionaries. The original cause of this
Breach, was nothing else but the Popes Usurpation, which those Churches were
not able to bear. It was the same cause, that many Ages after, divided this
Western part of Europe within it self. For our Church was thrown out of the
Roman Communion, many years before any thing else was reformed in it; when
there was no other difference between us, but only this, that we had cast off
the Popes Usurpation.

This breach of Christian-Unity, were of it self a great mischief to the
Church, though nothing else came of it but Hatred and Unchristian Censures, in
which perhaps, both sides might be to blame, but yet they might live and grow
wiser, and come at last to understand one another. And this would possibly
ensue upon any other difference of Opinion. But this grand point of Popery is
such, as sets men in no ordinary heat; it makes them breath not only Censures,
but Death against their Adversaries; it arms out all the Wealth, Power and
Policy of them that hold it, to reduce or destroy all them that oppose it. Not
to rip up ancient stories, we have a sad instance this in the Greek Church,
which refusing to submit to the Pope, was betrayed by him to the Turk; under
whom it has groaned these two hundred years. In all which time of bondage and
misery, which that poor Church has endured, what relief has she had from the
Interest or Wealth of the Papacy? I cannot say, but there have been, and are
daily great returns thither of money from Rome; but all the use of them, is to
hire her Children against her for bread; or to bribe the Turks Bassa's to do
her all the hurt that is possible. We have the less cause to take it ill, if we
find the Popes Agents busy among us, and if we feel the woeful effects of their
diligence, in our intestine Divisions, and in the growth of Atheism, which we
cannot but be sadly sensible, are both much increased since the late
Toleration. In these and the like practices, they plainly declare, that rather
then not bring in Popery, they would drive out Christianity before them; and
not leave the name of Christ to the people, that will not receive the Pope as
his Vicar.

How those Churches where he is so received and bears rule, as he would do
among us, are blessed in it, we may partly guess by the means that he employs
to get us under him. For it is seldom known, that they who are so greedy of
power, use it well when they have it. But not to go by guess, when we have a
Map before us: We may see the condition of his Subjects described by some of
themselves, that writ in those times when men durst write of such things; when
there was no Inquisition for them, nor no Index Expurgatorius for their
Writings. I believe, a more cruel Bondage, a more miserable Thraldom and Yoke
then they describe never was among the barbarous Nations. I believe also the
Inquisition, where it is introduced, has not made their condition easier
since. And that it is not introduced in some Countries, as namely, in France
and Flanders, they may thank the poor Protestants for it: Where such are, the
Pope will have a care not to make too much noise, for fear of frighting away
the Birds that he would take. And yet in France, where there is no Inquisition,
he found other ways not long since, to make the Iansenists feel the weight of
his hand, and that severely; for no other reason, but because in certain
School-points, they presumed to oppose another party that were more firm to his
Interests.

If this be his way of keeping Unity, for which they so much cry up his
Government (though men do not speak so well of the Russian, which keeps Unity
better:) I see no reason why we should not be content, and endure our
dissentions; or rather find some other way to compose them, than by putting our
necks into a yoke, which being once fastened, it will be too late for us to
complain afterward. We must either draw as he would have us, or else go to the
Shambles.

For the Temporal State, how it has been turmoild with this Papal Usurpation,
would ask a large Book to describe, as the matter deserves. I shall only say
this, that ever since it began, it has hung like a Comet, over Kingdoms and
Nations, and shed forth direful Influences on all that have been any way
obnoxious to it. But it came not to its height, till Pope Hildebrand's days,
whom their heavenly Muster-Roll Martyrolog. Roman. Maii 25.
calls St. Gregory VII. A Saint, no doubt, worthy of Red Letters; for he
caused the shedding of more Christian Blood than Mahomet himself; and as
Mahomet did, he taught his Sect to do the same, and merit Heaven by it. His
Dictates are commonly known, being published, both in his Books, and in the
Councils. I appeal to any one that has read them, whether Antichrist at his
coming (if he be yet to come) can Rev. 13.5.
speak greater things. Sure I am, nothing can be more contrary to the humble
and meek spirit of Christ. Among these, there is one Doctrine briefly
expressed, but more amply declared in his Bulls, and in his actions pursuant to
them. It is concerning a power that he assumes to himself to depose Kings, and
to dispose of their Kingdoms. Which Arrogant Claim (such as none but the Devil
Luke 4.6.
ever made before him) has ever since been continued by his Successors; and
yet is, as often as they see occasion, both declared and manifested by the like
Bulls and actions. The woeful effects of it throughout this Western part of
Europe, are notoriously known to all that read History; having torn the Bowels
of this part of Christendom like an Earthquake, for these last six hundred
years, having shaken the Foundations of all Empires, Kingdoms and States,
involving all of them, at one time or other, in bloody and cruel Wars, accursed
and unnatural Rebellions, and all other consequent Calamities. In Germany
particularly, where it first began to operate: The two next Emperors were fain
to fight no less than sixty Field-battels to keep their Crowns upon their
Heads. In France it has wrought proportionably. Other Countries have suffered
their share. But none more than England in King John's miserable days. And that
had been forgotten in 88. if the design had taken, which God only could, and
did defeat; when otherwise this Doctrine, in all probability, had destroyed the
English Kingdom and Nation, we had been gone, and our name had scarce remained
upon the face of the Earth.

The sad experience of the manifold mischiefs and dangers, both to Church and
State, from this pretended Authority, taught our Forefathers at sundry times,
It is worst in the Construction of the Law.
to provide against it by Laws, with such Penalties annexed to them, as they
found needful, to prevent the like mischiefs and dangers for the future. It
appears, that the ancientest Laws of this kind, were made by them that lived
and died in the Roman Communion: I mean, the Laws of Provisors and Praemunire,
enacted some hundreds of years since by Roman Catholic Kings and their
Parliaments; who could have no design against any other of those things we call
Popery; for they held the same erroneous Opinions which our now-Papists do,
though they held them not as Articles of Faith. But they endeavored by those
Laws, to secure themselves against the daily Encroachment of the Pope, and his
Faction in the Roman Church. When those Banks were found insufficient to
restrain the growing Torrent within its bounds, they found it needful to stop
the Channel, to exclude the Papacy it self, and turn it out of the Kingdom.
This was done by King Henry VIII, upon such a Provocation, as perhaps would
have moved a much gentler Prince to do the same. For he was made to dance
Attendance upon the Court of Rome five or six years, for Sentence in a Cause,
which he commenced not of himself, but by advice of the Popes Legate, and his
Confessor: A Cause which the Pope himself at first had encouraged; in which he
had the judgment of the whole Church of England, and diverse Foreign
Universities of his side. His exclusion of the Papal Authority was by Acts both
of Parliament, and of Convocation, almost no man dissenting. They both formed
the Oath of Supremacy, and took it themselves, and joined with him in imposing
it, in direct opposition to this grand point. And yet this King himself, and
all the Members of those Bodies, were firm to all things else that we call
Popery.

It was otherwise in the time of Queen Elizabeth, of blessed Memory; who, at
the entrance of her Reign, not only repaired her Father's Fence against the
Papal Authority, but also purged the Church of all those Errors and
Corruptions, which are yet retained and owned by all them of the Roman
Communion. And yet she laid no penalty on any of them, but the loss of their
Ecclesiastical Preferments, and the payment of Twelve pence for every Sunday
that they were absent from Church. This is all that they suffered for many
years, till the Pope took upon him to turn her out of her Kingdom. When he had
published his Bull to that purpose, and sent it hither among her Subjects, and
some of them had taken Arms, and tried all ways to put that Bull in execution;
Camd. Eliz. Anno 1571.
then she enacted a Law, to forbid any of her Subjects, under pain of
Praemunire, to bring Bulls, or any other such Trumpery from Rome, and made it
Treason for any of them to be reconciled (as they call it) to the Roman Church.
Yet for six years more, though some were taken in the offense, none suffered
the penalty of that Law. When the Pope proceeded further in Hostility against
her, Ib. Anno 1577.
to give away her Crown, to invade her Dominions, and to practice against her
life; when she found, that under pretense of Religion, he drew over many of her
Subjects, and trained them up as his spiritual Janissaries, in Houses founded
for that purpose; when she found, that at their return, they fully answered the
ends of their Education, and rather listed Soldiers against her, than made
Proselytes to their Religion; then she executed those former Laws, and made
more from time to time, as they gave her occasion. In which Laws, though she
found it necessary to forbid sundry Acts which were purely Religious, and to
make it penal to such as were taken at them, because she had no other way to
find out them that were dangerous to the state; yet she made it sufficiently
appear, that the design of such Laws was only against dangerous persons, by the
great care she took to turn the edge of them from those that were otherwise.
Ib. Anno 1581.
She gave private Instructions to her Judges, that before any was to suffer by
the Sanguinary Laws, they should examine him how he stood affected to the
State; whether he owned Hildebrands Doctrine; whether he approved the Popes
Sentence; whether he would side with him against her Majesty. If they found any
one, in those Circumstances of a Prisoner dead in Law, so desperately bold,
that he durst own a Foreign power, in defiance of her that had his life at her
mercy; she would not have her Judges spare him, that she might be very sure,
would not have spared her nor her Kingdom. Otherwise, if they stood right as to
the Civil Authority, it was her will that none should suffer death. And though
they were such of the Clergy, whom she knew to be the Popes Disciples and
Pensioners, and therefore thought it not safe to trust them in her Kingdom; yet
if they gave her a fair answer, she sent them out of it quietly. And thus she
dismissed Rishton says it of himself in his virulent Cont. of Sand. de Schism
Angl.
some of them, that proved afterward as errant Traitors as any whom she put to
death. But for many other of their Clergy, and especially those who were
Priests in Queen Mary's days, knowing them to be of peaceable Principles, she
suffered them to live peaceably in her Kingdom. Of the Laity likewise, she put
none to death, that would disown the Popes temporal power. She took only a
pecuniary Mulct, with which she thought fit to repair her self for the charge
she was put to in defending her self against the Head of their Communion. When
that charge was apprehended to be over; namely, at King James his coming to the
Crown, they were discharged even of those pecuniary penalties. The King knew of
no Sentence that the Pope had issued forth against himself; and finding no
trouble from those of his Communion, he was willing to give none. Nor did he,
till he had tried them* None suffered among them in any kind; none had cause to
be in fear of any suffering; no distinction was made between them and other
Subjects. But this calm was soon interrupted, by the breaking out of a
Conspiracy, which yet seemed only to waken the vigilance of the State. For no
great matter was done upon it, till another broke forth, that of the
Powder Treason, which out-went all former examples. And then (when it was
almost too late) he understood by searching into this Conspiracy, that though
the Pope had not deprived him by name of the Kingdom, yet he had barred his
right to it by a sufficient Description; having sent out two Breves before the
Queens death, in which he commanded all his Catholics, not to suffer any
Protestant, how near soever in Blood, to succeed her in the Kingdom. This Papal
Precept it was, to which the Authors themselves ascribed their
Gunpowder-Treason. And that the King might not always be in the like danger, he
saw no way but to punish them that heeded such Precepts. Other Papists he
excused, and made himself, as it were, their Compurgator, declaring to the
World, that he believed they were innocent and peaceable. Only they were not to
be excused for keeping ill Company: For they joined in all Religious Acts with
those of Hildebrand's Sect; therefore they ought not to think much if their
purses paid for it. But otherwise the King did what lay in him to distinguish
them. And therefore he provided the Oath of Alleigance, by the taking or
refusing whereof, he might be able to know the one from the other. That Oath
was made at first in such Terms, as might perhaps have raised scruple in those
that held the Papacy, to be of Divine Right, though not in Temporals, but only
in Spiritual things. Though most of that Communion held otherwise in France,
and few held so in England, in King Henry VIII's days. Yet lest that might
stick with any innocent person; the King, that desired to hurt none that might
be spared, and well knowing all their Principles, for he had studied their
Authors; therefore took upon him so to moderate the Oath, that it could not
pinch the Conscience of any Roman Catholic that was not first infected with
Hildebrand's Principles. And they were generally so well satisfied with the
Oath in those Terms, in which he had conceived it, that it was forthwith taken
by the Superior of the Secular Clergy, and by many other, both of the Clergy
and Laity. Few stuck at it, but those of Hildebrand's Sect; whom the King had a
mind to single out of the Herd, and to rid the Land of them, that he might live
quietly with the other Roman Catholics. But this pleased not at Rome, where
only those are the Darlings. And it concerned the Pope, to assert his own power
in Temporals; which being something the younger, he is more fond of than that
in Spirituals; and yet the elder being the more popular, he wilfully mistook,
and persuaded the people (as if he had believed himself) that the Oath was
against his power in Spirituals. But he mistook not in forbidding the Oath of
Allegiance to be taken by any Catholic, upon any Terms whatsoever. His
Prohibition was under pain of his Curse; both which were confirmed by one or
more Popes since. And yet many of their Church took that Oath, and some of them
defended it in writing; and it is taken and defended in like manner to this day.
By many others it is, and has been refused: Whether as being contrary to the
Principles of their Sect, or whether in Reverence to the Popes Prohibition; and
possibly some may have refused to take the Oath, upon some scruple which they
have conceived against the wording of it.

But whatsoever the cause of their refusal may be, the State has no way left
to distinguish; and therefore being assured of the lawfulness of the Oath in
these Terms, and being aware of the wicked design with which it is forbidden,
has just cause to secure it self by their peril. It has surely no cause to
look on them as Friends, that prefer their own scruples to its safety; much
less, that break its just Commands, to serve or to please its open Enemy. And
for this cause, that wise and gracious Prince suffered some of their Clergy
that were obnoxious otherwise, to fall under the edge of the Law. But never in
his nor his Sons days, did any one of that Communion, suffer death for any
Crime against the State, that would clear himself of it by taking the Oath of
Allegiance.

From what I have said, it sufficiently appears, that the asserting an undue
Authority in the Pope or Bishop of Rome, is properly to be called Popery; it is
the chief thing, and the only thing in the Popes esteem; it is most hurtful and
dangerous, and the worst thing in the Construction of the Law. From whence I
shall infer, that among Roman Catholics, Papist, an equivocal word.
some are properly Papists, and some are improperly called so. And however they
are both of one Communion, and meet together in the same Offices of Worship,
and therefore cannot easily be distinguished; (unless they please to
distinguish themselves) yet there is a great difference between them: As great
a difference in relation to the State, as there is between Wens and useful
Members in the Body.

They that wholly deny the Popes Supremacy, Improperly Papists.
cannot properly be called Papists, but Unreformed Catholics; as men generally
were here in England, in the later part of King Henry VIII's days. And they, as
I believe, were the first that used the word Papists, to denote the Assertors
of that outed Supremacy. Nor can they properly be called so in France, or other
Countries, who deny the Pope to have any Authority over them by Divine Right;
but grant it only by such Canons and Laws, as being made upon good
Considerations, may on better, be abrogated and repealed. I know there are some
of this mind in England, and do believe there would appear to be many, if they
found sufficient cause to declare it. R. C. (i. e.) Ricardus Chalcedonensis,
alias, Dr. Smith, the last Roman Catholic Bishop that pretended Jurisdiction
here in England, was of this mind, as appears by his Book against the Bishop of
Derry, entitled, A Brief Survey, etc.
Now though such men believe the same erroneous Tenets, and use the same
Superstitious and Idolatrous Rites that Papists do; namely, such as the Pope
himself has made the Terms of his Communion, and therefore they are properly in
Communion with him; Vid. cap. 5. p. 55. where he says, it is no point of Faith,
whether the Pope be St. Peter's Succeffor Iur^ Divino, or Humano.
yet those Tenets and Rites are not properly Popery. Though they are bad enough
otherwise, yet if they keep them to themselves, they are not hurtful to Humane
Society: As being consistent with the safety of the Kingdom, and with obedience
to Government, and with Justice of Contracts, and love of Neighbors; with all
which, at least collectively taken, Popery in the proper Notion of it is
inconsistent; and generally held so, not only by all other Christians, but by a
very great and considerable part of the Roman Catholics themselves.

They are properly Papists, that hold the Pope as Vicar of Christ, by Divine
Right, to have a Power and Authority over all Christians. And yet if they give
him this power in Spirituals only, and not also in Temporals, they are but
half-Papists: Half-Papists.
And so they will find the Pope accounts them, if they have occasion to make
use of him. They only are thorough-Papists, Throrough-Papists.
that acknowledge his Authority in both. First, directly in Spiritual things;
and then in Temporals also, whether directly, or whether indirectly, in order
to Spirituals, it matters not. Let him have the Power, and he will trust
himself with the use of it. Now this thorough-Papist, being a man after the
Popes own heart, I shall from him take the perfect measures of Popery. Their
Description.
He is one that asserts and maintains, or at least practically submits to the
Popes pretended Power and Usurpation; over all Kings and People in their
Temporals; and over all Bishops and Churches in their Spirituals; and in all
things, over all persons on earth, not only separately, Zenzelini Glossa;
Dominus Deus noster Papa.
but collectively, in their Parliaments or Councils; and consequently over all
their Canons, Laws and Definitions. In few words, that owns him to be the
Infallible Oracle, Vid. Glos. Extravag. Cum inter de verb. signif. Edit. Paris,
An. 1585.
and Universal Vicar of God; a kind of God upon Earth, who has no limits to his
Commission, or to the execution of it, but his own will and pleasure. This most
excellent Systeme it is, that only passes at Rome for the Catholic Doctrine.
This is authorized by the Pope, this is taught in his own Church at Rome, and
elsewhere by his Stipendiaries or other Dependants. And this is properly
Popish, for it belongs not to any other Christians of whatsoever Church, Sect
or Denomination: Nor is it owned by the far greater number of them that are or
call themselves Roman Catholics.

I have given my own private Opinion, as well of the true, as of the false
Notion of Popery; and have intimated withal (though but occasionally) what my
Opinion is, as well of the great Concernment of the Christian World, if not of
all Mankind, to suppress Popery, truly such; as of the little occasion there
is, for any great severity to be used against that for Namesake, which in
truth is not Popery, nor has any essential or necessary conjunction with it.

Now to enter upon the main design of this Paper; which, according to the
title, The main Argument.
is a Consideration or Search for the true way of suppressing of Popery, I
declare my design to be against Popery in its proper Notion. And whereas I have
shown a lower degree of it to consist in owning the Popes power in Spirituals
only; by suppressing of this, I intend, at least, such a restraint upon it, as
may suffice to keep it from being hurtful or troublesome. For the other degree,
which cannot but be hurtful wheresoever it is in being: I declare my design to
be no less, than the extinguishing of it, at least out of England, and, if it
were possible, from the face of the Earth.

Undistinguishing Severity is not the way to suppress Popery.
Of this matter to deliver my thoughts with all freedom, I confess it seems to
me, that undistinguishing Severity, whether of Laws, or of the execution of
them, against all Roman Catholics in general, cannot be the true way to
suppress Popery; much less to rid it out of this Kingdom, or any other of his
Majesty's Dominions.

The general Motives which induce me to think so, are these three: 1. That such
a course in all likelihood, would not prove effectual. 2. That if it should
prove effectual, yet it would be very far from seeming just or equitable. 3. It
would be against the interest of England in diversContingencies.

1. That it would be ineffectual, It would be ineffectual.
I am persuaded by the well-known experience of above a Hundred years, that is,
of what has passed in this Kingdom ever since the Reformation. For
notwithstanding all the Penal Laws that have been made, and the execution of
them, which was severe enough at some times; we see that still there have been
Roman Catholics ever since; and they were never so much lessened by their
sufferings, as by the Court of Wards, which took off many of the wealthiest
Families. But that which made them bear up against sufferings was this, as I
humbly conceive, That by diverse of our Laws, or by the Interpreters and
Executors of them (especially of those Laws that had pecuniary Penalties) they
saw no distinction made between loyal and disloyal; between peaceable and
turbulent Principles; between matters simply of Religion, and those which
threatened the State. The same cause is like to have the same effect still. And
therefore I think we have just occasion to fear, that if all men of that
Communion are still equally liable to the same punishments in any kind, and
accordingly treated; it will be thought by themselves, if not by others also,
that their suffering is for some Articles of Catholic Religion, and not for
any Principles either of Treason, or other Papal Superstition (which
Principles* very many of them do as much, as any Protestant, with all their
hearts abhor, and are ready to abjure.) And while they think so, it will
undoubtedly cause (at least a considerable number of them) to stand the utmost
extremities; and thereby the Pope will peradventure gain more Proselytes to his
Communion, and more strength to his side, than he will lose from it.

Besides, the number of their Priests at home, and of their Seminaries abroad,
would not lessen, but increase, by such undistinguishing Severity. For diverse
of those Sufferers, being straightened with want, would send their Children
beyond Sea, to get them off of their hands, to have them bred without charge,
and put into a way of living. And they are so brought up, and so principled, in
their Foreign Colleges, that let the Laws in England be never so severe, they
will return hither, and not stick to venture their lives in the service.
Seminaries also would increase. For they are so addicted to their Religion
beyond Sea, that, let a Preacher in a good Town solicit the Charity of people
toward the maintenance of such as shall expose their Lives to propagate their
Religion, and there will quickly be a new Foundation erected for that purpose.
The College in Sivil was maintained by Alms, and I think that at Valledolid
likewise, and yet Scholars lived no where better. These two Colleges, when the
times were most severe to Roman Catholics, sent every year many Priests into
England; and now in many years send none: But would undoubtedly grow numerous
again, if the Fame of our Severity here should quicken the peoples Charity in
those parts, which has been slackned very much of late years.

Again, neigbouring Princes, who shall see men persecuted for the same
Persuasions which they profess themselves, will interpose in their behalf; both
of their own accord in some measure, and much more at the Popes Solicitation;
who will be sure to engage all the credit he has with them, on such an
occasion: And the interest of all neighbor States are so interwoven, that at
one time or other it will be found inconvenient not to gratify them in such a
request.

There will oftentimes happen another kind of Obstruction, even at home, from
English Protestants themselves. For I think it ought to be considered, that
many Roman Catholics, however abused in their Judgments about some matters of
Divine Belief or Worship, are esteemed by their Protestant neighbors honest,
well-meaning men, such as they cannot find in their hearts to use hardly,
without great and evident Cause. Others have Relations, or Friends, or
Dependants, tied by several interests to them. And even strangers to the
persons who are to suffer the penalties of the Laws, will think it hard to
inflict them on men that are no otherwise liable, than merely for such
Religious Tenets and Rites, as have been for many Ages warranted by the Laws,
and held and practiced by all Christian People amongst us.

So that, from one or other of these causes I have mentioned, it will prove a
very difficult matter to have the Laws executed on Roman Catholics, without
Discrimination; that is, without separating those who are so qualified for
pity, from those who deserve none, in the judgment of any Protestant, nay of
any true Englishman whatsoever. For no man that loves the Peace of his
Country, can think fit to spare them, who are so fond of a Foreign Government,
that rather than not be under it, they will not spare to involve their Country
in Blood and Misery. Other men of that Principle, have done as bad in former
times. And we have cause to be jealous of all men of that Religion, that they
are of the same Principles, and will do the same things; unless they will
secure us by some Act, which they may lawfully do, being required to it. Now it
is evident, we have too many such among us, who are thorough-Papists, and
Ministers of that Foreign Government; and many others, who will not secure us
by doing any such Act, that the State shall require, against the interest of
that Foreign Government. Therefore the State has just cause to secure it self
against them, by such Laws, as being executed, it shall not be in their power
to do us hurt. But when those Laws are made without any distinction, they Herd
themselves with others of their Communion; and being hunted together, they have
some little trouble perhaps, which they laugh at, for they know it will come to
nothing. After a while, good nature works in the Protestants; every man that
should execute the Laws, knows some or other that deserve favor, and for
their sakes he will punish none. So the Prosecution at first grows cold, and at
last ceases; till some fresh Apprehension of Danger awakens us, and then there
will be a little more stir, to no purpose, as we have seen more then once in
our days.

But lastly, If the Laws are executed to the full, I speak of Laws made without
Discrimination, whatsoever severity shall be used in pursuance of them, will
chiefly light on the best and most innocent persons; on them that are truly
English, and have nothing to do with Rome, save that they live within her
Communion. For the thorough-paced Papist will shift better than the other can
do. The Jesuits can equivocate, and teach their Scholars to do it. They can
sail with every wind, and rather than lose their Port, they can do all that
Protestants do. And if they have no Dispensation before hand, they can have a
Pardon for it afterward: For they know where those things are to be had, which
any honest man, though of that Religion, abhors either to ask or need. And if a
Jesuit should have so over-slept himself, that he is taken napping with other
Catholics; he is sure to have Friends to bring him off. If none in England can
do it, he has them abroad to help. If he be put to fly his Country, he knows
whither to go. If he step short, and fall into a Prison; there, at least, he is
sure not to want either relief or means for his deliverance. While the man of
Loyal principles, if he fall into any of those Circumstances, is stuck, and
knows not which way to look for help. For from whence should he have it? At
home he has no Friend that dares know him; abroad he has no manner of interest.
For all there depend upon the Pope; who is so far from concerning himself for
any, whom he knows to be no Papists, that he does not own them for Catholics.
And especially if any such be men of parts, whom he hears to be in Prison, or
the like, he only wishes them hanged out of the way, that he may have the rest
the more entirely at his Devotion.

Much more might be said on this head, but what I have said may suffice. And
therefore to insist no longer on that Question, Whether undistinguishing
Severity would be effectual or no? I come now to show, 2. It would not seem
just and equitable.
that if it should prove effectual, yet it would be very far from seeming just
or equitable to indifferent men. And of this I am strongly assured, first, by
all the judgment I can make of the Intention of our Laws; secondly, by
Arguments from the rule of right Reason, and the Ancient Practice of
Christianity.

I begin with the former, and observe, That although the Severity of our Penal
Statutes, according to the bare letter of them, generally not distinguishing
between Papists and Roman Catholics, falls indifferently on both; yet, by the
wording of them in several places, and by other Circumstances, it appears, that
they were intended against the Abettors of undue Authority in the Pope, and
against no other.

For what appears in the wording of the Statutes, I shall instance only two;
viz. 23 Eliz. and 3 Iacobi: Whereof the former, namely, that of Queen
Elizabeth, expresses the crime to be punished by the Statute, in these terms,
An intent to withdraw Subjects from their natural Obedience. The other, namely,
that of King James, which was very severe, as it ought to be on so great an
occasion, mentions this as the crime to be punished by it: The withdrawing
Subjects from their natural Obedience, and moving them to promise Obedience to
the pretended Authority of the Sea of ROME.

That the Sanguinary Laws were intended against Popery in this sense, and no
other, it may further appear by the Account I have given before; where I
briefly set forth on what occasions they were made, and in what manner they
were executed. It is evident, that none ever suffered Death as a Papist, It is
so expressly provided in 27 Eliz. for fthe Oath of Supremacy, and 3 Iac. for the
Oath of Allegiance.
who could be brought to take the Oath of Supremacy or Allegiance. Now it is
certain, that those Oaths were primarily designed to be a suffient Test to
distinguish Papists from others. And yet in either of them, there is no mention
made of any Doctrines, but only those which concern Government; that is, the
external Government both of Church and State. It is indeed objected by Papists
against the Oath of Supremacy, and it sticks with some of those Roman
Catholics who are not Papists, that by the Oath of Supremacy, the King is made
a spiritual Head of the Church. But he that reads the Oath, will find no such
thing in it; and it is expressly declared by the Church of England in her
Articles, That she ascribes to the King no other Jurisdiction over the Church,
than what is merely external; even the same that was exercised by the Kings of
Judah, and the Christian Emperors, over the Church in their Kingdoms and
Empires.

To this I may add, Justitia Britannica 8o. Land. 1584. and K. James works. p.
252. and 336. and K. Charles I. vol. 1. p. 384.
the constant Profession and Answer of all Protestant Writers. Whenever any
Complaint has been made of the severity used to Roman Catholics, it has been
always said, that they suffered not for Religion, but Treason. And this is a
very plain and satisfactory Answer, while those only suffer who do those
things, or hold those Tenets which involve Treason in them. But if they who do
no such thing, and who renounce all such Tenets, are yet made to suffer in like
manner; though they suffer for that which the Law declares to be Treason, it
will bear some dispute, whether Lawmakers may not miscall things. However, it
shows the general sense of the Church and State of England; I mean, for what
concerns the design or intention of those Penal Laws.

And here by the way it may be observed how very different our dealing with the
Roman Catholics is from their dealing with Protestants in Q. Mary's days. That
then all professed Protestants were handled severely, and that many of them were
put to death, I think none will deny. But to avoid the Odium of this, some of
that Communion in our Age would persuade us that their suffering was not upon
the Account of Religion. And, to color this Evasion, they endeavor to show
that Cranmer, and two or three more, had deserved death for Treason; which is
more than they are able to prove. But admit this were true, that these men had
deserved it; yet they did not suffer death for Treason, but Religion, as they
would have it believed that made them dye. For they declared this throughout
the whole course of their Criminal Proceedings. And it concerned them so to do.
For, otherwise, by the Laws then in force, they had murdered as many as they
burnt; there being no Law to Burn men for Treason, but for Heresy. And so far
they were from using any Moderation, that they rather extended the Letter of
the Law: by inflicting it on many poor Creatures, who had nothing to provoke
any Jealousy against them; but enough to move pity, if there had been any, in
their Adversaries. It has been the glory of our Church, that we have not been
like them in this: nor can be, without altering the Design of them that made
all our Laws against Popery.

The intention of our Laws appearing so manifestly, as I conceive, against
Papists only, and not against any other Roman Catholics; it seems not
reasonable that any other butPapists should suffer by the Letter of those Laws.
For it is a Maxim, That not the bare Letter of any one or more Clause or
Clauses, but the Intention of the whole Law is the Life and Soul of it. I mean,
it is that which gives signification to words, and which ought (where itis
evident) to interpret theLaw. It is also a Maxim, That all Penal Laws should be
interpreted favorably; and therefore more should not be made Criminals, nor
should any Criminal suffer more by any Law, than was meant by the Legislator.
Now it is commonly said, there are very many RomanCatholicks (I hope the far
greater number of them in England) who maintain no Principles or Opinions,
which destroy the Fundamentals of Government, or disturb the peace of the
Kingdom; nor hold any of those Opinions which are essential to Popery, namely,
which assert any undue Authority in the Pope, or (as it is expressed in the
Statute) which withdrawSubjects from their naturalObedience, or move them to
promise Obedience to the pretended Authority of theSee of Rome. There are many
of that Communion, who profess that they hate and detest all such Doctrines.
And therefore to indifferent Judges, how can it but seem very hard to extend
the severity of theLetter of our Penal Laws, against the Legislators intention,
to all Roman Catholics universally and indistinctly, without any exception in
favor of those many that hold no such Opinions, and that are in all respects
truly Loyal and peaceable? Surely the punishment cannot seem just or equitable,
which has not theLaw for it; and that has not theLaw for it, which is against
the intention of the Legislator.

Next I say, with submission, that granting the intention of the Statute-Laws
of our Land, and of the Legislators by whom they were made, to have been
against all Roman Catholics indistinctly, and not only against the mere
Papalins; yet according to the Eternal Law of Reason, and ancient practice of
Christianity, it may seem in such case, than an undistinguishing execution of
the Laws, would neither be just nor equitable.

For first, it seems very unreasonable, to go about to force men to change
their judgments in any thing, that hurts none but themselves, and especially in
so weighty a matter as is that of Religion. It is confessed, that the Religion
of Roman Catholics, differs very much from that which is established by Law;
and I am much to blame, if I know not it is Erroneous in those points in which
it differs. For which Reason, I doubt not, they ought to be restrained from
public exercise of it, and (as far as it is possible) from hurting others by
the Propagation of their Errors. I also grant, that by some kind of
Punishment, less than death or ruin, men that err, may and ought to be
awakened and stirred up to seek better Information, and to attend to the means
of it, that they may be reclaimed from their Errors. I also grant, that it
belongs to the Legislative Power to define, how far, and by what means all this
should be done; without which, I see no way to preserve established Truth, or
to suppress Heresy in any Kingdom.

But all the punishment that is necessary for this purpose, may be inflicted
without any force upon Conscience; as I shall have occasion to show toward the
end of this Paper. Much less is that any force upon Conscence, when men are
punished for Treason, or for treasonable Principles. For those Principles are
Treason in Bullion, and will be coined out, whenever the Pope pleases to set
the Mint going; and that he will do, whensover he thinks it time to pay off any
King that does not please him. But I cannot say so, when men that have no such
Principles, are punished as if they had; and are either put to death, or made
unable to live, unless they will part with those things in their Religion which
are purely and simply erroneous, and which have no ill influence upon the State
any otherwise than as it is inconvenient to have different Religions in being
together in the Kingdom. This Severity is truly a force upon Conscience. And
it is very unreasonable besides, that the simply erroneous should be made to
feel the weight of that punishment, than which no greater could be inflicted by
Law, if their Errors were heightened and envenomed with all the Malignity of
that which we call properly Popery.

It Is also against the ancient practice of Christianity. For the Christians,
when they came to have power in their hands, did not punish either Pagans or
Jews, with either Sanguinary or Mulctative Laws; nor (for ought that appears)
thought it reasonable for them so to do. I confess they did after a while
punish Donatists with pecuniary penalties, and kept both them and all the rest
under diverse incapacities; and the same reason they had for so doing, is enough
to induce the Church and State of England to deal as they do now with
Dissenters, and especially with Roman Catholics, in keeping them under
incapacitating Laws.

If it be objected, that those who were so favorably dealt with in those first
Christian times, did not communicate with any that were dangerous to the State,
as those do who pretend to the like favor amongst us; and that while they
communicate with men of disloyal Principles, it may be thought not unfit to
involve them in the same punishment that is due to men of those Principles: It
will be answered, that they do not communicate with them in any disloyal
Doctrine or Practice, and therefore they ought not to be joined with them in
the punishment of those Doctrines or Practices. God forbid, that Innocents
should be handled as Nocents, for being of the same Communion with them. We
should think it very hard and unreasonable, that honest men and good
Protestants, who communicate in the Church and Worship of God with such as
prove to be Traitors or Felons, must therefore partake with them in suffering
for their misdeeds.

If it be farther objected, that among the Roman Catholics, there are many who
are fallen off from the Church of England, and that such men, at least, deserve
punishment for their Apostasy, and much more the Priests or others that
wheedled them away: I cannot deny, that in this case we have a just provocation
to Severity. And we have an example before us in the Roman Church, which if we
should follow, it would go hard with such persons. They which turn from them to
us, find no mercy in those Popish Countries where the Inquisition is settled,
nor much favor in any other. But we are not bound to follow those examples.
And therefore setting them aside, and considering things without Provocation, I
must needs say, that the simplicity of most of their Converts, seems to me to
deserve rather pity, than any hard punishment. They are generally such as
understood not their own Religion, before they suffered themselves to be fooled
out of it. Otherwise, if they are learned and knowing men, who thus leave our
Communion, which I think rarely happens, and specially if they are Converts to
downright Popery; it cannot but argue, that such persons are vehemently lead by
their affections, and therefore they may be justly suspected of ill design, and
of forming to themselves some interest against the Laws. And if that be true,
it cannot be denied, that they deserve to suffer all that the Laws have
ordained for such persons. Yet if men of knowledge and parts, though they have
deserted our Church, can content themselves to be Strangers, and not Enemies;
and will prove it, by declaring against all the Popes Usurpations, which will
be a certain bar to their preferment, and therefore may be a good proof of
their sincerity; in this case, I do not see but we may live quietly with them,
and perhaps the more safely by their means. What Laws are now in force against
them that shall be reconciled; or that shall reconcile others, to the Church of
Rome, were intended to keep men from being poisoned with Popery; against which
those Laws were severe enough, and yet not more than there was cause. And yet
according to the wording of those Laws, he is equally to suffer the penalty of
them, that draws others, or that is drawn himself, into the Roman Communion,
though not into Popery, as we have defined it. I do not know, that those
penalties have been inflicted on any one Offender these many years; nor has it
been considered, what the Principles were, either of them that were seduced, or
of them that seduced them; and 'twere hard, that the impunity of them who have
directly transgressed the intent of those Laws, should be a snare to them that
have only transgressed the letter of them. Therefore, I humbly conceive, that
whatsoever Retrospection is made, it ought to be with some kind of
Discrimination. And it were to be wished for the future, that the old Laws may
be put in ure against them that seduce others, or are seduced into Popery; and
that some gentler Laws may be made against them that shall enter into that
Communion, though they do acquit themselves of those dangerous Principles. But
how this may be done, I humbly leave to the wisdom of the State to consider.

The third Reason which I mentioned against an undistinguishing Severity, was
this, That it would be against the interest of the Church and State of England.
Both those great Interests are united together in the preservation of the
Monarchy. For Monarchy is essential to the State, as is visible in the
Constitution of it. And for the Church of England, as she is the best support
of the Monarchy, so she is supported by it, and must either fall with it, or be
brought into a very low condition; as we have seen by the experience of late
years. Now of all sorts and parties among us, that dissent from the Church of
England, there is none but has Principles which seem to look ill upon Monarchy;
nor is there any that has not explained the meaning of them by their practices,
at one time or other within our memory. To specify this in Instances of all,
would be needless; for I know no sort of Dissenters that go about to justify
themselves wholly in this matter, except only Roman Catholics. Among them,
some late Writers would bear us down, that they are, and have been always,
faithful to the Monarchy. It were better said by others of that Church, than by
some of them that have written this. But the truth is, they are a mixed
Communion, whereof the governing part of the Clergy are thorough-Papists; and
therefore neither they, nor any of their Faction can be right Friends to such a
Monarchy as we speak of, whatsoever they pretend. Many of the inferior Clergy,
and of the Laiety of that Communion are no Papists; as I have shown in this
Paper, and they have shown it themselves, in adhering to Monarchy against the
Pope himself.

Of both these sorts of Roman Catholics, we have lately seen the trial in
Ireland; where for some years they agreed in nothing, but that some times they
went to Church together. Their Bishops, and the rest of the chief of their
Clergy, were indeed the Pope's Creatures and Subjects. For they had sworn
Allegiance to him, and received a Right from him, as well to the Temporalties,
as to the Spiritualties of their titular Preferments. What the Pope's meaning
was in preferring them, we may guess by what followed. For as soon as they saw
an opportunity for it, they formed a Rebellion in that Kingdom against the
King. And when the Pope sent his Nuncio to head it, they joined with him, and
drove the King's Lieutenant out of the Kingdom. Which accursed Rebellion of
theirs, lost the King, not only that Kingdom, but the other two Kingdoms, and
his life in the end. And yet they of that Faction in Ireland, are so far from
acknowledging that they did any ill in all this, that within these ten years,
the General-Assembly 1666 Iun. 11. V. Hist. of Irish Remonstrance, part 2. page
671.
of the Clergy of that Nation, in plain terms, refused to ask His Majesty's
pardon for any thing that had been done in the late War by any of the Clergy of
that Kingdom. This was a sufficient Demonstration of the Prevalence of those
Popish Principles among them, and of the ill Influence they have upon Monarchy.
Yet there was even then as plain a Demonstration of better Principles in others
of that Communion. For some there were, though much fewer in number, who kept
their Allegiance to the King throughout that whole Rebellion, and fought for
him against the Pope himself, in the person of his Nuncio; and having one while
got a great part of the Laity to join with them, they prevailed so far as to
drive him out of the Kingdom. But they, and all the rest that served the King
in that Nation, were excommunicated for it by the Nuncio and his Clergy in
Ireland; And that Sentence being judicially ratified at Rome, I am assured that
many of them do continue under it to this day.

In England it is to be observed in all our Histories, That, even in Popish
times, there were those that stood up for the Rights of the Crown against the
Pope's Usurpations; and that they which did so, were the generality of the
People of this Nation. How else came those Laws of Provisors, etc. to pass in
Parliament, though the Spiritual Lords opposed them with all their might, and
protested against them, as often as such Laws came before them? How came King
Henry VIII to pass his Law against the Papal Supremacy? which in effect
contained no more than those former Laws did: And yet the Bishops at that time,
not only voted for it, but set their hands to a Book that was writ in defense
of it; and some of the most Learned among them, writ besides on that subject as
good Discourses as were written in that Age. And how came the whole Kingdom to
stand by him (as they did, both before and after the Dissolution of
Monasteries) against the Pope's Bull of Dated 1533. Aug. 30.
Excommunication and Deprivation? which Bull, I conceive was that which first
made the Schism. Though this Breach was made up again by Queen Mary, who
restored the Pope's Authority, to strengthen her own Right to the Crown, which
otherwise had hung by the single thread of an Act of Parliament; yet by what
passed before, it sufficiently appears to have been the judgment of our
Forefathers in former Ages, that Popery is no part of the Catholic Doctrine.
That it has more obtained since, and that the number of Papists has increased
among the English of that Communion, I partly ascribe to the great offense
which was taken at first here in England against the Reformation. The Horse is
said to have first taken up Man upon his back, to hunt down his Enemy. And for
the same end, I conceive, the Roman Catholics suffered the Pope to saddle them
in Queen Mary's days. They could not have gratified him more, than by letting
him ride and hunt together; both which he loves dearly. Soon after, the Pope
having by his Council of Trent, made Articles of Faith of their controverted
Opinions, it could not but oblige them to look kindly on all that he did for
himself in that Council. After which, it is no wonder that Queen Elizabeth found
the World so much altered since her Father's time. I think it is observable,
that when He was cursed and bann'd by the Pope, as She afterward was, yet he
had not one attempt made against his life. Some Rebellions he had against him,
but those not so much in the Pope's quarrel, as in the Common People's, who
were enraged at him for dissolving the Monasteries. But Queen Elizabeth, who
had little to do of that kind, and who generally pleased the People otherwise,
and was therefore not so liable to be shockt with Rebellions; yet for all that,
when the Pope marked her out for destruction, some or other of her Subjects
were continually driving practices to take away her life. I mention this as a
great Instance of the growth of Popery among the People of that Communion. And
yet no doubt she knew those among them that were no Papists; or else she would
not have made visits to them, as she did in the most dangerous times; nor have
protected their Priests, Camden. Eliz. an. 1592.
without sufficient assurance of their Loyalty.

Yet she had not that way of assurance which K. James found out afterward,
Ibid. an. 1602. page 276.
and which the Pope himself helped to make the more satisfactory. For when (as
I have said) upon occasion of the Gunpowder Treason, K. James required the Oath
of Allegiance to be taken by all his Subjects; and Pope Paul V. required all
his Subjects to refuse it: It was easy from thenceforward, among the Roman
Catholics, to know which were the Pope's, and which were the King's Subjects;
for each of them would do the will of their Lord, and what they did they
maintained on both sides. I think there needs no better defense for the Rights
of the Crown against the Pope and his Faction, than has been made by one of
their Priests, namely, He writ his Books in the name of Widdrington.
Preston, in his Books for the Oath of Allegiance.

Now this being the only Test appointed by Law, and this being already taken by
many Roman Catholics, who profess themselves ready to take any other that the
State shall prescribe, for the securing it self against Popery; I conceive that
such persons being taken off by this means from all dependence of the Pope,
ought in reason to be accounted good Subjects. For if their Principles be such
as they swear they are, as well their Principles, as their Oath, will make them
firm to the Monarchy. And nothing can be imagined to make them against it, or
to loosen them from it, but the Pope's Dispensation, against which they secure
us as the Law directs them to do. For they both swear expressly, that they will
not take any such Dispensation, and that they believe the Pope has no power to
give it. I do not say, but while they continue in that Communion, they are
continually liable to be tempted and drawn from these Principles: And I know no
way the State has to help it, but by making them often renew their Security; as
I shall humbly propose in due place. But while they keep to their Principles;
which in relation to Monarchy, are the same that the Church of England holds;
though she ought to desire their Conversion, and to seek it by all lawful
means, yet I see not why she should desire to have them driven away, or
disabled from assisting her in defense of the Monarchy. Now there is nothing
more plain, than that this party of Roman Catholics must be utterly disabled
and destroyed by an undistinguishing execution of the Laws. For if they have no
favor at home, they are sure to find worse abroad. There they must learn to
hate their own Country, by suffering for having loved it too well. When they
have spent what they can carry over with them, they must want, and may perish
ere they find relief. While their zealous Antagonists, the true Sons of the
Pope, are received with all kindness wheresoever they come; and when they have
weathered out the storm, they are sure to be sent back with full pockets, and
fresh supplies, and such Instructions as may fit the change of times. Then we
shall, if it should happen, which God forbid, see the fruit of an
undistinguishing Severity. We shall see the destruction of a considerable
number of men, that were friends to the Government, and that would have been
useful at such a time. Or we shall see them return with other Principles, and
become Enemies to the Government, which used them as Enemies, and wholly joined
in affection to them that fed them in their exile. In few words, we shall see
the Popish Faction (truly so called) return with more hope to do mischief, and
with more power to do it, than ever they had before. They could never yet make
all of their Communion to join with them in any design against the Government.
But then undoubtedly they will, if there be not a sufficient number left of the
other side to oppose them.

They at Rome are thought to understand their own Interest well. And there is
reason they should; for it is the Study of that place. The Pope and his party
are against the distinguishing of Roman Catholics.
And I suppose, it is not in favor to the Church or State of England, but for
the interest of Rome, that they are very well pleased with an undistinguishing
execution of the Penal Laws in England against the Roman Catholics; and are so
far from desiring to have it otherwise, that they hate and detest all
distinction, and declare him their Enemy that desires it. This might be proved
by more instances than are proper for this place. But I shall give one or two
that are sufficient.

And first of former days: Widdrington, Pref. of his Book against Fitz Herbert
the Jesuit.
a Priest of the Roman Communion, gives this following Relation: That Q.
Elizabeth having discovered, that she was minded to show favor to as many
Roman Catholic Priests, as should give her assurance of their Loyalty, and to
exempt them from suffering the penalties of her Laws; some well-meaning men
went to Rome to carry the good news, as they thought it. But when they were
come thither, they found themselves much mistaken. Instead of thanks, they were
reproached by the governing party, and branded with the name of Schismatics,
Spies, and Rebels to the Sea Apostolic. And moreover (says our Author) there
was one of that party ( Father Fitz Herbert.
F. F.) compiled a Treatise in Italian, to advise his Holiness, That it was not
good nor profitable to the Catholic Cause, that any liberty or toleration
should be granted by the State of England to Catholics.

Secondly, what their judgment is at present concerning this matter, I know not
who can inform us better than the Pope's Nuncio's. He that now is, or lately
was at Brussels, Falconieri, the Internuncio of Burgundy and the Low Countries,
I suppose has a power given him over our Roman Catholics; for his immediate
Predecessor Airoldi had it, and came over hither in hope to establish his
Jurisdiction in England. This Falconieri was informed, while the Parliament
were yet sitting, in March was twelve month, that diverse Roman Catholic Peers
had taken the Oath of Allegiance; which provoked him so far, that he lashed out
these words, It were better there were not a Catholic left in England, than
that they should take that Oath to free themselves from Persecution. This
Relation I had from one of that Communion, whom I have very much reason to
credit. And yet, if any one doubts of his Testimony, he may see as much written
by a Nuncio himself, who was also this man's Predecessor. I think his words go
something beyond those of Falconieri, unless they like the Oath of Allegiance
better than the Irish Remonstrance; which whosoever compares them, will judge
they cannot well do, according to their Principles. And yet of that
Remonstrance it was, that the former Nuncio Vecchii gave his judgment in these
words, Hist. of the Irish Remons. Part 1. p. 515.
It may do more hurt and mischief to the Church of God (viz. to the Popish
Faction in it) than any Persecution that ever was from the Heretics. I doubt
not, the late Pope's Nuncio, that waged war in Ireland against our late King,
if he had lived to these times, would have been of the same mind. He would have
endeavored to keep his party together, and not let them be separated by a
Test. He would have told them, they were as good have asked Pardon for what
they had done, as Promised to do so no more; which promise in fewer words was
the effect of that Remonstrance. By these Indications, we may guess at that
which might otherwise have been a mystery to us, namely, why so many
Leading-men of that Communion in England, who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance, are so much against the framing of any other Test. It might seem
very strange, that they who are so loud, above all others, in crying out of
Persecution, are yet so extremely averse from doing that which is the only sure
way to avoid it; namely, from giving public Security to the State. But their
meaning is plain. They would not have Popery garbled out of their Religion; nor
those Principles forsworn, that may be useful when time serves. If 'twere known
who are the Pope's, and who are the King's Subjects, it were to be feared the
Pope's would be left single; and that they themselves would be found to be of
that number. I cannot blame them, that they had much rather keep themselves in
the Herd; and therefore persuade all men of their Church, rather to run the
hazard of a general undistinguishing Persecution, than to submit to such a
Test, as may enable the State to know its Enemies.

It is plain, that He whom they serve, may despair of arriving at his ends upon
England, any otherwise than by one of these two ways; Two ways useful to the
Pope's design against England.
viz. Either by an undistinguishing execution of the Laws against all Roman
Catholics in general; or by an undistinguishing Toleration to them all; and
for their sakes, to all other Dissenters whatsoever.

By the former way, Popery, (properly so called) would be kept from appearing
in the Light, which it does not love. It would pass undiscovered, in the Crowd,
among Principles of Religion. I. An undistinguishing execution of the Laws
against Popery.
And the people, by little and little, would come to be persuaded, that they
ought to suffer as much for their Obedience to the Pope, as for their belief in
God. Than which there is no one thing that our Hildebrandists drive at with
more zeal; and no doubt the Pope would buy it with all his heart, at the hazard
of leaving not one Roman Catholic in England. Though the hazard would not be
so great to them, that should be his prime Agents in this business. For they
would be sure to keep themselves out of harms way. And all the danger should
light on Bigots, and such hotheaded men; who, though living, they are worth
nothing; yet, when they dye, leave Treasures to the Church. For they must
presently be cried up for Martyrs. And then, What can be said enough to the
glory of the Apostles that sent them forth, and of the Apostolic See, and of
Christ's Vicar that sits in it? Happy men, that are sure to have their Bodies
work Miracles, wheresoever their Souls be! And Blessed Cause for which such Men
did not stick to sacrifice their lives!

If there happens a Leading-man, a Garnet to be taken among them, there is a
loss indeed, for which perhaps the straw makes not a sufficient recompense. Yet
this loss falls on Persons only, and not on the Cause. The Tenets, which do all
the mischief, not only escape, but gain ground. If they were not de Fide
before, now they are, being sealed with the blood of Martyrs, and attested with
Miracles. And this Faith is not like to want Preachers worthy of it self. For
there will be always men enough left of the worse sort: The most subtle and
dangerous, will save themselves one way or other. They Will be sure to get out of
the way, till they see their own time to show themselves; And then they will
appear the more Venerable to the party, as being the Brethren and Successors of
them that died for their Religion.

By the other way of undistinguishing Toleration, II. Toleration.
they would have diverse advantages, more than I shall mention in this place.
For it is not my business here to write against Toleration, but rather against
an undistinguishing of Laws. But that I may not seem by this means, to desire
to persuade a Toleration, which I take to be much worse than the other, I shall
show the danger of it in these following particulars:

Toleration is a way to destroy the established Religion.
For first, they look upon Toleration as a sure way to destroy the established
Religion. And therefore in all Countries where Popery is established, they are
so far from admitting any Toleration, that they look upon him that speaks for
it as their Enemy, and count none their sure Friends, but them that set up the
Inquisition. By which also here in England, if England were theirs, they would
make a short work with all those other Dissenters, whom now they seem to look
upon with compassion, and to plead against Persecution, and wish Liberty of
Conscience, for their sakes. They would not have the Thorn be disturbed, while
it is in their Enemies sides; but if it were out, they would burn it, for fear
it should be a Thorn in their own.

Toleration would weaken the Civil Government.
Another use of Toleration among us, would be to weaken the Government; as needs
it must, if the strength of the Government consists in the hearts of the
Subjects. A most unjust and wickedly managed jealousy of our late blessed
King's inclination to Popery, first lost him the hearts of his People. Which
jealousy being confirmed, by his granting (as it was said) a Toleration of
Popery in Ireland, they grew wild upon it, and would never come at him more. Or
if they would, it was too late, when his Enemies had gotten him in their hands.
I think it is visible now, that as well as all parties among us love Liberty,
there, is none of them wish it to Roman Catholics; unless it be with design to
blow up the like jealousy again. God forbid there should be any such design
now on foot. But if there be, they that drive it, are not altogether Fools.
They have reason to think, that if the Government were away, they might be able
to make their party good against the Roman Catholics. Nor can our Papists be
such fools, to imagine, that they alone can make head against the other
Dissenters. It is possible they may hope, that if it should come to that, the
men of our Church would join with them. But that will never be, unless they get
the Government of their side. Which they very ill deserve, if they ask a
Toleration, before they have converted, at least, half the Kingdom. And this
they would consider, if it were any part of their care to preserve the
Government of the Nation. But there is but one Government in the World, for
which thorough-Papists are concerned. All the rest are to be brought under
this; and those that will not bend to it, must be broken. It matters not into
what Form they are reduced, whether of Kingdom, or Free-States, or
Commonwealth. Much less are those of Hildebrand's Sect concerned for this or
that Family. A Cromwell would have served their turn (when time was) as well as
a Stuart. For, I suppose they that courted him to be the Restorer of the
Catholic Religion, V. Dr. Baily's Life of B. Fisher, about the end of it.
would not have dealt so coursly with him, as to turn him out for his pains.
But that which makes their teeth ache against the present Government, is, to see
it united with the Church of England. Which Church being likely enough to be
destroyed by a Toleration, if the same means will embroyl the Kingdom too, they
will like it never the worse. The old Fisherman whom they serve, fishes best in
troubled waters. He never made such a draught here in England, as he did in the
late times of Confusion. And then also in Ireland, he had almost a whole
Kingdom in his Net; though for want of strength, he could not draw it ashore.

But in case a Toleration should not have that most desirable effect, of
blowing up a Civil War, nor any other way weaken the Government (which to me
seems impossible; A Toleration would increase the number of Papists.
) yet at least there would be hope, that it might some way strengthen the
party. If they could but have the face, which they seldom want, and that color
withal, which this would give them, to say, that this Liberty was granted in
favor to Popery, and that this favor was an earnest of more, and that now all
would be theirs very speedily, no doubt many would believe them. And not a few
by the power of this belief, would be drawn to join with them; and to be the
more welcome, would present them, as well with their Loyalty as with their
Religion.

It would also be a means to wear off the strangeness between them and the
other Sects. For, those who were content to enjoy Toleration with them, though
with design to try it out, who should be Masters at last, when they had trod
down the Church of England between them; yet would have some conversation with
them the mean while. And I suppose, a cunning Jesuit would be able now and
then to convince a simple Sectary. Howsoever that might succeed; they would be
united together, in one common Interest, though with different designs. They
would both be concerned to keep up the Toleration. They would engage together
against the Enemies of it. And there insensibly grows a kindness between men
that sail in the same ship together, though they are bound for different Ports.

But although this good effect may be procured by a general suspension, or
rather a Repeal of the Penal Laws; yet if that cannot be had, the same will
follow in some measure upon an undistinguishing execution of them. And
therefore, if there be no remedy but that they must be executed, it is the
interest of the Popish Faction, to have them felt by as many as is possible.
Perhaps it were for their turn to have them feared rather than felt. For the
smart of the Rod would cure many of their distempers, that are enraged by
having it shaken over them. But either the threatening of the Law, or a light
execution of it, being extended to all, would suffice to do their business. And
if that Severity, which were a means to cure many, would exasperate all the
rest, I conceive that would do it much better. For all other Dissenters being
brought under the Lash as well as Roman Catholics, no doubt would be as much
dissatisfied with the Government and Laws. They would join with them in
aspersing the State with injustice and cruelty. They would add to their noise,
by crying out of Persecution for Conscience. And all men loving naturally to be
pitied, they that study popular Arts, can easily find how to take men by this
handle, and to draw them nearer themselves, and to make a mischievous use of
them. I know I do not teach them, by saying, that such Accidents may arise, in
which 'twere very possible for the Jesuits to make such a conjunction with
some of our Fanatics, as might create no small trouble and danger to Church
and State.

But if other Dissenters are not yet angry enough with the Government, or if
they know the Jesuits so well that they will not deal with them, or if they
will give nothing for the privilege of being eaten last (for any of these
things may very well happen) then these Gentlemen have none left to work upon
but Roman Catholics. And of them they have all reason to be secure, unless
they are very loyally principled. The only way to work on such, is, by drawing
them off from their Principles. And that they may hope to do, when they find
them uneasy, and out of humor. As it cannot be expected but they will be, if
they are made to suffer the Severity of the Laws. They that have been faithful
to the Government, and know themselves to intend no other, and are ready to
give any proof of it; yet to see themselves ruined by the Government, or to be
kept in continual fear of it, must needs be discomposed, and think themselves
very hardly dealt with. Then, if a Jesuit step in, and endeavor to convince
him, that all their suffering is for Religion; and not for treasonable
Principles; if he instance in that Loyal Person himself, and bids him judge by
his own experience, he cannot but feel himself suffer; he knows himself free
from disloyalty, therefore his suffering can be for nothing else but his
Religion: He must be a man of more than ordinary Abstraction, that can discern
the fallacy of this reasoning. And he that cannot find that, had need stop his
ears, with a resolution to hear nothing against the Government, or else the
Jesuit will be too hard for him. He had need be as resolute in his Loyalty, as
in his Religion. For the proof being made, as well to his Sense, as to his
Reason, it looks like an Argument against Transubstantiation. If the person so
attacked be a very Job in holding his integrity; if no Argument will move him,
nor no other temptation draw him from it: Yet he must yield to Want, which can
neither be hid nor resisted. There are many good men that live from hand to
mouth, and that hardly enough, while they enjoy their Estates. If any of these
be deprived of so much as the Law would take from him, he cannot live with that
which he has left. And then if a Pension be offered him out of the Jesuits
Bank, or out of the Pope's Coffers, he will scarce know how to refuse it.
Necessity will make a generous man do that, which he would hate to think of in
better circumstances. And having eaten their bread, he will find it a hard
matter to keep himself disengaged from their Interests. Much more, if he suffer
himself once to be engaged, he will find it impossible to untwist himself
afterward. And it is next to impossible, for him that has been obliged by their
benefits, and as it were, listed in Service, and taken pay on the Enemies side,
to have any kindness left for his Country, that drove him to all this. I know
but one instance, that of David in Gath, of a man that was put to all these
streights, and yet not corrupted in his Principles.

I show but one way of many, how men that are very good Subjects, and desire
nothing more than to continue so, may be spoiled with hard usage, and made
Enemies against their Inclinations. Which, being added to those things said
before on this head, may be more than enough to make good my third Reason,
against an undistinguishing execution of the Laws on Roman Catholics; as being
against the interest of the Church and State of England.

And this seems so evident to me, that I have no manner of doubt, that as the
best news we could send to Rome, would be of a general Toleration of all
Religions and Sects whatsoever; so, next to that (which I know would please
them best) the most welcome news would be, to assure them, that all the Laws
here in England against Roman Catholics, were severely and indifferently put
in execution. And I am as sure, that nothing would trouble them more, than to
hear of such a Discrimination or Distinction of Roman Catholics, The true way
to suppress Popery, is by Severity to Papists, and Clemency to other Roman
Catholics.
as I come now to propound.

For, now to speak on the Affirmative side of the Debate, this seems to be the
only way for suppressing of Popery, if the State will be pleased to distinguish
btween Papists and other Roman Catholics: and so to show favor to the one,
upon security given of their Loyalty; as that the other, who will not give that
security, may have no part of that favor, but be left to the severity of all
those Laws that have been, or shall be made against their Principles and
Practices.

My Reasons are, 1. Because this course being taken, would be effectual to the
end abovementioned. 2. It would be equitable in it self. 3. And it would be
for the interest of the Church and State of England. I showed before, that the
undistinguishing way had not any of those three properties or qualities. Now
the way which I propound being contrary to it, must have all the three by the
Rule of Contraries; and I conceive I need no other proof. But to make the
matter more plain, I shall resume these three Reasons, and prove them severally
in the order proposed.

1. This course would be Effectual. For it would take away the causes of
Popery. The only immediate causes, which have either propagated or preserved
Popery so long in this Kingdom, notwithstanding all Laws that have been made
against it, as well anciently as of late times, are chiefly these two. On one
side, the great boldness and business of the truly Popish Clergy, in asserting
and crying up all Papal pretenses whatsoever. On the other side, the tameness
of the other Clergy of that Communion, or whatsoever else their fault is, and
has been, in not opposing those Papal pretenses. For the former of these, I
think it is very visible in all the Jesuits that come among us, and in most of
the other Regular Orders, and not a few of the Seculars; that their chief
business amongst us, is to advance the Pope's Authority in all things, and to
reduce all men under the obedience of it. It Is true, they have not yet seen
their time to attempt this by open War. They have not set up the holy Banner in
England, and placed the Pope's Nuncio in the head of an Army against the King;
as their Brethren did in Ireland, and do not repent of it. But neither will our
Popish Clergy say, that those in Ireland did ill in it. They have neither
declared their dislike of that Rebellion by any public act: Nor among all the
Books they have writ since the King's Restoration, has any one of their
Writers writ so much as one line against it, that ever I could see or hear of.
But their Books abound with those principles out of which that Rebellion was
hatched. They are slily insinuated in those which are to be had at every Stall.
And there are those that pass from hand to hand, in which this Treason is the
main scope of their writing. By which we may guess what wholesome Doctrine it
is that they infuse upon occasion in private, when they are among their own
people. What kind of preaching and catechizing they use. What information of
their Penitents. What ghostly counsel they give; and what loyal directions of
Conscience. And if we had nothing else to discover them to us, we may soon find
what kind of spiritual Offices they perform, by the Fruit of them, in the
perverseness and obstinacy of so many of their Laity, who choose to do or endure
any thing, rather than take the Oath of Allegiance.

I deny not, that there are other Priests of that Communion, who, as far as we
can judge by their private discourse, seem to be rightly principled, and well
inclined toward the Civil Government. There are those that seem to be heartily
for the Independency of the Crown of England; and that hold, that the external
Government of the Church ought to be in the King, in such manner as the Laws of
the Land do or shall prescribe; and who are firmly persuaded, that the contrary
Positions of Popery are as bad as they are declared to be in the Oath of
Allegiance. And some of them have declared this very honestly and publicly in
their Writings, both heretofore and of late days. I think I should do them no
service in naming them. For as things now are, it would only provoke and enable
those of the former sort to do them mischief. Which we see, they are prone
enough to do, by their traducing them publicly, though Priests of the same
Church; and branding them with the Characters of Schism, Heresy, Apostasy,
etc. and thereby setting the people of their Communion against them. But
whereas those honest men of that Communion tell us, that there are many more of
their Principles among the Secular Clergy, and also among the Regulars of
inferior rank and condition: I cannot but say, that if they are not mistaken,
there is a great fault among them on the other hand. Those many good men, of
whom they tell us, are much to blame, that they do not declare against the
Pope's Usurpation; but rather strengthen it by their sinful compliance and
silence. Either they do not think it so bad as they pretend; or else what
Wretches are they to juggle with the Consciences of their People? How can they
answer it to God, from whom they pretend to have these Souls given them in
charge, that they do not warn them of so dangerous a sin, that has slain its
thousands and ten thousands in our streets? Why do they suffer so great a
scandal to lie upon their Church, and such a danger to hang over the Civil
State, while they that are the Spiritual Watchmen see it, and yet hold their
peace? Nay, worse than so, the Dog fawns upon the Wolf. These honest men, if
they may yet be so called, hold very good quarter and fellowship with those,
whom they know to be Zealots for Popery. They make their Court to them, of whom
they cannot be ignorant that both their Principles and their Interest lead them
to it; that is in effect, they are so officious to stand by and hold the horses
of them that are committing a Robbery; or worse employed, in doing all those
evils abovementioned.

I cannot see how they can excuse this any otherwise, than by alleging, That
all their Compliance is for fear of being ruined, and imprisoned, and starved,
as some of their Brethren have been, for doing their duty; and more are like to
be, if some course be not taken to protect them against the rage of their
implacable Enemies.

Not to judge of the sufficiency of this excuse, I confess there is reason for
what they say. For it is visible what became of those Churchmen of their
Communion, who have given the highest Test of their Loyalty, who have scorned
all those servile Compliances, and who have declared against Popery by their
Actions and Writings. It Is the easier to observe this, because there have been
so few of them, I think not above two or three in an Age. They have been fain
to stand the mark of a violent endless Persecution, both from the Court of
Rome, and from all its Faction in England. And, however it came to pass, they
did not find that countenance, which they might have expected from the State,
in defense of whose Rights they drew all that wrath upon themselves. We have a
great example of this in Preston, who having both taken the Oath of Allegiance
himself, and maintained it against all the great Champions of Popery, was fain
to take Sanctuary in the Clink, and glad to hide his head there for many years
before he died. Another Learned man, Dr. Barnes, the famous Author of
Romano-Catholicus Pacificus, had not leave to choose a Prison to dye in. For he
was spirited by the Pope's Emissaries, and carried away to Rome, and thrown
into the Inquisition there. What became of him since, we shall know at the day
of Judgment.

If these be their ways to maintain, and to propagate Popery, we cannot be to
seek for our way to suppress it. For it is manifest, that this cannot be more
effectually done, than by such a Discrimination as has been propounded.

On the one hand it would be a means to preserve those few men of that
Communion among us, who have already declared against the Popes Usurpations.
And the same course that should be taken to keep them out of danger, would also
be a means to free all other men of their Principles, from the fear under which
they have been kept so many years.

Whether at this present they have more or less cause to apprehend the Popish
Faction, they will be the better able to judge, when they see what is done in
Monsieur Luzance's case. For as there is no reason to doubt, that those
Gentlemen, if they find they may do what they please, will do no less to those
of their own Communion, that oppose their grand design, than they attempted on
him that had deserted their Communion: So, if the State shall think fit to
check their audacious Insolence in this case, by some exemplary punishment,
though I doubt they will not forsake the Land upon it, yet it is to be hoped,
that they will upon some other Act of State, to which this may be a very good
Introduction. Sure enough, if the Laws were duly executed on all those that
will not give sufficient Security to the State, we should soon be rid of all,
or most part of their Company. And then it would be a time for better men to
show themselves. Those that did give Security, would be obliged in their own
defense, if no otherwise, to own the Principles by which they were warranted to
give it. Besides, it would be as well their interest, as their duty, to
disabuse that great part of the Laity whom those Hildebrandists had fed with
lies these fourscore years. It would concern them to possess themselves as well
of their Consciences, as of their Chapels; and therefore to make them see, how
vast a distance there is between that Faith which had been chiefly inculcated
into them (I mean, the properly Popish Faith) and the Primitive Christian; and
to convince them what a cursed Immorality they have been taught all this while,
under the name of Obedience to the Church; and to show them, that the way which
their former Guides have conspired to miscal by the glorious name of Holy
Martyrdom, is the downright way to Hell.

Having thus declared that most necessary Truth, to which both their Interest
and Conscience led them; the same Reasons would oblige them to love home, and
to study the Peace of their Country. They would have little business at Rome;
and that would be so ill done there, that they would not be encouraged to send
thither again.

On the other hand, of the Pope's Faction in England, if the Laws were so
executed, as I have said, none could remain here but only Hypocrites and
Equivocators. And their stay would be very uncomfortable, if they kept silence;
but worse, if they discovered themselves, for then they must expect to suffer
the Severity of the Laws. They must either hang like barefaced Traitors,
without any pretense of the Crown of Martyrdom; or they must take it for a
favor, that they may have leave to go after their Fellows. And they that are
once out of the Kingdom, will have no hope to come in again. To be sure they
shall not, if the Priests of their own Church can keep them out, or can
discover them lurking in it. Nor, I suppose, will any of the Laity be very
forward to harbor them. We have no reason to think, that any man should be so
unreasonable, to venture neck or purse, for the Reception of them for whom his
Soul is not concerned, when he might without danger, or any apprehension of it,
enjoy the exercise of his Religion; when he might have all the Offices of it
performed by other Priests, as Canonical in their Mission, and as exemplary in
their lives; men free from exception every way, save that they have no tincture
of Hildebrand's Doctrine. If that be it that makes them so in love with a
Jesuit, that nothing seems sacred that comes out of any other hand, the State
has just cause to suspect from whence that niceness proceeds, and to treat them
as those that hold correspondence with its Enemies. Nor can they in this case
have any color to pretend, that they suffer for their Religion, who might have
enjoyed their Religion, without mingling it with that Treason for which they
suffer. And however the matter may be thought of by Him at Rome, whose judgment
we ought not to value in this case, I believe no Foreign Prince will think this
a Persecution of Roman Catholics. France thought it none, when time was, to
banish the Jesuits. Nor Venice to turn out three Orders together, which were
all that submitted to the Pope's Interdict and Excommunication. There is no
reason to doubt, that any other State of that Communion would have done the
like, upon as great an occasion. So that if any of those States should
interpose in favor of those against whom the State of England has so just an
exception, it might seem as if they did not so much desire to have them taken
in here, as to rid their own Country of such Vermin, as they would not be
willing to harbor. They have reason to apprehend, that those that we send over
to them, would teach their own people to do like them, and put the Authority
there to the trouble of doing the same thing that ours have done here, and
which themselves have been fain to do in former times.

I say not but any Prince that were in hostility, or that thought himself
likely ere long to break with England, might be ready to receive this sort of
men, as he would do other Spies and Traitors to their Country. There were very
great Reason, that a Prince in those circumstances should consider these men,
as being most completely qualified for all such purposes. And because the Pope
is a sure Enemy to all them that are for the suppressing of Popery, I doubt
not, they would find him ready to mingle his quarrels with theirs, and his
Instruments would work much the better, when they received their impulse from
his hand. But all this would last no longer than until those Princes thought it
their best way to be at peace with us. And that would soon be, if we were at
Unity among our selves: As we should be, if none were suffered to live among
us, but such as might live in an easy, or very tolerable condition. Then those
Princes would soon ease themselves of the burden, and give the Pope leave to
find some other way to keep his Vermin. Which after a while, he would do with
such Italian Frugality, that if their Rents were stopped here in England, they
would soon look as thin as Fauxes Lanthorn; or to describe them to the life,
they would be like Envy in the Poet.

I need not trouble the Reader, with minding him, That in case of such a
Discrimination, there could be no danger of the increase either of Priests or
Seminaries abroad, and as little danger of any Commiseration or Pity at home,
to hinder it from being effectual. It is obvious to every apprehension, that
the removal of these dangers would be one of the necessary consequences of it.
For who does not see, that if the Roman Catholics, on such terms as I have
described, might enjoy their Religion, and their Estates, and their liberty,
they would not count them their Friends that would persuade them to throw away
that enjoyment. Doubtless, if some few did not know when they were well, the
generality of them would understand it. And both they of their own Church, and
much more the Protestants, would think them not to be pitied, that should lose
what they had thrown away with their own hands, especially when they
considered, for what end these men did it; that it was out of a restless desire
to bring a Foreign Tyrannical Yoke upon their Country.

Therefore, since by this, and what else has been said on this head, we cannot
but see, That the only immediate causes, not only of the Propagation, but
Preservation of Popery in this Kingdom; ( viz. the great business and boldness
of them of the Popish Faction, and the great tameness and fearfulness of the
other Clergy of that Communion among us) would be quite removed by such a
Discrimination of Roman Catholics: We cannot but conclude with the same
evidence, That such a Discrimination would be effectual to suppress Popery in
this Kingdom. For nothing can be more clear in Natural Reason then that,
wheresoever the only immediate causes both of the Propagation and Conservation
of any thing ceases, there that thing it self must cease to be. And after all
that has been said already, we cannot rationally doubt, whether by such a
Discrimination, those only immediate causes of the Preservation and Propagation
of Popery would cease to be any longer in England. It Is manifest to every
considering man, That in case of such a Discriminating Course, duly and
constantly held, the busy Agents for Popery, must either give up their Cause,
or fly their Country. And either way will do our business. If any of them stay,
they will do their part toward it, by giving security to the State. Which
cannot be without the renouncing of Popery. If they all go, it will be a
blessed riddance of them and Popery together. For the active part or soul of it
will depart with the Jesuits. And the Body or Scheme of Doctrines will be
interred by those whom they leave behind them, or rather hanged up, for it does
not deserve Christian Burial.

2. Such a Discrimination would also be just and equitable. For it would be
according to the intention of the Laws of this Kingdom, and most agreeable to
the eternal Law of Reason, and the ancient practice of the Christian World.

By all these Rules I have shown, that it is not just nor equitable, that the
penalties of the Laws, as now they are, should be inflicted on all Roman
Catholics indifferently, without any respect of Loyal or Disloyal. And in
proving this, I have sufficiently shown, (For it follows by the Rule of
Contraries abovementioned,) That it is both just and equitable, that all of
that Religion, who being faulty in nothing else, shall give such assurance of
their Loyalty, as the State shall think fit to require, should enjoy an
exemption from those penalties, which were never intended for such persons. But
of this more shall be spoken in due place.

For them, on the other hand, who refuse to give such an assurance, and by
their obstinacy therein, would keep the State in perpetual jealousy, and
expose it to the danger of unknown Enemies, who cannot be known from good
Subjects, but by such a way of distinction as they endeavor to obstruct: I
conceive it is just and equitable, that the State should look upon them either
as Enemies, or at least, as the Concealers of Enemies.

If they are only Concealers of such Enemies as our Papalins are, it is just
that they should suffer for it in the same degree as they transgress against
the Law, and as they hinder the security of the State. And it is no small
transgression in them, that not only disobey the Law, but (as far as in them
lies) make many Laws utterly useles. For those Laws being provided for the
security of the State against a Sect, or rather Faction of men, who are
dangerous in the highest degree, and for whom the Law has therefore procured
the highest punishment; it is certainly a great presumption of those, who in
spite, and as it were in defiance of the Law, will keep them not only from
being punished, but from being so much as distinguished.

Now it is evident that the Papalins are such a Faction, whose Principles lead
them, when they see their opportunity, to subvert the present Government and
Laws both of the Church and Kingdom of England. It is certain that in pursuance
of these Principles, they have attempted to do all this more than once within
these last hundred years. And this in favor to the pretenses of a Foreiner,
who has more than one dormant Title to the Sovereignty of England, who actually
invaded Ireland in Queen Elizabeth's days, and usurpt the Royal Power there by
his Nuncio in our Age; who assumes to himself in some cases (whereof he makes
himself the only Judge) a right to dispose of all States and Kingdoms
whatsoever. If therefore any State may justly endeavor to preserve it self
against a Foreign Enemy, and may make Laws to restrain their own people from
joining with them, and may punish with death or otherwise, as many as shall
presume to break those Laws; England has all this right within it self, as well
as any other State, and may use it as well against the Pope as against any
other Enemy. And therefore the State may require all its Subjects to declare
against his Usurpation, and to renounce all those Principles that are any way
favorable to it. If any of them shall refuse to do do this, the State may
justly punish them, whether with death or otherwise, according to its Laws;
which in this point are enacted with the highest reason, and backed with all
other Laws, Divine and Humane, etc. with the practice not only of other
Christian States, but of all other Nations in the world.

I know the Refusers will be ready to say, their Conscience will not suffer
them to declare against that Power which the Pope assumes to himself, nor to
renounce those ill Principles which they say are a part of their Religion. No
doubt they that are through-Papists have great reason to say this. For Popery,
as I have shown, does consist of such Principles, which though, as to the
matter of them, they are truly Secular and Political, yet go veiled under the
sacred name of Religion. They whose interest it is to have them believed, are
pleased to make them Articles of the Catholic Faith. And no doubt it takes
with many. For we see there are those that do not stick to sacrifice their
lives for those Principles. And what can be dearer to men than their Lives, but
Religion? We see they do not spare the lives of men of opposite Principles,
against whom they profess to have no other Quarrel but Religion. And we have
reason to believe them; for it is what our Savior said, John 16.2.
When they kill you, they shall think they are doing God service.

But what Religion is that, which teaches men to do things which are so
evidently against the light of Nature, as Murder; especially when joined with
Rebellion, and acted upon the persons of their own Princes, and tending to the
dissolution of humane Society and destruction of mankind? Whatsoever Religion
this be, sure enough it is not Christian, nor such as ought to be allowed among
Christians. And therefore if their Conscience binds them not to renounce it, so
does the Magistrates Conscience bind him to punish them for it. It Is the duty
of him that bears the Sword to punish all Immorality, though never so lawful or
necessary in the judgment of him that commits it. If a Jew or a Turk come to
live in this Kingdom, and marry many Wives, which he may safely do by his Law,
it is just by our Law to hang him for it. Much more if one be guilty of such
immorality as tends immediately to the subversion of the Kingdom, it is both
just and necessary to send him away, or not let him live in it but at his
peril. And if he complain that this is persecution for Conscience, (which by
the way cannot but sound very odly from one of that Sect, that burn men only
for Conscience) his complaint in this case would be very unreasonable: And we
ought to be no more moved with it, than we should be, if he complained that we
would not stand still, and have our throats cut, in compliance with his
Conscience.

There is nothing that can secure State or People against this Religious
Distemper of the fiery Papalins, and that can also preserve the Civil Rights
and Proprieties of good Subjects of that Communion, but only such a
discrimination between them as may distinguish the Loyal from the Disloyal, the
Turbulent from the Peaceable, in such manner that they both may have what they
deserve. This is in effect to render to every one his due, according to Law and
Reason: Which is the very definition of Justice and Equity. For the
administration whereof God has ordained the Civil Power, and put the Sword into
the Magistrates hand, to employ it, (as the Apostle says) to the praise of them
that do well, and for the terror of evil doers. 1 Pet. 2.14.


By what has been said on this last Head, it sufficiently appears, that such a
discrimination is also for the Interest of the Church and State of England. For
that Interest is preserved by Justice and Equity; which will entitle it to that
blessing from God which he has promised in his Word, and which are naturally
apt to be instrumental to the Divine Providence in producing that good which he
has promised. Prove. 14.34.
For a just distribution of Rewards and Punishments makes the Government
venerable in the eyes of the people, and secures it at home by their cheerful
obedience. It also acquires that Reputation abroad which will make it either
loved or feared by all the neighbor Nations. Our Neighbors of the Roman
Communion who are now possessed by the clamours of those among us, that say they
are persecuted for Religion, and who can judge no otherwise when they see men
severely handled that are criminal no other way, will be soon disabused by such
a discrimination. And it will right us to those Protestants abroad, to whom the
State has been ill represented by foam on the other hand, for not executing all
the Penal Laws against Popery. It will save England the trouble of making
Apologies either way, to vindicate the Justice of its proceedings to other
Nations. For it is manifest, that no Government can tolerate such as hold
Tenets inconsistent with its own safety; nor on the contrary, deny the
protection of the Laws to men whose Principle it is to obey the Government, and
to do all that in them lies to support it: To venture their lives in defense of
the Authority, not only of the Legislators, but of those very Laws which they
make against them, till those Laws are repealed by the same power by which they
were made.

It were easy to bring hither all those reasons with which I showed before,
that undistinguishing Laws and execution of Laws are against the Interest of
the Church and State of England; and to prove by the same reasons, that nothing
of this kind can be more for it than such a Discrimination as is here
propounded. For if it be for the Interest of England to support and strengthen
the Government, then it is not to weaken the Friends of the Government, nor to
strengthen or preserve the Enemies of it. I showed that such would be the
effect of an undistinguishing way; which is therefore desired by them of the
Popish Faction, as being next to a Toleration the most likely means to unite
and to increase their party among us. Now taking those things for granted which
are already proved, it follows that, upon the account of Interest, this way of
Discrimination should be as desirable to us as it is hateful and detestable to
them. Sure enough they apprehend it, and not without visible cause, to be the
likeliest way both to stop the further growth of* Popery, and to lessen the
number of Papists among us.

I may add (which is visible in the nature of the thing) that a Discrimination
between them that are of the same Communion will be a sure way to divide them
among themselves. Which may be a means to do some of them the greatest
spiritual good, or at least to keep us from taking that hurt which we have
reason to fear from so numerous and powerful a Combination against us.

For the way of Distinction between Papists and other Roman Catholics must be
by some test or mark of Distinction. And that either by the passing of some new
Law for it, especially when there is a new mark of Distinction, or by the
strict execution of those Laws that are in force for the taking of any Test
that is already made. In either of these Cases, the Papalins (who are men of
intelligence) will take an early alarm, and try their Friends here in England,
if they can to prevent the passing of any such Law, or the execution of any
that is past. If their Friends fail them here, their next resort is to Rome,
where they have an old Friend that never fails them. The Pope, if he has not
forgotten the old trick, sends out his Censures against all that shall submit
to those Laws, and take the Test which is prescribed in them. If it be no more
than the Oath of Allegiance, that is forbidden already by diverse Popes, and
condemned by them as having many things in it which are contrary to the
Catholic Faith. And the reason of this severity is, as well to guard their own
Temporal Power, as to keep their Creatures and Friends from discovery. If any
here, and especially if any Priests of that Communion, are so bold,
notwithstanding all this to take the Test; then upon the next information, or
soon after, the Pope sends to tell nofes. And if he finds they are but few that
transgress (which will scarce be in our case) he delays not to cite them to
Rome, and if they come thither, woe be to them; if not, he curses them afresh,
and particularly. But if they are many, he considers their strength, and being
Curse-proof, he forbears them for the present, only leaving them under his
general Censures. Otherwise, if they are a weak and obnoxious multitude, he
proceeds to further Censures against them. And if some few have been more
forward than the rest in doing that which the Law requires, and specially if
any dares justify what they have done, he denounces them Excommunicate by
name, and therein both sacrifices them to his own angry Deity, and gives his
discovered Creatures some kind of revenge on those poor men, to ease their
hearts, till he and they can find how to be revenged on the State, for which
they are to wait their opportunity.

When any of these things happens, as it has done in like cases, and as it will
do in these abovementioned, if Popes are constant to themselves: (For there is
nothing here said but what I could prove both by Rule and Example) we have
reason to hope that some of those censured men, who are able to right
themselves, or rather their Religion, will do it, by declaring against the
horrible injury that is done both to it and them. And specially their Priests,
who have hitherto alleged, that the reason they have not done it all this
while, has been their continual fear of a Proclamation to send them beyond Sea,
where they are sure to be called to a severe account for whatsoever they have
said or done against the Interest of Rome. When that fear is over, as it will
be upon their giving security to the State, it may justly be expected, that
they will both speak and write their minds freely, as occasion shall be
offered, for the instruction of their people, and for the Vindication of
themselves and their Religion. If the general Censures be objected, as it is
certain they will, by those that procured them, they will be obliged to show
the injustice and the invalidity of those Censures. If they are Excommunicated
by name for so doing, they will be further engaged to consider the Authority of
him that lays about him so madly with the Keys of the Church. It was so in
Luther's Case, The quarrel begun between him and the Procurers of the Pope's
Bulls. It proceeded from them to their Patrons in the Court of Rome. And so at
last it came up to the Papal Authority it self. Who knows but that it may
please God (for Vexatio dat intellectum) that many among us being vexed with
Declarations, Isa. 28.19.
that are certainly uncanonical, may be brought by that means to discover, that
the Power which sent them forth is Antichristian?

The most difficult thing that is required toward the making this discovery, is
only to lay aside those strong prejudices which men commonly receive from their
Education, and from converse with men and things of that Age in which they live.

He that laying aside these shall look impartially into the Scriptures, and
into the undoubted Records of the Primitive Church, shall find no Foundation
for that prodigious Fabric of the Papacy. For the first three hundred years
after Christ, they will find only two, namely Victor and Stephen, that took
upon them to censure any which were not of their Diocese. And though their
Censures (for ought that appears) were only Declarations of Non-Communion, such
as any Bishop in those days might send forth against the Bishop of Rome, as
well as he against other Bishops; yet we find that, even for that, they were
blamed and condemned by other Bishops. And that is all the effect that we read
their Censures had in any place out of Rome it self. Pope Victor in his Censure
of the Asian Bishops, is thought not to have gone beyond threatening, to break
Communion with them, and endeavoring to persuade other Bishops to do the same.
And yet for this he was smartly handled by some of the Brethren: and it is
charitably thought he was set right by the grave Counsel of Irenaeus, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. V. 24. Vales. in locum.
who writ to him in the name of the Gallican Church, and told him he did not
learn this of any of his Predecessors. Of Pope Stephen it is certain that he
went farther in his Quarrel with the Asian and African Bishops. Firmilians
Epistle among Cyprian's, Epist. 75. page 166. edit. Rigaltii.
For he not only broke off Communion, but all civil Conversation with them; and
commanded his people not to let any of them come within their doors. But this
was only at Rome. For it does not appear that he pretended any Authority
elsewhere. And how he was scorned abroad for his Pride and Folly in this, the
Reader may see in those two excellent Epistles. Cypr. Epist. 74. and 75.
The later of which was left out of the Roman Edition of St. Cyprian: and
Pamelius honestly declares he would have stifled it, Vide Rigalt. in Cyprian,
Epist. 75.
if others had not published it before him.

Lest any one should take offense at my not giving the usual garnish of the
Popes of that Age to those two whom I mentioned, (for I dare not call them
Saints and Martyrs, though the Roman Church does, both elsewhere, and in her
Offices on their days) I ought to let him know how that Church is abused by
them that have gained no small advantage to themselves by such Fictions. July
28. and August 2.
That the old Roman Church in the time of Constantius knew nothing of either of
their Martyrdoms, it appears by her Catalogue of Popes, published first by
Cuspinian, and since by Bucherius the Jesuit. Nay she knew the contrary of one
of them. For in the Roman Calendar of that Age, published by the same Jesuit,
Victor is not mentioned at all, and Stephen is among the Popes that were no
Martyrs. If this proof were not enough, or if this place were proper for it, I
should show from good Authors, that though these Popes lived under Emperors
that were afterward Persecutors; yet they died before the beginning of their
persecutions. I do not say but they may be Saints; but if they are, it is more
than we have any ground to believe. For neither the Church History, nor any
Writer within a hundred years of their time, has any more of their Sanctity
than of their Sufferings. Of Stephen there is great cause to doubt the contrary
from what we read of him in St. Cyprian's Cyprian, Ep. 74. and 75.
Epistle, and more from that of Firmilian, Rigalt. Obs. in Ep. 75.
which is thought to have been translated by St. Cyprian, and which was written
Almost 22 years after the Reign of Alexander Severus. Cyprian, Epist. 75. p.
160.
about the time of Stephens death, rather after than before it.

It is to be hoped that many Roman Catholics among us have truly that Reverence
which all of them profess to true Primitive Christian Antiquity, and to the
judgment of Saints and Martyrs in all Ages. We all agree that Irenaeus and
Cyprian had a just right to those Titles. And Firmilian was a chief Pillar of
the Church in his Age. He was thought worthy to preside in several Eastern
Councils: namely, in that against the Novatians, before Stephen was Pope: and
those against Samosatenus, after Stephen was dead. And after his own death, the
Eastern In their Synodical Epist.
Church of that Age called him Firmilian of Blessed Memory. Why this man is not
in the Calendar of Saints, they best know who can tell us why Victor and
Stephen are there. No doubt the Saint-makers do all things with great
consideration. But can any one imagine that those excellent men did ever believe
themselves to be under the Roman Bishop? that they owed any obedience to Him
whom they schooled so, or any Reverence to his Censures which they slighted in
that manner? Could any assurance of their Cause have justified that contempt of
Authority, if they had known any in him? But it appears they knew it not; nor
did others in that Age. Those that were against them in the Cause, blamed them
for that, and nothing else; and yet held Communion with them, for all Pope
Stephen and his Censures.

So far it appears those great men had the judgment of the Church on their
side. They knew of no Authority over the Universal Church that the Pope had
more than any other Bishop by any right, whether Divine or Humane. What the
Judgment of the Church was in the next Centuries, let them consider that shall
read those Canons See in the Codex, Canonum Universalis Ecclesiae, or in the
Councils; Council. Nicen. I. can. 6. Council. Constant. I. can. 2. Council. Ephesians.
I. can. 8. Conc. Chalced. can. 28. together with Act. 16. of that Council.
Council. Afric. can. 31. in the Greek, or 72. and 92. in the Latin. Epist. ad
Coelestinum, which is at the end of that Council.
in the Margent, and remember they are such as past in the first Four General
Councils, and in the African Council of 217 Bishops, (of whom St. Austin was
one) assembled at Carthage. To which I add, the African Church to Pope
Coelestine I. as containing a full Declaration of their mind in that Canon. I
know there are objections against one or two of these Canons. But all the dust
that has been raised will not hinder any reasonable man from seeing that which,
I think, is sufficient for our purpose: namely, that all the Fathers that sat
in those Councils, or at least the major part of them, were of the same
judgment with those abovementioned in this point of the Authority of the Bishop
of Rome. They all allowed him precedence as being Bishop of the Imperial City.
They had commonly a great deference to his Judgment in Debates between
themselves. And sometimes the Christian Emperors made him honorary Judge,
whether alone or with others, in such Controversies. Indeed by the Canons of
Sardica, those few The Western and Eastern Bishops together, were 170. says
St. Athamasius, (who was one of them) AdSolit. vitam agen^es. Tom. 1.818. Of
the Eastern, 73 declared against the Western Bishops. Hilar. Fragm. p. 448. and
some were Neuters.
Western Bishops that continued there, after the Easterlings had left them,
were pleased merely of their Charity to give him a new Power, to order the
reviewing of any Provincial Judgment upon complaint of any Bishop that was
aggrieved in it. And Pope Leo not being satisfied with this, got the Emperor
Valentinian III. to ordain By his Novel, dated An. 445. June 6. Vid. Leo I.
Epist. 89.
that the Bishop of Rome should give Law throughout his part of the Empire
(which then contained little more than Italy, and part of France, and part of
Spain, and the Illyrian Diocese.) Yet all that the Bishop of Rome had by these
Concessions and Grants did not amount to an Authority over the Universal
Church. I add, nor over the British Church in There were no British Bishops at
the Council of Sardica; as appears by the Inscription of the Synodical Epistle,
Athan. Tom. 1. p. 756. and by the Subscriptions, both of the Synodical Epistle,
Hilar. Fragm. col. 408. and of the Canons in the Edition of Isidorus Mercator.
Though the British Bishops or some of them did afterward approve of the
Councils Judgment in the case of St. Athanasius. Ath. Tom. 1. p. 720. (where
note, the Translation is false.) And as for that Law of Valentinian III. It was
not made till after Britain was forsaken by the Romans; which was Theodosii 18
(or Anno 440.) says Prosper Pithaei; Anno 443. says the Saxon Chron.
Theodosii 23. (or Anno 455.) says Beda, Hist. l. 13.
particular. And so far was this from arguing that he had by Divine Right any
Jurisdiction out of his own Diocese, that his seeking or accepting what was
given him by these Concessions or Grants, is a convincing argument to the
contrary. But for the Churches Judgment, nothing can be more plain, than that
all those Bishops who gave their Votes to those Canons which I cited before out
of the first Four General Councils, and that of Africa, together with the
Epistle annexed, had no question or thought of any Authority that he had by
Divine Right out of his own proper Diocese, or by Humane Right out of the Roman
Patriarchy, or any power of Jurisdiction that he had elsewhere from the Roman
Emperors, or from the Primitive Fathers.

Whatsoever power he has gotten since the decay of the Roman Empire and of the
Christian Religion, (from whence I have already Page 4, 5, etc.
dated the beginning of Popery) as it is plain he has gotten in many Countries,
which were not anciently within his Jurisdiction upon any account, it must be
either by force or fraud, abusing either the weakness or ignorance of the
people, or else by the concession or connivence of Princes and States. Blessed
be God, there are some Christian Nations in the world which have stood so far
out of his reach, that he has not been able to hook them in by any of these
ways. And as he has no colorable pretense to a power over those Countries
where it is certain he never had any, as Ethiopia, Russia, etc. (which they
that are pleased to call therefore Schismatical, must give me leave to admire
as well their folly as their uncharitableness: and yet they that do not call
them so, make the Pope no Head of the Universal Church:) so in those Countries
where he has gotten power, it is not necessary that he should always hold it,
till we see who is Antichrist, whether He, or one of the Tribe of Dan, who
(they say) shall come to take it from him. They over whom he gained a power by
force or fraud, are kept under it still the same way; which creates no right by
any Law whatsoever. And therefore when God makes them strong enough, and wise
enough, they will deliver themselves from him. They that gave him a power over
them when they saw cause, may have as good or better cause to recall it. And
they have just cause to do this, when they see him desert that Title by their
Gift, and claim his power by immediate Divine Right, or when he employs his
power not to edification but destruction: 2. Cor. 10.8.
and specially when doing all this he will force their obedience by such means,
as come not from the Wisdom which is from above, James 3.15.
but from that which the Apostle calls earthly, sensual, devilish.

Whosoever among our Roman Catholics will be pleased to consider these things
with that Attention and Impartiality that is due to all things of Religion, I
cannot but think he will see that the Christian Religion does no way oblige him
to own the Popes Authority in this Kingdom.

He will see that Iure Divino the Pope could have no Authority over this
particular Church, which he had not over the Church universal. And it does not
appear by any Records of the Primitive times, that the Pope ever had any such
Authority over the Universal Church, or that by the Diffusive Church he was
believed or acknowledged to have it.

But on the contrary it appears, by instances which I have given of those
times, that he was denied to have such an Authority, and that as well by the
Bishops assembled in their Councils, as by the best and wisest men of those
times in their Writings: Nay he was contradicted and resisted as often as he
endeavored to impose any thing against the mind of particular Churches.

He will see that whatsoever Humane Right the Pope had acquired over the people
of this Kingdom, was no more of one kind, than we are all originally of one
Nation; and that the power which he was suffered to exercise over us, was very
much greater at one time than another. In the worst and darkest times it was
highest, for it grew up on the bad Titles or other weakness of Princes; From
King Stephen to Hen. III.
and yet then he could not hold it peaceably, nor long enough to make a
Prescription. But at all other times it was much less than he claimed; which
shows plainly it was no more but what the State pleased to give him: and they
owned that the Pope had no right over them by any concessions of their own,
more than what he had over the rest of the Western Churches.

Particularly, in those times next before the Reformation, that right which was
generally acknowledged to be in him, was not a supreme right, but subordinate
to a General Council.

This appears to have been the sense of the Western Church. For it was declared
in plain terms by four Councils, Pisa, Constance, Siena, and Basil.
which were acknowledged for General in that Age, and were abetted as such by
the generality of the Western Church. Greg. XII. and Bennet XIII. and John
XXIII.
They not only declared this Doctrine in their Canons, but they reduced it to
practice. For those Councils deposed diverse Popes, and made new ones in their
stead. Which Acts of theirs the Papalins of this Age are obliged to defend, as
ill as they like the Canons; for without them they cannot make up the
succescession of their present Popes. But admitting those Acts to have been
just and good, how can they reject those Canons from which they had their
virtue and efficacy? If they say the Pope did not approve them, it is partly
true. Out of doubt those Popes did not like them that lost by them. Nor perhaps
those that came in by those Canons might not like them so well at another time.
But how then could they take upon them to be Popes? Their accepting a Title
from those Councils, and the Peoples owning them in it, was enough to show that
those Canons were then in force; and they were never repealed by any Council
since; nor has there been any Council to do it, that can be reasonably thought
so fit, as those four were, to declare the sense of the Western diffusive
Church.

Therefore taking it for proved, that a general Council is superior to the
Pope, it must necessarily follow that there lies an Appeal from the Pope to
such a Council. And that his hands are tied up by such an Appeal; so that he
cannot proceed at least to Censure the Appellant; for this were not only a
private Injury to the Person, but an Invasion of the Rights of the Supreme
Court of Judicature among Christians. Therefore if the Pope should do so
Uncanonical a thing, he may be Canonically disobeyed and resisted. Yea, he
ought to be so (for it were a betraying the Churches right to do otherwise)
till there is such a Court or Council to which the Appeal was made. And such a
Council there would be at least once in ten years, if the Pope did not hinder
it. For having taken upon-himself the power of Calling and Presiding in
Councils, it is his pleasure to have none. And no doubt he has reason for it,
though there is Law to the contrary, as good Law for a Council every ten
Council. Constable. Sess. 39.
years as can be made by any Authority in the Western Church.

Such Appeals from the Pope to a General Council have been made by diverse
Persons and Societies in the Roman Communion; as namely, by Auxilius in the
name of the Clergy of all Italy; Aux. Part I. 28 and ult. and 11, 14, 21.
By Michael of Caesena in the name of the whole Franciscan Order; By seven
Cardinals, who were at that time the major part of their College; By diverse
Emperors of Germany, Theod. de Niem. Nemoris, part. 6. c. 10.
against diverse Popes, some of whom they deposed, and made other Popes in their
Councils; By diverse Kings of France, Ioh. Marius de Schism. and Conc. 1.19, and
24.
some of whom have forbid all Communication with Rome till they had right done
them in their Controversies.

That some of these had cause enough for what they did, and that they had just
Authority to do it, will be granted by most of them of the Roman Church. But
they will not grant the like of our King Henry VIII. whom they make Author of
the Protestant Schism, as they call it. And yet setting aside Popular Opinions
and Prejudices, I do not see what there was really in his Case which might not
be cleared from Schism by those Rules and Examples. I speak only of his casting
off the Popes Authority, as being that which no doubt was a means to bring on
the Reformation. As for those other things with which he is charged, they are
extrinsick to our Cause, and we are no way accountable for them. Namely, for
his dissolving of Monasteries, It was The. Cromwell. Herbert. p. 173, 174.
one whom Wolsey had bred to it that taught him the way, and Dr. Lee and
Tregonion. Fox. p. 119.
they whom he employed would have burnt us if we had lived in those days. Dr.
London. Fox p. 897, and 1104, etc.
For his being Head of the Church, whosoever is offended at it, let him blame
the B. Gardener. B. Bonner, etc.
Six-Article men who brought up that Title, and who both Preached and Writ for
it, and not the Q. Elizabeth Protestants Camden, Eliz. p. 26.
who cast it forth. Much more for his Personal excesses, whatsoever they were,
if they concern any Religion, it must be theirs and not ours. For as to his
Conscience, Sand. de Schism. p. 103. B. Ed. 1585. Cressy Pref. to Exom.
they tell us, he always continued a Roman Catholic.

These things being set apart, or charged where they ought to be, there will
remain on our account only this to be considered, Whether that Prince were
guilty of Schism in casting the Popes Authority out of this Kingdom? Or whether
he did no more in that matter than he might lawfully do, according to the
Principles of his own* that is, the Roman, Communion? If he had Right to Appeal
from the Pope to a Council, and was hindered by him from prosecuting that right,
and was thereby forced to disobey and oppose him; in this Case it has been
shown that Disobedience and Resistance was Lawful. Whether that were his Case,
will appear by searching into matter of Fact. And to be rightly informed of
this, one must not take all for true that Sanders says; though having the luck
to be contemned at the first by them that should have confuted him, he has
carried the World before him ever since, being not only transcribed by the
Writers of his side, but also followed by many others that seem not to know
whence they have their Stories. We that live in a more inquisitive Age have
seen many things of which he is, the Author, acknowledged by his Labbe Chron.
An. 1528.
Friends to be very improbable, and some things proved by L. Herbert in Henry
VIII.
others to have been altogether impossible. Yet in those things which he says
without evident partiality, Protestants are not unwilling he should be heard;
and Roman Catholics may be content to hear others with him, who, though
Protestants, yet, are not liable to the like imputation.

In the Caufe of that King's Appeal, many things are to be considered
elsewhere, which are not proper for this occasion. It suffices to know that in
his Minority he was 1502 ending.
betrothed to Katharine of Spain his Brothers Widow. That the Contract was made
by his Father, for reasons of State, against the judgment and advice of L.
Herbert. Ib.
Archbishop Warham; who then told him that he thought it neither honorable,
nor well-pleasing to God. That the Ibid.
People at that time murmured against it, and 1505. June 27. Ibid. page 249.
soon after the Prince himself, as Warham advised, made a formal Protestation
that he would never marry her. And yet, after his Fathers death, he was
persuaded to it, and did 1509. June 3. Pol. Virgil.
marry her with the Popes Dispensation. When he had lived with her near
seventeen years, and, as Sand. de Sch. page 9. who makes 1526. the First Year
of the Divorce.
Sanders says, was weary of her, (whether he was or no is not material,) the
Popes Legate Cardinal Wolsey Sand. Ib. and Pallavicino.
pretended to have found a Nullity in the Marriage; and, in care for the King's
Salvation, (as he said) acquainted Bishop Longland, the Kings Confessor, with
it. They both declared this to the King; whose ancient doubt being now revived,
he spent Hist. Conc. Trent II. 15.5. Sand. Ib. p. 10.
almost a whole year in Study and Consultation concerning it.

I enter not into the merit of the Cause, being indifferent at this time
whether the Marriage was Lawful or no. For it appears (which is enough) that he
had reason to doubt, and that he took the best way for satisfaction, according
to their Principles.

When 1527. the Second Year.
he had satisfied his own Judgment, (as L. Herbert.
himself says, though Sand. Ibid.
Sanders say otherwise.) And had the Judgments, not only of those Men
beforementioned, but of all the 1527. Septem. L. Herbert.
Clergy of England, save two, that his Marriage was Null; And he had From the
Bishop of Tarbe's Speech before the Council. Sand. de Schism. page 10.
reason to believe that most Learned Men abroad were of the same Opinion; there
wanted only this more to have the Popes Declaration of the Nullity. This at
present could not be had, for he was the Emperor's prisoner. But as soon as he
was at liberty, being desired by the King, who had Pallav. Hist. Conc. Trid.
II. 15.9.
obliged him above all men, and whom as yet he had occasion to use, it seemed
at first that there would be no difficulty that way. For the Pope granted all
his requests, gave the King what Sand. de Schism. p. 27. L. Herb. p. 233.
Commissioners he had named, empowered them to hear the matter in England, gave
them Guicciard. Hist. Ital. l. 19. Camd. Eliz. p. 3.
Bulls to show the King; and to assure him he was in earnest, because things
could not be done presently in form of Law, he gave him secret 1528. Ian. 13.
Letter of Casalis in L. Herbert. 1528. The Third Year.
advice to marry while the cause was depending.

The King having been two years without a Wife, and not only holding himself
free in his conscience, but expecting to be shortly declared so, and having now
some kind of leave to choose another; cast his eye on Anne Camden Eliz. p. 2.
says in his 38. year of age. But he was born 1491. June 28.
Bolen, one whose Person and Birth might have Camden. Ibid. p. 102.
deserved the best of his subjects; and who being then a stranger in Camden,
Ibid. says, being then returned. Heylin says, she returned with her Father
from his Embassy; which was in 1527. says Stow, in that year.
England, could not have that part which Page 10.
Sanders gives her in displacing Queen Katharine; nor could have preserved her
any otherwise, than by submitting to the King's lust, the refusal Camden, Ibid.
Sand. de Schism. p. 23. Pallavic. Ibid. 11.15.8.
whereof made her worthy of a nobler application. But this Lady had been
brought up in France among Protestants, and was suspected to have some
inclination Sand. Ibid. p. 17.
that way; which suspicion was enough, not only to blacken her, but to dash the
King's Camd. Eliz. p. 3.
suit, much the sooner if not only for her sake. It moved but slowly before,
for the Pope, being L. Herb. p. 232.
engaged by the Emperor, had sent instructions Sand. Ibid. p. 28.
after his Legates, requiring them to use all possible delays, either to
conceal L. Herb. 1528. December. 17.
his Bulls, or to burn them, and leave him free to do as he should see
occasion. Thus far he seems to have gone, before he heard what choice the King
had made. But when that was discovered, (and whether for that cause, or because
he had made a new Signified to the King, 1529 Iun. 13. L. Herbert. published
July 3. Ibid.
Alliance with the Emperor, which tended to make the Popes Thuan. l. 1. p. 18.
C. D.
Nephew Duke of Florence, and the Queen being the Emperor's Aunt ought in
reason to have some benefit of it) whatsoever moved him to it, the Pope after
this would trust her cause no longer in England, but having voided A vocation
signed Iun. 15. L. Herbert. 1529. the fourth year.
that Commission to his Legates, called it home to his own Determination.

The King not knowing what to do next, and taking time to consider in his
Progress, had In August. Fox Mart. p. 1688. lin. 88.
Cranmer brought to him by some that chanced to hear him say what they thought
was material in the Case. He was a Fuller Hist. of Camb. Sect. 6. n. 40.
stranger to all that had passed hitherto (which I mention, because some would
make him a chief man in it.) But from what he had heard, and especially from
their discourse, he judged that the King had taken a wrong way; in courting the
Pope to retract his Predecessour's dispensation: whereas in truth, as most
learned men thought, the Matter it self was Indispensable. And because it was
not reasonable to expect that the Pope would judge it so, (for that had been to
cut off a main limb of the Papacy) he therefore wished that instead of dancing
attendance at Rome, the King would send to the Universities (as being most able
and unconcerned) and get them to declare their Judgments in the case. Hereupon
the King sent Cardinal Bellay's brother, and Bishop Stokesly. Stow, p.
532.1530. the fifth year.
learned men with his case, and got the judgments of the Universities upon it.
To send to those in the Emperors dominions had been to no purpose. But he had
ours in England, and those in France of his side; and the two Bologna and Padua.
chief in Italy, though not only the Emperor L. Herb. 1530. Iun. 13. and 22.
opposed, but the Pope, L. Herb. Ib. Aug. 24. and 29. and Sept. 23.
who had Bologna in his Territory. And whereas it is said the King bought them,
which his Agents Aug. 31. Ibid.
deny; they say that the Emperor bought Speed, Hen. 8. n. 71.
hands on the contrary; and that he offered largely to get those who had given
their judgments for the King to retract it, but they would not take his Money,
though they might much more safely than the other. The King being thus
strengthened in his cause, had reason to be the less in fear of the Pope, and
yet it appears he was not the more willing to break with him. For, after this,
he made fresh Camd. Eliz. p. 3. and 4.
application to him by his Orators and Letters; which were seconded with a
Petition under the hands and seals of both the Wolsey and Warham. L. Herb. p.
334.
Archbishops and others, the chief men of the three States of this Kingdom.
They represented their own and others judgments of the case, they passionately
besought him to do the King and them right in it, they declared that if he did
not, they should think he had left them to themselves. All this came out of
time, for the Pope was not then to be persuaded to break his Alliance while he
was gathering 1530. Aug 9. Florence taken, 1531. July 7. Alex. Medices made
Duke of it. Ricciol. Chron.
the fruits of it. This the King understood by his L. Herb. p. 335.1531. The
Sixth Year.
Answer. And therefore knowing what he was to expect from abroad, he was the
more careful to secure himself at home. Where to satisfy the minds of the
people, he declared what had passed to all his Subjects in Apr. 30. Stow. L.
Herb. p. 352. May 31.
Parliament; he showed them the Judgments of the Universities, and the books of
above one hundred Doctors against the lawfulness of his Marriage. He also
caused the same to be shown L. Herb. p. 354.
to Queen Katharine by some Lords of his Council; who would have persuaded her
to withdraw her Appeal that she had made to the Pope, and to refer her cause to
the Judgment of others. She refused it, and thereupon July 14. L. Herb. Ibid.
was removed from the Court, and had her choice given her of the Kings houses
in the Country.

The Queen prosecuting her Appeal, the Pope by Letters exhorted the King to
receive her. Which he refused, as being unlawful for him to do; and offered the
1532. Feb. L. Herb. p. 363.
Pope to send Doctors to dispute it before him. He also got March 16. L. Herb.
p. 364. 1532. the seventh year.
the King of France, to mediate for him, who did it, as being assured of the
Justice of his Cause. But all this did not hinder the Pope from July 8. L.
Herb. p. 364.
committing it to the Dean of the Rota, who cited the King to appear before
him. This being done July 8. L. Herb. p. 364.
once, and Nov. 4.
again, the King entered his Nov. 14. L. Herb. Ibid.
Protest against all proceedings in that Court. And the same Sand. de Schism.
p. 60. Cooper. Holinshed. 129, etc. 1533. the eighth year.
day he privately married Anne Bolen; in which, if he was too hasty, it was
because he had not been quite seven years to consider. Not long after this, he
had May 23* L. Herb. p. 375, etc.
the Nullity of his former Marriage judged and declared in his own Kingdom.
which being done, he owned her publicly as his Queen, and gave her the June 1.
solemnity of a Coronation. This was no sooner heard of at Rome, but the Pope,
(who as long as the King was Plaintiff, had used Sand. de Schism. p. 29.
all possible delay and dissimulation; now the Scales being turned,) without
delay* July 11. L. Herb. p. 386.
declared this Marriage a Nullity; and gave Sentence of Excommunication against
the King, unless he put away Anne, and restored Katharine, before the end of
September next. The mean while the Pope made sure of the French King by a
Treaty then afoot, which produced an Interview between them at Marseilles, and
a Marriage between their two nearest Relations. Our King, in hope this new
Alliance would have given good effect to the French King's Mediation in his
behalf, sent his Ambassadors thither. They waited there for a while, but found
nothing but delays. And the Pope was now returning to Rome, where he resolved
to proceed in the Cause. Therefore at an Nov. 7. Bonner delivered the Appeal.
L. Herb. p. 389.
Audience before him, they declared the King's Appeal from the Pope to the next
lawful General Council. Which Appeal the Pope Nov. 10. L. Herb. Ibid.
rejected, as being unlawful, and against the constitution of one of his
Predecessors. He also declared that there should be a General Council; but
that the calling of it belonged not to the King, but to himself. And soon
after, the term that he had set for the restoring of Queen Katharine being now
expired, he caused his Sentence against the King to be openly set up at
Dunkirk, which was then in the Emperors Dominions.

This was only a declarative Sentence, in the case of Attentates, as they term
it; but this being passed, there was no doubt but soon after he would proceed
to a Definitive Sentence in the cause.

The King was now concerned to look about him, and to provide for the worst
that could happen. Therefore first, with the advice of his December. 2. L. Herb.
p. 395, 396.
Council, he acquainted his Subjects with his Appeal, which he caused to be set
up on every Church door throughout his Kingdom; And that his people might
understand the validity of it, he commanded that they should be taught, that a
General Council is above the Pope, and that by Gods Law the Pope has no more to
do in England than any other Foreign Bishop. Next he sent to engage as many
Foreign Princes as he could into a stricter Alliance with him. And yet lastly,
to show that he sought not these ways, but was driven to them; he L. Herb. p.
396. and Lab. Chron. A. 1534
desired the Bishop of Paris, who was then Ambassador in England, to get his
Prince to deal effectually with the Pope; and to promise in his name, that if
the Pope would forbear to pass any definitive Sentence, till the cause might be
heard before indifferent Judges, he would also forbear what he had otherwise
purposed to do, that is, to withdraw his obedience from the Sea of Rome. The
Bishop gladly took the office of Mediation upon himself; and though it was now
In the Christmas holy days. L. Herb. p. 396.
the dead of Winter, yet he went post to Rome to discharge it. There in
Consistory he delivered his Message to the Pope; and so far prevailed, that, at
his earnest request, there was a present stop of proceedings, on condition,
that the King should send a Ratification of his promise precisely by such a
day. In prefixing the day they seemed not to have considered the time of the
year. For though the Messenger, whom the Bishop sent into England, found a
present dispatch there; yet, being hindered L. Herb. and Labbe. Ibid.
by weather, he did not return within his day. The Pope, as if he had watched
for that advantage, resolved immediately to proceed to a definitive Sentence.
There being March 19. L. Herb. p. 396^
a Consistory called for that purpose, 1534.
the Bishop once more came in, and pressed for a longer time. He begged no more
but six days, which as he said L. Herb. Ibid.
might be granted to a King that had waited on them with patience for six
years. It was put to the vote; where, through the eagerness of the Imperial,
Cardinals, not only that small request was denied; but such L. Herb. and Labbe.
Ibid.
precipitation was used, that as much was done at once in that Consistory, as
would have asked no less than thrice according to their usual forms. Such have
they were in, to cut off, and to destroy him whom three Popes Pope Julius II.
styled him, Defender of the Papal Dignity.

Leo X. styled him, Defender of the Faith.

And Clement VII. The Deliverer of the Roman City.


successively had entitled their Defender and Deliverer. When they had done
their will; within less than fix days, that is, the second day after this rash
and hasty Sentence, the Post L. Herb. and Labbe. Ibid.
returned from the King with a Ratification of all that had been promised in
his name. And he brought this further offer from the King, that he would submit
to the Judgment of that Court, on condition that the Imperial Cardinals, who
had made themselves Parties against him, should be none of his Judges. There
was an Authority sent, for Proctors to appear for him on that condition. At
which great submission of the King, compared with their precipitation, the
wiser Cardinals L. Herbert. P. 397.
were astonished, and petitioned the Pope for an arrest of Judgment. Which
could not well be denied him in those Circumstances. And yet it was as if it
had not been granted; for they that got the Sentence passed by majority of
Votes, had the same will and power to get it confirmed. And Mar. 23. L. Herb.
Ibid.
confirmed it was, with this advantage; that the Execution of the Sentence was
committed to the Emperor; who would be sure to see it done thoroughly, as well
to enrich himself with the Spoils, as to take his revenge in the ruin of a
Prince that had provoked him no way more, than in his zeal for the deliverance
of this Pope out of his hands.

In this series of things, I cannot but observe the hand of God; and adore that
unsearchable wisdom by which he made way to bring in the Reformation of this
Church. There was no King in that Age so zealous for Popery, as he had been,
that came now to throw it out of his Kingdom. Whosoever considers him from
first to last in this business, cannot but see he had no intention to do this.
He did all things to avoid it, that could be done by one who was persuaded of
the Justice of his cause. And those Princes and Prelates who were persuaded as
he was, did their parts to hinder things from coming to this extremity. None
desired it but the Spanish and Imperial Faction, unless perhaps the Pope
himself could desire to lessen the Papacy, by cutting off a whole Kingdom from
the Church, but he L. Herbert. p. 406.
seemed to mind nothing but the raising of his Family, and in order to that,
let the Imperialists do what they would with him. Perhaps he might think, when
his own turns were served, to give the King satisfaction afterward; as it may
seem by what Bzovius ann. 1534.7.
one says, that when the Sentence was past, he suspended the Execution of it
till the end of September next. But he died 1534. Sept. 26.
before that time, and so his Sentence continued in force.

The next Pope that came after him did not approve what he had done; Paul III.
for to use his own L. Herb. p. 451.
words he had urged him to right the King in his Divorce, and would have
persuaded the Emperor to have born it patiently. But as then he could not
prevail on that side, so now he came too late to be heard on the other. For on
the Novem. 3*
day of his Coronation at Rome the Parliament met here in England that made the
Act of Supremacy. The edge of which Law falling severely on the Friends of the
Papacy, even while L. Herb. Ibid.
the Pope was offering at a reconciliation; he was thereby provoked to 1535
Aug. 30. L. Herb. p. 394.
curse the King afresh, by a Bull which yet was not published till some years
after. When the King having presumed to Un-saint Thomas Becket, the Pope 1538.
Dec. 17. L. Herb. and Labbe.
thereupon pronounced him no King, which made the breach quite unreconcileable.

I have given so large account of this matter, because it is brought into
common discourse; and as it is told, serves to blacken many other, beside the
King who was only or chiefly concerned in it. Otherwise it would serve for our
present occasion, to show, (which I think I have sufficiently done,) that he
had cause to Appeal from the Pope to a Council, that he did Appeal in due form
of Law, and prosecuted it with great Moderation; which was enough to acquit him
from Schism, as far as we are concerned in it: That on the other hand the Pope
rejected his Appeal, to the affront of that Supreme Tribunal among Christians;
and not only proceeded against the Appellant, in which case the Appellant
might, and ought, to resist him; but he also took a course that the case should
never be otherwise. For whereas the Pope assumes to himself the only power to
call Councils, and whereas there had been none in Ten years, to say no more,
and therefore a Council ought to have been then according to the Canons; yet
the Pope would have no Council, then, nor afterward, till he had tried all
other ways to destroy both the King and his Kingdom. L. Herb. p. 489.


When at last, after many years talk and deliberation, a Council was called,
that at Trent, which pretends to be a General Council; it was such as the King
could not think himself bound to acknowledge, nay he was bound to oppose it, as
well for his own preservation, as to maintain the Common Right of Christians,
according to the Principles then received in the Western Church.

By his Appeal, he was not bound to submit to any other than he expressed in
it, that is, a Lawful General Council. Such the Councils of Constance and Basil
were then generally acknowledged to have been. And it was the cry of the
Western Church, as well in this as the foregoing Ages, for such a Council, as
those were, Marius de Schism. and Conc. part 3. c. 16.
to reform abuses as well in the Head as in the Members. But the Head was as it
would be; and therefore, being to choose, would take no Physic to cure it self.
This was visible in the Popes extreme averseness to a Council; till he saw
that, without it, the Nations were likely to Reform themselves. Then he began
to think it needful to call one himself. But at first he named no time or
place. Pallav. hist. III. 12.5. Stow Chron. 1533. May. Mantua, Vicenza.
Then he named first one Town, and then another. When men began to think he was
in earnest, (for they had been often fooled with reports,) the King declared he
would not own a Council called by the Popes single Authority. It was the
Judgment of the Church of England that he ought not to own it; for so their
Synod declared, that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any one Prince whatsoever,
1536. July 20, L. Herb. p. 471, 472.
may by his own Authority call a General Council without the express consent of
the residue of Christian Princes. When afterward it appeared that the Pope was
intent upon it, the King, on the same grounds, made his public Protestation;
1537. Mar. 25. L. Herb. p. 489.
showing that the Indiction of a Council belonged not to the Bishop of Rome,
but to the Emperor and Princes which should send or come thither. 1538. April
8. L. Herb. p. 502.
The like Protestation he sent abroad into all foreign Countries. And he
afterward made it good, by not sending one Bishop to the Council when it met*
Rich. Pates Titular Bishop of Worcester, L. Herb. p. 609.
though one of his Subjects was there, whom the Pope was pleased to make a
Bishop with a Title in this Kingdom.

Having thus no obligation to own this for a General Council; he was therefore
obliged to oppose it, as being the Mockery and Abuse of that Supreme
Judicatory, joined with the defrauding all Christians of their right in it, and
particularly himself of the benefit of his Appeal to it. Which things he ought
to have considered, had it been held in the most innocent manner. But much more
being held as it was, with most apparent design, to establish those abuses
which all Christendom cried out to have reformed, to deprive the diffusive
Church of that which was the only remedy for them, to bring it to pass that
there should be no more General Council, as now we see there is like to be none
while the world stands; particularly as to himself he had cause to oppose the
Trent Council, as far as he was able. For it was originally L. Herbert. p. 451,
452.
designed to please the Emperor; and thereby to oblige him to head the Party
of Christian Princes, whom the Pope was then uniting to make War against
England. And as that Council was framed in all its circumstances, the King
could consider it no otherwise than he did the Pope himself, who was his open
and implacable Enemy: For as the Pope called it by his single Authority, so he
always presided in it by his Legates. He had it filled with his Creatures,
Italians, and others, who were sure to carry every thing by their Number. And
yet for fear they should forget themselves, every thing must be examined at
Rome, before it could pass through their hands. And being past, yet it was of
no force till it had the Pope's Approbation. By which means he made himself so
far Lord of this Council, that though perhaps he could not pass whatsoever he
pleased, yet nothing could pass that should displease him in it. And least, by
taking all this care, the Pope might seem to intend no more but only to secure
himself, without doing the King a farther injury; there was one thing which
made it appear that he had as great a mind to plague the King as to provide for
his own preservation. For among all his number of Cardinals he could find none
fitter to preside in the Council, and there to judge the King's cause, (if he
were so unwise as to send it thither) than one that was the King's Enemy more
than the Pope himself, if it were possible. That was L. Her. p. 584, and 595.
Cardinal Pool, the King's unnatural Subject and Kinsman; who being B.
Tonstal's Letter in Foxes Acts, etc. II. 347.60. Edit. 1641.
brought up by him, and sent to travel for his farther improvement, and, while
he was abroad, being Sand. de Schism. p. 53 L. Herb. p. 329.
entrusted by him in his cause, forsook it, and joined himself to the Imperial
party. In which, though he might pretend that he followed his Conscience, yet
nothing could excuse him for practicing against his King and his Country. He
was the man employed to Sand. de Schism. p. 55.
write against the King's Divorce; and out-did other Writers in this, that he
L. Herbert. p. 418. v. Poli Orat. ad. Imp.
stirred up the Emperor to revenge his Aunts injury, for fear he should forget
it; and not only so, but B. Tonstal Ib. II. 345.10. in his printed Sermon.
Ibid. 341.46.
went about from Prince to Prince, and from Country to Country to stir them up
to War against this Realm. For which so unworthy and so officious a disloyalty,
he was L. Herbert. p. 511.
declared Traitor at home by Act of Parliament, and Labbe Chro. Anno 1537.
had a price set upon his Head; not to mention other instances of the King's
extreme displeasure against him. When this had so far endeared him to the Pope,
that being not content to have made him one of his Cardinals, he must also have
this man to preside in his Council; the English had so much the more cause to
be jealous, and to stand upon their guard, as well against his Council as
himself.

A General Council they could not hold it to be, for their Church was not
allowed to have any Right in it. Though she had not lost her Right, any
otherwise, than as being cut off by the Pope's uncanonical Censures; against
which she was relievable on her Appeal thither, if that had truly been a
General Council. And the Bishops whom she should send to represent her in such
a Council had as much to do there (precedence only excepted) as the Pope
himself had, according to the ancient Canons. But now, as matters were ordered
at Trent, if she had sent any thither and if they had been admittable
otherwise, yet they must not sit there without owning the Pope in his Legate.
They must not only be joined into one Body with him, but they must acknowledge
him for their representative Head, who yet to them was no other than a man dead
in Law. For they knew him to be condemned for a Traitor, by that Authority to
which they were Subjects, as well as Trent as in England. And though the Popes
placing him there in that Character was the highest Affront that could be done
to the Justice of their Nation; yet they must submit, nay, contribute to that
Affront, by owning him in that Character, or else they must have no place in
that Council. This Contumelious Condition being implicitly imposed on our
Bishops, was a virtual Exclusion of them from their Right of sitting there. And
it was so contrived, that it looked as ill upon the State as on the Church.

The King was not only concerned for both these, but also for Himself on
another account; having his Cause to be heard there, if it had been a General
Council. It was an Injury to him all this while, that he had None, so long
after his Appeal to it. But now to make him amends, he had a Council packed by
his Adversary; and if that were not enough, he had this Traitorous Subject in
the Head of it. Which last thing went beyond all former Trials of his Patience,
and perhaps had been enough to have angered the meekest of Princes. If it be an
ill thing to have ones Judge chosen by his Enemy, it is worse to have his Enemy
be his Judge. He had both in this Council, as the Pope had ordered it for him.
Therefore as he could not be Canonically obliged to stand by it, so he did but
use his own Right, as before in Protesting, so now in Declaring against it. He
did it on all Occasions, and continued so doing till his Death.

His Son Edward VI, who reigned next, kept the Pope at his distance; and had
many things reformed in the Church, of which I shall not speak particularly,
because, all that he did of this kind was soon after undone by his Successor
Queen Mary. She, for reasons that I mentioned Page 45.
before, restored the Pope's Authority in this Kingdom. And, though his Council
of Trent was all her time in adjournment, so that she could not send her
Bishops thither, yet she had it acknowledged by them in a Page 8, 9.
Synod, where Cardinal Pool (being first restord in blood) had the honor to
preside as his Legate.

But as to the Schism between us and the Roman Church, both these Princes were
unconcerned in the Original cause of it, which was (as I have shown) the Popes
Sentence concerning their Fathers Marriage. For Edward VI. was born to him by
another Wife, whom he had married after Katharines death. And Queen Mary, being
his Daughter by Katharine, was not aggrieved by the Sentence, but on the
contrary held her self righted by it. The only Person aggrieved was Queen
Elizabeth, the Daughter of Henry VIII. by Anne Bolen; whose Marriage the Pope
had Sand. de Schis. p. 68. b.
declared to be Null, and pronounced any fruit that should come of it to be
Illegitimate. This Queen being the only fruit of that Marriage, the Sentence
was injurious to her, if to any. And whether she was wronged in it or no, it
ought to have been tried before a Lawful General Council, to whose Judgment
her Father had Appealed, as has been Pa. 97, 98.
already shown. And there being no such Council held in his life time, the
right of his Appeal descended to her at his death. She was now the only party
concerned in the Cause, and her Right could not be given from her by any other.
She was as much concerned, as ever her Father was, to be heard by the Judge to
whom He had Appealed; and to be Righted against the Pope, if it should appear
that he had injured her; and also against his Council of Trent, which abetted
him in it. And she had as much Reason as ever her Father had, to disobey and to
resist both the Pope and his Council, till they would suffer such a Council to
meet as was the only proper Judge of her Cause.

Thus far all that has been said of her Father, except only in things of
Personal concernment, is as Applicable to her. And more needs not be said, to
show that they were neither of them guilty of Schism, in asserting their Cause,
as they did, against the Adversaries of it. For therein they did no more than
what they lawfully might, and ought to do, according to the Principles of the
Western Church.

But there was something in her Case, which was not in her Fathers, and which
would have cleared her of Schism, though he had been guilty of it. For whereas,
when he rejected the Pope and his Council, he was wholly of their mind in all
the Articles of Faith then in being; She did it, not till the Council had sat,
and till they had already made sundry new Articles of Faith. Whereof the first
were defined Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. An. 1546. April 8.
some months before her Father died. However he might like them, as they
presume he did, who Supra p. 91 Sand. de Schis. p. 139.
tell us that he died in their Faith; yet it is certain that (though at
sometime she did not show it,) she did always dislike them, her Enemies being
Judges. And as soon as she came into Power, she declared, they were so far from
being any part of her Faith, that she took them for no other than False and
Novel opinions. If she mistook in so judging, which shall be considered in its
place, then she was at least materially an Heretic. And such he must prove her
to have been that will make her a Schismatic. For if she was in the right, and
those Doctrines were not of Faith, then the Schism occasioned by them must not
lie at her door. It must be charged on the Council who defined them, and on the
Pope who added them to the Creed, who made the belief and profession of these
Doctrines, a condition without which there is no living in his Communion. She
did what she ought to do, in refusing to have it on those terms, in adhering to
the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and in rejecting the Authority which
would have it defiled with those Mixtures.

What has been said may suffice to clear Queen Elizabeth from the Imputation of
Schism, on any Personal account, in not obeying the Pope or his Council. It
appears that she was free from Schism in that matter; as well in Foro
Ecclesiae, having the Canonical right of an Appeal against them; as in Foro
Conscientiae, because what she did, was to keep her Faith pure from their undue
Impositions.

Whether she can be cleared as well on the account of her Government in
Ecclesiastical matters, this we ought to consider as a thing that more
immediately concerns us. For we date the Reformation of our Church from the
beginning of her Reign. And though we have a Prescription since, of above a
hundred years; which is enough to secure us against the Claims of the Papacy,
in the Judgment of them that hold it to be only of Humane Right, as all men
ought to do upon those grounds above mentioned; yet, to them of the Roman
Communion, it will perhaps be more satisfactory, if it appear, that beside the
Right that we have now from Prescription, there was also an Original Right in
our Reformers to do what they did in the beginning of the Reformation.

The first thing they did, was to assert the Queens Supremacy; from whence they
proceeded to settle the Church Government; and ended with the Reformation of
Worship and Doctrine.

1. First, of what she did in assuming the Supremacy, more needs not be said
than to make it be understood. And we cannot understand her meaning in it
better than by her own declaration and practice. She Camd. Eliz. p. 39, 40.
declared that she took no other power to her self, than what Anciently
belonged to the Crown of England, that is, immediately under God to govern her
people of all sorts, as well the Clergy as the Laity. And she exercised no
other Power or Jurisdiction over the Church than what was merely External, as
appears V.B. Sparrow's Collection.
by her Injunctions and other Acts. Though if she had exercised any other power
than what she claimed, it had been only an Act of Misgovernment in her, for
which she was accountable to God; and the Church had not therefore been guilty
of Schism, since it XXXIX Articles. Art. 37.
gave her no other power, nor owned her in the exercise of any other, than what
is abovementioned. And that power is so inherent in every Supreme Magistrate,
and so necessary for the well-being of the People, that we cannot deny the
right of it in them to whom we grant the Supreme Magistracy it self.

Wheresoever any Prince or State have seemed to think so ill of themselves as
if they were not so fit, as a Foreiner was, to be trusted with this Power over
their own People; or rather where they have been so obsequious to the Pope as
to take this Flower out of their own Crown and put it into the Triple: It may
be every where observed, that either they or their Successors have found
occasion, at some time or other, to call for it home again, or to use it as if
they had notgiven it from themselves. We may see examples of this, in Germany
in Ockham's days, in Spain under the Emperor Charles V, and in Venice at the
time of the Interdict. But especially in France; where the Gallican Church is
obliged to justify this Right of Princes, unless she will grant that her most
Christian Kings have been in Schism, more than once, and especially, while they
stood to the pragmatic Sanction.

But we need not go abroad for examples, having so many at home, and such as
are very full to our purpose. He that will, may see them See Sir Roger
Twisden's Collection of them in his Vindication.
elsewhere gathered to his hand. And I have Supra p. 18.45.
mentioned enough to show that even in Popish times our Princes were not
ignorant of their Right, and that between whiles they were fain to assert it,
in such terms as did import, though they did not name, a Supremacy. But as
their Laws did not expressly mention the word, so neither did they always stand
by their Laws. When they had made them, the Pope still found some device or
other to make them ineffectual. Till King Henry VIII. having thrown out the
Pope, for those reasons above mentioned; did by L. Herbert. p. 408.
advice of his Council and Bishops, take both the Power and the Title on
himself; whether he took more than his due, let others judge. As I am not
engaged to defend all that he assumed, so I need not, for so much as Queen Mary
exercised of it. For it is agreed, (and there was great Supra p. 45.
reason for it,) that she was always Sand. de Schism. p. 134.
for the Popes Supremacy in her heart, (though for fear of her life she Camd.
Eliz.
renounced it when time was.) And yet she no sooner came to the Crown, but she
exercised the Supremacy her self, in changing most She puts out thirteen
Bishops.
of the Bishops, and Reforming Fox Acts and Mon. 1280.60.1282.50. and 1332.20,
80.
what she held to be Abuses in the Church. Afterward when she had surrendered it
to the Pope, yet she did not so wholly put it out of her self, but that, when
He displeased her, she could Full. Church Hist. l. 8. 3. n. 41. and Pallavic.
Hist. Conc. Trid. XV. 7.1, 2
shut his Legate out of her Kingdom. So that to adjust the matter between the
two Sisters, in this point of Supremacy, they seem to have differed only thus:
One adjudged it to the Pope, and yet took it from him when she pleased; the
other thought it belonged to the Crown, and therefore kept it wholly to her
self.

2. What Queen Elizabeth did in settling Church matters, was founded on her
Right in the Supremacy. By virtue whereof, she took upon her to Reform abuses
in the Church, as her Sister Queen Mary had done. And I believe that whosoever
compares their proceedings, will find, that she took more leisure and advice
than Queen Mary, in doing it. For before a Parliament 1559. Ian. 23
sat, she had gone only thus Camd. Eliz. p. 39.
far, that she allowed her people some of the Church Offices in a Language
which they all understood. Afterward by advice of her Parliament Ibid. p. 25.
she restored King Edwards Laws, and repealed those which had been made by
Queen Mary for Ecclesiastical matters. And by those Laws she abolished the
Popish Mass, and restored the whole Communion to the Laity; whereas her Sister
had done the contrary, V. Supra.
without Law, by her mere Right of Supremacy. Which Right she having afterward
given away by Act of Parliament, (though still she used it when she saw cause,)
Queen Elizabeth thought fit to have it restored by Act of Parliament; (or
rather Redeclared, for the Act V. Bramhal^'s Vindication. p. 86.
was not Operative but Declarative.) And whereas by this Act it was required,
that all Bishops, and others that held any Church-living in this Kingdom,
should take an Oath of Supremacy, as we call it, or else should be incapable of
holding any such Church preferment: on refusal of this Oath there were turned
out thirteen Bishops. I note the number, the rather, because there had been
just so many of the Protestant Bishops turned out by Queen Mary. There appears
to have been some difference between the turning out, of these by Law, and of
those without any Law then in force. But there was more in the cause of their
fuffering; those being outed for matters purely Religious, and these for a
Civil cause, for refusing an Oath lawfully imposed. Which Oath did not truly
concern their Religion, even themselves being Judges. For they had all, or most
of them, Camd. Eliz. p. 41. Bonner, Tonstal, and Thurlby.
taken it before; some of them had taken it many times over; two or three of
them had writ in defense of it, nay, were at the first composing of it. But
there was a greater difference than either of these, if the Bishops, then
turned out by Queen Elizabeth, had been most of them Canonically deprived under
King Edward VI, and were never since Canonically restored, which may deserve a
further Consideration. The mean while it is certain that this Act outed not
Camd. Eliz. p. 36.
two hundred more of all the Clergy in this Kingdom. And their places being
filled with such as had been banished in Queen Mary's days, it is not hard to
judge how all things else to be done in Church matters might pass any
Obstruction, as they did, afterward in full Convocation.

3. As to Doctrinal things, it was generally observed in those times, by the
Advantage of Ecclesiastical learning, that in those many former Ages which
wanted it, many errors, and some very gross ones, had crept into the Church.
And those errors, having the Papacy on their side, for Supra. p. 6, 7.
Reasons which I have already shown, had so far prevailed, that they were
growing to be Articles of Faith. Many of them were already defined so, and more
were like to be by the Council of Trent. Therefore now the Church of England,
being free from the Yoke of the Papacy, and having an Absolute Power to act for
her self, thought fit to use the Right of a National Church, that is, to Reform
her self by declaring against those errors, and to rid Christianity from them
here in England, without taking upon her to prescribe to other Churches. And
withal she thought it needful to set such bounds to the Reformation, that men
might not, by their heats against Popery, be transported so far as to run into
contrary errors. For these causes that famous Summary of Christian Doctrines,
which we call the XXXIX Artieles, was drawn, up, and approved by Anno 1562.
Convocation.

The Compiling and Publishing of these Articles was properly the Act of the
Church of England. And these Articles being many of them opposed to those
Doctrines which the Roman Church holds to be of Faith, and being either in
Terminis, or at least in the sense of them, the same which their Trent Council
has branded with Heresy; it is therefore evident that, upon the account of
these Doctrines, neither the Queen nor Church of England can be justly charged
with Schism, unless the Doctrines themselves are first proved to be Heretical,
as they are judged by those decrees of the Trent Council.

For the trial of these Doctrines, they will not allow our Church that resort
which she would make immediately to the Scriptures. And we cannot go along with
the Roman Church whither she would have us; that is, to the Council of Trent,
or, which is all one to the judgment of their present Church. Therefore there
is no possible way to end disputes, but by some known equal Standard between
us. And that can be no other than Catholic Tradition. Which they of the Roman
side cannot well decline; for it is that from which the Council of Trent has
Conc. Trident. Sess. 4.
pretended to receive all her Doctrines. Nor have we any cause to decline it;
for the Primitive Fathers, who were the Original Conveighers of this Tradition,
did profess to know no other Faith than what was contained in the Scriptures.

Why we cannot stand to the judgment of the Council of Trent for the trial of
our Doctrines, we have all the same Reasons that they have in the French
Church, why they reject it in matters of Discipline. That is, if they deny it
to have the Authority of a General Council; the English, though of their
Communion, may as well deny it to have Infallibility. Nay, much more this than
the other. For we may give to whom we please an Authority over us; but we
cannot give Infallibility to any, but to them to whom God has promised it, that
is, if to any Council, to such a one as represents the whole diffusive Church.
And we have one reason more than the French have, and which signifies more than
all theirs, to show that, though they did, yet, we ought not to look upon this
as such a Council. For the French Church was represented at Trent, in some
sort, though they were not at all satisfied with it; but Ours neither was
Represented, nor could be, (as I have shown,) neither after nor before the
Reformation.

And though (as it is Cressy's Ep. Apol. n. 132.
said) the French have since received the Doctrinal Decrees of that Council;
that is, they have allowed them to be Antecedently true, in those Terms in
which the Council defined them, though not a whit the more true for having been
defined in that Council; ours cannot pretend that here in England it ever had
so much as that lowest Degree of Reception.

Before the Reformation of which we now speak, that is, before the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, the Council of Trent had sat not much more than half
its Sessions. And though it was quoted with respect by the Synod of Supra, p.
8, 9.
London in Queen Marys days, yet it does not appear that there was then any
Formal Reception of the Council. Nor if there had been, could that have obliged
aftercomers to receive whatsoever should pass afterward in that Council? Thus
much, I think, ought to be considered by them (if there be any) that hold
themselves obliged by that Synod. But much less would it have signified to our
Reformers, who did not hold themselves obliged by that Synod. For beside that
they differed in point of Faith, they had other Canonical Objections against
it: That it was composed of Bishops who had been Deprived (as was said,) in
King Edwards days, and had not been duly Restored since, for ought that
appears. And it was Headed by the Popes Legate, in that Quality, as
representing Him against whom they had an Appeal yet in force. Now to him that
considers the Case in these Circumstances, it cannot seem reasonable, that King
Edwards Bishops should have thought themselves obliged by the Synodical Act of
them that sat there in their Injury; or that they, who adhered to their Appeal
from the Pope, should be concluded by any thing that passed under his Legate.

Since the Reformation, it cannot be imagined that the Council of Trent should
be received, here in England, by any other than by them of the Roman Communion.
And whether they have Received it, or no, they best know. But if they have, it
must be their own voluntary Act; for no power whatsoever could oblige them to
receive it. If any could, it must be, either the Council it self, or the Pope
by his Universal Authority: But for the Popes Power, they understand themselves
so well, that they know he cannot oblige them to the reception of a Council.
For he cannot bring them under what Government he pleases; I say, not without
their own Consent; as they have judged, and showed it by their practice. When
he empowered an Archpriest to govern them; the Seculars would not receive him.
And when he would have placed a Bishop over them, the Regulars would not
receive him. So the Seculars and Regulars, as it were with one consent, have
given us their Judgment in the Case; and that by no Indeliberate Act on either
hand, for they contended about it a great part of the last Age. And therefore,
unless their Principles are altered since, the same Right which they exercised
in not submitting to a Government, they may exercise as well in not receiving a
Council, though the Pope should presume to impose it. And that the Council, of
it self, has no power to oblige them, it appears in that judged case of the
Egyptian Church. The Bishops whereof would not subscribe to a Decree of the
Conc. Chalced. Can. 30. in the Codex Canonum Universae Ecclisiae, and in
Binnius III. p. 447. E. Edit. Paris. An. 1636
Fourth General Council, because they had then no Archbishop to give them an
Authority for it. This was allowed to be a Reasonable excuse, though the
Decree, which they were to have subscribed, was in a matter of Faith. I suppose
they of the Roman Communion, here in England, have had the same Reason ever
since the Reformation. They have had no lawful Primate, nor no declared Bishops
all this while. And during this imperfect state of their Church, if there had
been a General Council, and any of their Clergy had been there, they might have
been excused from subscribing, though in matters of Faith. What difference
there is in the Case, makes wholly on our side. For there is a wide difference
indeed between Subscribing and Receiving. The first is only the declaring ones
own personal assent to the Decrees of any Council; the other is to give them
the force of Laws in the National Church. And if (according to that Canon,) the
Bishops, where they are in a Council, are not bound to subscribe without their
Primate; how much less can any National Church be Obliged to receive things for
Law without her Bishops; Nay more, how can she Lawfully receive them?
Especially, such a Church, as owns there is no Jurisdiction without Bishops.
She cannot do it without a Synod of Bishops according to the ancient Canons.
And therefore the English Church of Roman Catholics is so far from being bound
to receive the Trent Council, that, in her present condition, she could not
Lawfully receive it. I say still, according to the ancient Canons, which ought
to be of some force with them of the Roman Communion.

But let them do as they please. The case is plain, that the Reformed Church of
England ought not to receive it, if she can prove her charge, that that Council
has innovated in the Christian Faith; or rather unless that Council can
discharge her self of it, by proving that what we call her New Faith, is not
new, but received from Catholic Tradition. We think we are sure they cannot
bring this Tradition for those Doctrines which are laid as Foundations for all
the rest in that Council; namely, their making unwritten Tradition to be of
Divine Authority, and therefore equal with the holy Scriptures; their bringing
those which we call the Apocryphal Books, into the Canon of Scripture; their
making the Vulgar Latin Translation Authentic in all matters of Faith and
good life.

For these, and all the rest of their Doctrines of Faith, as they are called in
the Roman Church, which we call Innovations and Errors, We are not afraid to
refer our selves to Catholic Tradition. If they of the Roman side would submit
to it as well, there would be no difference between us, in matters of Faith,
whatsoever there might be in Opinion. And therefore they would have no cause in
their own private judgment to conclude us for Heretics; much less would they
find us condemned for such by any competent Judicature.

If they think otherwise than we do in this matter, the reason must be, because
they do not mean what we do by Catholic Tradition. It is plain that too many of
that Church have a wrong notion of it; taking that for Catholic Tradition,
which is only presumed to be so by a Party in these latter Ages. For though
they call themselves the Catholic Church, and perhaps really take themselves to
be no other, yet they are but a handful to the body of Christians; especially
considered in our notion of Catholic, which, as we take it, extends to all the
Christians of all Ages. We plainly profess to take the Catholic Tradition in
that sense of Vincentius Lyrinensis, and before him of Tertullian in his
Prescriptions; who make this to be the Standard of all Doctrines of Faith, quod
semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus. First, that which has gone for Christian
Faith in all Ages from the beginning of Christianity. Secondly, which has been
taken for such by the whole diffusive Church, comprehending all those
particular Churches which have not been Canonically condemned either of Schism
or Heresy. And lastly, that which has not only been the Faith of some persons,
though contradicted by others, but that which has been the constant belief of
the generality in all those Christian Churches. To bring our differences to
this standard betwixt us, I conceive that, first, they of the Roman Communion
will not find such evidence for their Articles of Faith, as they think of, in
the Primitive Records. I say, such evidence as will make it appear that they
were of Faith, antecedently to the Definitions of Councils. They will find that
those Councils, which first defined them to be of Faith, were not such against
which we have no just exception, nor that their Definitions have been generally
received throughout the diffusive Catholic Church.

For the Primitive Records, I suppose, they of the Roman Church, that have read
them, will scarce pretend to show how they convey all those Articles to us, as
of Faith. And where they fail to show this, of any Article, they must excuse us
if we cannot allow it to be a Catholic Tradition. Much more, when we show, from
those Records, that there are strong presumptions to the contrary. Whereof, not
to trouble my Reader with more instances, I have given some Pa. 81, etc.
proof in that which Bellarmine calls Caput Fidei, namely, in that Doctrine of
the Popes Supremacy over all Christians.

For the Councils, by which their new Articles have been defined, the most they
can rationally pretend to by their Definitions, is, to deliver the sense of the
present diffusive Church. Which they are presumed to do, when they have power
to represent it, or when their Decrees are received in all parts of it, and not
otherwise. But how few of their General Councils can pretend to either of these
Conditions? It appears, that the Eldest of them could not, I mean Anno 787.
Conc. Nic. II. said to be of 350 Bishops.
the Second Council of Nice, which first imposed the worship of Images. For,
about thirty years before, there was Anno 754. Conc. Constable. of 338 Bishops.
an Eastern Council held at Constantinople, which Condemned that very thing.
And, not ten years after, there was Anno 794. Conc. Frankf. of about 300.
a Western Council at Francford, which condemned this Nicene Council for
imposing it. Neither of these Councils can be said to have been less Orthodox
than that Council was, in any point but that which they opposed. And their very
Opposing it shows, that, at those times, it was not the sense either of the
Eastern or of the Western Church. When that Council obtained in the Eastern
Church, yet still it was opposed by the Western; and however there also the
practice crept in, yet that Council has never been received in the Western
Church, as has been lately proved by a Dr. Stillingfleet in answer to T. G. p.
812. to p. 838.
most learned Writer. Nor has Image Worship been defined by any other Council,
that could be said to Represent both the Eastern and Western Church.

In all Ages since, the Councils which have defined any Articles, have been but
Western Councils at best, For, though some Greek Bishops were present at one or
two of them, yet, what they consented to was never ratified by the Greek
Church. And for these Western Councils, to give them their due, it was not so
much their fault, if they lead us into Error, as it is ours, if we follow them
in it. For he that reads them, and knows the History of their times, will not
choose them for Guides, if he has any care of that trust which God has given him
of himself.

He cannot but see, that, bating the three last of those Councils, which have
not that Authority in the French Church, nor with some other of that Communion;
all the rest were held in times of such palpable Ignorance, that when they went
amiss they could not well see how to do otherwise. Their Bishops could not but
be generally unqualified to judge of matters of Faith. For they had a great
want of good Books, and of the Languages in which they were written. I speak of
those Books that are now chiefly used in all Questions of Faith, as well by
their as by our Writers. And sure they that had them not to use, could not but
be miserably to seek in all those parts of knowledge which are Absolutely
necessary for any one that should judge of those matters. Namely, those without
which they could not Ordinarily know, neither the true sense of holy Scripture,
nor the Judgments of Councils and Fathers, nor the Practice of the Primitive
Church. We find by the best of their Writers in those times that they were so
much to seek in those most needful things, that not a College in either of our
Universities can be said without scandal to know no more in them than one of
those Councils.

If instead of those last we bate four other of their Councils, which are
disowned by the Papalins, for reasons which have been already Supra p. 88.
given; all the rest were in such Bondage to the Papacy, that they had not the
power to do otherwise than they did. Their Bishops, by Pope Hildebrand's
device, were all sworn to maintain the Royalties of St. Peter; V. Greg. VII.
dict^ta.
whereof one was, that the Popes Faith could not fail. And being assured of
that, as men should be of things which they swear, their wisest course, when
matters of Faith came before them, was to trust the Pope's Judgment, and pass
every thing as he brought it to their hands. This way therefore they took, and
it saved them the trouble of Examination and Debate, and such like Conciliary
proceedings. It may be worth the observing, that in Seven General Councils,
which they reckon from the time of Pope Hildebrand downward, among the many
Doctrines which they are said to have Defined, there is not one that appears to
have cost them any more but the Hearing. The Pope had them brought and read
before the Council, as if that was enough to make them their Acts as well as
Hence the Style of those Decrees; Alex. in Conc. Lateran. Innocent. in Conc.
Lateran. etc.
His. And this was the constant course, till the Papacy was weakened by a long
and scandalous Schism; Then those Councils which made themselves superior to
the Pope, thought fit to use their Own Judgment, such as it was; and they
proceeded Conciliarly, as Councils had done in former times. Which way being
more for the credit of their Definitions, it was continued in those Councils
which restored the Pope to his Supremacy; with this difference only, that
whereas those Seven Councils abovementioned passed all things in the Lump
which the Pope or his Ministers brought before them; the Councils since have
passed them Piecemeal; with some show of using their own Judgment in every
particular, though in truth with so entire a resignation to the Pope, that
nothing could ever pass against his Interest, or his will, even when they
seemed most to endeavor it. So that, in all these Councils, whatsoever has
passed in determining Doctrines of Faith, is in truth no more than a Papal
Decree, though it bears the name, and perhaps has some show of a Councils
Definition.

Lastly, for the Judgment of the Diffusive Church, we are not ignorant that
many of the things thus imposed, (of which we can find no mention in Antiquity,
and which we know were first started long after the beginnings of Christianity)
yet have been received as well by Greeks as by the Latins in latter Ages. But,
not to say by what means they obtained it, we cannot forget what Ages those
were, in which these things came to gain such an Authority among Christians.
They were such as learned men of the Roman Communion, who are acquainted with
the Writers of those times, (I say as well with the Greek as Latin Writers,)
do not at all reverence their Judgments apart, whatsoever they think of them
together in Councils. And according to the Rule prescribed by those Fathers, it
will not pass for the Judgment of the Catholic diffusive Church, though both
Greeks and Latins agree in it, and have done so for some Ages together. There
must be semper, as well as ubique, and ab omnibus. Though the two last
conditions may suffice to make us think any Doctrine to be true, or at least
the Error in it not to be Damnable; yet to make us believe it is a Doctrine of
Faith, there must be semper likewise, without which it is no Catholic Tradition.

It is surely a great Affront to the Catholic Church, and to the great Author
and finisher of her Faith, that, as if that Faith once delivered were
Insufficient, there must be new things added to it from time to time, by a
Succession of men that take upon them to be his Vicars, without making out any
colorable title to that Office. And, though we find no such things in the
Ancient Records of his Church; though we see these are framed to support the
new Authority of those Vicars, and though we know how they abused the Ignorance
and Tameness of many Ages; yet because in those Ages these things were
generally received, and have mellowed some time since in the Faith of them that
knew no better, they are pleased to use this as an Argument, not only why
others must be concluded and bound for ever to sit down by their Judgment, who
had little, and used none; but why they must also receive all things else that
are imposed in like manner, under pretense that this is now the Judgment of the
Diffusive Church.

But the case is much worse, these new things being imposed on the Church with
a pretense of Infallibility. Which Infallibility being a word of good sound,
some that are no Papalins, but hold with them in some Doctrines which they
cannot well prove otherwise, strike in with them at this, though the sound is
all that they agree in. For whereas the Papalins mean an Infallibility of
Judgment, and place it in the Virtual Church; these mean only an Infallibility
of Tradition, and that they place in the Diffusive Church. They would persuade
us that it is a Demonstrable thing, that those things that are believed, as of
Faith, in this Age, could never be otherwise. They may as well Demonstrate,
that a Tale does not mend with often telling, or that no change can be made by
insensible degrees. But the Authors of this being Censured at Rome for it, we
have no more to say to them ti^l they make it appear that they are of the Roman
Church in spite of her Censures. For our dispute is at present with them of the
Roman Church; who pretend that this Infallibility is in theirs, that is the
Virtual Church. They say that she has it by virtue of Divine Assistance; which
being either without or above means, it is all one as if they said she has a
New Revelation. And one would think that they intended no other who founded
their Definitions on Miracles. Now if they can prove that any such Assistance
was promised to the Virtual Church, and if they can prove that they are the
Church to which those promises were made; or if they can prove their
Credentials to be the same that Christ gave to his Apostles; then we must grant
that we are out, in denying this Infallibility. Otherwise they must grant that
their virtual Church might be mistaken. And if she might, we have reason to
think that she was so in these matters. And if it is but colourably said, that
she was mistaken in matters of so very great moment, there is reason to think
that those matters are fit for a Review. To which the Greeks may submit, and so
may all other Christians that differ among themselves; but they of the Roman
Church cannot, while they keep up their claim to Infallibility.

If we must (as the Roman Court will have it) be called Heretics for not
submitting to new Revelation, we cannot help it. Nor need we much trouble our
selves. For we know we are no Heretics by any Law Divine or Humane, except
those which this new Power has made to fence in its new Doctrines. And we know
they cannot, with any color of Reason from Catholic Tradition, think us
Heretics themselves, while we hold to the Positive Doctrines of our Church. So
that when they are pleased to give us this Title, we can take their meaning to
be only this: They declare us to be, as indeed we are, the Enemies of that
Monarchy to which they would enthral the whole Church of Christ; They do as
good as tell us what we are to expect for this, if ever (for our sins) God
should suffer us to fall into their hands; They would have their people hate us
the mean while, and avoid all communication with us, for fear they should come
to know how we are wronged in this matter.

This appears to be the sense and design of the Interested men. And yet we
doubt not there are many others among them, who either have no such Interest,
or who will not give themselves to be led by it. We have reason to believe
this, partly from what we observe at this present, and much more from what we
read of former times. Of all Nations that continue in the Roman Communion, the
more any have flourished in Learning and Civility, the more free they have kept
themselves from all that which is properly Popery: while the more Ignorant, and
therefore more Superstitious Nations, are so fond of it, that, for want of
this, they will scarce allow the other to be Catholics. But for Protestants,
whom the other can endure to live among them, though perhaps in no desirable
condition; These will not allow them to live in their Country, unless that may
be called Living, when men are buried alive in the Inquisition.

So it may be observed among Persons of that Communion. The most busy and
imposing, the most fierce and untreatable Bigots, are commonly they that scarce
understand their own Prayers. Learned men either have not those heats, or else
govern them better. Unless they be such as are engaged to the Papacy by
preferment, or by the hopes of it, or by the Vows of their Orders; or perhaps
such as having forsaken our Church, will not allow us to Question either their
Wisdom or their Honesty in it. We are not ordinarily to expect so much as
common Civility from such men. But they that have no particular Quarrel against
us, and are otherwise of a Candid and Ingenuous temper; especially when they
have Learning with it, as not a few have, and would to God there were more in
the Roman Church; These men being not averse from inquiring into Truth, nor
from receiving it when it is brought before them, if they do not see how they
can prove us Heretics, and that their Proof is as strong and clear as the
Charge is heavy, they will not think it a sufficient Reason to call us so
because others have done it. Nor will they think fit to debar us the common
Right of all Christians, that is, to be heard what we can say for our selves:
And that either before a competent Judicature, if it may be had; or if that
cannot be, yet at least by all them that will judge of us.

I know no reason to doubt, that if all of them knew but so much of our Church
as has been said, and if they considered it with that Impartiality which we
ought to expect from such men, it would work some good effect in no small
number of them in that Communion. And that effect would appear upon such a
Review as I have mentioned; I mean, that we should have Right done us in a free
General Council, if the Pope would permit it to be held in our Age, or rather
if all Christian Princes would agree to call it themselves, and not wait for
His time, which will be never.

But though he will not suffer this Reason to be done us abroad, where it
should be in a Common Assembly of Christians; yet he cannot hinder us from
having it at home, at least in the private Judgment of them that do not fear
his Censures. I have shown that this is like to be the fruit of a
Discrimination. It will try who they are. And for them chiefly I intended this
Digression. In which I have been the more large, because I think it no
Digression, but rather the best way for the suppressing of Popery in this
Kingdom, to get our Church to be better understood by all among us of that
Communion. And surely, if they did rightly understand it, wise men would
consider how they made themselves guilty of Heresy and Schism by unjustly
charging us with those crimes. How of Heresy, by joining with them that have
made such Additions to the Faith: And of Schism, in charging us with Heresy
for not receiving those Additions; and thereupon separating themselves from our
Communion. They that shall be convinced of their danger in both these, will
endeavor to avoid it, by relinquishing that Foreign Power, which they can think
themselves no way obliged to, if they better consider it. And finding
themselves free from any such obligation, I do not see what should hinder them
from joining themselves to that National Church in which God has sufficiently
provided all things necessary for their Salvation.

Though if they stay where they are, it may perhaps be better for Us upon
Politic accounts; which I add as my last instance of the Benefit that we may
expect from this Discrimination.

It would be no small Benefit to us, if such men continuing in the Roman
Communion would but keep the Popish Party from being more united, and more
active against us. And thus much they would do for us, though they did not
intend it. But they will do much more, and that with full Intention, unless
their Opposition to us weigh more with them than their care of themselves. For
they will find themselves Obliged, if they consider it, as well in Duty as
Interest, and no less obliged both ways then we are, to keep out the Foreign
Power from coming in among us. Their obligation in Conscience will be the same
that ours is, and so much more if they are bound to it by Oath, whatsoever the
Oath shall be, that is designed for their Discrimination. And as to Interest,
it will be much more theirs than it is ours, to keep out the Common Enemy, that
will be heavy to us both, but much heavier to them than to us. For as they are
fewer in Number, so they are better known in their Persons, and therefore the
more easy to be found out. And being found; if ever that day should come,
which God avert; though we must look to feel Rods, they are sure to be punished
with Scorpions. The provocation which they have given already has been more
than most of us have been able to give: And when we are gone, if they continue,
the Roman Court having no other Adversaries, would be the more intent and the
more able to root them out of the Kingdom. I do not say this to waken them that
are most concerned to think of it; for I suppose they cannot sleep, having so
great a Danger before their eyes. And if they should happen to forget
themselves, they would be wakened by those Censures of which enough has been
spoken already. Page 78, 80.
It is at present more needful to make our own People (who do not so well
understand the Common Adversary, as not having had the same Experience of him,)
to be sensible how much they are concerned not to lose any Help that can be
had. And therefore that it is our Interest as well as theirs, to preserve such
a Party of useful men, and to oblige them to join with us against him. Which
can be done no other way but by a Discrimination.

I cannot think there is any Protestant among us, who will not for these, or
other the like, Considerations, think fit to use the Moderation here proposed,
and endeavor to promote it in others as far as he is able. Unless he may
perhaps be discouraged by some other Considerations, that may make it seem not
so Practicable as it were to be desired. For if it can be put in practice, I
think no wise and good man, having weighed the reasons here given, will deny
that it ought to be; and that as well in Prudence, as in Justice, to preserve
both Church, and State, and whatsoever is dear to us in this Nation.

The things chiefly alleged against the Practicableness of it, Objections
against the practicableness of this Discrimination.
are these that follow. I shall first name them, and then consider the
Consequence of them. First, It is alleged that all they of the Roman Church
are obliged by their Principles to follow the Judgment of the Roman Court: And
that they Actually follow it, in those very things which are Popery in the
proper signification. Secondly, If any of them deny this, or declare and
promise the contrary, we can have no Assurance of what they say; they have so
many ways to elude all such Promises and Declarations; especially being made to
Heretics, as they are taught to call us. Thirdly, Though we have a sufficient
assurance of any persons at present, that they are No Papists, yet while they
are of that Communion, they are in a continual danger to be seduced, or change
their minds; and whenever that happens, (as it may before we are aware of
it,) they will be able to do us the more hurt, through our relying on the
security which they have given us.

I confess there is a force in these Objections, which I cannot so well avoid,
but that they who are chiefly concerned to have them answered may suspect that
I use some kind of Prevarication; because I do not answer them their way, or
not say all that they think their Cause will bear. To secure my self against
that most odious Imputation; I do in the first place declare that I shall omit
nothing which I think to be material, though I do not pretend to say all they
have to say for themselves. And then for their Way of answering: If they think
they can Justify themselves against the charge that is implied in those
mentioned Allegations, and that they can thereby entitle themselves as well to
Trust as to Protection; I confess this is more than I can do for them. And
therefore I take so much lower; Endeavoring to excuse the persons as far as
they are capable to be excused from those things which are not to be Justified
in their Cause; and since the Law has excluded them from Trust, for such
Reasons as cannot but continue as long as the established Religion, I shall yet
endeavor to show that they safely may and ought to have Protection, while they
give such assurance of their Loyalty as they are capable to give, and no
otherwise.

I shall do it with much the more ease, having the matter prepared to my hand
in a Book Considerations of present Concernment. 1675.
that was published about two years since, to this purpose. Where the
Objections being proved as to matter of Fact, and the Inferences drawn with
great evidence and strength; if I should not extract enough to satisfy the
Reader in either kind I shall however satisfy my self, that I have made him
amends by recommending the Book to him, where he may find those things said at
large, and with very great accurateness, which either cannot so well be
contracted, or I cannot do it here, without exceeding the brevity which I
design.

First, I. The Roman Church and Court not differing in their Principles.
Whereas all Roman Catholics are said to be obliged by their principles to
follow the Judgment of the Roman Court; I find little less than Demonstration
for this, in a H. Dodwell of the fundamental Principle of Popery.
Book lately published. Where it is proved that they cannot justify their
calling themselves Catholics exclusively to all other Christians, any otherwise
than by resolving their Faith into the Infallibility of the Roman Church as
united to the Pope; that is, really, into the Infallibility of the Pope as
being Head of the Church. So that if he declare, as it is evident he has done,
that those things which we call Popery are Articles of Faith, they are bound
(if they will do things consequently to their Principles) either to believe him
in those Articles, or else to relinquish that Communion. This follows by good
Reasoning; though that way of proof is not so clear to a Vulgar Capacity, as
that which is drawn from Authority, and appears in plain instances of Fact. But
what greater Instance can there be of this kind, than the practice of the whole
Roman Church, which has actually followed the Judgment of the Roman Court, and
that in things which are properly Popery?

By the whole Roman Church, I mean that which they call so themselves; that is,
the governing part of the Clergy of all the Churches of that Communion; that
part which acts for all the rest in Ecclesiastical matters, and by whose Acts
all their Subjects are obliged according to their own Principles. Now taking
Popery (as I have Page 6.
defined it) to be the owning of the Pope's pretended Authority; whether in
Spirituals, over the Universal Church, or in Temporals, over all Princes and
States; it has been proved that this Roman Church owns this Doctrine in both
the branches of it.

First, in Spirituals, there can be no question of this. For none can be of the
Governing Clergy without taking an Oath, in which they own the Pope's Authority
with a witness. For they swear Fealty to him, and that in those Terms which
import as well a Temporal as a Spiritual subjection. No doubt that was
Hildebrand's sense that made the V. Labbe's Edition of the Councils tom. X. p.
23. A. and P. 379. E. compared with the Oath in the Pontifical.
Oath, and it is most agreeable to the Principles and Practices of them that
Impose it. But this I leave to Temporal Princes and States, and especially to
Protestants, who are chiefly concerned, to consider it. Let the Oath be for
Spirituals only, it is enough to prove the Churches subjection to the Pope;
because, in that sense at least, it is taken by all the Governing Clergy. And
for the rest, there is a Ib. tom. XIV. Col. 944. C. and v. sup. p. 10.
Form of Profession, by which they are sworn to him every one in his Person,
for fear they should not think themselves obliged by the Oaths of their
Superiors.

If among them that are the Guides of Conscience to others, there be any that
makes no Conscience of an Oath; yet such a one will go which way his Interest
leads him. And the Pope has them all secured to him by Interest likewise. Not
to speak of those ways that his Interests are theirs, nor of other ways that he
has to oblige them; it is enough that he is so far Patron of the whole Church,
that none can have a Bishopric, or any other eminent Dignity, but he must
either take it of the Pope's gift, or at least he must come to him for
Confirmation.

Having two such sure holds, on the Bodies, and on the Souls, of his Clergy;
the Pope is not only in present possession of a spiritual Monarchy over the
whole Roman Church, but he is (as much as it is possible for him to be) assured
that none shall ever be able to take it out of his hands. Unless the Princes of
his Communion should come to find their Interest in a Reformation, which is
rather to be wished for than to be expected in our Age; otherwise, there is
nothing that can dispossess him, but a general Council. And that indeed he has
some cause to apprehend upon the experience of former times. It is remembered by
others too often for the Pope to forget it, how such a Council, V. Supra p. 88.
when time was, humbled two or three of his Predecessors. But then they that
were for the Liberty of the Church, had not only the Diffusive Church on their
side, but they had a good party among the Cardinals themselves. Especially they
had the Papacy at an Advantage, being to Judge whose it was, among them that
pretended to it. They had also the times very favorable to to them, in other
Circumstances, which I shall not mention, because they are not like to come
again. And yet then, what ground they got from Popes of disputable Titles, they
lost afterward to those whose Titles were certain. They left free Declarations
and Laws for future times, which might do good, if there were men to put Life
in them. But withal they left a certain experiment, to show us, that that good
cannot be done by men who are so engaged to the Papacy.

Interest of it self were enough to give the Pope a Majority of Bishops in any
Council where Conscience did not bear too much sway. It was observed by one
John Major.
that writ for the Authority of those Councils; that they could never keep up
their side, for this reason, because the Pope had the disposing of all the
Livings. But how much greater must his Party be, when all the Bishops are bound
in Conscience likewise, as far as an Oath can oblige them, to support the Popes
spiritual Monarchy? It is hard for men to think that such an Oath does not bind
them, as well when they are together, as severally. We see the Pope so well
understood this, that when Anno 1552. Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 4. and Pallavic.
hist. XII. 15.12. and. 15.
it was proposed during the Council of Trent, that, to make it a Free Council,
he should dispense with the Oaths of all the Bishops that sat there; his
Legates declared that they would rather die than consent to it. I suppose they
would not have been so much concerned for that which they had not found to be
of very great use in their business. And we see the effect of it. For all the
Bishops there present, though it was against many of their wills, yet suffered
the Council to be prorogued, and translated, and rid about how and when the
Pope pleased, till he had done with them, that is, till they had V. supra p. 10
made it unnecessary for him ever to have another Council.

But as safe as he has made himself, in case there should be a General Council;
it cannot be denied, that it is safer for him to have none. And therefore
presuming there shall be none for the future, as we may judge by the experience
of the last hundred years; we come now to consider what his power is in the
Intervals of Councils.

During these, it is acknowledged by the whole Roman Church, and that as well
by the Laity as the Clergy, that the Pope has the supreme Authority over all
Christians. Which being another kind of Supremacy than we are used to, we are
to learn what it is from them that live under it. What they say and write of
it, is not the sense of the Church, as that is which they swear in those Forms
beforementioned. And yet their Oaths being in general terms, we cannot so
thoroughly know it from them, as from particular Instances of the Exercise of
it. I suppose they may be said to give him that Power, which he exercises every
where without let or contradiction. And to name only such Instances, there are
two which more particularly concern us, and which make him no less than some
call him, that is, the Virtual Church.

First, he takes upon himself, and they allow him, to be the only supreme Judge
of Fact in Ecclesiastical matters. So that whomsoever he has judged to be
Heretics, (of what rank soever they are, Kings not excepted,) they are subject
to all Canonical Punishments, and are avoided as if they were such indeed as he
judges them. And as he does not trouble himself to call a Council, and to take
their sense of the matter before he judges; so neither, if he judge amiss, are
the injured Parties relievable by Appeal to any other Judge whatsoever. If any
question this, they do ill to call us Heretics; who were never condemned by any
Council, at least, not by any that pretended to represent the Universal Church.
It was indeed moved at the Council of Trent, that they should have declared
against Queen Elizabeth, and it is said Pallavic. hist. Trent. XXI. 7.5
that they forbore to do it for politic reasons. But when the Pope Sand. de
Schism. Contiu. p. 182.
saw his time to declare, it did as well: for, though by the same Bull he
deprived her of her Kingdom, all her Subjects of that Church broke Communion
with her, even they that disobeyed the Sentence of Deprivation. Since her time
it does not appear that we are under any Sentence, but the Popes yearly Curse
on Maundy Thursday; and yet that is enough to continue the breach of Communion.
Nay, when Henry VIII. was condemned by the Pope only, and judged a Heretic for
no other cause but disobedience to him; though he had a just and lawful Appeal
then depending, yet then the Popes Sentence was obeyed, and he was treated as a
Heretic by all those of the Roman Communion. If this be not owning the Pope to
have an Absolute Authority, yet at least it is no small Privilege, that they
allow him, to let in and shut out of their Church whom he pleases.

But he claims a higher Privilege than this; that is, to be judge also of
Doctrines, to define what shall be Faith or Heresy. This he actually does. And
the Church so far abets him in it, that if private persons seem to question his
Judgment, (as some did when he condemned the Iansenists Propositions,) they are
punished for it as Rebels to the Church. Now being in possession of this power
to judge of Doctrines, what security can they have that he will not employ it
to advance his own Secular Interests under the specious pretense of Christian
Faith? If he please to make it of Faith that all men must obey him, even in
Temporal things; this is done already in a Unam sanctam. tit. de Major. and
Obed.
Decretal Epistle if there be any Coherence between the two ends of it. If he
should think fit to call it the Council. Edit. Labb. tom. X. p. 405. A. etc.
Henrician Heresy, for any one to hold that Kings may be obeyed
notwithstanding his Censures: If he call it the Heresy of the Baron. Anno
1046. n. 4.
Politici for any one to deny the exemption of the Clergy from Secular Courts;
or the Heresy of Baron. Anno 1111. n. 29. and n. 42.
Simon Magus, to hold that Lay men may lawfully present to Church Livings:
there is nothing new in all this, and therefore he may colourably do it. Nay,
we have reason to believe he will do it, whenever he thinks he may do it
safely. And that will be, when he is no more in awe of the French Monarchy,
than he was of the English when he censured the Irish Remonstrance. It may
concern more than Protestants to consider this. For no man knows how soon the
Pope may be concerned either to have him condemned for a Heretic, or to make
something that he holds go for Heresy. And either of these things being done,
there is no doubt but that the Popes Act must be owned by the Roman Church, in
consequence to to their now mentioned Principles. For all this is no other than
the exercise of that power which they give him in spiritual things.

Whether they allow him to have the like power in Temporals, is the Question
which we are next to consider. And that they do allow it him, will appear by
all the means that we have to know the sense of that Church. First, their
Church Virtual, that is, the Pope himself, has From Hildebrand downward.
declared it again and again; and that with all the Solemnities required by
themselves to his decreeing ex Cathedra. There never was any Pope that disowned
it, nor any that owned that Notion of the Virtual Church. Their Church
Representative has declared it in diverse Councils, of which one or other is
owned to be General by all them of the Roman Communion. Whereas many require
the the Popes Confirmation of Councils to make them General, there is no doubt
but such H. D. Considerations XXX. of third Lateran. XXXI. of the fourth.
XXXVI. of the Council of Lions.
Councils, so confirmed, have declared it. For those that do not hold any
necessity of the Popes Confirmation, those very Ibid. XXXVII. of the Council of
Constance. and v. Council. tom. 12. p. 276. D.
Councils, which they abet in not holding it necessary, have not only declared
this, but they have taken it for a foundation, which in reason should be much
more than a Definition. They supposed it as a thing out of Controversy, and
made sundry Acts in pursuance of it. Their Catholic Church Diffusive has owned
it, by receiving and approving of some Councils of both sorts; so as that
whosoever has rejected the Councils of one sort, has received those of the
other. They own it likewise in such Practices, as must be Catholic according to
their Principles. If any practice be Catholic, what can be more properly so,
than that which is the first Commandment of their Church? Namely, to keep her
Festivals, to hear Mass, to join in Offices of the Church? This they do in the
Memory, and with solemn Invocation of them as glorified Saints; who not only
(while they lived) were abettors of this Doctrine, but who were Sainted for
this reason, because they Abetted it. Such were H.D. Considerations, XXVIII.
Anselm, and Ib. IX. etc.
Becket; of whom I need say no more than show the Reader where he may find a
very full Demonstration of this. But among the many more that I might add of
this sort, I shall name only two that deserve more than ordinary notice.
Namely, Hildebrand, the first Author of this Doctrine; and Pius Quintus, who
was the first that practiced it on Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. This last
mentioned Pope being newly canonized, I suppose, to let us know here in England
what we are to expect when time serves. I do not see how they who suffer
themselves to be imposed on in this manner, and who fulfill the design of the
Imposers, in owning such men for Saints, can rationally avoid the owning of
their Principles. And if the doing these things obliges any to own these
Principles, it has the same force throughout their whole Diffusive Church.

It is not so easy to answer the force of these Arguments as it is to produce
Instances on the contrary; of them that have written against this Doctrine;
especially in France, where it is said to be disowned by a National Church. But
their Writings, and her Declarations, will stand us in no stead upon their
Principles, who expressly except the Case of Heresy; as Cardinal Perron says
they all did, and instances in the most eminent of them who defended the rights
of Princes against Popes before the Reformation. For I think it will not be
doubted that all the Writers of that Communion, (even those of the Gallican
Church not excepted) look upon us as Heretics.

But besides the French Church has been so far from disowning this Doctrine,
that they have Publicly declared for it, and that no longer since than in our
Fathers days. It cannot yet be forgotten how the body of their Clergy, as
representing the Gallican Church, by the mouth of their Speaker Cardinal Perron
declared themselves in that famous Harangue, which was printed there with Royal
privilege, and sent over hither to King King James thought himself concerned
to write his Defense of the right of Kings, in answer to it. v. his Works p.
383.
James, that he might not be ignorant of their sense in this matter. And they
declared it not only to be the present sense of their Church, but the same that
it had constantly been, from the first opening of her Divinity Schools till
Calvin's time. They show too much desire to have the French Church on their
side, that confront these great Testimonies, with Acts of State, or
Declarations of Universities, or with Writings of Private men: When they cannot
but know, that, according to their Principles, neither Private men, nor
Parliaments, nor Universities, can pretend to be the Gallican Church in any
case, where they differ from the Ecclesiastics.

But whereas Cardinal Perron there says, that all they who writ for the Rights
of Princes against the Pope in those times before the Reformation, did
nevertheless hold that the Pope might depose any Prince that should be guilty
of Heresy: Though I do not engage to make good his Assertion in the utmost
extent of it, because it is hard to know the mind of every Writer in that
Controversy; yet I think it is not hard to show as many Kings who have
declared their Judgment on his side, as there can be produced of those Writers
to the contrary. And it is no small proof of the Authority of any Doctrine,
when it is acknowledged by them, who would have been most obliged by their
Interest to have denied it, if their Consciences would have given them leave.
For examples of this, we cannot go higher than to the Emperor Henry IV. whose
very troublesome times gave occasion to Hildebrand to bring this Doctrine first
into the world. And it is very observable, that in the Infancy of it, he that
was so unfortunate to be made the first Instance of the cursed effects of this
Doctrine; though he denied the Popes power over him in all other respects, yet
he Brunonis Hist. belli Sax. p. 123. Lin. 18. in Freheri Germ. edit. Francof.
1600. Councils of Labbe's Edition, Tom. XI. part. 1. Col. 727. D. and 629. E.
owned it in this of Heresy, which is worth all the rest put together. Perhaps
he thought it did not concern him, at first, so much as he found it did
afterward. For having granted that the Pope might depose him in case of
Heresy, it was enough; Then the Pope knew what he had to do. It was only to
make a new Heresy of something which he would not or could not deny; and then
how easy was it to take away his Crown as being forfeited by his own
Confession? Another example of this we have in the Emperor Frederic II. Who
being in no very good terms with the Pope, thought to get into favor by
showing his zeal against Heresy. And he showed it sufficiently, by giving the
force of a Temporal Bzov. An. 1221. n. 2. and 1225. n. 10.
Law to that Canon of their General Council of Lateran; by which every Heretic
is made to forfeit his Estate, as well they that have no chief Lord over them,
as others of Inferior rank and condition. In Consequence of this, when the
Pope saw occasion to take away his Crown, and wanted only some good color for
it; among other crimes with which he charged him, this was one, that he was
guilty of Heresy: which appeared, as the Pope was pleased to say, by no
doubtful and light, but by evident Arguments; for that it was manifest enough
that he had run into many Perjuries: These are the very words of the Councils
of Labb^'s Edition, Tom. XI. part. 1. Col. 642. A.
Sentence. By which also it sufficiently appears, that not only Error in
Doctrine, but even Vice or Misgovernment may suffice to make a Heretic, when a
Prince's being so will forfeit his Crown to the Pope. But as Humane Nature is,
and in a Fortune so liable to temptation, how hard a thing it is for any Prince
to escape this charge? while the Pope is allowed to be Judge, as well who is
guilty of the Fact, as what Fact shall amount to a Heresy. For he may as
groundlesly judge one guilty of Perjury, as he did in that Instance judge that
guilt to be Heresy: And yet both these Judgments so inseparably belong to the
same Jurisdiction, that they who grant him either of them, ought in reason to
grant him both; as we have shown they do, according to the Principles of the
Roman Church.

And whereas it is alleged, that some National Councils have declared for the
Independent right of Kings; though none ever did so, but they are Being called
Conciliabula.
branded for it, at least, in all the later Editions of the Councils; yet of
these it is observable, that they never supposed the Case of Heresy, in which
there is no Reason to doubt that they went with the stream of the Roman Church.
It is more observable that, bating that Case, the rights of Princes against the
Pope were scarce ever maintained by any Council of any Nation or Province but
those who were under the Aw of Princes. And even of them, very many have
recanted, as soon as they found themselves at liberty to do it; and that
Conscientiously, as we have reason to believe. But on the other side, the most
Conscientious Persons of that Communion have stood their ground in the most
disadvantagious Circumstances. They have stuck to it, and maintained it, and
never recanted their Doctrine; howsoever they might have some remorse at some
of those horrid Practices into which they were led by it.

Now by the Principles of that Communion, whatsoever has been the sense of
their Church, can never cease to be so on further trial, but must be the
Churches Doctrine for ever. They who defend Infallibility of Judgment cannot
avoid this. Nor they who hold Infallibility of Tradition: Since they teach,
that, whatsoever has once prevailed, and that Universally over all Churches,
and specially over all Conscientious Persons; could never prevail so, unless it
had been delivered from the beginning. But of this Doctrine it has been proved,
that it was in the Church before those Councils above mentioned, and was either
declared or supposed by those General Councils, therefore it must have been
from Catholic Tradition. And therefore, according to their Principles, it ought
not to be called to a review; much less be disbelieved, or disputed, by any in
this present Age, whatsoever advantage it may have, above those former Ages, in
point of Learning and Monuments, for the discerning of Catholic Tradition.

Answer.
What has been said is sufficient to make it appear, that all they of the Roman
Church, by the Principles of their Communion, are obliged to maintain these
Doctrines of Popery. Whence it will follow, that as long as they are true to
those Principles, we cannot be secure that they will not practice those
Doctrines. Therefore all the reason we can have to believe that they will do us
no hurt, if they are truly conscientious persons, is only this; that we may
hope they do not yet know their Churches sense in this matter. At present they
do not see the repugnancy between their Duty to Princes, and the Principles of
their Communion. But this will only secure us so long as they do not see it;
and that may be a very little while. For as the proofs of this Inconsistency
are great, and notorious; so they are ready to be objected to them by their
Adversaries in their own Communion. And therefore we can have little security
of them, if we can have none any longer than while we may suppose them likely
to continue in this Ignorance. So that the only solid and lasting reason that
we have, or can have to hope well of the Loyalty of any such Conscientious
Persons among them, must be the assurance that we have of their firmer
adherence to their Duty to King and Country than to the Principles of their
Communion.

Of these Persons we may be secured, whilst they are ignorant of that
Inconsistence, because, if they are truly such as we take them to be, they
cannot but think themselves bound in Conscience to deal fairly and uprightly
with us. And when the Papalins, who will still be practicing upon them, shall
have brought them to discern that Inconsistency; the effect of it may be better
than they intend. For we have reason to hope that such Persons will be so far
from quitting their Duty for their Communion, that they may be rather induced
to leave their Communion; when they shall be convinced that it is not possible
to maintain it without complying with those Doctrines which they have in so
great detestation. And these hopes of the good effect of this Countenance to
them above others, and of the consequent jealousy of those others of their own
Communion, may be a farther encouragement to zealous Protestants, to fhew them
this countenance; Not only in regard of the security which such as these may
give to the State, but also in regard of the hopes, that, in process of these
disputes among themselves, they may at last by the wisdom of God be won over to
the Protestant Communion.

And concerning these Persons for whom the favor of the Laws is desired, we
have reason to believe that many of them do really adhere more firmly to the
sense of their duty to their Country, than to that of continuing in the Roman
Communion. Many of them are such as have given good proof of it already, of
which Instances might be produced, if it were necessary. But to wave all
Historical inquiries in this place; If the State desire satisfaction herein, it
may be had by the form which shall be tendered to them. By which they may
profess that they do in Conscience believe themselves more obliged to pay their
duty to their Prince and Country, than to stand to the Authoritative Decision
of any Judge whatsoever that is owned in the Church of that Communion.

The second Objection.
The second thing objected against that discrimination here proposed, is this,
which were considerable enough of it self, but much more being added to the
other. It is said, that we can have no assurance of any engagement they make to
us, they have so many ways to elude the force of it; what by Equivocation, and
Mental Reservation, what by Popes Dispensations, by their Doctrine of
Probability, and the rest. There are so many of them, that, considered one
after another, they look like a contrivance to destroy all Faith among men. For
when we think our selves assured by their Promise, and especially, when
confirmed with an Oath; yet, by Equivocation, that Oath, in their sense, shall
signify quite otherwise than was meant by them that made or imposed it. If
they do not Equivocate, yet they may have some mental Reservation; saying
inwardly not, or something else that quite alters the meaning of what is
spoken. And if they Swear without either of these tricks; yet they may believe
the Pope can dispense with that Oath, or he can absolve them when they have
taken it. And though the Pope should not do this, yet their Church Council of
Constance Sess* 19. in Labbe's Edition of Councils, Tom. XII. Col. 196. E. and
1* 0. A.
has given them the President of breaking Faith with known Heretics. And if
they make Conscience of that; yet it may be some Doctors opinion, that there is
something unlawful in this Oath, which though they did not discover before, and
therefore took it, yet having discovered this after, they may think themselves
not obliged by it. And though they should not be of this Doctors opinion, yet
that extrinsic probability of this Doctors Authority may be enough to sway them
against their own convictions to the contrary. The Probability that there is of
their holding all these opinions, as having been held by Doctors of Reputation
among them, and none of them ever censured for it by the Church, (though she
has taken all possible care to censure all such opinions as may be any way
contrary either to her Judgment or Interest) this presumption is sufficient to
persuade private persons, that their Church, though perhaps she may not believe
them true, yet believes them not hurtful or dangerous to her Children. And if
a Doctrine has no danger in it, though it prove to be false, yet the security
of it is inducement enough for men to practice it. These Principles will the
rather hold, because according to their other Principles, they are taught to
rely on the Judgment of their Church in matters of belief even where they
cannot do it without renouncing their own Judgment.

And in this Objection, it is very considerable, that it is not so easy as it
was in the former, to distinguish who they are that do indeed hold these
dangerous Principles. Only we have reason to suspect all them that keep to that
Communion upon Principles of Conscience. For they must think themselves bound
in Conscience to hold these Principles to be practicable, because they are so,
according to the Principles of their Communion. And they who are once suspected
upon prudent grounds, can neither clear themselves, nor satisfy us, by any
form of profession they can make. Because we must still suspect, that such
persons do prevaricate, even in those forms by which they seem to renounce
Prevarication. This Objection has been made, and it is not without visible
cause.

Answer.
Now in answer to this, it cannot be denied but that many of them have
maintained such Principles of this kind as would destroy all possible trust in
dealing with them. And if they had stood to these Principles in their Actions,
this would have given us cause to suspect all the rest of their Communion,
while they continue in it.

But whatsoever they say in their disputes, we have reason to judge of their
belief, by what they show of it when they come to the trial of Action. And
thus, even the Papalins themselves have not ventured to act upon these
Principles, even where they could have nothing to hinder them from it, but
convictions of Conscience. They who have died rather than they would take that
Oath, which according to these Principles they might have taken, and
prevaricated in it, have plainly shown, that even they durst not trust their
own subtilties when they came to be practiced. Nay, the Pope himself, who has
forbidden them to take these Oaths, and has animated them to be Martyrs rather
than take them, would not have exposed his dearest friends to such extreme
hazards, if in earnest he himself could have approved the practicing of these
Principles.

The utmost therefore that we may fear in dealing with them seems only this;
that, whilst they renounce one form of Prevarication, they may make use of
another. If they renounce Equivocation; they may at the same time, believe
themselves obliged not to Equivocate, and yet not renounce the belief of the
Popes Authority to dispense with their Oath, if that be not expressly contained
in the Form.

But we have no Reason to believe, that men of such Politics as the Court of
Rome are known to be, can possibly, when they come to practice, own fuch
Principles, as are like to prove so prejudicial to their own Interest. Or if
they should be overseen so far as to do this, yet the mischief that would
follow upon it being likely to prove more dangerous to themselves than to us,
we have no reason to fear running the hazard of it. For if there are any that
believe that they may prevaricate in the very same form of prevarication which
they renounce; How is it possible that the Roman Court it self can be assured
of such persons? That Court it self has found by experience, that it has had
many real enemies, that still pretended to live in its Communion. How can they
be assured but that many of these, who pretend to be their Servants and
Subjects, may prove to be their dangerous Enemies? If in earnest they may
prevaricate, even coram Iudice, in a thing not belonging to his Jurisdiction;
how can the Court secure themselves, that persons persuaded of the injustice of
the Popes Claim to a power in temporal things upon any pretense whatsoever; may
not prevaricate with him, since they believe that these matters belong not to
his Jurisdiction? How can they secure themselves, but that multitudes of such
persons, may, therefore, still keep to their Communion; purposely to form
Intrigues against them, which they could not do, if they were out of it? It is
certain that not only the Papalins have owned these Doctrines, but even those
who have been the greatest Adversaries of the Papacy among themselves.
Particularly, the Council of Constance is that which gave Authority to the
Doctrine of breaking Faith with known Heretics. And according to the definition
of that same Council, the Council of Basil in Labbe's Councils, Tom. XII. p.
620. D. and 621. A. and 766. B. and 767. B.
Pope himself, and all they who challenge for him the Supremacy over Councils,
are Heretics for doing so. And therefore, why may they not break Faith with him
as well as with any other Heretic? This is a just reason for him to suspect,
and they who are once suspected can give him no assurance by these Principles.

Since therefore the belief of this liberty of using Reflexive Prevarication,
is neither for the Interest, nor agreeable to the practice of the Roman Court
it self; and since the danger that may follow in the trust of it must be more
theirs than ours, for it destroys the Faith of all whom they have to employ
either to defend themselves or to prejudice us; we have reason to believe that
Forms, whereby they renounce prevarication, may oblige them to bar themselves
the use of those Prevarications which they do therein expressly renounce. So
that for giving us complete security, nothing more can be desired but that the
Forms to be tendered to them may take in all the cases wherein any celebrated
Doctors among them do allow them this liberty of prevaricating. And therefore
the drawing up of this Test would be more properly a work of Divines than of
Statesmen; and more particularly, of such Divines as have been most conversant
in the Casuists of the Roman Church.

If this will not suffice, how is it possible that even Protestants, who are
once suspected of inclining to Popery, can ever purge themselves of this
Imputation? We have had too many Instances of unjust Accusations of this kind.
It has been generally the Fate of them who have been most zealous for the
Church of England, or for any thing of Order and Discipline in it, to have been
thus represented to the people by men who have desired to make them odious. And
the mischief which must follow upon this distrust among our selves, even of
those who are our most zealous Patriots, and therefore most eminently capable
of doing service, is a mischief much greater than we can fear from any thing
that can follow on such a trust of the Romanists as have been here described.
It will make us incapable of driving on any great design, either for our own
defense, or to defeat their machinations against us. And therefore it must be
much more mischievous to us, than any hurt we can suffer from those of the
Roman Communion, especially from those who desire, not our trust, but
protection.

If it be farther suspected, that, when they have taken all the Tests that can
be given them, still their minds may alter after all this; and that so long as
their Priests are near them, and have their ear, we have too just reason to
suspect that they may actually change. It will be easy to reply, that a change
may be possible, when all diligence has been used to the contrary. But we have
no reason to believe it probable, of them who, by a Test that has been before
propounded, shall profess themselves more obliged to theirDuty to King and
Country than to any Judgment or Interest of their Church to the contrary. For
whosoever they are that are ready to oppose the Judgment of their Church it
self, if she should declare any thing contrary to their duty; it cannot in
reason be supposed, that they should be so far influenced by a Priest, as to do
that for his sake, which they would not do in obedience to the Church. But if
yet it be farther suspected, that their Priests may be enabled to work such a
change in their Penitents by their Intimacy and Assiduity with them, and by
that Reverence that is usually born to their Persons, which, being always
present with them, may perhaps prevail more than the dumb Definitions of the
Church. Yet this danger the State may very easily remedy, and will do it by the
making of a just and prudent discrimination. For that being to be made by such
a Test as the State shall require, no other Priests will be allowed, but only
such as have taken it. And the Test being made with such a Clause as has been
proposed, the Priests that take it will be upon the same terms with their
Laity; and will be equally obliged in behalf of the State, to oppose any
pretense that can be brought by any person or power whatsoever to draw them
from their Allegiance.

And if there be any fear of Practices against the State by them that, having
taken the Test, have been secretly changed by some means against which no
provision is made; the danger of this also may be prevented, as far as any
thing may be done by Obligations of Conscience. Not to say that their Interest
will oblige them likewise in great measure. It may be done by a frequent
Repetition of this Test, which may discover any change in some short time after
it is made; and so may give an early stop to any practices which might follow
upon it. The Priests also may be obliged by their Oath to declare the
Independent Right of Kings in their Sermons, as expressly, and as often, as the
State shall prescribe. And it may be so ordained that they shall continue in
their charge no longer than while they can bring sufficient Testimony that they
have done it. These expedients will suffice in all likelihood to prevent the
defection of them who have given security to the State, or at least will secure
it in time from receiving any dangerous hurt by their defection.

CONCLUSION.
TO conclude all with a brief Summary of what I conceive advisable in this
whole affair. I think it is not so proper to make the distinction between
Regulars and Seculars. Because many Seculars are more addicted to these
Principles than many of the Regulars; and some of the Regulars have declared
against these Principles, and suffered for it more than any Seculars in our
age. Besides that it may seem very partial to prejudge men by their Ranks, when
they may distinguish themselves sufficiently otherwise. Yet withal, whereas
there are diverse of those Regular Orders, that were never received in England,
even by the Romanists themselves; and who have here intruded themselves as well
against their own No new order of Regulars is to be admitted in any place
without leave of the Ordinary, v. Conc. Trident. Sess. 25. de Regular. Cap. 3.
and Bullam Urb. VIII. 1628. Aug. 28. which begins with Romanus Pontifex in the
Bullarium Cherubini of Lions Edition. Tom* IV. p. 62.
Canons as against the known Laws of the Land; it is but reasonable that we
should take that Advantage against them, which not only our Laws, but even
their own Canons will allow. Especially where we have Reason in other regards
to suspect them above others of being active and industrious in driving on
dangerous defigns. And this Advantage may be taken against Jesuits, discalceat
Carmelites, and Cappucins.
three eminent Orders among them; which have been founded since the
Reformation, and were never Canonically received here in England, and yet are
as Active as any other in designs for the advancing of Popery.

For the rest who are not thought fit to be totally excluded, the most equal
way for them, and as secure a way for us, to distinguish them; is to do it by
such a Test as has been more than once before mentioned. That this is a safe
way may appear from what has been already shown; that even the high Papalins
themselves cannot prevaricate in renouncing Prevarication, and therefore may be
capable of giving assurance to the State by submission to Tests, if they are
known to be conscientious otherwise. But antecedently to any Test, for some of
them, it would be requisite, that they should first renounce their former Oaths
and Obligations; or explain them so as to secure us that they will not be
induced by them to any dangerous practice against the State. Those of them, as
their Bishops and others, who have taken Oaths to the Pope, as they are
prescribed by their Pontifical; either to explain them, if they can possibly do
it, so that we may be satisfied of their Innocence; or to retract them, where
they will not admit of such an Explication. And here also it ought to be
considered what Oaths are taken by those Proselytes whom they gain into the
Roman Communion.

When this is done, and not till then, they may be capable of being admitted to
take the Test. Which ought in reason to contain all that which the Law has
already prescribed, as being that which the wisdom of our Lawmakers have
judged fit and suitable to their condition. It is not reasonable for them to
expect that any of those trials should be waved which have been made even since
the Reformation; as long as the same Reason continues which prevailed with our
Legislators to prescribe them. But if they were to make a Test for themselves,
I do not see how they can with any confidence decline those professions which
were made by their Ancestors before the Reformation. They have so frequently
boasted of them, and allege them as Arguments of the Consistence of their
Religion with their Loyalty. And therefore it were fit that the Test should
take in all those Doctrines concerning the Rights of Kings which are contained
or supposed in the Ancient Laws. Especially in those which themselves have
produced for the honor of their Communion; as namely, the Assize of Clarendon,
the Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire. These they cannot with any confidence
refuse, if they will but pretend to deal ingenuously, and to let us see that
they have been in earnest in those Elogies which they have given their
Predecessors for making them. Beside the forementioned particulars, it were
also needful for our satisfaction, that they would profess themselves so far
convinced in Conscience of their Obligation to their Prince and Country, that
no Ecclesiastical Judge or Judicatory whatsoever shall be able to draw them
either from the belief, or from the practice of their Duty. This will fully
secure us of their Loyalty, if they deal sincerely in it. And for satisfying us
of their sincerity, it has already been advised, to renounce all their
pretenses to Dissimulation. And great care should be taken that no Doctrine be
left out of this Test, which would leave them any liberty of this kind, in the
Judgment of any celebrated or uncensured Casuist in their Church.

This will be not only a sufficient, but also a just ground to distinguish
between them. For when a Test being thus contrived shall be prescribed by
Authority, it will then appear that none are like to suffer the severity of the
Laws but they who either are truly Criminal, or are justly suspected of being
so, even for their refusing of such a Test. And then that due severity which
may be thought necessary to preserve the State from their practicing against
it, may be executed on them with less color of exception to the Penalties.
They who have extolled the Loyalty of their forefathers, in making those Laws
already mentioned, cannot except against the Penalties mentioned in those Laws.
They cannot pretend that there was any other Cause of severity, in them, but
their care for the security of the Public; for they were otherwise of their own
Communion, and therefore could not be liable to any suspicion of that rigor
against them, of which they may suspect us in regard of our differences of
Communion. For other penalties, I say no more, but leave them to the wisdom of
the State; who best know that due measure of severity that is requisite in our
present Circumstances. For as their case may in some Reasons vary from the
condition of them against whom those Laws were made; so it is fit that their
punishments should do so too, whether their case be more excusable now or then,
that also I do not take upon me to determine. For them who will take the Test
so contrived, and that as often as the State shall require; it were fit that such
favor be shown to them as may consist with the safety of the State. And all
the favor which themselves have desired, is their exemption from Sanguinary
Laws, and protection against their Popish Adversaries, and permission to live
in their Country, upon the same terms as other dissenters do, who are as
Innocent as themselves will be upon this supposal.

As for Places of trust, they do not pretend to them. Which may be a security
against all reasonable jealousies. For other Laws which have been made against
the foreign Education of their Children; they will not then have the pretense of
any necessity for it, when they may have them taught at home, by persons well
affected to the State, and yet otherwise of their own Religion. And they will
have no excuse, if they do it without any necessity. So that they cannot object
against any Determination that the State shall think fit to make in that
particular; whether the Laws now in force shall be continued, or changed, and
if continued, under whatsoever Conditions and Penalties it should be done.

And if it be thought fit to impose on them such small pecuniary Penalties as
may only oblige them in Interest to endeavor the farther satisfaction of their
Conscience; it might be convenient that those sums were applied to maintain
converts to the Church, and to reward them that shall inform the State how
these things are observed among them.

This will be likely to keep up the practice of these Laws, when they cannot be
secured from discoverers among themselves. And may also be a means by degrees
to reduce them to the Communion of the Church in order to the capacitating of
them for farther favors.

Thus much was in Prudence necessary to be said, to show as well the
Practicableness, as the Convenience of this Proposal. The Convenience has
appeared in the Discourse it self, and the Practicableness in the Answer to the
Objections. For other more particular Expedients I leave them to the Prudence
of the State; whose most proper Office it is, and who are best acquainted with
all particular Circumstances to determine.

FINIS.

