Imprimatur,

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.
Febr. 27. 1678.
A SERMON PREACHED At St. Martins in the Fields, ON NOVEMBER the Fifth, 1678.

By WILLIAM LLOYD, D. D Dean of BANGOR, and One of His MAJESTY'S Chaplains in
Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for Henry-Brome, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

JOHN 16. 2. They shall put you out of the Synagegues: Yea the time comes,
that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service.
THe Words are part of that Discourse which our Savior made to his Disciples
the Night before his Passion. The Words of a Dying Man use to leave the deepest
Impression: And that was the end for which Christ intended this Discourse: He
knew there would be a more than ordinary need of it. That which gave such force
to his Words, was the very cause of this need; that is, his Death. For Him to
suffer Death, whom they looked upon as their Messiah; Him that was to restore
the Kingdom to Israel; For Him to Frustrate that great Work by Dying; They were
in pain to hear this: For Him to suffer such a Death; They were offended at it,
often offended, as often as He spoke of it.

Our Savior considered their Weakness in this; and mildly told them, it should
not be so, but much otherwise. That which they were so apt to be offended with,
when they heard it; He made them hear it, that they might not be offended, when
it came to pass. These things have I spoken to you, Verse. 1.
(says he) to the end that ye should not be offended; that you should not be
scandalized, nor deterred from my Service, by any thing that I am to suffer.
Nay more; What you shall see done in Me, will likewise be done in You. As I am
rejected and put to Death, so shall You be, and that for Righteousness sake.
They which now begin their Work with Me, shall deal likewise with You when I am
gone.

The time comes; and thus it will be, till time be at an end: The time comes
when they shall remove you from their Assemblies; they shall put you out of
their Synagogues; Excommunicate you for your Christian Profession. And having
done so, they shall kill you; and all this in Zeal, thinking it not only
lawful, but acceps to God. They shall do it as Men that would (...), do God
Service, or Worship; so the Original signifies; as if in so doing, they should
offer Sacrifice to God.

It is a wonderful thing: That Men of Knowledge, and Conscience, and Religion;
they who doubtless were a True, though then a Corrupt Church of God; should
think to please God with those Sacrifices, which were scarce offered to the
Devil by any other but the most Barbarous and Brutish part of Mankind. What? To
Sacrifice to God with Human Blood, which in his Law he had positively and
directly forbidden? To kill Men upon His account, that has expressly said, Thou
shall not kill? To kill, not Malefactors, but the most faithful Servants of
God, the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ? To kill them to do God service, was
surely a most preposterous way.

But they that did it thought otherwise; and they thought as they were taught;
they acted according to their Principle: It was the Principle of their
Religion, that false Prophets are to be put to Death. It Is most true, God had
so ordained it in his Law, as you read Deuteronomy. 13. six first Verses.

But how should a false Prophet be tried? Among the Jews he should be tried by
his Doctrine. And how his Doctrine? By Scripture. God sent them to the Law, and
to the Testimony: and declared, that, if Men that took upon them to Prophecy,
spoke not according to this Rule, they had no Light in them; then they were to
be taken for false Prophets.

But these of whom our Savior speaks, the Jews of his Age, had another way of
Trial, which they held at least equal with the Scripture. That was their Oral
Tradition. Our Savior told them of it: He blamed them smartly for preferring
it before Scripture. You make, Matthew. 15. 16.
(says he) the Scripture of no Effect by your Tradition. By this Tradition, if
they tried Christ and his Apostles, and judged them all to be False Prophets
that would not receive it, they must judge Christ and his Apostles to be False
Prophets; and, as such, must kill them by their Law.

Thus they did. They dealt so, First with Christ himself, and Then with his
Apostles. And they thought they did well in it. They did this upon the Account
of Religion. It was indeed for their Religion, such as it was; not grounded on
Scripture, but on that False Rule of Oral Tradition. In Defense of their
Traditions, they killed the Followers, and even the Writers of Scripture. Tanto
in Religio potuit -- Such a mischievous pernicious Inflorence has misguided
Religion upon the Souls and Consciences of Men.

So that now in my Text we have two things to consider. You see the Theme of it
is Persecution against the Followers of Christ.

You see, First, the Cause of it is Misgrounded Religion. In these Jews, it was
grounded, not on Scripture, but on Tradition.

Secondly, you see the Effect of it, in their carriage toward the Followers of
Christ. The Effect is twofold:

First, to shut them out of the Church by Excommunication;

Secondly, having so done, to put them to Death. They shall Kill you, says my
Text.

Now Killing again is twofold; either Publicly, by the Magistrate; or
Privately, by any particular Person.

It Is all one to him that Suffers, whether he die by the Sword of Justice, or
whether he have his Throat cut in a Massacre, or by Assassination. But as to
the Authors, it is far different. The Sword of Justice may be Abused, in many
respects; and is so sometimes in all Nations. It may kill the Innocent, through
Misinformation; and the Magistrate may be faultless in doing it. But for
Private Men's Killing, by Assassination or by Massacre, it is and ought to be
odious in all Nations. Yet some will do it, and Justify it. My Text says, some
would not stick to do it, yea and justify it, upon the account of Religion.

Thirdly, the Time when they will do this; The time comes, says our Savior.
Comes, when? Now under the Gospel. The Jews did it at the Entrance of the
Gospel. In Aftertimes, that Christians should do it, that profess to believe
the Gospel; Did our Savior ever think of this? If he did, you may soon guess
of what sort he meant. For I know but one sort of Christians, that do it, and
that justify it, upon account of Religion. I know not any Principles for it,
among Christians, but theirs in the Roman Church.

It seems as if Christ looked upon them, when he said these words to his
Disciples. It appears he thought of them, if what he said to his Disciples,
were intended of any sort of Christians. He declared elsewhere, Ioh. 17. 20.
that what he said, he intended not for them alone, but for them also who should
believe on him through their word. I say therefore, if our Savior had any
thought, of Christians that should suffer from their Brethren, as his Disciples
did from the Jews; I know not where to apply this, but only to them of the
Roman Church. Of them only among Christians he had Occasion to say this. They
shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea when they kill you they shall think
that they do God service.

So that I have a twofold Consideration in these words. First, in relation to
the Jews; and Secondly, to the Romish Christians.

First, in relation to the Jews, Christ said these words immediately to his
Disciples; that the Jews would Excommunicate Them, and Kill them in pure Zeal
for their Religion.

To pursue this in the Method that I propounded at first; First, the Cause of
those Evils which the Jews did to the Apostles, was merely Zeal for their
Traditionary Religion. What their Zeal was, you know, is often spoken in
Scripture. St Paul testifies of them, Romans 10. 2. They had a Zeal, but not
according to Knowledge. They reckoned it Zeal toward God, Acts 22. 3. They
were Zealous of their Law, Acts 21. 20.

But by the Law, they meant chiefly their Customs. So it is explained Acts 6.
13, 14. Those Jews that bore Witness against Stephen, their Witness was, that
He blasphemed against God, and against Moses, Verse. 11. How did it appear? In
the the Thirteenth Verse, He spoke against the holy Place, and the Law. What
did they mean by the Law? Even the Customs which Moses delivered them. No doubt
their Hebrew word was (...) their Cabalistical Rites, their Traditionary
Customs, Quos Moses Tradidit, which Moses delivered by word of Mouth.

That this was their meaning it appears by St. Paul's Explication. Speaking of
himself, what he did when he was a Jew, Gal. 3. 14. Says he, I beyond measure
persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it. A Jew persecute the Church of God?
Wherefore did he do it? He declares what I have said. I was, says he,
exceedingly Zealous for the Traditions of my Fathers. That stuck more with the
Jews, than the Scripture, the Written Law of God. They insisted much less upon
the Law, than upon the Traditions. Yea they called their Traditions, the Law,
as you have heard; and contended for them, as being Essential to Religion.
Says the Apostle, I profited in the Jews Religion above many of my Equals in
my own Nation, being more exceedingly Zealous for the Traditions of my Fathers.

So we have found out the Cause of this Carriage that follows. The Jews Cause
was, the Defense of their Traditions.

Their Carriage it self was, First, to Excommunicate; and Secondly, to Kill,
those that convinced them out of the Written Word of God.

Since their Religion was founded, not on Scripture, but Tradition, in those
Points that were in Controversy between them and the Disciples; The Disciples
not owning, but condemning those Traditions, they looked upon them as Men of
Another Religion, that is, both as Heretics, and Schismatics. And as such, They
put them out of their Synagogues, they cast them out of the Church, they cut
them off by the Sentence of Excommunication.

Even while our Savior lived, they had agreed among themselves, that whosoever
confessed him should be turned out of the Synagogue, Joh. 9. 22.

According to this Agreement, when one born blind, being cured by our Savior,
confessed him; and maintained it, that he that cured him, could be no other but
a Prophet sent from God: They were so moved at this Confession, and so enraged
at him that had received his Sight, (the more enraged, because the matter was
so evident) that, not knowing how at that time to revenge themselves otherwise,
(for the People took Christ for a Prophet, therefore they durst not meddle with
Him;) they fell upon the Poor Man, they took Occasion against him to turn him
out of the Synagogue, John 9. 34.

And the Matter was so notorious, that some that did believe in Christ, yet
durst not confess him, John 12 4. They knew they ought; but they durst not, for
fear of being turned out of the Synagogue.

It Is known to them that are conversant in the Writings of the Jews, that
whenever they had any cut off by their Censures, it was their way to expose
them with Contumelious Names. They called them (...), and (...); that is,
Heretics, and Schismatics.

Secondly, Whom they cast out for a Heretic, or a Schismatic, they looked upon
him as not worthy to live. When St. Paul discovered himself to be a Christian;
they threw off their Clothes, they threw Dust into the Air, they cried, Away
with such a Fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit that he should live, Acts
22. 23. They would have stoned him, if they durst; but that the Roman Governor
was present, as you read there, Verse. 34. By saying, That he ought not to live;
their meaning was, That it was a good deed to kill him; which was the usual
Effect of their total and final Excommunication.

The Effect of it was Killing; with those horrible Circumstances, that, whereas
he that was killed was judged an Enemy of God, he that killed him was
considered as having done God a great piece of Service: which made this much
different from any other kind of Death. He that killed a Man otherwise, knew he
did Murder. He that killed him for God's sake, looked upon it as a Sacrifice:
So far from being an Offense against God, that it rather made amends for all
his other Offenses.

And whereas he that ordinarily kills a Man, seeks nothing more but to be rid
of him as soon as he can; and therefore makes haste to put him out of his Pain;
Those that put Men to Death for Religion, think no Death too severe. Single
Death is not enough: It is too soon over. They will make such a one feel how he
dies. Common Rage is but a blunt Sword, in comparison of that which is whetted
and edged with a Zeal of mistaken Religion.

First, by the Sword of Justice: If the Jews put one to Death for Religion, it
must be done by the Sanhedrim, who were their Judges in Ecclesiastical things.
But the Sanhedrims way of putting. Men to Death was by Stoning* which was a
very Unmerciful Death. St. Stephen felt it. He was thus put to Death for
Religion. And they stoned Stephen calling upon God.

When Herod, that had no such Motive as Religion, was yet pleased for
Popularity to put St. James the Apostle to Death, he only killed him with the
Sword, Acts 12. 2. If the Jews had had the doing of it, it would have been done
at another Rate.

Else, possibly for Haste, or for Concealment, or the like, when they could not
intend those more exquisite Cruelties; and so in those cases where the
Sanhedrim had no power; there they were for destroying by Assassination; as you
read, Acts 23. 12. When St. Paul was so protected by the Magistrate, that they
could not come at him in a Legal Judicial way; then they resolved to
Assassinate him* They bound themselves under a Curse, that they would neither
eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. And they were more than forty of the
Jews that had made this Conspiracy. Those were of the Cannitae, or Zealots, (as
they called them;) Men that took upon them the Cause of God, to avenge him of
his Enemies; whether it were to kill any single Person, or a Family, or a
Nation if they were able to compass it. They stuck at nothing that stood in the
way of their bloody and barbarous Sect, disguised under the mild and sacred
Name of Religion.

I shall not show, nor will it be greatly material to tell you, what Reaks they
played among the Jews, nor what Havoc they made of the Christians of those
times. I have shown you enough of their Way, and of their Principle, which
suits the immediate scope of my Text.

This, together with the rest that I have said, was that measure that the
Apostles of Christ were to expect, and to receive from the Jews, upon the
account of Religion; that is, indeed, of Tradition against Scripture.

But now I come to consider the Time when this Prophecy was to be fulfilled. I
have shown you, that, besides the Completion in that Age, it is as capable to
be extended to any future Age; any Age before the Resurrection; for even That
lies within the reach of these words, Venit Hora, The Hour comes, in my Text.
The Hour comes, says our Savior, when they that are in their Graves shall
hear the Voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth, John 5. 28. The
Notation of that word then, it is plain, is large enough to extend even till
the Resurrection.

And if our Savior spoke this, First, of the Jews in the Apostles times; of
whom should he intend that they will do this in Future Ages? Could he mean this
of the Unbelieving Gentiles? Saint Austin says, No; in his Book Contra Literas
Petiliani. For, says he, They do not use Excommunication; nor, when they kill,
do they think that they do God good service. What then? Could it be said of the
Jews in aftertimes? Much less: For they were in no condition to kill. They
have been killed, in every Age; both by Heathens, and by Merciless Christians.
But for them to kill Christians, it has not been in their Power at any time
since the Destruction of Jerusalem.

Of whom then are we to understand this? If not of Gentiles, nor of Jews, it is
surely meant of some kind of Christians in Future Ages. So the same Saint
Austin does understand it in his Book Contra Epistolam Gaudentii. This, he
says, is to be understood of Heretical Christians. They will be ready to kill
the Orthodox Christians, whenever they have them in their Power.

But how shall we know who are Heretics? We know who they are, that are given
to Kill, among Christians, upon the account of Religion. I dare appeal to
themselves in the Roman Church; whether any, but themselves, either Teach, or
Practice this, among Christians at this present Day.

First, I am sure, for the Cause which these Jews had, they also have it. They
have the same Zeal, that those Jews had, for Unwritten Traditions. And as the
Jews called theirs by the Name of the Law, so the Papists make bold to call
theirs The Unwritten Word of God: So they call it expressly in the fourth
Session of the Council of Trent. All that which they chiefly contend for, is
wholly founded on their Unwritten Traditions.

Run through all those Points that they have added to the true Christian Faith.
What Pretense, or what Color have they for the proof of them? For many, they
do not so much as pretend a word of Scripture. For some they do: But, God
knows, very wretchedly and absurdly. For every one of them, the true Bottom is
nothing else but Unwritten Tradition.

Is there any thing else for seven Sacraments of Christ's Institution? For their
Picturing of God the Father, and of the Trinity? For their Worshipping Images?
For their Denying the Cup to their Laity? For their Doctrine of Purgatory? For
their Indulgences, and the like? The learned Writers among them do acknowledge,
even while they maintain these Traditions, while they endeavor to prove them,
that there is no Proof for these out of Scripture. For all the rest of their
Doctrines, they may have some Color; but they have no manner of Proof for any
of them, but what the Jews had against Christ himself; and as Christ convinced
the Jews, so Our way to convince them is, by Scripture.

But what Return have we for it? First, Excommunication, to be sure. Let any
among themselves argue any thing against their Tradition; Let him offer to name
Scripture against it; Nay, let him own his right to read Scripture; it is enough
to bring him under the Sentence of Excommunication.

As for us that do all this, we are cut off from their Church at one stroke. We
are Excommunicated in a heap. We are Anathematized in Bulla Coenae by his
Holiness, in Passion Week. It Is his Charity to us, at those times, when he most
solemnly betakes himself to remember the Death of Christ in that Sacrament.

And being so Excommunicated, and Accursed by him, as we are; you must not
wonder at the Names which they are pleased to give us. They call us Heretics,
and Schismatics, in their modest Appellations: Yea Infidels, and Atheists,
whenever they please. And whether they do not treat us like such, that comes
next to be considered.

Do I say they treat us like such? No, I know they do much worse. Except at the
first Conquering of the Indies, when the Spaniards killed some Millions, I say
Millions, of that poor miserable People; Except that time, they have dealt more
favorably, always, with Heathens than with us. They kill none, usually, where
they are Masters, but only Heretics. And they killed not even those, as they do
Heretics in those Countries which are wholly under the Dominion of Popery. As
namely, in Spain, and in Italy, in those Parts where they have the Inquisition.
Whosoever, there, sides with Scripture against their Traditions, is no sooner
discovered, but hurried away to Prison; where no Friend is suffered to come at
him, no Relief to come near him, no Hope of better in this World. All which,
taken together, make it Hell upon Earth; and the rather, for from thence there
is no Redemption. Well he may escape by Dying there: But if ever he comes forth,
it is to be burnt.

If one dies there in the Popes Slaughterhouse; or if one escape coming
thither, (which is impossible, but by not being discovered) if he be discovered
after death, they will not allow him Burial. Or if he be buried first, then
they dig up his Body to be burnt.

So that whether one dies in their hands, or no; it is all one, he must be
burnt. There is only this difference: He that dies in their hands, his Body is
not buried, but burnt. He that was buried before he was discovered, he is
dug up to be burnt as soon as he is discovered, though it be twenty or forty
years after.

I could give many undeniable Instances of all that which I have said in this
matter. Few Instances can be given to the contrary, in Spain, or in Italy, in
those parts which are under the Inquisition.

If it is not so in any other Country, yet it was so, even there, when it was
under the full Dominion of Popery. As for instance; in France, a little more
than a hundred years since. In our Kings Dominions, about a hundred and twenty
years since. In the Low Countries, (as Grotius tells us in the first Book of
his Annals) a hundred thousand Men and Women had suffered thus, before ever
Sword was drawn against the Spanish Government. Not to speak of Merindole, and
Cabriers, and Piedmont, and in Austria, and Bohemia, and other Places, where
this Cruelty was exercised so lately, in Countries not under the Full Power of
Popery.

When all was theirs, before the Reformation, it was no where otherwise. How
was it possible it should be? When since the time that it came to be a Practice
of their Church, that all whom they accounted Heretics should be burnt; (that
is since about the year 1200, for then it began) it has been Established by
their Laws both Ecclesiastical and Civil; It has been approved by, and acted
in, their General Councils; It has been taught by their Doctors and Writers; It
has been Enacted, and Prosecuted, and Executed, every thing by the Pope: whose
very Throne is Established, whose Greatness has been built, the Foundations of
it laid, in the Bodies, and the Walls cemented (as I may say) with the Blood of
Orthodox and Innocent Christians.

Where they have not Power to do this, and the color of Law; where the
Government has been against them, or where it has been weakly on their side;
There they have found other ways to do the same thing; by Private Murder; by
Public Assassination; by Open Rebellion; by such Barbarous ways as I should not
mention, for fear of being accounted a Slanderer, but that they are notoriously
known to all the World. And in All these ways, there is none like them, for
Cruelty, among Christians.

There were indeed Assassines among the Heathen Saracens; There are Deruices
among the Turks, and Said among the Moors; Single Persons, or Orders of Men,
that are bloody enough in other Sects: But for a whole Sect to be led by its
Principles, nay even Obliged to shed Blood, I know none like these Traditionary
Christians. The Jews in the Apostles time, to Them, were but Children; Their
Zealots, not to be mentioned with the Jesuits, the Cannites of the Popish
Religion.

They have the same Zeal, that those had, for their Traditions; the same
Diligence to make Proselytes; the same Cruelty to shed Blood. Only what those
acted upon the small Stage of One Country, these do throughout the whole World,
wheresoever they dare, and have opportunity to do it: Whether it is to be done,
by Private Murder, or by Open War; Whether by a Foreign Sword, or by the
Civil; Whether it be upon Subjects, or upon Princes. And in this last thing
indeed, they Outdo the Turks, and the Jews, and all other; That they spare not
their own Princes, where they may hope to advantage their Cause by it.

For the Foreign Sword, they hold it not only Lawful, but Necessary, to be
drawn upon the mere account of Religion. There is no Kingdom in our Europaean
World, but the Pope has given it away upon the account of Religion; No Country
but He has made an Aceldama upon the account of Religion.

His giving Kingdoms indeed, has been, like the Devil's offering them to
Christ; upon Condition, that they to whom he gives them shall fall down and
Worship him. As the Devil offered All, so the Pope has given Many; though they
are none of His Own; Though He had no more Title to any One of them, than the
Devil himself has to All Kingdoms.

The Empire he has given away more than once; France many a time over; England
many and many a time, to those that would Conquer them. And for fear that Prize
should be too little, he has given them Heaven into the Bargain. He has
Commanded them to Conquer those Kingdoms; and that, for the Remission of their
Sins.

Thus he gave Navarre to the Spaniard; who both Conquered it, and holds it to
this Day, under no other Original Title but of the Popes Gift; and that founded
upon No other Right the Pope had to it, but what he has to All Kingdoms.

He knows little of our Story that knows not how he has played with the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland: Sometimes exciting the Foreign Sword;
sometimes stirring up Princes against their Subjects; sometimes Arming the
Subjects against their Prince; sometimes commanding them, and sometimes hiring
them, either to Rebellion, or to Assassination. And in this they exceed the
Turks, and all others; who do bloody things otherwise, but not to their own
Princes; at least, not upon the account of Religion: But to Kill Kings merely
for Religion, I know not one Instance where it was ever done, but for Popery.

Not to insist upon old Stories. Within this last hundred years, there have
been Two Kings of France Stabbed by their own Popish Subjects, but for
Favoring the Protestant Religion; Henry the Third in our Queen Elizabeth's,
and Henry the Fourth in King James's time.

For those Princes themselves, Queen Elizabeth's Life was attempted many times.
She was never out of Danger after the first Eleven years of her Reign; Though
all that time she had not put One to Death of that Religion. Afterward indeed
she did put some of them to Death, to secure her own Life. And knowing it was
Chiefly sought by their Priests, she forbad them to come into her Kingdoms. And
for coming in spite of her, she did sometimes put to Death some few of them;
whom she had cause to judge faulty otherwise. But this Rule she observed, She
never put any One to Death, that would declare under his Hand, That the Pope
had no Power to take away her Life and her Kingdoms.

When King James came in after her, He even Studied to oblige them. He treated
them with all possible Indulgence. He could not presently take away the Laws;
but he put none in Execution against them. He never touched, either the Person,
or the Purse, of any of those whom they call Catholics. He forgave all that
was in Arrrear from them to Queen Elizabeth. He refunded what Money of theirs
he found in the Exchequer. He gave them leave to live at Home, how they
pleased, only peaceably: Or to go Abroad, and Travel, where they pleased,
without Account: Or to take Employment under what Prince they pleased, without
Distinction. He Honored all alike with Advancement and Favor. He Knighted
Many of them; and even One Sir Everard Digby.
that was afterward in this Treason. This Gunpowder-Treason was Encouraged, or
at least Hastened, by those Means.

I speak in the very Words of that King: Says he, King James's Works, page 253.
The Papists themselves grew to that Height of Pride in Confidence of my
Mildness, that they did directly expect, and assuredly promise themselves,
Liberty of Conscience, and Equality with my other Subjects in all other things.

When they found that King James was not for downright Toleration, then they
were for his Blood. Nothing would satisfy them but his Blood: And not only
His, but the Queens, and his Childrens. King James's Works, page 224.
I speak the Words of His MAJESTY'S Proclamation, and of the Act of
Thanksgiving upon this Day: The King, the Queen, the Prince, were all at one
Thunderclap to be sent to Heaven together.

Oh Barbarous, and Horrid, and Execrable Cruelty! How could it enter into the
Hearts of Men, but by the Instigation of the Devil, to do such horrid things as
they had designed! To destroy their own Prince, the Anointed of the Lord; His
Gracious Queen; their Hopeful Children; their whole Parliament with them; and
GOD knows how many more that should come within the reach of that Blow! The
Innocent with the Guilty! Yea, all Innocent; for there were none Guilty of any
thing but the Protestant Religion. And their Religion was according to
Scripture; Only it was against the Popish Traditions, as the Scripture it self
is. The Scripture is against those Popish Traditions. What then? If others do
what Christ and his Apostles did, mu^t they be such Arrant Jews to kill them
for this? Yes, and that with the same color of Duty and Religion. It was
resolved, Thu. Hist. Tom. 4. p. 1206. E. King James's Works, page 503.
To be Lawful, to be Laudable, to be Meritorious; or (as my Text says) a good
Service, an acceptable Sacrifice to God.

I know how they that come afte do endeavor to excuse this; and shall lay open
their Excuses more fully elsewhere. I shall only at this time desire you to
think, what they can say for themselves; and, much more, for the Authors of
this Wickedness.

What they first say, is, That the Authors did not come of themselves, but were
drawn into it. They were indeed led into this Wickedness by their Religion:
They acted according to their Consciences, as the Jews did in Crucifying
Christ. They were drawn in by none but their Spiritual Guides; by their own
High Priest, and their Rulers; by the Pope, and the Governing Clergy.

For the Minister of State whom they Now charge with this; there was no Ground
for such a Charge, but his Vigilance. There was not the least Intimation of any
other in those days. Both they that died, and they that survived, accused none
but themselves, left no shadow of Guilt on any other.

But what then? Were they Rashly drawn into it? Nothing less. It was a
Deliberate Plot. It was begun, and carried on with great Consultation. It was
some Years in Contriving, before it was to be put in Execution.

But it was managed only by a Few Desperate Men, that were thrust upon it with
some great Provocations. That is a second Excuse.

But for the Provocation, take it in the King's own Words: King James's Works,
p. 225.
There was no Foreign Grudge, nor no Inward Whisper, nor Discontent, that was
any way appearing before this Plot.

For their Condition, the chief Actors in it were Men of Great Estates, and
spent many Thousands of Pounds in it, and were able to have spent many more.

For the Number, I believe the Design it self was known to Few: But that there
was a Design, was known to many more. King James himself tells us so: King
James's Works, page 291.
A great Number of my Popish Subjects, of all Ranks and Sorts, both Men and
Women, as well within as without the Country, had a Confused Notion, and
Obscure Knowledge, that some great Thing was to be done in that Parliament for
the Weal of the Church. Though, for Secresies sake, they were not to be
acquainted with the Particulars.

But perhaps those Many were of the more Ignorant sort, that were drawn into it
for want of Knowledge. Nay, they knew as much as they generally care to know.
They understood the mind of their Governors concerning this matter. Their
Spiritual Governors were the Chief Men in it themselves: King James's Works,
p. 273.
Garnet, the very Chief Man, was the Provincial of the Jesuits; and the rest of
his Order were the chief Instigators: Who not only consulted, and contrived,
but formed Prayers for this Purpose; and used them in their several
Congregations for the good Success of this Business. These are again the Words
of King James in his Book Ibid. p. 291.
.

But it will be said, The Catholics ever since have disowned it. I think, and
doubt not, many of them do from their Hearts. But I assure you, it is disowned
by not many of the Governing Party. Some of the Traitors themselves confessed
their Guilt at their Death; Winter, Rockwood, and Digby.
three of them, and no more: The rest justified themselves, and stood in it to
the last. King James's Works, page 291.
Some of them refused to ask any Pardon for it. One of the Jesuits Hall.
said, It would have been Commendable if it had been done. A Lay-Gentleman R.
Winter.
said, (even at his suffering) He hoped their Sons would grow up to Revenge
their Cause. One of them, Grant.
being advised to Repent of that Sin, answered cheerfully, He was satisfied it
was far from being a Sin: Nay, that he trusted, the Merit of that Undertaking
would amply suffice for the Satisfaction of his Sins. Thus they thought.

What others did, it appeared after their Deaths. Some of their Leaders are yet
esteemed no less than Martyrs in their Church. And those Principles by which
they went are yet the very Catholic Doctrines. I know, or believe at least,
they are detested by some Members of that Church: But they are as boldly, and
as strenuously, asserted, by the Head of that Church, and by all the Principal
Members. They do really that, which Christ foretold some would do in future
times, upon the Account of Religion: They will (says he) put you out, etc.

The more evident this is in them, the stronger Motive it should be to us, both
to Zeal for our Religion at all times, and now especially to Thankfulness to
God for this Deliverance.

For our Religion, we know it is from the God of Truth; and theirs, (as far as
it differs from ours) is from the Father of Lies. And they take his way to
maintain it, if Fraud and Violence are of the Devil; which they are, as sure as
Truth and Goodness are of GOD.

Blessed be GOD for our Religion; for giving it, for keeping it from all
Danger, and especially from this. He deserves no other MERCY, that is not
thankful for this.

LORD! We deserve none at all. We deserve nothing but Judgment. We are below
even the least of thy Mercies. It was for thy Mercy sake, for thy own sake,
that thou did this.

Oh, never let it be forgotten in our Days! Never let it be remembered, or
thought of, but with Thanksgiving to our God! And as the highest Motive upon
Earth to those Ways that are pleasing in his sight; To a Zeal for his Truth, to
Love and Unity among our selves, to true Holiness in all our Conversations!

And having this Experience of GOD's Care for his Church in these Kingdoms; let
us learn, by this, to trust him with it on all other Occasions. We have a great
Occasion at present, and GOD knows what we are like to have more. Let us Trust
in Him, that as He has done, so He will still deliver us.

But withal, Let us Keep His Way; and not follow our Adversaries in theirs. It
is properly their Way to Kill Men for Religion: GOD forbid we should follow
them in it! But for those other things in which they give us Example; for Zeal,
and Activity, and Undefatigable Diligence; as they are Theirs in an Ill Cause,
so in a Good they may and ought to be Ours.

And in these, if we cannot outdo them, yet for shame let us not be outdone.
Let us not (as perhaps we are too apt to do) so much rely on our Cause, as to
think that we need not defend it.

Lastly, Let us follow our Endeavors with our Prayers to Almighty GOD;

That being delivered from the Hands of all our Enemies, we may serve Him
without fear:

That having escaped the greatest Cruelty on this side Hell, we may at last
escape that too; And that Living and Dying in the Communion of his Church, we
may be Partakers of his Kingdom in Life Everlasting.

FINIS.

