PAPISTS NO CATHOLICS: AND POPERY NO Christianity.

H B



LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, 1677.

Imprimatur, G. JANE, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sac. dom. Jan. 10. 1676/7.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THe Council of Trent, confirmed by the Pope, is the Chief Oracle of the Church
of Rome: From it she receives all Doctrines necessary to be believed unto
Salvation; Romish Catholics hold it for a principle, That whatsoever is
delivered therein for Doctrine, is an Article of Faith; and must steadfastly be
believed, upon pain of Damnation: He that does not, is pronounced an Heretic,
and is made liable to their supposed Curse. What little reason there is, that
Papists should yield such blind obedience to that Council, may appear by this
plain and true Testimony, which was given thereunto by a Bishop, an eminent
member of that Church and Council, who was present thereat; which is as
follows.

ANDREAS DVDITHIVS Bishop of Quinquecclesisiae, Quinquecclesiae is a City in
Hungary, called in German Funskirchin, in Turkish Peri(...)hen or Petschen.
and Ambassador in the Council of Trent, for Maximilian II. Emperor: In an
Epistle to the said Emperor (wherein he delivers his Judgment about granting
the Cup to the Laity, and the Marriage of Priests) writes thus of the Council
of Trent:
WHat good could be done in that Council, where voices were taken by number not
by weight? If argument, if reason, might have prevailed, if we had had some,
and those not many, to take part with us, though we should have been but a few,
yet had we overthrown the great forces of our Adversaries: But when all stood
upon number, wherein we were much inferior, we could not get the better, the
Pope was able to set an hundred of his against every one of ours: And if an
hundred were not sufficient, he could upon a sudden have created a thousand to
succor them that were ready to faint and perish. Therefore we might see every
day hungry and needy Bishops, and those for the most part beardless yonkers,
and wastfully riotous, come in flocks to Trent, hired to give their voices
according to the Popes humor: unlearned indeed, and foolish, but of good use
to him for their audaciousness and impudency. When these fellows were joined to
the Popes old flatterers, then Iniquity got the upper hand and triumphed:
neither could any thing be decreed but according to their liking who thought it
the highest point of Religion to defend the power and riot of the Pope. There
was in the Council a grave and learned man, who could not endure this
indignity; but the Council by terror threatening and baiting him, as one that
was (...) good Catholic, drew him to yield to that which he did no way like
of. In a word, things are brought to that pass by their dishonesty who came
thither prepared and made for the nonce, that it seemed to be a Council not of
Bishops but of Puppies; not of Men but of Images, who (as it is reported of
Daedalus statues) were moved not by their own, but by other men's nerves and
muscles. Those hireling Bishops most of them were like Country Bag-pipes, which
must have breath blown into them before they can sound. The Holy Ghost had
nothing to do with that Conventicle all things were argued by humane policy,
which was wholly employed in maintaining the immoderate, and indeed most
shameless Lordship and Domination of the Popes. From thence were Answers looked
and waited for, as it were from the Oracles of Delphos or Dodona* From thence
the Holy Ghost, who (as they brag) is President of their Council, was sent shut
up in the Carriers budgets and packs, who (a thing worthy to be laughed at) when
the waters were up (as it falls out many times) was fain to stay till they were
down again before he could repair to the Council.

By this it came to pass that the Spirit was not carried upon the waters, as in
Genesis, but along beside the waters. O monstrous and incredible madness!
nothing that the Bishops, as it were the body of the Church resolved of, could
be of any force, unless it came first from the Pope as the head of the body.

The Popish Faith is Pius Quartus his Creed at Trent, so that we may justly
demand of Papists, where was their Religion before Trent, which was since
Luther?
HAS not the Church of Rome the Lords Prayer? Object.


Yes: except the Doxology. Ans.


Wherein does she differ from the Reformed Church in that great Duty of Prayer?
Object.


The Reformed Church places the virtue of Prayer in Faith, Ans.
grounded upon the Promise of God.

But the Romish Religion confines the virtue of Prayer to several repetitions
of the same words by count, and in a Language the people understand not. Popish
abuse of Lords Prayer.
And that if one Pater Noster or Ave Maria be neglected once, and the
prescribed number be not fully completed, then all the merit of that Prayer is
lost. Which is as scandalously opposite, as if it were done in a mere despite
against the express order of the great Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, especially from the 13. to the 17. verse. Whereas their own
Aquinas and Lyra both confess, that the common Service of the Church in the
Primitive times, was in the common Language, and the Christians of Dalmatia,
Habassia, Armenia, Muscovia, Russia, and the Reformed parts of Christendom have
the service of God in their vulgar tongue.

Has not the Church of Rome the Creed? Obj.


Yes: Ans.
But their Popes have besides at Trent coined a great number of new Articles of
Faith, the Author to the Preface to Bishop Jewels works, 2. Of the Creed
and Doctor Sharp's Looking-glass for the Pope, page 271. reduces them to 12.
and published by Pius Quartus, with straight charge to be received of all men
upon peril of Salvation. Nor does the Pope only dare to make and impose new
Articles of Faith upon the People; but most impiously to detract from, and
alter the very X Commandments of the Lord Jehovah. Witness their Decalogue so
often published by the Church of Rome, which is as follows. 3. Of the Dec(...)
[1.] I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but me. [2.] Thou
shall not take the name of God in vain. [3.] Remember to sanctify the Sabbath
day. [4.] Honor thy Father and Mother. [5.] Thou shall not kill. [6.] Thou
shall not commit adultery. [7.] Thou shall not steal. [8.] Thou shall not bear
false witness. [9.] Thou shall not desire thy neighbors wife. [10.] Thou shall
not desire thy neighbors goods. Wherein the second Commandment is not only
left out, (as it is usually in their Psalm-books and Catechisms) because it
perfectly condemns their Idolatry: But they divide the tenth Commandment into
two; whereas the holy Ghost foreseeing the Abominations of Antichrist in the
last days, was pleased (by way of anticipation) to place Thou shall not covet
thy neighbors house, before that of Thy neighbors wife [in Exodus] and in the
fifth of Deuteronomy, in the tenth Commandment thereto place thy neighbors
wife [first] before thy neighbors house; so that the Bibles printed among
themselves, will condemn them of horrible wickedness therein.

Does not the Romish Church allow the reading of the Scripture? Obj.


Wheresoever the Pope rules absolutely, Ans.
he forbids the people to read the Holy Scripture: and in the Index of
prohibited Books made by the Council of Trent, 4. Of the Holy Scriptures.
and approved of by the said Pius Quartus, it is expressly declared, That if the
Holy Bible were allowed to all indifferently in the Vulgar Tongue, there would
come more hurt than good of it. This is an express and direct opposition to our
Lord Jesus Christ, who says to all indifferently, Search the Scriptures for in
them you think to have eternal life; and they are they that testify of me. And
to his holy Apostles, who address their Epistle not only to Bishops, but also
to all those that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, and not only to men,
but also to women, young folk, and children, adjuring them by the Lord, that
they be read to all the holy brethren. Whence we argue thus, All who forbid
Christian people to read the holy Scripture, do directly and formally oppose
Jesus Christ and his holy Apostles: But the Pope and his Creatures forbid
Christians to read the holy Scriptures, therefore they directly and formally
oppose Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

But does not the Church of Rome own the holy Scripture to be the word of God?

Nevertheless she has falsified and corrupted it in many places. As for
example, in Heb. 11.21. It is said, that Jacob worshipped, leaning upon the top
of his staff, but the Romish Bible says, that Jacob worshipped the top of his
staff, thereby to confirm the adoration of creatures, which is the same abuse
which is found in Psalm. 132. where David says, worship at his footstool, the
Romish Bible says, worship his footstool. Jesus Christ when he gave the Cup,
said, This Cup is the New Testament of my blood, which is shed for you; but the
Romish Bible reads it, which shall be shed for you, left it might be perceived
that Jesus Christ speaks of the effusion of his Sacramental blood: For he did
not then really shed his blood, which he began to shed in his passion. In Genesis
3.15. God says, that the seed of the woman (which is Jesus Christ) shall bruise
the serpents bead: The Romish translation says, The woman shall bruise the
serpents head: attributing that to the Virgin Mary which belongs to Christ. To
establish the uncertainty of salvation, the vulgar translation reads the first
verse of Eccles. 9. thus, man knows not whether he be worthy of love or hatred,
but all things are reserved in uncertainty for the future. But the Hebrew Text
is this, No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before them. To
establish man's merit, the Romish Bible corrupts the 13. verse of Heb. 16. And
to the same purpose they have curtailed the 6. verse of Romans 11. leaving out
two links for these words of the Apostle, ( If it be of Works, then it is no
more of Grace, otherwise work is no more work) are rased out, and omitted in
their vulgar translation. A great collection might be made of many other
passages, and of Romes enormities in her like practices.

Yet is not the Church of Rome the mother and mistress of all Churches?

No, For the preaching of Christ was to begin at Jerusalem in the Prophecy of
Isaiah 2.2. Mic. 4.2. and in the completion in Luke 24.47. (...) abuse of
(...)uity.
Nor was it Rome but Antioch in which the Disciples were first called
Christians. Act. 11.26. So there was a Church at Antioch before there was one
at Rome. And it is expressly affirmed by Gildas an Author very much revered by
the Romanists themselves, that Christianity was in Britain in the latter time
of Tiberius Caesar, and it is known St. Peter remained in Jury some time after
his death, so that Rome, which pretends to be a Mother Church, could be no more
at best (when she was Christian indeed) than a Sister Church, and not the
eldest Sister neither. And as for the pretended Universality of the Roman,
(...)e no Mother (...)e eldest sister (...) neither.
that is to say, of a particular Church, it began with Boniface the third,
whose vile compliance with Phocas (that Heretic and murderer of Mauritius
their Master and Emperor) was both the bribe and price that bought that Title,
and not out of respect to the Pope, but in displeasure to Cyriacus of
Constantinople, who from John his predecessor, had first usurped that Title of
Universal Bishop: So that Gregory the Great of Rome, writing to Mauritius,
touching the name of Universal, which the said Bishop of Constantinople had
taken unto himself, calls it a wicked, profane, and blasphemous Title, a Title
importing that the times of Antichrist were at hand, little thinking that Pope
Boniface after his decease, would presently usurp the same, and prove the Pope
to be Antichrist by the confession of a Pope. And have not the successors of
that heretical traitorous bloody Boniface exactly followed his steps to this
present age?

Beside, if we look back to the beginning, we find that Paul was equal at least
to Peter, when he withstood him to the face, and rebuked him in public for his
dissimulation, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. Nay St. Peter as well as James and John,
who were his peers, perceiving the grace that was given to Paul, gave to Paul
and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, Gal. 2.9, and good reason, for Peter
was but one of the many Apostles of the Jews, whereas Paul was much more the
great Apostle of the Gentiles, to whom the Jews were no more than a river to
the ocean. Moreover, Cyprian positively affirms, the Apostles were every one of
equal authority; and St. Jerome is as express, That all Bishops in all places,
whether at Rome, Constantinople, Rhegium, or Eugubium, are of the same merit as
to the quality of their office, though they may differ in point of revenue.
Nay, by the Canons of the two first general Councils, Nice and Constantinople,
every Patriarch and Bishop is appointed to be chief in his proper Diocese. And
a strict Injunction is laid on all (none excepted) that they presume not to
meddle in any Diocese but their own. And the very primacies of order were
granted to Rome and Constantinople, not for their being* Sees of such or such
an Apostle, but for being the two seats of the two great Empires.

Did not the Church of England first depart from the Church of Rome? Obj.


They of Rome by their excommunications and barbarous murders and hostilities,
Ans.
properly first departed from us, separating from the primitive Church of
Christ, and we then made a secession, that we might not be partaker of their
Schism and Heresies.

What difference is there between the Reformed Church and the Church of Rome?
Obj.


They are very many, I shall only hint some; as first, Ans.
The Reformed Church gives addresses which may be followed, and exhorts men to
study, Papists the first Separatists.
and strives to instruct them in the holy Scripture, and conceals nothing from
the people: But the Church of Rome endeavors to keep the people in ignorance,
especially in the business of Religion, and therefore forbids them the use of
the Scriptures, giving them service in an unknown tongue, amusing them with
Images, exterior ornaments, and addresses the people to where they know
nothing, giving them undiscernable marks, as the succession of Chairs, whereof
some are more ancient than that of Rome: and their successions imbroiled with
many interruptions and contradictions in History.

The Ministers of the Reformed Church will be judged by the word of God, but
the Priests of the Romish Church will be judges of the word of God, Popish
guiltine(...)
which argues their guilt; for when they are accused of Heresies and
Blasphemies, they will be themselves judge of this question, and consequently
will be both judge and party.

The Protestant Ministers have a charge and calling, Protestant Ministers have
a calling, Popish P(...) have no calling
the institution whereof is found in the holy Scripture, for the word of God
speaks oftentimes of Pastors, Doctors and Ministers. This being as clear as the
day, the calling of the Priests of Rome falls necessarily to the ground, and is
of no use; for in the Ordination of their Priests, they are not charged to
preach the Gospel: But they are expressly established to be sacrifiers of the
body of Jesus Christ, which is an Imaginary Charge, never established by Jesus
Christ, nor practiced by the Apostles, and whereof there is not any one word in
all the New Testament. And yet, these are they which question others concerning
their Calling, whereas there is not any word of the sacrifiers of the body of
Christ.

The Reformed Church in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, endeavors to raise up
man's heart to Jesus Christ which is in heaven: But that of Rome abaseth Jesus
Christ, and puts him into the hands of men, they make their breaden God, adore,
and then eat him up: And according to their doctrine, Christ did eat his whole
self, and drink his own body, for they will have the body to be in the Cup,
which is highly scandalous both to Jews and Turks.

And note, in all sacrifices that which is offered must be consecrated; Popish
Mass n(...)
and they pretend to sacrifice the body of our Savior, which cannot be
consecrated: For who can consecrate the Son of God, who is he alone that does
consecrate us. So then the sacrifice of the Mass does in this appear to be null.

And as to their Objection, Take eat, this is my body? It must be either cibus
animae vel corporis; if bodily food, how can it nourish the soul? if spiritual,
how can it enter into the body? Besides, Deus non potest facere qua naturae
suae sunt contraria. Now Ambrose resolves this with us, and says, That Corpus
nutritur pane symbolice, anima vero corpore Christi. Which agrees with the
whole scope of the Scripture, speaking of it every where in a spiritual sense
and ^^guratively.

(...)r Sacrament (...).
Moreover, if Christ's Body be really present in the Sacrament, as Papists
affirm, where is the outward visible sign? And the Institution of the Eucharist
being but to last usque quo venerit, until I come. If Christ be really,
corporeally and substantially present in the Sacrament, as the Church of Rome
teaches her creatures to believe upon pain of damnation; their
Transubstantiation is a mere cheat, for the Sacrament then cease.

The Council of Trent also determined, that there are neither more or less, but
just seven Sacraments: whereas instead of seven the Romish Church has
thirteen: For themselves say, That the Sacrament which they call Orders, is
subdivided into seven, which have each of them a particular form, and different
Ceremonies: Vid. The Porters, Readers, Conjurers, Acolytes, Subdeacons, Deacons
and Priests. But let them justify (if they can) their seven or thirteen
pretended Sacraments: In the mean time, the Reformed Church does as clearly as
the Sun evidence that there are but two, and that these two are sufficient,
seeing one of them, (which is Baptism) is the Sacrament of our spiritual birth,
and entrance into the Church. And the other (which is the Eucharist) is the
Sacrament of our nourishment and growth, until we attain unto the measure of
the perfect stature of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Besides, (...)ish Religion (...)hes vice and
The Reformed Church has no Rules which teach Vice: But the Romish Religion
has many Rules which teach to disobey God in doing evil. Such is the Rule of
the Council of Constance, That no faith is to be kept with Heretics. Such is
the Doctrine which says, The Pope may dispense with Oaths and Vows; i. t. may
give a man leave to forswear himself, and not make good what he has promised
to God. Such is the disobedience of Children to their Parents, authorized by
the Church of Rome, when a child enters into a Monastery or Nunnery against his
or her Fathers will. Such is the allowance of Bawdy-houses, for which the Pope
receives a Tribute out of Rome it self. Such is the revolting of Subjects
against their Prince, when the Pope dispenses with them for the allegiance
they have sworn to their King. Such are the Taxes in the Popes Chancery,
wherein Letters for absolution are given for every sin at a certain price: But
offenses done against the Pope are always rated higher then sins against God.
Such is their calling Marriage a great Sacrament, (...)ish abuse of (...)riage.
(...)heir abuse of Civil Law.
that it might appertain to the Church: and thus take from secular Judges the
cognizance of cases matrimonial. Such is the order of Canonists and
Scholasticks, which they have set up against the power of the Civil Law, which
anciently maintained the power of the Emperor and Princes, and they have
confirmed those Canonists and their Decretals to be unquestionable, thus as
much as in them lies to annihilate the authority of the holy Scriptures. Such
are their plae frauds, pia mendacia, their aequivocations, their godly deceits
and lies as are made and told for the advancement of Religion and to stir up
Devotion. Hence they belly their Adversaries in their Lives, (...)ish lies.
Doctrine and Deaths, as we know in Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bishop King and
others. Hence they counterfeit false Fathers, and by their Index Expurgatorius,
make the true ones speak as they list: and thrust thousands of lies on the poor
people, as the history of Loretto, the Dalmatian Priest, who having his bowels
plucked out of his body by the Turks, took his guts in his hand (if we will
believe it) and went many days to Loretto, and there was cured. They also abuse
the credulous people by their Legends in Latin, English, and other Languages,
That the power of St. Patricks prayer (as they write) made a sheep bleat in the
belly of him that stole it; and of an Heretic who was converted by seeing St.
Anthonies horse worship the Host: with innumerable like ridiculous fopperies.

Obj. But may not bad actions happen in a good Religion?


Ans. This of the Church of Rome is not only a malady of manners, and these
examples are not only bad actions, but they are prescribed Laws and public
Rules, which cannot consist with the Doctrine of Salvation.


Obj. But do not Protestants hold a Papist may be saved?


Ans. We say as a man that has the Plague may live, but not by the Plague;
Whether a Papist may be saved?
so Popery being the bane of Christianity, and enmity to man's salvation, those
that are saved among them, must be saved from Popery, not by it: As famous
Bishop Jewel, ( Def. Apol. Par. c. 22. Div. 1.) says, If we should content our
selves to turn to the Pope and to his errors, we should kindle Gods wrath
against us, and clog and condemn our souls for ever. And in another place he
says, so the case stood, that unless we left the Pope, we could not come to
Christ. And Doctor Broughton, God can save a man at the last; but, as Gods word
is infallible, so, said he, if a man lives and dies in the faith of all the
Articles of the Council of Trent, he cannot be saved.

Doctor Reynolds, another shining light of the University of Oxford, in his
Verses upon the third Conclusion handled in the Schools November 3. 1579.
says, If that ye seek eternal life, see that you Rome forsake.

Doctor Whitaker, a man for his learning and judgment approved of the Churches
of Christ abroad, and of this of England. We say, says he, that the Church of
Rome must be forsaken of all men that desire to be saved. And a little after he
adds, That there can be no salvation hoped for in the Church of Rome. D.
Whitaker de Eccles. cont. qu. 6. cap. 1.

Mr. Perkins in his Reformed Cathol* in the Prolog. Sect. says, That all those
that will be saved, must depart and separate from the Faith and Religion of the
present Church of Rome: He also writ a Treatise to prove a Papist cannot go
beyond a Reprobate; the same do all Protestants affirm of all those in whom
Popery is predominant practically, and overcomes Christianity.

Here is the Judgment of those Learned Divines, and therein the consent of both
the Universities, Oxford and Cambridge; For their Books, especially the three
last, were allowed for Printing by the Principal Doctors of the several
Universities then Resident in them: Nor is it to be taken for the Judgment of
the Universities only, but also of the whole Church; as it appears evidently by
the continuance of it from time to time in the writings of those famous learned
men, successively one after another. It was diverse years proclaimed openly in
the Public Schools by Dr. Reynolds, ratified afterward by Dr. Whitaker in his
Public Lectures of Divinity, and confirmed by Mr. Perkins, and by every one of
these published in print, with the approbation of our Church and State. And
this has been the judgment and practice of the Churches of God in all
Protestant Countries for the space of more then an hundred years, to declare
and testify our separation from the Church of Rome in respect of Faith and
Religion, to be a matter of absolute necessity: especially if we consider, that
every Parish throughout the whole Land is enjoined to have the Book of Bishop
Jewel, with the rest of his works in their several Churches for all men to
read, and that they were all new printed to that end.


Obj. Though that might be the Judgment of the Church of England in this case;
yet what is the sentiment of the Church of Ireland of the Religion of the
Church of Rome?


Ans. Doctor Downham Bishop of Londonderry, in his Sermon Preached before the
Lord Deputy of Ireland, and the whole State, April 22. Anno 1627. having taken
for his Text, Luke 1. 74. In the midst of his Sermon, openly read the
Protestation subscribed by the Archbishop, and all the Bishops of that Kingdom.
That

1. The Religion of the Papists, i. e. of Rome, is Superstitious and Idolatrous.

2. Their Faith and Doctrine Erroneous and Heretical.

3. Their Church in respect of both Apostatical.

To sell them therefore a Toleration, is to set Religion to sale, and with that
their Souls, which Christ redeemed with his precious blood.

To give them Toleration, is to make our selves accessory to their
Abominations, and to the damnation of their Souls.


Obj. Has not the Church of Rome the testimony of the Fathers on her behalf?


Ans. I shall answer this concerning Rome as contradistinct from the Reformed
Churches of Christ, with the saying of a worthy Divine, That Roma nihil aliud
quam vitia Patrum retinet; Rome retains nothing but the errors of the Fathers.


Obj. But has not the Church of Rome had a long continued peace and
prosperity, whereas the Reformed Churches have been still most of them in
troubles and afflictions?


Ans. It Is true, the Church of Christ is sometimes fluctuant as the Ark of
Noah, sometimes moveable as the Ark in the Wilderness, and sometimes at rest as
the Ark in the Temple. In persecution removes in peace, having this Motto,
Premimur non opprimimum* But the Popish Church though she says in her heart, I
sit a Queen and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, therefore shall her
plagues come in one day, death, mourning and famine, Romes destruction.
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord God who
judges her. As she has fallen culpably, so shall she fall penally, like that
of Jericho, which can never be re-edified, as Sybilla long since foretold; Tota
eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. When the Wars began in Germany,
Anno 1619. A massy stone fell down upon a great brass Image of St. Peter, that
had Tu es Petrus, etc. fairly embossed upon it, standing in St. Peter's Church
in Rome, and so shattered it to pieces, that not a letter of that sentence
(whereon Rome founds her claim) was left whole to be read, saving this one
piece of the sentence, aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, I will build my Church. This
was left fair and entire.


Obj. But are not those of the Church of Rome true Catholics?


Ans. Papists no true Catholics.
Christians were termed Catholics, ex obedientiae omnium mandatorum Dei: From
their Obedience to the whole Faith of Christ in Doctrine and Manners: And he
that wilfully offends in one, is guilty of all; and therefore they that through
nesarious pride forsake and contumeliously reject, or profanely alter any
point of the Orthodoxal Faith, or audaciously add any thing thereunto, are not
to be reputed Catholics but rather Antichrists.


Obj. Wherein does the Church of Rome directly contradict, oppose or alter the
express word of God?


Ans. In many more particulars, I shall instance a few.

Papish gross Idolatry.
First, They worship Angels, contrary to the express prohibition of Saint Paul,
Col. 11. 2.

Secondly, They adore the Cross, and the figure of it, with adoration of
Latria, (which is the term whereby the sovereign Adoration, wherewith they
adore God, is expressed; which is directly and formally against the express
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve.

Thirdly, They make graven Images; and resemblances of things in Heaven, and
bow down to them, and worship them; beside they make Images of God himself, and
represent him both in carved work and painting, which are used in their
Churches, and are received almost everywhere, as Bellarmin confesses in lib.
2. of Images, c. 8. And is not this contrary to this Law which God himself
uttered with his own mouth, and wrote with his own finger; Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven
above, thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; and also contrary to
what God expressly forbids in Deuteronomy. 4. and Isay, chap. 40. And this they
audaciously do, notwithstanding the penalty that is added to such: Vid.
Confounded be all they that worship carved Images, Psalm 97. 7.

Fourthly, Popish presumptions and impudencies.
The Romish Church commands (under pretense of Religion) on certain days to
abstain from certain meats, and forbids Marriage to Priests, and thus directly
opposes St. Paul, and expressly teaches what this great Apostle calls a doctrine
of devils, Col. 2. 2 Cor. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.

Fifthly, The Popish Church professes to believe that Jesus Christ is on earth
in respect of his humane nature, which is contrary to what he himself says in
St. John chapter 18. and 16. and contrary to the express words of St. Peter, Acts
3. That the Heaven must receive him, until the times of the restitution of all
things.

Sixthly, The Romish Church teaches that Christ is offered often in the
Sacrament of the Ma's, which directly contradicts the Apostle, who expressly
says, and without exception, That he is not offered often.

Seventhly, Papists teach the Mass is an unbloody sacrifice, and yet
propitiatory for the remission of the sins of the quick and dead; which
directly opposes the Apostle, who says in express words, without shedding of
blood there is no remission. And where there is remission of sins, there is no
more offering for sin, but in the sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered to God
on the Cross, there is remission of sin, therefore there is no more offering
for sin, and consequently it is false that the Mass is an offering for sin, and
a propitiatory sacrifice.

Eighthly, Our Lord Jesus Christ in the Institution of his holy Supper,
presents the Cup to all those to whom he had distributed the bread, saying to
them, Drink ye all of this, etc. But the Church of Rome forbids the people the
use of the Cup of the Lord, and therefore directly and formally opposes our
Lord Christ, and his Apostle St. Paul, who ordains in express words, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him drink of that Cup.

Papists believe and teach that the Souls of those that dye in the Lord, are
tormented after this life in a fire which they call Purgatory, Popish
blasphemies*
which is directly contrary to the Holy Ghost, who declares in express terms,
that Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them;
and against the express words of the book of Wisdom (which was Canonized by
Trent Council) The souls of the just are in the hand of God, and no torment
shall touch them.

The Popish Church ordains a prodigious number of Festivals, Colos. 2. Gal. 4.9
10, 11.
against the express clause of that Law which the Sovereign Lawgiver has
given. Six days shall thou labor; whence we argue thus, Whosoever forbids
people to work six days of the week on pain of a mortal sin, does manifestly
set himself above God, who expressly permits us to work six days: But the Pope
and his Prelates do forbid people to work six days of the week on pain of a
mortal sin. Therefore the Pope and his Prelates do manifestly set themselves
above God.

Papists say that the works of regenerate men are Christ's works in them, not
their own, and as Christ's they save, and so are saved by Christ's merits:
Whereas St. Paul says, we are not saved by such works as God has ordained
regenerate men should walk in, Ephesians. 2.10. And St. Paul opposes all works done
in matter of Justification and Salvation to the Grace of Christ, Romans 11.6.
Phil. 3.8. Romans 3. 27.

This their finest web being so clearly cut in sunder by those plain texts,
they grossly dare avouch and teach, that a man is saved by works, and can merit
the eternal felicity of Heaven, and degrees of glory and bliss, and thus
directly fight against the doctrine of the Son of God, and of his blessed
Apostles, Luke 17. When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded
you, say we are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to
do. And Ephesians. 2. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. And in
Romans 6.11. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And if it be by grace, then it is no more of
works, otherwise grace is no more grace; but if it be of works, then it is no
more of grace, otherwise work is no more work.

And thus Papists works become not only unprofitable unto them, but plainly
damnable, yea and blasphemous, because they ruinate the very foundation of our
faith, and make frustrate the all and alone sufficient sacrifice of our
Redemption, viz. the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Shall we then call those Catholics, Papists no true Christians.
or think such men believe in Christ, and are Christians indeed? when St.
Ambrose says, Non videtur ab his exhiberi fides Christo, a quibus evacuatur
passio ejus, atque distrahitur. It seems not that such men do believe in
Christ, who go about to frustrate and distract his passion.


Obj. Is not then a Papist a true Christian?


Ans. No. Qua^ Papist. But as a thief is a true man in regard of his essence,
as he is a creature endued with reason, but not a true man in regard of his
honesty or goodness: So the Popish Church is a true Church, in regard of the
essence of a Church, (as a Church is a company which profess Christ and are
baptized) but it is a false Church in respect of its heretical doctrine.


Obj. But can a man belong to the visible Church of Christ, and to the
Synagogue of Satan?


Ans. They maybe of the visible Church in regard of some part of their outward
profession, who in regard of their inward disposition of mind, and of their
external conversation, yea and of the greatest part of their outward profession
also, are hateful unto God, and execrable in the eyes of the founder part of
the visible Church of Christ. So may a legion of devils incarnated, if they
will profess the name of Christ, and be admitted by the Baptism of Christ, may
be of the visible Church: so was Judas an Apostle and a traitor too, but the
more wretched because an Apostle. So the Pope pretends to be the Vicar of
Christ, though his enemy, and the more wicked, because he pretends to be
Christ's Vicar. So the Church of Rome is a Church, and the Pope Antichrist who
has impudently pearched, and with all ungodliness erected his seat therein. As
the Scripture teaches us that Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God: But it
is not possible that such should belong to the mystical Church, which is the
whole Company of Gods Elect in Heaven, Earth, and not yet born* In which
Invisible or Universal Church alone is Salvation: Because that only consists of
the true Servants of Christ's, and such as are Christians indeed.


Obj. But what is the main difference betwixt Christianity and Popery?


Ans. The difference between Christianity and Popery.
Christian Religion does most honor God, and most humble man; but the sum of
Popery is to disenthrone God, and to deifie man.


Obj. Wherein does Popery principally consist?


Ans. In merit, mediation, satisfaction, supererogation, and pardon, which is
an humane invented Religion, or an Antichristian superstructure, to undermine,
and as much as possible, to overthrow all that is truly Christian.

This Popery, the very word of a Mediator, does sufficiently refute; for if a
man can merit, mediate, satisfy, supererogate, pardon, and do all himself,
what needs he either Savior or Mediator?

Beside, the Holy Scripture gives us a general Rule, which is alone sufficient
to make us reject the Mass, Purgatory, Papal Indulgences, Invocation of Saints,
Veneration of Relics, Adoration of Crosses, and all Humane Invented
Traditions. For it tells us, That they worship God in vain, who teach for
doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 5.9. and to such as add or detract
from Gods commandments, Cursed be he that adds or detracteth from the least
of these sayings, Rev. 22.

And to such as create new Articles of Faith, praeter quam or contra quam,
beside or contrary to the doctrine of the Scripture; if an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel then that you have received, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.8.


Obj. How came this Popery to be so greatly confirmed?


Ans. To establish this mock Religion or cheat upon Christianity, Popery a
cheat upon Christianity.
the Popes at last forged that Council or rather Conventicle of Trent; and
there added numbers of new Articles of Faith, having these Pillars to prop her
sandy foundation, viz. allurements, and all vainglorious enchanting
enticements on the one hand; and all manner of prodigious tortures by fire,
sword, etc. on the other. Trent for Romes last support, was forced to borrow of
Lucifer his main engines, and for executioners the Jesuits and the prati de
l'inferni, as they are termed in Spain, i.e. The holy Fathers of the horrid
Inquisition, these are the perpetrators of Romes bloody Bulls.

This Popery is that which is generally preached in Spain, Italy, etc. [vide
Sands Survey of the Western Religion] and seldom is Christianity, except on
certain days, and then with that mixture of Popish vanities, enough to destroy
the good seed of the Gospel of Christ. For refusing and denying this Trentine
Popery (but for denying nothing of Christianity) have so many thousands of
Orthodox Christians been massacred, drowned, burned, in all parts of Europe, by
that Antichristian Romish Hierarchy.


Obj. How is it that the World could be so long deceived by Rome?


Ans. Because the Lambs horns were upon the head of Antichrist, and if a
Traitor carry the colors of a Prince in War, all the common Soldiers stock to
him, and fight under his Banner, till the Traitor be known and the Treason be
discovered. So the Popes of Rome pretending the common principles of Faith and
Manners, and giving themselves out to be colour-bearers to Jesus Christ,
without which they could not so easily have insinuated themselves into the
hearts of the world, most of the Western Churches, whom they had wrought by
policy and power, flocked unto them: But when their pretenses were discovered,
and we would no longer take their parts against Christ, then the Popes made a
faction and head against us in that Council of Trent, and Excommunicated us, as
if it were our fault that would not drink their poison, and not theirs who were
so traiterous and wicked to force it upon us.


Obj. What are the marks of Antichristian Papists?


Ans. They are such as have their heads and hearts poisoned, The marks of
Popish Antichristians
rejecting the word of God, and taking pleasure in falsehood, which is
manifested two ways: First, by an over-eager pursuit of the things of
Antichrist without examination; as if they should say, we will be thus, because
we will be thus, doting upon a spirit of Infallibility: Secondly, by cruel
killing and sacrificing all opposers with fire and sword, (Idolatry being
naturally cruel) of such the Apostle says, They shall be damned.


Obj. Have all Papists been and shall be damned?


Ans. When the Church was low in the eyes of the world, then as God gave his
people less, so he required less at their hands, and such as had the knowledge
of the Belief, the Ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments,
these being speciously in the Church of Rome (though with hideous corruptions,
as is beforementioned) and having hearts willing to be informed in the truth,
when our provident God should offer opportunities, with purposes and endeavors
to know and do aright, and holy obedience to what was known, and being
ignorant, or at least not so fully stated in the pernicious errors of the
Popish corruptions, though they have been in that Church, yet were not of it,
as many of our Fathers from age to age have been. Such in these qualifications
might be saved, but such are not acknowledged by the Pope to be right
Catholics. Marks to know Christian Catholics from Roman Catholics.


Here note Gods power and faithfulness in all Ages, in singling out his
servants in the very tents of Antichrist, and delivering them from the power of
hell and darkness* But such as worship the Beast and his Image, and are in
inward fellowship and mystery with him, being by wilfulness and resolution as
it were embowelled in that state. Of such the Holy Ghost says, They shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God. These latter only are owned by the Pope
to be his true Catholics, and not the former.

You may here see the difference between the ancient Christian Catholics, and
the new Roman Catholics, and withal consider how vigilant and careful Satan
is to distinguish and appropriate his own Vassals, that they may also partake
with him of his just reward.


Obj. But do not Papists believe in Christ, and hold it the surest way to put
their confidence in God for Salvation?


Ans. Yes, but withal that men may put their confidence also in their own and
in other men's works; Bellar. 5. c. 7. de Justificat. And by this confidence in
the creature, they presently overturn all true confidence in the Creator.
Beside they teach, that we must not only believe but apply to our selves the
promise of everlasting life. Popish deceits.
But mark the deceit in applying all, for this must not be done, say they, by
Faith assuring us of our Salvation, but only by hope in likelihood and
conjectural.

Here you may see that great point in the Mystery of Iniquity, for by this
wavering hope and uncertain application of the promise of Salvation to our
selves, they overturn half the doctrine of the Gospel, for as in colored words
they seem to agree with the true Christian Church in the doctrine of Faith; so
indeed they deny and abolish the substance thereof, that is, the particular and
certain application of Christ crucified unto our selves.


Obj. How then do Papists believe the Truths of Faith?


Ans. Papists believe the truths of Faith not distinctly in themselves, but in
their common principle, wherein all things to be in this manner believed are
(as they hold) contained, and that not so much to be the holy Scriptures, but
absolutely their Church. Now their Church to affirm it self, cries up their
traditions, and these (not Gods word) do they give for the Rule of their
creatures, and yet these Traditions must stand and fall at the pleasure of the
Pope.

Thus their Church flies to their invented Traditions for bottom, and their
Traditions, The Pope the bottom of Romish Faith.
Church and Faith fly to the Pope to center all in his personal Infallibility,
and notwithstanding one Pope can condemn another for an Heretic, and yet every
Pope must be still Infallible! and as Dr. Harden avouches, can dispense with
all things against the Law of Nature, against the Apostles Creed, against the
New and Old Testament, and above General Councils.

So that the Pope exalts himself above all that is called God, for God in the
Creation made but creatures, but the Pope can make as many Gods as he list.
Secondly, he make himself of more authority then God, because he will not have
Gods word to be authentical without his allowance; but what he says, however
contrary to the Text, must be ipsissimum Dei verbum.

Beside this head of Antichristian Heresies assumes to himself the Title of
Universal Pastor, The Pope Anichrist.
Rex regum, Dominus dominantium, Admirabilis, Leo de Tribu Judae, Radix David.
His doctrine is also that Papa habet Imperium in Angelos and Daemones; and is
not this to make himself a God?

Is not this that Beast full of the names of Blasphemy?

And as his Majesty of blessed memory observed most prudently, that there is no
Church, State, nor Man that has been since the penning of the Revelations, to
whom those things foretold by the Apostle from the mouth of the Lord Jesus, can
in any reasonable fort agree, but the Church and Pope of Rome alone.

I might add much, but will only instance the sayings of Pius Quintus (recited
by Cornel* a Lap. in Numb. 11.11.) When I was first in Orders, I had some good
hopes of salvation; when I was made a Cardinal, I doubted; but now that I am
made a Pope, I do almost despair. And that saying of Pope Marcellus the Second,
wherein he seems to be pretty ingenious for striking his hand upon the Table,
he uttered these words, Non video quomodo qui hunc locum altissimum teneant,
salvari possunt, I see not how any Pope can be saved.

Now let us cast our eyes upon Gods word and promise, and firmly believe if
Agag be to be slain, God is raising up some Samuel to do it; yea let us cast
our eyes upon Gods work already, and we shall see him gone a great way in the
accomplishing of his word, whereby we may strengthen our Faith in that which
remains. For how has the word preached discovered him to be that man of sin?
detected his frauds and impostures, with which for many Ages he deluded the
blind world.

How are his Bulls and Excommunications esteemed as wind? How do all Reformed
Churches detest his Antichristian usurped power over the Scripture, Churches,
and Men's Consciences? How do many Princes despise his claws over them? How weak
are all their Popish endeavors to prevent final ruin? viz. Sophistry, knotty
distinctions to hide and delude the plain sense of Scripture, threatenings,
treacheries, Machivilian contrivances, wars, treasons, murders, massacres,
powder-plots, firing of Towns and Cities, etc. Lo these are the inseparable
marks of Popery, and the brands of their devilish Religion. And these do but
hasten their incurable destruction, rendering them odious to Christian States,
Princes and People, yea and to Turks and Infidels. Certainly the date of her
reign is almost out, and the time draws on apace, wherein both she and her
King Abaddon shall be laid in the dust. That man of sin, the son of perdition,
etc. who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he is as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4.

The Gospel now being so restored, and that Antichrist of Rome so clearly
manifested, woe be unto them that delight in the whore, They shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels and the Lamb, and the smoke of
their torment shall ascend for evermore, and they shall have no rest day nor
night who worship the Beast and his Image.

Seeing then the followers of Antichrist shall be damned, let not our souls
enter into their secret. As the wicked man shall not meddle with a Christians
joy, so let not a good man meddle with Antichristian woe.

But what are the Doctrines of the Church of Rome that are against the
Foundation of Truth and Salvation?

They are all those which draw from Jesus Christ that honor that is due unto
him as Savior of the World. Popish doctrines against the Foundation of Truth
and Salvation.
Which are,

Papal Monarchy, this undermines and opposes Christ's Kingly Office.

Traditions, as the object of Faith, Papal Infallibility, etc. these undermine
and oppose Christ's Prophetic Office.

Justification by Merits, Adoration of the Mass, and all other Idolatrizing
points of Antichrist, these undermine and oppose Christ's Priestly Office.

To take pleasure in, and to be obstinately given over unto these things,
cannot stand with Salvation.

Come hither and I will show thee the judgment of the great whore, etc. Rev.
17.1.

Babylon the great is fallen, etc. cap. 18.2. Come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, v. 4.


Epigramma G.B. de Roma and Papa.
Non ego Romulea miror quod pastor in urbe
Sceptra gerat, Pastor conditor urbis erat.
Quumque lupae gentis nutritus lacte sit Author,
Non ego Romulea miror in urbe lupos,
Haec tantum superat nostrum admiratio captum,
Quomodo securum praestet ovile lupus.
The same Translated.
It is not strange a Shepherd reigns in Rome,
For he that built it was a Shepherds Groom;
Nor is it strange that Wolves in Rome abound,
He sucked a Wolf that did the City found:
But this is strange, and far above my skill,
How Wolves should keep the flock secure from ill.
FINIS.

