LAMENTABLE NEWS FROM IRELAND BEING, A true, perfect, and exact Relation of
the Landing of 10000. men in that Kingdom, who are rumor'd to be under the
Command of the Lord George Digby who has joined himself to the Rebels, who in
their march toward Dublin, have fired two towns Racool and Sword, put both man,
woman, and child to the sword.

Also the sending forth of forces under Sir Thomas Moor to oppose the Rebels
proceeding, his happy fight, and joyful victory, whereby their bloody
proceedings were prohibited. Also, a strange Apparition of two Stars, which all
the time during the Skirmish, appeared in a most glorious manner over the
Protestant Army.

LONDON, Printed for I. G. Smith, and A. Cot, 1642.

Sad News from Ireland.
Worthy friend Mr. Gates,
Upon the 6. of this present May, there were landed at Waterford, 10000. men
all accounted in warlike habit fitted for present service, which men, in this
Martial array, provided with all kind of Ammunition, were supposed to be under
the conduct and command of the Lord George Digby, and that he and the rest of
these his Rebellious Confederates have joined themselves unto the Rebels now in
Ireland. Immediately after their arrival in Ireland, they having had some
Conference with the Ringleaders of all these mischievous Designs, they marched
toward Dublin, and in their march they gave most cruel and bloody testimonies
of their divellish and inhumane intentions.

In their march unto Dublin, they burnt two stately towns, and put all the
Inhabitants (...) to the sword, their cruelty neither spa^ed the Infant for the
cries of the bleeding Father or Mother, nor the Parents in Compassion to the
Innocent Infant, but most malicioussy slrw all, both man, woman, and child;
neither did their malice stay here, but did extend it self even unto the
senseless stocks, for after they had pillaged and spoiled the Towns of all
their wealth, and butchered the Inhabitants, at their departure they set fire
unto the building, and burnt them down to to the ground.

It was strange unto all our English Nation, that that nobly descended Lord
Geore Digby should bid his farewell to his Religion, and Allegiance unto this
Kingdom.

The noise and shrikes of these so inhumanely butchered Protestants, and the
flames of these so burned towns, could not long be convealed from Dublin.

But with a speed as great as the mitery, it did soon arrive at Dublin, and
cntred into the knowledh of Sir Thomas Moor, who was grieved at the soul at
that heavy and bloody News, and being rather desirous to redress and save
their survivers cries, forthwith desired that a general counsel might be
summoned within the City, to advise what should be the most speedy and most
convenient means of remedy. The agreement and consent being made for present
forces, it was much dilated under whose command these Forces should be
dispatched, but at the length it was agreed upon by the general consent, that
Sir Thomas Moore should have the ordering and command of those present Forces.
This Noble Cavaleere was now on fire until he came to action, and thought
every minute a tedious Age until he came to face his enemy. At his first
approach, the Enemy seemed very confident and resolute, and as if he had
depended upon the merit of his cause, was bold and gave strong defiance unto
the now approaching Cavaleere. It was no-now a time to debate the mattet in
words; the quarrel, which nothing else could determine, their Swords now must
decide. Without any further delay their Forces are brought up, the signal was
given, and the Fight began. So hot and fierce was the first onset, that the
Enemy would not now need the heat of those damnable flames which his divellish
malice had kindled to warm himself. The Fight was violent and fitrce, and the
true God of war was himself a spectator, and a just Judge of this cause; and
after a tedious and after a tedious and bloody Skirmish, thought it fit, that
those who by their practices had endeavored to bring all to ruin and
destruction, should now themselves, like waste and ruined buildings, lie in
heaps and spectacles to the public contempt and scorn, as ways fit for their
former cruelty.

And here I cannot omit to inform the Reader, and let him understand of a most
strange Apparition, which appeared in the time during this Skirmish, the time
being rare as the sight, and the truth having been confirmed by many worthy
Gentlemen, who were spectators thereof, and now are resident in this City.
When both the Armies had joined in Battle, it being about the mid season of
the day, there appeared, to the Admiration and astonishment of all the
Spe^tators, two great Luminaries or stars, of more then an ordinary bigness,
and during all the whole space of the Battle, according to the motion of the
Combatants, did mhve up and down sensibly, to the Apprehension of many
thousand people. And as soon as the Fight was ended, these two Stars
shrouded themselves within the Clouds, and appeared no more. I have not made
this Relation to win the Reader to a superstitious belief, but thus far I
will be bold to say, that I ^eleeva they were great encouragements to their
Cause, and might serve as testimonies of Almighty Gods assistance.

As I would not be too curious in my observations, so would I not be too
careless in my respects; I would willingly shun both the censure of
superstitious folly and negligent obstinacy, I do not belee^^ my real
assistance in the Apparition, yet I will not deny but they did appear by the
special providence of God, and although as no re^ll assistants, yet may be
thought good encouragements unto the Protestant Cause. These Apparitions are
supernatural, and without a Providence to judgment, may be construed to arise
by some extraordinary and special Cause.

FINIS.

