November. 1668. At a meeting of the Council of the Royal Society of London for
Improving Natural Knowledge.
Ordered

That these Discourses, viz. A short Relation of the River Nile, etc. Of the
Unicorne; Why the Abyssine Emperor is called Prester John of the Indyes; A
tract of the Red Sea. Of Palm trees, Translated out of a Portuguese Manuscript
at the desire of the Royal Society, by Sr. Peter Wyche Knight. fellow of the same,
be printed by their Printer.

BROUNKER Pres.

A short RELATION Of the RIVER NILE, Of its Sourse and Current; Of its
Overflowing the Campagnia of EGYPT, till it runs into the MEDITERRANEAN: And
of other Curiosities:

Written by an Eyewitness, who lived many years in the chief Kingdoms of the
ABYSSINE EMPIRE.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society and are to be
Sold at the Sign of the Bell without Temple Bar, 1669.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY Ld. ARLINGTON, one of the Lords of his
MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council; AND Principal Secretary of State.
My Lord,
THE thoughtfull provision for my Journey, into Russia (whither his Majesty
has been pleased to send me) hindered me from a more solemn Dedication of
these Discourses to Your Lordship: They were by Curious Sir Robert Southwell
procured from an inquisitive and observing Jesuit at Lisbon, who had lived
many years in Aethiopia and the Indies; so writ as to seem a candid Relation of
matter of Fact, contai^ a more precize and minut^ account of some Historica^
and Natural Curiosities then is in any one Tract extant, and give the
Portuguese their just and undoubted Title of Discovering daily to the West, the
Wonders and Mysteries of the East. The Royal Society commanded me to Translate
them, and ordered the Impression. My Lord, Your benign and encouraging
Patronage, for all subtle and nice Enquiries; Your peculiar province to get
intelligence from the South, and my particular obligations, countenance this
Dedication, which (were I not in procinctu) the copious argument of Your
Lordships virtues and perfections, would justly make much larger; now it must
only excuse the faults of the Translation, and publish my zeal of being
esteemed,

My Lord, Your Lordships most devoted Kinsman, and humble Servant; Peter Wyche

A short Relation Of the RIVER NILE, etc.
THe Abyssine Emperor (vulgarly, though falsely called Presbyter John of the
Indies) is Lord of the most ancient and largest Dominions of those many
Kingdoms and Provinces into which Africa is divided: This Empire, is the most
Easterly part of all Africa, called Ethiopia above Egypt, not without reason,
all Egypt lying below it, and the same Situation have to it most of the
bordering Kingdoms.

The Red Sea bounds it on the East, Egypt on the North; On the West, the Island
of Africa, and on the South, the Indian-Sea; with this difference, that
Eastward this Kingdom reaches the Red Sea, though at present the Turks
courtaile its greatness, by keeping the whole Shore of that Sea with two Forts
in the Islands of Suaguem and Massuba and one upon the main Land called
Arquico, which serves for no other use, than the defense of the Water drunck in
the Island of Massuba, drawn out of Wells called Cacimbas sunk near the head of
a River, dry in the summer, full in the Winter, fetched daily in Boats called
Geluas.

The Island of Massuba and fort of Arquico are too leagues distant. This, the
only Port where is imported what Ethiopia wants, and whence the natural
Commodities are exported, that, in circuit about twelve hundred fathoms; shaped
like a man's foot, has a convenient Haven, little or no defense, though
Garrisoned by near sixty Turks, white and black: The Customhouse is inhabited by
the Basha's Lieutenant, (called Caqua) and other Officers.

The Island of Suaguem with the third Fort, is less, but better defended by
Art and Nature, encompassed with many Shoals, inhabited by an hundred Turks;
being the residence of the Basha out of the limits of the Empire, and of
natural right belonging to a powerful and warlike King, whose Kingdom is
called Ballow, (anciently Negran) the Inhabitants are Moors, the Men, Horses
and Sheep the fairest I have any where seen; the water-mellons the most
delicious I have ever tasted.

Toward the North, between Egypt and this Empire lies the famous Desert of
Thebaide so renowned for the ancient Ancorets, where begins the Kingdom of
Ballow above mentioned.

This Empire reaches Westward so far into the main Land that the Kingdom of
Congo was its tributary, as the great Historian John de Barros, affirmed in his
first decade: At present it extends not further than the Kingdom of Naire whose
Inhabitants are neither Abyssines nor Ethiopians, yet not defective in policy,
garb or government: The soil is rich in Goldmines of the same quality of
those of Sofalla, lying under the same parallel and not far distant, they pay a
Tax yearly tribute of their Gold to the Abyssine Emperor, the Coin called
Miloqueas, the value ten thousand pieces of Eight.

The Greatness of this Empire is toward the South more restrained, there lying
betwixt it and the Sea, diverse Nations of Moors and Pagans, barbarous to
extremity, which never did, nor do acknowledge themselves Vassals to the
Emperor, who live in tents like the mountanous Africans. The chief amongst
them is elected every Eight year, with the Title of Caraye Primeyro afterward
called Luba. The Moors bordering on the Seacoast have Kings, the greatest of
them called Macheda.

This Empire anciently commanded many Kingdoms and Provinces, their own Annals
and some Historians count above twenty, with almost as many Provinces: What at
present passes for current; is, that its Greatness was notorious, though now
limited to five Kingdoms, each about the bigness of Portugal, and to six
Provinces, every one little different from Two Provinces in Portugal.
Beyra or Alenteyo.

One of these, and among the biggest is called Agaos; the Inhabitants of the
same name, whether these bestowed their Name, or took it, from the Province.
This is divided into Diverse Territories, the most famous called Tuncua,
deservedly glorious in two respects, being the Country of the famous Unicorn
(of which I shall speak in this discourse, and only now say it is not the Abbada
(rightly taken by Authors for the Rhinoceros,) being in shape, a quite
different Animal) and having in it the so long sought for Head of Nile,
concealed so many Age, discovered by the industrious Portuguees.

The higher part of this Province is mountanous and woody, yet not without
Vallyes and Groves of Cedars, for goodness and scent, not inferior to those of
Mount Lebanus, their thickness is a great inconvenience to Travelers, but
suites with the inclination of the native Agoas, who being professedly Pagans
and so of little faith or loyalty, live commonly in Rebellion, thereto invited,
not more by their own natural disposition than the convenience of certain
caves, into which in time of war they retire, these Caverns have but one
entrance, are capable of one or two families, which are ordinarily great among
the Pagans increased by their wives, multiplied proportionable to the Cows they
keep, allowing to ten Cows one woman.

What is most admirable in those subterraneous Caves or Caverns is, that they
receive not only their Goods and Cattle (which are their whole Estates,
personal and real, they living little on their crop) but they ordinarily find
in them water sufficient to serve them the summer months, when only they are
assaulted, and are without apprehensions of being conquered, though with smoke,
by fire made at the mouth of the Cave, having Vents by which they receive
sufficient light, and can conveigh the smoke, if attempted by fire.

In this Territory of Toncua is the known head and sourse of the River Nile, by
the natives called Abani (i.e.) the Father of Waters, from the great collection
it makes in the Kingdoms and Provinces through which it passes; for the
greatest part of Ethiopia being mountanous, and the Torrents swelled in the
winter, the mountains so transmit them as to increas the Rivers, which falling
into the Nile, make no little addition to its greatness, causing it to run with
such a stock of water as overflows the plain of Egypt: this is the River, the
Scripture in, Genesis. 2. calls Gihon, which encompassed the land of
Ethiopia, so does Nile, with its turnings and Meanders.

The Head rises in the most pleasant Recesse of the Territory, having two
Springs, called Eyes, each about the bigness of a Coach-wheel, distant twenty
paces: The Pagan Inhabitants adore as an Idol, the biggest, offering to it many
Sacrifices of Cows which they kill there, flinging the head into the spring,
eat the flesh as holy, lay the bones together in a place designed for that
purpose, which at present make a considerable Hill, and would make it much
bigger if carnivorous Beasts and Birds of Prey did not by picking them, lessen
and scatter them.

These two springs rise in a little field covered over with green and thick
wood, Travelers, especially Horsemen are easily convinced that this ground
stands in the water, from the trembling and hollow sound, this field is lost in
a Lake where it is under water. Provincia ubi Nylus Oritur Vocatur Agaos, Vicina
regno Gojam Terra vocatur Sagela, in apice montis in plano arboribus undiq,
circundate. Athan. Kercheri Oed. Egypt. Tom. 1. Cap. 7. p. 57. Fons Nyli situs
in summitate unius Vallis qua assimulatur ingenti campo jugis montium undique
circundato. ibi.


This Plain is on the top of a high mountain, overlooking many spacious Valleys
and from this hight insensibly descends; from the middle of this Descent is
seen, near a Trench entangled with shrubs, the bigger of these springs whose
bottom is not to be reached with a Lance of five and twenty palms, which by
the way meets with (as is gues'd) the roots of the Neighboring shrubs, so
hindered further passage; the other spring is to be fathomed at sixteen Palms.

From the biggest spring runs in a straight line a green and pleasant Wood
seeming to follow the course of the water, which though under ground, leaves
the vein to be track'd by its re-appearing at the distance of little more than
an hundred paces, at this appearance the quantity of water is so
inconsiderable, as only to make a very little Rivulet, which grows presently
bigger, by the assistance of other springs bringing in their water. At little
more than three days journey from the Head, the River is large, deep enough
for Vessels to sail in, and so broad that I doubt whether a strong arm can
throw a stone over it.

A little above a hundred paces from this place, this River so conveys it self
betwixt rocks, as in the year 1629. I passed it without wetting my foot; in my
journey from the Kingdom of Gojama to the Province of Dambeha when, the
Passengers being many; and the Boats but few (which I will anon describe) I
with my companions going along the banks of the River, and engaged among many
little Rivulets, leaping from stone to stone, got dry to the other side; the
same did immediately many others, naming it the Passage of Father Jeronimo, I
being the first who discovered or attempted it.

This is the ordinary passage over the Nile most frequented by Travelers, who
come from the Court and Province of Dambeha for the Kingdom of Gojama, the
Territory called Bed, the passage over in Boats with head and Stern, made of
gross and thick Navigatio hic nulla nisi cymbis papyraceis quas ipsi Tancoas
appellant. Vossius de Origin Nili, Cap. 16. p. 55. Conficitur bibula Memphitis
Cymba papyro. Lucan.


matt, strongly joined and put together yet not secure from falling in pieces,
which often happens and the Passengers left in the water; they are rowed with
long round poles, being without the use or knowledge of any other Oars; are
capable of receiving about ten persons with some baggage, many swim over; so do
all the beasts, and both man and beast go in danger of some mortal accident
from the Sea-horses and Crocodiles, both bred in the Nile, and infesting the
passages.

From this place the Nile grows crooked, making almost a semicircle: Two days
journey from this passage it runs by a point of land into a Lake of fresh water
called by the Natives Dambeha, abounding with wild-foul, some there is, but
little fish, the reason conceived that the Sea-Horses fright, and the
Crocodiles devour them, this Sea is in length twenty five leagues, fifteen over
at the largest place, about the middle are diverse Islands of different
bigness, full of Wood, some inhabited, others desert: The biggest called Dec,
two leagues long, but narrow, hither are banished condemned persons sent for
security, whereas the Boats not being many, and pain of death to any who
without leave go to the Island, all means of escape is desperate, swimming is
less inviting, the Lake being full of Sea-horses and Crocodiles, which to meet
is certain death.

The point of this Lake is with so much violence broken by the Nile, that the
current is divided in the water and Mud till it forces a passage at another
place. The Nile is for about a quarter of a league detained in this Lake,
leaving that, it makes a beautiful and large Tour, so great, as to contain in
the circumference a Kingdom called Gojama about the bigness of Portugal, and
a great part of another called Damotes. By this circuit the Nile returns again
within less than two days journey of its head; hence taking a south east
course running through many Kingdoms and Provinces, it falls into Egypt, by the
way in diverse places are made those so canazing and stupendous Cataracts, so
famous for their noise, when the water falling with its whole Body sinks and
hollows the Abyss which receives it. Yet does not the greatness of the noise
deafen the neighboring Inhabitants, as some fabulously write, if so, the
populousness of the adjacent places would swarm with deaf multitudes, which
hear the noise and find not that effect. One of these Cataracts is eminently
remarkable, as will appear in the relation of what has surpised and allured
many.

At the first or second Cataract the Nile makes; The water from an high and
craggy rock is praecpitated with all its mass into a large and deep Abyss,
the noise heard three long leagues, and the rebound, (which spends it self i^
minute atoms and subtle smoke seen as far. The water to adm^ration being
shot with so much Violence as to fall at a distanc^ makes an arch, and under
that leaves a larg Road where people pass, in security not to be we^ There are
convenient seats cu^ out in the Rock for Travelers (...) rest themselves,
where they enjo^ the most pleasant sight Imagin^tion can fancy, made by the su^
reflection on the water, so producing glorious and pleasing Colors, resembling
those of the Rainbow, which at this nearness of the water, most deliciously
satisfy and feast the Eye.

The Nile was never under any Bridge, before we arrived in Ethiopia; The first
made in the Kingdom of Amara, where betwixt two high Rocks was a straight and
dangerous passage: The Nile ran deep and violent between, all ran great
hazard, many lost in the passage, the winter chiefly increased the difficulty;
The Abyssines were incapable of removing this evil, ignorant what Bridges were,
and without Workmen to make them: The Emperor, informed what a Bridge was, how
conveniently made in so narrow a Passage, and we having brought from India, in
the Patriarks company, two stone-cutters, designed for building Churches in
Ethiopia, One was recommended to this work, who made this first Bridge, of a
beautiful structure and great convenience to Passengers: Thus was the Nile at
first brought under a strange Dominion.

This discourse is not improperly ended, by a reflection why anciently
Alexander the Great and Julius Caesar using so great diligence to discover the
head of Nile, miscarried in the Enterprise: The reason was, because they sent
discoverers against the stream: Thus going by Land, the length of the journey,
the many Kingdoms and Provinces to be traveled through, the swarms of
Barbarous people to be incountred, so many unwholesom Clymates to be passed,
made their advance impossible; going by water, the same difficulties increased,
attend them: The violent Current of Nile stopped their passage, and coming to the
first Cataract, they could not proceed, but were forced back with lost Labor;
and being without either knowledge of, or commerce with the Abyssine Empire by
the Red sea, they neither ventured that way, nor conceived their design so
feisible. Thus were their endeavors frustrated; the knowledge of this Province
would, by some of the Ports of the Red sea, have brought them into the Abyssine
Empire, thence two months journey had made them drink in this so desirable, so
concealed, and so famous Spring. This secret, (with diverse others of many parts
of the world, and their discovery) was received for the indefatigable industry
of the Portuguees, who have seen with their Eyes, what many have desired, but
could not obtain.

The true Cause of the River Nile's overflowing and drowning the Campagnia of
Egypt at the height of Summer in Europe.
Diverse causes were by the Ancients assigned, for the Nile's overflowing in the
hottest Summer months in Europe, according to the Opinion of the Writers, every
one asserted what was in the reach of his reason, yet all wandered from the
truth. The little knowledge had of the sourse and current of this so famous
River, of the places it passes through, and chiefly of the inland of Ethiopia,
where it rises, occasioned such variety of Opinions, without the discovery of
the truth reserved for the Navigation and Commerce of the Portuguees.

The great quantity of Snow, which falls in the rigor of Winter on the inland
mountains of Ethiopia, and is melted by the intense heat of the Summer, is not,
as some affirm, the cause of this Rivers overflowing; Ethiopia having not so
sharp colds as to beget Snow, unknown in this Country, nor conceivable from our
relation: Two Places only have a thick white Frost, and Hail in great
quantities, which resemble, but are not, Snow; One is in the Kingdom of Tigre,
upon the high mountains of Seman, the other in the Kingdom of Damotis, in the
Territory called Namora of the cold Climate, which melted, do superficially
water the mountains, therefore mistaken for Snow, semetimes fall with a Current
into the low-lands, yet not so considerably, as to swell the Rivers, much less
to cause the innundation of Nile.

Neither do the great Winds, which in those months of the overflowing of Nile,
blow in at the mouth of the River, where it runs into the Mediterranean, cause
this Innundation; as others assert, who say, those winds repel the water,
which being detained, with the water which descends, increases to that
Excess, to force the Nile out of its Channel, and stagnate in the Plains of
Egypt, so enriching and fatning the soil, by the slyme brought from those
places through which it passes.

Other reasons, of the same credit, given by Authors, I omit, in have to
declare the true one, only attainable by such who have lived some years in
Ethiopia. The truth in short, is, that, the winter in Ethiopia, is the same and
at the same time, as in India, and other places under the Torrid Zone,
beginning at the end of May, or the first days of June, and in all August (the
reason of the fairest weather in Europe) spends its greatest fury; the
overflowing of Nile, being at the height in these months, the ignorance of
Summers and Winters begat the Opinions mentioned: Whereas, the greatest part of
Ethiopia being mountanous, and the Nile in its course through many Kingdoms and
Provinces of the Inland, collecting the Rain waters which fall from the
Mountains, and receiving into it many great Rivers, thus becomes so
considerable and masterlesse: As the plain of * Egypt experimentally and to its
great benefit finds. -- Nihil indiga mercis Aut jovis in solo tanta est fiducia
Nilo.
As much discountenanced by the Heavens, in being deprived of the common
benefit of Rain, as munificently requited by the water of this famous River,
which gave rise to the observation, That the Egyptians never lift up their Eyes
to Heaven, never expect any favor from God Almighty, but wholly depend upon
the Nile; thence receiving that benefit other places enjoy by Rain; those
Verses of Ovid, may seem not Applicable to the Egyptians.

Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Jussit, et erectos ad sydera tollere vultus
The Nile, running into the Mediterranean, washes the Walls of Grand Cairo,
distant from the mouth fifty miles. This River declares by the way, the more
or less abundance to be expected that year; The Harvest, proportionable to the
greater or less inundation, is thus concluded. The Walls of this populous City
have to ward the River The Author, a faithful Eyewitness of all he relates,
and so of undoubted Credit, took this only thing upon report that the Nile
washes the walls of Gran-Cairo, and that on the inside of this Tower in the
walls, should be kept the Register of the innundation of the Nile, which is on
a Marble Pillar, placed in the middle of the River, near a long Island called
Rhodes opposite to Gran Cairo; upon this Island and over the Pillar is built a
Mosque, with such an Arch toward the River, to give the water passage. This
place and Pillar is so superstitiously secured from the sight of Christians,
that I found the attempt vain and dangerous; only saw in January the bottom
of the Pillar in the water: The other Circumstance of the number of Degrees and
the Proclamation, are truly related.
a Tower open with an Arch giving passage to the Nile, which according to the
waters it brings down, rises more or less. On the walls of this Tower are from
the bottom upward, made marks, or degrees, and by ancient custom, as more or
fewer of these are covered with water, the Magistrates make it be proclaimed
every night in the streets that the knowledge how many degrees the Nile has
that day overflowed may be general. This Proclamation begins at the end of
July, and continues all August, when the rise or fall of the River is
Particularly observed by the degrees. The abundance of the year is thus guessed
at, when the water covers not sixteen degrees the want of water suggests fear
of a Famine; rising toward twenty five, the higher it ascends, the fairer are
the hopes of a fruitful season; passing that number, they are assaulted with
new fears of death, the quantity of water not allowing them to sow, or house
their Harvest. These months pass not away, without some trouble and anxiety,
the weather being every where subject to irregularity, so rain is sometimes too
much, sometimes too little, by which the Crop is altered.

Another Curiosity makes the Nile famous, whose current stores Gran Cairo with
Senna so known, and so experienced in Medicine in the shops of Europe; It is a
little shrub peculiar only to the woods of Ethiopia: the place where I lived
in that Kingdom has great quantity. The Wild Negro's fetch it from the Inland,
and bring it in great Boats to Grand Cairo. The French Consul there has the
Monopoly of it, for which he presents every new Basshaw with thirty thousand
Dollars, and bargains at a certain set price and a day prefixed, to buy all that
comes; which he performs Having housed it in his Magazines, he divides it into
three parts two are burnt, one reserved to be transported for Europe which
pays for the two parts consumed: There is less Expense for freight, the Shops
always want the Medicine which goes off at the price demanded: Thus is the
account balanced, a Frenchman Zacharias Vermiel, a servant many years in the
Consul's house, gave me this Information, his desire to travel, brought him by
Land into Ethiopia, where he lived a year in my house, and when we were
banished, went into the Emperors army, being grown rich, and turned
Inhabitant, not permitted to return, he died there, ten years after his
arrival.

Of the famous Unicorne, where he is bred, and how shaped.
THe Unicorn is the most celebrated among Beasts, as among Birds are the
Phaenix, the Pelican and the Bird of Paradise: with which the world is better
acquainted by the fancies of Preachers and Poets, than with their native soil;
little knowledge is of any of them, for some of them, nothing but the received
report, of their being in nature; it deserves reflection, that the industry and
indefatigable labor of men in the discovery of things concealed, can yet give
no account where the Phaenix and Bird of Paradise are bred: some would have
Arabia the Country of the Phaenix, yet are the Arabians without any knowledge
of it, and leave the discovery to the work of time. The Bird of Paradise is
found dead with her Bill fixed in the ground, in an Island joining to the
Mallucco's not far from Macaca, whence it comes thither, unknown, though great
diligence has been employed in the search, but without success: One of them
dead came to my hands. I have seen many, the Tail is worn by Children for a
Penashe, the feathers fine and subtle as a very thin cloud; the body not
fleshy, resembling that of a Thrush; the many and long feathers (of a pale
invivid color, nearer White than Ash Color) which cover it, make it of great
beauty. Report says of these Birds, that they always fly, from their birth to
their death, not discovered to have any feet; they live by flies they catch in
the Air, where, their diet being slender, they take some little repose, they
fly very high, and come falling down with their wings displayed; As to their
Generation, Nature is said to have made a hole in the back of the Male, where
the female lays her Eges, hatcheth her young and feeds them till able to fly:
great trouble and affection of the Parent. This is on the account of the
Authors credit which gives the relation; I set down what I have heard. This is
certainly the Bird so lively drawn in our Maps.

The Pelican has better credit (called by Quevedo the self diciplining Bird)
and has been discovered in the land of Angola, where some were taken; I have
seen two. Some will have a Scar in the breast, from a wound of her own making
there, to feed (as is reported) her young with her own blood, an action which
ordinarily suggests devout fancies. So much of Birds. Among Beasts we come to
the famous Unicorn, of the more credit, because mentioned in holy Scripture,
compared to many things, Edie vulg. Psalm. 28. verse. 6.
even to God made man. None of the Authors, who speak of the Unicorn discourse
of his birth or Country, satisfied with the deserved Elodiums, by which he is
celebrated. That secret reserved for those who traveled and surveyed many
Countries.

That the Unicorn is not to be confounded with the Abada (commonly contended
for) is certain, from the difference of the names of Rhinoceros and Unicorn
not reasonably to be given to both without distinction, and from the variety of
their Bodies and parts; as appears in the Abada we know, and in the Unicorn we
see painted. This has one great straight horn, of admirable virtue, the Abada
or Rhinoceros has two, a little crooked, not so Sovereign, though used
against poison. The Country of the Unicorn (an African creature, only known
there) is the Province of Agaos in the Kingdom of Damotes; that it may wander
into places more remote is not improbable: This Animal is as large as a
handsome horse, of a dark brown color, with the mane and tail black, both
short and thin (though in other places of the same Province they have been
observed with them longer and thicker) with a fair beautiful horn, in the
forehead, five palms long, as is painted, the color inclining to white: they
live in close woods and Thickers, sometimes venture into the Champian, not
often seen, being timorous, are not many, and those concealed in the Woods; The
most barbarous and salvage people the world has, enjoy them and probably feed
upon them as upon other Beasts.

A Father, my Companion, who spent some time in this Province, upon notice that
this so famous Animal was there, used all possible diligence to procure one;
the Natives brought him a very young Colt, so tender as in few days it died. A
Portuguese Captain, a person of years and credit respected by all his
acquaintance, and of great esteem with some Princes of that Empire, under whom
he had served, gave me this relation of the great ones: He told me, that
returning once from the Army (whither he usually went every Summer with the
Emperor Malac-Segued) with twenty other Portuguese soldiers in company, they
one morning rested in a little valley encompassed with thick woods, designing
to breakfast, while their horses grazed on the good grass which plentifully
grew there, scarce were they sat down, when from the thickest part of the
wood, lightly sprang a perfect horse of the same color, hair and shape before
described; his carrier was so brisk and wanton, that he took no notice of those
new inmates, till engaged amongst them; then as frighted at what he had seen,
suddenly started back again, yet left the spectators sufficient time to see and
observe at their pleasure. The particular survey of his parts seized them with
delight and Admiration, one of his singularities was, a beautiful straight
horn on his forehead, like that above mentioned; he appeared to run about with
Eyes full of fear; our horses seemed to allow him for one of the same brood,
curveted and made toward him; the Soldiers observing him in less than Musket
shot, not able to shoot, their muskets being unfixt, endeavored to encompasse
him, out of an assurance, that that was the famous Unicorn so often spoken of,
but he prevented them, for perceiving them, with the same violent carrier he
recovered the wood, leaving the Portuguese satisfied in the truth of such an
Animal, discontented at the loss of their Prize. My knowledge of this Captain,
makes the truth with me undoubted.

In another Place of the same Province, (the most remote craggy and mountanous
part called Nanina) the same Beast has been often seen, grazing amongst others
of different kinds. This place is in the furthest recesse of the Province,
therefore the ordinary place of banishment for those the Emperor intends to
keep securely; it ends in high mountains which overlook great and vast Plains,
and Forests inhabited by several sorts of wild beasts: To this place of
banishment a Tyrannical Emperor, named Adamas-Segued sent without any cause
diverse Portugueses, who from the top of these mountains, saw the Unicorns
graze in the Plains below, the distance not greater than allowed them so
distinct an Observation, as they knew him like a beautiful Gennet with a fair
horn in his forehead. These testimonies, particularly that of the good old man
John Gabriel, with what the Father, my Companion, affirmed of his own
knowledge, confirms me, that this so celebrated Unicorn, is in this Province,
there foaled, and bred.

The Reason why the Abyssine Emperor is called Prester John of the Indies.
THat there was anciently in the East Indies a puissant Christian Prince, Lord
of many Kingdoms and large Territories, is out of question: being grounded on
the authentic authority of good Historians and Authors; as undoubted is it,
that at present there is no such Prince; his memory perished many ages since,
leaving the extent of his Empire undecided. Both these Assertions are proved by
the famous Historian John de Barros in his Decads. And the advance made by the
Portuguese into the Indies, assures us, that at present no such Prince is known
in those many Kingdoms and Provinces of the East, by them discovered.

This being out of controversy, yet the Emperor of Ethiopia, in the opinion of
many, passes for that famous Presbyter John of the Indies; by this name
commonly, though falsely called, by those who pretend much, but have little
knowledge of him.

There have not been wanting some late Authors, who upon small grounds, and
less truth, would maintain this opinion and report, proving by diverse
Etymologies and interpretations of the word, that the Abyssine Emperor was
properly Prester John: But this affirmation being without any appearance of
truth; excuses me from showing how little it has; I only say, that those who
have spent some time in Ethiopia know all reported on this subject to be a mere
fable; never any Prince of this Empire had that Title, neither is the word
known in the whole extent of those Dominions.

That some Probability spread this report through the world. That this Emperor
was the famous Presbyter John of the Indies; is undeniable: First, his Kingdom
being in the Eastern parts, thence, without Examination, if his Empire were
properly in the Indies (only lying betwixt the River Indus and Ganges) the
opinion first settled on this Bassis. Secondly, The ancient Presbyter John
professing himself a Christian, having for the Emblem of his faith a Cross in
a hand, and when he went forth or a Journey, a Cross carried before him, being
beside a Priest, (all which or the greatest part suites with the Abyssine
Emperor, for that he was by ancient custom a Priest, is reported of him by
tradition and their own Annals; for the Cross in particular, he often carries
it in his hand, and all there have it in peculiar reverence and devotion) gave
apparently this Error a second rise. Thirdly, Ignorant, in what part of India
his Empire was, having often heard of the Christianity of this King and his
Subjects, and without any records of the ancient Presbyter John, uninquisitive
men concluded him the Abyssine Emperor: Thus mistakes are commonly gilded
over with the appearance of truth. We who lived in Ethiopia, reflecting on
this, and often discoursing by way of Inquiry, what might most probably beget
this opinion, derived it from what I shall here offer; If a thing so obsolete
admits any conviction, or what is maintained by common opinion is to be refuted.

Ethiopia has an ancient and usual Custom for slaves to petition their
Masters and subjects their Sovereign, either in their Ear with an humble and
submissive voice, or at a distance from some eminent place, to tell their
grievances, and demand justice against their Oppressors, so placing themselves,
as to be most conveniently heard, every one cries as loud as his voice can
reach, in the language of his own Province or Nation. The Portuguese (frequent
here) cry Senhor, Senhor, Senhor; not desisting till their business be
dispatched. The Moor cries Acid, Acid, Acid, which signifies the same. The Boor
of the Kingdom of Tigere says Adaric, Adaric, Adaric. The Courtier, and those
more civilized Abeto, Abeto, Abeto, intimating the same. Others bark like Dogs,
howl like Wolves, and by imitating the different cries of other Beasts, are so
understood and known of what place and Province they are.

Those of an higher Province, in the heart of this great Empire, (where many
ages these Princes kept their Court) when according to this ancient and usual
Custom, they present their Petitions, cry Jan Coy (i.e.) my King: ( Jan
signifying King, and Coy my) which supposed, for the cleerer proof of what I
endeavor to evince, you are to be reminded: That the Abyssines affirm their
Emperors were Priests, in testimony of that, relate some Miracles wrought by
them That the Abyssines are naturally Wanderers, particularly undertake
pilgrimages to the Holy Land, which being not far remote, does more easily
engage them in the journey. This they practice at present, though formerly they
did it more frequently.

It is also notorious, that the French, most of any Nation of Europe, used the
Levantine trade, their concourse was so great, that those Infidels scarce knew
any other Europeans, and called all white men (as they still do) Franks by a
small corruption from the word Francois. The French necessarily met many
Abyssines particularly in Palestine with whom their discourse was probable
about their Nation and Country: The Abyssines speaking of their King,
undoubtedly gave him the most ancient, most usual and most respectfull title of
Jan; neither is it less probable, that for the greater reverence of the Royal
person, they told them their King was a Priest; thence was he concluded Jan by
title, and by office a Priest: All know that among us, Sacerdote and Presbytero
are the same, which the Latins call Presbyter and the French Prester; this
word joined to Jan begets Prester Jan, which with small addition is corrupted
into Prester John, intending the same. The French returning home were likely to
relate what they believed and heard in foreign parts, so spread the report,
that the King of the Abyssines was King and Priest Prester Jan; there not being
then any knowledge of the true Prester John of the Indies. This report, set
abroad, past current, that this famous Prince was without doubt the Emperor of
the Abyssines, thence at present vulgarly called Prester John of the Indies.

I may without arrogance think the Conjectures and Probabilities on which this
Discourse is grounded, above contempt; both from my own observations and
Experience, and from the approbation of able Judgments; particularly of great
Travelers, and those conversant in Ethiopia, who found them agree with their
information; if any are dissatisfied with this Tract, let them not condemn the
good will that offers it, and take my word to acquiesce in any better proposed.

A short Tract of the Red Sea, and of the Cause of this name by which it is
commonly known.
THe Red Sea bounds the Territories of the Abyssine Empire which Eastward
drinks those Waters; having therefore discoursed what names the Abyssine
Emperor Prester John, we may conveniently inquire after the true cause that
calls that boundary of this Empire the Red Sea.

The Name of Red Sea commonly given to the Arabian Gulf, is very ancient, the
mistake lies only in the Reason, I shall relate what I think most suitable to
my own survey and experience.

The Ancients named the most Easterly point of all Africa Aromatum Prom. the
Cape of spices; because all those Ships, which brought them from the Coast of
India, and traded with the Ports of that Sea, first made that Headland, called
at present by all Mariners Guarda fuy, the Inland is the Kingdom of Adel, the
Inhabitants all Moors and stout Soldiers; The defect of Rain, is here the same
as in Egypt supplied by the many and great Rivers, running from the mountains
of Ethiopia, which on that side bound this Kingdom. This Promontory is answered
by another in Arabia the happy, directly opposite, called Cape Fartach from a
City and people of the same name inhabiting the main Land, Warlike Moors, and
so reputed; the distance between these two Capes is fifty leagues.

The largnesse of the Ocean begins to be restrained from these two Promontories
to the entrance of the Red Sea, in length an hundred and fifty leagues: the two
shoars all the way coming closer till they meet at four leagues distance in
the narrowest part of the straight where this Sea loses the name of the
Arabian Gulf, and within is called the Red Sea; which extends three hundred and
eighty leagues to Sues near the bottom of that straight, in the largest place,
betwixt Masuba and the Island of Camaran, the breadth is forty leagues, near
Sues only three, which is yet narrower at the bottom.

Authors divide this Sea into three parts* the Middle is clear and navigable,
not without some small Islands and Rocks which appearing above water are of
little danger; the other two parts near the two shoars of Arabia and Ethiopia
are of very bad passage, full of Shoals, Rocks and white Corral, which, in the
night especially, endanger Passengers.

The Mouth is double, made by an Island called Nahum or Babelmandel, two
leagues in length, less than a quarter in breadth, all an high wild barren
Rock, parched with the Wind and Sun, without any Grass, possessed by an
abundance of Sea-foul.

The entrance on the side of Arabia being clear and deep is the ordinary
passage for Ships of burden; the other part of the mouth toward Ethiopia
though three leagues over, is so full of Shoals, as none venters through, but
in little vessels, called by the Natives Geluas. Near the Island is a narrow
Channel of a good depth, which I twice passed, but too dangerous for great
Ships, joining on the Island.

Within this straight begins the Red sea, the Easterly Shore called Arabia
Petrea. Twelve leagues higher than the mouth is the City Mocha, rich and of
great trade: Forty further is the Island of Camaran; then follow Rido, Loia,
Zebita and Goro; this latter, within sight, and within half a days journey of
Mount Sinai. Hither lies Gida the Port of famous Mecha or Medina, where is the
tomb of Mahomet. At the bottom of this straight is Sues, anciently a City of
Heroes; at present a poor fishing Village, wanting the trade of Spices from
India which arrive there as to the Mart of the East and Levant, and the general
Fair of the Indies. This City from Grand Cairo twenty five leagues; sixteen
from the nearest part of the Nile, and forty one from the Mediterranean.

Crossing from hence to the other shore of Ethiopia, the first City is
Alcocere, formerly rich and populous, now a poor Village. Little further, is
Corondelo, where the Children of Izrael at their coming out of Egypt, past
over to the other shore of Arabia, the Sea opening for three leagues, (the
distance betwixt both the Shoars) into a fair large way, as seems to be
intimated in the book of Chap. 19. verse. 7.
Wisdom; or dividing it self into twelve parts, as may be gathered from the
Psalm. 135. verse. 13.
Psalmist. Not far distant, is a place called Risa, whence are exported and
imported Commodities from and for Egypt. This place is situated in the hollow
of high mountains, which run along in a Bridge, discoverable from most parts of
the Red Sea; The same affirmed by Grotius, in his Book de Origin Nili, of this
Shore of the Red Sea, and of other Mountains in Asia and Africa. Cap. 12.
when, from these mountains toward the Sea it is winter, on the other side of
them is summer; so vice versa. Hence to Suaguem, is desert, but the Road for
Grand Cairo. The Island of Suaguem, (where the Turks detained me sometimes
Prisoner) is round and little, full of Inhabitants: the residence and Court of
a Bashaw, having in it the Custom-house, where all Merchants Ships unlade. Half
the profit, by agreement, accrews to a King of the Inland, called Balen. An
hundred leagues further is the Island Massuba in circuit twelve hundred
fathoms, shaped like a man's foot. Between this and the main Land, Ships have a
convenient Road. Here resides the Bashaw's Lieutenant called Caqua, judge of
the Custom-house. Two leagues further is a Fortress called Arquico, (where I
was sometime Prisoner) ill fortified with stone and Clay; worse provided with
Ammunition, only defends the water which every day goes in Boats, (called
Gelluas) for Massuba, destitute of any other liquor. Below this Island is that
of Daleca, where Pearl is fish't; in length sixteen leagues, straight and
populous. Few leagues lower is the Port of Bailur in the Kingdom of Dancali,
where I landed going into Ethiopia. Twelve leagues further, we return again to
the straight of Babelmandel.

This general knowledge presupposed, we come to speak of the Original of the
name, for which diverse reasons are given. By my Observations, in six weeks I
was at one time upon that Sea, and twenty days at another, when my Inquiries
were very severe and scrupulous, I found not any opinion warrantably grounded.
So general a Name is vainly contended for, and not to be allowed, by certain
red spots which appear, and to some, seem to proceed, from certain parts of a
Whale; those spots not always appearing, and the Whales being very few in
those shallows; in the Ocean, out of the straight there are many. Neither did I
in all my voyage upon that Sea observe any such discoloring.

A second Reason for this Name is fetched from some Hills of red earth, whose
dust carried by the fury of the Winds and falling into the waters, changes it
to this color: This opinion seems fabulous, for by curious search, no such
Hills are discoverable, neither could the Dust be so considerable, to make the
spots so great, as would give the General name to the whole Sea. Others
contend, that the red Coral which grows in the bottom of this Sea, by
reflection on the water begets the same apparent color, and gives the name:
This Opinion is equally false: The Coral at the bottom of the Sea being not red
enough to create any such apparent color or name; the red is faint, nearer
white, than any other color, enlivened by an Artificial composition. Upon the
shore of this Sea I have gatheted some, not in branches but in little pieces,
called shop-ware, (being ground and there exposed) The Sun gave it out of the
water a very vivid color; this confirmed me, that the name proceeded from the
Coral.

I shall now declare my opinion, if any voice be permitted me upon this
Subject. What I shall affirm, I saw with my Eyes, and discoursed the matter
with my Companions capable of giving their Judgment. Being Prisoner to the
Turks, and sailing in those Seas, one of my companions and of the Company of
Jesus hapened to be Patriarch of Ethiopia, excellently skilled in Divine and
Profane Learning; We concluded the water of that Sea, not different from that
of the Ocean; in some places we observed, a long tract of water bluish, caused
by the great depth: In others, found diverse white spots proceeding from the
white sand, and the shallowness: Other places were discolored green, by the
mudd which covered the bottom. In other parts of the water, where it was as
clear as in any other Sea, were some reddish spots; We found these spots (which
were many) to be caused by a weed resembling that we call Cargaco, rooted in the
bottom; some that was loose and swum almost on the surface of the water we took
up, and casting Anchor thereabouts, made an Indian dive to the bottom for more.
Upon strict examination, it proved to be that the Ethiopians call Sufo, which
in great quantity, grows in India and diverse parts of Asia. The same name of
Sufo, is given to the seed; to a meat made of it, like Almondmilk, well tasted,
(and often eaten by me) and to the Flower, which resembles Saffron and may be
mistaken for it. Of this is made a Red-colour called Sufo, used for dying
cloth in Ethiopia and India (some of which Cloth furnished my poor Church in
Ethiopia with a sure of Hangings) The weed, seed, meat, flower, and color
agree in the same name of Sufo, which considered, put us in mind, that the
Scripture, in St. Jerome's Translation calls the Red Sea, in stead of Mare
Rubrum, Bahar Suf, making Suf and Red the same in Hebrew: This Sea therefore,
being so near rather between Ethiopia and Palestine, and in both places Suf
signifying Red, our observation named the Sea, not from any such color
appearing in the water but from the growth of that weed, which in the Hebrew
and Ethiopian language signifies Rubrum. And by Experiment, the flower boiled,
and mixed with juice of limes, makes so beautiful a Red, that it is nearer an
incarnate than Red, and if durable would be deservedly of great esteem.

Considering the weakness of the other reasons; from our Discourse had on that
Sea, we concluded the name derived from no other cause, than from the growth of
the weed Sufo; insufficient of it self to produce that color, but whose flower
makes it, and the Natives give the name of the weed to the Color.

A Discourse of Palme-trees, Of their Variety, their Fruit, (and the
usefullnesse of it,) Of their proper Soil.
OF all the Trees, created by God Almighty for the ornament of the Earth and
service of Man, the Palm Tree is the most useful and profitable to humane
society: Though for this end the Author of Nature created all Plants, all
which, with all their virtue are at man's devotion, yet none serves so
munificently, and for so many uses as the Palm Tree. For from her deepest
roots, which take first possession of the Earth and vegetation, to the highest
leaf of her adorned head, with the variety, propriety, excellency of her fruit,
in fine, with all her virtue, is man substantially served, and paid his due
tribute; What I shall say in this Tract will disengage this truth.

The Palm Tree is advanced by one peculiar Excellency, by which, without any
second, she has the advantage of all other Trees, well satisfied in paying man
once a year their Tribute, rest from their labor. The Palm Tree takes no
repose, but every month in the year presents new fruit: A beautiful cluster of
thirty, forty, sometimes more Cocoes, or nuts monthly appearing; and though not
above seven, twelve at the most, come to be ripe and attain the last
perfection, (there not being strength and nourishment for so many) yet is it
questionless, that the Palm Tree by her fruitfulness was by God peculiarly
created for the advantage of mankind; If Vigor to perform her natural
propensity be wanting, yet is her generous inclination apparent.

We may truly say of the Palm Tree, that not being, (which is not contended
for) that so singular and excellent tree, peculiar to the happiness of Heaven,
which the Revel. 22. verse. 2.
Scripture calls the Tree of life, which bears twelve manner of fruits, and
yields her fruit every month, yet that it is a similitude or Emblem of that
faecundity. That by the frequency and goodness of her fruit, and by the great
benefit man enjoys by it, it is a certain Tree of life on Earth, as the other
is truly in Heaven, and the most beneficial the earth produces, shall appear
in this Discourse.

The most favorable Climate or Soil, and which with greatest propriety and in
most abundance produces this famous Tree, (which strangers, divine and humane
writings, and the Natives, in the property of their language called the
Palm Tree) is Asia, particularly that part of it, called India, containing the
Kingdoms and Provinces, which lie betwixt, and are bounded by the two famous
Rivers Indus and Ganges, both so well known in History. How religious fables
have made Ganges, and how vain a sanctity, blind Idolatry attributed to those
waters, (in which to wash, is sufficient to be cleansed from fault and
punishment, and be secured of Salvation) much might be said, by what I have
observed and heard of this superstition; but that is not the task of this
discourse, intended only of Palme-trees.

The land nearest the Sea side produces the fairest; the Air from the Sea,
being very favorable and benign to them. Though strangers give the same name
of Palm Tree to diverse sorts of this tree, all cannot challenge it, neither
enjoy the Excellencies, proper to the Palm Tree called Coco: The Natives
distinguish them by particular names, and reckon up eight sorts, all different
in their Truncks, leaves, fruit, profit and appearance, yet enjoy the general
name of Palme-trees, having I know not what likeness, by which they lay claim
to it, besides the proper name of each species.

The chiefest and most famous, and which best retains the property of the
Palm Tree, is that which bears Coco's; of these some are wild, some
cultivated, some, but few, called Barcas, which amongst them signify
excellent; and when they knavishly put off any thing for excellent, they say
it is Barca. The Nut Barca is savoury, wholesome, not to be surfeited on, though
eaten in never so great a quantity; But as all Trees are not Barca's, so not
all the Nuts, and the same Tree bears Barca's and others: The Natives
distinguish and very much vallue them. The Nut Barca, when crude and unripe is
called Lanha Taugi (i.e.) excellent and sweet; is refreshing, wholesome, of
great use in Fevers. If the Roots of this Tree touch the Sea or any brackish
water, the bearing is very much improved.

Of the other seven sorts, some are esteemed wild, from their fruit, soil, and
the little manuring they require. The Tree called Cajuri, is the peculiar one
which bears Dates, though in India this tree yields none, but affords a certain
liquor which they distill, and of it make wine. Another sort named Trefulim,
from her fruit of the same name Arequeira of whose leaves are made great
umbrellas, large enough to shelter one or two men from the rigor of the Sun or
rain, without which none could travel: There are less, for the same use, like
our umbrellas, which also keep off the rain. This tree yields no fruit.

Another tree there is, (the name not much in use,) by the leaf, trunck, and
make, of the race of Palme-trees; the fruit called de Raposa (i.e.) the Foxes
fruit; eaten, of no good taste, such a Crab as never ripens, and if brought to
maturity, would prove a wild Date, being so in the form, color, bunch or
cluster. The tree called Berlim, bears no fruit, only used for adorning
Churches; the boughs of so fit a size and proportion for this use, as if folly
created by God almighty for his service, not of less esteem and value, because
serviceable to divine worship, this dedication supplies the defect of fruit for
the service of man, and may reasonably rank the tree above the fruitful.

The last the Earth produces, called Macomeira, is without doubt a species of
the Palm Tree; her fruit in clusters of thirty or more, every one as big as an
ordinary Apple; when ripe, of a Date-colour, and very grateful, the rind as
hard as Tow, oftener sucked than eaten; if swallowed, of very hard disgestion;
In sent, exceeding the Esteemed the best Apple in Portugal.
Camoesa: the stone, called Coquinho, very hard, though green, is sovereign
against many diseases.

These are the Palme-trees the Earth produces, which challeng a right in that
name. The Sea affords one, which though at the bottom of the deep and so
undiscovered, the fruit called Coco, and surnamed Maldiva, (because the Sea
about those Islands affords that Plant in greatest abundance) gives us the
Information. The Maldives are a Ridge of great and small Islands, reaching near
two hundred leagues, are counted from North to South, distant from the shore,
thirty or forty leagues, the Natives affirm them to be Eleven thousand: He was
at leisure, and of no small curiosity who counted them. But not to enquire too
strictly and minutely into their number, the Ocean about these Islands most
abound with these Nuts, which are rare; the Sea casts them upon the shore, or
they swim upon the water, yet have I seen them from the coast of Melinde to the
Cape of Guardafuy, for above two hundred leagues: they are little less than a
man's head, grow two together, joined one to the other, not all along, but near
two thirds; the color of the Rind, (which is hard though thin) black; the
Europeans make of it Bodies of Birds, e. g. of a Peacock, adding to it feet,
neck, head and wings, and that perfection of parts the Bird designed requires.
The Pulpe or kernel of this fruit is very firm, as in those that grow at
Land; of very great esteem with the Natives; I have seen it sold for its weight
in silver, being esteemed a singular Remedy against all diseases, particularly
against poison, pounded in a Mortar (made for that purpose) with a little
water, till it grows white, and so drank. In India they make frequent use of
this remedy, having it in abundance. So much of the Palm Tree and the Nutt
Maldiva; I am now to discourse of the inestimable profit of the other sorts.

Palme-trees, of what species soever, have neither a thick Trunck, nor boughs
like other trees. As they grow in height, their boughs come out at the top,
and open to make room for others; as the old ones fall, they leave an
impression in the Tree where they were; If any have two truncks, the thing is
very peculiar, and shown as notorious: I have seen one or two such, in all the
time and places I was in India: One of them near the Coast of Melinde, whence I
embarked for the Island Pate, to see a thing so remarkable. The tree called
Macomeira, (from the fruit named Macoma) is the only one, that grown to the
height of a man, divides her self into two trunks, each of which at the same
distance is divided into other two, so grows on, each Trunck producing two,
till she arrives to that hight, the Natives allow proportionable to the
species. The tree called Trafulim grows the tallest, and for hight, were the
thickness proportionable, (celfity is more considerable in this, than any
other of the sorts) and the nature of the wood solid, and strong, might make a
Mast for a great Vessel, but it wants sufficient substance, neither are those
trees which yield Coco's proper for that use; In little Vessels they serve, as
will be immediately related.

That the most favorable situation for the growth and fertility of these trees
is the ground nearest the Sea, has been said before: and if the roots reach the
mudd of salt water, they thrive best with that watering. Experience has found,
that those Palme-trees, which grow nearest houses inhabited, are the most
fruitful; therefore the Natives, if possible, contrive to dwell in the
Palme-Orchards, having there their goods and Estates, (as will presently be
said) their pleasure and recreation: These are the real Estates in India, as
Vineyards and Olive-yards in Europe: amongst these is arable Land, which they
sow, and have a Crop of Rice, Wheat and other grain; I have seen fair and
beautiful Palme-trees in the Inland, remote from the Sea, always in Plains,
never upon Hills, where they come to no maturity, either because in low grounds
they shelter one the other, or that on the hills the wind shakes them too
violently, to the no little detriment of their fruit, being tall and tender
with all their boughs and fruit on the top, they are obnoxious to the wind,
the whole weight being at the head, the body high, tender and fragile: they may
be fitly compared to the Mast of a ship with round top and topmast without the
help of shrouds to support it.

These trees are planted, by sowing the Coco's or Nuts in a Bed, and covering
them with Earth: A little time will put forth a shoot, the ordinary product of
seed; arrived at some growth, they are transplanted into a place designed for
that purpose. There ranked in fit distance, order and proportion, where they
remain till arrive to perfection, And being planted in a line, make a fair show
in the field, so pleasant to the Natives, that no Garden in Europe is with more
care manured, or of greater, if of equal satisfaction. This has been
experienced by presenting them with our Rarities, who neglect them and sigh
after the Palme-trees of their own Country; though there is not a more
melancholy and unpleasant sight to the Europeans, than to be in a
Palme-Orchard, where nothing is to be seen but Truncks of Trees set in order,
which appear withered without any foliage; all the greenesse being above, the
sight there is little enjoyed; beheld at a distance, no Prospect so grateful.
Being young plants, their mortal Enemies are the Cattle, which risle their
beauty, and with their teeth do them no little damage; that begets a necessity
to encompasse them with fences.

These Plants are manured with small expense, ordinarily they require not much
watering: grown to some bigness, they lay Ashes to their Roots, all sorts of
shellfish, particularly, little fish, called by the Natives Cuta, putrefied at
the foot of the tree, are of admirable effect; but all trees cannot be so
indulged; this is supplied by Mud taken out of salt marshes, by which their
fruitfulness is very much advanced. They bear fruit at five years if planted
in soft Artificial Beds, so taking root sooner and with greater ease; At seven,
if the Earth be firm and hard, spreading their roots leisurely and with more
difficulty. I only know one spot of Ground in the Island of Ceilaon so
fruitful and proper for these trees, that in two years they come to their
growth, get strength, and are laden with fruit.

The fruit of this tree, (whatsoever the species is) comes forth thus; From the
stem of the Palm, shoots out a Twig, made like a man's Arm, not unlike a
Moorish simiter, which the Natives call Poyo. This opens and puts forth a
cluster of thirty, fifty, eighty, sometimes an hundred Coquinhos or Nuts, about
the bigness of an Hasle-nut; should all come to perfection the quantity were
stupendous, but the Parent wanting sap and nourishment for so many young ones,
the greatest part falls off and comes to nothing; few remain of the first
appearing multitude, twelve or fourteen in every cluster may come to maturity,
according to the goodness of the ground, or the soyling employed: Nature
supplies the lost ones, by putting forth immediately another cluster before the
first is ripe or cleared of the flower; the same happens to the latter fruit,
and so to more, every month a bunch appearing, and all the trees having four or
five clusters of different ages, some in the blossom, others newly cleared of
the flower, as big as ordinary nuts, others larger, some come to perfection:
The Palm Tree resembles an indulgent mother, environed with greater and
smaller Children, at the same time feeding these and bearing others; a rarity
not experienced in other trees.

The Emolument of this fruit Coco is very extraordinary, for diverse ways it
proves good meat; while the kernel is yet in water and full of liquor, the Nut
green, and not come to maturity, the Natives drink it as an exquisite Regallo,
being sweet and recreative, affording a good Cup of wholesome water called
Lanha; arrived to a greater consistence, like that of Cream, they eat it with
spoons, then called Cocanha: come to the last perfection, it is eaten, is
savory and well tasted: but being extremely hot and of hard digestion, much of
it is unwholesome, the Nut Barca excepted, which is savoury and harmless. The
thin Rind which covers the kernel, black, and good in Medicine. This Nut
grated and put into the hollow joints of Canes called Bambus is boiled, and of
it made A Meat like the Italian vermicelli, and near' the Consistence of our
Grout.
Cuscus. The gratings, steeped in water and squeezed, the milk they yield,
makes a kind of broth, frequent amongst them called Cerul, which is very
delicious: the Nut Coco is eaten other different ways, which deservedly
advance the esteem of this provision. The two Rinds taken off, the kernel
divided into two parts, and exposed to dry in the Sun, when dried is called
Copra, of this, great quantities, go for the Inland Country, and where no
Olive Trees grow, Oil made of it, which is toothsom, wholesome, good for wounds
and sores. This Copra eaten with Igra, (a sort of course muscovados sugar) made
of the sweat of the Palm tree, as shall immediately be related) is a great
dainty with the Indians. And that no part of the Coco may seem not valuable,
and declaring the obligation humane life has to the Palmtree, The outmost
Rind, called Cairo, not unlike Tow, well macerated and drawn into threads,
affords all sorts of fine Thread, and Ropes big enough for the greatest Vessels
and Ships, which are of great esteem for good and secure Cables, they will
endure stretching, and rot not in Salt Water; these advantages have they above
Cables made of Hemp. The second Rind, the immediate cover of the Coco, when
green, is eaten like Chardons, is tender, crackles in the mouth, and of the
same effect in the stomach, blacks the lips and fingers like Chardons; when
ripe is very hard and thin, called Charetta, made up for diverse uses; Chark'd,
it admirably tempers Iron, accordingly esteemed by Artificers.

Besides the related, diverse other Emoluments accrue from the Palmtree and her
Fruit; the Palmtree alone being sufficient to build, rig, and freight a ship,
with bread, Wine, water, Oil, Vinegar, Sugar, and other Commodities, all
afforded by the Palmtree. I have sailed in Vessels, where the bottom and the
whole Cargo has been from the munificence of the Palmtree; I will take upon me
to make good what I have asserted.

The Vessels are by the Natives called Pangayos, on which I have Coasted the
land of Melinde, and gone into the Red Sea: they venture not far from shore,
being weak, without any binding of Iron, unable to endure any stress of
weather, or beating of the waves, therefore lanch not out into the main Ocean.
The Palmtree yields Plank, though weak and spungy, as if made of Tow: the
Planks are sowed together with fine thread made of the outmost Rind of the Nut
(as has been said) the seams are Caulk'd with Okum of Cairo, after paid over
(as is usual) with the fat of Fish, serving instead of hot Pitch: where there
is any use of Nails, that is supplied by wooden Pins, made of a certain species
of the Palmtree; the Mast is provided by the same Tree, and requires not much
pains to fashion it; Ropes of all bignesses are made of Cayro (i.e) the rind of
the Coco: Sayls are woven of the Leaves of the Palmtree called Cajuris, of which
are also made Sacks (called Macondas) in which they carry Millet, or any other
thing at pleasure; Bread (before mentioned) the same Nut supplies, either dry,
then called Copra, or green, when named Puto; which grated and put into hollow
Canes is Cuscus: Water proceeds from the same Nuts being green, before the
Kernel arrives to a due consistency, clear as Rock water, fresher and better:
Oil is made of Copra ( i.e. the Nut dried in the Sun) in great quantity used
by all people in India, having no other of their own growth, besides what is
drawn from a seed called Gergelim, of small value, only used by the poor.

The Wine requires more pains and assiduity: When the Palm Tree puts forth her
shoot or Poyo (shaped like a Moorish Simiter) before the cluster appears, they
cut three fingers breadth from the point, and tying it near the Incision with a
reed to prevent slitting, put the end of the shoot into a pitcher made for that
purpose, called Gorgo; leaving it there, the shoots, like Vines pruned, but in
greater abundance, weep that juice, which should have produced Coco's. This
Liquor is twice drawn in the natural day; in the morning, that which was wept
by night, and in the Evening, the distillation of the day: At these times, a
man deputed to that business, and of a certain Extraction, called Bandarins,
with a goad hung at his girdle, and with a Pruning-hook in his hand, climbs the
tallest Palmtree: some of which, peculiarly those called Cajuris, are of a
prodigious height, they climb as on a Ladder by notches made in the Trunck of
the Tree, and with as much security as Seamen run up to the Maintop: In other
less Palmtrees, (seeming to be of that Race which yields Dates) they make a
hole in the Trunck, there lodging a Cane through which the Liquor distills,
which when the Tree affords, she bears no Coco's. This Liquor is sweet,
medicinal, clears the Body from humors, is drunk for a Regallo, and called
Sura; set to the Fire in great Vessels, is distilled as in a Limbeck, with this
caution, That they continually cast cold water upon the Vessel, least as strong
water, it should take fire, This is the Wine made of the Palm Tree, called by
the Natives Vrraca, it entoxicates in little quantity, flies to the head, and is
of strange effect; much more powerful if distilled over again, when it becomes
a Quintessence. Of this Vrraca is made excellent Vinegar, by putting into it
two or three fired sticks, or a great stone well heated. Sugar is made of the
sweet Sura coming fresh from the Tree, which boiled till it coagulates becomes
good Sugar, perfect in taste and color. The Merchandise afforded by the
Palmtree, and laden on Vessels, are dried Coco's or Nuts, the Rind, and many
other Commodities before mentioned: this justifies the Palm-tree's building,
rigging and lading a Vessel with goods and Ship-provisions for the Mariners;
all her own product.

The Palmtree being so beneficial and advantageous to humane life, doubtless no
Tree in any known part of the World may come into competition with it; and
amongst all her advantages, no other so well satisfies the sight when laden
with great and smaller Clusters, some ripe, others coloring; some in the
blossom, others forwarder; the grateful appearance of her Fruit is no less
pleasant than her admirable foecundity: Her tallness not inferior to a high
Cyprus-tree, her Trunck slender, without the help of Boughs to climb by, her
Nuts retired at the top, amongst her leaves and branches, makes her resemble a
fond Mother, bringing her Children about her the better to preserve them, and
cutting off all intercourse tending to their destruction.

All places produce not Coco's of the same bigness, which are great or small
according to the nature of the Climate, and quality of the Soil fitted for the
production of that fruit. The Coast of Malabar being cool, and abounding with
Rivers (which spring in the Mountains of Gate, to whose foot this Coast
extends) affords such large and fair Coco's that the Lanhas (i. e.) young and
imperfect Nuts of Cochim and those Territories, are every one sufficient to
quench the thirst of two persons. After these are cried up these of the Island
of Ceilon, where the ground is very rank and luxuriant, yet inferior to the
Soil of Malaca, and the places adjoining, where the Coco's are the greatest.
Those of Arabia the Happy are fairer than any yet spoken of; the goodness of
the Soil, and nature of the Climate, being proportionably advantageous, the
name of Happy proves it. Of all these places and sorts of Fruit I am an
Eyewitness; Two peculiar virtues of these Coco's, are not to be passed over in
silence: The first, That when the Cluster begins to appear, being yet covered
with the flower; gathered, pounded, boiled in three pints of Cows milk, it is an
infallible cure for the Yellow-jaundies; beside the opinion had of this remedy,
I speak by experience, having with it in few days cured one troubled with this
disease. The second is, That in the opinion of the Women, (where fancy most
domineers) the water of Lanhas makes a wash for the face, which eminently
betters the Complexion, either by creating it where Nature bestowed it not, or
advancing it where Nature is deficient, or preserving it where it was naturally
allowed. From what has been said, is evidently concluded; That if the Author
of Nature created all Trees for the service of man, the Palmtree of all those
does most industruously serve and advantage him, by so many ways, and so
considerable productions; and because that which bears Dates is of the true
Race of Palmtrees, something is to be said of that and her Fruit.

Those Trees which bear Dates, yield them not in India; there only affording
the Sura before mentioned, of which Wine is made Northward, those Trees grow in
the greatest quantity; some have Dates, which appear in fair clusters but come
not to maturity: the reason must be in the Climate which favors them not. In
Africa they attain the highest perfection, Dates being the natural Fruit of
that part of the World; those of Arabia, where they grow in great quantities,
are excellent; pleasant to the sight in beautiful Clusters, (which beginning to
ripen appear in various colors, consisting of a faint Vermilian, and paled
whiteness, called the Date-colour) and more acceptable to the taste. Arabia
produces diverse sorts, particularly the Happy; ( Petrea is not without them.)
A baser sort there is, which serves for common sustenance, given to Horses for
Provender: Others there are of a more exquisite taste and value, amongst them
those called Muxanas, which are the least, but naturally recompensed by an
excellent flavor; few of them exported out of Arabia; the Xarifes reserving
them for themselves as excellent, and give the reason that their exquisitness
makes them properly theirs, challenging the best things in the World, as the
posterity of Mahomet, and for the Religion they profess, which they would
falsely put off for Orthodox. This Fruit ripens not upon the Tree if there be
not near it, or in sight, the Fruit called the Male; a secret in Nature found
by experience, the cause yet undiscovered.

Writing this, I remember a discourse I had with an Old man, but a credulous
Christian; As we were eating some of these Dates, I was observing, That the
stone beaten and drank in water was good for Women in strong labor, to ease
their pangs, and facilitate their Delivery; and that it had on one side the
perfect shape of the letter O. the good Old man in great devotion and
simplicity, answered me with a story, which with him passed for infallible;
That the letter O, remained upon the stone of a Date, for a remembrance that
our Blessed Lady the Virgin, with her Divine Babe in her arms, resting her self
at the foot of a Palmtree, ( which inclined her Branches, and offered a Cluster
of Dates to her Creator) our Lady plucked some of the Dates, and eating them,
satisfied with the taste and flavor, cried out in amazement, Oh how sweet they
are! this Exclamation engraved the letter O; first word of her speech upon the
Date-stone, which being very hard, better preserved it. I have related this
story of more piety and plain devotion, than truth and certainty, for the
Readers diversion and entertainment; Yet not to believe this Old-wives Fable
would be with them scandalous. There are some Palmtrees which bear a Fruit
called Macomas, of a singular virtue, (besides their scent, more grateful than
that of a Camojesa, and their perfect Date color:) This Fruit eaten upon an
overcharged stomach, after too much repletion, in a very little time digests
all, and begets a fresh Appetite; God be praised these Trees are so far removed
from Europe, that our Epicures are without the advantage of their Fruit, which
would advance the luxury of those men St. Paul speaks of, Quorum Venture Deus
est, whose God is their Belly, from their frequent sacrifices made to it; I
have had experience of this natural virtue of this Fruit: The Stone eaten is
good against Hypocondraical Vapors.

Another Fruit called Trefolim (which has the name of the Tree which bears it)
grows in Clusters of fifteen or more, each as big as two fists joined; the
first color green, when ripe ends in a Purple color; opened, has three
partitions, repleat with a certain substance like ill coagulated milk; fresh
and cooling, of an insipid taste, yet commonly eaten for a Regallo; the Kernel
of a faint white; the Fruit of a Palmtree called Areica, not much differing
from the Trefolim, is of eminent esteem with the Native Indians: The Island of
Ceilon produces the most and best. These Coco's are exported and prove good
Merchandise, not bigger ordinarily than an Haslenut, the Kernel firm and hard,
the usual dainty of the Indians, who accustomed to chaw the leaf of an herb
bigger, thicker, and of a clearer green than an Ivy-leaf, are forced to champ
Areica; from warming and recovering the stomach, esteemed very cordial and
delicious; the juice contracteth the mouth like Alum, or a Cypress-Apple if
chawed, which sometimes supplies the virtue of Areica, this fruit like Dates
grows in Clusters, two hundred or more counted in a bunch; exquisite Beads are
made of them, white, streaked with black: The Indians so dote on this fruit, as
to have it common in their mouths, thence transmit the juice to their stomach,
which it fortifies and strengthens, fastens the teeth and helps digestion;
therefore the last thing done at meals is to chaw a piece of this, which they
as highly prize, as the Europeans their choycest fruit; but from the experience
of both, I am for my Countrymen. The Coco or Nut of Maldiva is another fruit
of the Palmtree; we have already spoken of its shape, virtue, price, and value;
the fruit commonly called Coco is found on the Sea, or cast upon the shore, the
make of the Tree which produces them, nature has hid at the bottom of the
deep, and charged her self with its Culture. I shall conclude this Discourse of
Palmtrees, with this observation, That nothing has life without Enemies of that
life, which by diverse ways and stratagems attempt and assault it: The
vegetation of the Palm Tree wants not these, by the Indians called sicknesses
and diseases, which prejudice this so adventageous Tree and her fruit, by which
Man is so plentifully provided, as he is said to live and dye, the same is said
of the Palmetree, which, like man, has infirmities and diseases, by which, and
many accidents, they pine away, decay, dry up, and at last dye. There is a long
list of diseases incident to this Tree, which work her death if Remedies are
not timely applied.

A mortal Enemy to this Tree, is a certain species of black worms, which are
naturally so provided, as easily to pierce any Timber green or dry, thereby
conveying themselves into the heart of it, neither does this consume much time,
they desisting not till they arrive at the innermost sap, living on what they
corrode and deface, casting out the remainder. This in the Palm Tree is
effected with more facility and less time, the wood being tender, and the
marrow (the part fed upon) savory: With greater gusto, and by natural instinct,
they get to the top of the Tree; and what they did in the Trunck, do in the Eye
of the Palm Tree, with more ease and satisfaction; devouring the Eye, which is
Extremely white, tender, sweet, delicious and grateful, to a miracle. A
Palm Tree is often cut down, to come at the Eye, as her choycest fruit and
dainty; I have had great experience of its goodness; the worm has no ill
palate in the choice of this morsel; timely remedy not applied, the worm
leaves not, till, (as they call it) she procures the death of the poor Tree. To
prevent this, the proprietor, or those called Bandarins, (the only men charged
with these Trees) are obliged to watch these thieves; and with Iron
Instruments, invented for that purpose, (sometimes made straight, when the
holes go so, sometimes crooked when they make their way by turnings and
meanders) to pursue them, till they seize them, and upon their forked point
draw them out dead.

Another distemper fastens on these Trees, through the carelessnesse or little
dexterity of the Bandarins, when they clime the Tree, to empty the Sura, out of
the Gorgo or Vessel, into their Gourds; if by chance, any drop lights on the
Tree, by a natural malignity, it engenders another worm which attaques and
devours the Eye. This disaster is desperate beyond the help of remedy, the
Master loses the Tree, but the Custom of the Country, obliges the Bandarin
to make satisfaction: the price of every such neglect is ten Pardaos, in our
money, three 'twenty five shillings.
Mil-Rees: The great abundance of these trees in India, lessens the mulct;
Every Palm Tree well manured, and growing in good ground, yields the owner one
Pardao yearly. According to this Estimate, every Proprietary, gives a near
guess at the Rent of his Orchard.

A third disease seizes this Tree (her Emolument to man seeming to beget her
more Enemies to lessen her value) which is no open and violent adversary, but
created by the same Earth, which gives growth and nourishment to the root of
the tree, and is no faint resemblance of a Nurse, who for want of milk, or
having it spoiled, sees her Nursling pine away, and (without umely prevention)
languish till it dies. The Palm Tree is not secure from this danger, the Earth
which produces it, in a long tract of time, or by some malign influence,
growing barren; this defect is communicated to the Tree, which renders it
infirm, vitiated, barren till it fails utterly. This distemper and
indisposition of the Earth, (which the Palm Tree, by an attractive virtue
sucks in, with the moisture that nourishes it, and conveyes throughout from
root to head) is discovered, by a reddish minute sand, appearing in the Earth;
The disease dilates not only in the body, but outwardly on the trunck of the
Tree; when the Bandarin perceives this, he is forced through the sound part of
the tree to make a great hole, to hinder the contagious creeping further, as is
practiced in Gangrenes, where the sound part is cut off: the parts affected
without, are unbark'd, and where the sand appears they run in hot Irons. These
cures not timely applied, the profitable tree perishes.

These disasters are accompanied with a secret of Nature, worth reflection. Two
or three years before this untimely death, these Trees are said to be laden
with Coco's or Nuts, so beyond Custom, that this unusual excess is suspicious
to the Natives, and awakens them to watch the diseases incident to the
Palmetree, so to hinder them by a timely prevention; Nature by this overplus,
seems to supply the absence and loss of this Tree; and the beneficial Palm,
foreseeing the End of her munificence, strives to recompense her Owner.

There is yet in the Palmetree a thing more excellent, delicious, more
grateful to the palate, than has been mentioned; a Morsel to be compared
with whatsoever is esteemed most delicate, is that they call Palmito, the
innermost Eye of the tree; which being cut out and stripped of the boughs, may
pass for the Center of all the branches, which in the heart of the Tree,
before they shoot forth are so joined and united, as to appear the same thing.
The substance of this Palmito is white like milk, delicious in extremity,
coagulated, tender, of a taste above milk, more delightful and of a better
Confection; in fine a Bocone pleasing in the highest, and free from all
fulsomenesse. What I have said is without exaggeration, the Reader I am sure,
would, if he tasted it, be of my opinion, who am able to give a sufficient
account of this Palmito, for besides my experience of it in India, where other
provision wanted not, at the Cape of good Hope (where the Vessel, we came in
for Portugal, suffered shipwreck, at the land called Terra de Natal, and where
we spent eight months on shore, in the place we were first cast upon, to build
two barks to save our Company) I had leisure enough to be convinced of its
exquisiteness, there scarcity of provision, obliged us to make use of what we
found; 'twas our good fortune to light on great store of Palmetrees, not of
those which yield Coco's or Nuts, but of that species which bear Dates; there,
having known in India what the Palmito was, we in a short time furnished our
selves with as many as grew in a leagues compass; the Palmito served us for
food and dainty, neither was its gratefullnesse hightned by our hunger.

The Fruitfullnesse and profit of the Palmetree, lasts many years; there are
signs for a near guess, at her precise duration. This tree puts forth every
year four Branches, which leisurely display themselves in the form of a
Cross, after three or four years decay; which the Palmetree of her self casts
off, or they are lopt off by the Bandarins, every one leaves a mark where it
grew: By these is given a probable conjecture at the age of the tree. That it
may appear how the whole Palmetree is serviceable to humane life, nothing
superfluous, but all substantially profitable, from the deepest root to the
highest leaves: The Root (as has been said before, where we spoke of the
virtue of the other parts) Chark'd, gives an excellent temper to Iron; The
boughs and leaves, made up with a wick, serve for a torch, (called by them
Chuli) with this Travelers are secure from all danger of Serpents, which
abound in India, are of exquisite poison, and their multitude makes them
frequent the Roads, and assault Passengers: They fly from the light of this
Chuli; of another service when they fish in the Rivers, in stead of a Candle as
is usual in Portugal: Of the leaves besides, are made great Parasols, capable
to shelter two persons from the Sun or Rain; these require a man to carry them
(there are persons deputed for that office) and are called Boy de Sombrero;
small portable ones there are for the same use, none walking in the streets,
winter or summer without great or little Parasols. The leaves have another use;
of them are made Coverings for their Palanquins or Litters, in which one person
is commodiously carried and defended from the rain and sun. Some Palmetrees
afford leaves called Olhas, which serve for Books and Paper, with a small Iron
Pencil in stead of a pen, they open and grave the letters, upon the leaf or
Olha, without the use of Ink, as fast and as easily, as the swiftest writer.
The leafs of the Tree Cajuri dried, remain of a lively white color, which are
made into hatts, of great account though cheap, being so becoming, so
accurately wrought and light, that every body the viceroy not excepted,
desires to wear them: the Indians call them Palhate. The Bark of the Poyo or
twig on which grow the fair clusters of Coc'os, being of a thicker and stronger
substance furnish the Common people, particularly the Banderins, who dress the
Palmetrees with Caps made like the English ordinary Riding-caps.

To end the discourse, I shall observe, (what challenges a reflection) the
natural fabric of the Palmetree; that the trunk being very slender and
disproportionable to the tallnesse, the whole weight of the boughs, (called
Palms) and of the fruit, being at the top, in a manner at the vertical point
of the slim body, the boughs, as they grow, displaying themselves, and amongst
them hanging the fair clusters of Coco's, the shock of winds, should without
doubt, easily break and ruin this disproportioned Machin. Provident nature,
against this, has for every new birth of those boughs provided swathes, of
the same matter and texture of the Palmetree, not unlike course cloth or
Canvas: with these the branches and what grows there, are swathed so strongly
and securely as to defy any violence of winds to disjoynt them: they are liable
to be shak'd, yet not where they have this Girdle, which to break is a work of
Iron. By these the Palmetree, as a tender mother, gathers her Children about
her, as secure from being lost and scattered, as they are well defended against
any violence of wind, which would tear and force them from her bosom.

This is what, for the satisfaction of the Curious, could be known of the
Palmetree, of what species soever; who desires a more particular and severe
relation, may travel into India, and those other parts where this Tree grows,
may enquire more minutely, and perhaps loose his labor.

Finis.

