A Chronological Account Of the LIFE of PYTHAGORAS, AND OF Other Famous Men His
Contemporaries. With an Epistle to the Rd Dr. BENTLEY, ABOUT Porphyry's and
Jamblichus's Lives of Pythagoras.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, William, Ld Bp of Coventry and Lichfield.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for H. Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and J. Hartley, against Gray's-Inn-Gate in Holborn, 1699.

To the Reverend Dr. BENTLEY.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to ask my Opinion concerning the time of the Birth and Death
of Pythagoras, and of the chief Passages of his Life; and also of the Lives of
other famous Men his Contemporaries. I am sure you know these things better
than I; and therefore you need not come to me for Information. But if you have
only a mind to know my opinion of these matters, I cannot deny you that: and in
truth that is all I can tell you of that great Philosopher. Not but that I have
by me every thing that I observed concerning Pythagoras, when I read the old
Greek and Latin Authors; and to satisfy your desire, I have put my Collections
in order to draw out a Chronological Account of his Life, if it were possible.
But now they are here before me, I know not well what to make of them; they
look like Moonshine in rough Water, all over Discord and Confusion: Out of
which I am so far from making out that which I designed, a perfect Account of
his Life, that I must confess, I cannot do any thing toward it. There is not in
all my Collection, any one certain year in which any thing happened to him, or
was done by him.

Yet I cannot lament that great Man's misfortune in this, nor ours neither: for
as he was a perfect Iugler, so his Life, being all fast and loose, I must needs
say, is written worthy of himself: and it is not only come entire into our
hands, notwithstanding those defects I have mentioned; but with many
Improvements by later Writers, who have striven to outdo one another in
Stories to his Honor and Praise.

Of those Jonsius de Script. Hist. Philos.
many eminent Writers that have employed their Pens on this Subject, there are
three that have given us his History at large; Diogenes Laertius, Porphyry and
Jamblichus. These three, I believe, have culled out all that was remarkable in
any of the rest: and the two last were his great Admirers who would not omit
any thing that might make for his Glory.

They describe him as a very extraordinary Person, for his Parts and Inventions
for the good of Mankind: they tell us what Discoveries he made in natural
Philosophy: how much he advanced the Mathematical Sciences, as well by his
Studies as his Travels. But above all, they magnify his knowledge of the Gods,
and of the things of Religion. VIII, 2.
Laertius tells us, he was initiated in all the Sacred Rites, as well of the
Greeks, as Barbarians. Those other Writers of his Life take particular notice
of this in every Stage of his Travels. And yet Porphyry will not let his Reader
be ignorant, that Pythagoras was a Deist, as well as himself; and took both
Apollo and Jupiter for no other than deify'd Men, which he showed by the Verses
that he made in those places where he was to see their Sepulchers. Indeed by
those Verses one cannot but think that he despised those made Gods in his
Heart: and so did probably those Philosophers that tell us these things;
though, according to the latitude of their Principles, they were nevertheless
as zealous as he was for the propagating of Heathen Idolatry.

What Notions men have of a Deity, one cannot better judge than by their
Morals. For every one that has any sense of Religion will endeavor to conform
himself to the God whom he worships: At least he will avoid any thing that he
knows to be contrary to his God. If we judge this way of Pythagoras, according
to the accounts they give of him, we have reason to believe, that as the
Apostle tells us of them whom the Heathens worshipped) his Gods were no better
than Devils. It could be no otherwise, if there be any truth in the stories
they tell, of his impudent Diabolical Fictions, and of the fraudulent ways that
he took to make the people admire him: which they also that tell us these
things seem to think were no lessening of his Moral Virtues.

Particularly, they show how he persuaded his Hearers to receive that Doctrine
of the Transmigration of Souls. That it was originally an Egyptian Doctrine we
are told by Herodotus. Herod 11. Diod. Sic. Philostr. vit. Apoll. Ty. iii. 6.
But if lying Philostratus may be believed, the Egyptians had it from the
Bramins. It is agreed, that Pythagoras was he that first brought it into
Greece; and there it seems he had a mind to be thought the first Author of it.
Porph. p. 188.
To make the people believe this, he told them an impudent Lie, that his Soul
was in Euphorbus at the time of the Trojan War; and in the six hundred years
between that and his Birth, his Soul had passed through several other bodies
before it came into his. He faced them down that he knew this by a singular
gift of remembering all the Stages through which his Soul had passed in its
Travels.

First, When Euphorbus was killed by Menelaus, (which was in the year before
Christ 1185) then his Soul, as he said, came into Aethalides the Son of
Mercury. After his death, it came into Hermotimus: then into one Pyrrhus a
Fisherman; Porph. p. 201.
and at last it came into Pythagoras. This is Porphyry's way of telling the
Story.

But from others we have it, Schol. in Sophoclis Electram.
that Pythagoras himself used to say, That his Soul was in Aethalides before it
came into Euphorbus. And for this, they give us the Authorities of them that
had reason to know things of him much better than Porphyry; namely, Diog.
Laertius says it from Heraclides, Diog. Laert VIII, 4. Schol. in Apoll.
Argonaut I.
that lived near the time of Pythagoras; and another from Pherecydes, the most
intimate Friend of Pythagoras. They tell their story with particulars worth
knowing, if there were any truth in it. As namely, How Pythagoras came by the
gift abovementioned: They tell us, that Mercury, whose office it was to carry
Souls into Hades, gave the Soul of his Son Aethalides in its way thither, the
privilege not to drink the Waters of Lethe, the drinking whereof makes Souls
forget all that passed in this world; and so it is plain, D. Laert. VIII, 4.
how, as Pythagoras used to say, Euphorbus remembered his Soul had dwelt
formerly in the body of Aethalides and Hermotimus, that his Soul was in both
these, and the Fisherman that his Soul was in those three, and Pythagoras, that
his Soul was in them all. They also tell us, how it came to pass, that in six
hundred years that Soul of his was only in two bodies, namely, of Hermotimus
and the Fisherman: for Mercury, as Pythagoras himself used also to say, gave
the Soul of his Son Aethalides leave to rest sometimes in Hades, D Laert. VIII.
14.
and at other times to travel above-ground; and so Pythagoras himself said,
that after the Fisherman's death, his Soul had rested 207 years in Hades,
before it came into that body of his.

But what of all this? The Doctrine of Transmigration of Souls is sufficiently
proved, if the Soul of Pythagoras was at any time formerly in the body of
Euphorbus. Porph. p. 191.
And that, as Porphyry tells us, was positively affirmed by Pythagoras himself,
Jambl. c. 28.
and proved beyond dispute; as likewise his Scholar Jamblichus tells us in the
very same words. But these Philosophers were wise; they took care to hide that
part of their Ware which would have disgraced all the rest. Herod. II. Diog.
Laert from Heraclides.
It was the Egyptian Doctrine, that Souls passed out of men into Beasts, and
Fishes, and Birds. This also, according to Heraclides, Pythagoras used to say
of himself; that he remembered, not only what Men, but what Plants, and what
Animals his Soul had passed thoro^gh. And, though this was more than Mercury gave
to Aethalides, Pythagoras took upon (...) to tell many others how their Souls
had lived before they came into their bodies. One particularly that was beating
a Dog, Porph. p 191.
he desired to forbear, because in the yelping of that Dog, he heard a Friend's
Soul speak to him. So Empedocles, D. Laert. VIII. 36.
that lived in the next Age after Pythagoras, and was for a while the Oracle of
his Sect, declared of himself, that he had been, first a Boy, then a Girl, then
a Plant, then a Bird, then a Fish. Apollonius had the same Impudence, if
Philostratus may be believed: Philostr. III. 707. VI. 18. V. 15.
who tells us, he owned that his Soul was formerly in the Master of a Ship; he
showed one young Man that had in him the Soul of Palamedes, another of
Telephus, both killed at the time of the Trojan War; and in a tame Lion that
was carried about for a sight, he said there was the Soul of Amasis King of
Egypt. How could such Fictions as these come into Men's heads? There is more
than idle Fancy in them. They show plainly a pernicious Devilish design, to
confound those two Doctrines that have so great an influence into Men's minds,
to make them do good, and eschew evil: the Doctrines of the Immortality of the
Soul, and of the Resurrection of the Body. For if those Fictions were true,
there would be no difference between the Soul of a Man, and the Soul of a
Brute, or a Plant; and there would be many more Bodies than there would be
Souls to animate them at the Resurrection. What would not the Devil give to
have these things believed by all Mankind?

For the Tricks they tell us he had to make the People admire him, they are so
agreeable to his Character, that his Historian Jamblichus, with the same
Design, Aped him in some of them; unless he is belied by Eunapius the Writer of
his Life. They were, as one may properly call them, the Artifices of an
Impostor. Mahomet, the greatest that ever was of that sort, when he set up to
be a Prophet, though it is not likely that he had ever heard of Pythagoras, yet
took the very same Methods that He did to impose upon Mankind. This will appear
in several of the following Instances, if any one will take the Trouble to
compare them with those that are in Mahomet's Life.

The first thing, we read Pythagoras did, to make way for the Authentical
publishing of his Doctrines, Diog. Laert. VIII. 41. from Hermippus.
was to make himself look like a sort of Demigod to the People. For this
purpose, he provided himself a Cell under ground; and then, giving out he was
dead, he retired into that Hole: and there for a long time together, seven
Years, as some tell us, he lived unknown to all Mankind. Only his Mother was in
the Secret, for she was to supply him with Necessaries: but of these, he took
in no more than just what would keep him alive. Then at last, he came forth
like a perfect Skeleton: and showed himself as one that had been all this while
in another World.

He that was so greedy of vain Glory, that he could afford to purchase it at
this Rate, would not spare his Pains, or refuse any Help, to get into
Possession of his Purchase. And for this, it being requisite he should do
things above the Power of any Mortal, therefore of such things, true or false,
they tell us not a few in his Life.

Some of the Fathers have said that he wrought them by Compact with the Devil.
Chrysostom. Hom. II. in Joh. Cyril. in Julian III.
But I see no Necessity of that; for he had other ways by which other Men have
obtained the fame of working Miracles. He was doubtless both a natural
Philosopher, and a great Mathematician. He understood all the Secrets of the
Egyptians and Chaldaeans. And having many Disciples on those Accounts, it seems
very likely that he might act in Confederacy with them. This at least they
could do for him; they might help devise Stories of the Miracles that he
wrought: and then, for their own Credit as well as his, they would be
industrious to spread them among the People.

Such Lies they were, I do not doubt, Porph. p. 193. Jambl. c. 28.
that Porphyry and Jamblichus tell us, of his laying Winds, Tempests, and
Earthquakes; for of these they do not give any particular Instance, nor are
these things mentioned by any other Writers that I remember. So likewise they
tell us of his curing Diseases, whether of Body, or Mind, which, they say, he
did with Charms: P. 194.
that is, as Cyril says, he did them by the help of the Devil. For his hearing
the Music of the Spheres, that Porphyry speaks of as a wonderful Harmony,
Porph. p 191, 192. Jambl. c. 28.
now we know this is a Lie framed upon a false Imagination. But if this were
true, being an invisible Miracle, and impossible to be proved, it could not be
made use of to prove any thing else. Many other lying Wonders they tell of him,
which seem to have been made only for Talk, being such as could signify
nothing to the good of Mankind. Porph. ib. and Jambl. c. 13. Jambl. c. 28.
Porph. p. 190.
As namely, how to show his Company what he could do, he took up Serpents, that
had killed other Men, and handled them, so as that they neither hurt him, nor
he them. How for the same purpose, by whistling to an Eagle that happened to
fly over his Head, he brought her down to his Hand, and then let her go again.
Another time seeing some Fisher men at their draught, he foretold them the
exact Number of Fishes that their Net should bring up; and when they were told,
threw them in again. How by stroaking a Bear, and whispering a Bull in the Ear,
he brought them both to the Pythagorean Diet: the Bear to eat nothing that had
life; and the Bull to crop no more Bean-tops. How he spoke to a River that he
was passing over with many of his Friends, and it answered him again in all
their Hearings, Good morrow Pythagoras. But this goes beyond all the rest, if
there be any Truth in it; that when Abaris had been all over Greece to beg
Money for the Temple of his God Apollo Hyperboreus; at last, in an evil hour
for himself, he came to Pythagoras in Italy, where the cunning Philosopher
rooked him of his Money, by persuading the poor Man that he was his God. And to
convince him of the Truth of it, they say, That Pythagoras showed him his
golden Thigh; and then, which was worst of all, made him swear the People into
a Belief that he was Apollo himself.

If any other Author mentions any of these wonderful Things, he declares that
he has it only from report, or by hearsay, and so leaves the Reader to judge
of the Truth of it. But most of these things are positively affi^med by
Porphyry, and his Scholar Jamblichus: only they vouch nameless Authorities for
them, to show they were not of their own devising; which yet one cannot forbear
to think of as many of them as are not to be found in other Authors. But why
should these Philosophers either be so wicked to abuse the Faith of Mankind in
devising such Stories? Or why should they take the Pains to Collect them, and
Pawn their Faith to give them Credit in the World? Such great Men as they were,
had no doubt great Reason for this. But what that should be, deserves a farther
Consideration; wherein, if I do a little exceed, I know you will not only
Pardon me, but will take the fault upon your self, if these Papers should come
to be published through your hands.

It is certain that these Men had a vehement Hatred against the Christian
Religion; not only through the Prejudices of their Education, but much more on
the account of that way of Philosophy, by which they so much valued themselves,
and had got so great a Fame in the World. They had no Patience to see that sort
of Learning, that had been so long in Possession of Glory among all civilized
Nations, now to be brought in Disgrace by a Religion, which they accounted to
be no better than Folly and Nonsense, and yet pretending to Divine Revelation,
would show that they by all their Wisdom knew not God. Their Indignation at
this was much the more, 1 Cor. I. 21.
because th^s New Religion sprung up among the Jews, whom they looked upon as
much the worst of the barbarous Nations; and the first Teachers of it were
justly, as these Philosophers thought, both hated and contemned by the Jews, as
much as the Jews themselves were by all other Nations.

That the Author of this Sect, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, bore no greater
Figure in the World, than that of a poor Carpenter; Acts IV. 13.
and that his Apostles and Followers were unlearned and ignorant Men; this is
owned, to the Glory of God, by those among themselves that writ his History,
and their's, in the Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles. And that these very
Books were written by Men of that sort, even by them whose Names they bear,
this I think has not been gainsaid by any that lived within some hundred
years after Christ: But it has been acknowledged by those learned Heathens
that writ against the Christian Religion, V. Hierocl. infra, and Julian. Apost.
in Spanheim's Edition of Cyril. lib. X. p. 327.
and especially by Julian, who of all others was best able to inform himself.

But what is it that these Men say of their Master, in the Account they give of
him, and of them that were the first Publishers of his Doctrine, how they came
to have such Authority in the World? They say he wrought in their Presence an
infinite number of Miracles; and particularly, those which they have published
for the Proof, as well of his Authority, as of his Doctrine. John XX. 30, 31.
They say also of themselves, that, in their Preaching of him and his Doctrine,
the Lord worked with them confirming their word with Signs following. Mar. XVI.
20.


They laid the chief Stress of their Proof upon his Resurrection from the Dead:
Of which, not only his Apostles were Eyewitnesses, but above 500 Persons, 1
Cor. XV. 6.
most of them then living, when St. Paul appealed to their Testimony. V. Uss.
Annal. A. D. 54. and Pearson. Posthum. Act* II. 32. IV. 33. V. 32.
And that he did, in an Epistle which was written within some 20 years after
the matter of Fact. The Apostles especially took it on themselves, as their
Office, to be Witnesses of his Resurrection. For the faithful Discharge
whereof, as they could expect nothing but Sufferings in this Life, so they
desired nothing more than to finish their Course by dying for it. And they were
not deceived in this Expectation; all of them being continually persecuted as
long as they lived, and many of them suffering Death for the Testimony of
Christ. They were charged with no other Crime in this World.

As for what they write of his Miracles; and also of their own, which they
professed they wrought only by a Power derived from him; the truth of the matters
of Fact, we do not find was ever questioned by any that lived in that Age. On
the contrary, we see it was acknowledged by the Pharisees, John IX. 47.
the most malicious and vigilant Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts IV. 16.
and of his Holy Apostles. No doubt it puzzled their Wise heads to think how'
such wonderful Works should be wrought by such simple illiterate Men. For one
cannot think they could satisfy themselves with the account which they gave
others, of the way that Christ had to cast out Devils, when they said that he
did it by the Prince of Devils; for, as he there answered them, Mat. IX. 34.
XII. 24.
it was visibly against the Devil's Interest to do this; the Miracles of Christ
being plainly in those Instances to dispossess the Devil of Men's Bodies; and
by that, and other beneficial Works, to oblige them, and others, to receive a
Doctrine that would also dispossess him of their Souls. But besides the
absurdity of this, it is plain the Jews did not believe themselves in this
Accusation of Christ. For if they had, they would have insisted on this; as
being a Capital Crime, not only by their Law, but also the Roman: And therefore
to be sure, they would not have been to seek for other Crimes, Mat. XXVI. 59,
60. Luke XXIII. 14.
if they had thought they had any Color to charge him with this.

But that which the Pharisees said then, of that one sort of Miracles; though
it was against all Reason, and against their own Conscience; yet, for want of a
better Color for their unbelief, the Jews in after times have alleged against
all the Miracles of Christ, and his Apostles and Followers. This we see in
those Objections of the Jews, whom Celsus brings in arguing against the
Christian Religion: these Jews, Origin. contra Celsum. I. p. 30, 55. II. p. 93,
94.
on this very account, rank our Blessed Savior with Pythagoras, of whom enough
has been said; and with such other Heathen Impostors, of whom more will be said
afterward. P. xx, xxv.


But for those Jews whom Celsus produces, since it has been sufficiently shown
that they ought not to be admitted as Accusers in this Cause, therefore they
might be dismissed; but that the same Celsus gives us occasion to make use of
them as our Witnesses, as to those Matters of Fact which he denies, when he
comes to speak in his own Person, as a Heathen, and one that was an Epicurean
Philosopher. For then he is pleased to say, Origin. contra Celsum. III. p. 126,
127. and VIII p. 407.
That what things our Scriptures tells us of the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles, are all Fictions and Tales. This he says more than once: And yet he
does not pretend to prove the Writers of them were Liars, or to show any
Inconsistence, either in the Miracles themselves, or in the Accounts that are
given of them. So that he expected Men should take his Authority for this. But
why so? He could say nothing of these matters on his own Knowledge: for he writ
in the Emperor Hadrian's time, Origin contra Cells. I. p. 8.
or something later; and that was at least 50 years after any of those Miracles
that are mention^d in our Scriptures. Nor does he pretend to have any ground to
say this, either upon hearsay, or from what he found in former Writers. If he
had referred us to other Writers, it would have been very great News. For, of
all that have written in the times of Christ and his Apostles, there is none,
Jew, or Heathen, that makes any mention of their Miracles: which is a plain
sign they knew not what to say against them. Otherwise, they would have spoken
as spitefully of them, as they spared not to do of Christ himself.

But how could Celsus answer this to his own Conscience? that whereas of the
Miracles wrought by Christians in his own time, he saw there was no denying the
matters of fact; Orig. cont. Cells. I.
and therefore he affirm^d that these Miracles were wrought by Invocation of
the Devil; which was the same in effect, that, by his own telling, P. xvii.
the Jews said of the Miracles that were wrought by Christ and his Apostles: he
should nevertheless have the Impudence to say, that these were Fictions and
Tales, as if He knew Christ and his Apostles, better than the Jews in whose
Country they lived, and whose Ancestors were conversant with them; or as if
Christ himself could not work as true Miracles, as were done in Celsus's time,
and to his own knowledge, by Christians that wrought their Miracles in his name?

This learned man took surely a likelier way to disparage the Miracles of
Christ to the unthinking part of Mankind; Origin. contra Cells. III p. 125, 129.
by likening the great things that are said of Christ, to those that we read of
Aristeas Proconnesius, Orig. cont. Cel. III. 125, 129.
and of Abaris, in Heathen Writers. But they that Think what they read, will
consider, that of the former of these, the first account we have is from
Herodotus; Herod. IV.
and he tells it only by Hearsay. He says, they say that Aristeas died at
Proconnesus, and appeared there again 7 years after: and having made some
Verses, disappeared: but that, two or three hundred years after, he appeared
again at Metapontum, where, by special direction from Apollo, he was worshipped
as God. Orig cont. Cells. III. p. 129.
Of Abaris, Celsus tells us himself, that he had such a Power or Faculty, that
he rode about upon an Arrow through the Air, over Mountains and Seas, in his
Travels out of Scythia into Greece, and back again into Scythia, as both
Porphyry and Jamblichus tell us at large

These things Celsus tells us without any Censure, as if he believed them to be
true. And so they are, as much as his Book is a true Discourse, which is the
Title he gives it. Whoever considers these Stories, I think will not much
regard the Judgment that He passes on the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles.

But the Way that he took to bring them in disgrace, by ranking them with those
incredible Fables, this took mightily with the learned Heathens that came after
him. And therefore, I doubt not, it was, that both Philostratus writ the life
of Apollonius Tyaneus, and that Porphyry writ the Life of Pythagoras, which led
me into this Digression. They seem to have been written, both of them with this
design. I am sure they are both of them made use of to this purpose; to show,
that all the great things that are told of our Savior in the Gospel, were
equaled, if not outdone by these Heathen Philosophers.

As for Porphyry, Holstein de vita and scriptis Porph. c. 10.
his hatred of the Christian Religion he showed sufficiently, in writing 15
Books against it: the Loss whereof, though some of our Deists complain of, yet
they may be assured for their comfort, they will not want the help of any of
our learned men to bring them to light. We want them indeed on many accounts:
but especially, to show them, that as they have Porphyry's malice, so if they
had his great Learning too, both these joined together would not hurt the
Christian Religion. We should want his Books the less, Hieron. praef. Dan.
if we had any of those Answers that were written against him by three learned
Christians, Methodius, Eusebius, and Apollinaris. But, De vit. and scr. Porphyr
c 4.
as Holstein well observes, the Roman Empire being turned Christian within very
few years after the writing of these Books; as the Emperors took care by their
Edicts to keep them from coming into the hands of the Vulgar; so for learned
men, they had now no occasion to transcribe them, or preserve the copies that
were written.

Of the time of Porphyry's writing these Books, Eusebius. hist. VI. 19.
we have nothing certain, save that we are told they were written when he was
in Sicily. And the time of his coming thither, as he tells us himself, was
about the 15th of Galienus the Emperor, that is, about the year of Christ 267.
Porph. v. Plotini, p. 4.
He acknowledges that, being in Rome at that time, he had a mind to kill
himself: which Plotinus discovered; and upon his chiding him for it, he left
him, and went away into Sicily. What it was that enraged Porphyry to that
degree that he must needs kill himself, he does not say. Probably it might be
out of madness, Eusebius. hist. VII. 12. VIII 4.
to see That Emperor's favor to Christians, whom his Father Valerian had done
all he could to destroy. If that was the reason of this Philosopher's being
weary of his life, he had some ease within a few Months in the death of that
Emperor, and then a Succession of others that wanted only a fit season for the
renewing of the Persecution. And it might be as well to quicken them to that
Wo^k, as to ease his own passion, that he set himself to the writing of these
Books. Wherein, as all that quote from them observe, he Ho^st ib. c 10
out-did all others in virulent Railing and Scoffing at the Christian Religion.
As for his Arguments, it cannot be imagined that there was any thing of
strength in them more than what Julian the Apostate took into the work that he
writ afterward on that Subject. And to our comfort, as well as the Deists,
That work is not lost. It has been often published, with Cyril's answer to it:
but never so much to the Reader's advantage, as now lately in the excellent
Spanhelm's Edition.

Whether it was before, or after these Books, that he writ the life of
Pythagoras, we cannot certainly know: for the life it self is imperfect, both
at the beginning, and the end; and the whole Book is but a part of his History
of the lives of Philosophers. But whereas these lives of his, as Holstein
observes, were all made up of Patches taken out of the ancient Writers; De vit.
and Scr. Porph. c. 7.
and so is this among the rest; yet here, after all the heap of stuff that he
has collected from others concerning the life of Pythagoras, at last, he
brings in those stories of Miracles wrought by him, part of which are in no
other Writers, and the rest he has made his Own by vouching for them, as I
have shown. This I cannot imagine why so wise a man should do, p. xiii.
but in pursuance of his malicious design against the Christian Religion, by
making his reader believe, that the Miracles of Christ, upon which the credit
of our Religion is built, were of no greater credit themselves, than those
which were wrought by Pythagoras. That I am not mistaken in this, the Reader
will see in the following instance of Hierocles; who, writing some few years
after Porphyry had so highly advanced Pythagoras, set him up in Competition
with our Lord Jesus Christ, as I shall presently show.

Hierocles, being chief Judge at Nicomedia in Dioclet^an's time, Lact. de
Justit. v. 2.
was a chief Instigator of that bloody Persecution that was then against the
innocent Christians. And to justify this, he writ two Books against the
Christian Religion, which he published under the title of (...), a lover of
Truth. No doubt by these means he won the heart of the Emperor Galerius, who
was the first mover of that Persecution: and therefore by him he was advanced
to the most profitable Government of Alexandria in Egypt. Lact. de mort. perfec
c 16. Eusebius. de Mart. Palaest. c. 5.
There also he went on in his butcherly Trade; till an end was put to it, by
the wonderful Providence of God, which by Constantine's means brought
Christianity to be the Imperial Religion. Then Hierocles betook himself wholly
to Philosophy, and among other things, writ his Commentary on the Golden Verses
that bear the name of Pythagoras; which I mention, to show how much he was
addicted to the honor of Porphyry's Saint.

Of his two Books against the Christians, Eus. cont. Hier.
it seems that Eusebius saw but One; and of that, he tells us, the most part
was stolen out of Celsus; and was long since answered by Origin. It appears
that in that work of Hierocles, to pull down the honor of Christ, he first set
up Aristeas, as Celsus had done: next he sets up Pythagoras; Edit. Oxon. 8o. p.
264.
and lastly Apollonius Tyaneus. All this we learn out of that Fragment of
Hierocles, which is published in the end of his Works, and also at the end of
Eusebius's answer to his Book: though Eusebius medleth only with that part
which concerns Apollonius, because that was all that was New in this
Controversy. In this piece Hierocles, having magnified Apollonius Tyaneus for
the great things that were recorded of him by Philostratus in his life; and
having vilified our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Christians, as he says on the
account of his doing a few (...) call a God; he concludes in these words: It is
worth the considering, that those things of Jesus are bragged of by Peter and
Paul, and some others of that sort of men, Liars, and Illiterate, and
Impostors: but for these things of Apollonius, we have Maximus, and Damis a
Philosopher that lived with him, and Philostratus, men eminent for their
Learning, and lovers of truth.

What a Lover of Truth Hierocles himself was, we are to judge, not by the title
of his Books, but by the things contained in them. And though his Books against
the Christians have been lost many Ages since, (as those blasphemous Books of
Porphyry were,) yet here we have a kind of Summary of them in this Fragment.
For here we see in short, what he had to say against the Apostles of Christ,
and what to say for the Evangelists of Apollonius, whom he sets up against him:
and it cannot be denied that, on either side, the truth of the matters of fact
is to be judged of chiefly by the sufficiency and the honesty of the Witnesses.
Therefore knowing what he has to say of them, we know in effect the validity of
all that is contained in his Books.

First, In his charge against the Apostles of Christ, to say that Paul was
Illiterate, this was certainly an impudent Calumny. For beside his knowledge of
the Greek, that was his native Language, Gal. 6.11.
wherein also we see he writ a large Epistle with his own hand, and quotes the
Greek Poets in several of his Epistles; I say, beside this, he had the Hebrew
Learning in great perfection, being brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Act.
22.3.
a Doctor in great fame among the Jews to this day. And he gave such proofs of
his Learning before the Roman Governor and King Agrippa, that the Governor
said, Act. 26.24.
too much learning had made him mad. So far was He from calling him an
illiterate Man.

Then to call him and Peter, Liars, and Impostors, what occasion did they give
him for this? Only by their Preaching and Writing for the Christian Religion.
But did they believe that Religion, or not? If they did, suppose they might err
in this, yet they could not be Liars and Impostors; for they both knew, and
writ, that all such are in a state of Damnation, Romans 3.8. 2 Pet. 3.3.
according to the rules of their Religion. But if they did not believe it, then
indeed they might do wicked things for their Religion, if that would recommend
them to the Emperor's favor; and so to get preferment, as Hierocles did. But
they were so far from that, the Government being against their Religion, that
they could get nothing by it but Dangers and Sufferings. Those they met with in
all places wheresoever they preached. And they looked for nothing else in this
world, but Sufferings, and those to end in a cruel Death, for Christ's sake. 2 Timothy 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.14.
This both of them declared in the last Epiples they writ. And in this we see
they were not mistaken. For both of them suffered Martyrdom, as Clemens tells
us in his Epistle to the Corinthians, which he writ within two or three years
after their death, the truth of which Epistle has never been questioned by any
learned man whatsoever.

But what shall we say of a man that was perfectly Blinded, with Prejudice and
Malice, or with Ambition and Covetousness? If Hierocles had not been so, he
could not but have seen that those two Apostles of Christ had nothing about
them that would suit with those two ugly characters of Liars and Impostors. But
he had those in his eye that would certainly have been taken by those marks, if
there had been a hue and cry after them. I cannot think any learned man in his
Age, being asked, Of all the Writers, whose Works were then extant, which was
the greatest Liar? would name any other than Philostratus. I am sure he could
not, if he would speak impartially. And yet this Philostratus, and his two
Authors, Maximus, and Damis, known to none but himself, are the men whom
Hierocles calls Learned Men, and Lovers of Truth. And for an Impostor, if
such a one had been enquired for, I know not whom a learned man, that had no
design to serve with a Lie, would have named before Apollonius Tyaneus: whom
yet Hierocles so much admires, that he thinks himself modest for saying only
this, He was a Favorite of the Gods; whereas the Christians say, that Christ
was God himself, for those few strange things that are told of him.

First, For Philostratus, on whose single word all the credit of this story of
Apollonius depends; of what value his word is, must be judged by considering
how he was qualified for an Historian. To begin with the opportunities he had
to inform himself; it is certain, he could say nothing of his Own knowledge.
For as himself tells us, Philost. VIII. 12.
Apollonius died a few weeks after the Emperor Domitian: that was in the year
of our Lord 96. But Philostratus did not write this till above a hundred years
after. How came he then by all the stuff with which he has filled a large
History? He tells us, that while he lived in the Court of Julia, that most
infamous Empress, the Mother and Wife of that horrible brute Caracalla, the
Minutes of Apollonius's Life, written by one Damis, Philost. I. 3.
that lived with him, were presented to her by one of Damis's Relations; and
she being a Lover of fine Language, delivered them to this Sophist
Philostratus, to put them into a handsome dress. But that we may not think
these Minutes were all that he had for the furnishing of his History, he tells
us, he had besides, Ib.
an account from one Maximus of Aegae, how Apollonius past his time in that
Town, for the two or three years that he lived there, being then about 20 years
of Age, almost a Boy, as Hierocles words it. And this is all the help he had
from these two Lovers of Truth, as Hierocles calls them. But there was besides,
one Moeragenes, (...) Ib. I, 3.
that writ IV Books, On or Against Apollonius; but he is not to be heeded,
says Philostratus, because he was ignorant of many of our Stories; so he lost
the Honor of being recorded by Hierocles for one of the lovers of Truth. In
short, except the little things that happened in the short time that Apollonius
was at Aegae; for any thing else of his Life, Philostratus does not pretend to
have any Author but Damis. Yet all that he had of Damis, was no more than a
Table Book of Minutes, as Philostratus owns. And those might be written by any
one else, for ought he knew. For it was a hundred years after Damis's death,
before he saw or heard of them. Till then they were not known. And then a
Nameless man, pretending to be a relation of Damis, brought them, and said they
were written by Damis. Th^s is all the Authority we have for Philostratus's
Legend.

But he says in the Chapter before, he had some things from Town-talk, I, 2.
in the places where Apollonius had been; and some things he had that other men
said of him: and some things from Epistles that Apollonius had written to
Kings, etc. As for the Talk of things done a hundred years ago, that is very
uncertain; but of what Authority were these Epistles? There may well be a doubt
of this. For the Epistles in Diogenes Laertius were generally forged by
Sophists. Philostr. Soph. II. p. 617. He writ a book of Love-Epistles. Suid.
And Philostratus being a Sophist, and one that knew how to write to Kings,
might be the very man that forged the Epistles now extant. We have reason to
like them the worse, for agreeing too well with his History. But besides, he
seems to doubt that his Reader might suspect these Epistles, and therefore
question his History. To fence against this, he says, I, 1.
he took things that were more certain from the Authors that he names
afterward: Damis, etc. Of how little credit those Authors were, we have seen.
And if things taken out of them were more certain, as he himself tells us, then
there is no credit at all to be given to his Epistles.

So much for the Authority: now for the Matters of his History. Some of them, I
dare say, were such as Lucian had never heard of, and yet He lived midway
between Apollonius and his Historian. Particularly, IV, 3.
I cannot believe he ever heard of that Story of Apollonius, how he made the
people at Ephesus stone an old Beggar; who, as He told them, was a Demon; and
when the Stones had made a Hillock over his body, he bad the people remove the
Stones, which they did* and found under them, not a man, but a Mastiff, as big
as the biggest sort of Lion, and foaming at Mouth, as if he had been mad. So
likewise he tells how Apollonius being invited, with many other Guests, by his
Friend Menippus to his Wedding; he found that the amiable Bride was a
She-Devil, IV. 8. Empusa.
that was in love with Menippus, and pretending to be a great Fortune, had
provided the Wedding Dinner, with a noble Antendance, and all manner of
Delicacies: but, upon his telling his Friend what she was, she, together with
her Attendance and Dinner, vanished, leaving Apollonius to make her Excuse to
the Bridegroom and his Company. Here were Subjects for Lucian to have bantered
upon, beyond any that are in his Book; so that, because they are not There, I
say again, one may be sure he never heard of them.

He that could thus descry Devils, might as well ken Souls, one would think,
and tell what Bodies they had passed through; especially being a Pythagorean
Philosopher. I have shown Apollonius could do that, P. ix.
as well as Pythagoras himself; though Philostratus does not tell us, that ever
his Soul dwelt, as that of Pythagoras did, in the Body of a Son of Mercury,
that had that Gift from his Father. But he was not to be measured by
Pythagoras, being as Philostratus tells us, far the greater Man of the two. He
outdid him in many things; C. 1 c. 1.
and particularly in this, that he could call up the Souls of any of the
Heroes, and entertain himself with them at his Pleasure. Particularly, at the
Tomb of Achilles, IV. 3.
where that Hero appeared sometimes frightfully to others, who therefore
warned Apollonius not to come near him; he laughed at them, and spent a whole
Night there in Conversation with Achilles, till the Cocks-crowing, which, it
seems, warns the Sprights away. IV. 5.
But the next day he told his Company all this; how the Ghost appeared to him,
at first but five Cubits high, but rose up by degrees to be twelve; perhaps
swelling with Indignation against his Contrymen of Thessaly; of whom he
bitterly complained, That whereas they used to worship him formerly, now they
had this good while left it off. He called Apollonius by his Name: And told
him, I am glad you are here, for I have long looked for such a one as you to
tell them of this. But for one thing he expostulated with Apo^l^nius too: That
he had received into his Company one Antisthenes, that was of the race of King
Priamus, and that used to sing the Praises of Hector; whom, belike, Achilles
hated, even after Death. But it seems Apollonius, having done this ignorantly,
now he was told of it discarded the young Gentleman. All this, as Philostratus
says, was in the minutes of Damis, who was present at that time.

And with Him I go next to Apollonius's Travels, of which Philostratus tells us
many wonders that he says Damis saw; among which are the most incredible
things that we read in the Travels of Sir John Mandevill. But he tells us many
more and greater than that Knight has in his Book. Particularly this, which
Damis confesses made him stare. III, 8.
When he was among the Bramins, they brought him to a Treat: where he saw four
Tables, that walked and placed themselves in an apt Figure: each of these was
supported by an Image that served them with Drink: Two of these Images poured
out Wine, and the other two Water, one hot, and one cold, to every Guest
according to his drinking: and for Dinner, there came in Dishes of all the best
Fruits of the Season; invisible, till they were upon the Table, and there they
set themselves in order for eating: then the Earth thrust up heaps of Grass,
that were softer than Beds, for the Guests to lie upon. Philostratus says
indeed, that how they did these things, Apollonius neither asked, nor cared to
Learn: that is, he took all to be done by Magic. But he liked these Magicians
never the worse for it; as appears by the high Praises he gave them at every
mention that he made of them afterward. Which so pricked the Gymnosophists,
when he was with them in Aethiopia, that they, VI, 5.
to show him a proof of their skill, made an Elm-tree speak to him. It spoke,
he says, articulately: but it was with a Woman's voice; perhaps because the
Greek word for an Elm is of the Feminine Gender. (...).
These are very rank fulsome Lies: but they are but a small taste of the
abundance that Philostratus gives us out of his Damis's Minutes.

What he tells of Apollonius without that Authority, himself, as I have shown,
P. xxxi.
does acknowledge to be very Uncertain. Such he owns those stories to have been
that he tells us; of a Choire of Swans, that, I, 4.
happening to be in the Meadow where his Mother fell in Labor, Sung him into
the World: and also of a Choire of Virgins, that sung him into Heaven; VIII, 12.
if the lying Cretans may be believed, that gave Philostratus the words of
their Song. For the distance of time between his Birth and his Death, he owns
it to be very uncertain: He says it was, as some say, 80 years, as some 90,
and as some above 100. But therein, as well as in many other things, he showed
his want of Chronology. For if, as he tells us, Archelaus rebelled against the
Romans, when Apollonius was at Aegae, being then but 16 years old; then he must
have been born in or very near the first year of our Lord: I, 9.
for it was certainly A. D. 17, in which Archelaus, Tac^ Ann. II. 42.
after a very short struggle, yielded, and was deposed for his Rebellion. Tac
Annal II, 42.
And as I have shown from Philostratus himself, Apollodorus died A. D. 96. P.
xxix.
Therefore, according to Philostratus's own account, he died at the Age of 96
or 97 years old; which is none of the years above mentioned. So uncertain was
also the place of his death. For, as Philostratus says, some say he died at
Ephesus; some say in the Isle of Candy; VIII, 12.
and some in Minerva's Temple at Lindus. For Philostratus's part, not daring to
strain the credit of Damis, by making him side with any of them, he declares
that D^mis said nothing of the manner of his Death. But then, delivering the
opinions of others, VIII, 12.
he says, Thus died Apollonius; adding, if he Died at all. O rare Historian!
that, having not only assured us he was Born, but having given a particular
account, of his Father, and his Mother, and the Green Chamber he was Born in;
comes at last to make a Doubt whether he ever Died or no. What would this man
have the Reader think of his Apollonius? that he was greater than Apollo? or
than Jupiter himself? So it seems. For both these Died, as we have shown from
Pythagoras himself; P. v.
who owned it was after their Deaths that they were made Gods: and Pythagoras
could not but Know this; for, as this Writer tells us, Pythagoras was Among
them sometimes; and Apollo came to him, I, 1, 2.
and owned that it was He that spoke to him. Yet here, Philostratus, that told
us all this, though he durst not speak out, that Apollonius did Never die; yet
he intimates this was his Opinion, and would incline his Reader to believe it:
Certainly your Tzetzes did not exceed in calling him the most lying
Philostratus. Among all the Writers that I know, there is scarce a greater Liar
in the world.

Nor was there a greater Impostor than Apollonius; whom, on the sole credit of
Philostratus's History, Hierocles so much extolls, as the great Favorite of
the Gods, and fitter to be called a God, than our Blessed Savior. But to show
more particularly what Apollonius was, we must not wholly reject his lying
Historian. For, if we do, we are quite in the dark: there being no other that
writ of Apollonius within two hundred years after his death, Lucian only
excepted. And therefore to make the best of what we have in these two Writers,
I shall begin with Philostratus, and take the best Information we can get of
him.

Now according to this Historian, Apollonius was bred up at first among the
Pythagoreans, and always affected to be thought a Philosopher of that Sect. For
he strictly observed the rules of Pythagoras, though he understood not his
Doctrine. Eusebius. in Hier.
But he not only imitated, but much out did him in his Travels. And according
to the way of that Sect, which was much addicted to the Worship of Daemon's, he
made it his b^siness, wheresoever he went, to restore the Gentile Idolatry,
which was then much sunk by the preaching of the Christian Religion. This, no
doubt, might entitle him to the Devil's especial Assistance, by which he might
do Wonderful things; and might, as he Boasted he did, know more than all the
men in the world. That was nothing to him. He would be thought to be a God, and
therefore he boasted of things which no Man could know or do. I, ^3. p. 25.
He declared, he knew all the Languages of Men without any teaching; and that
he understood, not only their Words, but even their silent Thoughts. Damis, as
soon as he heard this, fell down and worsh^pped him; he could do no less,
looking upon him as a Demon, says the Historian. Others that saw his Tricks,
and heard such things from him, soon found both what he was, and what he would
be at. They saw, he was either a Magician or a grand Cheat. This was the common
Opinion they had of him, I, 2, 3.
according to Philostratus, who notably fenceth against it. They also saw what
he drove at, even to be thought a God. Of this he was accused to the
Government: VII, 1.
and that by Philosophers even by Euphrates the greatest of them in his Age.
These learned men, no doubt, had seen the Books that he published; namely, III,
13.
his four Books of Judicial Astrology, and his Books of Sacrifices, to show
what sorts of them would best please every God. I find no other Books that he
writ. And these could not but confirm those Philosophers in their opinion of
him. We have these things, and much more of this kind, from Philostratus; whom
we have reason to believe in these things, though not in many other; for in
these he agrees with him that lived nearest Apollonius's time.

Of all the Writers now extant, the nearest to the time of Apollonius was
Lucian, as I have shown. And what opinion he had of him, we may see in his
account of another of the same Trade, one Alexander, a Famous Impostor. Lucian
in Pseudo-Mant. p. 476.
Lucian tells us of this Alexander; that being at first a handsome Youth, he
was abused by one of Tyana, that made him his Catamite. This execrable
Sodomite, being, as Lucian says, not only a Countryman of Apollonius, but also
one of his Companions, that knew all His way of acting the part of a
Philosopher; (...)
to make this young man the more passive to his Lust, trained him up to Magic,
and taught him the use of Charms, and made him a great Proficient in all the
other arts of Cheating, in which he excelled. This is all that we have of
Apollonius from Lucian. And we had not known so much of him as this, but that
Lucian, having occasion to speak of a Companion of his, that set up at his
Trade, and took Apprentices at it; thereupon brings him in, as the
Master-workman of his Age in all that way of Diabolical Practice.

This was the Reputation he had, as it seems, till above a hundred years after
his Death. Then outcomes this Book of his Life; composed, as I have shown, out
of unknown Memoirs, P. xxx.
brought into the World by an unknown hand. They are said to have been Brought
to the Empress Julia, as I have shown. That might be, though they were first
born in her Court. P. xxix.
She might as well order the first Devising, as the composing of them in^o a
History. Philostratus owns that what he did was by Her order. And she was her
self a Philosopher, Philost. Soph. II. p. ^^^
as he tells us: a great Intriguer, all acknowledge. No doubt she had very
great reasons for such an extraordinary thing as this was, to canonize a
Magician a hundred years after his death, and to advance him even to be a God:
Whether she had a mind this way to draw off her Son, the young Emperor, from
the esteem he had of the Christians, whom he favored on his Nurses account,
Eus. hist VI.
that was of that Religion: or whether to do honor to a Disciple and in^imate
Friend of the Magi, Phil. vit. Apol. l. 18, 24.
that were Noted to lie with their Mothers; Sext. Empir. Pyrth. III, 24.
and thereby to countenance her wicked design of drawing her Son to her Bed.
These are but Conjectures. But whatsoever the matter was, it was She, as
Philostratus owns, I, 3.
that set him upon the design of writing the Life of Apollonius; at such a
rate, that whoever believed it, could not but look upon him as a fit Rival for
our Blessed Savior. Her, More's Mystery of Godliness, IV, 3, 4. V, 7, 1.
and her Son Caracalla, I take to have been the Emperors that ordered him to
be worshipped, at Tyana where he was born. That Emperors did order this, Phil.
VIII. 13.
Philostratus tells us in a Chapter which I take to be an addition to the end
of his Book. And sure this could not be done by any Emperors before Lucian's
time: For if it had, he durst not have writ those things that I have quoted
from him. Considering also that her Sister or Neice Mammaea, the Mother of
Alexander Severus, was a Christian; Eus. hist. VI, 21.
I do not wonder at that which Lampridius has in this Emperors Life. Where he
says, Lampr. Alex. A. 29.
he had the Images of Christ and Apollonius together in his Lararium. Of his
Mother he had his Birth and Education; and it was his Aunt Julia that raised
him to that Greatness; in which, being to furnish a Closet for his Devotion, he
thought to please them both, in setting up his Aunt's God together with his
Mother's.

As the bigoted Heathens could not but be pleased with the Honor done to
Apollonius, in order to the Lessening of our Blessed Savior, so no doubt the
Devil would promote it what he could. And therefore I am inclined to be of Dr.
More's opinion; Mystery of Godliness, V, 7, 8.
that the Devil might make that appearance to Aurelian, in the name of his
Saint Apollonius, to persuade that incensed Emperor to spare his City of Tyana
for his sake. Though otherwise, it is not improbable that Vopiscus might Invent
this part of his History. Vopisc. Divus Aurel. c. 24. Mr. Dodwell 's praelect.
prooem. in hist. Aug. V. 6.
For, as my most learned Friend Mr. Dodwell shows, he writ it in the first heat
of Diocletian's Persecution, and dedicated it to the Praefectus Urbis, who had
the same concern in this matter at Rome, that Hierocles had at Nicomedia. And
by the high Encomium he gives Apollonius; out of a Greek Book, as he tells us,
which could be no other than his Life written by Philostratus; it is plain he
had the same wicked design with Hierocles, namely, to set up this Magician for
a Rival to our Savior; and thereby to bring Contempt on his holy Religion, and
on all them that suffered and died for it in that Persecution.

But when God^s time was come to set up the Kingdom of Christ, three or four
Emperors that Opposed it with the utmost Malice and Rage, V. Lact. de mort.
perfec.
were successively taken away by the visible hand of God; the Justice whereof
two of them at their death did acknowledge. Then the Devil being thrown out of
Heaven, all his Angels fell with him. Christianity came to be the established
Religion. And Then, (to use the Phrase of a Gentleman that had more Wit than
did him good,) Religion having taught the people to say Grace, there was no
more danger of the crooked Pin in the Pudding: those palpable Lies of
Apollonius would not go down; and so, for ought I find, Hierocles quite lost
his labor.

Next, Jamblichus, who, as Eunapius says in his life, was a greater Scholar
than his Master Porphyry, and who was no less a Hater of Christians; yet living
under Christian Emperors, a she did all the time of his age for writing Books,
he durst not write Professedly against the Christian Religion. But taking this
to be a safe way, he went on with his Masters design of setting up Pythagoras
to be a Rival to our Savior. In order to this, he took up all the stuff that
Porphyry in his life of Pythagoras had gathered ready to his hand. He worked it
over again his own way, oftentimes making use of Porphyry's words. Then, for
farther Embellishment, he added out of his own Invention, whatever he thought
would either adorn his Subject, or promote the design of his Writing. His
design was plainly to subvert the Christian Religion. But so, as not to run
himself in any danger on that account: and therefore, without ever mentioning
Christ or Christians; which he could not do in this Book without seeming to
make some kind of reflection upon them; he only endeavors to make Pythagoras,
and those of his Sect, outshine them in the Luster that he gives them with his
Eloquence, such as it is. Which, together with other Services that he did to
the cause of Heathenism against the Christian Religion, did so far endear him
to Julian, that wretched Apostate; that, after he came to show himself, which
was not till he took the Empire upon him, Juliani Epist xxxiv* xl, xli, liii,
lx, lxi.
he writ more Epistles to Jamblichus than to any other while He was living: and
after his Death never mentioned him but with the highest Encomiums, Juliani
Orat. IV. Crat VII.
calling him sometimes the Hero, sometimes the Divine Jamblichus, and one whom
he admired next the Gods. Ib.


Julian, having been sometime a Reader in the Church, might very well
understand him as I do in the following instances of his Book; which I take to
have been written in a kind of Abusive imitation of the Gospel. Jambl. vit.
Pyth c. 2 p. 28.
Namely, where he tells us, how the Mother of Pythagoras, being with Child of
him, which was more than her Husband yet knew, was brought by him to the Oracle
of Apollo Pythius at Delphi: and there the Prophetess told him both the first
News of his Wife's Conception, and also that the Child she then went with
should prove the greatest good to Mankind. Thereupon he says, her Husband
changed his Wife's name from Parthenis to Pythais: and afterward, when the
Child was born, called him Pythagoras; as being foretold by Apollo Pythius, for
so he says that name signifies. c. 2. p. 29.
Jamblichus will not take upon him to say (as he tells us some Others did) that
the Child was of Apollo's own getting: but he says, Ib.
none can doubt it was one of Apollo's Companions in Heaven, that came down to
be the Soul of that Child. He should have said rather, one of Pluto's
Companions in Hell; for the Soul of Pythagoras came then out of Hades, P. viii.
if Pythagoras himself may be believed. But Jamblichus was aware that
Pythagoras overshot himself sometimes, and did it particularly in his account
of the Stages that his Soul passed through in it is Travels. Therefore Jamblichus
takes notice of no other but Euphorbus, in whom that Soul formerly dwelt. He
smuggles all the other Names we have mentioned, p. vi, vii, viii.
not only from his Master Porphyry, but even from Pythagoras himself.

But however, he says, it has been affirmed by many, and that with great
probability, that Pythagoras was the Son of God. Nay, that he was one of the
Heavenly Gods that then appeared upon Earth for the Good of Mankind; P. 43.
a greater Good than ever did come before, or should ever come after. His
Disciples indeed could not agree among themselves what God he should be. Some
would have it that he was Apollo Pythius; c. 27. p. 127.
others, that he was Apollo Hyperboreus; others, that he was Aesculapius;
others, that he was one of the Demons that dwelt in the Moon. They that said
he was Apollo, seemed to be the greatest number; and they had the greatest
Authority on their side, c. 19. p. 94.
even his Own; for so Pyth. himself told Abaris (to entitle himself to the
Money, P. xiii.
as we have shown) that he was the very God himself: and proved it by showing
him his Golden Thigh, such, as it seems Abaris had told him that the Image of
his God had in Scythia. But then, lest Abaris should ask him what he made Here?
Pythagoras added, c. 19. p. 94.
that he put on human Shape, that Men might not be afraid to Converse with him;
as they would, if they knew the Excellence of his Person, and so they would
deprive themselves of the benefit of his Doctrine.

Such stuff as this runs through his Book; which, being written for the
deifying of an Impostor, plainly showed that the design of it was to Banter the
Gospel of Christ. He begins like one of the Heathen Poets, with invoking the
Gods, and Pythagoras, to assist him in the Work. How he ended it, we cannot
tell; for his Book is imperfect. But probably he continued it with an account
of this Impostor's Disciples, in imitation of the Acts of the Apostles. In
short, as well for History, as for Doctrinal matters, from one end to the
other, it has so much of the Devil in it, that it seems to have been wholly
written by his Inspiration.

But all this I do acknowledge to have been a Digression, as well as all the
rest of what I have written, that does not concern the Writers of Pythagoras's
Life. For it was my proper business to show of what credit They are* as to
matter of History. Now the two chief of these, being Porphyry and Jamblichus,
who were great Philosophers themselves, and such great Admirers of Pythagoras,
as they show in the writing of his Life; one ought to expect they would have
taken care to gather all that was True of him out of all the former Historians,
and to have mingled nothing with it that was Inconsistent with the truth of
History. How well they have performed this in other respects, I shall not take
upon me to examine. But I shall take account of it only as to matter of
Chronology. And that I think sufficiently shows how much at random it is that
Jamblichus pretends to give the Years of Pythagoras's Life, and his chief
Actions and Events: and also how grossly both He, and Porphyry before him, have
abused their Readers in the accounts that they give us of his principal
Disciples.

As to the years of Pythagoras's Life, Jamblichus tells us, that it was much
about his XVIII year that he set out to Travel: and that after some time, c. 2.
p. 31. l. 5.
(which I take to be IV years) spent in other Countries, he came into Egypt,
c. 4. p. 36. l. 27.
and there he stayed XXII years. He goes on, and says that the Philosopher
being taken there by Cambyses's Soldiers, c. 4. ending.
c. 5. beginning.
was carried to Babylon, and there he stayed XII years; and then returned home
to Samos, being now about LVI years old. There he stayed for some time, (it
should seem for another IV years) and then in Olympiad LXII he went into Italy.
c. 7. p. 47. l. 23.
There, he says, he governed his School XL years wanting I, c. 36. p. 220. l. 4.
and lived in all very near C years.

So Distinct an account as this is of the years of Pythagoras's Life, whereof
there is not the least Item in any of the ancienter Writers, did, I confess,
not a little rejoice me, when I first met with it: and so much the more,
because of two Certain Notations of time, by which, if they were true, all
those years might be reduced to the like certainty. There is nothing better
known in ancient History, than the year of Cambyses's conquering Egypt. We are
certain it was in the end of the third year, or the beginning of the fourth of
Olymp. LXIV. So that according to Jamblichus, this was the very year of
Pythagoras's being carried to Babylon. And the time of his going into Italy is
as certain, according to Jamblichus, who says it was Olymp. LXII wherein
Eryxias was Victor. There is plainly VI years distance of time between these
years that are here mentioned. And the same, one would think, there should be
between his being carried to Babylon and his going into Italy. But that cannot
be Jamblichus's meaning. For he says, it was XII years that Pythagoras stayed
at Babylon; and then, to make up his life very near C years, as Jamblichus
reckons it, there must be three or four years more that he stayed in Crete, and
at Samos, before he went into Italy. Add these to the XII years before
mentioned, and they make some XV or XVI years. And yet here Jamblichus makes
his going into Italy to be in Olymp. LXII, that is, to be VI or VII years
before the certain time of his being carried to Babylon, which must be in the
third or fourth year of Olymp. LXIII, if he was carried thither by the Forces
of Cambyses, as Jamblichus tells us. So in short, he brings Pythagoras Captive
to Babylon some XV or XVI years before his going to Italy; and yet he makes his
going into Italy VI or VII years before his being carried to Babylon. Here are
two of the chief accounts of time in his History which so manifestly contradict
one another, that to believe him in both is impossible.

Th^s is a great disappointment, but it will make us some part of amends, if
there be any truth in either of them. To begin with that which he says of
Pythagoras's being taken in Egypt by the Soldiers of King Cambyses; that must
be in the third or fo^rth year of Olymp. LXIII, as I have shown. But as herein
he contradicts himself in his other Notation of time, so in this he does not
agree with the ancienter Writers; who generally speak of Pythagoras's coming
from Babylon to Samos, and (...) going from thence in^o Italy, before the Reign
of Cambyses. Now that he that lived near DCCC years after those times, should
presume to publish this to the World, without naming any Author for it, but as
if he said it of his own knowledge; this I cannot look upon as any other than a
very imp^dent Fiction. As for that which he said of Pythagoras's going into
Italy in Olymp. LXII, it is very likely he had Authors that said something like
it. There are enough that say he was there in Olymp. LXII; and it is very
likely Jamblichus might mistake them, and that might occasion him to say that
Pythagoras went thither at that time. This is the best I can say of it. And so
in short, I have lost all the joy that I had of both his Discoveries. For
having examined them, I see the last is a mere Blunder, the former a bold
Fiction, and they both contradict one another. What credit can one give to such
an Historian?

For his account of the Disciples of Pythagoras, he takes what he will out of
the rude heap that his Master Porphyry had thrown together, and much more he
adds very lavishly out of his own head.

Zamolxis the Lawgiver of the Getes, they will have to be one of Pythagoras's
Disciples. Porphyry makes him one of the First. For he says, that Zamolxis
being yet a Boy, was brought out of Thrace by the Father of our Philosopher, c.
30. p. 154. l. 22.
who gave him to his Son, and he taught him all matters of Religion. Jamblichus
owns he was Slave to Pythagoras; who, as he says, taught, him and then gave him
his liberty. And yet he had reckon^d him before, c. 23. p. 103* l. 15.
among the young men, that came to be Disciples to Pythagoras in his old Age.
All this is true alike. For Herodotus, Herodot. IV, 56.
that lived among them who remembered Pythagoras, says, Zamolxis was much
Ancienter than he. And therefore Jamblichus was once in the right, though
perhaps it was through forgetfulness, when he left him out of the Catalogue of
Pythagoras's Disciples.

Zaleucus and Charondas he has in the Catalogue; for which, he has not only
Porphyry on his side, who tells us from Nicomachus, that by these he gave Laws
to their people; but also in Diogenes Laertius there is a mention of them to
this purpose. c 23. p. 103. l. 11, 15.
But Jamblichus of his own head reckons both these among them that came Young
to be Pythagoras's Disciples when he was Old: which is no truer of them than of
Zamolxis; for these also were much ancienter than Pythagoras. Zaleucus lived
Olymp. XXIX, according to Eusebius's Chronicon. Of Charondas you have shown
that he was the Scholar of Zaleucus, Dissert. p. 362.
or as others say, older than he. So that, if these three were Pythagoras's
Disciples, it must have been some time after the Wars of Troy, before his Soul
came into that Samian Body of his; which, if it could be made out, would be a
wonderful proof of his Doctrine of Transmigration.

They reckon three other Disciples of Pythagoras, on whom he set no ordinary
value, if it be true that they tell us of the Names that he gave them. These
three were Epimenides, by him Surnamed Purger; (...).
Empedocles, called Wind-charmer; and Abaris, called Sky-rider. (...).
And very fine Stories they tell of the reasons of his giving them these Names:
all tending to this, Porph. vit. Pyth. p. 193.
that he imparted to them some of those Romantic Powers which these Historians
were pleased to ascribe to Pythagoras. Jambl. c. 28. p. 127, 128.
I indeed called them Lies, but I shall ask their pardon, p. xi.
if I do not prove that they belie Pythagoras in what they say of these his
Disciples.

First, for Epimenides, whom both Porphyry and Jamblichus do reckon among his
Disciples; VIII, 3.
there is much more probability in what Laertius says, that makes him one of
the Masters of Pythagoras. c. 23. p. 103. l. 15.
But certainly Jamblichus over-shot himself, in saying that he also came a
young man when Pythagoras was old. And both he and his Master are extravagant
in making Pythagoras Teach him to conjure. For Epimenides, as all Writers
agree, had purged Athens, whence he had the name (...), before he could see
Pythagoras, who, as they say, gave him that Name. And he was a very Old man
when he died. And that was either before Pythagoras was born, or not many years
after. See my account of him in the year 594 before Christ.

To fetch Empedocles into his School, they seem to stretch hard on the other
hand. For, though all agree that he was of the Pythagorean Sect, yet that ever
he was taught by Pythagoras, seems very improbable. That Alcidamas said this,
D. Laert. VIII, 56. ibidem.
is true: but he makes Empedocles a hearer of Anaxagoras, either first, or
together with Pythagoras. This could not be; because Pythagoras was Dead,
either before, or a very little after the Birth of Anaxagoras. See my account
of him in the year 500 before Christ. But that Empedocles came too late into
the World to be at all a Disciple of Pythagoras, it sufficiently appears by the
accounts we have of him in D. Laertius. Who says, that he flourished in Olymp.
LXXXIV, VIII, 74.
and that Aristotle says he died at LX years old; though others of less credit
say he lived LXXVII, or CIX years. But if he was in the flower of his Age in
the LXXXIVth Olympiad, that is above LX years after Olymp. LXVIII, 3. in which
I place the death of Pythagoras; or placing it in Olymp. LXX, 4. which is but
IX years after, and that is the lowest I can go: (...), p.
I must needs say, Empedocles was a very young Conjurer, or he flourished in a
very old Age: or, which I rather believe, there is no credit to be given to
these two Historians.

This will farther appear by the account they give of Abaris, whom also they
make a great Conjurer, (...).
and trained up to it by Pythagoras. So much Porphyry had said. But Jamblichus
much out-does his Master. For having told us that Abaris came for improvement
in knowledge into Greece; he says, that in his way home from thence, being now
well stricken in years, he came to see Pythagoras in Italy. c. 19. p. 92. l.
32. p. 93. l. 10.
There he gave Pythagoras the Arrow upon which he used to ride aloft in the
Air: though elsewhere he says Pythagoras took away his Arrow, and kept it till
he made him confess all he cared to know of him. When there in Italy they had
spent as much time together as Jamblichus pleased, c. 28. p. 131. l. 28.
then he brings them to Agrigentum in Sicily; and there he sets them to try if
they can work any good upon Phalaris. In his 32d Chapter Jamblichus shows his
Talent in the making of Speeches for them, and of Answers for Phalaris; till
they came to be upon ill terms. Then he makes Phalaris resolve to kill them
both; and he makes them for prevention set the People against him; by whom, he
says, Phalaris was killed the same day that he had determined to kill both
Pythagoras and Abaris.

Now this is so fine a Romance, that it is pity there should be no truth in it;
but only that there was such a City, and that there were such Persons. It is
civil to grant that in the time of Pythagoras there was such a one as Abaris
living, though Authors differ much about the time of his coming into Greece.
For as Harpocration tells us, Hippostratus placed it in Olymp. III, others in
Olymp. XXI. Pindar in the time of King Croesus; and Eusebius. Chronicon has it
twice, namely there, and in Olymp. LXXXII. But granting that Abaris was in
Greece in Croesus's time, which is the only time that consists with
Jamblichus's story: Then, according to Eusebius. Chronicon, his coming was in
Olymp. LIVE, 2. that was while Pythagoras was abroad in his Travels, according
to Jamblichus's Account, which makes his coming into Italy to be in Olymp.
LXII; that is, full XXX years after. By this time Abaris, though he came out of
Greece with him, must needs be very well stricken in years: much more, if he
came after Pythagoras was settled in Italy. But what becomes of Phalaris the
mean while? See in my account, 572 before Christ. There it appears, the latest
we can bring Phalaris to die, is in Olymp. LVII, 4. that is XVI years before
Jamblichus makes Pythagoras come into Italy. After this, Phalaris could neither
kill, nor be kill^d, but in a Romance; and I take all this Story of Jamblichus
to be no other.

For the rest of the 218 Names of Disciples in his Catalogue, c. 36 p. 221, etc.
I can bring none of them within the time of Pythagoras's Life, but Milo, and
Parmenides, whom I mention in my account in the years 539, and 504 before
Christ. There are scarce two more of them that ever saw Pythagoras, for ought
that appears in any good Author: though here are the names of several more that
were Philosophers of the Pythagorean Sect. Yet even these, together with them
before mentioned, will not make up the odd number of eighteen. For the other
two hundred, I take them to be insignificant Names, invented by Jamblichus only
out of vain Ostentation.

To conclude, I do not lay any weight at all upon the Testimony of Jamblichus,
nor much on that of his Master Porphyry, where he does not mention his Author.
But I quote them sometimes in the following account, as in a History of the
British Kings I would Geoffry of Monmouth. But then naming my Author, for want
of a better, where I think what he says may be true, I should leave all I said
from him to the reader, with a perfect indifference whether he believed him or
not. With the like indifference, as to every thing but what I have Scripture
for, I commit these Papers into your hands; desiring you to take them only as
my Opinion, which is all that you ask of,

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and Servant, W. Cov. and Lich.
Mar. 30. 1699.
A Chronological Account Of the LIFE of PYTHAGORAS, AND Of other Famous Men his
Contemporaries.
Pythagoras the Samian Philosopher Plin. Not. Hist. II. 8. who says, that in
Olymp. XLII, and V. C. 142, he first found that Venus was sometimes the Morning
Star, and sometimes the Evening Star. But it is not improbable that in this
Pliny might mistake Pythagoras for his Master Thales, of whom see the year 585
before Christ.

N. PYTHAGORAS born this year, if Antilochus's Account, which follows in 583
before Christ.

Nabopolassar King of Babylon. Next his Son Nabocolassar or Nebuchadnezzar, who
had reigned about two years with his Father. This year Jan. 21, was his first
Thoth, according to Ptol. Canon.

Suidas. He was born in the Isle of Syrus one of the Cyclades. Strabo x.
Pythagoras was at first his Disciple. Cicero Tusc. Qu. I. Diod. Sic. Excerpt.
and many others.

Athens. Diog. Laert. from Sosicrates. So Eusebius. Chronicon in 1 MS. Clem.
Alexandr. (...) says, he was Archon in Olymp. XLVI.

He made his Laws in the time of Tarquinius Priscus. A. Gellius XVII, 21. He
made them the year that he was Archon, and that with the help of EPIMENIDES,
who came thither from Crete, and having expiated the City in Olymp. XLIV, as
Suidas says, or in Olymp. XLV, as Eus. Chron. Pontaci, or Olymp. XLVI, as
Laertius, returned home, and died soon after. D. Laert. l. 110, being 154 years
old, as Xenophanes said he had heard. Ib. III. of Xenophanes see in the year
540 before Christ.

Scytha now came to Athens, Eucrates being Archon. D. Laert. 1. 101.

Pythagoras Samius offered himself to play at Fisticuffs among the Boys at the
Olympic Games; but having long Hair, and wearing Purple, he was rejected with
Reproach. Therefore he went from them among the Men; and there offering himself
at the same Exercise, he was Victor. This was our Philosopher, according to D.
Laert. VIII, 48. who has all this from Eratosthenes, Favorinus, and
Theaetetus. Iamblichus has the same; and many others. Eratosthenes says
farther, that our Philosopher was the first that boxed according to Art. Yet D.
Laert. cites a Poet, that says this was Pythagoras, Son of Crateus. Hesychius
says, they are mistaken that think it was the Philosopher.

Mnesarchus, Hippasus, who was formerly of Phlius) by Pythais, who was
descended from Ancaeus one of the Planters of Samos. There most Writers say he
was born: though Porphyry would have him born at Tire, and Jamblichus at Sidon,
perhaps as being the ancienter City. It seems there were other Pretenders to
the honor of being his Countrymen: for Joseph. in Ap. 11. says, it is as hard
to tell his Country as Homer's But yet it is harder to tell the year of his
Birth. I am doubtful whether it ought not to be the year 605 before Christ.
But I rather place it here, for Reasons that will appear afterward in the
years 506 and 497 before Christ.

Croesus, and 1 year before Olymp. XLIX. D. Laert. 1, 95. from Sosicrates.

He had reigned at Corinth 44 years. Arist. Pol. v, 12. Of the VII Wise men of
Greece, he was the first that died. The other VI were Thales, Solon, Cleobulus,
Chilo, Bias, and Pittacus, thus reckoned by Diog. Laert. Prooem. 13, and 1.40,
1, 2.

Cicero de Divin. I.

Pythagorae (...), according to Antilochus, Epicurus's death, which was (270
years before Christ) Olymp. CXXVII, 2. Gamelion 10. Cic. de fato. D. Laert. X,
15. and Clem. Alex. (...).

Proconnesius was born this Suidas.

It was after Olymp. L. that Pythagoras came into Italy, says D. Halicarn.
lib. 11. p. 120. But H. Valesius, and Menagius think this is a mistake of
Olymp. N^. instead of Olymp. X

Tarquinius Priscus died. Next King Servius Tullius. Dion. Hal. III.

Suidas, and Eus. Chron. Pontaci, which says it continued 16 years. Eus.
Chron. in a former account has his Tyranny, according to Scaliger's Edition,
beginning Olymp. XXXI, 2, and ending Olymp. XXXVIII, 2. Here also according to
Scaliger it should be LIII, 4.

Teius lived in this Olymp. Polycrates's time. Suidas.

D. Laert 1, 72.

Mitylene. D. Laert.

Pythagoras, being 18 years old, went Jamblichus c. 2. for which, by Thales, he
was advised to go to Egypt. Ib. D. Laert. VIII, 2. says, he was then a young
Man, and addicted to Learning. But his going for Egypt, was to avoid the
growing Tyranny of Polycrates. Strabo XIV. and Jamblichus c. 2. Yet Polycrates
writ a Letter in his Commendation to King Amasis, being his Friend and Hospes,
desiring him to get him instructed by the Egyptian Priests. D. Laert. and
Porph. from Antipho. Iamblichus c. 2. says, he went first to Pherecydes, then
to Anaximander, then to Thales. Id. c. 3. then to Sidon, to Byblus, to Tire,
and many other Cities of Syria: in all which places he was initiated. Then he
took Ship for Egypt: but by the way he landed, and went up Mount Carmel.
Iamblichus, c. 3.

He came into Egypt. Isocr. de laud. Busiridis. Cic. de finibus v. Strab. XIV.
Plin. XXV, 2. Lucian, Tatian, Clem. Alex. He gave Polycrates's Letter to
Amasis, and obtained Amasis's Letter to the Egyptian Priests. D. Laert. and
Porph. from Antipho. With this Letter he came first to them of Heliopolis: they
sent him to them of Memphis, their Seniors: they to the Diospolites; who at
first were very shy; but, fearing to displease Amasis, they undertook him,
thinking at first to balk him with their Austerities. But he underwent all,
says Porphyry from Antipho. He was circumcised, and initiated in their Sacred
Rites. Clement. Alex. (...). He learnt the Egyptian Language, he learnt their
three sorts of Letters. They admitted him to their Sacrifices, and Exercises of
Learning; which none ever obtained before. D. Laert. from Antipho. He learnt of
their Priests the manner of their Sacrifices, and their religious Rites. Isocr.
de l. Busir. He read the Books of their ancient Priests, Clem. Alex. He learnt
their Geometry, and Astronomy. Jambl. c. 4. He got the Observations of infinite
Ages. Valor. Maximus, VIII, 7. He was in Egypt a long time, as all confess.
Plut. Q. Symposiac. VIII, 8.22 years says Jambl. c. 4. This I believe was all
the time of his Eastern Travels. He also went to the King of Arabia, and learnt
all he could there. Porph.

Strabo XIV. p. 439, 18, etc. says, from A^gypt he went to Babylon. There he
was with the Chaldees and Magi. D. Laert. There at Babylon he learnt of several
of the Chaldees; particularly of Zabratus, by whom he was purged from all the
Desilements of his former Life. Porph. He was Disciple of Nazaratus the
Assyrian. Clem. Alex. (...). He went to the Persian Magi. Cic. de finibus V.
Plin. XXV, 2. Of them he learnt matters of their Religion, and way of Living.
D. Laert. from Lycus. There he came to learn and understand the Jewish
knowledge, particularly their Oniromancy. Porphyry from Diogen.

In his return from Babylon, he came to Crete to get Minos's Laws. Justin, V,
4. After his being with the Chaldees and Magi, he was there in Crete with
Epimenides. D. Laert. VIII, 3. He was purged by the Priests of Morgus, one of
the Idaean Dactyli. Porph. He went into the Idaean Cave. Ib. The Priests there
have the Verses that he made on the Sepulcher of Jupiter. Ib.

After his return from Babylon, he came home to Samos. Strabo XIV. So D. Laert.
and Porph. from Antipho. There he opened a School in a place called in
Antipho's time, Pythagorae Hemicyclus. D. Laert. and Porph. from Antipho. There
he also had a Cave without the Town, into which he retired for his Studies. Id.
and Id. This is the sum of what we read of the Life of Pythagoras for the
space of 22 years, that is, as I account it, from the year before Christ 568,
till the year 546 before Christ.

Apollo Hyperboreus, Greece. Eus. Chron. Scaligeri, and two MSS. Other MSS
bring him 10 years sooner. Harpocration from Pindar faith, he came in the time
of Croesus.

Athens was made Susarion, and acted upon a movable Scaffold. Chron. Marmor.

Nabocolassar or Nebucadnezzar King of Babylon. Next his Son Iluarodam or Evil
Merodach. This year Jan. 1^. was his first Thoth according to Ptolemee's Canon.

Herod. 1.86.

PISISTRATUS was now Tyrantat Athens. Chron. Marm.

TH. AESOP died. Eus. Chron.

CLEOBULUS was yet living at Lindus, if his Epistle to Solon be true, which we
have in D. Laert. 1.93.

Astyages King of Media. Next his Cyaxares. Xen. 1. Scripture calls him Darius
the Mede. Africanus says all agree that Cyrus Son of Cambyses, by Mandane,
Daughter of Astyages, began his Reign over the Persians in Olymp. LV.

Iluarodam killed by his Sister's Husband Neriglissoroor. Beros. Next King of
Babylon; this Neriglissoroor or Nergalsharezer. His first Thoth was Jan. 10.
this year in Ptol. Canon.

Cyprus this Spring. VSS. Annals. He died 2 Pisistrati Plut. in Solon.

Adimantus was Archon, as himself says* and so Chron. Marm.

if in Olymp. LIII, 4, then he died seven year later. The people of Agrigentum
rose against him, and killed him. Cic. Offic. 11.

Suidas. Eus. Chron. is Olymp. LVI, 2. the highest is Olymp. LIVE, 4.

This year Euthydemus was Archon at Athens. Chron. Marm. And the year that he
was Archon, CHILO was Ephorus at Lacedaemon. D. Laert. 1.68 from Sosicrates.

TH. Laborosoarchod Son of Neriglissoroor Babylon, Nabonadius or Labynitus,
called Belshazzar in Scripture. His first Thoth was Jan. 9, according to Ptol.
Canon.

Chinese. Martin. Hist. Sin.

Croesus past over the River Halys on a Thales. Herod. 1.75. and so lost
himself and his Kingdom, after 14 years Reign. Herod. 1, 86. that was this year
according to my account from Herodotus.

D. Laert. Eus. Chron. Scal. and Pont. from 4 MSS. He was born in Olymp. XXXV,
and died 90 years old. D. Laert. 1, 38.91 years old, says Chron. Paschale.

Ionic D. Laert. Prooem.

Now flourished LASUS of Hermione, that first wrote of Music. Schol. Arist. in
Vespas.

Diog. Laert. II, 2. from Apollodorus. He flourished chiefly under Polycrates
Tyrant of Samos. Ib. XENOPHANES lived in his time. D. Laert. IX, 18. But his
Successor in the School was ANAXIMENES.

XANTHUS the Lydian Historian lived Sardes was taken. Suidas.

Pythagoras, being 40 years old, and seeing it was not for a Freeman to live in
his Country under the Tyranny of Polycrates, which was now stricter than
formerly; thereupon thought of going into Italy. D. Laert. and Porph. from
Aristoxenus; and Strabo XIV. without the year.

In his way thither he went to Delos, where he writ those Verses on Apollo's
Sepulcher. Porph. from Diog. He went to Lacedaemon for the Laws of Lycurgus.
Just. V, 4. He came to Phlius the ancient Country of his Family. There being
asked by Leo, Tyrant of that City, what Profession he was of, he said, of none;
but that he was a Philosopher. See the rest in Cic. Tusc. Qu. V. or in D.
Laert. Prooem. 12. who says this was at Sicyon, and who makes Leo Tyrant of
Sicyon and Phlius. Both Cic. and D. Laert. Prooem. have it from Heraclides. But
D. Laert. VIII, 8. has much the same story from Sosicrates, Pythagoras went
also to Delphi to give the more authority to his Laws, by pretending that he
received them from Theoclea, or Themistoclea, the Priestess of Apollo in that
place. D. Laert. VIII. 7, 21. from Aristoxenus. Porphyry calls her Aristoclea.

Being come into Italy, he lived there all the rest of his life. Strabo XIV. He
taught there 40 years wanting one, says Jamb. c. 36, who makes his whole Life
very near 100 years. Ib. He stayed 20 years at Croton, then went to Metapontum,
where he died. Justin, XX, 5. At Croton he began the Italic School, which grew
old at Metapontum, says Clem. Alex. (...). Croton was then in great Glory for
having so many of Pythagoras's Scholars in it, among whom was Milo the most
famous Athleta: Strabo IV.

Dion. Halicarn. says Pythagoras was in his (...), four Generations after
Numa. It is to be considered, whether he reckons from the beginning of his
Reign, which was in Olymp. XVI, 3. or whether from the end, which was Olymp.
XXVII, I. Plut in the Life of Numa says, Pythagoras came into Italy almost
five Ages after Numa. Livy 1.18. says, he came into Italy above 100 years
after Numa; accounting no doubt from his death in 672 before Christ. Livy says
farther, it is certain, that in the time of Servius Tullius, Pythagoras had his
Colleges of Disciples at Metapontum, Heraclea, and Croton, as abovementioned.

Medes were coming up against Ionians, of which Anaximenes writes to
Pythagoras, who was then at Croton, and had his house full of Scholars out of
Italy and Sicily, if the Epistle be genuine. D. Laert. II, 5.

D. Laert. Eus. Chron. He lived in the time of my Gentilis, (that is, of
Servius Tullius,) says Cicero, Tusc. Qu. I.

THEOGNIS the Poet of Megara flourished now. Eus. Chron. Pontaci.

Herod. 1. that he advised the Jones to leave their Country to the Medes, and
go all to Sardinia.

Pythagoras now flourished. D. Laert.

Now also XENOPHANES Colophonius flourished D. Laert. IX. 20. of whom see
before in 547, before Christ. He was now at least 80 years old, according to
Sextus Empiricus, and Clem. Alex. from Apollodor. that place him in Olymp. XL.
But he was a Writer till after he was 98 years old. D. Laert. IX. 19.

Now IBYCUS, the Poet of Rhegium, came to Samos. Eus. Chron. Scalig. and Pontac.

Belshazzar's being slain in the taking of Babylon by the Armies of Darius and
Cyrus, the next King of Babylon was Darius or Cyaxares according to Xenophon.
His Reign being short, he is omitted in the Canon, and there the next is Cyrus,
whose Thoth was Jan. 5.

TH. Cambyses Father of Cyrus in Persia, Cyaxares in Media. Xenophon. VIII.
according to whom this is the first of the seven years reign of Cyrus at
Babylon.

Pythagoras was now famous in Italy, Thericles being Archon at Athens. Diod.
Sic. Excerpta. p. 241.

The first TRAGEDY at Athens, was made by Thespis, and acted on a Wagon, in
Olymp. LXI. Suid. See Chron Marm.

Servius Tullius died this year. Live. Roman King was Tarquinius Superbus. In
this Tarquin's time Pythagoras came into Italy according to Cic. Tusc. Qu. I.
and A. Gellius, XVII, 21.

Eus. Chron. has this year Polycrates, Syloson and Pantagnotus Tyrants
together at Samos. But Polycrates drove out his two Brothers soon after. Now in
Polycrates's time Pythagoras flourished. Tatian. p. 174. B. Clem. Alex. (...).
Cyril. contra Julian. II. In this Olympiad, in which Eryxias was Victor;
Pythagoras came into Italy, says Jambl. c. 7. He was now famous, says Eus.
Chron.

Cyrus being now dead, his Son Cambyses Persia. His first Thoth was Jan. 3.
according to Ptol. Canon.

Athens died Arist. Polit. V. 12. Next was his Son HIPPARCHUS, a great lover of
Learning. He first brought Homer's Poems to Athens. Plato in Hipparcho.

Justin, XX, 5. Pythagoras Italy, removed from Croton to Metapontum, and died
there. It was at Metapontum, that as the Fablers say, having taken his Disciple
Abaris's Arrow, he rode upon it in the Air from thence to Taurominium in one
day, though some days sailing distant from one another. Ponph. and Jambl. They
tell us, that there at Metapontum, he had a noble house, which was afterward
the Temple of Ceres, and a School. which was called the Museum. Iambl. c. 30.

Amasis King of Egypt. He died Cambyses was coming against Egypt. Diod. Sic.
1. The next King Psammenitus after 6 Months was killed, and Egypt conquered by
Cambyses. Herod. III.

AESCHYLUS was born. Chr.

Samos died Cambyses King of Persia. Herod. III. 120. about V. C. 238. Plin.
XXXIII, 1.

Cambyses King of Persia. Next King Smerdis Magus was killed after seven
Months. Next was Darius Son of Hystaspes. His first Thoth was 521. Jan. 1.
according to Ptolemey's Canon.

Suidas.

Suid. and lived 85 years. Lucian in Macrob. He was eat up with Lice. Arist.
Hist. Animal. V. 30* and that for his Blasphemy. Aelian. IV, 28. Serpents came
out of his Body. Plin. VII, 5.

Pythagoras, who had been his Disciple, now hearing that he was dying in Delos,
went out of Italy thither, and did all he could to recover him: and when he was
dead, buried him as his Father, and then returned into Italy. Diod. Sic.
Excerpt. That he died in Delos, see Apul. Florid. II. Aelian IV. Hist. 28.
Porph. and Jambl. Duris Samius says he died in Samos, followed by D. Laert. I,
119. where also he quotes Heraclides for it. Porphyry says, that Pythagoras
went to Delos from Samos, and returned to Samos. But he says afterward, that
it was in Pythagoras's Absence on this occasion at Delos, that Cylon raised the
Mob, v. infra 497, 6. before Christ. (These things do not agree.)

Harmodius Aristogiton. Thucyd. I, and VI. Then was Pythagoras in Italy. A.
Gell. XVII, 21.

Pythagoras's advice the people of Croton would not deliver up some of Sybaris
that had fled to their Altars for Protection against their own people.
Whereupon a War followed, in which 300000 of the Sybarites were overcome by
Milo with 100000 of Croton, who after this Victory destroyed the City of
Sybaris. Diod. Sic. Olymp. LXXXIII, 3. where he says, this happened 58 years
before, and 5 years, that is in all 63 years before. Therefore I place it in
Olymp. LXVII, 4. This Milo was Disciple of Pythagoras, and had been 6 times
Victor in the Olympic Games. Ib. and often at the other public Games.

Brutus delivered Rome, Pythagoras Italy, says Cic. Tusc. Qu. IV. Solinus c.
16. by mistake says, then he came into Italy.

Eus. Chron. in D. Laert. 1, 44. from Heraclides. This account of his Age
Menage takes to be the most likely, because Lucian does not reckon Pythagoras
among the long-lived men; as probably he would if Pythagoras had lived 90
years, as most say, according to D. Laert. Ib. much more, if he had lived, as
Jamblichus says, very near 100; or as Tzetzes says, perhaps from Jamblichus,
100 wanting one; or according to the nameless Writer in Photii Biblioth.
CCXLIX. 104 years; or according to a nameless Writer in Galen's Works 117 years.

But if the Reader is not yet tired, I will go on with him to the end of the 90
years, which is as far as I see any ground.

Pythagoras is placed in one MS of Eus. Chron.

D. Laert.

PARMENIDES now flourished. D. Laert. IX, 23.

Now Cynaethus Chius first rhapsodied Homer's Verses. Schol. in Pindar. Nem. B.

Aristagoras from taking Arms against Darius King of Persia, Herodot. V. 36.

D. Laert. II, 7. from Apollodorus. This is confirmed by Democritus saying of
himself, tha^ ^e was 40 years younger than Anaxagora^ D. Laert. V. 41. for
Democritus was born Olymp. LXXX. Ib.

Mariana's Copy of Eus. Chron. places Pythagoras this year.

Eus. Chron. Scal. Pontac. from 4 MSS. Most say he lived 90 years. D. Laert.
III. 44. The accounts of his death are various. The likeliest is that which we
have in the Excerpta of Diod. Sic. Porphyry, and Jambl. c. 35. They tell how
one Cylon of Croton, a rich, ambitious, boisterous man, having offered himself
to be taken into the College, and being refused, was thereby so enraged, that
he got the Mob together, and fell upon Milo's house, when Pythagoras and his
Disciples were all there together, and burnt the house, and all that were in
it, except two or three that narrowly escaped. Some say Pythagoras was one of
them that were burnt there. Others say, he escaped out of the Fire, and was
killed in pursuit. Others, that he fled to Caulonia, thence to Locri, thence to
Tarentum; but being no where received, at last he went to Metapontum, and there
got into the Muses Temple, where being kept from Victuals 40 days, he was
starved. Hermippus, whom Josephus calls the most eminent Writer of Pythag.
Life, has a most unlikely story of his death. He says that being engaged with
^he Agrigentines against the Syracusans, and his Party, being worsted, he was
taken in Flight because he would not run over a Bean Plot, and so was killed by
the Enemy. D. Laert. has an Epigram on his Death, according to this Story,
which I think indeed is fitter for a Poet than an Historian.

After his Death, those of his Disciples that were living, are said to have
been dispersed into Greece, and the neighboring Countries. And yet his Family
is said to have continued at or about Croton. His Wife Theano was born there,
according to Clem. Alex. from Didymus, and D. Laert. and Suidas. But Porphyry
says she was of Crete. Some say that she, and her Son Telauges, revived or
continued his School. Others say it was done by Aristaeus of Croton, that
married his Daugh. Theano. His Son Arimnestus is mentioned by Porphyry from
Duris Samius, and said to have taught Democritus the famous Philosopher. D.
Laert. mentions his Son Marmacus, and D. Damo. Suidas seems to call that Son
Mnesarchus, and also mentions his D. Arignote, and Myia. Another D. of his is
called Sara. But of all these we have nothing that looks like a Certainty, in
my opinion.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. vii. l. 2. have also from. p. ix. l. 12. for LVII, r. LXII. p. 5. l. 1. for
5 2. r. 52. p. 10. l. 12.41 should be in lin. 15. p. 11. l. 22. r. (...).

N. is here put for the Birth, and TH. for the Death of any Person.


