A SPEECH DELIVERED TO HIS MAJESTY In the Name of the French Church AT THE
SAVOY: Containing their Humble Thanks for HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION In favor of
those of the FRENCH Nation, Residing within HIS Dominions.

By A. Lombard, Minister of the said Church.

Published by Command.

DUM PREMOR ATTOLLO

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, living in Thames Street, over against
Baynards Castle. 1665.

A SPEECH delivered to His Majesty in the Name of the French Church at the
Savoy: Containing their humble Thanks for His Majesty's Declaration in favor of
those of the French Nation, residing within His Dominions.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
IT is the French Church at the Savoy, which now craveth Your Royal and
Favorable Audience: And I bring along with me to it, all the Hearts and all the
Vows of those of that Nation, who help to compose that Body.

As I have the honor usually to speak on their behalf to GOD; so have they
given me the honorable Commission to speak this day in their Names to His
VICEGERENT, one of the most August Lieutenants of the DIVINE MAJESTY, whereof
Yours is a most living Character. Neither was it possible (SIRE) to be silent,
where there is so great cause to speak, considering the fresh Testimony of Your
most Royal Bounty, which we have so lately received by Your Majesty's
Declaration in favor of our Nation, whereby You are pleased to suffer their
abode in Your Dominions, under the shadow and protection of Your own Throne.
How could we forbear after this surprising GRACE, and extraordinary FAVOR, at
the least to evidence in some measure unto Your Sacred Majesty, what our Hearts
are big with on this eminent Occasion; and in this Important conjuncture, to
testify some part of our Duty and Acknowledgments? Which (SIRE) are so full,
that we cannot possibly produce them all together, nor in their real extents,
for they loose considerably whilst they are rising from our Hearts but to our
Lips, such are our transports and our joys within.

Each good Frenchman within Your Kingdoms, is doubtless full of this sense,
and especially such whom You permit here to enjoy the greatest and most dear
of all Interests, and to be as it were linked unto Your own Crown, by the
Sacred ties of Religion, and by the Sympathy of the same FAITH. But (GREAT SIR)
suffer us, we beseech You, to presume that our Church and Congregation may
challenge a Right for her particular Application upon the occasion of this Your
General Declaration; and that she ought to behold it with an Eye and Light much
differing from the rest of the French; and that discerning therein a more
especial concernment and interest, she has with reason imposed on her self a
more singular way of acknowledgment.

No doubt (SIRE) but all Men will observe no less then we do, an infinite
Charity in this Your most Prudent Declaration: All Strangers, Your generous
Hospitality; And all French, an incomparable Generosity. The wise and knowing,
will admire in it Your wonderful penetrating Spirit, as well as Your preventive
Policy, which foils and disappoints all the pernicious designs of that of Your
Enemies, who must now be obliged to confess, That Your Majesty understands the
Art of Reigning in our Hearts, and has found out an infallible way how to make
good Subjects of Natural Frenchmen, even while they remain such. Certainly all
Christendom will discover in every part of it, the perfect Genius of
Christianity, and will be surprised to see the Spirit of Peace, thus reigning
in a Declaration of War. All of the Protestant Profession may learn by it; that
Your Majesty does indeed consider Your Divine Title of DEFENDER OF THE FAITH,
as the most beautiful Flower of Your Diadem.

They must consider You, Great Sir, from All the ends of the Earth, where
Divine Providence has placed them, as the Supreme Head of the Reformed World,
as the Angel of the Church, and the Light of Israel: And especially the
Protestants of our Nation, who remain within Your Majesty's Dominions, and have
embraced with us the Reformation, and Discipline of the Church of England, have
already, doubtless, with extreme satisfaction observed, in this Your Majesty's
Declaration (or rather Oracle) all the Illumination, Piety, Prudence, and
Moderation, which every day they so earnestly pray to GOD for upon Your
Majesty, in their holy Prayers and Devotions.

Permit us (SIRE) to repeat it once again, but in few words, lest we abuse Your
Royal Patience; That our Church upon this occasion enters into further and more
particular thoughts and reflections; and that she enjoys the taste of this Your
Majesty's benignity, with more delight and sweetness, then the rest of the
French, who have it common with us, because it is a Church which has the honor
to be Your own Workmanship, and ows its Establishment and Subsistence to Your
Self.

She looks upon You (GREAT SIR) as her Founder and Patriarch. It was Your
Majesty, that like another Apollo, did fix this floating Island; You provided
rest for this Ark, and when we have the Blessing there to present our selves
frequently before the Throne of Grace, we remember, that it is evermore under
the blessed shadow and auspicious protection of that of Your Majesty.
Therefore as this Church has been confirmed in her first Privileges by that
Your Majesty's wise, Christian, and Protestant Declaration; and that withal,
Your Majesty does thereby sustain her, even when in appearance she was at the
point to fall; and that some were prone to believe, that the very Interests of
State required her entire destruction;

Is it not so (most Gracious Sovereign) that she is under a double Obligement
to Your Majesty for her conservation and settlement? And that You are now, as
it were, a second time her Founder and her Father? And that therefore, albeit
the Oracle, by which she subsists still, were pronounced in behalf of all the
French, it appears how much more especially it touches and concerns those
Members, out of which her Body is framed? And it is also most evident and
certain, That our Acknowledgments ought to be, and are much more strong and
passionate then those of others.

But (Gracious Sir) what is there we can do, that may in any measure express
it? We have nothing but faint words, and useless thanks to present You with,
for that Royal Word (in the terms of Your own Declaration) for that great and
saving Word issued from the Royal Mouth of our Cyrus, in favor of all our
Tribe. Such yet as they are, these thanks, these words, we are bold to offer
them to Your Majesty, as we do most humbly; as sincere, as faithful, as true,
as are the words of the Soul it self, her thoughts and motions.

In this sort only it is, that we presume to tell Your Sacred Majesty, (though
in terms, it may be, like Hearts filled with Zeal and Submission) that we
render You Declaration for Declaration; and that we think we can not better
answer that which Your Majesty has been pleased to publish in our Favor, then
by that we now make to Your Majesty; which is, That we shall never cease to
have for Your Majesty, all the Loyalty and Reverence, all the tenderness, zeal,
and utmost duty, which the most humble, most obedient, and most faithful of all
Your Majesty's Subjects and Servants do ow You.

FINIS.

