TITHE NO Gospel Maintenance FOR Gospel Ministers.

In an EPISTLE to all who Conscienciously suffer for not Paying them.

By William Loddington:

Haec olim meminisse juvabit. Posterity shall reap the Fruits,
Of your hard Sufferings by Tythe-suits.
LONDON, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street. 1695.

To the Priest that Sues for Tithe.
DID thy Parish'oners themselves invite
Thee to their Pulpit? Do they still delight
To hear thee Preach? (...) I shall not gainsay.
Nulla volenti fit injuria.
He that is free to hear, should freely pay.
But if within thy Parish any dwell,
Who see the Way, which does thy Ways excel;
Here is for Thee and Them a Dram that may
God's Power Co-working, purge thy wrath away;
And strengthen them, that in a Suffering Season,
Men may not judge them wilful, void of
Truth having taught us rightly to divide
What things are God's, and what is on Caesar's side.
Let not Man's Idol Self divert thine Eyes,
Then this may prove to thee a richer Prize
Than Levi's Tithe. For if thou would advance
Christ's glorious Gospel; trust his 1 Cor. 1.9, 14.
Maintenance.
W. L. TITHE NO Gospel Maintenance FOR Gospel Ministers.
Dear Friends,
IN the weighty Sense of God's Honor, and the Peoples Welfare, both which are
eminently concerned in your Sufferings, do I salute you; desiring all Grace and
Peace, Courage and Constancy, may be in You.

You may probably expect harder Sufferings than many others, for many of those
you have to deal with, neither want Wit to disgrace us, nor Malice to pursue us
to the utmost of their Chain.

I doubt not but you are well satisfied in the Goodness of your Cause, though
some of you may not have so many words in readiness to defend it, as others.
But inward Satisfaction is beyond Words. Yet this I knowing by long Experience,
That it is a Refreshment and Delight to hear that Cause justified by others, for
which I suffer, I am concerned to add this Mite for that end partly, as also to
inform impartial Readers we have Scripture and Reason with us.

I know many able Friends have abounded in this subject, I have only this to
say, I know none in so few words. It Is the more probable Men of Business will
sooner read it.

First, We may observe for our Encouragement, how the Clergymen (so called) of
late Years, have retreated from pleading for Tithe upon a Gospel Account.

With their Jure Divino, People formerly were very much frighted: But now
(blessed be God) there is so much Light broken forth, as discovers the Darkness
of those kind of Arguments for Tithe; which the Priest himself perceiving, runs
now to the Law of the Land, as his best plea for Tithe.

Take one instance out of a Learned Man's Commentary upon Heb. 7. after a large
pleading for Tithe, he closes up his Matter with this Question, 'Why are
Tithes under the Gospel paid to Ministers? Mark his Answer verbatim, 'It is for
the most part the fittest Proportion, and that the very Heathen did observe
about their Ministers. When God himself set down a distinct and particular
Portion for his Ministers (he should have said Priests) he judged a Tenth part
most convenient. Hereupon (says he) good Governors have in all their
Commonwealths thought meet to establish such a Portion, and where such a
Portion is established by Law, the People are bound in Conscience to observe
the same.

Thus we see how so Great and Learned a Man as Dr. Gouge found himself
necessitated, page 129. to clench up his whole Argument for Tithe in his day,
with the Law of the Land. And now it is become a general plea for it.

But a little more to this Heb. 7. because I read it as the plainest Text in
all the Scripture to prove Tithe abolished. The Author in this Chapter
principally treats of the Levitical Priesthood, and their Maintenance, by way
of Comparison to Christ and his Ministry, as if he had lived in our day, and
heard our Controversy about Tithes. Therefore to end, or rather to prevent all
such Disputes, he first proves Christ to be an High Priest after the Order of
Melchisedeck, and not after the Order of Aaron, and therefore his Ministers not
to be maintained, as the Others Priesthood. Mark how he grants, ver. 5. That
the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood, have a Command to
take Tithes of the People according to the Law, that is of their Brethren; but
in ver. 12. The Priesthood being changed, there is made of Necessity a change
also of the Law. If any ask, Of what Law? What Answer can be with Sense or
Reason, but of the Ceremonial Law, and especially of Tithes, that Priesthoods
Maintenance, as a Branch of that Law, and in particular mentioned by the
Apostle upon this Occasion. Nothing can be more plain; for if he had believed,
that Tithes were to be paid to Christ's Ministers, here was a very fit
Opportunity to confirm it.

But for as much as the Law of the Land is most pleaded now; I turn to that.

' Obj. The Law (say the Clergy) which compels People to pay them Tithe, is
very just, for Tithe is not theirs, they did not buy them when they bought
their Lands, but the purchase was the cheaper, because they were Tythable.

Ans. The common Answer to this is not to be omitted, viz. That the Writings do
not except the Tithes, if they had, the Objection had been good; but the common
form of Deeds, is to have and to hold every part and parcel of the Premises,
with the Appurtenances. But further, It Is but reasonable, such Tythe-sick Land
should be sold cheaper than other Land; for if the Buyer have Faith and
Patience to suffer for the Good of Posterity, he must expect great Sufferings
and Charges, before it be Cured of this Evil. For it is not to be done by any
outward Force or Might, but by the Spirit of the Lord, Zach. 4.6. The Lamb in
time will have the Victory, Rev. 12.11. It Is well observed in our Common
Grammar, Daemona non Armis sed Morte subegit Ie^sus.

And we may truly say -- De^cima non Armis sed Morte necatur Jesus,
Legibus, aut Armis non revocanda feris.
Tithe, not by Arms, but by Christ's Death being slain;
No Laws, or Arms can give it Life again.


But a little more to this, because it is the most common, and thought the
strongest Objection. I grant as aforesaid, I bought Land the cheaper for being
Tythable. I will freely give Two and Twenty Years Purchase for Tythe-free Land,
rather than Twenty for Tythable. But what is that to the Priest? This gives him
no Right to it. Nor can any Law, as a Salary for Preaching; for Christ has
established a Maintenance for his Ministers, and it is not in the power of any
Government under Heaven to change it. Wherefore such as Demand Tithe by virtue
of the Law of the Land, either confess by so doing, that Christ has not
commanded it; or that refusers to pay are disobedient to his Commands, or else
that they like not his Law for their Maintenance, Luke 10.7. All which are
liable to many Absurdities.

Naked Truth speaks thus of Tithes, in the Second Part, page 30.

' It Is the idlest of Dreams to say, That because the Priesthood under the Law*
the Levites, had the Tithes of the whole Land, that therefore by the same
Reason, Ministers of the Gospel, should have the same Proportion and Allowance
out of all Men's Estates, and that it is Sacrilege to detain them. For is the
Parish Priest the Twelfth part of the Parish he lives in, though you also
number with him his Family, if he have any? Or are the Clergy and their
Families the Twelfth part of England, as the Tribe of Levi was the Twelfth part
of Israel.

And therefore, says he, 'it is an idle Dream, and a Bugbear, to call
detaining of Tithe, Sacrilege; except it can be proved, that God, or Christ,
or the Apostles ever took (or commanded to be taken) the Tenth to Gospel
Ministers, (as God expressly commanded the Tithes of all Israel to the Levites)
that bear no proportion in Number to the Tribe of Levi, nor are the Tenth part,
nor scarce the Hundredth part of most Parishes, and yet shall lick up the whole
Tenth of the Parish.

He further adds in the same page, concerning those great Tithes which by Henry
VIII. were taken from the Abbots and Nuns, 'That they, as gotten by a Cheat,
Escheated to the King by the Law of the Land.

Now whether all the rest of the Clergies Tithes were not gotten by a Cheat, as
much as the Abbots and Nuns, and may as lawfully Escheat to the King as the
other, I leave to more able Judgments to determine, when it shall be judged
expedient by the Government, to Debate it.

But until a Seizure be made by the Government, totally taking away the
Sacerdotical use thereof as aforesaid, I know none have more Right to the
Tithe, than the Owners of the Land: Because I believe all Clergy-mens Claims
are of no force, and all who Conscienciously refuse to pay them, say as much in
plain English, by their denial of them: For they cannot demand Tithe but upon
the Account of their Ministry, and other Ecclesiastical Offices, which if they
neglect, the Law will not give it them. Wherefore by paying Tithe in Obedience
to such a Law, I practically own and support that Priesthood, Offices and
Calling. And it is but an Equivocation to say I disown them, and yet pay to
maintain them. Every Eye may see, fear to suffer, is the Motive to pay,
whatever is pretended. Nor will it excuse to say, it is paid only in Obedience
to the Law; for by that Argument I may as lawfully go to Mass as to Meetings,
if a Law should command it, which God forbid.

' Obj. I have seen an Objection in ^ to spring from the Root, viz. That by
denying Tithes we teach the Tenants to Popish Landlords, to pay them no Rent,
because they may employ it to Popish Services.

Ans. Proper Comparisons explain things, improper cast a Mist before the
Reader's Eyes. Popish Landlords do not let their Lands upon Condition, the Rent
shall be paid to their Priests by the Tenant, for saying Masses, if they
should, I know no Protestant that would be their Tenant. They let their Lands
as other Men, to have the Rent paid to themselves; and it is not a Tenant's
Concern, to inquire what his Landlord will do with his Rent.

' Obj. But further, the same Author very plausibly, and no doubt very strongly
in his own Opinion, returns the thing upon us thus, as if the Case were our
own. If you or I (says he) should by a Deed for Ever, give a Ninth part of our
Estates, to Teachers of our own Persuasion, over and above the Tenth, which is
none of ours, and should after sell the remaining Eight parts, and abate the
Buyer proportionably in Price, would you not count such a Buyer a Thief, if he
should take that Ninth part, and call it his own, saying, We gave it to a bad
Use?

Ans. No, I should rather count the Seller a Cheat, and the Buyer a Fool. For
instance; Suppose the Land thus sold contains Ninety Acres, is not he a Cheat,
that gives away Ten of them, and yet sells me the whole Ninety? for my Deed
must mention, either Eighty or Ninety. If but Eighty Acres is expressed, it is
folly to claim any more; but if the whole Ninety be in, I am no Thief to keep
it all.

' Obj. But here it will be replied, that though the whole Ninety Acres were in
the Writing, yet I had an implicit Abatement, in Consideration of my paying
the Ninth part to such Preachers.

Ans. The Reason of this Abatement, when the Bargain was made, was either
mentioned or not; if it was, and agreed unto by the Buyer, the Objection is
good, but if it was not, as generally it is not, in the Case of Tithe, then
this Objection, takes for granted, that the Buyer must do, what the Seller
thinks he must do. This is childish, to suppose, that a Seller's Thoughts must
be a Rule for the Buyer's Actions.

2. But secondly, This implicit Abatement begs, what I utterly deny, viz. That
a Man may bind his Heirs to pay what he gives to uphold such Religions and
Forms of Worship as he himself believes to be right. The very Government of
England have denied this; for by their taking Tithes as aforesaid, from the
Roman Clergy, to whom they were first given, and giving them to their own
Clergy, they plainly declare, That Gifts given to bad Uses, are not binding,
nor ought to be employed to such purposes. To confirm this, hear what one
Brightman, a Famous Man in his day, says in his Exposition of Rev. 17.16. 'By
what Right does Rome challenge her Territories? What did the Emperors give it
them? Just so as Constantine gave his Palace to the City of Rome.

'But admit (says he) that Pepin and Charles, gave them all this, they gave
it, when they knew not what they did: They thought they did it to advance the
Christian Religion; but seeing it is now found out by lamentable Experience,
that there was never any thing has more redounded to the undoing of the
Church, and the overthrow of Piety, than this Bounty of theirs, why should not
the Emperors take their own again?

That the Civil Magistrate has power to convert Payments from Religious
Ceremonies to Civil Uses, is indisputably confirmed by our Savior himself,
both by paying and commanding that Tribute to be paid which is mentioned, Mat.
17.24. and Chap. 22.21. For if Godwin's Records of those Times, and the
Marginal Notes in our Bibles be true, that Tribute had been long paid to the
Temple at Jerusalem, Exodus 30.13. And this is very probable, for if it had been
an ordinary Tribute, there had not been such Ground to scruple it. But Caesar's
taking it from the Temple, might exasperate the Jews, as well others as the
Galileans, and raise the Question so high, as, Whether it were lawful to pay it
him or not? But Christ ends the Controversy, as before said, without disputing
Caesar's Authority to receive it, which doubtless they which came to trap him,
thought he would have done, or else I see no Snare in their Question, ver. 17.

But to return a full and final Answer to this Objection. You may see plainly
how it begs all them for Fools, who deny Tithes to be a Maintenance for Gospel
Ministers, by supposing them willing to encumber their Land with what they
disown: And their Ministers also to be of the same Principle to receive such a
kind of Maintenance, which is not to be supposed in this Case.

Thus we see how ignorantly Men argue when out of Truth, how confusedly they
jumble things Temporal and Spiritual together, supposing things not to be
supposed, to make a Paint for Diana Tithe. And then follows harsh words, as
Cheats, and Thieves, for not paying it. But what care some, so long as they can
quiet their Minds with this, That they have a Law for it. So did Informers of
late, and the Jews of old, Joh. 19.7.

But whether a Law will stand the Trial before the Great Lawmakers of Heaven
and Earth, is too often the least part, though it should be the principal Part
of every Man's Examination, before he conform to it. But are not such of
Vespasian's Humor? who when he was advised not to lay a Tax upon Urine, it is
said he answered, Dulcis odor lucri ex re qualibet.
No kind of Profit comes amiss,
If got by a Law, though it stinks like Piss.


' Obj. Lastly, The Priest has one more fling at us, saying, His Title to the
Tenth is as good as ours to the other Nine parts; and that the Law has given
him a Right to it, as much as of the Rest to us.

Ans. This fair show has a false Foundation. For the Law creates not a Right
or Title to things of this Nature betwixt Man and Man. Gift or Purchase is the
true Ground of Right and Property. When a Man Buys an Estate, or has it given
him, it is truly his own, before any Writings be made; yet we go to Counsel to
have them drawn, to secure it from false Claims. So the Law in this Case may
fitly be compared to a Man of War, which defends the Merchant's Goods from
Pirates. But the Merchant's Title to his Goods is not derived from the Man of
War.

' Obj. If any Reply, That the Law gives the Poor a Right to the Rates or Taxes
charged upon our Land without our Consent.

Ans. The Poor's Right to Relief is grounded upon the Law of God, Lev. 25.35.
Romans 15.26, 27. Gal. 2.10, etc. and he is not a Christian that denies it:
Therefore it is not the Law of the Land, that gives the Poor an Original Right
to Relief; it only does, as aforesaid, secure Relief to them, by commanding
equal Collections for them in all Parishes.

I might further show, if it were needful, how unreasonable it is for the
Priest to force those to pay him, that never hear him, or receive any Benefit
by his Ministry. But most Peoples Eyes are open to see this. I know no Man, not
concerned in Tithe, nor blinded with Prejudice, but will grant, there is as
little Reason, why I should be compelled to maintain a Minister of his
Religion, as for him to maintain one of mine: Or for me to build or repair a
Place for him to worship in, as for him to repair one for me. This Fruit would
naturally grow upon the Tree of Conscience Liberty, did not some kind of Brids
spoil the Blossoms.

Truth has always pure Reason on its side, and it teaches every Friend rightly
to their measure to answer Questions of the hope in them, 1 Pet. 3.15. And I
pray with the Apostle, 2 These. 3.2. to be delivered from unreasonable Men, for
such have not Faith. But I shall briefly conclude this about Reason, with those
Ingenious Verses of Palingenius concerning it, Lib. 8. Quicquid Aristoteles vel
quivis dicat eorum
Dicta nihil moror, a vero quum forte recedunt.
Nemo putet sibi me addictum; mihi flectere mentem
Solo solet Ratio, Ratio Dux fida Sophorum:
Hanc scrutator amet very, imprimisque sequatur.
When Learned Rabbis, or great Aristotle,
Recede from Truth, their Talk's but Tittle Tottle.
Let no Man think me to himself to bind,
Reason, pure Captain Reason rules my Mind;
And every Man's, that seeks the Truth to find.


So, dear Friends, I have given you very plain and short Answers to the
strongest Arguments, I ever heard for the Priest's Tithes. I pray God convince
all in Power, that we are not against any Man's Civil Property; nor that we
deny Tithe because it is a burden to our Estates, but to our Consciences. We
know our Savior has put an end to them, and we dare not continue them: But
are made willing rather to suffer the severe Penalties of the Law, as Writs of
Rebellions, Sequestrations, Outlawries, Treble Damages, and Imprisonments unto
Death. Lord incline the Government to take off these hard things, before the
Cry of the Oppressed bring down greater Calamities than yet we have seen. In
the mean time, that we may stand faithful and patient under all, to the End, is
the Desire and Prayer of,

Your True Friend, W. L.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN the End of many Bibles there is a Form of Prayer, for private Families,
bound up no doubt but by Consent of Authority. It begins thus,

Almighty and most Merciful Father -- and about the middle it goes on thus --
And because thou have commanded us to pray one for another, we do not only make
our Request (O Lord) for our selves, but for all People and Nations of the
World, who as they know by thy Wonderful Works, that thou art God over all, so
they may be instructed by thy Holy Spirit to believe in thee their only Savior
and Redeemer. But for as much as they cannot believe except they hear, nor
cannot hear but by Preaching, and none can Preach except he be sent: Therefore
(O Lord) raise up faithful Distributers of thy Mysteries, who setting apart all
Worldly Respects, may both in their Life and Doctrine only seek thy Glory.
Contrarily confound Satan, Antichrist, with all Hirelings, (and Papists in some
Copies) whom thou have already cast off into a Reprobate Sense, that they may
not by Sects, Schisms, Heresies and Errors disquiet thy little Flock. And
because (O Lord) we be fallen into the latter Days and dangerous Times, wherein
Ignorance has gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his Ministers, seeks by all
means to quench the Light of thy Gospel, we beseech thee to maintain thy Cause
against those Ravening Wolves, and strengthen all thy Servants, whom they keep
in Prison and Bondage.

Quis non subscriberet -- Amen?
FINIS.

