A CATALOGUE OF The most vendible Books in England, Orderly and Alphabetically
Digested, Under the Heads of Divinity, History, Physic and Chyrurgery, Law,
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astrology, Dialling, Measuring Land and Timber, Gageing,
Navigation, Architecture, Horsmanship, Faulconry, Merchandise, Limning,
Military Discipline, Heraldry, Fortification and Fireworks, Husbandry,
Gardening, Romances, Poems, Plays, etc. WITH Hebrew, Greek and Latin for
Schools and Scholars. The like Work never yet performed by any. Also, All sorts
of Globes, Mapps of the World or in Parts, either Kingdoms, Provinces or
particular Counties; French and Duch Pictures and Landskips; Paper of all sorts
from 5s to 5lb a Reame: The best perfumed India, and English Wax, etc.

All to be sold by the Author at his Shop in New Castle.

Varietas Delectat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1657.

TO THE GENTRY, MINISTERS of the GOSPEL AND OTHERS. Of a Peculiar Choice TO THE
Wise, Learned and Studious in the Northern Counties OF Northumberland, Bppk of
Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland.
GENTLEMEN, (For such should be Scholars, and Scholars are no less,)
THis Work seems of right to challenge your protection: The true Nobleness,
Virtue, Learning and Wisdom of many I know, has bribed me to honor your
remembrance, and bring my endeavors to the test of your sober and judicious
Judgments; which if accepted and heartily interpreted, in earnest, it is all I
expect and crave; nor shall I value what others disprove, if you do but approve
of my intention: Nobility of Blood, Gentlemen, is but the fruits and effects of
Learning, and culture of the mind, whereby the Country has ever tasted the
sweet fruits thereof: and thus Virtue and Honor become Rivals, when vice and
baseness become extinct: Honors and Titles, are but attendants on the most
Noble deserts of a Learned and virtuous mind; nor can they be accounted above
Apparel and Drapery to a comely person; for true Gentility hangs not upon the
Nothing of vulgar applause, but is absolute in it self: I remember a story of
Doctor of the Civil Law, that having Knighthood hung to his Estate by Sigismund
the Emperor, presently accounted the Society of his fellow Doctors at a cheap
rate, only valuing Knights as most fit consorts for his new Degree; for which
great folly he was publicly accosted at the Counsel of Constance by the
Emperor in these words; Fool who preferrest Knighthood before Learning, the
gingles of Fame before that true worth of the mind; I can coin a thousand
Knights in one day, but cannot one Doctor in a thousand years. You may imagine
he wished himself out of the Senate: Such men are not wanting in all ages, that
overvalue their fortune, and undervalue their best and truest riches; which I
hope is not a fault that sticks to your more sober and solid esteem of Knowledge
and Learning. To be endowed with both, is that (Gentlemen) which privileges
your free access to the Title of Honor, and proclaims you the very Honor of
your Country.

But if there be any so unfortunate, as naturally to fall under the Rank of my
Dedication, and are not poised with apt endowments for the service of their
Country for want of Learning and Knowledge; or not using both to the best end; I
am sorry to think how they disrobe themselves of that Title which by birth they
claim: For either Reason mocks me, or else I think to be born a Gentleman (and
not bred a Scholar, nor studiously bent to gain Knowledge by study and reading,)
may well invest him in his Fathers Lands, whilst he is incapable to govern
himself as he should, or his Country as it must be; and is a greater blemish to
the true Honor of a Gentleman, then the vastness of an Estate can compensate;
for though hereby a man may be Richly respected, yet is he not honored for
that true Worth, which is riveted in by Learning and Knowledge; which indeed are
additions beyond Nobility of Birth or Honor of Blood. without them its but a
glorious Ignorance: and therefore it is accounted amongst the most Judicious
Rusticks simplicity, to take the gayest Courtier for the Wisest man, though the
latter wears the more gorgeous and rich Apparel, that of the mind: in as much
as Riches are only the Ornaments to Gentility, whereas Learning and Knowledge is
the Essence, and true being of a Gentleman. Yet must we not forget, that there
is a true Worth to be found Accomplished by the Elsewhere enlarged.
study of Books, where Learning never advanced: but where Learning meets with a
Generous and Brave mind, all must needs acknowledge and bow to him with respect:
These are the best Instruments to open the Veins of true Worth and Wisdom, as
well as the Seal and Stamp of Double Honor: so that if wrong education have
produced Ignorance in some Gentlemen, yet may they here make up that defect, by
their Industry in seeking after Knowledge above that of Pleasure or Vice; which
will install them into the Privilege of their natural Birth.

What need then Gentlemen, is there to Read and study Books, whereby to gain so
great a Purchase; The Advantages of Translations of History, etc. from the
Latin, Italian, French, etc. the neglect of which (to such Gentlemen as have
been so unfortunately dealt with by their Parents, as not to know other
Languages then their own) is the grand Reason that many of great Estates, can
hardly make their minds or thoughts, stretch to a Geometrical measuring of
their own Lands: thus too many idly sit down in the Chair of Ignorance,
traveling by the fire side, with the Wandering Knight Sr John Mandevil, or it
may be Bevis of Southhampton; whilst the Laws of Nations, admirable
foundations of Commonwealths, pass undiscovered or dived into. Others, Hunt
and Range, and hope to hit it to a Hair. These are Escapes somewhat too hard
for excuse in the Gentry; who certainly, if any be, they are born for better
and more Noble ends then the Vulgar; there are sparks and seeds, which are
natural Plants in the minds of Gentlemen, that in others seem not to be known;
and for these to take any growth than according to their natural tendency to
Learning, Generosity, Urbanity, Knowledge, etc. is a greater pity than can be
expressed. It Is noysed of Alexander the Great, that he had Virtues by Nature,
and Vice by Accident. Let Tinkers and vulgar Brains, drown and soak their
meaner wits and conceptions, in draining a Country Alehouse. Let Gentlemen seek
their own Honor, and blazon their own Reputation, by their Noble and brave
deportment; which is only to be accomplished by Study, Reading, and converse
with Discreet and Wise men; and thus may you prove Thorns in the way of
Wickedness, rather than Supporters and nourishers of Debauched courses, to the
ruin of your own Fortunes, and blush of your Relations: Thus may you strive to
recover your selves from the Tyranny of common Education, which lies now much
in wearing fine clothes, eating, sleeping, drinking, and know nothing above
the degree of common and low understanding; many being only by their rude
demeanours, the constables slaves and a derision to all, drowning those parts,
bestowed with their Parents cost, and it may be purchased with the sweat of
their own Industry: thus like high spirited Horses that beat out their fiery
lives in their own litters. Pure oil cannot mingle with water, nor the
extracted Quintessence of true nobleness (in a right Gentleman) with the dregs
and subsistence of unworthiness; and this is all the harm I wish to the Gentry
of these parts: who I hope are more generous then to storm at what I say, or
exile this Council and advice, by a prejudicate acception. I love not to be so
unnatural to my own relation, as to blemish the name of a Gentleman, because
so; I hope I am not so ill read in Ethics, as to blot others and defile my own
nest; such thoughts I beg may have no room to step over the threshold of your
entertainment; let them harbor only in base and degenerous breasts* what I
say, desire, and in this work design; I do really profess to be only intended,
for the general good of these parts, which I hope wise men will see and so
Judge.

These thoughts create in me, as well as in others, a great fear of a dearth of
Knowledge, for want of study, whereby we shall have little of Nobility or Gentry
left, but that of Birth and Pedigree quod omen Deus avertat. Those that are not
equally fitted for the use of their Country, as well as themselves, are only to
be accounted stakes in ditches that rot rather then grow.

These Counties recorded for Honor, have not been yet worthy to be branded
with any thing, that could truly stick to them so much, as the present want of
Studious Gentlemen; and though I reckon Learning of late days, to be that
which the misery of these Tempestuous winds of a civil War, (worse then
Euroclydon that troubled Paul) has made too great a stranger to these parts,
yet now it seems to plead for it self, by the generous education of very many
hopeful branches, from good families: whereby I hope these Counties will call
back the Ancient days, when by their valor and nobleness, they seemed to
attract the Estimation of all the rest to themselves. Chronicles will free me
from the least tincture of flattery, if any think I am beyond the bounds,
either of sincerity or truth.

For the next order of such as I boldly beg leave: Gentlemen you are such as
(Indeed ought, and amongst the best of Men and Christians) are dignified with
the largest respect, and that as by your Knowledge and Learning in the best
things, you are made capable to instruct others, so are you also thereby fitted
to receive advice, in as much as true knowledge puffs not up: Yet will I not
undertake to direct, but wish you may on all occasions, promote the general
design of Learning and Knowledge: which may be much gained upon and improved,
by Reading and Studying; encouraging, and helping, such as desire it, and
prompt others to it; you know the great advantage that is to be got by reading;
besides it will make men's minds so pliable and beget such a reducement, as that
they need not always beat as on an Anvill: for you have more to do to piece a
dull and ignorant understanding, then one more already verst in some Knowledge;
this will break a way for your more facile aproach to the very hearts of men.

For such as are in the lowest form they may by the help of Book-ushers, climb
to the highest pitch of Knowledge; a thing that none can despise but the
ignorant; and that only because they have it not; they indeed depose themselves
of Human society, that give it not the advancement above all things in the
World.

And now Gentlemen seeing learning and knowledge are such Real things, as need
no other props to support them but what is cut out of themselves; and also that
this design I have undertaken, is to sow knowledge, which the whole Nation may
reap, a better medium to effect it then by reading Books I know not: and to let
all know what Books are daily pressed for their service, seems to me as good an
expedient to follow it as any; and though there be a complaint that the world
seems oppressed with Books, yet do we daily want them; and indeed, there is no
reason, any should deny, but that they are the best furniture, nor do I know
any reason, why others with my self, should not think their variety the most
excusable Prodigality; Therefore have I for the advantages of these Northern
parts, where I am so much Indebted; endeavored not only to have such choice
both of Divinity, History, Law, Physic, Mathematics, etc. as never yet were
in the Country, but also intend, that not any in England, of esteem, or of
easy purchase, shall escape me: and that is not all, but have taken the pains
to let you know all, whereby you may fathom them, and by your sober choice,
retain the best, whilst the chafe you may refuse; that your judgments may like
deep Rivers let weighty things sink, whilst sticks and straws swim down the
stream. Now I have nothing left but to Entreat your Candid acceptance, and
(Gentlemen) to place me in the number of those; that Honor your true Worth,
and am no less then in the greatest measure

Your Humble Servant, Wm. London.

TO THE MOST CANDID AND INGENIOUS READER.
Reader,
IF ages past and we present, esteem the Register of actions, as well as
sayings, to be of greater value and use, then to trust them with our slippery
memory (that never was yet known to be a good accountant,) how necessary then,
to retain the knowledge of Books, which are only Trustees of such Treatises: if
profitable to record and remember things, how fit to know where to find them?
Else may we happily seek for them in an empty storehouse. It was this which
made that Honorable Sr. Wa. Raleigh his voyage so unfortunate; in that he knew
there was a mine, but knew not how to find it: and there seems to be no less,
then as great need of a Register of Books, which else may be buried with their
Authors.

He is to be accounted a schismatic from man kind, that values not Learning
and knowledge in their general and particular extents, above the rate of more
ruffling and gaudy enjoyments. Had the poor Indians the treasures of knowledge
contained in Books, who will not say they would surfeit of Knowledge, compared
with many in this age, that in the midst of means to accomplish Wisdom and
Knowledge, are only like moths in Books? Much of the ignorance in many places
may be attributed to the want of Books, but in this Nation for want of their
use; and many a good Book lies asleep as not known, (that I dare say are as
great strangers to many that would purchase them at their greatest worth) as
Learning is to Ignorance. Many a good Advantage is smothered in the swaddling
clothes, for want of the very knowledge of Books: and as many Books are
Still-borne, so no few are stifled in the sheets, and never come to be covered
from the injury of forgetfulness. For not being published, they cannot be
nourished by the favorable acceptance of the world, and so pine away and come
to nothing. These and many more reasons are sufficient to justify any attempt
from ignorant censure. He is miserably sordid, that sets a low rate upon
Knowledge, or the ways to it; he has too much knowledge of his own coining, and
too little of himself, that does despise it in others. As there are many with
the Fox in the Fable, which despise, only because they cannot reach: so are
there none greater enemies to Learning, then the ignorant.

Now because that in all sublunary actions there is an end that gives life to
every motion in a design, therefore may some labor to Flie-blow my Reputation,
and disinherit my candid intentions from the privilege of their Birth; alluding
to Hortensius that spruce Orator, who suffered for his Encomiums of eloquence,
because (say they) lifting her up, was only that he might go with her. To which
give me leave to say; that all men are not here chosen umpires; those I appeal
unto, must (according to the custom of our Nation) be the sole Judgers and
Condemners; and good Reason it is, that the Wisest and best able should be
accounted most fit. I have received some remark of encouragement from the most
solid Judges, in other pieces of different nature: therefore I do the less
Question this; Especially when I can also say, this has past the test and
approbation of such as (if known) would sufficiently pass me free from the
danger of Censure; I know Wise men stand not upon punctul's, nor are Scholars
generally Courtiers, though Courtiers should be Scholars; That which wise men
account the staple Commodity at a feast, is the solid food, not the gaudy
attendants; they are Children only that cry for Ornaments and flourishes; and
this will somewhat excuse my task, when considered, that I aim, and intend
good, which I wish may so fall out; and I hope, may I think, I need not
Question, but all men will allow me (as well as themselves,) somewhat for the
shrinking.

Thus prepared, I once more adventure (in print) my own fortune, to repair and
Careen my Countries; I dare not deny neither, but that the design had seemed
more clear if others had handled it: But to be free; we all know there is no
action whose Natural tendency is not to Meum, Tuum, or both. To deny the
first, would hinder that I am for the last; neither do they look to me, To be
such great opposites, as in this case; to wrong my repute, if I play
Ambo-dexter, I cannot be for the public, but my particular self falls in as
one of the Number; That therefore there may be no schime in my resolutions (to
speak in the dialect of Arithmetic) I Will make an Intiger the product of
fractions: Resolving to be for all; for the Public, and the Private, for thee,
and for my self, yet wrong neither. I hope none will discommend the saying of
Cassiodore, who concludes him, a worthy Citizen, that seeks the commodity of
his own Country; it is reckoned an useless clod of earth, that sucks in the
rain, and brings forth no fruit; so must he be that drinks, the sap of his
native soil for his own nourishment only.

If this undertaking seems to wrong any man's purse, he that Imagines it, has
the wrong end of the Book upwards; he that gets Books for his money, has in my
mind as good a bargain as our Mariners, who trade with the Indians, and get
Gold for Knives, Rattles, Glasses, etc. None is so absurd sure, as not to know
which scale weighs heavier: I smile to think of that Scholar (which I fear is
this Customer) who had a good Library and a bad Head-peice stitcht together: to
whom one (coming into his Study) wittily said: Mr Fullers Holy state.
Salvete libri sine Doctore: Such indeed had better keep their money, which
(like Jewels in a Swines Snout) may adorn their acceptance amongst foolish
Worldlings: but never privilege their society in wiser company. I plead not my
own cause, I profess, Such as know me best, least of all believe it; and were
it fit, many reasons might be brought in to Convince all that read me, I do not
always expect to sell what I so greatly value, I am more ambitious to read
then to sell them; but the chief end is to Invite men to value the means of
knowledge above trifles, which cannot be better improved, nor more prudently
expended then in such a purchase. What can a man's rusty bags affoard him to the
profits and treasures of Books. Plato was accounted a Wise man, and we find it
Mr St Philosophy.
recorded of him, that he accounted it a rich purchase when he bought three
Books of Philosophy belonging to Philolaus a Pythagorean in Sicily, though at
an incredible rate. Mr Leigh of Learning and Religion, Ep. Dedica. to him.
And that Atlas of Learning, that Orthodox Scholar, The Usher of Learning and
Knowledge, one whose name is Anagram'd in the choicest memories, one that stands
in Renown amongst the greatest Worthies that either pole can Boast of: He it
was that sent to Samaria for sundry copies of the Samaritan Pentateuch; and
with a dear purchase it was also that he brought the Syriack Bible, with other
Books from Syria: and when his own, yet proved a free donor to those that
wanted them.

I know some men love rather to keep their estates free from such purchases,
then know the difference. I will not wrong the other part of my work, to speak
of the difference betwixt Riches and Knowledge. I am indeed limited in this
place from that which my mind begins to kindle at; certainly if men's minds
would but nibble at these baits, they might be trapt to their best advantage,
which in time they should fully see beyond what now they do believe: but I
leave all to as much liberty, as the Press seems to take, which now gives as
little quarter to paper as ever.

For the Work in general, the Inclination and Tendency of it will support it in
the greatest throng of censures, and not suffer it to be crushed or smothered in
a popular tumult; when I remember those favorites, and patrons of it, I Will let
it run the gantlope and never fear a lash, unless from the curled furrows of
prejudice, emulation, and malignity. I turn it loose into the World, and if it
cannot shift for it self amongst such, it knows where it may have shelter: to
get the respect of all, is too much popularity, which in Courts is not
accounted the greatest safety, but rather a pleasing mischief, and too often
strikes up it is own heels by the ruin of such as court and affect it.

For the imperfections of the Work, for want of a good architect: I think to
confess them, is to the Wisest men a penance sufficient; in greater crimes I am
sure this is a great satisfaction. Yet because I steer a new course, bringing
opus sine exemplo, standing singular in my method: some reason will be
expected. Therefore

First, I would not have any expect it a possible, or think it a profitable
thing, to have a Catalogue complete; yet this I dare promise, that there is no
choice Book omitted, but the best and most Books printed in England are here
inserted: but why I shoud crowd in Latin Books, and but some few of them
neither, is a strong objection from my self, but that I quiet it with the
conveniences and advantages which I know will abound by the knowledge of some,
rather then to omit the knowledge of all. I only take such as come in my way; I
wade no further then I know I can with safety give an account, and with Honor
retire; and such as I mention, are to my own knowledge usually sold in most
places of repute in the Country, and is fully useful to the private end I first
intended by this Catalogue, viz. the use of these Northern Counties. Nor do I
think my self so much too blame for this, as others are for not publishing a
Latin Catalogue: and though what I have done, may be found of small use to
such as may see it beyond the Seas, yet is of great use to England. They may (I
confess,) disorder method, which I look upon as a thing not essential to the
general knowledge and sale of Books. If it prove useful for this Nation, and
especially for the Meridian of these Counties for which it was calculated, and
wherein I am placed; I reckon it of a repercussive force to all object^ons that
bandy against it; and though I cannot promise, yet do I hope to produce, a
Catalogue of the most profitable and useful Latin Books which are sold;
especially such as are at a more easy purchase then the strictest rate. If my
resolutions in this set others at work and produce such a Catalogue; he that
enjoynes the benefit, shall not more rejoice, then my self, seeing it is for
the public good.

That the Titles of all Books in this Catalogue are at large and so swell the
bondary of such a Work; producing rather an Inundation to drown, then a shower
to make it grow: is easily reduced to reason, if we consider the very native
use, and primitive intent of Titles themselves, as placed to their Books; nay
the general defect of this in Catalogues, makes many good profitable Books
strangers to the World; whereas if fully discovered in their Titles (which
should be the scope of each Book in short) would be eagerly looked after; and
this is the reason why many (as they have good reason,) are timorous to
adventure on what they know not; for a full Title tells us the purport and
intent of the Books, whereby we may not be deceived: which in many hundred
Books might be instanced: take only two or three for brevity: Parr. on Romans
Sibbs on Corr. Cotton on John, Burgess on John, Heldersham on Psalm. accounted
by all (if they judge according to the shortness of the Titles usually given in
all Catalogues formerly,) to be of the whole Epistles or Gospels; whereas
indeed some are but part of an Epistle, others a single a Chapter, and others
again but some verse or verses of Chapter, which are great deluders and
deceivers of men's expectations. So most Books, by their short and usual
Titles, are not half discovered to strangers: now this method provides against
this cheat, in having partem pro toto; nay many have been cosen'd by a short
title, that when they expected a Book to treat of one thing, it has the clean
contrary. Therefore we see that the very advantages got by this method,
condemns the Objection; for here they have all books brought to you lying open;
shops opened in your studies; and to me it looks like a walking Library.

I will not stop the Current of a general knowledge of Books, by leaving out
all that are accounted Heterodox, then should I, with others, leave out all
that are so in my fond and choice opinion, and insert only such as please my
own humor; when it may be such as dissent from my judgment are more Orthodox
then my self: I like not his resolution and opinion, that lately thrust out a
Catalogue in print, and out of a comendable Zeal, refuses to insert Heterodox
Books, as unfit to be sold (to some indeed they are so:) To hinder the knowledge
of such Books when once born, is not to stifle their errors, for they grow out
of their own ruin ofttimes; and if they be not chrusht in the Press, it is a
grand folly, and a fault against the experience of these times, to do it when
their liberty is expanded beyond the power of a Curb, their ashes too often
prove a second seed time; though I am against selling them to such as may be
seduced by them, yet will I not hinder their acquaintance to such as may
confute them. The Apostle hints to us, that Errors, which are the very Apes of
Truth (must be, that the truth may more clearly be discerned and pried into;
yet not that they ought to be, but that they will be, it cannot be avoided. We
are bid to contend for the Faith: and sure contention is not (I am certain it
ought not to be) amongst friends, nor can it be above, it is only sharp and most
constant amongst Enemies, as Truth and Error are one to another. I resolve to
condemn to secrisie every pernicious Piece as soon as I know it, yet cannot
but think them, when once out to the knowledge of all, that such should also
know them that are best able to Confute them; which is the best weakner of
Error, and most compendious road to their ruin; besides, the blessed
advantages to the establishment of Truth, which stands surest by often shaking.
To know errors is the shortest cut to destroy them.

For Romances, Plays and Poems, I do indeed take less pains to promote their
study though I hinder not their sale; their names are not so wiredrawn as
others are; Ld Mount. Essays.
They are least useful of any. The two first may properly be said to be
Incentiva vitiorum to some; hear a Learned Author speak to the first; Romances
are the trash of writings, and they could never have the Credit so much as to
allure my youth to delight in them; The wonder in this is the greater, that he
was a French man. The matter is not so small an Evil as the manner, The
language is indeed the kernel of worth, but the design is like the green
Walnut, that both defiles all it touches, and is bitter in the taste, unless you
peel the bitterness away, which how to do in Romances I am ignorant to direct.
For Poetry as it is in it self above praise, so is it of late too much
corrupted in the praise of Cupid and Venus; proving also to some the bellows
to the fire of lust, yet may they be very well used, if quallified by a regular
proportion of their use to a good and true end.

Such Books as have been printed from the year 1650, to 1655, have this
Charracter *, and you are led by the to all such as are come forth since.

It only now remains that I let the World know my care to promote this design,
by resolving an annual Supplement of all new Pieces that are pressed into the
service of this Commonwealth: which will I hope preserve the remembrance not
only of good Books, but the durable and lasting fame of their Authors to
posterity. And though the Wise man says, that of writing Books there is no end
(which I think is meant of such as are writ to no end) yet I hope this
reducement of Many into One, may prove of some good advantage, and to some good
end, and that without prejudice to Solomon's Text.

W. L.

AN INTRODUCTION To the Use of BOOKS: IN A short Essay upon the Value and
Benefits of Learning and Knowledge.
THe end of the Creation seems to contract unto all men these two duties; to
know, and to learn; First, to know Gods will, Secondly, to learn to Obey it:
The want of the first, will not excuse our neglect of the last; we cannot serve
God without the knowledge of him, nor know him unless we learn; for man was
born for knowledge. It was the Devil at first, that persuaded Adam, by his
soliciter Eve, to value Knowledge at a greater rate then an Apple; and having
gained us this advantage by so dear a purchase, he now thinks it as good
Logic, to persuade us to be ignorant: and we may a little guess, what a value
nature has set upon Knowledge in the minds of men, in that Adam would venture
to know upon pain of Damnation. Oh that he had never been so forward a Pupil
to so subtle a Tutor! He learnt to know what we may all wish had never been
known; Yet may we now sound those depths by allowance, which he to do, broke
the Royal Command; there is now no Scilla on one hand, nor Caribdis on the
other, to break this privilege; no Law to dock the Entail of this so Costly an
Inheritance; We are privilidg'd to learn without sin, that which before
contained a world of sins; and oh, that we could know how to learn the right
Improvement of so Rich an Advantage! that we could arive to the All of
Knowledge, even God, and our selves. now if Learning and Knowledge be the threads,
which lead us through the most knotty parts of Divine and Humane Affairs; what
need is there then to acknowledge them our greatest Riches; the best Counselors
and Advisers, in our greatest businesses and deepest straits; accounting all
true worth epitomized and envelloped in them. They seem to be born as if they
were twins and ought not to be separated; yet for methods sake, we must unlink
the chain, and place them in their proper stations: for I think our unhappy
predecessor, learned to know, before he did know to discern between Good and
evil: to dissect therefore my undertaking, I will first begin with Learning in
it self; then with Knowledge, without the acquisition of University Learning,
then rivet them together again, and see them in their issues and productions in
general; and therein, first of Divine, then Humane Knowledge: The great esteem
the wisest and best men, always had, and still have, of them; Their
excellency, and that above Riches or vainer pleasures; The Honor and
advantages accruing to the possessors of them; in fitting men for the
Government of themselves, and their Country, either Millitary or Civil: The
many and main evils they prevent, as they are Antedotes against Idleness, and a
supine life, the Root of all: Then of the difference betwixt them and
Ignorance the only Coin current amongst beasts. Lastly, the several parts of
Learning and Knowledge, in particular: wherein first and principally, that of
God, that Divine knowledge treasured in that sacred Book, is chiefly to be
studied: and may serve as an Imprimater to all other studies; and which no
doubt, if well poised, will bring us to the knowledge secondly of our selves:
and of this as we stand related to God; then to the world: especially the
advantages, of the Country wherein we live, and that by the several parts of
Humane study, as History, Poetry, Law, Physic, Mathematics, etc. And all by
the favorable aid and knowledge of Books, which are treasured up and set in
order for the use of the Learned and studious.

Now In earnest at the entrance, I am affrighted to think of what I have
undertaken, since I am so little able to perform what I promise; especially
considering that I have not so much as the parings of Learning, nor capable to
be an Apprentice to the Inquisition of Knowledge. I can only with children
admire what I cannot comprehend, and greedily wish for what I think so well
worth admiring; and if I speak my mind frankly of things not within my own
jurisdiction, I hope to be censured only, as I manifest the proportion of
desire; of insight into the nature of things, rather then to take a measure of
them. A Blind man indeed cannot judge of Colors, yet do I think a distanc't
sight is here on the advantage ground; and it is not accounted a good eye that
must have the object drawn too nigh it: the Richer lusture the scarlet has,
the more it admits only of a transcient veiw as the best trial; Howsoever, if
I do err, sure it is on the better side, for that it is a Rule given in
Politics, rather to speak well, then ill, of things or persons: and if weakly
done, it is the more pardonable, because my own, without the aid of better
helps. I stand upon stilts, and may on another shoulders see what a taller
cannot: For my own part, I think this Catalogue laden with Riches, commands me
to bait the entrance, with somewhat which may probably pull in some to seek
after Knowledge: and though I am conscious, that some may justly say, I do with
unlearned boldness, seems to warp more then I can well weave, yet do I choose
rather to run the Censure of the best, in craving their pardon, then neglect
the many advantages, I propound may accrue, to the worst. I aim at the white,
and if I hit it not it is nere the worse shot.

It Is not my intention, by an Appologie, to darken their luster, which indeed
shines not with borrowed lights, but stands upon better propes cut out of
themselves, then can be lent by any; though I think truly, I could not say so
little in defense of Learning and Knowledge, were I to defend them, as the
baffling pretenders to Ignorance speak against them; their very names, advances
their worth, above the darts and dints of envy it self: yea says one; they are
tacitly commended by their enemies, whilst they are proud of that little
Learning they pretend to: my task, is only to show, the great advantages, of
Learning and Knowledge, etc. which I have already anatomized: And first of
Learning, which, one says, Ld Bacon Adv.
is the perfection of Reason, the only distinguishers of men from beasts;
delivering the mind from wilderness and Barbarism. It is Religions handmaid,
the great honor and accomplishment of a person or nation, the most universal
and only useful instrument that God vouchsafes to the sons of men. Of
Learning in general
It is an excellent Drug, to reduce man's wilder nature (for that nature without
learning is blind) softens our ruder dispositions, making them pliable to the
choicest desires; banishes levity, temerity and insolency; extirpates vanity.
Cato misses not the mark. Irst ue praeceptis animum nec dicere cesses;
Nam sine doctrina vita est quasi mortis Imago.
With learning store the mind, cease not to learn;
Without it none can life from death discern. Distichs.



Learning, is a thing confined, yet not limited, for all may be sharers if they
contend for it; the nature of it, of such a diffusive quality, as it fills all,
and the more a man has of it, he is wisely ambitious to purchase more; of
other things, whereof a little gluts, here a great deal, does but excite and
quicken the appetite; like a man in a dropsy, the more he drinks, the drier.
Method for Sciences.
This is that, which is the porch to that Beautiful and Spacious fabric of
Knowledge, by this, a man is taught the art of Diveing, into all the secrets of
Nature and Art; this gives us with the Be, wings to range for knowledge, and
ravish the very hidden mysteries of Divine and Humane things: we may join with
him that says; the Rarest and most understanding men have avered, that all we
know is nothing, to things that are unknown to us.

Now though Learning be of such singular advantage, yet are not all men the
wisest that are learned, no more, then all that have learning are wise; and yet
the wisest of men are such as are learned, and without learning they could not
be so. There is I say, learning without wisdom and sound knowledge; our times
produce such monsters, as we see are filled with parts and learning, and can
(as one says) utter their Complaints in Greek and Latin, or beg in half a
dozen Languages; yet are not so much as fitted in any measure for their
Country, unless to devour the fruits thereof; and many such have been lopt off
from public employment; For, though Learning in it self be good, and many men
are found great engrossers of it, yet are they not benefited by it, nor
advantage others in wisdom and knowledge, to which Learning seems only of worth:
These are only great devourers of Learning yet like great feeders, are for want
of good digestion (by a retentive and understanding faculty) like Pharaohs lean
kine: whom One well calls, Ld Mountague Essa.
Letter-strucken-men, knocked on the head, dazzel'd with learning; Only some
parts of literal doctrines floating up and down their brains, They know the
Theory of all things, but you must seek who shall put them into practice: and
many there are, who only aim at the name, desiring only to be accounted
Scholars, yet are the broad Butt of knowing men to shoot at; they are but at
best learned fools: and you may partly know them by their jangling bells at the
top of their fools Capes, their heads: which as One well says, is the
Cockloft of these Learned buildings, for they are the shallowest Rivers which
make the greatest noise: and I had rather be no Scholar, than a mere Scholar;
for as One that knew well, says: M. Go^t Essa.
Bare learning, though of the best kind, is but a map of Happiness, and no Real
felicity.

Of Knowledge without Learning.
Now there is a knowledge in some men, who though they want the Education of
Learning, yet are not only accounted, but even valued, at the Rate of Wise men;
There is I say, a knowledge below the name, and that never advanced, to the
threshold of Learning, and this is improved by the study and habit of Books;
for Natural abilities, says One of no small abilities: Ld Bacon. Essa.
are like natural plants, that need pruning by study; then he conlcudes, that
reading makes a full, Conference a Ready, and writing an exact man: what must
he then be, that reads, Conferrs, and writes? to such, I would very much
commend the use of Books, the advantages of them are spacious and wide. These I
say thus accomplished, are not less a glory to themselves, and honor to their
Country, than a shame to such as by their university-study, are made Capable,
to attract a greater part of knowledge to themselves, than seems possible, to be
acquired by others, who have only the Auxilary aid of Books. Now what great
pity is it, that such as Range, and turn diligent free-booters, to seek after
knowledge, should have missed of the best ends, to attain the very perfection of
it. By this we see how fortune distributes unequally, in giving advantages to
empty brains, whereby those that are best fitted for the greatest
Improvements, and Employments, wants the help, which others have too much of,
not to be even better than the best, by arriving to the perfection of all kind
of knowledge. I cannot therefore reckon it of small use, that such minds as are
intended for study, should be boared as they do with mines; for if aptness, and
fitness, were dived into, we should not have so pitiful effects, by forcing
of men's minds to be scholars, because rich; when those whom nature has adopted
to be frank engrossers of all learning, should be stifled, and crush't in their
ripe conceptions; and because young brothers by birth, they must be always,
and in all things, kept so. This is to clip the Wings of Industry, and like the
spiders webb, proves only a net to entangle the Industrious Be: upon this
ground it seems to be, that Antipater demanding of the Athenians, fifty of
their Children for Hostages, was thus replied; They valued their Countries
Education so much, that rather than part with such a number of plants, they
would double it with twice the number of Men. Let us not therefore rob the
latter of it is due, above the former; because they spend on the stock of their
Natural abilities; being greedy pursuers of that which others are forced upon;
the one falls in by accident, the other acquired by the sweat of the mind, that
which a man seeks after, is sweeter than what is found, it tastes like venison
of ones own hunting.

We see there is learning without knowledge, and knowledge without learning, that
there is a good, distinct in either; yet do they grow and have always
flourished best together, therefore to spel a Right man, is to join them
together; and so they become rare and excellent Qualifications, Ennobling the
minds of men, making Capable of the vastest comprehensions, and fit for the
largest Employments; they must needs be well furnished that have two such
principles, to adorn and Enrich their minds. Whether (says one) Cornwallis
Essa.
a natural man speak in his best, I can but say Witty; there my commendation
is at a full point: but the mind and tongue, steeped in true understanding,
incident to learning, has wisdom for his Reward. Therefore those that want
learning, yet are full of knowledge, should study, a little to be acquainted,
with that which is such a foil, as well as a guard, to defend knowledge, and
then they shall be able not only to know, but to know what is best; for many men
know enough, yet are no better, unless they have the Knowledge of that which is
most worthy to be known. Of Divine Knowledge.
The foord thus sounded, we have a more easy passage to the partitions of
Knowledge, which are Divine, and Humane: and first, of the True Worth and
Excellency of the Knowledge of God, which is, the Summum bonum, the chiefest of
studies, which indeed is superlatively above all. Spiritual Knowledge is a thing
in it self, above the span of our slow capacities, but that it is Gods great
condescension to stoop and teach us; For all things are from him and by him,
every good and perfect thing is from above, from the Father of Lights. This is
the knowledge that speeds our passage to Eternal Glory, that is the shortest cut
to Immortal Happiness. This is that Knowledge, which has not only the stamp of
Gods Command, but also the Seal of his approbation; the study whereof, is
usually accompanied with his Divine benediction. Aristotle could say, The
Knowledge of Divine things, is the head of all other Sciences. And whether can
Knowledge better bend her force, or Learning her power, than to break a passage
into the Mysteries of Divinity? We need not erect an Altar with the Athenians,
to the unknown God, Act. 17.23.
unless we will be beholding to our own ignorance. Blessed St Paul gives the
Garland to this Knowledge, and that with an Emphasis, and from the testimony of
his own experience; For (says he) I account all things dung and dross in
comparison of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. To know God, and Christ
whom he has sent, is to know all things; and to know all that is to be known,
without the Knowledge of God in Christ Jesus, is to be a beggar in Knowledge I
may well say, that the Knowledge of God in Christ, is the Philosophers Stone in
Divinity; by it we may turn all events into golden advantages to our souls.
When the wisest of men advises to Knowledge, What is it less, than Christ
himself under the Metaphor of Wisdom? He thinks it of great advantage, to spend
the morning of our days in seeking after this hid Treasure, this Pearl of
price, that to sell all for the purchase is the safest bargain: Prove. 3.13, etc.
Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, that gets Understanding! Wherein is
this happiness? The merchandise is better then fine gold, all things desirable
not to compare with it; length of days in one hand, riches and honor in the
other, her ways pleasant, her paths peace; happy he that can get and keep her.
Nay further, God himself to encourage our industry, and honor such paths and
studies; lets us know, that he has founded the earth, established the Heavens,
and broken up the depth, and that by Wisdom, Understanding, and Knowledge. The
study of God in his Creatures, his Attributes, the Works in nature, etc. are
sweet, pleasing, and no less profitable to man, as they are wonderful; but to
know God in Christ, is that the Angels pry into, and would gladly interest
themselves in this Knowledge, which God of his infinite grace has afforded to
us that live under the Gospel; our neglect will be our condemnation. I wish, I
could as easily take hold on my own advice in this, as freely as I can give it
to others. To study and seek after moral Knowledge, is so lawful, that the very
neglect contracts guilt, and sinks us under the burden of ignorance; But we are
first to study the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and then
expect the performance of all other things to be added to us. The many
advantages now in print, by Learned, Reverend, and Holy Ministers, will be one
day a witness against such as make it not their chief study to train up
themselves, and relations therein; It should be our duty to hug our selves, and
rejoice in the multitude of Gods mercies, wrapped up in these gracious
advantages, and pious helps; The times are glutted with precious conveniences
of the Gospel, by Preaching, and Books, which makes them dis-relish with so
many, and not relish as they should with the best: and therefore our Saviors
words are here fully verified, and it is our condemnation, That light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather than light, because their deeds
are evil, Joh. 3. and 19.

Of humane Learning and Knowledge,
Now as all other Knowledge is not to be compared to this of Divine, yet is not
Moral Knowledge out of the road to it; and indeed, ought properly to be
subjected to it; That as we have said of Learning and Knowledge, a man that has
both, speaks the best accomplishments; so he, that is full of Divine, and
Humane Learning, is most complete; We may guess a little at the Major by the
Minor; The worth of Humane, must needs set a value on Divine Knowledge. If there
be found any worth in the former, the latter must sure be of greater; For as
they are gifts of God, and are commonly set as gates to pass to this spiritual
Fabric of Divine Knowledge, so are they eagerly to be pursued, and purchased
above all terrene felicities; If they be steps to Divine Knowledge, then are
they not to be thrown aside, as Children do their toys, when they grow either
weary of them, or not well pleased with them. But some, as a hedge to this
discourse, may quote Solomon's Summary of Vanity, wherein he leaves not Learning
and Knowledge behind; For what is Humane Learning, and Moral Knowledge, but the
devils edg-tooles to cut asunder the truth? What are they, but Satan's Anvill,
upon which he knocks the Divine Truths of God in pieces? Are they not blocks in
the way to the best Knowledge? the only props for error and popery? Therefore
the wise man's Text is well interpreted in his own words, and so I conclude with
Solomon, Omnia vanitas.

Well met ignoramus, if you will be as wise as Solomon, you must be his fool;
for if you will take all in the literal sense, (as such will do that can snatch
at what is for their turn) you are by a plain Text fools in print. However, let
me advise you to take along Solomon's interpretation as the best Comment. 2.
They are indeed vanity compared to the true Knowledge of God, which is the
highest pitch; and thus considered, if you can now pin this vanitas upon the
front of Humane Learning and Knowledge, you have better skill than far wiser
men, and so you may prove famous for somewhat. Yet must it not be denied, but
that if these studies intend not to the best end, they will prove as
unprofitable as pernicious: and yet (if not thus used) nothing below their own
proper worth and value.

Valued by the wisest men.
To guess a little therefore, at these so cried up possessions, let us pry into
the esteem of the wisest men, who are the only favorites of Learning and
Knowledge. The great value they that knew them best, set upon them: A Kings
Ransom is below the rate of a peasants possessions, if he have only These
inward Endowments: Let Us see what desires Wise men have had, and how by all
means they strove to accomplish the taking sweetness of these occult Treasures;
who above all things, rather let slip the profits, Honors, pleasures, and
sensual delights of this deceitful world, than the knowledge of things; who
desired, rather to know the world, than enjoy it; who rather strove, to know
the vanity of all terrene enjoyments, by studying them in the Theory, than
Practically to embrace or use them. A Wise man will hear and increase Learning,
says the Royal Philosopher. Prove. 1.5.
You may as soon turn the Sun out of his course, as a wise man from this
choice. Socrates thanked God for three things chiefly; whereof one was, that he
was a Philosopher, and not unlearned; esteeming the gifts of nature, far below
the ornaments of the mind. What shall we say to Diogenes in his Tub, prouder
than Alexander in his Court or Camp; despising this great Monarch, who in his
gorgeous pomp and warlike splendor, deigning to give this poor rich man a
visit, did not so much trouble him, to see the difference betwixt himself and
Alexander, as that he should interpose betwixt him and the face of Heaven.
Speed. Chro.
The Learned Henry the first of England often said, He esteemed an unlearned
King but as a Crowned Ass. King Alphonsus had rather lose all his Kingdoms
than his Learning; his Ensign was a Book opened: when he was told that the
King of Spain said, Learning was not fit for Princes; he frowningly answered,
that it was the speech of a beast, and not of a man. It is very observable,
that of all those that flocked to the Olympic Games, those were accounted the
wisest, that came to Philosophize their time, in reaping knowledge by their
observations, and not with the rude multitude, only to gaze at the active
valor of the Combatants, but to enrich their minds by contemplation, valuing
the sight of the mind, beyond that of robes or valor; and Caesar, that wanted
but life, to begirt the world by his Conquests, as Drake did by his Adventures,
in his Letter says, I had rather excel others in Learning than in Power: And
Pythagoras delivers it thus; He that knows not what he ought to know, is a
beast amongst men; he that knows no more than he has need of, is a man among
brute beasts; but he that knows, or striveth to know, that which is to be
known, is a God amongst men. When Plato was at Dionysius Court, he must again
to Athens, or else his life was clipped from that true content which his mind
found in the society of Learned men, valuing the study of Philosophy above the
pleasures of the Court. Stanly. Philos.
Some Wise men, that might (by reason of age) plead for a Writ of ease from the
toil of the mind (by studying to learn and know,) have rather chose, to wade in
Learning and Knowledge at their dying day; so eagerly have they followed after,
and dearly esteemed Learning above life it self; for that it teaches how to
live as we ought. Solon, at the hour of his death, hearing some Philosophers
disputing in his chamber, he suddenly raises his body upright, and being
demanded the reason, replies; Burtons Mel.
when I have learned that whereof you are now disputing, I may end my days;
and so he did, in the eighth year of his age. Democritus put out his eyes, that
he might be more intent upon his study: yet says one, French. Acad.
he saw more than all Greece besides. A notable story there is of M. Aurelius
Emperor, whom Lucius meeting in the streets, accompanied with a single
servant, demands, which way? to Sextus the Philosopher (replies this Noble and
brave Emperor,) to learn what I know not; for it becomes even an old man to
learn. At which Lucius breaks forth, Oh! I see an Emperor, gray headed,
carrying his book like a child to be taught. And Robert King of Jerusalem and
Sicilia, a wise Prince and great lover of Learning, often said; He had rather
choose to lose his Kingdom than his knowledge. And so did Robert King of
Naples, esteem his Learning more than his Kingdom. It was Great Alexander that
laid Homer under his pillow; and him we see, conquering more by his Wisdom,
than Hector or Achilles by their Valor; using Learning as a diversion from the
toil of Martial thoughts; and in the vacancy and intervals of public
occasions and battails, he used as Cordials to refresh him; holding as it were
a Sword in one hand, and a Book in the other: Ld Bacon. Essa.
Some contemn, others admire, but wise men value Study and Knowledge. And if I
did not here intend to do homage to the command of Brevity in this task, I
could usher upon the stage of observation, several great Persons, and as great
Scholars, that advanced the Nobility of Learning, by their forward assistance
and Contributions, to the Honor and esteem, as well as the support of it: one
or two shall serve. Ptolomie Philadelphus the Egyptian King, with vast charge,
raked into his Study, five hundred thousand Books; and by his means was the
Septuagint translated, Card. Richeleiu, his erecting of the famous Academy at
Paris, comes up to be registered among the valuations which great men, and not
less wise, had to Learning and Knowledge. And Francis the first of France, with
infinite numbers both of Fame and Power, might be introduced, as pregnant
witnesses to the truth: of that great value that has, in all ages, been
treasured up, as the attendants of all humane Learning and Knowledge.

To close this part of our discourse: We find the Lord giving countenance to
humane Learning and Knowledge; by letting the world know, not transiently, as it
were, to be told as a story only, but with the sound of Applau^e and
Commendation; as the livery of Gods Bounty and Honor; as a full testimony of
the laudable and lawful use of Learning. It Is recorded by God, to the Honor
of Moses, (whom One calls Gods first Notary,) Ld Bac. Adv.
that he was filled with all the Learning of the Egyptians; which Nation is
observed, to have contained the most ancient Schools in the world. We find also
in the Scripture, eloquent Apollo; and who is it we find in these days, to
disparage that commendable ornament, of civil and decent demeanor, setting it
against the simplicity of the Gospel; but such, as despise it because they want
it and others have it; it is not lawful because they cannot attain to it: What
say we to Daniel, who is recorded to be no small proficient in the cunning of
the Caldeans: and Solomon, that gulf of knowledge, whose parts spread so far,
as the Queen of Sheba (a great lover of Knowledge and Wisdom) traveled far to
hear him: It seems, Learning was then in great esteem among the Wise; and the
Echo of Wisdom sounded far. We read also of Learned Paul, brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel^ and as the Learned Lord Bacon observes; Natural and Moral
Philosophy, Politics, Poetry, History, Mathematics, etc. are strewed up and
down the Divine Scriptures; and not a few of them in that book of Job. Dr.
Jackson Creed.
And it is also observed, that Learning and Knowledge, in Christ's time, was
strongly pursued and valued; that the most curious Arts flourished in great
splendor; the Grecians flock't after the search of Wisdom and Philosophy;
whilst the Romaes, no less busy in the hunting of Policy: and yet must it not
be let slip; that all was put into the fire and burnt, when they proved stops
in the way to Christ.

The excellency of Learning and Knowledge.
Let us now see their excellency; and should I fathom this depth, my shallow
capacity would be drowned ere I came nigh the bottom, I should be lost in the
pursuit; should I travel over these vast Perrenian Mountains, I should be too
long a coming to my journies end, and perhaps tire the Reader to go with me;
but I Will court Brevity. Herein consists a part of their excellency, that they
cannot be purchased with Riches or Moneys, but with the sweat of the Mind only:
for were it not so, fools that are rich would be wise men, and all that have
Moneys would be Scholars, which is too great a Paradox to interpret; And herein
lies another part of the Excellency of them, that such Minds that are soaked
in Learning and Knowledge, have their Intellectuals clarified, their natures
softn'd, Reason, which before lay fallow, and in the Thory only, is now forced
into practice; That which was in Bullion, is ow coined, and minted, having the
stamp of Majesty put upon it; the mind, now flourishes with strong abilities,
is made capaple to help and guide others, and it self; Others are better,
himself no worse. In the full view of this, Cicero cries out: Oh Wisdom! the
guide of our life, the enemy to vice, and supporter of Virtue. And, we may
believe him, for this is that mouth from whence proceeded the best Maxim for a
well ordered life. Let a man be never so well qualified, with the laudable
accomplishments of Fencing, Dancing, Music, etc. other accute Properties of
Gentlemen, yet, if Learning and Knowledge be not mixed, all other Embellishments
are clouded, and prove as abortive. I cannot pass by an apt story to this
purpose of Ismenius, whom by his great improvement in Music, pu^chased the
deserved Name of an excellent Musician, to which Antisthenes (to commend
Learning and Knowledge above all) says: It Is true, he was no less than report
famed him, he handled his Instrument with a commendable and ravishing
dexterity: but (concludes) otherwise, he is good for nothing. Study and
Knowledge (says a Learned Author) Ld Bacon Essa.
perfect nature, and are perfected by experience. And this a known Author
judiciously amplifies in the life of Boethius: For (says he) Causs. H. Court.
Learning and Knowledge vindicate from stupidity, and a savage life; they
cleanse, refine, and store the soul, made only to know great things; they open
the Understanding, by reading so many excellent Books, and even unloose the
tongue, an Instrument that is the mannager of hearts; they make one more mild,
civil, and courteous, contracting much respest and credit. And, there must
needs be a vast and hidden Treasure in Learning and Knowledge, else Alexander
sure would never have wished he were no King so he were but Diogenes: and, that
he esteemed it more to excel others in Learning, than in power or Empire:
whose ample Territories stretch even to the Heavens, and grasp greater things
then Authority or Command can compass.

Riches, Pleasures, etc. not to compare with them.
The fame of Learning is below the pleasure of it. Antisthenes says, he could
talk with himself; and it is no small pleasure and happiness to live comfortably
within doors; What is Riches to Learning and Knowledge? What is it to be called
a rich fool? Glister within and spare not; Inlay your minds, and cast away your
gilded Trappings, more fit for Butterflies than men; He has the most right to
outward bravery, that has inward to boast of. What Is a rich man, and no more?
but with the Peacock, proud of his Tail: like a Tulip, has no sweet smell, is
only for show; like a painted and gilded Sign-post to an empty Inn, tells you
what there should be, but leaves you to seek for what there is not to be found.
Knowledge and Wisdom, says the Philosopher, Hermes.
garnisheth riches, and shadows poverty. And another, Pythagoras.
That Knowledge is that which can never be forgotten, nor fly away. The Riches
of both Indies, cannot fill, nor ballast a truly noble and aspiring mind in the
midst of his possessions, without Learning and Knowledge as an Adjunct. If
Riches prove his Portion by Inheritance, he reckons them only as the
Antecedent, which without the Relatives of Learning and Knowledge, are no more
to him, than what they are in themselves, slippery vanities, fading and
perishing pleasures. He reckons his best fortune shipwrackt, if he should be
tempted to spend the least time to pursue them for their own sakes; For a man
to be rich in Knowledge, is to be rich in all things. Solon.
Riches can bring no Light, or profit to, but fetches a luster from the soul,
when yoked with Learning and Knowledge. Have you a thousand Acres of Land, he
that prises Learning, scoffs at it, he can embrace the world and account it his
own, and if it will not be so, he cares not. Ld Montague. Essa.
For as Cato says, A man of great Knowledge, cannot be poor; and that as in
war, Iron is to be preferred before Gold, so is Knowledge before Riches. These
are the true Riches which cannot be taken from me, which are situate from the
fingers of the greedy Plunderer; The evil fate of cloudy times, cannot make me
compound for these Riches within, nor can the Sequesterer deprive me of a
thought, they are beyond his reach; The freedom of my soul has a Charter to
uphold it, that envy it self cannot touch nor break. I can traffic for
Knowledge, in the midst of fiery combustions and perturbations, and no Cannon
can reach me; I can sit in a contemplative Cabin, and no Martial Alarm can
disturb me; These Riches cannot be decimated; that is my happiness, says a
noble mind thus laden; I can hide the greatest Treasures in the world, and yet
carry them with me, and not a burden, more then the feathers of a Bird, or
leaves of Trees are. Give me (says one) Whitlocks Essa.
that which will not put me to the charge of portage to carry, though I travel
the world over. The more a man has of Learning and Knowledge, the less burden
they are to him: Nay, these take away all burdens, and make such burdens as
will stick, rather to hang ready for shaking off, than to fix fast, as Paul did
the Viper. Bias the Philosopher, when his Country was invaded, and all fled
away with their richest Movables, he being demanded why he did not follow the
example, and secure his choicest things: answered, I can carry them about me, I
have nothing of worth but what I cannot part withal. And Val. Maximus says,
He bears them in his breast, not to be seen by the eye, nor touched by mortal
hands. For indeed, experience tells us, there is no true content can be expected
from the large confluence of a full estate, when adverse fortune appears; but
a mind steered with Wisdom, accomplished by the best means, Learning and
Knowledge, teaches the soul to stand steady in the greatest storms and
vicissitudes here below. The vast hazards to fetch Merchandise, storming the
curled waves, bending under the violence of Herecan's, are testimonies
produceable, that there is no less hazard than life it self, which is above the
worth of what is adventured for; And, when they have rifled the Treasures of the
Indies, uncertain Riches. Nor can such hazardous adventures bring any thing,
which have escaped the painful searches of former industry: But those (says
One) Sr Rich Tempests Meditations.
that flies over the flowery-field of Learning, are mounted upon the wings of
sublimer enquiries, and come home laden with the Nectar of Knowledge, brim'd
with inseparable Riches. For, if a man lose all he has of the world, yet has
he left him that which is better than all he could ever lose; and, it is no ill
management of our losses, if we choose, with the Philosopher, rather to be
thankful for what is left us, then repine at what escapes us. Dionysius the
Tyrant, demanding the reason why Philosophers frequented Kings Counsels, and
rich men's Houses, was thus answered by Aristippus: Quoniam Philosophi norunt
quibus egeant, divites nesciunt. They know what they want, rich men don't.

I too much doubt, many that are rich, had rather be so, than Learned; And as
One in another case says, so say I: His voice is, hang Learning, give me
twelve-pence; I love to read my sums writ upon my bags, rather than think
there is any value in Knowledge bound up in Books; I had rather be bound seven
years to the first, than trouble my brain a day with the last: I love to work
in these silver Mines, though I be condemned to be a slave all my days, my
Children shall be Merchants, hang Learning; to be compassed about with my best
friends at a feast of my own cost, is as bad as the torments of hell; I laugh
to think what fools those Kings and Emperors were, that made so much of
Scholars and Philosopers, as to give away their riches upon such slaves to
Learning. Oh! thou miserable soul, from whence came thou, from Hell? Can
thou have any true content or pleasure, like to those of Learning and Knowledge?
Thou sordid Mole, that digst underground to find Hell, do thou know how nigh
thou art the Precincts of it? 'Twere thy happiness if thou did know the
misery in thy full enjoyments; Unless thou had a heart to use them to their
appointed end, thou dig'st in the earth to undermine thy self; thy bags will
take fire by some flash from Hell, and then thou art blown up bags and all;
when death comes with a Habeac corpus, and sets a ne plus ultra to thy
miserable life, what would thou then give to learn the Knowledge of God, thy
self, or thy sad condition? Oh then, that thou had known and learned to be
wiser! 'Twas a sharp Epitaph given to such a Miser, as suits our present
disposition. Here lies ten in the hundred fast ram'd,
It Is a hundred to ten but his soul is damned. Cambd. Re^ane.



Is there any pleasure will hold comparison with this pleasan^ fruit of our
labor and study? If any be, these are the utile and dulc, the profit and
pleasure; these are the constant handmaids of Learning and Knowledge; These are
the Honey and Honeycomb; and if so, then the Knowledge of God, must needs be
sweeter than both. If the one be positively and comparatively sweet, the other
must needs be superlatively so. If it be such a sottish thing to want Knowledge,
if such a brand of bruitishness and savage barbarism to be ignorant, What must
it then be to be Learned, Knowing, and Wise? the first may well be as a foil to
set off the two last. I remember a notable example, to prove that the wisest
men found sweetness and pleasure in these things: French Acad.
Antigonus, King of Macedon finding Cleanthes always turning the Millstone, I
turn it (says he) to get my living, but forsake not Philosophy for all that;
For, the same hand which turned the Stone, wrote of the nature of God, and the
Heavens. Now I say, if so pleasant to such as were poor, and stole Knowledge and
Learning from the extremity of time, how much more delightful and easy to
them who may better make it their recreation, by reason of outward
conveniences? for certainly, most men's minds are crushed in a time of adversity.

The Honor of Learning above all other Honors in the world.
Is there any which seeks after Honor, let them tell me if the truest Honor be
not enveloped in this rich Mantle of Learning and Knowledge: and that also the
greatest Honor, in that it appears God himself is the Grand teacher of Wisdom
and Knowledge; These are the very Loadstones and Attractives of all Honor;
These are they which Aggrandize a man's acceptance, to the most wise with great
affection and courtesy; His worth is perpetuated with the remembrance of
Honor, when his dust is offensive; The beauty and luster that Learning and
Knowledge sets upon him that enjoys them, are their natural Escutcheons. He that
is thus qualified, is honored at home, in the City where he lives, beloved by
his Country, and is indeed the Honor of it. It Is better to be envied for thy
Parts above others, than pitied and laughed at for thy ignorance. This
Privileges his access to strangers, honors him in a foreign Nation, makes his
Name survive his life; The want of these (necessary set-offs) so dis-robes and
unmans us, that we are to be only accounted things of scoff and pity. To be
well seasoned with Learning, Knowledge, and Wisdom, perfumes our society; To
blazon a rich goal of many descents, what honor is that to the study of the
universal frame of nature? Is it like to the honor of either, of natural
Philosophy that teaches what things are, or moral Philosophy, to know how to
use and improve them? Nay, Learning and Knowledge teaches how to manage the
honor it attracts, whereas ignorance when it has surreptitiously snacht at
honor, cannot weild it for want of the former; And it is pity any should know
what it is to have honor, that has not Knowledge and Learning to use it.
Knowledge and Learning (says One) are Endowments and Honors greater than
Nobleness of birth, or estate; Careless Heirs may darken the two last, but
Immortal Honor attends the first, making a man like God. We may guess at it a
little by what honor is added to the Possessors of Learning and Knowledge even
by ignorance it self, because they carry a stamp of Authority in the
countenante even of young men, when gray hairs, and a vicious conversation
dwarfs gravity it self. It Is not gravity in countenance (says Cato) that
carries authority in the front, or contracts respect in the rear, but a life
steered according to the true end of our being: and to such says the
Philosopher, age, which in it self is grievous, yet by Knowledge and
contemplation, they rather grow than grieve; for that their minds receive sap
and nourishment whilst their bodies peele away. For what is it, I pray tell
me, that Caesar stands on Record so much, as for Learning? so Homer, all the
Royal Philosophers, and thousands that can now be only reverenced in their
Graves: their thoughts are as perfumes to study. This it was that carved
Trajans Name upon the wall, with the Character of Parietaria Walflower, for of
all the Emperors that reigned, he was the most renouned for Learning and Arts.
And it is recorded with no small honor to the feminine sex, and well may be
also exemplary, that Cornelia was so Learned, that she taught her two Sons the
Latin Eloquence, so that Cicero admired her. Eudoxia Theodosius Empress wrote
Learned Poems, and one concerning Christ was accounted singular. Aristippus was
taught Philosophy by his Mother Aretia: and Zenobia, Queen of the Palmirians
instructed her Son in Greek, Latin, and Egyptian Tongues, and penned an
Epitome of the Esterne Stories. And if we descend to our Times, many like
Examples might be introduc't: I only light on the Lady Gray, who was skilled in
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. Mr Torshea. Glory of Wom.
May not these few, indeed of many, revive the footsteps of that Masculine word
which our Predecessors left us, as paths for succeeding ages to tread in. Now
to leave this part of our Discourse, who will not conclude it of the greatest
advantage and Honor in the world, for men to be fitted for the service of
their Country: which in the next place falls in to be considered.

That Learning and Knowledge makes wise, and only fit for public affairs in
City or Commonwealth.
Is it sweet, pleasant, profitable, and honorable, by Learning to govern our
selves in all affairs, vicissitudes, exigencies and straights? How much then
will Knowledge guide us to the government of others, which is no less
profitable, honorable, etc. Learning and Knowledge are the very essence of
Magistracy, and the countenance of Authority and Majesty. It is of great
advantage and benefit to a Nation, to have fit supporters for the Fabric of a
Town, City, or Commonwealth. Wise and Learned men are the surest stakes in the
hedge of a Nation or City: they are the best conservaters of our Liberties; the
hinges on which the welfare, peace and happiness hang; the best public good,
and only Commonwealths men. These qualifications meeting with a true and brave
mind, can conquer men, and with the Bazilisk, kill envy with a look; Knowledge
and Learning are the guards of a City; if commanded by wise and Learned men;
are the gates of a Town, that by disorder it may not thrust it self out, the
Bulworks of a Nation. Learned men are the only well Orderers of Kingdoms,
Provinces, and Cities, in the constitution of a safe Government, by
establishing good and safe Laws, which accordingly are instituted and managed,
as the Agents are fitted with Learning and Knowledge. For says one, Ld Bacon
Advancement.
If they be illuminated by Learning, they have certain anticipate notions of
Religion, Policy, and Morality, which preserves, and refrain them from all
ruinous and peremptory errors and excesses, whispering in their ears when
Counselors cannot; They also proceed upon safe grounds and substantial
Principles, which men only of experience, cannot so well direct unto; seeing
dangers afar off, and repulsing them betimes, whereas men of experience see
things at hand, seeing only that which is ready to fall upon them, and trust to
the agility of their wit (upon the very point of danger) to ward and avoid
them. And who so (says Seneca) thus comes to hold the Helm, will find easy
access to the most knotty Parts of Government; Weild it with Honor, whilst
others fitted only by long experience, though at last they attain to sit at the
Helm of Government, and steer it well, yet is to the great damage of the
State: as much, as a young Surgeon is forced for lack of Knowledge in some
extraordinary cure, to torment the Patient with more pain, than could be
expected from a more experienced Doctor in that faculty. Experience does much
(says One) Cornwallis Essa.
but it is too full of scars and wounds, and is bought with gray hairs and
danger. Hence the Persians Elected none to rule amongst them as King, unless he
were a great Philosopher; And this advantage accrues to one Learned above
experience and knowledge only, in that our Scholar and knowing Statesman,
having laid his fame upon the eminency of Learning, early practicing on lesser
matters, which by degrees compleats his ascension, gradually signalizing his
public acceptance, (which courts him daily) and so by Learning and experience,
is better completed for public employments, then the latter of the two is
able to perform alone. Caussin. H. Court.
And One producing some examples of wise Governors, lights on Moses, one whom
God chooses to a great charge of Government, who it seems could not be better
fitted, than by attaining to know somewhat of all those Sciencies that was in
request amongst the Egyptians: and there be Learned Areth. Geom. Music. and
all other great Sciencies of Philosophy in the Hyerogliplicks. Pray who is it
which stands on Record for good Government, but such as were great Scholars?
And as Ld Bacon well says: Adv. Learning.
It Is almost without instance, that ever any Government was disasterous, that
fell into the hands of Learned Governors. And it is very observable, that the
Ages which passed from Domitians death to the Reign of Commodus, was a
succession of six Princes, all Learned and choice Favorers and Advancers of
it: and those times wherein they lived, the most flourishing that ever Rome
saw, which was then the Module and Epitomy of Government in the world. So that
in this continued sequence of six Princes, a man may see the happy fruits of
Learning in Authority, painted to the life, upon the greatest Tables of the
world. And such says, Ld Bacon Essa
the general counsels, plots, and modelling of affairs, come best from those
that are Learned. Burtons Mel.
It was said of Democrites, that for his Learning, Knowledge, and Wisdom, he was
sent to Abdera in Thrace, to be the Lawmakers or Recorder. And the Ld Bacon
alluding to Empericks in Physic, concludes: That it cannot but be a matter of
doubtful consequence, when the Government must be at the dispose of Emperick
Statesmen. Causs. H. Court.
And another says, That Sciences well managed, add a mavelous luster to one
in Government. Cornwallis Essa.
Aristotle hits it, when he says, It Is no small utility which grows to a
Commonwealth by the sapience of a Learned Governor. And he misses not the
mark, that says, He governs by guess, that is not a Philosopher. And me thinks,
the Answer of Themistocles fits this part of my Discourse fully: There were
some that Ironically desired him to play and sing, I cannot (says he) fiddle,
but (which is the proper Orb of a Learned man) I can make a little City a
great one. Not much unlike Tiberius, who could steer the Senate with his eye.
Method for Sciences.
They are unprofitable Citizens (says One) which can contribute nothing to the
good of a Commonwealth, or Ornament of a State, by their parts and Learning.
Innumerable Instances might be produced in this behalf; The best Lawmakers
were the wisest of men, as well as Scholars; all good Laws produced from their
care; others may steer the Helm, but they are the fittest to order it. How many
persons of no mean quality, have been coined out of the Schools of Philosophy,
to be Governors and Rulers of the vast Continent; And tell me, who stands upon
record for good, but such as Learning and Knowledge made wise and able to
manage. If we do but read the History of Solon, Stanly Histo. of Philosophy.
we need no Arguments but that example; he was a great Philosopher, and no less
Ruler; he ascended gradually by his wisdom, which shined in the eyes of all
with a wonderful clearness and brightness: and the Grecian Army being
commanded by Clisthenes the Athenian, Solon must be sent for his Counselor: He
it was, that by his wise advice quieted the hot disputes of several factions
and parties, in the City Cirrha; For, Solon was looked upon by the discreetest,
as the only man fit to command them, whom they entreated to take into his
custody his Helm of the Commonwealth: He became both a Lawgiver, and a
Lawmakers at once; he ruled so well, and became so great a happiness to the
Commonwealth, as a Proverb ensued, and was often repeated; Equality breeds no
strife. And some say, this Oracle was received by Solon from Apollo: Sit at the
Helm of State, their Pilot be,
The Common wealth's glad to be steerd by thee.


What excellent Laws were made by him, every Nation, Province, and City, to
this day experiences; they are so good that they need no other Name to know
them by, but Solon.

I Will dismiss this Discourse with the Example of Xenophon, who by his Learning
and wise conduct of Affairs, gave life to the bleeding condition of himself and
followers, with one of the most notable Examples of valor that ever was yet
read of in the world; testifying, that Learning and Knowledge fits for
Government, as well of Armies, as Cities; Martial affairs being sharp and
quick, require a wit and headpiece proportionable. Stanly Philos. Montagues
Essa. Ld Bac. Adv.
This Xenophon was a Socratick Philosopher of Athens, a young man, yet aged
with Wisdom; his first assay of valor was in the Peloponnesian War, betwixt
the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, where seeing his Master Socrates dis-mounted
from his Horse, and fighting on foot, takes him upon his shoulders, and carries
him many furlongs, till the enemy left the pursuit. He goes with Cyrus into
Asia, in his expedition against Artaxerxes, he was never in Arms before, nor
had seen the Wars; and now went only as volunteer for the company of
Proxexus, betwixt whom there was knit a Gordian knot of friendship. Cyrus their
General being slain, a message comes by the mouth of Falinus to the Grecian
Army, (now a prey to their enemies, being but an inconsiderable few in the
midst of Persia, many miles from their Country) That they would deliver
themselves up into the Kings mercy; (One would take it for a good message in
such a condition.) Now before a public answer was returned, diverse of the Army
had discoursed with the Messenger Falinus, and amongst the rest Xenophon
speaks: Falinus, we have but these two things now left, our Arms and Virtue; to
yield up the first, stifles the last. Falinus scornfully replies, If my
judgment deceives me not, you are (young Gentleman,) an Athenian, and study
Philosophy, you speak indeed neatly; but build not on such airy speculations,
as to think Virtue can stand against the Kings Authority; But, as one of my
Authors says, Ld Bacon.
This was the scorn, the wonder follows. This young Philosopher now displaies
his Parts, Wisdom, and Valor, for the Honor of his Country, and discourse of
the World; in saving the Grecian Army from the gulf of ruin: when no hopes
seemed to remain; he made way for their safety, and the overthrow of the
Persian Monarchy, which afterward Jason the Thessalian designed; Agesilaus the
Spartan commenc't; and Alexander the Macedonian pursued, till victor; and all
by the means of this young Scholar: For, with an Army of ten thousand foot, he
wades through Persia to Greece, fording fifty Rivers, and ushered his well
ordered few with so great skill, that he arrived to his own Country with
safety, through the daily opposition of an hundred thousand enemies; yet never
disordered with any skirmish, though he had many sharp ones, besides Mutinies.

Diverse Stratagems in War, have produced much honor to the Learned Authors,
and with great success; take only one in short. Stanly Philosophy.
Periene being besieged, Bias the Philosoper being beset in the siege, orders
two very fat Mules to be sent out of the City: Craesus wondering at their
plenty, desires Peace by a Messenger, which Bias hearing, did against his
coming to the City, order great heaps of Sand to be made, and covered with
Wheat: when information comes to the besiegers of their great abundance, they
had their own terms accomplished. And what has been said of Xenophon, might
be almost paralelled with Epaminondas the Theban, who abated the power of
Sparta. The wonderful Engines of defense and offense, to the great advantage
of Armies and Cities, produced only by the power of of Learning, I leave to
their proper places to be spoken of. These already hinted, with many other,
were raised to the highest pitch of Fortune, through their brave aspiring minds
stirred up through the Knowledge and Study of Philosophy. These were taken from
the Schools of Philosophy, and being as it were minted out of the rubbish of
the world, received the stamp of Honor, as a due debt to their Learning and
Wisdom.

The Evils which Learning and Knowledge prevent.
Let us now turn about, and as we have seen the Advantages of Learning and
Knowledge; Their Worth above all things; their Pleasure, Profit, Honor, etc.
you may set their opposites to them, and thereby judge of the several
Inconveniences and Discomodities in the want of them; they will fall in of
themselves, as necessary Consequences; I Will only touch at that, which is the
great enemy to all good; the nursery and storehouse of wickedness; the
retarder and pull-backs of all kind of Virtue; the great Antagonists of
Learning and Knowledge, this Monster, Idleness: The very lethargy of the mind;
no man that is troubled with this epidemicall disease, can stir a foot for it;
nor make any progress toward any noble design; it is the sluice to let in all
wickedness and vice: But the study of Sciences, the desire of Learning and
Knowledge, rouses up the mind, and enervates this fosterer of Ignorance and
Error, which if nourished stifles all the Heroic actions of the mind: for
without the study and search after Knowledge, the mind is sick: Now a man cannot
be idle, that is richly lined with Learning and Knowledge; there is no room to
slow idleness, where the mind is full fraught with the merchandise of Knowledge;
for, he is always at work with contemplative thoughts, which are the souls
life; and true Knowledge, sets the soul at work, to think on that which is good;
and the will embraces it; else our thoughts may be flagitious and wicked: To
converse with our selves in our studies, and private retirements, is better
company and society, than I see by most now adays frequented. Cicero tells us,
That idleness is the cause why the body and mind languish, and that to do
nothing, is to do ill. The Romans taught not their Children any thing which
was to be learned sitting They are a brood of mischeifs that are hatched with
sitting idle. The Romans also enacted, that none should go about the City, but
such as carried the badge of his Trade; so that when one had earnest occasion
to dispatch a Letter three days Journey from the City, he found none so idle
as to be his servant: Was not here a great evil cozened? Plato describes it as
a Maxim for the health of our minds; For says he, The Doctrine of Learning and
Knowledge, is the safeguard of the soul, and certainly the mind must needs
wither away, if not pruned and sometimes lopt: It will rust without use. No
Pilot exercises his Office standing still; When once men's minds have a taste
of the sweet fruits of Learning and Knowledge, they never delight in other
company, but such as may advantage their desires in Knowledge. What are deboist
courses, but the proper branches of Idleness? Knowledge is the Bezar, the only
cordial to the mind, in the deepest Melancholy: It Is the best guard of safety
in a field, to be always in motion; Skipping from bough to bough, preserves
the life of the poor Bird: whilst the lazy and careless seat, courts
destruction, and as surely embraces it. Idleness is the grave of living men,
says the Philosopher, Plato.
and that a man is twice buried; in the body, and sloth; and a man that passes
the one part of his life without profit, ought to have the rest of his life
taken from him. And still I say, and with it conclude, that there is nothing
fortifies the mind against all vices, as Errors, Ignorance, etc. in particular;
and against Idleness in general, but Learning and Knowledge.

Now in that I have placed diversity and variety of studies, in this Catalogue
of Books; I will crave leave a little to speak somewhat of most; pointing as
well to the particular studies, as generally what they are: not aiming so much
to direct how, as what to use; That if Books be the Spectacles we see through
to all Learning, let us then use them so; branch them forth, and spread their
Knowledge, by discovering the benefits and advantages of each sect. For, if I
mistake not, it is the counsel of a wise man, and great Counselor of this
Nation, rather to embrace and follow a general Knowledge, than be confined to
any particular: and there seems no small reason for it. For, one who retains
the Elements of all Knowledge, though but weakly, yet shall be fit for discourse
in what company soever: but to be confined to an exact sight of our Knowledge,
puts him out of that element, wherein he is only exquisite: he must then veil
to others discourse, and so keep consort with silence. There was never any Art
yet (says One) Cornwallis Essa
that could fasten me to her service, for to know them otherwise than
superficially, was more than he intended to do; he would not earn them so
dearly, as to tie the mind to one thing; for by this her best power is taken
away; for that her power is limited, which would walk universally, if she had
her own will. It Is injustice, says another, to fetter a man's spirit to any
fixed labors. Hall. Essa.
For what I see not at first view, I shall less see (says Ld Montague) if I
opinionate to it. The Apostle Paul seems to be the File-leader, when he bids
Try all things, and hold fast that which is good. Therefore in reading Books,
One said, Ld Montague Essa.
He had a skipping wit, for if one Book (says he) seems tedious, I take
another, and so I am not weary with doing nothing, nor with too much poreing on
one Subject; which is not to do less than to dull our minds, and never suffer
them to be relieved, but tired and jaded out like Hacknies, with continuance.
Diversity of study, is found by most Scholars to be a great refreshing and
nourishment to the mind, as well as variety of meats provoke the appetite to a
fresh desire, when it may be one bit of another already tasted, will not down.

The study of the Bible above all Books.
Now in this diversity of Books, I must still keep touch with my duty in setting
the Book of God above all; This we are all bound to, as the most serious and
necessary; It pleads for it self against all gainsayers; The most considerate
know so; and that it will at the great Day, plead against such as neglect or
contemn it. There are here all sorts of Philosophy, as well as variety of
History, etc. So, that if any be weary with the Children of Israel, and loath
this sweet Manna of Heavenly Knowledge of God in Christ, or in his creatures,
there be all the Sciences sublimely comprehended in it. This sacred Verbum Dei,
will teach us the true keeping of those Account-Books of our consciences, which
one day must be opened, when our Shop-Books are burnt. Mr Clarks Examp.
Charles the Great, used to set his Crown upon the Bible, concluding, that
Piety was the best Policy. All studies that are stolen from this, though good in
themselves, yet are in their issues bad, unless necessary, according to the
Rules of Christian Prudence and Wisdom; to which I leave every one, as his own
guide. A Divine said well to this purpose: Mr Church.
If the Word be our Counselor all day, it will be our Comforter at night. To
step aside, and make it our only business, to take up the golden Apple of
Atalanta; chiefly studying moral Knowledge; the Divine Race may be frustrated,
and the Goal lost. M^ Clarks Lives, first part.
It was holy Luther, that said, Odi ego meos libros, etc. He wished his own
Books lost, fearing they would hinder him of his time, which he thought two
little, to employ in reading the Sacred Scriptures; This is the guide to the
deep secrets of God, and as short a cut to that de art cordis. By this a man
is taught to know God, and that well relished, will the sooner bring us to the
true Knowledge of our selves. Though David had good Counselors, yet says he,
Psalm 119 24.
Thy Testimonies are my delight, and the men of my counsel. We are taught by
this our duty to God, and demeanor toward men; all the duties which we are
indebted one toward another, are plentifully treasured up in this Book of our
Instruction. To read what David says of Gods Word, is enough to make us deeply
affected with the study of it; The Law of God (says he) Psalm 19.
is perfect; Converts the soul; his Testimonies sure, makes wise the simple,
rejoices the heart; pure, enlightening the eyes; true and righteous; They are my
Meditation day and night, a light unto my feet, and Lanthorn to my paths, etc.
Next to this sacred Book, are the infinite labors of Gods Servants to be
valued, and prized; as Index's to find out the obscure parts of it; I have
already glanced at them before, and therefore come now to the Advantages and
Use of Moral Studies, beginning first with

History.
History: which I may well say is Speculum mundi: to praise the use of it, were
in a manner to dispraise it; advancing it, would but clip its own wings, which
is able to make it soar above the highest commendations. I would only, with a
few chips of my own, strew the way to the profits of this study; and drive them
home with more solid persuasions of wise m^n. Cicero.
The usual encomiums of that center of Eloquence, and others, are no whit
pigmied by my refusing them; I think (as many others wiser than I can express)
that History is the best Prospect into Humane affairs, a thing which
consociates the remotest Regions; by which we may, as it were, be seated free
from danger, yet be fully acquainted with all the ruptures, perturbations,
tumults, changes, actions and transactions, of all Nations, Kingdoms, and
Empires in the world; which many Millions have engaged their lives in. It Is
grand discretion, to learn to beware by others Examples. In History are many
Examples of Virtues, as Copies drawn for our imitation; as baits to allure us;
And alas! no few of vice, as Sea-marks to warn us; as a glass to show us the
ugly deformity of sin. For, they say, Examples are more taking, than Precepts
binding. The Law furnishes us with the last, and History with the first:
according to Seneca: Longum Iter per praecepta, breve and efficax per exempla.

Here Virtue survives our Persons, and wicked men may perhaps find it the
truest Astrology to tell them their own fortunes. It was Thales, that said of
History: Nil mortem a vit a differ: because, the life of the deceased, hangs
upon the remembrance of the living; Ld Bacon
else, to be vicious, and virtuous would be all one as to their Examples, if
not transmitted to posterity. History: makes men wise and deliberate in their
public and private affairs; and indeed, wisdom got by experience, is very
costly, and somewhat dangerous; it hazards a man's reputation, to pay any thing
of it for the least part of wisdom. For as another says well, Fr. Acad.
Such as are studious in History, though young in Knowledge of affairs, have a
very grand Aspect, and almost tell their experience in Knowledge, by their
countenance. If that received Opinion be true; that Vultus est Index animi. But
especially in the judicious deportment toward business, and men: You may read
their minds by their eye, that card, and compass, which guides to the heart; Vt
ex pede Herculem: Trace their fitness, for larger strides in more important
affairs. One speaking of the accomplishments of the Gentry, says, Mr
Brathwaits Nursery for the Gentry.
Would you be enabled for company? no better medium than Knowledge in History.
And he that trod on the Theater of History more than any other, could say, he
never affected airy complements, which give only a sound to the ear, but never
leave an impression behind them; a thing that History is not guilty of. History
is that, which has, as it were, reduced tradition into profitable Knowledge,
tempers the mind, and forms it to a perfect shape and symmetry. We may by
History reconcile the future and present tense: See Asia in England, travel
the Holy Land; and go to the Holy War with Mr Fuller: See the Grand Seignory
in the Seraglio, compass the world with Drake. Would you see the Wars and
Actions of the Roman Empires? you may see them tread the stage again with less
cost or hazard, than at first. You may by the study of History live in all
Ages, see Adam in Eden, sail with Noah in the Ark, sit and consult with Julius
Caesar, converse with Seneca, confer with all the wise Philosophers; go to
school at Athens, and with a free access hear all disputes; and much more from
this study of History; which one well calls, the worlds Recorder: G. Essa. Ld
Montague.
We cannot sure, deny that of the Sages, That no wise man could be an
experienced Statist, that was not frequent in History. And he is not otherwise
to be accounted, than Learned and wise, who concludes: Historians were his
right hand, being (says he) pleasant and easy, from whence may be drawn, wise
sentences, rare examples, and as rich precepts. Mr Torshell.
One takes notice of Apollo, as a man not only Eloquent, but also much Learned
in History. And a modern, and Divine Moralist, observes, Mr Herle.
That to be acquainted with History, purchases more wisdom, than the strictest
Rules of Policy, for that the first do furnish as with Instances as well as
Rules; and as it were personates the Rule, drawing out more into full
proportion, and lineaments. Again, (says, he) We are weaued from a childish
effeminacy, and habituated by the reading of History, to partake of what we
most affect therein, training our minds to manlike actions, snatching us from
the vanity of youth and corrupt society. Socrates tells us, that History best
suits solid Head-pieces; and therefore was Caesar's Comment, the bosom
companion of King Alphonsus, and T. Livy in no less esteem; and that when
exquisite Music assaid to ravish his mind, he commands their absence, as a
disturbance to the better content he resented in Livy; And I trow, there was
good reason; for that this King of Arragon, and Ferdinand of Sicily, found the
Physic which proved the life of their health, and health of their life; the
first by reading T. Livy, the last from Q. Curtius, when all their physical
doses could not effect the least change of their conditions toward their
health. An Historian says truly: One looks round about him, and sees things
past, whereas a traveller in other studies, looks only forward to what he is a
doing. For my own part, I account it with others, a useful and beneficial
study; A man needs not so much toil and beat his brains, as with other parts
of Humane Knowledge, which shall not avail his cost and pains so much; Yet not
to neglect other Studies; for this comes not up in account amongst Students, as
a Sudy so full as others; if it be, it is the easiest part of it, yet the most
profitable, reckoning with what little pains it is to be purchased. Therefore
with Plato, I think it best, when weary with other Studies, To sport thy self
with reading of good Histories. Mr Leigh. Learning. Bartons Mel.
Chronology and Topographie, are the two eyes of History; Geographicall Maps
(says one) should please any man. But these I refer to their proper places,
as part of the Mathematics, let us now slide into the sweet and pleasant paths
of

Poetry.
Poetry and Poesy It Is affirmed by some, that Poets were the first Pri^sts
Prophets, Legislators, Politicians, Philosophers, Astronomers, etc. in the
world. La Montague Essa.
Others, that Homer was the first and last of Poets; for that, having no Copy
set him by any, yet has left One unimitable by any, One admired by all; he was
greatly valued by Alexander, who in the rich spoils of Darius, ordered a
Cabinet (there sound) of great worth, for the preservation of Homer, saying: he
was his best Adviser, and faithful Counselor he had, in his grand Affairs:
doubtless, he was of great honor and estimation, that when Constantinople was
fired, Homer (writ in Letters of Gold) shrunk under that general Martyrology of
two Hundred Thousand Books. And Al^ibiades requesting of a Scholar Homers
Works, no sooner was answered, he had it not; but was replied by a box on the
ear, for that, he thought as a Scholar, he could no more want it, than breath
to live by. Another, he calls Virgil the Prince of Poets: And, I. Scaliger, was
so much affected with Poetry, that he protested, he had rather be the Author of
twelve Verses in Lucan, or an Ode in Horace, than Emperor of Germany. We find
Moses giving thanks to God at the Red Sea, in this Language; and David composed
many sweet and heavenly Hyms and Songs. A Learned Writer says well; That the
Books of Job, Psalms, and Moses Song, are the best Pattern's of true Poesy. D^
Jackson. Creed. Mr Leigh on Learning.
It Is certain, that Poetry and Poesy are well called the luxury of Learning;
and quintessence of wit: serving principally, to vent extraordinary affections;
But I could wish all Poets followed these spiritual Patterns; For, that corrupt
Subjects defraude Poetry of her due praise. Therefore says One, Impious Poets
make Clio, a Thais, Helicon a Brothell house: and themselves contemptible. Now
as the Ancients chief Learning consisted in Poetry, so did they wisely improve
that Talent of God to Sacred things; which indeed Adorned the use of it,
commending it as lawful; whereas, it seems now, so adulterated, as too many
men's minds stand fixed to the imaginary part of wickedness; staining their
souls, with contemplative vices; so strongly bent by their speculative lusts,
that they only want occasions to turn them into practice; Many good wits, have
abused their better parts, by sophisticating this Noble Institution; fitting it
only to serve the Devil, by being a pandor to all sorts of lusts and filthy
drollery; lardeing their Writings with fictions, providing more poison than
wholesome aliment. That as One says: Mr Hall. Essa.
If the rich fame of Poetry, which has been improved in frothy love Stories,
and fantastical Chimera's, had been bestowed on some rare Ideas, they might
have produced extreme advantage to mankind. But let us now turn to examine our
actions, by the Royal Standerd of the

Law.
Law: which is only distributive Justice; and a constant and perpetual Will, to
render every man his own right, and that that according to Law, grounded on
reason; and of what use Justice is, to the well ordering of men in peace and
safety, who knows it not? and that the due execution of the Law, is the life
and soul of it. God himself was the first Institutor of Laws: and Moses proved
a conscionable pleader in Gods behalf. Those Cities, says Plato, in which are
no severe Laws for punishment of sin, are rather to be accounted forests for
monsters, than places habitable for men. The Laws of this Nation are branched
into Common, Statute, Civil, and Canon. Something only of the first, and a
little of the last.

The Grounds of the Common Laws of England (says the famous Lawyer) Ld Cooks
Ep. to Reports.
are beyond the limits of time, and not bounded in by any remembrance: that the
Laws which W. the Conqueror swear too: Were Bonae and approbatae antiquae Regni
L^ges. And those comprehended in Magna Charta. That as no Jewel is comparable
to Learning, so none more excellent than the Knowledge of the Law; and none so
necessary for preserving of life and goods, as the Common Laws of England: and
indeed, it is so much the more noble, in that none can be Lawyer to any good
purpose, or as they ought to be, but such as are Scholars: and not so, but also
of very profound understandings; acute apprehensions, and strong parts. The Law
is the Touchstone of truth. And it is will said by One: Mr Noy.
That most studies are private, retired, the Law is public for all. The first,
fitted only for Universities, the other for Commonwealths; and therefore it is
that the Civil Law calls the Counselors and Interpreters of the Law,
Honorable; to be free from public charges, and to be wrote and sent unto as
persons of special Worth and Dignity. Our Laws, says Ld Cook, seem dark and
obscure, but they cannot bear the burden of that Imputation, it rather falls on
their Ignorance, that understand them not; You shall (says he) never find any
strife arise about the Law, but through Instruments, Conveyances, and Wills,
made by ignorant men; and as often with Acts of Parliament, overlaid with
Proviso's; And really, if a man should speak truth, and as much reason as the
Law speaks, there are none so great enemies to the Laws, as such as desire some
liberty for their own advantage, which the Law denies; or such, as having
plotted some crimes against the Law, are afraid of the hammer and force of it;
and such like they are, that either through ignorance or malice, raise the dust
of an envious clamor; which at last will reverberate, and blow into their own
eyes. Reports (says the grave Reporter) L^ Cook.
opens the windows of the Law, showing the beauty of it, in the great reason it
stands on; breaking the shell of difficult cases, so that the kernel slips
into ones hand. And another very famous in the Law, says: Pleadings are the
most honorable, laudable, and profitable things in the Law. And this puts me
in mind of an Ancient custom of the Athenians (which might happily flow from
this Opinion:) They put their young Gentlemen, to preferring cases in behalf of
the people, or pleading for the poor; and this consideration may mind our
Gentry, and stir them up more to study the Law; in that they may not only be
great helps (like some good Ladies with their Physic) to their poor Neighbors
and Tenants, against oppression, (which the world cannot give more Honor) but
also be able to keep themselves safe in their Estates. To be well read in the
Law, is the greatest Ornament of a Gentleman. No Study more Noble, Honorable,
and Profitable. Gentlemen are thereby fitted for any public employment (for
which the Gentry seem wholly above all others to be born to) for their
Country, if suddenly called to it; and able to discharge it with public
Honor and Credit. It Is recorded of the Bp of Hereford, that he was of a very
profound Judgment in the Knowledge of the Law; Which was (says a good Author)
both safety and solace to himself. Without the Knowledge of it (in some measure)
a Gentleman lies unguarded, and open to the assaults of every base mechanic
and troublesome fellow; and it is the reason many Gentlemen are abused by their
vassals, as blind men are led by their Boys; and are tormented and wrack't, at
the pleasure of such, whose eyes and ears they borrow: and to all such as are
pestilent in this case, I wish that Law might take hold; Charles the 9. France.
That all that commenced any Actions, left a considerable Sum of Moneys in
the Kings Exchequer, and to forfeit it, if it appeared, they had no just cause
for what they did. We find (indeed) Zenas Tit. 3.13.
to be a godly Lawyer, though now it seems a solecisme in Reason, which the bad
practice of some has made too great a Paradox to all. I durst almost
distinguish, that he may be a godly man, that is not a godly Lawyer; but that
touches not the Nobleness of the Science; the Law, is good and just: few follow
it so, or according to conscience; the Name of it is enough to cast the scales,
and be a general conviction to all. To say this is Law, is a word big enough to
stop gainsayers. And he that wresteth any text, (says a good Expositor) Ld
Cook.
against his genuin sense, though to confirm a truth, does against distributive
Justice: which is to give every one his own. But I shall come short on brevity,
if I treat so long on the Common Law, as to forget

Civil Law
The Civil Law: whose body is thus epitomized. Hurt no body, live honestly, and
give every man his due. The Civil Law was the Star that led the wisest in the
Roman Empire, to the due Government of that mighty Empire. And doubtless, the
great success of that Monarchy, must a little reflect on their Laws, as the
primum mobile of their great Fortune. His Excellency of the Civil Law.
It Is a wise man, that says, though other Nations have their peculiar Laws,
yet beyond the Seas, no Law is accounted of, or used, but the Civil Law; none
suffered to plead in their Courts, or sit as Judges, but Sudents in that
faculty. And it is a study fit to be looked into, though not here practiced. But
let us now suffer our selves to mind our health, and look into the practice of

Physic.
Physic It cannot be of ill reflection to the Doctors of this Profession, if
on the front I place Luke as a man taken notice of, for a godly Physician; and
if we ascend from the lesser to the greater, it is a glory that Christ is
compared to a good Physician; and indeed was a gracious, and is still to soul,
as well as then to the body. Physic, says One, is a Noble Art, and according
to the Poets, descended of a generous Race; bringing in Apollo as the chief
grace of Medicin, and Esculapius his Son, who was a God and Professor of
Physic. Mithridates King of Pontus, was famous for Physic, and was the first
compounder of Mithridate, which retains its Name from him. He was very Learned,
and could through his Knowledge of twenty Languages, answer all Ambassadors in
their own tongue. It must needs be a Noble Science, that is of so general a use
to mankind; To see a well cut Herball, flourishing with all sorts of foreign
and Domestic Plants, Flowers, Herbs: with the Virtues of each Vegetable, all
which demonstrate the usefulness of this Art. Of what esteem ought such to be
had, that with Galen or Hippocrates, dead many years, yet stand alive to this
day by their Learned Parts and Knowledge in Mysteries of this Art; and the great
discoveries of those greater secrets contained in the Mysteries of God in
Nature.

Alchimy and Chemistry.
There are many Branches which flow from this, as the general; many Rivers fall
into this One of Physic; as distillation, Alchimy, Chemistry, etc. The two
last being very delectable, and profitable as well as the former: though such
as know them not, cannot say so: and no wonder, if ignorance be the judge. There
goes a good Story, which reflects on Alchimy and Chimistry, it is the Fable of
Aesops Husbandman, who dying, bequeathed to his Son a vast Treasure of Gold,
hid in his Vineyard; but the absolute place whereabout it lay, he forgot: The
Son diligently searches, turning over every place throughout the Vineyard,
but finds nothing worthy of his vast toil; yet as we say, It Is an ill wind
blows no body good; for, it proved of great good to the Vines, in a plentiful
Harvest the year following. So, says my Author, Ld Pac. Adv.
The search for Gold, procures much advantage in fruitful experiments, both of
nature, and to the great use of mankind. And, it cannot swarve from reason, for
that, though they make no Gold in Specie, yet virtually they get even the
Philosophers Stone, which turns all into the golden Experiments, of
incomparable value; for who reckons not extractions of Oil, Sand, Salt,
Spirits, Stones, etc. of great use, the separation and alteration of Metals,
etc. of great advantage? They are not few, but as well many, as rare
Experiments, which might be produced as the natural and proper effects of these
occult Mysteries. But I cannot stay any longer from the Delectable Sweets, that
are found in this Hive of the

Mathematics.
Mathematics: Which says One, Mr Leigh.
are most accurate and profitable studies. And Ld Bacon says, They make men
wise and subtle. And to their Honor, Abraham was a famous teacher of them,
amongst the Caldeans; and Alexander as good a Scholar. Many Princes and great
men, are upon record for their diligent search into this Noble Study: which one
properly calls, Rich Gemms. Mr Hall Essa. Burtons Mel.
What more pleasing study than the Mathematics (says One?) A thing he much
delighted in himself. And Mr Diggs says, Creds mihi extingui dulce erit
Mathematicarum artium studio. I could live and die in these Studies; they are
above the childish babies of Riches. Burton.
Democritus Juniour observes, that Orontius the Mathematician, wondered so much
at Archimedes, that he breaks forth calling him Divinum and homine majorem.
Seth, who lived in the first age of the world, is said to have been skilled in
the Mathematics. It Is somewhat prity that is said of Aristippus: whom, the
adverse fortune of a stormy wind, and roaring Sea vomited out of the Ship, upon
the banks of a foreign Country (who was you must think in great straits, to
know whether his destiny was worse or better, than if a favorable Sea had
given a quick and suddainer death, by sending him to the bottom, than to fall
into the hands of wild Beasts, or savage men) whilst thus tortured with fear in
his mind, he spies some Mathematical Figures drawn on the sandy Banks, (as the
Ancients then did use to do) suddenly he breaks forth: Salva inquit res est,
amici, hominum vestigia conspicio. Concluding, there must be some City nigh for
their comfort: that those marks were the steps of more civility, than they
could have expected from so barbarous and silent a Coast. The Emperor Charles
the fifth, was a great Studient in the Mathematics, and sat close at it in
his Tent, in the midst of his Army. There is a very remarkable Story, recorded
of the Delians: Mr Stanly Hist. of Philosophy.
who being much infected with the Pest, consulted with the Oracle of Apollo,
and had this answer; that it should cease when they doubled their Altar, which
was of a Cubick Figure. And you may at large read their endeavors, which
effects produced not their desires: Wherefore again they repair to the Oracle:
the answer was, They had not yet doubled their Cube, which their ignorance
could not teach them: so they repair for advice in this great strait to Plato
the Philosopher, who returns them this answer: The Gods derided the Greeks, for
the neglect of Philosophy and Learning; Yet would he be willing to serve them,
and did double the Cube, and banished the Plague. Other admirable effects, I
find as the natural Children of this Knowledge: which I refer to the proper
places of the Mathematics. It Is a Sudy, of late much engrossed by many in
these parts, as well as other places of the Nation: and that it is somewhat kept
under, for the want of variety of Books, which because of some small Knowledge,
I have in some parts of them, I have inserted at large, whatever Books have
come to my Knowledge; and shall reduce more to the obedience of this Catalogue,
as they come either out, or to my Knowledge. Let us now see it in the Branches
of it: and if we would keep our Accounts right, we must begin first with

Arithmetic.
Arithmetic, which Pythagoras is noysed to have reduced into an Art. Est
Doctrina been numerandi, says One: Mr Leigh. Learning.
Most parts of the Mathematics hangs upon Arithmetic. It Is as generally known
to be profitable and useful, as no less delightful; for, having tasted
considerably of this Science, I can therefore say its both. By this you may, ex
ungue leonem, proportion the whole hody. By this (as One observes) Burt. Mel.
from a little part, you may know the Dimensions of Domitians Amphitheatre, and
vary the twenty four Letters, into more words than the world can contain. Here,
by the Knowledge of the square and Cubick root (suppose it as small as
imaginable) you may find the number of the sandy Mass, if even, the world were
nothing else; if you know but the number contained in that small Cube. So for
Algebra, which is a part of ^t, of which One says: Nothing can be more
delicious to the mind, more bewitching and ravishing, abstruce and recondite;
Yet so facile, as it swells it up to a perfect delight. Upon this hangs the
Invention of

Geometry.
Geometry. By the Egyptians, which when Nile broke down their hedges of
distinction, they were forced to this excellent Art of measuring Land. Thales
of Melita, first brought it from thence to Greece; Since Arithmetica Geometria
subsistere non potest, says P. Ramus. It Is said to be Ars omnium sine
controversia certissima, the most sure of all Arts. And therefore it was that
Plato wrote on his Study door: Let none ignorant of this Art enter here. He
that shall see (says One) the Geometrical Tower of Garsenda at Bollogne in
Italy: the Steeple and Clock at Strasburgh, will ever after admire Geometry; Or
that Engine of Archimedes, able to remove the Globe from Atlas shoulders, could
a place to fix it, be found. The rare Geometrical Instruments to make a
Chariot move, sine animali: I'ts no impertinent Story which I remember is
recorded of Alchimedes, the famous Syracusan Geomitrician, who being surprised
from his studious contemplation, and requested to discover what advantage his
deep Studies could produce for the good of his Country: he quickly brings
forth such Eng^nes of terror, that by their strange effects, (they exceed
almost belief; he only accounting it an essay to far greater exploits. He it
was that by his Geometrical Instruments, annoi'd the Roman Army, which had
straightly begirt Syracuse) more than all the City could do by Arms and force,
Making great and small Stones, fly nigh hand, and at a distance, like
Hailstones, to the preservation of the City. This was he that to the wonder of
the world framed a Brazen Heaven, wherein the seven Planets had their motion.
And, with his hand drew after him five thousand Bushels of Grain. Infinite
might be the Instances of this kind, but take one for all, to shut up this
discourse: Ferdinand the Emperor sent to Solomon the great Turk, the Heavens
made of silver, wherein the motions had their true courses with those of the
Heavens; the Stars arising and setting, the Planets keeping their oblique
Motions; the Sun eclipsed at his just time and the changing every Month, with
the same in the true Heavens; and this was carried before Solomon, by twelve
men, and taken in pieces, and reunited again by the Maker. Now though this be
indeed a curious and admirable piece of Art, yet is it the less, considering
the customary use of Watches and Clocks, no less rare, but not taken notice of
in regard so common.

And the like Engines, with their terrible slaughter of men in the P. of
Parma's Army, at the siege of Antwerp, Strada's Siege of Antwerp.
is above a common wonder. I do not think it is to be paralelled, that grave
stones should fly in the air four miles; the Waters part (with the violence of
this invention) to the discovering the bottom, the earth felt to move and
tremble seven Miles off; it is tedious to relate the story at large. Have ye not
read of Architas Tarentinus, who made a Dove of wood (to which by weights
equally poised within the body, and a proportion of air) flew like a living
Dove. Of no less wonder was that Eagle, which mounting into the air, flew
before the Emperor to the gates of Norimberge; with that Iron Fly made by Art,
to fly about the Table at a public Feast. Diverse Arts hang on Geometry: as
Astronomy, Optics, Music, Dialling, Geography, Architecture, and Mechanics:
as Husbandry, Navigation, Military Discipline, etc. A little of each: and first

Astronomy.
Astronomy is a Science whereby one may examine and calculate the motion of the
heavenly Bodies; B. Mel.
Their Magnitudes, Apogeums, and Perigeums, etc. their distance from the earth,
with the bigness and compass of the Firmament; each Star with the Diameters, by
the aid of Glasses, Astrolobes, Sextants, Qaudrants, etc. This Art, says One,
Mr Leigh.
exceeds all other in this kind; That Thales was the first that studied it.
Pliny.
Atlas the Libian was so delighted with this Science, that he left the society
of men, and lived upon the highest mountain of Africa, from whence it bore his
Name; and from this arises the Poetical fiction, that he bore up the Heavens
with his shoulders. And Endymion, spent his time upon Rocks and Mountains,
studying the Stars and Motions of the Heavens. Doubtless, it must needs be a
sweet and pleasing study, to find out the wonderful Works of Gods hand. David,
sure was well studied in this Science, if we consider but how he spreads forth
the glory of God, in the forming the Heavens, etc. As a fruit of this proceeds

Astrology.
Astrology: which some say, is a profitable and useful study, and not
unlawful, as others would affirm; For (says One) Knowledge in the Stars and
Caelestial Bodies, hindered not the wise men from coming to Christ. But I
suppose it is judicial Astrology that is condemned by most men, especially the
godly, who urge it strongly as a great sin, breaking the Holy Command of God;
and they bring in no childish Reasons to prove it so. Famous M. Gats. and
Others.
There Is a terrible example of Gods judgment, one who went about to calculate
his future fortune from the judgment of the Heavens; Fox Acts.
It Is enough to bind our hands from fingering such unlawful edge tools. And a
neat Story goes recorded of an Augure in the Roman Army, who on their march
espying a Bird hovering in the air, would needs by the chirping and flight
prognosticate the event of their present undertaking; (a thing of great account
at that time;) a Soldier more bold and wise then the rest, steps out, and with
an Arrow kills it for which presumption and contempt of the gods, he being
called before the General, discreetly answered; how could they conclude, the
Bird knew their fates so far off, that could not it is one so nigh hand
Chiromancy, is the neighbor of judicial Astrology; I cannot determine of what
I know not fully, nor will I judge with blind Rashness but rather desire first
to have some skill in the

Optics.
Optics, which also is a dependant on Geometry; and is only ars been videndi;
we all account, seeing especially that of the mind, to be above all things; To
see with our eyes, and discern with our understandings, so as to judge of things
that differ, may well be rank't amongst the Divine Optics. Perspectives,
burning and multiplying Glasses, (teaching (as One says) to walk in the air)
are not the less rare because of Old invented. A man had need of this skill in
the Optics, else he will be forced to see all things like a Staff in the
Water, which only is crooked by a deception of the sight. But hearing the sweet
melody of Orpheus, quavering upon his Harp, and the ravishing voice of the
Syrian charms, I am forced to skip from the Optic sense, into that Sea of
pleasure

Music.
Music: which indeed, awakens all the Senses. Music. (says One) is the
Loadstone of fellowship, and delightful Society. It Is (says Another) a
roaring-megge against melancholy, affects the very vital and animal spirits,
cheares the countenance, expels austerity, abateth heaviness. The cheerful
mind of a Soldier, can tell you, that death disheartens not so much, as Music
encourages against all f^ar It even ravishes Reginam sensuum, the very soul it
self. Some say Whales at the noise of a Trumpet, will appear dancing upon the
liquid waves. The Rhodian Musician could say, His Music would make a
melancholy man merry, and a Religious man devout. 'Twas a pretty fancy of One
taken with Instrumental Music, who thought the soul to be in the fingers. And
Music used moderately, (says One) is the bodies best recreation. Vocal, is
the daily Harmony of Saints and Angels, that which God delights in, Psalm.
149.150.
David commends all sorts of Instrumental Music, as well as vocal, for which
he calls upon the Angels, the Sun and Moon, Beasts, Birds, and other creatures
that God had made; And, shall not man be in love with that which God delights
in? It Is the most proper end of Music to praise God. Amongst all the beasts of
the Field, the Ass only was found grazing, whilst the rest were gazing about,
with admiration at Orpheus Harp; All sorts of Creatures almost, are affected
with it. Many men there are, which stand upon record as rare Artists; and it is
affirmed by some, that there is no one Science more delectable, and innocently
recreative, to free and generous spirits, nor more stirs up the mind to
commendable actions; Read 1 Samuel 16 23.
And Physicians tell us, it lengthens the life, by reviving the spirits,
holding a secret sympathy with them That deathfull and venomous bite of the
Tarantula in Italy, is only cured by Music. Plato calls it a Divine and
Heavenly practice. It Is reported that in Arcadia, the people forgetting this
laudable practice, grew into sedition; and upon this it is supposed, that Order
came forth, for every one to practice and learn Music for thirty years. Nay,
the rude Gauls, lost their babarity, by the delight they took in Music* It Is
observed, L. Bacon.
that in the Age before the Flood, those few Memorials in Scripture of those
times, usher in the honor of Music. Genesis 5.
And they say, it was first found out by Pythagoras from the noise of the
Smiths Hammers; However these be, or be not true, yet sure I am, from my own
experience, it conduces much to the exhilarating of the spirits, and even as
the mind tends properly to good or evil, so will it be wrought up in
contemplation; See 2 King. 3 Chapter 15 Vae.
if a man's soul be principled from above, his thoughts are very much screwed up
toward Heaven by Divine thoughts; and it will (if a man's mind be so set, and
his soul so ^un'd) create carnal and vain rejoycings; so that it is in this, as
in other sublunary things, temptations to evil, if our hearts are not biased
another way. But it is not good to harp too much on one string; therefore I
conclude with Others, that my Music hangs by Geometry, as well as does

Architecture.
Architecture. Which though indeed it stands on it is own Basis, yet leanes upon
Geometry; which as well as other parts of the Mathematics, is accounted
pleasant and profitable, and is (so much the more pity,) more esteemed and
practiced beyond the Seas, than in England: and that is the reason such rare
Artists are in Italy, and other places; whereas ours, that should be Artists
indeed, endeavor not by their study or desire to exceed; but if they can live,
it matters not for their honor or credit. Some there are not thus culpable,
but too few: but there may be somewhat in the sloth of such, as should be the
foundations of Architecture for their encouragement; in that a rare Piece is
admired and applauded by them that know any thing of Gentile Education, yet
desire not to have any thing of this kind themselves worthy to be wondered at,
or stand as a Monument to posterity. Had our Predecessors been so, many Palaces
had tumbled into Graves, and we might have lived like Indians, who build such
houses as stand one day, and fall the next. But it is time improved to spend it
well; therefore let us look upon the front of this Architect, which should be
acquainted with the useful and necessary Ornament of a.

Dyalling.
Sun-Dyal; Which Art, some say, is very Ancient; 2 King. 20. the Lord turning
the Sun back ten degrees for Hezekiah's sake, whereby it had gone down in the
Dyal of Ahaz, who was then King of Jerusalem in the first Olympiad, and in the
3200 years after the Creation. Mellesius found out the reason and proportion of
shadows. The Caldeans were the first that divided the day into twelve hours.
The Egyptians had a hand in this Science, who called the Sun Horus, which by
motion limits the time of every hour; and it seems, a 100 years before Cicero's
time, they were common in Rome, for that the Parasite in a Comedy, envied
against the many Clocks and Dyals. Optans ut suus enique venture sit Horologium.
And it must needs be confessed by all, that it is no less rare and pleasant,
than necessary; And oh! that we could tell how to number our days, that we
might apply our hearts to Wisdom; and I think it is not ill shadowed, if I set
the Word of God as the best Hand-Dyal, to point us out the improvement of time.
Let us now take a measure of what we have done, by the golden Rule of

Geography.
Geography: which says One, should please any man, for to measure the World in
Ones Study, know the distances, extent and site of remote Provinces, and all by
the scale and compass. It Is said Charles the Great took much delight in this
study, and for that end, had three Tables of Silverion: on one, was cut the Map
of Constantinople, the other Rome, and third of the whole World, all
exquisitely and neatly done. Suavi animum delectatione allicere, ob
incredibilem rerum varietatem and jucunditatem, and ad pleniorem sui
cogitationem excitare, says a skillful and Learned Geographer. Hondius Prefat
Merat.
Indeed, he that knows it, will assent to this, that it is a study exceeding
delightful to the mind, and of incredible sweetness and variety, provoking and
stirring up many profitable searchers in the bowels of History. We may know
with freedom, the situations of the rich and opulent Cities, and Kingdoms in
the world; their commodious advantages, to run over a Map, and be more exact
than those that have bought less Knowledge at a dearer rate; and from my own
experience, I assure thee a world of pleasure, and of great advantage,
especially if thou tracest thy History, with a Map lying before thee, it takes
a double impression in thy mind; first of the History thou read, and then of
the remembrance of all circumstances about both, not without a deep impression
of the situation of all places. But least I digress, by directing to the use of
what I intend not; let us now come to answer part of Geometry, which is the

Husbandry and Gardening.
Mechanics. I Will touch at three of them only, and first of Husbandry, which is
no less profitable, than very necessary; though the pleasantest part thereof be
Gardening, an Art so courted with delightful contemplation, that though a man
be in a wilful sweat, he shall not feel it; the recreation sweetens all his
labor, like Adams first task, who is observed to have delight in the greatest
toil. L. Bacon.
Many by reading Books of this Art, may advance their Knowledge very much, when
they walk into a Garden, discoursing fully, freely, and skilfully of any Plant
or Flower, more then a Gardener himself, who in a manner grows there, and
dwells night and day. Besides, there is infinite variety and delight, to see a
rarity Spring out of our own labor, even provoking nature to play. To see how
nature in the Spring puts on her new clothes, and appearing in a rich dress,
to tempt the eye and ravish the contemplation. When Flora and her Children come
dressed to this solemn Assembly, at which time (says One) if a cunning Herald
saw the variety of colors, he would condemn her Coat to be of no Ancient
bearing. From hence may we magnify the great Creator of all things. This has
been the practice of Kings, without the least infringent upon their greatness,
or straitning their more important affairs. And very much delight there is
known to be found amongst the several tribes and kindred of Natures Beauty;
many profitable Advantages to be snacht from this plentiful Treasury of
Natures Store, as well for use as pleasure. Let Us now put to Sea, and lanch
into the depths of

Navigation.
Navigation: which, though in Solomon's time it was but in the Embrio, yet now
it is at its full growth Nor is it amongst other things of value, to be
accounted small, that enriches the whole world with Treasures, which is the
supports of Kingdoms and Empires. We had not been able to boast of such strong
Bulworks, as blessed be God we repo^se our selves in, if Navigation were not in
its perfection; the invention, is by all accounted both noble and admirable: by
which, the Riches of the world, is by transportation, brought from far
Countries; does, as One says, consociate the most remote Regions, in
participation of their fruits and commodities, and may I add Countries; breeds
acquaintance; without which many places had lain hid with Terra incognita to
this day. Many wonders of the Lord have been discovered in the deep waters;
those that have gone into the depths can best experience this. But discovering
danger by the foresight of a suspected enemy, I must make ready to understand
and use the Art.

Art Millitary.
Military: for Mars and Minerva are no enemies, nay are often found nigh friends:
as in Caesar, Xenophon, Alexander, etc. I never was a Practitioner in earnest
of this polemicall Art, so cannot properly be a Judge of it; yet this I sadly
know, that by our Civil and Bloody Wars, it has been anvil'd into the
brains of so many, that I fear 'twill hardly out again; Many have been taught
the Art of taking up Arms, that forgets to lay them down; and many have learnt
to advance what they cannot order; I wish this Nation, that has paid so much
Blood and Treasure, to learn both the Theory and Practice, may have a good
occasion to forget both. For War is good Physic, but i'ts not good diet,
It Is the best Art to study to be quiet.


Painting.
Next is Painting which is a silent Poetry, as well as Poetry is a speaking
Picture; Zeuxis and Apelles were famous in this Art, and the story of the
first, and Parrhasius, the one cosening the Birds, the other Zeuxis himself, is
a known story to the honor of that Art: It Is a very laudable accomplishment of
a Gentleman. It was in high esteem with the Romans: and amongst the Grecians
it was held too high to be taught to any, but the Children of Noblemen. Among
the Ancients, it was held the first of the Liberal Arts; many Princes and
Noblemen, might be introduc't as famous to their honor; and many rare Pieces
there are to the eternal praise of the Authors. I remember a Story of two Dogs
painted in Italy, striving for a bone, and it being set on the ground, a third
Dog coming in, flew upon the Picture with such earnest violence, as he brake
them in pieces. This is such a comely Ornament to a Gentleman, that without it
he cannot arrive to the Noble and Gentile exercise of

Heraldry.
Heraldry, which is a contemplation full of variety, and naturally Sympathizing
with every generous mind; A great dishonor it is to a Gentleman, not to blazon
his own Coat. As it was for a Nobleman of France, who at an etertainment of
some Friends, had at the last course served up a Marchpane, richly gilded with
his Arms: and when almost eaten up, he calling back his thoughts, says, It was
told me my Arms were represented in this, but I have looked about me, and
perceive them not. To which one of his men replied, Your Lordship has eaten
them: at which he was angry, that he was not told of them before, that he might
have known them. How shall greatness and Nobility of birth be distinguished and
snacht from the pretenses of ignoble persons without this? It Is as necessary
for Gentlemen as dividing Inheritances: What Is the reason that other Nations
are in confusion, and so poor, as one Coat must be borrowed to serve almost
all, but for want of the due regulation of this Art? Peacham.
For in France, every Peasant is a Mounseir, and in some parts of that Kingdom,
all claim an alliance to the greatest blood. In Spain, a Groom is Signour, and
will not open a Note wherein he has been indebted for his Boots to the
Shoemaker twelve Months, unless Don be superscribed. And my Author says,
that in the Low Countries, his Host in Arnam changed his Coat and Crest three
times in a fortnight; that a common Shopkeeper will have his Arms with a
Beaver full faced in his Glass-window, which is a Coat allowed only to Kings
and Princes. This should, methinks, irritate the Gentry, especially of these
Parts in the North (where Ancient and Honorable Families are plentiful) to
outvie these Mechanics, that boast only of their folly and impudence, where
there is as little right as worth; and such Gentry as belong to Honorable
Families (to which is annexed as an Inheritance, a rich Coat) may not by their
lewd and unprofitable courses, dishonor their Families, blot and tear their
Coat in pieces; that too often to support their wickedness, morgage their Honors
and Credits. And now I have done with all that concerns the Parts of Humane
Study, showing how fit it is for the Gentry to be exemplary in their Studies
after Knowledge and Learning; how commendable, how profitable, how above Riches
and vainer pleasures, how fitting them to serve their Countries, etc. Let

The difference betwixt Ignorance and Knowledge.
Therefore the mouths of the ignorant be stopped; If God approve of Humane
Learning, and Moral Knowledge, I account i^ a plasphemy against discretion, for
any to condemn them: and it is only the want of them surely, that opens men's
mouths against them. It Is the Devil that prompts men to think (and it is
strange) themselves somebody, and only because, they suppose themselves above
others in Knowledge, and yet will not grant pre-eminence to the most Knowing and
Learned upon the same ground; And what is the Reason? oh, away with pluralities,
they love to be singular. These men seem to me to be the Devils shooing-horn,
to pull contempt and scorn upon Learning and Knowledge, as well as upon wise men
that possess them; If they did but know how the truly Learned and wise men
thought of themselves, they would blush at their horrid thoughts and malice
against them: suffering their own accusations to serve against them, and not
with their father, devise lies for slander. For true Science (says a studious
and Learned Gentle man) Sir Rich Tempest Medi^.
is a solid thing, and carries rather to the bottom and depth of things, than
to lift one up with aerie estimation. And I remember One undertakes to
disparage Learning and Knowledge, but not in themselves, but in himself; which
to me is a Testimony, it comes nigh to grace; for it was no Moses that saw his
own face to shine; True Knowledge dimmes the sight of it in ones self; Ignorance
is never known to be ignorance, till it be matched with Knowledge, like to that
wise Philosopher, who knew not any thing till he thought he knew nothing: or
like another no less famed for Learning, that never answered to any question
possitively, but rather, I think it is so, or it may be so. And if it were not
thus, wise men would be otherwise; for the first step to Wisdom, is to be
sensible of ignorance. Amongst wise men, he is wisest that knows much, and
shows to know little; and he is wise that knows his Ignorance; It is the
proper ecco of Wisdom to conclude with one that says, -- The perfect Seal of
wit is wits distrust.

There is nothing more certain, then that the loyalest Subjects to ignorance,
are the most perfect and stubborn rebels to Knowledge; And this was the reason
why Licinius ( Constantines Colleague in weilding the Government of the Empire)
finding a barren understanding to all Learning, calls it the public plague
and poison of the Empire. And because this Ignis fatuus, this fatal ignorance,
is the only enemy to Learning and Knowledge, they are therefore to be the more
valued; for fools hate Knowledge, Prove. 1.22.
but Justificata est sapientia a filijs suis. Mat. 11.9.


Now, that I have in some weak measure unravel'd my fancy, and showed what
Treasures Knowledge and Learning are, it remains, that I speak of Books, which
are the Cabinets of these rare Jewels; It Is certainly concluded by all, that
Books are the next helps to Gods Blessing upon all our studies, and we shall
find them greatly estimated by those that know best how to value true worth.
Dionysius the Tyrant said of Plato, that he desired nothing but Books; And I
remember a great Scholar said, all his Comfort was in his Books. Books (says
One) are the Instruments of Wisdom. To have the mind well dressed, where is it
to be had, if not in these Learned Wardrobes? It Is recorded, that Solomon's
Library was the feather in the Plume of his glorious Enjoyments: a part
whereof, he thought as the choicest Present to the Queen of Sheba, for the
recompense of her great pains in traveling to profit her self, and honor
him. These are the dead Counselors, which afford us the Knowledge how to
prepare and accomplish men. Zeno tells us, That it is good to live with the
dead; to read Books. And Ptolomy was advised by one of the Interpreters, that
reading of Books, which daily offered their service, was an exercise beyond
exception; the profit above commendation. These are Minerva's Tower, where a
Treasure lies hid to ignorance and idleness, but open to Industry and
diligence. And seeing the variety of sorts (says One) Burt. Me^l.
he must needs be a block, that is affected with none. Reading of Books is not
steril, but like a good steersman to the best Knowledge. King James, when he saw
the Oxford Library, wished, that if ever it happened he must be a prisoner, that
there he might be kept, and that those chained Books might be his fellows, and
the chains his fetters. W. Es^a.
These are the viaticum, the household stuff of the mind; the magnes animorum,
the irresistible attractives to Scholars, life's best business. They are indeed,
feeless Counselors; whereas a Lawyers lips are locked without a see; you
cannot squeeze any advice from them, unless you boar your way with an
Angelical Instrument; or at least, pawn a Crown for their counsel: I
generally enquire after Books (says One that knew how to use them.) Mont Essa.


Now what cau vulgar Societies, and sordid embraces afford to the advantages,
that is to be got by studying Books; no Society is to be valued, without they
comment upon these dead, yet living Authors. W. Essa.
Therefore follow his advice, that bids, Count thy Books, thy best Inventory
Jewels, things, whose right use is the best Husbandry. Times captivated and
snacht from them by incursions of affairs, and thefts of visitants, is by them
redeemed. Yon can only cut with your Sword, Titulum Sepulchri, when Books are
their Authors Epitaphs. And One says, M. ^ur.
where can a man be better accompanied then with wise men, or reading Books;
Therefore Another says, He is a wise man, that knows wise men's company. You
may discourse with them though dead. For to keep company with them makes a man
better. Xenophon says, Good Consorts are worth my acquaintance, and good Books
my perusal. Corwallis speaking of Advice, says, Essa.
Thus let Books and Advice rectify, and prepare us for the entertainment of
all things. And this will be found to be true in fuch a9 read much, as they
ought, that they shall upon occasion find their Arms to reach further, than
they could expect or promise to themselves. Banquet of Essa.
Of all Companions, Books are the best, for there one may, solace himself, yet
hear nothing but the echo of his own words; Of all Glosses Books are best, for
being Inspective, are both prospective and reflective. Ld Cook.
He was a wise man, that in his vacaucy from public Services, took his old
acquaintance Industry, and so conversed with his Study and Books, as well as
company. And who will not say, that good Books and good company are the very
Epitomy of Heaven; a solace when the greatest adversity threatens. For my own
part, I wish no other outward Enjoyment or Comfort in the world. (And to be
free and ingenuous from the taint of profit or hope advantages) I do wonder,
how so many men, as I have observed in the world, to be rich, and have
occasions enough, nay and raised to places, which should force them to it; yet
study not, nay read not any thing, but their own simple profits of this world,
which how little to be valued to Knowledge, (if it were but in History or Humane
Learning,) I have already discovered. Were I never to discourse in company, or
frequent wiser society then my self, or appear upon the stage of my own
Country in any public Service, but lived to converse with my own thoughts:
yet would I, (if no less then a good part of my Estate could purchase) then
have a sufficient stock of choice Books for my private retirement; There Is
nothing comparable to the purchase of Knowledge, and when ever men begin to
taste it, they will say I speak truth with a witness.

DIVINITY BOOKS Alphabetically digested.
A.
* ASsembly of Divines. Annota. on the whole Bible. 2 vol. folio. * -- The
grounds and principles of Religion, by way of Catechism. 8o. * -- The
Confession of Faith and Catechism at large, approved by the General Assembly
of the Kirk of Scotland, with the League and Covenant. 12o. Dt Airay. A
Commentary on Philip. 4o. Bp Andrews. 96 Sermons all together in one vol.
folio. -- Catechisticall Doctrine at large, or A learned and pious Expos. of
the ten Commandments, with an Introduction, containing the use and benefit of
Catechizing, the general grounds of Religion, and truth of Christian Religion
in particular, proved against Atheists, Pagans, Turks and Jews, now perfected
from many errors in former Impressions. folio. -- An Expos. of the Prophecy of
the Prophet Jonah. 4o. -- A Treatise on the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. --
Catechisticall Doctrine. 12o. -- A manual of Private Devotions and Meditations.
24o. -- A Catechism, containing the grounds of Christian Religion. 8o. Mr
Aynsorth. Annotations on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy; the
whole Book of Psalms and Canticles, all in one vol. folio. -- The Marrow of the
Bible, or a Logico-Theologicall Analysis of every Book of the Holy Scripiure.
12o. -- The Communion of the Saints; A Treatise of the fellowship that the
faithful have with God, his Angels, and one with another in this present life.
8o. -- An Arrow against Idolatry. 12o. Mr Austin. Devour, godly and learned
meditations. folio. Mr Attersoll. A Commentary on the Epistle of St Paul to
Philemon; wherein the Apostle delivers sundry high Mysteries; And the
practice of Duties Oeconomicall, Political, Ecclesiastical: moving all
Ministers of the Gospel, to a diligent laboring in the spiritual harvest, and
the people to a conscionable attending to the word of salvation. folio. -- A
Commentary upon the whole Book of Numbers. folio. G. Amesio. Bellarminus
Enervatus, sive Disputationes Anti-bellarminianae, in quatuor tomus divisus.
8o. -- A Treatise on Conscience, with the power and Cases thereof. 4o. -- The
Marrow of sacred Divinity. 12o. -- Medulla Theologica. 12o. -- De Conscientia.
12o. -- Lectiones in omnes Psalmos. 8o. -- An explication of the Analysis of
the Epistles of St Peter, illustrated by Doctrines out of every Text, and
applied by their Uses for a further progress in holiness. 4o. -- The same in
Latin. 8o. -- Technometria and demonstratio Logicae verae and disputatio
Theologica. 12o. -- De redemptione generali and electione ex fide previsa. 12o.
-- Anti-Synodalia. 12o. *Mr Ash. A Sermon at Mr Whitakers funeral. 4o. * -- A
Sermon at Mr Gatakers funeral. 4o. * -- A Sermon at Dr Spurstowes Sons
funeral. 4o. * -- A Sermon of Zeal. 4o. * -- A Sermon at Mr. Strongs funeral.
4o. Mr Ambrose. First Things: or the Doctrine of Regeneration, the New Birth.
4o. -- Media or middle Things; the Means, Duties, Ordinances, both private and
public for continuance and increase of a godly life till we come to Heaven.
4o. -- Vltima, or last Things; being certain Meditations on Life, Death,
Judgment, Hell, Right Purgatory, Heaven, etc. all reprinted in one vol. 4o. Mr
Adams Sermons and Works, all collected into one vol. folio. -- A Commentary
upon the Epistles of St Paul to Peter. folio. St Augustines Confessions
illustrated with Marginall Observations. 12o. Mr Allington. The grand
conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their King. 12o. --
Englands faithful reprover and monitor ^. To the Church of England, inferior
Ministers, Nobility and Gentry, the seduced of the Nation, such as are
separated from our Mother Church, etc. 12o. *The ancient and durable Gospel.
12o. Mr Abbot. A Christian family builded by God; directing all Governors of
families how to act: showing 1. Gods timber and framing, 2. Gods foundation and
upper-building, 3. Gods finishing, 4. Gods furnishing. 8o. -- The Young-mans
warning piece: A Sermon at the burial of Mr Rogers, with a History of his
sinful life and woeful death; showing also the use of such Examples. 12o. --
Milk for Babes, or the Mothers Catechism; showing all the Principles of
Religion through the whole Body of it. 8o. -- 4 Sermons, viz. on Judge. 11.22.
Mat. 7.12. 1 Timothy 1.19, etc. 8o. -- 3 Sermons, viz. on Mat. 13.45,46. Psalm.
31.5, and 19, and 12. 8o. * -- A Trial of Church-forsakers, proving the Church
of England a true one, has a true Ministry, etc. 8o. St Ambrose Christian
offices, in 3 Books; with his Conviction of Symmacus the Gentile. 4o. Mr Archer
M.A. Instructions about right Believing; several Sermons leading unto Christ,
directing unto says, and encouraging thereunto; showing the nature, measure
and necessity of the sense of sin, Christ the bread of life a sufficient remedy
for man's misery. 4o. St Augustine. A precious Book of Heavenly Meditations, or
a private talk of the soul with God, which who so zealously will use and
peruse, shall feel in his mind an unspeakable sweetness of the everlasting
happiness. 12o. A^bert the Great Bp of Ratisbone. A Treatise adhering to God,
Englished by Sr Kenelm Digby; also a Conference with a Lady about change of
Religion. 8o. Mr George Abbot. The whole book of Job paraphrased, or made easy
for any to understand. 4o. * -- Brief Notes upon the whole book of Psalms, put
forth for help to such as desire to exercise themselves in them: being a pithy
and clear opening of the scope and meaning of the Text to the capacity city of
the weakest; with Mr Vines Epistle. 4o. -- Vindicia Sabbathi, in answer to Mr
Broad, with a survey of all that have handled that subject. 4o. Dr Abbot. An
Exposition of the Prophecy of the Prophet Jonah. 4o. -- Two Volumes against
Bishops. 4o. *Mr Angier. An help to better hearts for better times, in sundry
Sermons: wherein the zeal and fervency in Gods service is declared, hindrances
discovered, and suitable helps provided; all out of Gods treasury, in hope to
revive the memory and reinforce the practice, if the Lord please. 12o. An
Apology for the gesture of Kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper.
4o. *Mr Ashwell. Fides Apostolica: A discourse asserting the received Authors
and authorities of the Apostles Creed, with a double Appendix touching the
Athanasian and Nicene Creed. 8o. Mr Archer. Christ's Personal Reign on Earth.
4o. Mr Alcock. Plain Truths of Divinity; of Antichrist, and Christ's coming to
Judgment, and Reigning with his Saints for ever upon this Earth after the
restitution of all things. 8o. Agreement of the Associated Ministers and
Churches of the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerla^d, with something for
explication and exhortation annexed. 4o. J. Armin^. Examen thesium D.F. Gomari
de praedestinatione, etc. 8o. * An Assertation of the Government of the Church
of Scotland in the point of Ruling-Elders, and of the Authority of Presbyteries
and Synods, with an Answer to a Treatise, i^tituled, The Presb. Government
examined. 4o. Astrology Theologized. 4o. Mr Armitage of Norwich. The Son of
God walking in the fire with the servants of God, in 9 Sermons upon Daniel
3.25. with a Sermon on Eccles. 9.10. at the entrance of the Major of the City
into his Office. 8o. Dr Arrowsmith. Tactica Sacra, sive de milite Spirituali
pugnante vincente, and Triumphante dissertatio, tribus Libris comprehensa. 4o.
B.
R. BOdii. in Epist. Pauli Apost. ad ^phesios praelectiones supra C.C. lectione
varia, multifaria eruditione, and pietate singulari refertae. In quibus praeter
textus Apost. accuratam Analysin and explicationem copiosam ad dilucidum, etc.
Passim interseruntur locorum communium, Quaestionum and Controversiarum
tractationes, etc. fol. Mr Barnard. Thesaurus Biblicus: A Concordance of the
Bible. folio. Mr Bayfield. A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of the
first Epistle of Peter: wherein are most judiciously and profitably handled
such Points of Doctrine as naturally flow from the Text, with Application and
Rules for a Godly life. folio. -- An Expos. upon the Epist. to the Colossians:
wherein not only the Text is methodically analyzed, and the sense of the Words
by help of Writers both ancient and modern is explained, but also by Doctrine
and Use, the intent of the holy Ghost is in every place more fully unfolded and
urged; the very marrow of most Common places is a^tly diffused throughout the
body hereof, with many Cases of Conscience resolved, all with convenient
variety and brevity. folio. -- The Spiritual Touchstone, or signs of
Godliness; also how the weak Ch^istian may establish his Assurance. 12o. -- An
Exposition of the Apostles Creed. 4o. -- The Marrow of the Oracles of God,
being diverse Treatises of the weightiest matters that concern a Christian life.
12o. -- The sum of the Principles of Christian Religion. 12o. -- A Treatise
of Gods Promises. 12o. -- The Doctrine of the Sabbath vindicated. 12o. -- A
Treatise of Faith, the life thereof, and way of holiness; showing what to
believe, and what to suffer in this contending age. 12o. -- Directions for
reading the Scriptures, Rules to read it with profit, and pithy Directions to
reconcile different places. 12. -- The practice of Christianity, or an Epitomy
of Mr Rogers 7 Treatises. 12o. Mr Baine. A Commentary upon the Ep. of St Paul
to the Ephesians. folio. -- A Commentary upon the 1, and 2d Chap. of St Paul to
the Colossians; the Text opened, Observations perspicuously deducted, Uses
inferred and applied, sundry holy Meditations extracted, with diverse places of
Scripture explained. 4o. -- Directions for a godly and holy life. 4o. --
Christian Letters. 12. -- Spiritual Armor. 12o. -- The Diocesans Trial. 4o.
*Mr Anthony Burgess. Spiritual Refining, a Treatise of Grace and Assurance,
handling the doctrine of Assurance, the use of Signs in self-examination: how
true Graces may be distinguished from counterfeit: several true signs of
Grace, and many false ones: The nature of Grace under diverse Scripture-notions
or titles, as Regeneration, the New Creature, heart of flesh, vocation,
sanctification, etc. Many chief Questions occasionally controverted betwixt the
Orthodox and Arminians, with many Cases of Conscience tending to comfort and
confirm Saints, and undeceive and convert sinners: being 120 Sermons. folio. *
-- Spiritual Refining the second Part; A Treatise of Sin, its causes,
differences, mitigations and aggravations, especially of the deceit of the
Heart; of presumptuous and reigning sins, of hypocrisy and formality in
Religion: all tending to unmask counterfeit Christians, terrify the ungodly,
comfort doubting Saints, humble men, and exalt the grace of God. 4o. * --
Vindiciae Legis, or a vindication of the Moral Law and Covenants, from the
Errors of Papists, Arminians, Socinians and Antinomians. 4o. -- The true
Doctrine of Justificacation asserted and vindicated from Papists, Arminians,
Socinians and Antinomians, 1^ Part. 4o. -- The true Doctrine of Justification
asserted, etc. 2d Part. 4o. -- Public Sermons on sundry subjects; viz. The
difficulty of, and encouragements to Reformation, Mark 1.2,3. A Sermon before
the Court Marshall, Psalm. 106.30,31. The Magistrates Commission, Romans 13.4. At
election of the Lord Mayor. Romes cruelty and apostasy, Rev. 19.2. on 5^
November. The Reformation of the Church to be endeavored more then the
Commonwealth, Judge. 6.27,28,29. before the House of Lords. Public affections
pressed upon, before the Commons: all in 4o. -- 145 Expository Sermons upon the
whole 17th Chapter of St John: or Christ's Prayer before his Passion explicated,
and both practically and polemically improved. fo. J. Brentio. In Scriptum
Apostoli and Evangelistae Mathoei, de rebus Gestis Domini nostri Jesu Christi
Commentarius. folio. J. Christi Dom. nost. Nov. Test. sive novum foedus, cujus
Graeco contextui respondent interpretationes duae: una vetus; altera Theod.
Bezae, ejusdem T. Bezae Annotat. in quibus ratione Interpretationis vocum
reddita, additur Synopsis Doctrinae and Evangelica Historia, and Epistolis
Apostolicis comprehensae, and ipse quoque contextus quasi brevi Commentario
explicatur, etc. folio. Bp Babingtons Works complete. folio. Mr Browning. A
Treatise on public Prayer and the Fasts of the Church. 4o. Dr Bastwick. The
Church of England a true Khurch. 4o. Mr Brown. The sum and substance of
Christian Religion. 8o. Mr Bradshaw. A Commentary upon the Epistles of St Paul
to the Thessalonians. 4o. -- A Treatise on Justification. 12o. -- A Treatise of
the sin against the holy Ghost, grounded on 12th Mat. 22,23. tending to
comfort such as are afflicted for sin, are at the brink of despair. 12o. -- A
preparation to the receiving of Christ's body and blood: directing weak
Christians how they may worthily receive the same. 12o. Dr Bilson. A Treatise
of the sufferings of Christ. folio. -- On Government. 4o. Mr Robert Bolton. A
discourse of true Happiness. 4o. -- Some general Directions for a comfortable
walking with God. 4o. -- Instructions for a right comforting Afflicted
consciences, with special Antidotes against some grievous temptations. 4o. --
Of the 4 Last Things; Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven; with his Assize
Sermons, and Notes on Justice Nichols funeral; the Life and Death of the
Author, reviewed, with marginall Notes; with the Sermon at Mr Boltons funeral
by Mr Estwick. 4o. -- A Cordial for Christians in the time of affliction. 4o.
-- Meditationes in diebus Dominicis de vita futura. 4o. -- A discourse
concerning Usury. 4o. *Dr Sam. Bolton. The arraignment of Errors; serving to
curb the want^n spirits of men in the entertainment of Opinions. 4o. -- The
true bounds of Christian freedom; or a Treatise wherein the Rights of the Law
are vindicated, the liberties of Grace maintained, and the several late
Opinions against the Law are examined and refuted; with a discourse annexed of
the Learned I. Camerons, touching the three fold Covenant of God with man,
translated. 8o. * -- The Wedding garment or Guard to the Tree of Life; A
Sacramental discourse; showing a Christians privilege in approaching to God in
Ordinances; in his Sacramental approaches, with the danger if he do not
sanctify God in them. 12. * -- The tossed Ship. 8o- -- The dead St Speaking to
Saints and sinners living, in several Treatises, viz. The sinfullness and
greatest evil that is in sin, 2 Samuel 24.10. The nature and royalties of
Faith, Joh. 3.15. The slowness of the heart to Believe, Joh. 1.50. The causes,
signs and cures of Hypocrisy, with motives and helps to sincerity, Isa. 58.2.
The wonderful workings of God for his Church and people, Exodus 15.11. prepared
for the Press in his life, and never before published, with Mr Calamies
Epistle. folio. Mr Breerwood. A Treatise on the Sabbath. 4o. *Mr Ball. A
Treatise on the Covenant of Grace; wherein, the graduall breakings-out of
Gospel Grace from Adam unto Christ are clearly discovered. 4o. -- A Treatise of
Faith: the nature and life of Faith. 4o. -- The Principles and grounds of
Christian Religion in Question and Answer. 8o. -- Against Cann. 4o. -- Against
Separation: the trial of the new Church Way in New England and old. 4o. -- The
power of Godliness, doctrinally and practically handled; wherein the nature,
comprehensiveness, parts and properties of a Godly life are discovered; with
distinct Treatises of the Affections, Spiritual combat, government of the
Tongue, of Prayer, and of the Lords Prayer. Published by Mr Ash. folio. Mr T.
Ball Fell. E. Coll. Pastorum propugnaculum; or the Pulpits patronage against
the force of unordained usurpation and invasion. 4o. Mr Bulkley. The Covenant
of Grace opened, wherein are explained the differences betwixt the Covenant of
Grace and of Works; the different administration of the Covenant before and
since Christ; the blessings and benefits of it, with the conditions and
properties of it. 4o. Mr Brightman. An Exposition of the Revelation of St John,
illustrated with Analysis, with a most comfortable Expos. of the last and most
difficult part of the Prophecy of Daniel. 4o. -- An Exposition on the Song of
Songs or Canticles. 4o. -- Brightman Redivivus: Or the Post-humian offspring
of Mr T.B. in 4 Sermons; 1o. Of the two Covenants, from Gal. 4.22,23, etc. 2o.
The danger of scandals and offenses, from Matthew. 18.7. 3o. Gods Commission to
Christ to preach the Gospel, from Luke 4.18. 4o. The Saints security, from Jude
20, and 21, verses. 4o. *Mr Buroughs. Exposition of the first 13 Chapters of
Hosea. 2 vol. 4o. * -- Irenicon, Heart-divisions, the evil of the Times. 4o. *
-- Gospel Worship, or the right way of drawing nigh to God in 1o. Hearing the
Word, 2o. Receiving the Lords Supper, 3o Prayer. 4o. * -- Gospel Conversation;
showing 1o. That the conversation of Believers ought to be above what could be
by the light of nature: 2o. Beyond those under the Law: 3o. Suitable to the
Gospel; with the misery of those men that have their portion in this life. 4o.
* -- The rare Jewel of Christian contentment; containing 1o. The holy art and
mystery of contentment: 2o. Directions to work the heart to contentment: 4o.
The excellency of it: 5o. The evils and aggravations of the sin of murmuring.
4o. -- Gospel Reconciliation, or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the world: wherein
the nature of Reconciliation is fully opened. 4o. * -- Earthly mindedness, the
evils of it, and reasons against it: of conversing in Heaven, and walking with
God. 4o. -- The Saints Treasury: showing 1o. The incomparable excellency of
the Holiness of God; 2o. Christ all in all; with a preparation for Judgment.
4o. -- The evil of evils, or the exceeding sinfullness of sin. 4o. -- Treatise
of Faith, of Hope; the Saints walk by faith on earth, by sight in Heaven. 4o.
-- Moses choice with his eye fixed upon Heaven; discovering the happy condition
of a self-denying heart, from Heb. 11.25,26. 4o. * -- The glorious Name of God
the Lord of Hosts. 4o. -- The excellency of a gracious spirit, from Numb.
14.24. 8o. -- A Treatise of Self-denial, upon Heb. 11.24. 8o. * -- 3 Sermons
before the Parliament. 4o. * -- Jacobs seed; or the excellency of seeking God
by prayer. 12o. *Mr Baxter. The Saints everlasting Rest: or the blessed estate
of the Saints in their enjoyment of God in glory. 4o. -- Of Baptism. 3o. --
His Confession of Faith, especially concerning the interest of Repentance and
sincere Obedience to Christ in our Justification and Salvation. 4o. -- His
Apology against Crandon, Blake, Air, Kendall and Colvinus. 4o. * -- Christian
Concord, or the agreement of the Associated Pastors and Churches of
Worcestershire; with his explication and defense of it; also his exhortation to
Unity. 4o. The Quakers Catechism, or the Quakers questioned, their Questions
answered,, and both published for the sake of those that have not yet sinned
unto death, etc. 4o. The unreasonableness of Infidelity: 1o. The Spirits
intrinsic witness to the truth of Christianity: 2o. The Spirits internal
witness: 3o. For prevention of the unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.
4o. Proud arrogance, the cause of Infidelity. 8o. * -- Aphorisms of
Justification; the nature of the Covenants, satisfaction, righteousness, faith,
works, etc. opened. 8o. -- A Sermon of Judgment preached at Paul's before the
Lord Major, from 2 Cor. 10,11. 8o. -- A Sermon at Worcester: True Christianity,
or Christ's absolute dominion, and man's necessary resignation, from 1 Cor. 6.19,
and 20. and Psalm. 2.10,11,12. 8o. * -- 32 Directions for settling peace of
Conscience and spiritual Comfort 12o. -- Making light of Christ and Salvation
too often, the Issues of Gospel-Invitation. 12o. * -- A defense of
Worcestershire Petition for the Ministry and Maintenance in answer to 16
Queries. 4o. -- Gildas Salvianus. The Reformed Pastor; The Nature of true
Pastoral Work, especially in private Instruction and Catechizing, with an open
Confession of our too open Sins, prepared for a day of Humiliation, etc. 8o.
-- Certain Disputations of Right to Sacraments and the true Nature of visible
Christianity; against the Reverend Mr Blake. 4o. -- The safe Religion, or 3
Disput. for the Reformed Cath. Religion against Popery, that its against the
holy Scriptures, unity of the Cath. Church, consent of the ancient Doctors,
plainest reason, and common judgment of sense it self. 8o. -- Of Conversion.
Published for use of those that are strangers to it, especially to the grossly
ignorant and ungodly. 4o. -- An Account of his present thoughts, concerning the
Controversies about the Perseverance of the Saints. 4o. Mr Birbeck. The
Protestants Evidence, taken out of good Records: showing that for 1600 years
after Christ, diverse worthy guides of the Church have taught as the Church of
England does, namely in the 9 Articles; with an Answer to a Romish Antidotist.
folio. -- A Treatise of Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven, commonly called
Quatuor novissima. 8o. Mr Beesly. The souls Conflict with the sins of
vainglory, coldness in professing Christ, envy, ingratitude, forgetfullness of
God, revenge, etc. 8o. *Mr Bedford. A Treatise against Antinomianisme, being an
examination and confutation of their chief Tenants, with an Answer to the
compassionate Samaritan. 4o. *Mr Blake. Vindiciae Foederis: A Treatise of the
Covenant of God with mankind, in the several kinds and degrees of it: wherein
the condition of the Covenant of Grace on man's part is asserted, etc. several
Corollaries containing many controverted heads of Divinity, etc.
Infant Baptism maintained in its latitude, etc. 4o. * -- Birth-priviledge,
with a Treatise of Baptism against Blackwood. 4o. -- The Covenant sealed, or a
Treatise of the Sacraments of both Covenants polemicall and practical,
especially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of Grace. 4o. *Mr Bridge his
WorKs: viz. The benefit of Christ's Priestly office: 2o. Satan's power to tempt,
and Christ's love under temptation: 3o. Thanksgiving required in every
condition: 4o. Grace for grace: 5o. Spiritual acting of Faith: 6o.
Evangelicall Repentance: 7o. Spiritual life: 8o. The Woman of Canaan: 9o.
Vindication of Ordinances, with some Sermons annexed, all in one vol. 4o. --
Three Sermons on 2d Pet. 1.19. Scripture Light the most sure light, compared
with Revelations and Visions, natutall and supernatural dreams, impressions
with and without the Word, Light and Law within, Divine providence, Christian
experience, Humane reason, Judicial Astrology. 2o. Christ in travel. The
greatness thereof both in soul and body, the first and after-effects of his
death, his assurance of Issue, his satisfaction therein; in three Sermons on
Isa. 53.11. 3o. A lifting up for the down-cast in case of great sins, weakness
of grace, miscarriage of duties, want of assurance, affliction, tentation,
desertion, unserviceableness, etc. in 13 Sermons on Psalm. 42.11. also added
four Sermons of the sin against the holy Ghost: 2o. Sins of Infirmity: 3o. The
false Apostle tried and discovered: 4o. The good and mean of estament: all in
one vol. 4o. *Mr Corn. Burgess. Baptismall Regeneration. 4o. -- A Treatise of
Zeal. 12o. *Mr Bithner. Lyra Prophetica David is Regis, sive Analysis
Critico-practica Psalmorum. 4o. *Mr Bowls. De pastore Evangelico tractatus; in
quo universum munus pastorale, tam quoad postoris vocationem, and
praeparaetionem, quam ipsius muneris exercitium, accurate proponitur. 8o. Mr R.
Bridge. A Treatise opening the Promises and threats of the Scripture. 8o. Mr
Bisco. The grand trial of true Conversion, or sanctifying Grace appearing and
acting first and chiefly in the thoughts; wherein is opened the Mystery of
Iniquity in man's thoughts by nature, and of holiness in the thoughts of
sanctified persons; with precious preservatives against evil thoughts. 8o. --
The Mystery of Free Grace in the Gospel, and Mystery of Gospel in the Law. 8o.
Dr Barnard. The Life and Death of the most Reverend and Learned Father of our
Church Dr J. Usher late Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland, in a
Sermon at his funeral at Westminst. Abbey, now reviewed with enlargements. 8o.
Mr Barlow. A Commentary on the Apostle St Paul to Timothy. 4o. Mr Barnard. A
Commentary upon the divine Revelation of St John. 4o. Behm's. Mysterium magnum;
or an Exposition of Genesis. folio. -- Principles of the Divine Essence. 4o. --
The threefold Life. 4o. -- 4 Questions of the Souls original and nature. 4o.
-- On the two Testaments, Baptism and the Supper. 4o. -- Mercurius Teutonicus.
4o. -- The Tree of Christian Faith. 4o. -- The way to Christ discovered. 12o.
Mr Batt. A definition of Faith. 4o. Mr Benefield. A Commentary upon the
Prophecy of Amos. 4o. Mr Brooks. The unsearchable Riches of Christ, in 22
Sermons on Ephesians the 3d and 8. 4o. -- Heaven on Earth; or a serious
discourse touching a well grounded Assurance of man's everlasting Happiness and
Blessedness. 8o -- Precious Remedies against Satan's devices, or Salve for
Believers and unbelievers sores. 8o. -- Apples of Gold for young men and women,
and a Crown of Glory for old men and women; or the happiness of being good
betimes, and the honor of being an old Disciple; with Objections answered, and
doubts resolved. 12o. Mr Bailey. A disswasive from the Errors of the times;
wherein the Tenets of the principal Sects, especially of the Independents are
drawn together in one Map, and examined by the Touchstone of the holy
Scriptures. 4o. * -- A Scotch Antidote against the English Insection of
Arminianisme: which little Book may be, through Gods blessing, very useful to
preserve those that are sound in the Faith, from the Infection of Mr J.
Goodwins great Book. 12o. -- An Historical vindication of the Church of
Scotland. 4o. -- Anabaptisme the fountain of Ind^. Brown. Antino. Familis. and
most Errors. 4o. -- Catechesis elenctica errorum qui hodie vexant Ecclesiam.
12o. -- The disswasive from the Errors of the time, 2d Part, vindicated from
the Exceptions of Mr Cotton and Mr Tombs. 4o. *Mr Brinsley of Yarmouth. The
mystical Brazen Serpent, with the magneticall virtue thereof; or Christ
exalted on the Cross, with the blessed end and effect thereof, in drawing the
elect world unto himself, to believe on him and be saved by him. 8o. * -- The
Saints joynt-membership, with the mutual respects and offices which on the
account thereof they owe each to other. 8o. * -- The one and only Mediator
between God and man; the Mediatorship of Christ, and the great Gospel Mystery
of reconciliation betwixt God and man, opened, vindicated and applied. 8o. * --
Mystical Implantation, or the great Gospel Mystery of the Christians union and
communion with, and conformity to Jesus Christ, both in his death and
resurrection. 8o. -- Stand still, or a bridle for the times; A discourse
tending to still the murmuring, settle the wavering, stay the wandering,
strengthen the fainting: Published as a proper antidote against the present
epidemicall distempers of the times. 4o. -- The Communion of Saints. 12o. --
Sundry Sermons. 4o. -- Two Treatises: 1o. Three sacred Emblems. The mystical
Stars, Sword and Sun, in the hand, mouth and face of the Son of man; showing
the authority, dignity, duty and security of the Gospel Ministry, etc. 2o.
Tears for Jerusalem; or the compassionate lamentation of a tenderhearted
Savior, over a rebellious and obdurate people. 8o. -- The sacred Ordinance of
Ordination by Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery; with an exhortation to
the Ministers after their Ordination. 8o. Mr Bunnies Resolutions for a
Christian life; showing how we should resolve our selves to become Christians
indeed. 12o. The burden of a laden conscience, or the misery of sin, set
forth in the Confession of a miserable sinner. 8o. * -- Mr Began. A view of the
Threats and Punishments recorded in the Scripture, alphabetically composed,
with some brief observations on sundry Texts. 8o. *Mr Bohemius. A Christian
delight, or Scripture meditations, wherein many difficulties are unfolded, and
sundry Texts profitably applied, with an Appendix against promiscuous admission
to the Lords Table. 8o. * -- The Peace and Concord of the Churches. 8o. -- Dr
Brough, Chaplain to his Majesty. Sacred Principles and Soliloquies, or a
Manual of Devotion: 1o. The Grounds of Religion, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as it differs from the Roman and new Reformed: 2o. Daily
Prayers fortified with Scriptures: 3o. 7 charges to Consc. in a body of
Divinity; which is the Art not of Disputing but Living well; with a
preservative against schism. 12o. -- The holy Feasts and Fasts of the Church,
with Meditations and Prayers proper for Sacraments, and other occasions leading
to a Christian life and death. 12o. Ld Brooks. The nature of Truth, its union
with the soul, which is one in its essence, faculties, acts, one with Truth.
12o. Mr Buchan. Institutiones Theologicae, seu locorum communium Christianae
Religionis ex Dei verbo, etc. 8o. -- Psalmorum Davidis Paraphrasis Poetica.
Argumentis ac melodiis explicata atque illustrata: Opera and studio N.
Chytraei. 12o. Mr Barton. A Book of Psalms in meter, close and proper to the
Hebrew, plain and easy to the times; with musical Notes, Arguments,
Annotations and Index. 12o. Man's Monitor, or the Free School of Virtue;
holding forth the Duties required, and Sins forbidden in the two Tables of the
Law, in easy English Verse. 8o. Bp Bramhall. A fair warning to take heed of
the Scottish Discipline, as being of all others most injurious to the Civil
Magistrate, most oppressive to the subject, most pernicious to both. 4o. * --
An Answer to Mons. de la Militiere, Counselor to the King of France, in his
book entitled, The Victory of the Truth for the Peace of the Church, to the
King of Great Britain, to invite him to embrace the Roman Catholic Faith:
with Milliteeres own Epistle. 8o. -- A Defense of true Liberty, from Antecedent
and extrinsecall Necessity; against Mr Hobs Liberty and necessity. 8o. -- A
defense of the Church of England, from the unjust Aspersions of criminal
Schism: Wherein the nature of criminal Schism, the diverse sorts of
schismatics, liberties and privileges of National Churches, right of
Sovereign Magistrates, extortion and schism of Rome, etc. are all manifested to
the world. 8o. * -- A Replication to the Bp of Calcedon. 8o. Mr Broughton. A
view of the holy Scriptures. folio. -- An Expos. of the Prophecy of the
Prophet Daniel. 4o. * Boisi^. Veteris interpretis cum Beza aliisque
recentioribus collatio in quatuor Evangeliis, and Apostolorum Actis; in qua ac
non saepius absque justa satis causa hi ab illo discesserint disquiritur. 8o.
Biddle dispossessed; or his Scripture perverting Catechism reformed by
Scripture. 12o. Dr Boys's Sermons, expounding the Dominicall Epistles and
Gospels in the English Lyturgie. folio. Mr B^adle. The Journal or Diary of a
thankful Christian; presented in some Meditations upon Numbers 33.2. Book of
Psalms: with the Hymns Evangelicall and Songs Spiritual, composed into 4 Parts
by sundry Persons, with such several Tunes as have been and are usually sung
in England, Scotland, Wales, Germany, Italy, France and Netherlands. 8o. Mr
Broxolime. The good old way; or Perkins improved, in a plain Exposition and
sound Application of those depths of Divinity briefly comprised in his six
Principles. 8o. Dr Brown. Religio Medici, with illustrations, reprinted. 8o. *
-- A Catholic medicine for the diseases of Charity. 8o. *Mr Boreman. The
Countrymans Cattechisme, or the Churches plea for Tithes; plainly discovering
the duty and dignity of Christ's Ministers, and the peoples duty to them. 4o. Mr
Buck. A Treatise on the Beatitudes. 4o. Mr Bentham. The Christian Conflict;
showing the difficulties and duties of a Christian War are, with a discussion
of the Case of Usury and depopulation, with Errors of Antinomianisme. 4o. --
The Society of Saints. 4o. Mr Belkes. A Scripture inquiry, or helps to the
memory in duties of Piety. 8o. Mr Bourton. A Translation of Alstedius of the
thousand Apostolical years, or the Saints Reign on Earth a Thousand years. 4o.
Dr Boughen. An Account of the Church Catholic, where it was before the
Reformation. 4o. Mr Bond Mr of the Savoy. Diverse Sermons on sundry occasions.
4o. Mr Beacon. The displaying of the Popish Mass, showing the Idolatry of it.
12o. Mr Rob. Barnard Rector of Battencomb. Bible battles. 12o. -- The Isle of
Man, or the legal proceeding in Manshire against sin; wherein by way of a
continued allegory, the chief Malefactors disturbing both Church and State are
detected, with the Arraignment and Trial according to the Laws of England.
12o. Mr Bulstrode. A golden Chain, or a Miscellany of divine Sentences of the
sacred Scriptures, and of their Authors, collected and linked together for the
souls comfort. 8o. Mr Bell. Incomparable Company-keeping; or a conversation on
earth in Heaven. 8o. Mr Bazlee. Predestination defended against
Post-destination, in Answer to Mr Pirce on Reprobation. 4o.
C.
Mr CAlvin. The Institution of Christian Religion in English. folio. -- The
same in Latin. folio. and in 8o. -- A Commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to
the Romans, English 4o. -- Sermons on Jacob and Esau, English. 8o. -- An
Exposit. of the Book of Genesis, English 4o. -- A Harmony upon the three
Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, with the Commentary, English 4o. -- A
Commentary upon the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ according to St John;
Translated by C. Fether-stone. 4o. Mr Cocks. A Survey of Gods Household on
Earth, both before and under the Law. folio. Causins Holy Court in 5 Tomes: 1o.
Of Motives which should excite men of quality to Christian perfection: 2o. Of
the Prelate, Soldier, Statesman and Lady: 3o. Maxims of Christianity against
profaness: 4o. Command of Reasons over the Passions: 5o. The Lives of the most
famous and Illustrious Courtiers, taken out of the old and new Testament and
modern Authors. folio. The Holy History. 4o. A Christian Diary. 12o. Mr Cotton.
A Commentary on the first Epistle of John with observations, reasons and uses.
folio. -- Pouring out of the 7 Vials, being an Exposition of the 16th Chap. of
the Revelation of St John. 4o. -- Christ the fountain of life. 4o. -- Way of
Life, or Gods way and course in bringing home sinners, etc. 4o. -- The way of
the Churches of Christ in New England, walking in brotherly equality or
co-ordination, without subjection of one Church to another; measured and
examined by the Golden Reed of the Sanctuary, being a full declaration of the
Church Way in all particulars. 4o. * -- The Gospel-Ordinance of singing of
Psalms vindicated; wherein is handled, 1o. The duty it self: 2o. The matter to
be sung: 3o. The Singers: 4o. The manner of singing. 4o, -- On Baptism. 4o. --
Gods Mercy. 4o. -- The Keys of the Kingdom. 4o. -- A Commentary upon Zachariah;
on Acts the 12th and 2d of Proverbs. 4o. -- A Treatise of Public Prayer. 4o. *
-- The Holiness of Church Members. 4o. -- An Exposition with Practical
Observations on the whole Book of Ecclesiastes. 8o. -- A brief Exposit. with
practical Observations on the whole Book of Canticles, never before printed.
Published by Dr Tuckney. 8o. -- A Treatise of the Covenant of Grace;
discovering the great work of a sinners reconciliation to God. 8o. -- Gods
Promises. 4o. -- Against Dr Twiss: clearing many doubts concerning
Predestination. 4o. -- A Letter. 4o. -- An Exposit. upon the 13th Chapter of the
Revelation of St John. 4o. -- The constitution of Churches. 4o. Mr Clement
Cotton. A large Concordance to the Bible, last edit. enlarged, with a
Concordance to the books of Apocrypha. folio. -- None but Christ: the 9th
Edition. 12o. Corn. a Lapide. Commentaria in quatuor Prophetas majores. folio.
-- Commentaria in duodecim Prophetas minores. 2d vol. folio. Bp Cooper; All his
Works collected into one vol. folio. Mr Cartwright. A confutation of the
Rhemists Translation, Glosses and Annotations on the new Testament, so far as
they contain manifest impieties, heresies, idolatries, superstitions,
profanness, treason, slanders, etc. by occasion whereof the true sense and
doctrine of the Scriptures and humane Authors (by them abused) is now given.
folio. -- An Offspring of mercy from the womb of cruelty: a Passion Sermon at
Christ-Church Oxon. 8o. -- A Catechism of the principal grounds of Christian
Religion. 8o. -- Electa Thargumico-Rabinnica; sive Annotationes in Genesin ex
triplici Thargum, seu Chaldaica paraphrasi, nempe Onkeli, Hierosolymitana, and
Jonathanis; Item ex R. Salomone, and Aben Ezra, aliisque Hebraeis pariter ac
Hebraizantibus excerptae, una cum Animad versionibus subinde interspersis, etc.
8o. -- A Sermon on the Soul. 4o. -- Of the Power of the Civil Magistrate. 4o.
Mr Calamy. A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr Bolton. 4o. * -- The monster of
Self-seeking anatomized: a Sermon before the Ld Mayor. 4o. -- The godly man's
Ark, or City of Refuge in the day of his distress, in diverse Sermons: the first
at the funeral of Mrs. Eliz. Moore, with her evidences for Heaven. Other 4
Sermons from Psalm. 119.2. 8o. -- The City Remembrancer: a Sermon preached to
the native Citizens of London. 8o. Mr Caryl. An Exposition of the first 27
Chapters of the Book of Job, in sundry volumes. 4o. -- A Thanksgiving Sermon,
pressing to, and directing in that great duty of praising God, from Ps.
111.1,2,3,4,5. Mr Collings. Responsoria bipartita, sive vindiciae suspensionis
Ecclesiasticae ut and Presbyterii Evangelici; against B^atman, Humfrey,
Brabourn, Marshall, Barkdale and Timson. 4o. * -- Vindiciae Ministerii
Evangelici; or the Vindication of the great Ordinance of God, a
Gospel Ministry. 4o. -- Responsoria ad erratica pastoris, sive vindiciae
vindiciarum; or a revindication of the great Ordinance of God; Gospel Preachers
and preaching. 4o. -- Resp^nsoria ad erratica piscatoris: or a caveat for old
and new profanness: against Fisher and Dr Hammond: against Festival days and
Christmas day, etc. 4o. * -- A Cordial for a fainting soul; or some Essays
for the satisfaction of doubting wounded Christians, laboring under several
burdens: The first Part in 14 Sermons. 4o. * -- A Cordial, etc. The second
Part: Showing the power of Faith in the conquest of slavish fears, and
irregular disquietments of spirit: in 22 Sermons. 4o. * -- A Cordial, etc. The
third Part in sundry Lectures: all three in one vol. 4o. * -- Five Lessons; 1o.
The lost Sheep b^ought home: 2o. The Spouse raised, from under the Apple tree:
3o. Her carriage in the Wilderness, lea^ing on her beloved: 4o. A Lesson of
Self-denial: 5o. A right way to true peace. 8o. * -- Comforts against the fear
of Death. 8o. * -- Faith and experience; or a short narration of the holy life
and blessed death of Mary Simpson of Norwich; with her funeral Sermon. 8o.
Elisha's lamentation for Elijah: a funeral Sermon for Mr Carter. 4o. Mr
Chillingworth. The Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation: or an Answ.
to a Book entitled, Mercy and Truth; or Charity maintained by Catholics;
which pretends to prove the contrary, folio. -- Chillingworthii Novissima. Mr
Crave. Timothies vade mecum; or a pocket-companion for the Sons of the
Prophets, treating of matters appertaining to Ministers and such as intend for
the Ministry. Mr Cudworth. A Treatise concerning the true use of the Lords
Supper. 4o. *Mr Craddock. Gospel-holiness, or the saving sight of God. 4o. * --
Mount Sion, or the privilege and practice of the Saints. 4o. * --
Gospel-liberty in the extentions and limitations of it. * -- Good News from
Heaven, to the worst of sinners upon earth. 4o. * -- Divine drops distilled
from the fountain of holy Scriptures. 4o. * -- The Saints fullness of joy in
their fellowship with God. 4o. *Mr Cawdrey and Mr Palmer, Sabbatum Redivivum;
or the Christian Sabbath vindicated: first and second Part. 4o. * -- The power
of the Keys in 4o. * -- The Inconsistency of the Independent way with
Scripture and it self. 4o. -- Church-reformation promoted, in a Sermon on
Matthew. 18.15,16,17. with some Animadvers. upon Mr Humphries Vindication, and Mr
Saunders Antediatribe. 8o. -- Independency a great Schism: against Mr Owen,
His Apology in his Tract of Schism; also showing the inconstancy of the Dr,
and inconsistency of his former and present opinions. 8^. -- Against Dr
Hammonds Diatribae. 8o. -- Family-reformation promoted, in a Sermon on Josh.
24.15; by short Catechismes fitted for the threefold relations in a family, of
Children and Parents, Servants and Masters, Husbands and Wives. 12o. *Mr
Crompton, M.A. An Exposition on the 4th Article of the Apostles Creed. 8o. Mr
Culverwell. An elegant and learned Discourse of the light of Nature, with the
Treatises of Schism; Act of Oblivion; The Child's return; The panting Soul;
Mount Ebal; The white Stone; Spiritual Optics; the worth of Souls. 4o. *Mr
Cobbet. A vindication of Childrens right to Baptism. 8o. * -- The Civil
Magistrates power in matters of Religion, modestly debated, Impartially stated,
according to the bounds and grounds of Scripture; Answ. all weighty Objections,
with an Answer to a certain slanderous Pamphlet called Ill news from N.E. 4o. *
-- On Prayer; Ejaculatory, closet, family, and public. The nature, duty, and
qualifications, with the necessity of it, and Engagements to Prayer, with Cases
of Conscience about Prayer resolved. 8o. -- A fruitful and useful Discourse
touching the Honor due from Children to Parents, and Parents to Children, both
being cleared from Scripture; the failings and sins of either, the manifold
causes thereof are discovered, applied, and pressed. 8o. Mr Chapman.
Hallelujah, or King David's shrill Trumpet sounding a loud summons to the whole
world to praise God: being a Commentary on the 117 Psalm. 4o. *Mr Case.
Correction, Instruction: or a Treatise of afflictions, first conceived by way
of private Meditations, then digested into certain Sermons now published for
the help and comfort of humble suffering Christians. 12o. -- Sundry Sermons in
one vol. Two Sermons before the House from Ezekiel. 20.25. Gods waiting to be
gracious, from Esa. 30.18. The Quarrel of the Covenant, with the pacification
of the Quarrel, from Levit. 26.25. Jer. 50.5. Gods rising, his enemies
scattering. On a Fast before the House, from Psalm. 61.1,2. The root of
Apostasy, Thanksgiving Sermon. from Dan. 11.32. Jehoshaphats Caveat to the
Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.6,7. A model of true Spiritual thankfullness, from Psalm.
107.30,31. Thanksgiving Sermon from Esa. 43.14. The set-backs of Reformation,
Exodus 5.22,23. Spiritual whoredom, a Humiliation Sermon. Hosea 9.1. 4o. * --
Encouragements. 12o. -- The vanity of glorying in the flesh. 12o. -- Morning
Exercises, or some Notes taken out of the Morning Exercises which diverse
Reverend Ministers of the Gospel preached in Giles in the Fields. 12o. Mr
Calvert. Melcoeli, or the Prophet Isaiahs crucifix. in an Exposit. of the 53
Chap. of Isaiah. 4o. A contemplation of Heaven, with an exercise of love, and a
descant on the Prayer in the Garden, by a Catholic Gent. 12o. Mr Cooper. The
triumph of a Christian, Containing Jacobs wrestling with God; 2o. The Conduit
of Comfort; 3o. A preparative for the Lords Supper, full of sweet consolation
for all that desire the refreshing sweetness of Jesus Christ. 8o. *Mr Crofton.
Against the Rabinicall Talmud of Rabbi John Rogers; wherein is examined his
Doct. of the matter and form of a Church, duty of Separation, and subjects of
Christ's power, etc. 8o. -- Catechizing Gods Ordinance, in a short Treatise of
that ancient, approved, soul-edifying, singularly-necessary exercise of
Catechizing. 8o. -- The peoples need of a living Pastor, asserted and
explained, in a Sermon at the funeral of Mr Frost. 4o. -- The Saints Zeal.
12o. Confessions of Faith of all Christian and Reformed Churches, which purely
profess the Doctrine of the Gospel in all the Kingdoms, Nations and Provinces
of Europe, with the order of time when they were written; with a Table of
principle Articles of Faith which in every Confession is debated: freely
submitted to all reformed Churches, as a means to knit and unite in one bond of
love, for avoiding of Heresies, discords and schisms in these dangerous times.
4o. *Mr Cole Newcastle. David's distress in the loss of Jonathan, or an
explication of David's mourning at the death of Jonathan, in a Sermon upon 2 Samuel 1.16. at the funeral of Mr Henry Massey Minister of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ at Kirby-Kendell in Westmoreland. 12o. *Mr Croft. On the Mystery of
Godliness, or the Character of a Saint in seeming contradictions. 8o. *Mr
Cartwright York. The Doctrine of Faith, or the principal heads in Divinity
which a Christian is to know and believe: where also the Articles of the Creed
are observed. 8o. * -- Certamen Religiosum: A Conference between his late
Majesty and the Marquess of Worster about Religion, at Ragland Castle; with a
vindication of the Protestant Cause, and the aspersions cast upon the famous
Instruments of the Protestant Cause ( viz. Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius,
Melancthon and Beza) fairly wiped off. 4o. Dr Crisp. Christ alone exalted in 14
Sermons: first vol. 8o. -- Christ alone exalted, in 17 Sermons upon Phil.
3.8,9. second vol. 8o. -- Christ alone exalted in the perfection and
encouragement of his Saints, notwithstanding sins and trials, in eleven
Sermons: the third vol. 8o. Mr Crodacot. The necessity of making heavenly
Treasure our chiefest Treasure. 4o. *Mr Cordett. The Magistrates support and
burden. Mr Chomley. The state of the new Roman Church discussed, in vindication
of Bp Hall, against the cavils of H. Burton. 8o. *Catageri. Tetragrammato
nomine Jehovah dissertatio qua vocis Jehovah apud nostros receptae usus
defendetur, and a quorundam cavillationibus iniquis pariter atque inanibus
vindicatur. 12o. Mr Crumpton. An explanation of the Principles of Religion,
expressed in the Catechism of the Church of England, set down in the Common
Prayer. 12o. -- A Candle in the dark. A Treatise of the nature of Witches and
Witchcraft. 8o. *Mr Crandon against Baxters Aphorisms of Justification. 4o. Mr
Carter. The Covenant of God with Abraham opened, wherein Infant Baptism is
cleared, and somewhat about the Sabbath, with the manifestation of God to his
people in the latter days. 4o. Mr Colvill. Refreshing streams flowing from
the fullness of Jesus Christ. 4o. Mr Collier. The exaltation of Christ in the
days of the Gospel. 8o. * -- Marrow of Christianity, or a spiritual discovery
of some principal truth. 8o. * -- Mysteries unveiled, or the glory of Christ
and Mystery of Antichrist. 8o. -- Three general Epistles written to the
universal Church of the firstborn. 8o. -- On the Sabbath against Mr Fisher. *
-- A discovery of the new Creation. 8o. -- The Corruption of the Ministry of
the Church of England. 8o. Mr Cheynell. The divine Trineunity of the Father,
Son and holy Spirit; or the blessed Doctrine of the three coessentiall
Subsistents in the Eternal Godhead, without any confusion or division of the
distinct Subsistences, or multiplication of the most single and entire Godhead,
etc. 8o. -- The rise and growth of Socinianisme. 4o. Mr Capel on Tentations,
their nature, danger and cure, in four Parts. 8o. * Clavis Apocalyptica, or the
Revelation revealed, in which the great mysteries in the Revelation of St John
and the Prophet Daniel are opened, by a German Doctor. 8o. Mr Culverwell. A
Treatise of Faith, wherein is declared how a man may live by Faith, and find
relief in all his necessities; applied especially to the weakest Christians.
8o. Mr Chewney. Antisocinianisme, or a brief explication of some places of holy
Scripture, from many gross errors and Socinian Heresies lately published by W.
Pinchin Gent. called the Meritorious Price, etc. with a description of the
Lives and Deaths of the Authors, promoters and propagaters of this Heresy; by
what means it spread, and when and by whom it was first brought into England;
that so we may not be deceived. Mr Clapham. A full discovery and confutation of
the wicked and damnable Doctrines of the Quakers. 4o. Mr Cooper. A Commentary
upon the Revelation of St John. 4o. -- Anabaptists anatomized and silenced, in
a dispute with Mr Tombs, by Mr Craggs M.A. Or a Reply to Mr Tombs Plea for
Anabaptisme; wherein the antiquity, universality and succession of
Infant Baptism (since the Apostles days until the Anabap. sprung up in
Germany) is maintained, necessity of Dipping refuted. 8o. -- A Cabinet of
spiritual Jewels, wherein man's misery, Gods mercy, Christ's treasury, Truths
prevalency, etc. in eight Sermons: Also the nature, equity and obligation of
Tithes under the Gospel, and Marriage to be solemnized only by a lawful
Minister, etc. 8o. Chrysostom. A Commentary upon the Epistle of Paul to the
Ephesians. 4o. Mr Cartwright. An Exposition of the Revelation of St John. 4o.
Mr Clapham. A brief of the Bibles History, drawn first into English Poesy and
illustrated by apt Annotations, with a Synopsis of the Bibles doctrine. 12o.
Crummes of Comfort: Godly Prayers with thankful remembrances of Gods
wonderful deliverances of this Land. 24o. Comfortable Doctrine for Adams
offspring, in a Conference betwixt two Christian friends. 12o. Creation and
fall of Adam. 12o. Sr Lucas Carey, late Ld Vicount of Faulkland. A discourse of
Infallibility, with an Answer to it, and his Lordships Reply, with Mr
Mountagues Let^er concerning the change of his Religion. 4o. Mr Carltons
Remembrance on the 5th of November. 4o. -- Directions to know the true Church.
12o. Ld Capel. Meditations Divine and Moral. 12o. Mr Sam. Clark. A sweet
Poesy for Gods Saints, containing many choice and sweet flowers gathered out
of Gods own garden the holy Scriptures; being directions for these evil times,
and how to walk comfortably in all times: or a watchword to Zions mourners, to
a close walking with God. 12o. -- A Sermon at the Warwick-shire-mens Feast;
entitled, Christian Good-fellowship. 4o. Cuique suum. The Law of Tithes
affirmed against all opposers: or an Apology for maintenance of a
Gospel Ministry, confirmed by divine and humane sanction. 4o. Mr Church.
Miscellanies of the Attributes of God; or God and man: A Treatise compendiously
describing the nature of God in his Attributes; his Wisdom in ordering
terrestrial and Celestial Bodies, described Theologically and
Philosophically; many secrets in Scripture and Nature are unbowelled, with
solid proofs and apt applications for brevity and perspicuity. 4o. -- The good
man's Treasury. 12o. -- Of Ejaculations. 12o. -- A Pocket-Companion, or cheap
Riches, in 500 Proverbiall Aphorisms; with the wise or tame Serpent. 12o. Mr
Chaffie. A Treatise on the Sabbath, wherein all Controversies about it are
reconciled. 4o. Mr Cook. A Treatise of Baptism, or the Font uncovered. 4o. Mr
Giles Collier M.A. Vindiciae Thesium de Sabbato, in vindication of certain
passages in a Sermon of the Morality of the Sabbath, from the exceptions of Mr
Fisher in his Christian caveat; with an examination of this bold assertion,
viz. That there is equal authority and antiquity, for observation of the 25th
of December. as for the Lords Day. 4o. Mr Calvin York M.A. Heart-salve for a
wounded soul; or Meditations of comfort for relief of a soul sick of delayed
prayers and the hiding of Gods face. 8o. The Christian Directory. 12o. Mr T.
Cooper. The art of giving, or a guide to Charity; showing the right nature of
Liberality. 8o. Celebriorum distinctionum Philosophicarum Synopsis, aut L.
Castanaeo. 8o. Bp Chapel. The Preacher, or the art and method of Preaching;
showing Rules for invention, method, expression, and Books, etc. 12o. Mr
Chishull. Two Treatises; 1o. The Young-mans Memento; showing how, why, when, we
should remember God, or the seasonableness and sutableness of this work to
youth. 2o. Now if ever: Proving that God gives a day, that it often ends while
the means of Grace continue, and when ended peace is hid from the soul. 12o. --
The danger of being almost a Christian; showing 1o. How far men may go without
grace: 2o. Why some men go so far: 3o. why no farther: 4o. Their dangerous
estate. 12o. * Confessio Fidei in conventu Theol authoritate Parl. Angl.
indicto elaborata. 8o. Dr Charlton. The Immortality of the Soul, demonstrated
by the light of nature, in two Dialogues. 4o. Dr Cossens. Devotion, Prayers and
Meditations with additions and enlargements reprinted. 12o. -- A Scholasticall
History of the Canon of the holy Scriptures, or the certain and indubitate
books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England. 4o. Mr Carpenter.
The Deputy-Divinity, or inferior Deity, and subordinate God in the world,
Conscience. 12o. A Theological Concordance of the Synonymous terms in the
holy Scripture; all various words and phrases, which concur in sense are
common-placed, etc. 8o. Mr S. Crook. The guide unto true blessedness; or, a
body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, directing a man to the saving knowledge
of God. 12o.
D.
Dr DOnn. Eighty Sermons collected into one volume. folio. -- Essays in
Divinity. 12o. -- Six Sermons before his Majesty. 4o. Bp Davenant. Expositio
Epistolae D. Paul ad Colossienses. folio. -- Determinationes Quaestionum
quarundam Theologicarum. folio. * -- Animadversions upon a Treatise entitled,
Gods love to mankind, by Mr Hoard. 8o. * -- An Exhortation to brotherly
communion between the Protestant Churches. 8o. D. Diodate. Annotations upon the
Bible expounding the difficult places, with the Analysis folio. Mr J. Downham.
A Concordance or Table to the whole Bible for the finding out any verse
therein. Bp Downham. A Treatise of Justification. folio. Mr G. Downham. A Guide
to Godliness, Directions to a Christian life. folio. -- The Christian Warfare.
folio. -- An Exposition of the 25 Psalm. 4o. -- An Abstract of the ten
Commandments. 8o. -- A Treatise of Liberty. 8o. -- On the Sacrament: Directing
weak Christians how to celebrate the Lords Supper. 8o. * -- A brief sum of
Divinity, showing how a man ought to examine his ways aright in this life, to
the attainment of eternity. 8o. Mr Dan. Dyke. The great Mystery of
self-deceiving, or deceitfullness of the heart of man. 4o. -- A Treatise of
Repentance 4o. -- On Michael and the Dragon: or Christ tempted, and Sa^an
soiled. 4o. -- Evangelicall Histories. 4o. -- The School of Afflictions. 4o. --
An Exposition of the Epistle of Philemon. 4o. -- An Exposition of 124 Psalm,
tending to stir up thankfullness for our late deliverance in the Powder Plot.
4o. Mr Jer. Dyke. The worthy Communicant, or the due order of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 8o. -- A Treatise on Conscience: 1. Of a good
Conscience: 2. The miseries and mischiefs of scandals both taken and g^ven. 8o.
-- A Treatise of Covetousness. 4o. -- Of Archippus. 4o. -- The Righteous man's
Tower; The way to be safe in time of danger. 8o. -- Select Sermons. 1. Of
quenching and not quenching the Spirit. 2. The heart-smtiten sinners suit for
pardon. 3. The right eating and digesting of the Word. 4. The purchase and
possession of the Truth. 8o. -- The Grounds of Religion by way of Catechism.
8o. Mr D^d. An Exposition of the ten Commandments. 4o. *Mr Day. M.A. An
Exposition of the Book of the Prophet Esaiah. folio. * -- A Treatise of the
Resurrection, from 1 Cor. 15,16. 4o. * -- A Moment of Mortality. 1. A wakening
for worldlings. 2. Meditations of Consolations. 3. Comfortable Considerations,
preparing the sick for a happy change. 4. A Mirror of Modesty, with a reproof
of the strange attire of Women: with the sacred use of Christian Funerals 8o.
Mr Down. A Treatise of Faith 4o. Mr Dixon. On the Epistles Latin 4o -- A brief
explication of the Epistles of Paul to the Hebrews. 8o. -- An Exposition of the
Gospel of St Matthew. 8o. -- A brief Explication of the whole Book of Psalms 8o.
-- The Rapeutica sacra, seu de curandis Casibus Conscientiae circa
regenerationem, per faederum divinorum prudentem applicationem. Libri tres. 4o.
*Mr Durant. Comfort and counsel for dejected souls, wherein is handled the
nature, working, grounds, and remedies of spiritual dejection. 8o. * -- Sipps
of sweetness, or consolation for weak Believers, discoursing of the sweetness
of Christ's carriage toward all his weak Members. 8o. * -- Salvation of Saints,
by the appearances of Christ now in Heaven, and hereafter from Heaven. 8o. *Mr
Dingley. The spiritual Taste described, and a glimpse of Christ, discovering the
sweet Incomes of Christ to a spiritual heart: or Divine relishes of matchless
goodness. 8o. * -- Messiah's splendour, or the glimpsed glory of a beauteous
Christ. 8o. * -- The dispensation of Angels, or the Angel guardian: 1. Proved
by the dim light of nature, clear beams of Scriptures, consent of many
ancient and modern Writers untainted with popery. 2. Cleared from many rubbs
and mistakes, the critical queries of Antagonists examined and untied. 3.
Applied and improved for information, etc. grounded on Acts 12.15. 8o. * --
Divine Optics, or a Treatise of the eye, discovering the vices and virtues
thereof, as also how that Organ may be tuned, chiefly grounded on Psalm. 119.37.
8o. The daily Exercise of a Christian. 12o. Mr Duke. The fullness and freeness
of Gods grace in Jesus Christ in two points. 1. That personal election is no
ground of the Saints perseverance. 2. In what sense the Scripture speak the
Saints perseverance in the grace of God. 3. Against the Familists and Quakers.
Doctrine of the Bible, or rules of discipline, briefly gathered through the
whole course of Scriptures by way of Questions and Answers. 12o. Mr Davenport.
On the Messiah. 4o. Drexilius. Considerations on Eternity. 12o. -- A right
intention, the rule of all men's Actions. 12o. -- Hive of Devotion, or the
Saints evidence for Heaven, with a cordial for afflicted minds, and tender
Consciences. 12o. -- The School of Patience in three Books. 12o. Dream of the
Devil and Dives. A Sermon. 8o. Mr Deerings Grounds of Religion by way of
Catechizing. 8o. Dives and Lazarus. A Sermon. 8o. Mr Despagn. Of the eating of
the body of Christ, considered in his principles. 8o. -- A Treatise on the
Creed, or new Observations being the first of the four parts of the Doctrine of
Christianity, preached upon the Catechis. of the French Churches, with the use
of the Lords Prayer maintained. 8o. -- Popular Errors in general points
concerning the Intelligence of Religion, having relation to their causes; and
reduced into diverse observations. 8o. -- Shibboleth, or the reformation of
several places in the translations of the French and English Bible, with the
correction of diverse common opinions, History, etc. 12o. -- An Exposition of
the ten Commandments. 8o. A Sermon preached on a Fast day, for the success of
the treaty betwixt King and Parliament. 4o. -- A Funeral Sermon upon the death
of his Wife, in French. 8o. A discourse against Mr Montagues new gagg, and just
appeal, wherein he labors to bring ^n the faith of Rome and Armenius, under
the name of the Doct. and Faith of the Church of England. 4o. Mr Drake. A
Boundary to the Holy Mount, against Mr Humphrey. 8o. * -- De Sanguine. 4o. *Mr
Drape. Gospel Glory, or Visible, and Invisible worship of God. 4o. *Mr
Dornford. Gospel Mystery, or the great union that is betwixt Christ and the
Saints, from Cant. 2.16. With a true way to discern a godly from a carnal or
ungodly man, with the way how the Saints return after backsliding: also the
worth of a good conscience. 8o. Mr Dawson. 18. Sermon. upon the Incarnation of
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: wherein the greatest mysteries of
Godliness are unfolded to the weakest capacity. 4o. Mr Darton. The true and
absolute Bishop Jesus Christ. 4o. Divine Meditations on the 91 Psalm, and on
the History of Agag King of Amaleck. 4o. Mr Davis. Heaven and Earth shaken,
showing how Kings, Princes, and their Governments are changed and turned. 8o. A
Directory for the public worship of God, throughout England, Scotland, and
Ireland. 4o. Mr Duport. THPOTHPI'AOS, sive Liber Job Graeco Carmine redditus.
8o. -- SOLOO'N 'EETPOS: Sive tres Libri Solomonis scilicet, Proverbia,
Ecclesiastes, Cantica. 8o. *Mr Dalley. Of the right use o^ the Fathers in the
decision of the Controversies that are at this day in Religion. 4o. Mr Dent.
The Ruin of Rome, or an Expos. upon the whole Revelation, wherein is plainly
showed and proved, that the popish Religion with all the power of Rome, shall
ebb and decay through all the Churches of Europe, and come to an utter
overthrow, even in this life, before the end of the world: written especially
for the comfort of Protestants and daunting of Papists, Seminary Priests,
Jesuits, and all that cursed rabble: with an Epitomy of Mr Brightmans Expos on
Revelation. 8o. -- The plain man's pathway to Heaven, wherein every man may
clearly see whether he shall be saved or damned, 8o. Mr Dayrell. A Treatise of
the Church, written against them of the separation, commonly called Brounists;
proving the Church of England a true Church, etc. 4o. Mr Dale. M.A. fellow Mag.
C. Ox. The Analysis of all the Epistles of the New Testament; wherein the chief
of each Chapter is reduced to heads, and many hard places explained for the
help of memory and understanding. 8o.
E.
Mr ELton. A Commentary on the whole Epistle to the Colossians. folio. -- On
the 7, 8, and 9 Chapters to the Romans. folio. -- On the ten Commandments,
with the grounds of Christian Religion: added by way of catechizing, with
Christ's holy mind touching Prayer, in that holy Prayer which himself taught his
Disciples. 4o. An exposition on the 5th Chapter of John's Gospel. 4o. Evans
voice from Heaven to the Commonwealth of England, with an echo to the voice.
12o. Mr Eaton. The Divinity of Jesus Christ, also the Doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction and reconciliation on Gods part to the creature, etc. 8o. -- A
discovery of a most dangerous and dead Faith. 12o. -- A Honeycomb of free
Justification. 4o. Mr Estwick. Biddles confession of Faith, touching the holy
Trinity, wherein his chief design to overthrow the Sacred Mystery, and the
Deity of our blessed Savior is examined and confuted: with seven Arguments to
prove the Deity of the Son of God. 4o. Exhortation to Catechizing, the long
neglect whereof is sadly lamented, and the speedy reviving as earnestly
desired; by the Provincial Assembly at London. The English Presbyterian and
Independent reconciled. 4o. The Epistle congratulatory of Lyscimachus Nicanor
of the Society of Jesus to the Covenanters in Scotland, parallelling their
Harmony in Doctrine and Practice. 4o. *Mr Air. A Treatise of Justification
against Mr Baxter, etc. 4o. *Mr Eliot and Mr Mayhew. A relation of the
repentance and conversion of the poor Indians in New England; showing the
wonderful work of God in their poor souls. 4o. *Mr Eaton. A Treatise of the
Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblige not 4o. *Mr Edes. The
Doctrine of Justification asserted and vindicated, in Answer to Mr Eyres and Mr
Baxter. 4o. An Expedient for composing differences in Religion. 4o.
F.
Dr FEatlies works in one vol. folio. -- The grand Sacrilege of the Church of
Rome. 4o. -- The Dippers dipped, or the Anabaptist duckt over-head and ears, at a
disputation in Southwark, with a full discourse of their Original, sorts,
errors, attempts against the State, punishments, with the History of their
practices in Germany. 4o. -- Ancilla pietatis, or the Handmaid to private
devotion, containing Instructions, Hymns, and Prayers, fitted to the days of
the week, and Feasts, and Fasts of the Church. 12o. -- Against Fisher the
Jesuit. 4o. Mr Finch. Animadvers. upon Sr H. Vanes Book called the retired man's
Meditations, examining his Doctrine concerning Adams fall, Christ's person, and
sufferings, Justification, common and special grace, etc. 8o. Mr Fergusson. (A
scotch Minister) A brief Exposition of the Epistles of Paul to the Philip. and
Colossi. 8o. Mr Flecher. A Commentary on the first Psalm. 4o. -- Joy in
tribulation, or consola. for afflicted Consc. 12o. *Mr Fuller. The Infants
Advocate, or a Treatise of Circumcision and Bapt. on Jewish and Christian
Children. 8o. -- A Collection of Sermons, viz. 1. The best improvement from
Act. 10.38. 2ly A gift from God above, from Prove. 23.26. 3ly The true penitent,
from Luke 22.6. 4ly The best act of oblivion, from Psalm 25.7. with Notes upon
Jonah. 8o. * -- A Comment upon Ruth, with two Sermons. 1. Comfort in Calamity,
teaching to live well. 2ly the grand Assizes, minding to die well. 8o. * -- A
Triple Reconciler stating the Controversies; whether Ministers have an
exclusive power of Communicants from the Sacrament. 2ly If any persons may
lawfully preach unordained. 3ly whether the Lords Prayer ought not to be used
by all Christians. 8o. * -- A Treatise of Temptations: or a Comment on the 11
first verses of the 4 of Matthew, concerning Christ's temptations. 8o. -- Good
thoughts in bad times, better thoughts in worse times. 12o. -- The best name on
earth; with other Sermons. 8o. The Fort-royall of the Scriptures, or vade Mecum
Concordance, wherein the weaker sort of Christians may suddenly command all
the Rarities in the Book of God. 12o. *Dr Fern. A defense of the Church of
England. 12o. -- Episcopacy and Presbitery considered, according to the
several respects which may commend a Church Government, and oblige good
Christians unto it. 4o. * -- A Sermon before the King at the Isle of Wight. 4o.
* -- Certain considerations of present concernment, touching the reformed
Church of England. With a particular examination of A. Campny Dr of Sorbon, his
exceptions against the lawful Calling and Ordination of the Protestant Bishops
and Pastors of this Church. 12o. -- A Compendious discourse upon the case as it
stands between the Church of England, and those Congregations that have divided
from it. 12o. *Mr Ford. Of Reading. The great Interest of Kingdoms. 4o. * --
Two Sermons in Latin. Anhitio Sacra. 4o. * -- An Assize Sermon. 4o. -- The
Spirit of Bondage and Adoption largely and practically handled, with a
discourse on the Duty of Prayer in an Afflicted Condition. 8o. -- The
practical use of Infant Baptism. 8o. *Mr Ford of Exeter. A Treatise tending to
prove the lawfullness of singing Psalms. 8o. Mr Forbes. A Commentary of the
Revelation of St John. 4o. -- A Treatise of Justification. 4o. -- Irenicon. 4o.
Mr Fenner. His Works complete in one vol. newly printed, or in sundry volumes
apart, viz. 1. A Treatise of the Affections, or the Souls Pulse, whereby a
Christian may know whether he be living or dying, with a description of their
Nature, signs, and symptoms, with directions for the right use and ordering of,
them. 2ly The Souls Looking-glass, lively representing is estate before God;
with a Treatise of Conscience, wherein the Definitions and Distinctions thereof
are unfolded, and several cases resolved. 3ly Christ's Allarum to drowsy
Saints, or Christ's Epistles to his Churches. 4ly Wilful Impenitency the
grossest self-murder, and all they that are guilty of it, tried and condemned.
5ly The Spiritual man's Directory, guiding a Christian in the path that leads
to true blessedness, teaching how to believe, obey, and pray. 6ly Hidden Manna;
or the Mystery of saving Grace, wherein the peculiarity of Gods special grace
to the elect is asserted, and diverse Objections of Pelagians and Arminians
about the power of the will of man to supernatuall good, are fully answered and
confuted. 7ly The Riches of Grace, showing the value and excellency of a
gracious spirit, by comparing it with the nature and spirits of wicked men. 8ly
The Continuation of Christ's Allarum to drowsy Saints, with a Treatise of
effectual Calling, the killing power of the Law. The spiritual Watch; The New
Birth; Ingrafting into Christ; On the Sabbath. 9ty Twenty Nine Sermons on
sundry Texts, viz. The use and benefit of Divine Meditations; Danger of
deferring repentance; Vain thoughts arraigned at the Bar of Gods Justice; The
Judgment of the world by Saints at the last day; The punishment of unworthy
Communicants; The Duty of Communicants; The Duty of Reprovers, and persons
reproved; The misery of earthly thoughts; The necessity of Self-denial; The
efficacy of importunate Prayer; The necessity of Gospel obedience; Caveat
against late repentance; The Sovereign Virtue of the Gospel; A Funeral Sermon,
signs of Gods forsaking a people; The Sacrifice of the faithful; The msery of
creatures by the fall of man; The Christians imitation of Christ; The enmity of
the wicked to the light of the Gospel; Gods impartiality in his Judgments;
Dignity of Saints; Time of Gods grace limited; Spiritual Mortification; Sin
and danger of Hypocrisy; Reformation under correction; The way to prevent
desolation folio. *Mr Firmin. On Separation. 4o. * -- The Case stated. 4o. --
Against the Quakers, or the Prince of darkness like an Angel of Light. 4o. Mr
Fisher. The wise Virgin: or a wonderful Narration of the various dispensations
of God toward a Child of a 11 years of age: her excellent speeches in a sad
time of sickness, to the loss of sight, hearing, and her recovery without any
external means, to the wonderful amazement of all that came far and near to
see her. 8o. *Mr Fulwood. Vindiciae mediorum and mediatoris: or the present
Reigning error arraigned at the Bar of Scripture and reason, discovering that
falsehood and danger of that opinion that pretends to an immediate enjoyment
and call of the Spirit of God, both above and against its own efficacy, cause,
Word, Ministry, and Witness, in all respects, etc. 8o. Mr Fulk. On the Rhemish
Testament. folio. Mr Fettiplace. The Sinners tears in Meditations and Prayers.
12o. -- The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth
of everlasting darkness. D. S. Fabritio. Conciones sacrae seu december praecepta,
a Deo ipso duabus tabulis conscripta, and per Mosen populo Israelitico tradita.
-- Ecclesiae contingensis Pastore. 4o. Mr Farmer. A Treatise on the personal
reign of Christ upon earth. Mr S. Fisher. A Love token for Mourners, being two
Funeral Sermons, and Meditations preparatory to his own expected death, in a
time and place of great Mortality. 8o. D^ Fulk. Pleasant prosp. into the Guard.
of Not. Contemplation, seeing the natural causes of all kind of Meteors, as
well fiery as a iery, as watery and earthly: to the glory of God, and profit of
his creatures. 8o.
G.
Mr GVmbledon. Christ tempted, the Devil conquered, or an Expos. on a part of
the 4th of Mat. with two Sermons before the University at Oxf. 4o. Mr Gunton.
M.A. Gods House, with the nature and use thereof, as it ought to be understood
and respected by Christians under the Gospel. 12o. Mr Gery. The Fort Royal of
Christianity defended; or a demonstration of the Divinity of Scripture by way
of excellency called with the Bible: with a discussion of the great
Controversies in Religion, etc. 12o. H. Grossius. A Commentary upon the Old and
New Testament in three vol. Latin. folio. -- De veritate religionis
Christianae. 12o. -- De satisfactione Christi. 12o. -- Poemata. 8o. * -- Of the
Law of War and Peace, with Annotations in three parts, with the Authors life
and death: Translated. 8o. The Magistrates authority in matters of religion
asserted, or the right of the state in the Church Englished. 8o. -- A Treatise
upon the Providence of God, and on Christ and his Miracles. 12o. Mr Godolphin.
A Holy Arbor, or a cluster of spiritual Grapes, containing the whole Body of
Divinity. folio. -- The Holy Lymbeck of a Semi-century of Spiritual
extractions, wherein the Spirit is extracted from the Letter in Scripture. 12o.
Mr J. Goodwin. Redemption Redeemed, with a through discussion of election and
reprobation. folio. -- Catabaptism, or the new Baptism washed old, and ready to
vanish away, in two parts: 1. Considerations pregnant for healing the common
scruples touching the subject of Baptism, and manner of Baptizing. 2. In
defense of Infant Baptism, in answer to a discourse against it. 4o. -- An
Expos. upon the 9th Chap. of the Epistle of St Paul to the Romans, showing that
the Apostle discourses not of any personal election or reprobation of men from
eternity. 4o. Divine Authority of the Scriptures. 4o. -- Reply to A.S.
vindicating the Congregationall way vindicated. 4o. -- Antapologies, in answ.
to Edwards. 4o. -- Fresh discovery of a high Presb. spirit. 4o. --
Anticavilearism. 4o. -- Queries concerning the Government. 4o. -- Hagiomastix,
or scourge for Saints. 4o. -- Peace protected. 4o. -- Vindication of the
sentence past on the late King. 4o. -- Apologist condemned. 4o. -- Three
disputes about extent of Christ's death, with Mr Powell and Mr Sympson. 4o. --
Pagans debt and dowry. 4o. -- Defense of the true meaning of Romans 3.5,9. in
answer to Mr Walker. 4o. -- Water-dipping, no firm footing for
Church Communion. 4o. -- The Return of Mercies. 12o. -- Saints Interest. 12o. A
Treatise upon the Sabbath. 8o. -- The Christians engagement for the Gospel. 8o.
-- Distance and Agreement of Brethren. 4o. -- Of fighting against God, from the
counsel of Gamaliel. 4o. Dr Gouge. A Commentary upon the whole Epistle of St
Paul to the Hebrews, wherein every word and particle in the Original is
explained, and the Emphasis fully showed. 2o. The sense and meaning of every
Verse clearly unfolded. 3o. Each Chapter and Verse logically and exactly
Analyzed. 4o. Doctrines ^raised and applied. 5o. Types of Christ unveiled. 6o.
Cases of Conscience resolved. 7o. Many Controversies discussed. 8o. Various
common places perspicuously opened, being the substance of 30 years Lectures,
with the Narrative of the Authors life and death: Two Volumes. folio. The
calling of the Jews, a Present to Judah, and the Children of Israel that joined
with him, and to Joseph (the valiant Tribe of Ephraim) and all the House of
Israel, that joined with him; with an Epistle unto them in Hebr. translated
into English. 4o. -- Domestical duties in eight Treatises, from the 5th and
6th of the Ephesians. part of each Chapter. 4o. -- A Guide to go to God: or an
explanation of the Lords Prayer. 4o. -- The whole Armor of God, from the 6th
of Ephesians -- The Saints Sacrifice, or a Comment upon the 116 Psalm. 4o. --
Gods Three Arrows, Plague, Famine, and Sword, in three Treatises. First, A
plaster for the Plague, from the 16th of Numbers, from 44. to 50 Verse.
Secondly, Dearths death, on 2 Samuel 21.1. Thirdly, The Churches conquest over
the Sword, from Exo. 17. from 8 Verse. to the end. 40. -- The dignity of
Chyvalry; A Sermon on 2 Chronicles. 8.9. 4o. -- A Treatise of the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, from Mat. 12.31,32. and Mark. 3.28,29. -- Two Catech. of the
Fundamental Points of Religion. -- The extent of Gods Providence, from Mat.
10.29,30,31. A Sermon on 5th Novem. on occasion of the downfall of Papists in
Blackfriars 10 days before, with the relation of the said downfall. 4o. --
Two Treatises: 1o. The Sabbaths Sanctification. 2o. A Treatise of Apostasy,
from Luke 15.31. 4o. -- The Saints Support. A Sermon on Nehem. 5.19. 4o. --
Mercies Memorial. A Sermon on Exo. 13.3. on Q Eliz. Inauguration. -- The
progress of Divine Providence, on Ezekiel. 36.11. 4o. -- A Sermon on Ezekiel. 24.16.
at the Funeral of Mrs Duck, with a relation of her life and death. 4o. -- The
right way. A Sermon on Ezra 8.21. 4o. -- Mr Gattaker. Sermons, viz. David's
Instructor, on Psalm. 34.11. Christians care, Mat. 6.33. Spiritual Watch, Mat.
13.37. Gain of Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6. Joy of the Just, Psalm. 9.10,11. Jacob's
Thankfullness, Genesis 32.10. David's Remembrancer, Psalm. 13.1. Noah's Obedience,
Heb. 11.7. Engl. delivery from Span. Invasion, Psalm. 48.7. A spark of sorr. for
Zion, Amos 6.6. Gods parley with Princes, Psalm. 82.6. Marriage-Prayer, Genesis
24.12. A Good Wife Gods gift, Prove. 19.14. A Wife indeed, Prove. 18.22.
Marriage-duties, Colos. 3.18. Paul's departure, Phil. 1.23. Good Name and good
end, Eccl. 7.1. Abraham's decease, Genesis 25.8. Christian Constancy crowned by
Christ, Rev. 2.10. folio. Antinomianism discovered and confuted, and free grace
as it is held forth in Gods word, as well by the Prophets in the O.T. as by the
Apostles and Christ in the N.T. showed to be other then is by the Antinomian
party in these times maintained. 4o. * -- A discourse Apologeticall, wherein
Lillies loud lies in his Merlin are clearly laid open, his shameless slanders
fully refuted, and his murtherous mind, inciting to a general massacre of Gods
Ministers from his own pen evidently evidenced. 4o. -- Gods eye on his Israel;
or a passage of Balaam, from Numbers 23.21. expounded and cleared from
Antinomian abuse. 4o. -- Antinomianism discovered and Confuted. 4o. -- D.J.
Piscat. and M. Lud. Lucij Scripta quaedam adversaria: De causa meritoria nostri
coram Deo Justificationis. 8o. -- Against Saltmarsh. 4o. A Commentary upon the
New Testament: Latin. 4o. -- Of the nature and use of Lots: A Treatise
Historical and Theological. 4o. Mr Gross. The happiness of enjoying and
making a true and speedy use of Christ setting forth: 1o. The fullness of
Christ. 2o. Danger of neglecting Christ. 3o. Christ Jesus is the souls last
refuge. 4. St Paul's last Legacy or farewell to the men of Corinth. 4o. -- Sweet
and Soul-perswading Inducements leading unto Jesus Christ. 4o. -- Deaths
deliverance, and Eliahs fiery Chariot: In two Sermon. 8o. * -- The fiery Pillar
of heavenly Truth, showing the way to a blessed life, composed by way of
Ca^ech. for preserving of Gods people from the spreading evils, and pernicious
enchantments of Papism and other errors. 12o. -- On Sacred things. 12o. -- The
Anatomy of the heart. 8o. -- The buddings and blossomings of old Truths, or
several practical points of Divinity gathered out of that sacred Evangelist
St John, Chap. 3. from Verse. 22. ad finem. 8o. *Mr Gell. A Sermon touching Gods
Government of the world by Angels, preached before the Astrologers. 4o. Mr
Gallaspie. Aarons ^od Blossoming for Presbyteriall Government. 4o. -- Misselane
Quest. Many cases of Consc. concerning the controversies of the times are
discussed and resolved. 4o. Mr Greenhill. An Expos. of the first 19 Chapters of
Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon: In three volumes. 4o. -- Sermons
of Christ his last discovery of himself, viz. 1o. Christ the root of all. 2o.
his Royal descent. 3o. Christ the star. 4o. The voice of the Spirit and
Bride. 5o. Of his coming. 6o. Of spiritual thirsting and thirsters. 7o. Christ's
willingness to save sinners. 8o. The water of life; all from the 22 Revel. 16,
and 17 verses. 8o. Mr Griffieth. Form for Families, wherein all sorts of sexes
are so squared for the Word, as may best serve for useful pieces in Gods
Building. 4o. *Mr Gee. A Treatise of private and public Prayer. 8o. *Mr Philip
Goodwin. The Evangelicall Communicant in the Eucharisticall Sacrament: or a
Treatise declaring who are to receive the Supper of the Lord: that it is an
Ordinance peculiar to some, and not to all that live under the Word; With
contrary Objections answered, necessary Directions tendered, cases cleared, care
encouraged, and this duty guided for reforming times. 8o. -- Dies Dominicus
Redivivus, or a Treatise discovering the practical part of the Evangelicall
Sabbath; so to Recover the spiritual part of that pious practice to its
primitive life, lamentably lost in these sad declining times. 8o. -- Religio
Domestica Rediviva; or a Treatise discovering the good old way of serving God
in private Houses, so to recover these pious duties to their primitive
platform; lamentably laid down in these last backsliding days. 8o. -- The
Mystery of Dreams Historically discoursed; or a Treatise wherein is clearly
discovered the Secrets, etc. 8o. Dr Gerrard. The Souls Watch, or a Day-Book for
the devout Soul, consisting of Two and Fi^ty heavenly Meditations and godly
Prayers, fitted for a sanctified conversation, and spiritual riches for the
inward man. 12o. -- Meditations and Prayers translated by R. Winterton. 12o.
Garden of spiritual Flowers. 12o. Granadas Meditations containing devout
Exerci^es for the seven days of the Week, with an excellent Treatise of
consideration and Prayer. 8o. Mr Greenwood. Works containing the day of
Judgment; Lords Prayer; Race to Salvation; Torment of Tophet; Birth of Christ;
Jaylors Jayl delivery. 12o. Mr Gibbons. An Exposition of the Book of Genesis.
4o. Mr Gilpin. Several Sermons, with his life and death. 8o. Mr Tho. Goodwin.
A Child of light walking in darkness, showing the causes by which, the cases
wherein, and the ends for which God leaves his Children to distress of Consc.
4o. -- A Child of darkness walking in light. 4o. -- The Return of Prayers,
wherein is resolved how to discern Gods answer to our Prayers. 4o. -- Tidings
of peace to distressed Consciences. 4o. -- Folly of relapsing after peace
spoken. 4o. -- The trial of a Christians growth in mortification and
vivification. 4o. -- The aggravation of sin, and sinning against Mercy and
Knowledge. 4o. -- The Vanity of thoughts discovered, with their danger and cure.
4o. -- Christ set forth in his Death, R^surrection, Ascension, sitting a Gods
right hand, Intercession; etc. 4o. -- The Heart of Christ in Heaven to sinners
on earth. 4o. -- Encouragements to Faith, drawn from several Engagements, both
of Gods heart and Christ's to receive and pardon sinners. 4o. -- Christ^ the
Universal Peacemaker. 4o. -- The great Interest of Kingdoms and States. 4o. A
distinct, or in one vol. together. Dr Griffith. A Sermon preached at St Paul's.
4o. Mr Guild. The sealed Book opened, or an Expos. of Revela. discovering the
fall of Antichrist, by that blessed work begun in the several Churches and
Kingdoms of Europe. 8o. * -- Moses unveiled. 8o. Mr Graile. A modest
vindication of the Doctrine or conditions in the Covenant of grace, and the
defenders thereof from the aspersions of Arminianism and popery cast on them by
Mr W.E. 4o. Mr Gurnell. A Christian in his complete Armor, or the Saints war
against the Devil, wherein is a discovery of that grand enemy of God and his
people, in his policies, power, seat of his Empire, wickedness, and chief
design he has against the Saints. 4o. * Grand debate concerning Presbytery and
Independency, by the assembly of Divines, containing 1o. The Assemblies
propositions, with proofs from Scripture for Presby. Government. 2o. The
dissenting Brethrens Reasons against the said Propositions. 3o. The Assemblies
Answers to the Reasons. 4o. Grand Imposture of the Church of Rome, in this one
Article of the New Roman Creed, viz. The Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman
Church, Mother and Mistress of all other Churches, without which there is no
salvation; Proving it a blasphemous Article, etc. by the Bp of Coventry and
Leichfield. 4o. *Dr Gawden. Hieraspistes. A defense by way of Apology of the
Ministry and Ministers of the Church of England, humbly presented to the
Consciences of those that excel in Virtue. 4o. -- Three Sermons. 4o. -- A
Treatise of Marriage. * -- A Case of Ministers maintenance by Tithes. 4o. The
Gospel declared in Truth. 8o. Mr Gay. Rector. Fourteen Sermons on several
Texts with a Catechism. 4o. Dr Gardener. The Devotion of the Dying man, that
desires to die well. 12o. *Mr Gove. The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truth.
8o. -- The Communicants Guide, Directing the younger which have not received,
and the elder and ignorant sort, to receive the Lords Supper with comfort. 12o.
*Mr Geere. Touching supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, showing how the
powers Civil and Ecclesiastical may act without encroachment on each other.
4o. Mr Gaul. Select case of Consc. touching Witches and witchcraft. 12o. --
Judicial Astrology largely confuted from Scriptue Authority, nature, reason,
confession; large Observation on History, and from several other particulars
of that unlawful art. 4o. Gualtheri in Prophetas duodecem, Quos vocant
minores. folio. -- On Zepheniah. 8o. Mr Gifford. An Exposition of the
Revelation to St John. 4o. *Mr Gage. A Vindication of the Parish Churches, and
Parochial Ministers of England, from the uncharitable Censure, and infamous
Title of Antichristian and Babylonish, 4o. An Exhortation for desparate
sinners, by the Ld visc. Grandison prisoner in the Tower. 8o. Mr Gralle. The
supreme power of Christian States, Vindicated from the insolent ptetences of
Guil. Apollonii. 4o. Mr Got. Novae Solymae, lib. Sex. Sive Justitutio
Christiani, de pueritia, de creatione mundi, de Juventute, de peccato, de
virili Aetate, de Redemptione Hominis. -- Essays upon the true happiness of
man. 12o. -- Parabolae Evangelicae latin redditae Carmine paraphrastico varii
Generis. Mr Gurney. Corpus Christi, together with the demonstration of
Antichrist. 12o. Groans of the Spirit, or the trial of the truth of Prayer,
handling 1o. what Prayer is. 2o. How a man may know wherein he Prays in the
Spirit. 3o. How the sense of the Spirit in Prayer may be attained. 4o. How a
man may hold on in the duty without the sense of the Spirit. 8o. How they that
want the Spirit of Prayer, should labor for it. 8o. Mr Gilbert. The Libertine
Schooled, or a Vindication of the Magistrates power in religious matters. 4o.
Good thoughts for every day of the Month. 24o.
H.
Mr HIldersham. Hundred eight Lectures by way of Commentary upon the 4th
Chapter of St John's Gospel. folio. -- Hndred fifty two Lectures by way
Commentary upon the 51 Psalm. folio. -- The Doctrine of fasting and Prayer and
Humiliation for sin, in sundry Sermons. 12o. Bp Hall. Contemplations upon the
New Testament. folio. -- A Paraphrase upon the old and New Testament. folio. --
Soliloquies, or holy self-conferences of the devout soul, on sundry choice
occasions, with humble addresses to the Throne of Grace; with the souls
farewell to earth, and approaches to Heaven. 12o. * -- The great Mystery of
Godliness, laid forth by way of affectuous and feeling Meditations, also with
the invisible world discovered to spiritual eyes, and reduced to useful
Meditations. 12o. * -- Balm of Gilead, or Comfots for the distressed, most fit
for these woeful times. 12o. -- The devout soul, or rules of Heavenly
devotion. 12o. -- The Free Prisoner, or the comfort of restraint, written in
the Tower. 12o. -- The Peacemaker, laying forth the right way of peace in
matters of Religion. 12o. * -- Cases of Conscience practically resolved,
containing a decision of the principal cases of conscience of daily
concernment, and continual use amongst men. 12o. * -- Holy Raptures, or
Patheticall Meditations of the Love of Christ. 12o. * -- Christ Mystical, or
the blessed Union of Christ and his Members, with the Christian laid forth in
his disposition and carriage. 12o. * -- Select thoughts in one Century, with
the breathings of the devout soul. 12o. * -- The Apostolic Institution of
Imposition of hands for confirmation revived. 12o. -- The Revelation
unrevealed, touchin the 1000 years Reign of the Saints with Christ on earth: A
Treatise against the Millenaries 8o. -- A Treatise against Profaneness. 8o. --
The holy Order or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion, also in the night, or
cheerfulness under affliction. 12o. -- The Remedy of coffeehouse, or a
Treatise of contentation in whatsoever condition. 12o. -- Occasional
Meditations. 12o. -- Meditations and Vows. 12o. -- Satan's fiery Darts. 12o. --
A modest offer tendered to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. 12o. -- Pax
terris. 12o. Mr Haughton. Clavis (...), The Key of Ordination: or Missio
potestativa (...), Ministerial power: or Authoritative separation of men to
the work of Christ, a Ministerial Privilege. A Sermon preached at the
Ordination of Mr T. Petter. M.A. Mr J. Wilson, M^ D. Jenks, etc. 12o. -- The
rise, growth, and fall of Antichrist. 12o. Mr Hollingsworth. The Holy Ghost on
the Bench, other spirits at the Bar, or the Judgment of the Holy Spirit of
God upon the spirits of the times, recorded in his Holy Word. 12o. Dr Henshaw.
Horae succisivae, or spare hours of Meditation upon our duty to God and our
selves. 12o. Mr Huit of N. Engl. The prophecy of Daniel expounded. 4o. -- The
Anatomy of Conscience. 4o. Mr Higginson. A brief Relation of the No. thern
Quakers, wherein their horrid principles and practices, Doctrines and manners,
as far as their mystery of iniquity has yet discovered it sel^, are plainly
exposed to the view of every Intelligent Reader. 4o. Help to Devotion. 12o. Mr
Hook. N. Englands tears, and Old Englands sense. 4o. Dr Hammond. Annotations
and Paraph^ase on the New Testament folio. -- Practical Catechism. 4o. -- A
V^ndication of some passages therein from the Censures of the London Ministers.
4o. -- Several Tracts: 1o. Of Conscience. 2o. Scandal. 3o. Wilworship. 4o.
Superstition. 5o. Idolatry. 6o. Sins of weakness and wilfullness. 7o. Of a
late, or deathbed Repentance. 4o. -- Of Fraternall admonition, or corruption.
4o. -- Of the power of the Keys; of binding and loosing. 4o. -- A view of the
new directory, and vindication of the Antie^t Liturgy of the Church of England.
4o. -- Considerations con^erning the danger of changing our Church Government.
4o. -- Of resisting the lawful Magistrate under color of Religion. 4o. -- A
view of some exceptions made by a Romanist to the Lord Vicount Fauklands
discourse of the infallibility of the Church of Rome. 4o. -- A Copy of some
Papers past at Oxford betwixt the Author and Mr Cheynell. 4o. -- The
Christians obligation to peace and charity, delivered in an Advent Sermon at
Carisbrooke Castle, with Nineteen Sermons added. 4o. -- An address to the Ld
Fairfax, with a Vindication thereof. 4o. -- A Vindication of the dissertations
concerning Episcopacy against the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelii. 4o. * -- Six Queries resolved. 1o. The way of resolving
Controversies, which are not clearly stated and resolved in the Scriptures. 2o.
Of Marrying the Wifes Sister. 3o. Of Poligamy and Divorce. 4o. Of Infant
Baptism. 5o. Of Imposition of hands for Ordination. 6o. Of Observation of
Christmas, and other festivals of the Church. 12. -- Of Fundamentals in a
Notion referring to practice. 8o. -- Of Schism: a defense of the Church of
England against the Exceptions of the Romanists. 12o. -- A Reply to the
Catholic Gentlemen's answer to the most material parts of the Book of Schism.
3o. -- A second defense of the Book of Schism. 4o. -- An Answer to the
Animadversions of the dissertations concerning Ignatus Epistles, and the
Episcopacy in them asserted. 4o. -- A second defense of the Learned Hug^
Grotius. 4o. -- An account of Mr Cawdry's Triplex diatribe, concerning
superstition, will worship, and Christmas Festivals. 4o. -- The baptising of
Infants revived and defended against the exceptions of Mr Tombs. 4o. --
Dissertationes quatuor quibus Episcopatus Jura ex. S. Stripturis, and primaeva
antiquitate abstruuntur contra sententiam Blundelli and aliorum. 4o. -- A
Paraenesis, or seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of
England: wherein is Inserted a Discourse of Heresy in defense of our Church
against the Romanist. 12o. -- A review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on the
N. Test. with some Additions and Alterations. 8o. -- Against Mr Jeans. 4o. --
Mr Huchison. A brief exposition of all the small Prophets. 8o. -- An exposition
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ according to John. folio. *Mr Harwood. The Lords
Prayer unclasped, with a Vindication of it against Schismatics and Heretics.
8o. J. Hayward. The strong helper, offering to bear every man's burden, showing
how in all troubles, to cast our burdens on God, with infallible grounds of
comfort for troubled consciences. 8o. -- David's tears, or Meditations on the
6, 32, and 130 Psalm. 12o. -- The Sanctuary of a troubled soul. 12o. --
Meditations of Christ's Prayer upon the Cross. 8o. -- Of Supremacy in affairs of
Religion. 12o. *Mr Humphrey. A Treatise of the Sacrament, or a Vindication of
free Admission to the Lords Supper. 12o. -- A Reply to Mr Drakes Boundary to
the Holy Mount. 8o. -- A second Vindication of a free Admission to the Lords
Supper. 12o. Mr Harris. Works complete, containing the Beatitudes, The Covenant
of Grace; The threefold state of man; A suplement with sundry Sermons. folio.
*Mr Harvey. Sabbato Dominica: Four Propos. tending to reconcile the seeming
differences between the Letter of the Law, and Christian Liberty in the
Doctrine of the Sabbath or Lords Day. 12o. * The hearts Happiness, A Treatise
discovering the difference between true and feigned happiness. 12o. Mr
Hackwell. An Apology for the power and Providence of God. folio. Hermes
Theolgous, or the Divine Mercury, new descants on old Records. By a sequestered
Divine. 12o. Mr Hall. The Pulpit guarded against Schismatics. 4o. -- The
beauty of Holiness, describing the excellency, amiableness, comfort and content
which is to be found in the ways of purity and holiness, wherein is set forth
the glorious Attribute of Gods holiness, etc. 8o. -- The loathsomeness of long
Hair, or a Treatise wherein you have the Question stated, many Arguments
against it produced, and the most material Arguments for it refelled, with the
concurrent judgment of Divines both old and new against it, with an Appendix
against painting, naked breasts, etc. 12o. *Mr Horn. THYPA ANEOTEN: The open
door for man's approach to God, or a vindication of the record of God concerning
the extent of the death of Christ in its Object; in answer to a Treatise of Mr
J. Owen. 4o. * -- An Expos. of the 91 Psalm, with Doct. and Uses. 4o. * --
Three Sermons of the Learned Dr Eades Dean of Worcester, upon Ephesians.
2,19,20,21,22. and Ephesians. 5.15,16. Psalm. 37.35,36,37. Pub. by Mr Horn. 4o. Mr
How. A Treatise of universal Redemption. 4o. Mr. Hatton. The Psalter of David
with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each Psalm, with Devotions
for aid of all Christian people in all occasions and necessities. 8o.
Commentarii D. An. Hyperii. Doct. ac claris. Theologi. in Epistolam D. Pauli ad
Romanos and utramque ad Corinthios. folio. -- In Epist. D. Pauli ad Timo.
Titum, Philem. and D. Judae. folio. *Mr Hausteed. Ten Sermons on several
Sundays and Festival days of the Church. 4o. Mr Heywood. The Hierarchy of
the blessed Angels, their Names, Orders, and Offices: The fall of Lucifer, with
his Angels. folio. Mr Hynd. A Remonstrance of the holy life and happy death of
John Bruen Esquire. 8o. Mr. Higgen. The deaf man cured, a Treatise on Mark. 7.32.
for the comfort of the deaf. 8o. The House of mourning. folio. Mr Hieron. His
Works complete two Volumes. folio. -- An Expos. of the 51 Psalm. 4o. Mr Hooker.
A Survey of Church Discipline. 4o. -- The souls exaltation, in a Treatise:
First, Of the Souls Union with Christ: Secondly, The Souls Benefit from that
Union: Thirdly, The Souls Justification. 4o. -- The Christians two chief
Lessons, self-denial and self-tryall. 4o. -- The Unbelievers preparation for
Christ. 4o. -- The Saints Dignity and Duty, with the danger of ignorance and
hardness. 4o. -- The Souls Humiliation. 4o. -- Heavenly Treasury opened in a
fruitful Epos. of the Lords Prayer, with the principles and grounds of
Religion briefly unfolded. 12o. -- The Souls preparation for Jesus Christ. 4o.
-- The Souls Vocation or effectual Calling. 4o. -- The Souls Implantation. 4o.
-- A farewell Sermon. 4o. -- Gods Image, or man and his Covenant made with him
in his state of Innocence. 12o. -- Four Treatises. 12o. -- The Souls
possession. 12o. -- The Pattern of Perfection. 12o. -- The Souls Invitation to
Jesus Christ. 12o. -- The Saints Guide. 12o. -- The Application of Redemption
by the effectual work of the Word and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home
of lost sinners to God. The first eight Books. 8o. -- The Application of
Redemption, etc. The 9th and 10th Books. 4o. -- The poor doubting Christian
drawn unto Jesus Christ, wherein the main letts and hindrances which keep back
men from coming to Christ are discovered, with special helps to recover Gods
favor. 12o. -- A Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the 17 of John, wherein
is opened the Union Believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. 4o. Mr Hudson. A Visible Church: A vindication of
Presbyterial Government. 4o. Mr Hersnet. A Cordial for the afflicted, the
necessity and utility of afflictions, the happiness of those that thankfully
receive them, with the misery of those that want them. 12o. -- Gods Summons to
a general Repentance. 12o. Mr Hopkins. M.A. Salvation from sin by Jesus Christ,
or the Doctrine of Sanctification (which is the greater part of our Salvation)
founded on Christ, who is both the meritorious and efficient cause of
sanctifying grace, purchasing it for, working and perfecting it for his people.
8o. Mr Hoard. The Souls misery and recovery, or the grievings of the Spirit. --
The Churches Authority asserted. -- Gods Love to mankind, manifested by
disproving his absolute Decree of their damnation. *Mr Hardy. Eleven Sermons
preached on solemn occasions, collected into one vol. 4o. -- The first Epistle
general of John unfolded and applied, in 22 Sermons. 4o. *Dr Hill. Six Sermons.
1o. The beauty and sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and brotherly
Accommadation budding. 2o. Truth and Love happily married in the Saints, and in
the Churches of Christ. 3o. The Spring of strengthening grace in the Rock of
Ages Jesus Christ. 4o. The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their
strength. 5o. The best and worst of Paul. 6o. Gods eternal preparations for his
dying Saints. 4o. *Dr Holdsworth. The valley of Vision, or a clear sight of
sundry sacred Truths, in 21 Sermons: one on Psalm. 144.15. Six on Hosea 14.2.
Four on Jam. 1.12. One on Psalm. 119.111. One on 119.48. Two on 123.2. Two on
84.7. Two on Luke 23.11,12. Two on 1 Pet. 1.12. 4o. *Mr Herle. A Treatise
against Independency. 4o. -- Wisdom Tripos, or rather its inscription, Detur
Sapienti in Three Treatises. 1o. Worldly Policy. 2o. Moral Prudence. 3o.
Christian Wisdom. The Vanity of the first, Uusefulness of the second, and
excellency of the third. 12o. Mr Hudson. The life of Faith in dead times. 12o.
Dr Hide. A Christian Legacy: preparation for death, and consolation against it.
12o. Mr Harrison. A Vindication of the holy Scriptures, or manifestation of
Jesus Christ the true Messiah already come, being the Christian Antidote
against the poisons of Judaism and Atheism of this Age, proved from Sacred
Scripture, Ancient Historians and Jewish Rabbis. 12o. Mr Hinckley. M.A. Four
Sermons: 1o. At Reading Assize, Cant. 7.4. 2o. At Abington, Psalm. 82.1. with
two at Oxford, from 1 Cor 15.10. and Psalm. 58.11. with Matrimonial Instructions
to persons of Honor. 12o. Dr Holladay. Motives to a good life, in Ten Sermons.
Of searching the Consc. and last judgment, 1 Cor. 11.31,32. Of spiritual
sorrow, Jer. 9.1. Christians strife, 1 Cor. 9.25. Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3.9.
Misery of uncleanness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Racha, Mat. 5.22. The Serp. and Dove, Mat.
10.16. Of Bapt. Gal. 3.27. Bread of Life, Joh. 6.34. Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor.
16.22. All in one vol. 4o. Dr Hylin. Ecclesia Vindicata, or the Church of Engl.
justified, in her Reformation, Liturgy, etc. 4o.
J.
Mr JEnkyn. An Exposition on the Epistle of Jude, with many large and useful
Deductions, with two Tables added. folio. -- Four Sermon. on sundry Subjects. 4o.
-- An Answer to J. Goodwin. 4o. -- A Sermon. at Dr Gouge Funeral. 4o. -- A
Sermon preached before the Parliament. 4o. Dr Jermin. The exemplary life, and
holy death of Mr Jordan. 4o. -- A Commentary on the Prove. of Solomon, wherein
the litterall sense is considered, and Original Hebrew Texts explained. folio.
-- A Commentary on Ecclesiastes, wherein the litterall sense is considered, and
Original Hebrew Texts explained. folio. Dr Jenison of Newcastle. Of Compunction
or pricking of heart, the time, means, nature, necessity and order of it, and
of conversion. 4o. -- A Treatise of Gods Promises touching the Elect, and
concerning the extent of Christ's death. 12o. -- Apparelling of Christ. 8o. Mr
Jacomb. A Sermon at the Funeral of Reverend Mr Vines. 4o. -- Gods Mercy for
man's mercy. A Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 4o. The Immortality of the soul.
4o. * Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici: or the Divine right of the Gospel
Ministry in general: The necessity of Ordination, the unlawfulness of private
men's assuming that Office, with a Justification of the Ministers from the
aspersion of Antichristianism. 4o. * Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, or
the Divine Right of Church Government, asserted and evidenced by the holy
Scriptures, etc. in all which is discovered that Presbyteriall Government, by
preaching and ruling Presbyters, in Congregational, Classical, and Synodicall
Assemblies may lay the truest claim to a Divine right according to the
Scriptures. 4o. Jacob's Ladder, consisting of fifteen degrees, or assents to
the knowledge of God, by the consideration of his creatures and Attributes. 12o.
Mr Jones. An Exposition of the Catechism of the Church of England. 8o. Mr
Jackson. The Key of Knowledge intended for the good of all Christians,
especially for religious Families and Schools. 12o. Bp John. A Survey of man,
a Sermon at his Fathers Funeral. 4o. *Mr Jemmat. An Abridgment of all the
Works of the Reverend Dr Preston, reduced into order and contracted for the
comfort and benefit of meaner Christians. 12o. * -- The chief Rock, or a settled
heart in unsettled times. A short discourse helping Gods people to use their
faith to moderate their fears in these sad times of the sorrows of Zion. 12o.
D. Iuelli Apologia. gr. and lat. 8o. -- The same in English. folio. Mr Jeans. A
mixture of Scholasticall Divinity with Practical, in several Tractates,
wherein some of the most difficult knots in Divinity are untied, many dark
places of Scripture cleared, sundry errors and heresies refuted. 4o. -- Dr
Hammond his 'EKTENE'STEPON: Or a greater Ardency in Christ's love of God at one
time then another, proved to be utterly irreconcilable, with his fullness of
habitual grace, the perpetual happiness, and Impeccability of his soul. 4o. *
-- The want of Church Government no warrant for a total omission of the Lords
Supper, with a reply to Mr Fulwood. *Mr Jessey. The exceeding riches of Grace
advanced in the conversion of Mrs Sa. Weight. 8o. *Mr T. Jackson. The true
Evangelicall Temper, wherein Divinity and Ecclesiastical History are
interwoven and mixed. In three Sermon. 12o. A Collection of the Works of that
holy and profound Divine Dr Jackson, President of Corp. Chr. Coll. Oxon.
containing the eternal Truth of the Scriptures, and Christian belief thereon
wholly depending, manifested by its own light, in two Books of Commentaries
upon the Apostles Creed; The first containing the positive Grounds of Christian
Religion in general, cleared from all the exceptions of Atheists or Infidels.
The second, the Grounds of reformed Religion so firm that the Romanists cannot
oppugn them, but the utter overthrow of the Romish Church, Religion, and
Faith. The first vol. with the life of the Author. folio. * -- A second part
of Collections, containing Christ's exaltation in his Priesthood, man's servitude
to sin effected by Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, and there
officiating as a most compassionate high Priest in behalf of sinners; or a
Treatise of that knowledge of Christ, which consists in the true estimate or
experimental valuation of his death, resurrection, and exercise of his
everlasting sacerdotall ^unction in the heavenly Sanctuary, where he now sits
at the right hand of God the Father. folio. APANATHA: or Dominus veniet.
Commentary upon these Articles of the Creed, never before printed, viz. of
Christ's session at the right hand of God, being made Lord and Christ: coming to
judge the quick and dead: Resurrection of the body, and life everlasting: with
diverse Sermon. proper attendants to the Tracts, as well as befitting the present
times. folio. * The Judgment of the University of Oxford, concerning the solemn
League and Covenant, and negative Oaths. 12o. Or in Latin. 8o. Mr Arth.
Jackson. An help for understanding the holy Scriptures, the first part being an
Exposition upon the five Books of Moses, viz. Genesis Exodus Levit. Numb. and Deuteronomy.
wherein many places that at first seem to contradict one another, are
reconciled. 4o. -- Annotations upon the remaining Historical part of the Old
Testament, viz. Joshua, Judges, Sam. Kings, Chron. Ezra, Nehem. Ester. The
second part. 4o. T. Vet. Biblia Sacra sive lib. Canonici priscae judaeorum
Ecclesiae a Deo Traditi; Catini recens ex Hebraeo facti, breviusque scholiis
illustrati ab Im. Tremelio, and Fr. Junio; Accesserunt libri qui vulgo dicuntur
Apocr. lat. redditi, and notis quibusdam aucti a Fr. Junio, Multi omnes quam
ante emend. Ed. and aucti locis innumeris: quibus etiam adjunximus N.T. lib. ex
sermon Syro ab eodem Tremel. and ex Graeco a T. Beza in lat. verse. notisque
itidem illustratos. folio. Mr Jelinger. The usefulness and excelleny of Christ.
8o. Justification Justified, or a Treatise of Justification by faith, wherein
that glorious Doctrine is practically handled, cleared, and Vindicated from all
cavils. By a Learned Divine in the West of England. 4o.
K.
Mr KEndall against Goodwins Redemption redeemed. folio. -- Sancti Sanciti, or
the Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation; vindicated against J. Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed: with
an Appendix to Mr Horn goreing all University-Learning. folio. -- Fur pro
Tribunali, examen Dialogism cui inscribitur fur predestinatus, etc. 8o. Dr
Kellets Tricenium. folio. -- Misselanies. folio. -- A return from Algier; In
Two Sermons. 4o. Mr Knight. A Concordance of the Bible, containing a survey of
Theological Propositions, with their Reasons and Uses in Holy Scripture.
folio. Mr Knewstub. 4o. King James. Works containing a Paraphrase upon the
Revella. Meditations on Rev. 20.6,7,8, and 10. Meditations on 1 Chronicles.
15.25,26,27,28,29. Demonologie. Instruct. to H. the Prince. The duties of a
free King, and his natural subjects. A discourse of the Powder Plot. Apolog.
for the Oath of Allegiance against the Pope and Bellarm. A premonition to all
Kings and Princes; Proceedings about Contradus Vorstius; The Independency of
the Crowns of Kings against an Oration of Card. Perron. Five several speeches
made in Parliament, etc. All in one vol. folio. -- Royal Aphorisms Divine and
Moral. 12o. -- Meditations on Matthew 27.27,28. and 29 verses, or a Pattern for
a Kings Inauguration. 12o. -- Bazilicon Doron. or his Majesty's Instructions to
his dearest Son Henry the Prince. 8o. Kings Charles Mannuall of Meditations and
Prayers. 12o. T. Akenipis. The Imitation of Christ, which are for Wisdom and
Godliness most excellent. 12o. Bp King. A Commentary on the Prophet Jonah. 4o.
-- The Psalms of David in Meter. 12o. Mr Knox On Predestination. 8o. Mr King.
The Marriage of the Lamb. 12o. Psalterium Carolinum, the Devotions of his
Sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings rendered in verse, set for Three
Voices, and an Organ, or Theorb by Dr Wilson, Music Professor of Oxford.
folio.
L.
*Mr LEigh. Critica Sacra, being Observations on the Radices, or primitive
Hebr. words of the Old Testament, with Philologicall and Theological
Observations on the Greek words of the New Testament. folio. * -- Annotations
on the New Testament, Philosophical and Theological, wherein the Emphasis and
elegancy of the Greek is observed, etc. folio. -- A System or Body of Divinity,
consisting of ten Books; wherein the fundamental and main grounds of Religion
are opened, the contrary errors refuted, most of the controversies between us,
the Papists, Arminians, and Socinians discussed and handled, several
Scriptures explained and vindicated from corrupt Glosses. folio. -- A Treatise
of Religion and Learning, and of Religious and Learned men, a Work seasonable
for these times, wherein Religion and Learning have so many enemies. folio. *
-- A Treatise of Divinity: First, Of the Scripture. Secondly, Of God, that
there is a God, etc. Thirdly, Of Decree, Creation, and Providence. 4o. * -- The
Saints Encouragement in evil times, or observations concerning the Martyrs in
general, with some memorable Collections about them, out of Mr Fox his three
vol. Mr Luther, the Covenant and Promises, Afflictions, living and dying by
Faith, etc. 12o. * -- A Treatise of Divine Promises, their nature, kinds,
excellency, use, properties, and to whom they belong; A declaration of the
Covenant it self, the bundle of all the Promises, and special Promises
likewise that concern a man's self, or others, spiritual, temporal, and eternal.
8o. -- A notations on Five Poetical Books of the Old Testament, viz. Job,
Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. folio. *Mr Lee. Defensive
Doubts, Hopes, and Reasons for refusal of the Oath imposed for establishing
Episcopacy; with a case of Conscience about the Sacrament. 4o. * -- Sunday a
Sabbath, or a preparative Discourse for discussion of Sabbatary doubts; being
the first part of a greater Work. 4o. * -- Against Saltmarsh. 4o. * M. Luthers
Mensalia, or Divine Discourses at his Table, which he held with diverse Learned
men, as Melancton, Casparus, Forsterius, etc. Also concerning Religion, with
notable History and other Learning, with Comforts, Advices, Prophesies,
Admonitions, etc. folio. -- A Commentary upon the Fifteen Psalms, called Psalmi
Graduum, very fruitful and comfortable for Christian afflicted Consciences to
read. 4o. -- A Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galations, wherein is showed
the glorious Riches of Gods grace, and the power of the Gospel, and the
strength of faith declared to the joyful comfort of Christian Belivers. 4o. --
Christian Liberty. 4o. -- Several excellent Sermons. 8o. -- Loci Communes,
etc. cum tergemino elencho Capitum videlicet, locorum Sacrae Scripturae, and
rerum memorabilium. 4o. Bp Latimer. Sundry fruitful and learned Sermons
preached on public occasions, much tending to the edification of all good
Christians. 4o. Bp Lawde. A Conference with Fisher the Jesuit by command of
King James. folio. -- Seven Sermons on several occasions; some preached before
his late Majesty, on Psalm. 121.6,7, the 21.6,7, etc. 12o. Dr Lightfoot. The
Harmony, Chronicle, and order of the New Testament, the Text of the four
Evangelists Methodized, the story of the Acts of the Apostles Analyzed, order
of the Epistles manifested, and times of the Revelation observed; all
illustrated with variety of Observations upon the chiefest difficulties,
Textuall and Talmadicall, for clearing their sense and language; with a
discourse of the fall of Jerusalem, and the condition of the Jews in that land
afterward. folio. * -- A handful of gleanings out of the Book of Exodus,
probable Solutions of some of the manifest scruples, and explanation of the
hardest places. 4o. * -- The Temple-Service as it stood in the days of our
Savior. 4o. * -- A Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles, Chronicall and
Critical: the difficulties of the Text explained, and the times of the story
cast into Annals, etc. 4o. * -- The Ch^istian, Jewish and Roman History of the
Year of Christ, 34. 4o. * -- The Christian History, Jewish and Roman for the
Year of Christ, 37. 4o. * -- The Christian History Jewish and Roman for the
Year of Christ, 41. 4o. * -- Elias Redivivus; In a Sermon on Luke 1.17. 4o. *
-- A Sermon on Rev. 20.1,2. 4o * -- A Sermon on Psalm. 4.4. 4o. * -- The
Harmony, Chronicle, and Order of the Old Testament. 4o. * -- The Harmony of the
four Evangelists among themselves, and with the Old Testament, first and second
part. 4o. *Mr Love. Two Treatises; First, Heavenly Glory. Secondly, Hells
Terror; the one as a spur to duty, the other as a preservative against
security. 4o. * -- The Combat between the flesh and the spirit, in 27 Sermons
preached a little before his death. 4o. * -- A Christian directory to guide him
in those several conditions which Gods Providence may cast him into. 4o. * --
Degrees and growth of grace in 15 Sermons, with a Funeral Sermon, the last he
preached. 4o. * -- Effectual Calling and Election, wherein a Christian may
discern whether he be effectually called and elected, and what course he ought
to take that he may attain the Assurance thereof. 4o. * -- The Natural man's
case. 8o. * -- The Zealous Christian taking Heaven by violence. 8o. * -- A
Christians duty and safety in evil times. 8o. * -- The true Doctrine of
mortification and sincerity, in opposition to hypocrisy. 8o. * -- The Souls
Cordial. 8o. * -- The Sum of practical Divinity of Grounds of Religion.
12o. *Mr Lawrence. An History of Angels, being a Theological Treatise of our
Communion and War with them. 4o. * -- On Baptism. 8o. * -- On Ordinances. 4o.
*Mr Loves Case, containing his Petitions, Narratives and speech. 4o. Mr Lyford.
A discovery of the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, with the
toleration of them, as they are collected and testified by the Ministers of
London, in their Testimony to the truth of Jesus. -- Of the Ministry. 4o. --
The Grounds of Christian Religion. 8o. * -- The Marching the Magistrates
Authority, and the Christians true Liberty in matters of Religion. 4o. -- An
interpretation of the Names of the Hebrew, Caldee, Syriack, Greek or Latin.
12o. Mr Langley. The persecuted Minister in defense of the Ministry, the great
Ordinance of Jesus Christ. 4o. *Mr Lockier. England faithfully watched within
her wounds, or Christ as a Father sitting up with his Children in their
swouning state. 4o. * -- Christ's Communion with his Church Militant. 8o. * -- A
Divine discovery of sincerity according to its proper and particular nature.
8o. * -- Balm for bleeding England and Ireland, or seasonable Instructions for
persecuted Christians. 8o. * -- A Stone cut out of the Mountain; A Lecture
Sermon preached at Edinburgh, concerning the matter of a visible Church. 12o. *
-- An Olive-leaf, or a bud of the Spring, viz. Christ's Resurrection, and its
end, viz. The conversion of sinners, and a Christians complete relief. 8o. * --
Spiritual Inspection, or a review of the heart; needful for this loose and
lascivious season. 8o. *Letters between the Ld Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby
concerning Religion. 8o. Mr Larkham. The Attributes of God unfolded and
applied, wherein are handled the life, perfection, holiness, benignity, mercy,
truth, wisdom, power, justice, love, hatred, anger, Independency, simplicity,
eternity, Infinitness, Immutability, Immensity of God. 4o. * -- The Parable of
the Wedding-Supper explained, wherein the offer of Salvation both to Jews and
Gentiles, is pithily and plainly applied; With a discourse for payment of
Tithes. Sr H. Lind. Via tuta. 12o. -- Via de via. 12o. Bp Lake. Of Bath and
Wells. His Sermons complete one vol. folio. Mr Lawson. On the Sabbath. *Holy
life and blessed death of the late Vicountess Faukland. 12o. Dr Lushington. The
expiation of a sinner, in a Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews. folio. --
The Justification of a sinner, being the main Arg^ment of Paul to the
Galatians. folio. Mr Lewis. The right use of Promises. 12o. Mr Lewthwat.
Vindiciae Christi, and obex errori Arminiano, a Plea for Christ. In three
Sermons. 4o. Mr Longland. Quatuor Novissima; Or Meditations upon the four last
Things, in four common place discourses. 12o.
M.
MArlorat. Prophetica Esaiae cum Catholica expositione Ecclesiastica, etc fo.
Martinis. Loci Communes. folio. Mollerus. An exposition on the whole Book of
Psalms, Latin. folio. Bp Mourton. Of the Institution of the Sacrament of the
blessed body and blood of Christ, by some called the Mass of Christ: Eight
Books discovering the superstitious, sacrilegious, and idolatrous abominations
of the Romish Mass, with the consequent obstinacies, overtures of perjuries,
and the Heresies discernable in the defenders thereof. folio. -- Antidotum
adversus Ecclesiae Romanae de merito proprie dicto ex condigno venenum: ex
Antiquae Ecclesiae Catholi. Testimoniis, locupletissimis confectum: Juxta
Eccles. Anglica. and protestantium omnium vnanimem sententiam, in gloriam
gratiae divinae meritorum Christi, and ad verae pietatis profectum salutarem.
4o. -- The grand Imposture of the Church of Rome. 4o. -- Apologia Catholica ex
meris Jesuitarum contradictionibus conflata, in qua paradoxa. haereses,
blasphemiae, Scelera, quae a pontificiis, obiici protestantibus solent, ex
ipsorum pontificiorum testimoniis diluuntur omnia. 4o. -- Apol. Cathol. pars
secunda Judicem Ecclesiae demonstra^s, (de qua controversia pendent caeterae
omnes) in lib. quinque digesta. 4o. * -- Ezekiels Wheels, a Treatise of Divine
Providence. 8o. -- Causa regia, sive de authoritate and dignitate principium
Christianorum dissertatio adversus Bellarminum. 4o. Montacutii Episcopi. de
Originibus Ecclesiastici Comentationem. folio. -- Apparatus ad Origent.
Ecclesiastic. collector. folio. * -- Mr Milton. Of Reformation. 4o. * -- Of
Episcopacy against Bp Usher and Bp Hall. 4o. * -- Reasons of Church Government.
4o. * -- An Apology for Smectymnuus. 4o. * -- Against Salmatius: Latin. 4o. And
the same in folio. EIKONOKLA'STS in answer to E'IKO'N ASILIK; The portraiture
of his sacred Majesty in his solitudes and sufferings. 4o. * -- The Doctrine
and Discipline of Divorce, restored to the good of both sexes, from the bondage
of the Canon Law, to the true meaning of the Scripture in the Law and Gospel
compared. 4o. *Mr Matton. Isreal's redemption redeemed, or the Jews general and
miraculous conversion to the faith of the Gospel, and return into their own
Land; With our Saviors personal reign on earth. 4o. *Mr Manton. A practical
Commentary, or an Exposition with Notes on the Epistle of James. 4o. * -- A
Funeral Sermon, or the blessed estate of such as die in the Lord. 4o. -- A
Sermon preached before the Lord Protector and Parliament, on a public day of
Humiliation. 4o. *Mr Marbury. An Exposition on the prophecy of Habbakuck, with
many useful Observations. 4o. * -- An Exposition of the Prophecy of Obadiah.
4o. Mr Meede. Diatribae pars, quat. Discourses on sundry Texts of Scripture,
with his Epistles in answer of diverse Letters of Learned men, with a view of
his life and death. 4o. -- A Paraphrase on Peter 2 Epist. and 3 first Chapters.
4o. -- The Key of the Revelation, searched and demonstrated out of the natural,
proper Characters of the Visions, with a Comment thereon. 4o. -- Triga. 4o. --
The Name, Altar, or THYSIASTPION 4o. -- Churches appropriate places to Gods
worship. 4o. -- The Holiness of Churches in several Discourses. 4o. -- The
Reverence of Gods House. A Sermon. 4o. -- Daniel's Weeks. 4o. -- Remains on
some passages in the Revelations. 4o. * -- Clavis Apocalyptica innatis and
insitis visionum, characteribus eruta and demonstrata una cum comment. in
apocalypsin. and conjectura de Gogo and Magogo. 4o. -- The same Translated. 4o.
* -- The Apostasy of the latter times, which, according to Divine prediction,
the world should wander after the beast, the Mystery of iniquity should
prevail, etc. Or the Gentiles Toologie of Demons, i. e. Inferior Divine
powers, supposed to be Mediators between God and man, revived in the latter
times amongst Christians in worshipping Angels, Saints, Crosses, etc. all which
with the Nature, Original, Progress, of the great fatal and solemn Apostasy are
cleared. 4o. Mr Mosely. Natural and Divine Contemplations of the passions and
faculties of the soul of man. In three Books. 8o. L. de Moulin. Histo. Reader
in Oxon. The Power of the Christian Magistrate in Sacred Things. 8o. --
Paraenesis ad Aedificatores Imperii in Imperio; in qua defenduntur jura
Magistratus adversus Mosem Amyraldum, and caeteros vindices potestatis
Ecclesiasticae Presbyterianae. 4o. -- L. Molinaei. Corolarium ad Paraenesim
Juam ad Aedificatores Imperii in Imperio, in quo Se purgat de consilio and
argumento operis suscepti, and insuper disserit. De optima ratione disciplinae
constituendae in Anglia. De ratione proposita ab H. Vaneo equite aurato. De
tolerandis and puniendis haereticis. De natura schismatis. De jure quo
disciplina Ecclesiarum reformatarum in Gallia nititur. 8o. * Marrow of Modern
Divinity, touching the Covenant of Works and Grace, their use and end, both in
time of the Old and New Testament: showing the middle path between a Legalist
and an Antinomian, which by Jesus Christ leads to eternal life: With Mr
Buroughs and Mr Strongs Epistle. 8o. The first and second part. Mothers
blessing, or the godly and holy counsel of a Gentlewoman to her Children. 12o.
Mr Mason. Hearing and doing, the ready way to blessedness; with Rules for right
hearing of Gods Word. 12o. -- The Epicures Fast. -- The Tribunal of Conscience.
-- The Cure of Cares. -- Contentment in Gods Gifts. -- The new Art of lying
covered by the Jesuits under the veil of Equivocation. Mr Mayer. A Comment on
the first five Books of Moses, viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuternomy. folio. -- A Comment, on the Historical part of the Old Testament,
from Joshua to Hester. folio. -- A Comment on Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Canticles. folio. -- A Comment on the small and great Prophets.
folio. -- A Comment on the New Testament. folio. In all which Volumes are
diverse translations and expositions, literal and mystical, of all the most
famous Commentators propounded and judged of. -- On hard places. 4o. -- A
Catechism. 4o. -- Antidote. 4o. -- Praxis Theologica, or the Epistle of St
James resolved, expounded, and preached upon by way of Doctrine and Use, for
the help of young practitioners in Theology. 4o. *Mr Sam. Moore. The yearnings
of Christ's bowels to his languishing friends, wherein the sincerity, ardency,
constancy, and supereminent excellency of Jesus Christ, as it works from him
toward his friends, is delineated, discussed, and fitly applied. 8o. * -- An
heavenly wonder, or a Christian clothed with Christ, penned to comfort Christ's
Spouse. Mr Moore. The grounds of Christian Religion by way of Catechizing. 8o.
*Mr H. Moore. An Antidote against Atheism, or an appeal to the natural
faculties of the mind of man, whether there be not a God. 8o. -- Conjectura
Caballistica, or a conjecturall Essay of Interpreting the mind of Moses,
according to a threefold Caballa, litterall, philosophical, mystical, or
divinely Moral. 8o. -- Enthusiamus Triumphanus, or a discourse of the nature,
causes, kinds, and cure of Enthusiasm; by P. Parresiastes, and prefixed to
Alazonomastix his Observations and reply. 8o. * -- Philosophical Poems; The
life of the soul: her immortallity, her sleep, unity of souls, memory after
death, infinity of worlds, etc. 8o. Mr Morton. The Touchstone of Conversion, or
marks of true Faith, wherein the impenitent sinner is rouzed, the true
Believer discovered, and doubting Saint resolved. 12o. -- The state of the
Church. -- The threefold state of man. Mr Mather. of N.E. A Catechism
containing the grounds of Religion. 8o. Dr Maden. Christ's tears, with his love
and affection to Jerusalem. In several Sermons on the 19 of Luke 41,42. 4o.
Peter de Moulin. D.D. The Christian Combat. -- A preparation to fasting and
repentance. -- An Antidote against popery, being a full discovery of the
ridiculousness of the Mass, and other vain ceremonies of the Church of Rome.
8o. -- Of Peace and contentment of mind. 8o. Dr Main. Sermons and Letters of
defense and Resolutions to some of the late Controversies of the times. *Mr
Mossum. Zions prospect in its first view, presented in a Summary of Divine
Truths, consenting with the Faith professed by the Church of England, confirmed
from Scripture and reason, illustrated by instance and Allusion, published for
prevention of Apostasy, conviction of Heresy, confutation of Error, and
establishment in the Truth. 4o. -- The Preachers Tripartite, in Three Books:
First, To raise devotion in Meditation, upon Psalm. 25. Secondly, To administer
comfort, by conference with the soul in particular cases of Conscience.
Thirdly, To establish truth and peace against Heresies and Schisms. folio. *Mr
Steph. Marshalls Works all collected into one volume. 4o. -- The Power of the
Civil Magistrate in Matters of Religion, pub. by Mr Firmin. *Mr Montague.
Misselanea spiritualia, or devout Essay; The first and second part. 4o.
Manchester Almondo, contemplatio mortis and immortalitatis: The sixth Edition.
12o. Mr Merlin. A Comment on Hester. 8o. Dr Morgan. The Christian Diurnall, or
daily duties to be practiced toward God, our neighbors, and our selves. 12o.
Mr Tho. Moore. An undiscovering of mysterious deceits, by which many are kept
from repentance, and entering the door of life. 4o. Medici Catholicon, or a
Catholic Medicin for the diseases of charity. 8o. Mr Mico. Spiritual food and
physic, in a large Catechism of the principal grounds of Christian Religion.
8o. Mr Morris. The new enclosures broken down, and the Lords Supper laid sorth
in common for all Church Members, having a dogmaticall faith, and not being
scandalous; in a Diatribe and defense thereof, against such as administer the
Lords Supper in a select Company. 4o. Mr Murcott. His Works containing
circumspect walking, on Ephesians. 5.15,16. Parable of ten Virgins, Mat. 25. from
verse. 1.10,14. The Son of Righteousness, Mat. 4.8. Christ willing to receive
sinners, John 6.37. All published by Mr Caryl, Mr Manton, Mr Eaten, etc. 4o.
N.
*Mr NEwman. A Complete Concordance of the whole Bible. folio. New-Engl.
Platform of Church discipline, gathered out of the Word of God, and agreed upon
by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches assembled in the Synod at
Cambridge, to be presented to the Churches and general Court for their
consideration had acceptance in the Lord. 4o. Mr Needler. Expository Notes,
with practical observations toward the opening of the first five Chapters of
Genesis. By way of Expos. in several Lords days Execises. 8o. Mr Nicholson. A
full and plain exposition of the Church Catechism. 4o. Mr Napier. An Exposition
of the whole Revelation of St John, with certain Oracles of Sibilla agreeing
therewith. 4o. Mr Norton. N.E. The Orthodox Evangelist, wherein many great
Evangelicall Truths (not a few whereof are much opposed and ecclipsed in this
perilous hour of the passion of the Gospel) are briefly discussed and
cleared, as a further help for the begetting and establishing of the faith
which is in Jesus; also the state of the blessed in their dissolution and
resurrection. 4o. -- Responsio ad totam Quest. sylogen a clariss. viro D. Guil.
Apolonio ad componendas controversias, quasdam circa politiam Eccles. in Anglia
nunc temporis agitas Spectantem. 8o. * -- A discussion of that great point of
Divinity, the sufferings of Christ, and the Questions about his righteousness,
active and passive; in answer to Pinchins meritorious price. 8o. * -- His
Apollogea. 8o. * -- A Treatise of the Doctrine of Godliness, or a living unto
God, being a Body of Divinity by way of Quest. and Answ. 8o. Mr Nowell. The
grounds and principles of Religion by way of Catechism. 8o. Mr Negus. A
Treatise of Faith; wherein methodically is handled the nature of true, saving,
justifying faith, inopposition unto counterfeit: Also diverse helps unto says
are prescribed, hindrances thereunto removed, and many other Gospel truths
clearly discussed. 4o. *Mr Newcomen. Sermons on sundry Subjects. 4o. Mr Noy.
The Temple Measured, or a brief survey of the Temple Mystical, which is the
Instituted Church of Christ, wherein is solidly and modestly discussed most of
the material Quest. touching the constitution and Government of the visible
Church Militant. 4o. * Newcastle Ministers, viz. Mr Weld, Mr Hammond, Mr
Prideaux, Mr Cole, and Mr Durant. A false Jew, or a wonderful discovery of a
Scot, baptized at London for a Christian, circumcised at Rome to act a Jew,
rebaptized at Hexham for a Believer by Tillanbat, found out at Newcastle to be
a cheat. 4o. -- The perfect pharasie under Monkish holiness, opposing the
Fundamental Principles of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Scripture practices
of Gospel Worship, manifesting himself in the generation of men, called
Quakers, or a Preservative against their gross Blasphemies and horrid
delusions. 4o. -- A further discovery of that generation of men, called
Quakers, by way of reply to an Answer of Ja. Nayler to the perfect pharasie,
wherein is more fully laid open their Blasphemies, notorious Equivocations,
Lyings, Wrestings of the Scripture, Raylings, and other detestable Principles
and Practices. 4o. Mr Nichols. Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion,
proving that the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England is the only
true Catholic and unchangeable Faith of Gods Elect. 4o. -- A Catechism of the
Principles of Religion. 8o. *Mr Nichols. Life and death of M. Igna. Jurdain. A
Sermon in Exceter. 120.
O.
Mr OTes. An explanation of the Epistle of St Jude, delivered in One and Forty
Sermons in sundry Lectures. folio. Dr Owen. The Doctrine of the Saints
Perseverance, explained and confirmed, or the certain permanency of their
acceptance with God, and sanctification from God manifested, and proved, from
the eternal Principles, effectual causes, external means thereof, etc. against
Jo. Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed. * -- A Vision of unchangeable free mercy in
sending the means of grace to undeserving sinners. 4o. * -- A Sermon on
Jeremiah 15.19,20. With a discourse about toleration, and the duty of
Magistrates in matters of Religion. 4o. * -- Eben-ezer. An exposition of the
first ten verses of the 3d of Habakkuk. 5o. * -- The shaking and translating of
Heaven and Earth. 4o. * -- The Branch of the Lord, the beauty of Zion, or the
glory of the Church in its relation unto Christ. 4o. * -- The Advancement of
the Kingdoms of Christ, shaking the Kingdoms of the world. * -- A Sermon on
Daniel 7.15,16. * -- The laboring Saints dismission to rest, a Sermon on the
Lord Deputy Iretons Funeral. 4o. * -- The stedfastness of the Promises, and
sinfulness of staggering. 4o. * -- Of the death of Christ, the price he paid,
and the purchase he made, also against Mr Baxter. 4o. * -- A display of the
errors of Arminianism, concerning the old pelagian free will: the new goddess
contingency, etc. * -- Salus Electorum sanguis Jesu. A Treatise of the
Redemption and reconciliation that is in the blood of Christ, with the merit
thereof, and the satisfaction wrought thereby. 4o. * -- The duty of Pastors and
people distinguished. 4o. -- Vindiciae Evangelicae, or the Mystery of the
Gospel vindicated, and socinianism examined, in the consideration and
confutation of Biddles Catechism, and the Racovian Catechism, with a
vindication of the Testimonies of Scripture, concerning the Deity and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, from the perverse expositions and Interpretations
of them by Hugo Grotius in his Annotations on the Bible, also somewhat about
the death of Christ against Mr Baxter. 4o. -- Of the mortification of sin in
Believers, the necessity, nature, and means of it, with a resolution of sundry
cases of conscience thereunto belonging. 8o. * -- Escol. 12o. * -- Diatriba, de
Justitia Divina. 8o. * -- A Review of the Annotations of H. Grotius, on the
Deity and satisfaction of Christ, in answer to Dr Hammond. 4o. -- Of schism,
the true nature of it dicovered and considered, with reference to the present
differences in Religion. 8o. -- Of Communion with God. The Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, each person distinctly; in Love, Grace, and Consolation. 4o. -- A
review of the nature of schism, with a Vindication of the Congregationall
Churches in Engl. from the imputation thereof, against Mr Cawdry's Indep. a
great schism. 8o. -- Gods Work in founding Zion, and his peoples duty
thereupon. A Sermon before the Parliament, Sep. 17. 1656. from Esa. 14.32. 4o.
-- Gods presence with a people, the Spring of their prosperity; with their
special Interest in abiding with him. A Sermon before the Lord Protector and
Parliam. from 2 Chronicles. 15.2. 4o. Osiander. A Manual of Controversies. 8o.
P.
B^ PRideaux. Nine Sermons: Ephesus backsliding. First fruits of the
resurrection; Hezekiah's sickness; The breach of Vzzah; A consecration Sermon
of Exeter Coll. New Chapel; Wisdoms Justification; Heresies Progress; A plot
for preferrment; The patronage of Angels. 4o. * -- Viginti-duae Lectiones de
totidem Religionis capitibus praecipuae hoc tempore controversis, prout public
habebantur Oxoniae in vesperiis quibus accesserunt tredecim orationes in
augurales, de totidem Theologiae Apicibus scitu non Indignis, prout in
promotione Doctorum in comitiis habebantur. Subnectuntur sex conciones pro more
habitae adartium Baccalaureos in die ^inerum. folio. * -- Fasciculus
controversarum, ad Juniorum, aut occupatorum captum sic colligatus, ut in
praecipuis fidei apicibus compendiose informentur, aut sparsim alias lecta vel
audita facilius recol^nt and expendant: Ed Sec. emend. and auctior ^inis
libellis posthu. ejusdem Reverend. praesulis; 1o. Theolog. Scholast. Syntag
mati. 2o. Conciliorum Synopsi. 4o. -- Euchologia; or the Doctrine of practical
praying; being a Legacy left to his Daughters in private, directing them to
such manifold uses of our Common Prayer Book, as may satisfy upon all
occasions, without looking after new Lights from extemporall flashes. 12o. --
The Doctrine of conscience framed according to the form in the Common Prayer,
left as a Legacy to his Wife. 12o. * -- Theologiae Scholasticae Syntagma
Mnemonicum and conciliorum Synopsis. 4o. -- Manuductio ad Theologiam Polemicam.
8o. Mr Pennington. Expositions on the first Epistle of John, and other places
of Scripture. Pattern of female perfection, presented to all Women who desire
to live under the government of virtue, and are obedient to her Laws,
illustrated with diverse Figures: by a person of honor. Piscatoris. Commentarii
in omnes Libros veteris and Nov. Testam. quibus continentur. 1o. Analysis
logica singulorum librorum and capitum. 2o. Scholia in singula capita. 3o.
Observa. locorum Doctrinae e singulis Capit. Three vol. folio. -- His Aphorisms
Englished -- Of Justification. Mr Parr. An Exposition of the Epistle of St Paul
to the Romans. folio. -- Grounds of Divinity, discovering the Mysteries of
Christian Religion: with an Exhortation to the Scriptures. 12o. Mr Pilkintons
Parrabella, or the grounds of the new Roman Catholic, and the Ancient
Christian Religion compared together. 4o. The penitent Pilgrim. 8o. D. Dav.
Parei. Operum Theologicorum parts quatuor: in quibus commentarii and
Adversaria Biblica, in omnes se Scripturae tuam canonicos quam Apocryphos
Libros. In Three vol. folio. -- Irenicum sive de unione and sinodo
Evangelicorum concilanda Liber vetivus paci Ecclesiae and desideriis
pacificorum dictatus. 4o. -- Corpus doctrinae Christianae Ecclesiarum a papatu
reformatarum continens, Catecheticas, Explicationes D.Z. Vrsini. 8o. -- Ad.
Corinth. Priorem St P. Episto. Coment. 4o. -- A Comentary upon the Divine
Revelation of St John, Transla. by Arnold. folio. -- De universa Theologia
Orthodoxa and omnes prope theologorum hujus temporis controversiae perspicuae
and variae explicantur. 8o. Dr Preston. The new Covenant, or the Saints
Portion, unfolding the All Sufficiency of God: Man's uprightness, and the
Covenant of Grace. 4o. -- Life Eternal, or a Treatise of the Knowledge of the
Divine essence and Attributes. In Eighteen Sermons. 4o. -- The Breastplate of
Faith and Love, wherein is the ground and exercise of Faith and Love, as they
are set upon Christ their Object, and expressed, in Gods Word explained. 4o. --
The Saints Qualification. 4o. -- The Saints Mortification. 4o. -- The golden
Scepter. 4o. -- On Prayer. 4o. -- The Divine Love of Christ. 4o. -- Lively
Faith. 4o. -- Four godly Treatises. 4o. -- Court Sermons. 4o. -- A Position
delivered in Cambridge, concerning the Irresistableness of coverting Grace. 4o.
-- The only Love of the chiefest of ten thousand, showing the Motives, Means,
Marks, and Kinds of our love to Christ. 12o. -- The Doctrine of the Saints
Infirmities, delivered in sundry Sermons. 12o. -- A preparation to the Lords
Supper. In three Sermons. 12o. *Mr Palmer. Memorials of Godliness and
Christianity: with the way of making Religion ones business, etc. 12o. * -- The
Christians freedom by Christ, or Gods deed of gift to the Saints. 12o. * -- The
Tempestious Soul calmed by Jesus Christ. 12o. * -- Against free Admission to
the Sacrament. 12o. The famous Mr Perkins Works complete. In three vol. folio.
-- A golden Chain, or description of Theology; the order of the causes of man's
salvation and damnation, according to the Word of God. 12o. -- The whole
Treatise of the cases of Conscience in sundry Lectures. 4o. -- The Abridgment
of the Body of Divinity. 12o. -- The grounds of Religion, or the six Principles
by way of Catechism. 8o. Mr Prinn. The perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate;
That such as are truly regenerated and engrafted into Christ by a lively faith,
can never finally nor totally fall from grace. 4o. * -- Against Lovel-ocks. 4o.
* -- Against Stage Plays. 4o. * -- Against drinking Healths. 4o. * -- On the
beginning of the Sabbath. 4o. -- On the Sacrament. Pope proved Antichrist. 4o.
-- Apollo Evangelium; for the true Doctrine of the Divine predestination
concorded with the Orthodox Doctrine of Gods free grace, and man's free will.
4o. *Mr Powell. Christ and Moses excellency, or Sion and Synais glory, being a
Triplex Treatise of the two Covenants of the Gospel and the Law, directing to
the right understanding of both. 12o. * -- Saving says set forth in three
Dialogues, betwixt Christ and a Publican, Pharasie, and Unbeliver. 12o. *
Purnell. The way to Heaven discovered, and the stumbleing blocks cast in by^
the world, flesh, and the Devil, removed. 12o. * -- Shuttle. 12o. * -- A word
to those of the world, and two to those that are chosen out of the world, or
good tidings for sinners, great joy for Saints. 12o. Mr Peacock. His grievous
Visitation, and dreadful desertation in his Sickness, with the sweet and
gracious issue in his comfortable and blessed end. 12o. Mr Pagit. The History
of the Bible briefly collected by way of Questions and Answers. 12o. * --
Heresiography, or a description of all the Heresies and Sectaries of the latter
times. 4o. Posy of godly Prayers, fitted for every Christian to use. 12o. Poor
man's rest, founded upon Motives, Meditations, and Prayer, expressing to the
inward man true consolation in all kinds and times of affliction. 12o. Practice
of Piety, directing a Christian how to walk, that he may please God. 12o. Posy
of flowered Prayers, containing sundry Meditations and Prayers, gathered out of
Sacred Writ. 12o. Pensive man's Practice, fitted with Prayers for all occasions.
12o. Mr Poole. The Blasphemer slain with the Sword of the Spirit, or a plea for
the godhead of the holy Ghost, wherein the Deity of the Spirit is proved
against the Cavils of John Biddle. 12o. Mr Peter's. A good work for a good
Magistrate, or a short ^ut to a great quiet, by honest, homely, plain English,
hints given from Scripture, reason and experience, for regulateing most cases
in the Commonwealth, concerning Religion, Mercy, and Justice. 12o. *Mr Parker.
of N.E. The Visions and Prophesies of Daniel expounded, wherein the mistakes of
former Interpreters are modestly discovered, also touching the two Witnesses,
the new Jerusalem, the thousand years, etc. 4o. Mr Peck. The great danger of
little sins. 12o. Pathway to Patience. 12o. Paraphrase on Job, written in
French by J. E. Sennault. Father of the Oratory, dedicated to the Card. of
Richl^iu. 12o. * Public Sermons preached before the Parliament on sundry
occasions, bound up in several vol. 4o. * Pacification between the Lutheran
and reformed Churches. 8o. *Mr Philips. A Christian Alphabet of the grounds of
knowledge unto salvation, showing the most select places of Scripture, whereon
our Christian faith is grounded. 12o. -- A Treatise of Hell. 12o. -- Of the
Genealogy of Christ. 12o. *Dr Potter. An Interpretation of the Number 666.
showing that this Number does exactly discribe that state of Government, to
which all other notes of Antichrist do agree: added also Mr Medes Judgment
thereupon. 4o. Dr Playfere. That eloquent Divine, his Works collected into one
vol. viz. The Mean in mourning, etc. 8o. Mr Pemble. An Introduction to the
right receiving of the Sacrament. 12o. *Mr Pawson. A Vindication of free grace;
proving, first, That we are not elected as holy, but that we should be holy,
and that election is not of kinds, but persons. Secondly, That Christ did not
by his death intend to save all men, and for those he intended, he did not die
for them only, if they would believe. 4o. Protestants practice, or a complete
Christian, being the true and perfect way to the caelestiall Canaan, fit for
all Families: by a reverend Father of the Church of England. 12o. * Pulpit
Sparks, being set Forms of Prayers used before Sermon, by Dr Tailor, Dr
Gillingham, Dr Heuit, and other Eminent Divines. Pelecanicidium, or the
Christian Advisor against self-murder. 2o. A Guide to the Land of the living,
for the discontented that are in the dangerous path to self-murder. 3o. The
Pilgrims pass to the Land of the living. 8o. Mr Pilkinton on Nehemiah. 4o. Mr
Playferman on Romans. 4o. *St Paul's. Progress upon earth, about a divorce
betwixt Christ and the Church of Rome, by reason of her desoluteness and
excess, recomended to all tender consciences, rendered into english from
Itallian. 8o. Mr Peirson. Excellent encouragements against afflictions, or
Expos. of four select Psalms, viz. 27, 84, 85. and 87. Containing David's
Triumph over distress: his hearts desire: the Churches exercise under
affliction, and the great Charter of the Church. 4o. *Mr Pinchin. Of the
Sabbath. 1o. The time when the first Sabbath was ordained, negatively not in
the time of Adam's Innocence: Affirmatively, after Adam's fall and Re-creation.
2o. The Manner how the first Sabbath was ordained. The second part is a
Treatise of holy time, concerning the limits of the Lords day, when it begins
and ends. 4o. * -- The meretorious price of our redemption, reconciliation and
Justification. 4o. Mr J. Paget. A defense of Church Government exercised in
Presbyteriall and Synodall Assemblies; according to the practice of the
reformed Churches, touching 1. The power of a particular Eldership against
those that plead for a mere popular government, especially Mr Aysworth, etc.
2o. the Authority of Classis and Synods against the Patrons of Independency,
etc. 4o. -- Meditations on Death. 12o. -- Family Duties. 12o. *Mr Pierce. A
Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation.
4o. -- The Divine Philanthropis defended against the declamatory attempts of
certain late printed Papers, entitled a correptory correction in Vindication
of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, etc. -- The Sinner Impleaded in his own
Court, wherein are represented the great discouragements from sinning which the
sinner receives from sin it self. 8o. Mr Porter. God incarnate, showing that
Jesus Christ is the only and most high God; in Four Books: Containing
Animadversions on Dr Lushingtons Commentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. --
Tri Vnus Deus, or the Trinity and Unity of God, etc. 8o.
Q.
* QVestio qoud libetica; A Discourse enquiring the lawfulness of taking
interest for Money. 12o.
R.
A. RIveti Pictavi S. Theo. Doct. and Prof. in Achad. Batava. Cathol. Orthodox.
oppositus Catholico Papistae in quatuor par. in quibus continentur summa
controvers. de religione, quae inter Orthod. and pontificios agitantur.
instituiturque examen accuratum, and refutatio omnium and singulorum, quae ad
causae pontificiae subsidium adduxit, Guil. Bailius Jesuita, in Epit. seu
Catech. Controvers. folio. -- Libertatis Ecclesiasticae defensio. 8o. -- An
Exposition of the whole Bible in Latin. folio. Mr Randall. Twenty Nine Lectures
of the Church, the necessity of separation from the Church of Rome. 4o. Mr
Rodgers. An Exposition on the first Epistle of Peter. folio. -- Seven
Treatises; containing such Directions as is gathered out of the holy
Scriptures, leading and guiding to true happiness, both in this life, and that
which is to come. 4o. -- Practical Catech. or a view of those principal
Truths of Word, which most directly tend to life and Godliness. 4o. -- A
Treatise of the two Sacraments of the Gospel, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord. 4o. -- Practice of Christianity or Epitomy of his seven Treatises. 12o.
-- On Love in all tha Branches of it. 12o. -- On Faith. 12o. Mr Tym. Rodgers.
Righteous man's Evidence for Heaven. 12o. -- A faithful friend true to the
soul, or the souls self-examination, preparing it self for the great trial of
life or death, eternal in the other world. 12o. -- The Christians Jewel of
Faith or the ready way to believe and be saved. 12o. -- News from Heaven. 12o.
-- On the Parable, lost Son, lost sheep, lost groat penitent Citizen. 4o. --
Vinyard of Palestina. 4o. Mr Rodgers. A Commentary on the whole Book of Judges.
folio. Dr Reynolds. Three Treatises: 1o. Vanity of the Creature. 2o. Sinfulness
of Sin. 3o. Life of Christ. 4o. -- Animalis Homo conscio Latin habita
Academicos Oxoniense. 4o. -- Shields of the earth. A Sermon on Psalm. 47.9. 4o.
-- Peace of the Church. A Sermon on Romans 14.19. 4o. -- Self-denial opened and
applied, In a Sermon on Matthew 16.24. 4o. -- Israel's Prayer in time of
trouble, with Gods gracious* Answer, in an Exposition of the 14 of Hosea. 4o.
-- An Explication on the 110 Psalm. touching the exaltation of Christ, the
Scepter of his Kingdom, Character of his Subjects, his Priesthood, Victories,
Sufferings, etc. 4o. -- A Treatise of the passions and faculties of the soul of
man, with the several dignities and corruptions thereunto belonging. 4o. -- An
Expos. of Haggie. In 15 Sermons. 4o. -- Meditations of the holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. 4o. -- Joy in the Lord. A Sermon on Phil. 4.4. 4o. Mr
Rutherford. A survey of the spiritual Antichrist; Opening the secrets of
Familism, Antinomianism, against Dell, Saltmarsh, Chrisp, Denn. In which is
revealed, the rise and spring of those errors, and Luther vindicated. 4o. --
The Divine right of Church Government and excommunication, or a peaceable
dispute for the perfection of the holy Scriptures in point of Ceremonies and
Church Government; to which is added a Treatise of Scandal. 4o. -- Disputatio
scholastica de Divina providentia adversus Jesuitas, Arminianos, Socinianos, de
Domino Dei, etc. 4o. -- Christ's dying and drawing sinners to himself: or a
survey of our Savior in his Soul-sufferings, his loveliness in his death, and
efficacy thereof: wherein the flowings and heightnings of free grace are
opened, in sundry Sermons upon the 12 of John, from 27 to 33. Where also are
interjected some necessary digressions touching Antinomian Errors, with a short
Vindication of the Doctrine of Protestants, from the Arminian pretended
universality of Christ's dying for all, the moral and feigned way of resistable
conversion of Sinners, etc. 4o. * -- The due right of Presbyters, or a
peaceable plea for the Government of the Church of Scotland, etc. 4o. * -- The
trial and Triumph of Faith, or an exposition of the History of Christ's
dispossessing of the Daughter of the woman of Canaan, opening the Victory of
Faith, the condition of those that are tempted, the excellency of Jesus Christ
and free grace. 8o. -- The Covenant of life opened, or a Treatise of the
Covenant of Grace, especially of the Covenant of sureteship or redemption,
between the Lord and the Son Jesus Christ, and the Seal of Baptism. 4o. * --
A free disputation against pretended Liberty of conscience, resolving doubts
moved by Mt John Goodwin, Dr Tailor, the Belgic Arminians and Socinians, with
others contending for licentious toleration of Sects. 4o. A Rationale on the
Common Prayer. 8o. *Mr Row. C.C.C. Oxon. Tragicomedia. A Relation of the
wonderful hand of God at Winty, in a Comedy acted, where was some slain, many
hurt, with sundry remarkable passages: With Three Sermons preached on that
occasion, from Romans 1.18. which may serve as a check to the growing Atheism of
this present age. 4o. Mr Neh. Rogers. A Mirror of Mercy, and that on Gods part
and man's, set out in two Parrables. 1o. The penitent Citizen, or Mary Magdelens
conversion, on Luke 7.40, 41, etc. 2o. The good Samaritan, on Luke 10.30, --
38. 4o. Mr J. Robinson. M.A. The birth of a day: being a Treatise Theological,
Moral, and Historical, representing, as in a Scene, the vicissitudes of
humane things, with their several causes, and Sacred uses. 8o. Mr Rouse. His
Works, viz. Treatises and Meditations dedicated to the Saints, and to the
excellent throughout the three Nations. -- Diseases of the time, attended by
their Remedies. -- The Oil of Scorpions; The Miseries of these time turned into
Medicines, and curing themselves. -- The only remedy that can cure a people when
all other remedies fail. -- Catholic Charity, complaining and maintaining,
that Rome is uncharitable, against a Book called Charity mistaken. --
Meditations, endeavoring the Edification and repairation of the House of God.
-- The Heavenly Achademy. -- The great Oracle, even the main Fram and Body of
the Scriptures, resolving the Question, whether in man's free will and common
grace, or in Gods special and effectual grace, stands the safety of man, and
the glory of God by man's safety. -- The Mystical Marriage, or experimental
discoveries of the Heavenly Marriage between a Soul and her Savior. -- The Art
of happiness. 1o. Searching the happiness of man out. 2o. Discovering and
approving it. 3o. Means to attain and increase it. All in one vol. folio. --
David's Psalms in Merer. In 8o. And 24o. -- Mella Patrum per prima nascentis
and patientis Ecclesiae tria secula. 8o. *Mr Roberts. Clavis Bibliorum. The Key
of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasury of the holy Scriptures, whereby
the order, names, times, Penmen, occasion, scope, and principal parts containg
the subject matter of the Books of Old and New Testament, are opened for the
help of the weakest capasity in the understanding the whole Bible. Two vol. 8o.
* -- Believers evidences for eternal life, whereby persons truly regenerate may
diverse ways discover their present state of grace, and title unto Glory. 8o.
-- On Sacrament. 8o. -- The broken heart. 4o. *Mr Richardson. The Saints
desire, or a Cordial for a fainting soul, declaring that in Christ's
Righteousness only, and in nothing else there is life, happiness, peace,
strength, comfort, joy, and all fullness of perfection; also the happy state of
a man in Christ, the life he lives, wherein he is exercised, his experiences
and desires to enjoy God. 12o. * -- Divine Consolations, or the teachings of
God. In three parts. 12o. Mr Rayner. Precepts for Christian practice, or the
rule of the new Creature modl'd, containing duties to be daily observed by
every Believer, with directions to govern the thoughts and the affections: with
an Epistle of Mr Mantons. 8o. -- Rules for Government of the tongue, with
directions in six particular weighty cases, confessing our faults to men,
confession of Christ before men, reprehension of others. 8o. Christian
Communication, Urbanity and Eloquence, self-condemning, etc. 8o. Reformed
Presbytry opposing tyranicall Presbytry and prelaticall Episcopacy. 12o. Mr
Resbury. The lightless Star, or Mr John Goodwin discovered a Pelagion,
Socinian, with Athesis of Dr Preston concerning the Irristibility of converting
grace. 8o. Bp Richardson. Choice Observations and explanations upon the Old
Testament, containing many remarkable matters, as Additions to the Assemblies
Annotations: also Observations on the whole Book of Genesis. folio. Mr
Robinson. The Christian completely armed; a Treatise of Christian Armor,
cleary opening every thereof; pressing to the putting of it on, and instructing
us so to use it, as we may not be foiled in times of temptation. 8o. -- The
Saints longing after their heavenly Country. A Sermon at the meeting of the
Cheshier Gentlemen. -- Christ all in all, or several significant similitudes
by which the Lord Jesus Christ is discribed in the holy Scriptures. Published
by Mr Ash, Mr Calamy, and Mr Tailor. 8o. -- The Triumph and Unity of Truth
intended, as a preservative against the many Errors and unhappy Divisions of
these times in point of Religion. 8o. Mr Raworth. Jacob's Ladder, or the
Protectorship of Sion, laid on the shoulders of the Almighty, in a description
of the sufficiency of Providence, suitable in the times of temptation. 8o. --
Work and reward of a Believer for his entrance into Glory. 2o. Blessedness, or
God and the world weighed in the Balance. 8o. Mr Robotham. An exposition on
the whole Book of Canticles, wherein the Text is explained, and useful
Observations raised thereon. 4o. -- The Mystery of the two Witnesses unvailed,
being a description of their Persons, Office, time, manner of Prophecy, acts,
and sufferings, death and resurrection: with the Consequences that follow, with
the Kingdom of Christ explained. 8o. * -- The preciousness of Christ to
Belivers. 8o. *Mr Roborough against Goodwin, about Justification. 4o. *Mr
Reeve. Christian Divinity contained in the Divine Service of the Church of
England. 4o. * -- The Communion Book Catechism expounded. 4o. * -- Lazarus
rest. A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr Vdall Minister. 4o. *Mr Reading. A grain
of Incense, or Supplication for the peace of Jerusalem. * -- An Evening
Sacrifice, or Prayer for a Family in these times of calamity. 8o. *Mr Ross. The
Picture of Conscience consisting in the Truths to be believed and practiced,
with the vices and heresies to be rejected. 12o. -- An Exposition on the first
fourteen Chapters of Genesis. -- Meditations on Predestination. -- Medicus
Medicatus, against Dr Brown's Religio Medici. 8o. -- Reliquae Sacrae Carolinae:
or the Work of that great Monarch, and glorious Martyr K. Charles the first,
collected together, and digested in order to their several subjects Civil and
Sacred. 8o. The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000, seeming
contradictions in the Old and New Testament are fully reconciled, necessary for
all that desire to study the Sacred Scriptures aright unto salvation. 8o. A
Relation of a Disputation between Dr Griffeth, and Vavassor Powell, wherein the
Orthodox Ministry is Vindicated. Mr Rodgers. Thirty Nine Articles of the Church
of England. 4o. *Mr Rogers. A Tabernacle for the Son, or an Idea of Church
discipline. 4o. Mr J. Reading. A Guide to the holy City, lor Directions and
helps to an holy ^ife, 4o. Mr Ricraft. A Nosegay of rank smelling Flowers, such
as grow in J. Goodw. Garden. 4o. *Pet. Ravanelli. Vticensis Occitani
Bibliotheca Sacra, seu, Thesaurus Scripture Canonicae Amplissimus: in quo ea,
quae in utroquae foedere extant, non Theologica modo, sed etiam Phisica,
Ethica, Oeconomica, Politica, etc. Accurata logicaque metbodo, pertractantur,
ratioque dextre colligend; locos communes, atque adeo, utilit er legendi
Sacras, and ad earum usum referendi aliorum authorum lectionem indicatur: In
duas parts divisum. folio. Mr Row. Westminster. Man's duty in magnifying Gods
Work. In a Sermon on a public Day of Thanksgiving before the Parliament, for
the great Victory obtained against the Spanish West- I^d a Fleet. Upon Job
36.24,25. 4o. Mr R^c. Late Meron C. Oxf. The Spirits Touchstone, or the
teachings of Christ's Spirit on the hearts of Believers, by way of
contradistinction to the spirit of Antichrist, or of this world in the heart of
Unbelievers, which a man may know whether he have the real Teachings of Gods
Spirit or not. 8o. Mr A. Ross. The picture of Consc. consisting in the Truths
to be believed and practiced, with the voices to be avoided, with heresies to
be rejected. 12o.
S.
*Mr SHute. Sarah and Hagar, or the Sixteen Chapters of Genesis opened, in
Nineteen Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that
Orthodox Divine: J.S. B.D. Rector of N.W. folio. -- An Exposition on the Eighth
Chapter of Exodus, in Nine Sermon. Or the Plague of Frogs infflicted and removed:
With a Sermon. at Mr Vdalls Funeral. 4o. Dr Sibbs. A Fountain opened, or the
Mystery of godliness revealed. 4o. -- Angels Acclamations, or the Nativity of
Christ celebrated by the heavenly Host. 4o. -- Churches Riches by Christ's
Poverty. 4o. -- Rich Poverty of the poor man's Riches. 4o. -- An Exposition on
the 3d of the Philip. 4o. -- Two Sermons. One on Luke 12.37. the other on
Revelations 16.15. 4o. -- An Exposition on para of the 2d of the Philip. 4o --
A Sermon on Mal. 4.2,3. 4o. -- The glorious Feast of the Gospel, or Christ's
Invitation and Royal entertainment of Believers. 4o. -- The returning
backslider, or a Commentary of the 14 Chapter of Hosea: wherein is showed the
large extent of Gods free mercy, even unto the most miserable, forlorn and
wreched sinners, upon their humiliation and Repentance. 4o. -- Saints
privilege, or a Christians constant Advocate, being sweet Directions for every
Christian to walk comfortably through this valley of tears. 4o. -- The Beasts
dominion over earthly Kings. 4o. -- The Ruin of mystical Jericho. 4o. -- The
unprosperous Builder. 4o. -- The successful Seeker. In two Sermons on Psalm.
27.8. 4o. -- Faith Triumphant. In five Sermons on Heb. 11.13. -- Hidden life.
Two Funeral Sermons on Colos. 3.3,4. 4o. -- Baalams Wish. A Funeral Sermon on
Numb. 23.10. 4o. -- The faithful Covenanter. Two Ser. on Genesis 17.7. 4o. -- The
demand of a good Consc. A Sermon on 1 Pet. 3.21. 4o. -- The Sword of the
wicked. 4o. -- Bowels opened, or a discovery of the near and dear Union and
Communion betwixt Christ and his Church: being an Exposition upon Canticles 4,
5, and 6, Chapters. 4o. -- The spiritual Jubilee. Two Sermons on Romans 8.2. 4o.
-- St Paul's Challenge. A Sermon on Romans 8.10. 4o. -- The Churches Echo. A
Sermon on Revel. 22.17. 4o. -- David's Conclusion on the Saints Resolution. A
Sermon on Psalm. 73.28. 4o. -- King David's Epitaph, or his life and death.
Three Sermons on Acts 13.36. 4o. -- A description of Christ in his nearness to
God, his Calling, Qualification, and execution of his Calling. 4o. -- Gods
Inquisition. Two Sermons on Jer. 8.6,7. 4o. -- The dead man, or the state of
every man by nature. A Sermon on Ephesians. 2.1. 4o. -- The souls Cordial. folio.
-- The fruitful Labourer for eternal food. Two Sermons on John 6.27. 4o. --
Violence victorious. Two Sermon. on Math. 11.12. 4o. -- The Churches complaint
and confidence. Three Sermons on Isa. 64.6,7,8, verses. 4o. -- A glance of
Heaven, or hidden secrets revealed by the Gospel. 8o. -- Yea and Amen, or
precious Promises. 8o. -- The Christians Portion, or a Christians Charter. 12o.
-- A Fountain Sealed, or the duty of the Sealed to the Spirit, and the work of
the Spirit in sealing. 12o. -- Two Sermons on John 14.1. 12o. -- Riches of
grace in two Treatises. 1o. Lydia's Conversion. 2o. The Rescue from death. 12o.
-- The Brides longing for her Bridegroomes second coming 12o. -- The Spiritual
man's aim, guiding Christians in affections and actions. 12o. -- The bruised
Reed, and smoking Flax. 12o. -- The Saints Comforts. Diverse Sermons on the 30
Psa. 12o. -- The Saints happiness. On Psalm. 73.28. 12o. -- The rich Pearl. On
Matthew 13.45. 12o. -- Mary's Choice. On Luke 10.38,39. 12o. -- Christ's
exaltation purchased by humiliation. 12o. -- Souls Conflict with it self, and
Victory over it self by Faith. 8o. -- An exposition upon the 2 Cor. and the
first Chapter. -- Beams of Light. Published by Mr Manton. folio. -- Antidotum
contra naufragium fidei, and bonae conscientiae. 12o. Mr Sympson. An exposition
upon the 2d of Peter. 4o. Mr Squire. An Exposition upon the 2 These. the 2d
Chapter; wherein is proved that the Pope is Antichrist. 4o. Mr Sutton. An
Exposition on the 11 of the Romans 4o. -- On the Sacrament: Or godly Meditations
on the Lords Supper, with the duty of a due receiving of so great a Mystery.
12o. Mr Sarson. Analysis on Timothy, with an Appendix called Chronologia,
vapulans. 4o. Mr Stock. On the Attributes, and the Divine essence; the one
showing what God is, the other what we ought to be. 4o. -- On Mallachy, with an
exercitation thereupon. By Mr Torshell. folio. Mr Streat. The dividing of the
hoof, or seeming contradictions throughout Sacred Scriptures, distinguished,
resolved, and applied for the strengthening of the faith of the feeble,
doubtful and weak, in these wavering times. 4o. Dr Stoughton. The Preachers
dignity and duty. In five Sermons on 2 Cor. 5.20. -- Christ crucified, the Tree
of Life, Six Sermons on 2 Cor. 2.2. 4o. -- Form of wholesome words, or an
Introduction to the Body of Divinity. Three Sermon. on 2 Timothy 1.13. Also the
righteous man's plea to true happiness. Ten Sermon. on Psalm. 4.6. with a learned
discourse concerning the definition and distribution of Divinity. 4o. Two Sermon.
in 12o. *Mr Sheffeild. A good Conscience the strongest hold, or a Treatise of
Conscience in all the parts of it. 8o. * -- The rising Sun, or the Sun of
Righteousness shining upon the sons of unrighteousness. 8o. Story of Stories,
or the life of Christ, according to the four holy Evangelists. 8o. Mr. Ob.
Sedgwick, Christ's Counsel to his languishing Church or Sardys, or the dying or
decaying Christian, with helps and means for recovery and strength. 8o. -- The
doubting Christian resolved. 12o. -- On Faith. The humbled sinner resolved what
he should do to be saved, or faith in the Lord Jesus the only way of salvation
for sensible sinners, discovering the quality, object, acts, seat, subject,
inseparable concomitants and degrees of justifying Faith. 4o. * -- The best and
worst Magistrate. 4o. * -- Against Antinomianism. 4o. -- A Sermon at the
Funeral of Mr Strong. 4o. -- The Riches of grace displaied in the offer of
salvation to poor sinners; Christ's standing at the door, the sinners opening:
with the comfortable event of both. 8o. -- The Fountain opened, and Water of
life flowing forth for the refreshing of thirsty sinners; showing Christ's
gracious Invitation, expostulation, and renewed solicitation. In sundry
Sermons. 4o. Dr Stuart. Catholic Divinity: or, most solid and sententious
expressions of the Primitive Doctors of the Church, with other Ecclesiastical
and Civil Authors. 8o. Mr Spark. Scintillula altaris, or a pious reflection on
primative devotion, as to the Feasts and Fasts of the Christian Church
Orthodoxally revived. 8o. Mr Sheepeard. The sound Beliver, a Treatise of
Evangelicall conversion, discovering the work of Christ's Spirit, in reconciling
a sinner unto God. 8o. -- The sincere convert, discovering the paucity of
Believers, and the great difficulty of saving conversion. 8o. -- The Saints
Jewel, showing how to apply the Promises. 8o. -- Souls Invitation unto Jesus
Christ. On Cant. 5.2. 8o. -- A Trial of regeneration, or a discovery of the new
birth. 8o. -- Of Liturgies, power of the Keys, and of the Catholic Visible
Church: In answer to Mr Ball. 4o. -- On Subjection to the Ordinances of God, or
a wholesome Caveat for a time of Liberty. 8o. -- Theses Sabbaticae, or the
Doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein the morality, change, beginning, and
sanctification of the Sabbath, is clearly discussed. 8o. -- Certain select
cases resolved, especially tending to the right ordering of the heart, that we
may walk comfortably with God in our general and particular calling. 12o. Mr
Sherman. White salt, or a sober correction of a mad world in some well-wishes
to goodness. 8o. Mr Symond. The case and cure of a deserted soul, the nature,
kinds, degrees, Symptoms, causes, cure of, and mistakes about spiritual
desertion. 12o. * -- Sight and Faith; Meditations on 2 Cor. 5.7. 8o. * -- Three
Treatises. 1o. The fixed eye, or mindful heart, on Psalm. 25.15. 2o. The
principal interest, or propriety of Gods Saints, on Micha 7.7. 3o. Gods
interest in man natural and acquired, on Psalm. 119.4. 8o. *Mr Symond. Saints
like Christ. 12o. -- Darkness fading, light appearing. 12o. *Mr Sidenham. A
Christian sober and plain exercitation on the two grand practical
controversies of these times, Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms. 8o. * --
The great Mystery of Godliness opened, on the 1 Timothy 3.16. 8o. -- Hypocrisy
discovered in its nature and workings. From Luke 12.1. 8o. Mr Simpson. The
perfection of Justification, maintained against the Pharasie, the purity of
sanctification against the stayners of it; the unquestionableness of a future
glorification against the Sadduce. 8o. Saints Legacies concerning grace, or a
collection of certain Promises out of the Word of God: Also the Saints Support
in time of trouble. 12o. Mr Sandder. The Christians daily walk in holy security
and peace. 12o. Mr Strange. Thirty One select Sermons on special occasions, viz.
Spiritual Barrenness: Holiness the way to happiness: Babylons utter ruin: The
Saints Triumph: Gospel order: A Churches beauty: Church Officers according to
Institution: Communion with God, good in bad times: Saints Inheritance: The
great Day: Grace abused: The just man's end: God with us whilst we are with
him: Doctrine of the Jews Vocation: Heedless service unacceptable: Gospel
Exaltation: The two Covenants; with fifteen Sermons more. All published by Mr
Manton, Mr Row, and Mr Griffith. 4o. -- Communion with God in Ordinances: The
Saints privilege and duty: The way to attain it, and preserve it; with Notes of
Trial. Published by Mr Row, Mr Manton, and Mr Venning. 12o. -- Heavenly
Treasure, man's chiefest good; wherein the several workings of the heart, about
and in persuance of its chiefest good, are solidly and judiciously discovered.
Published by Mr Manton, Mr Row, and Mr Griffith. 12o. -- A Treatise, showing
the subordination of the will of man unto the will of God. 8o. * Horae
subsecinae seu Prophetiae Iona, and Histo. Susannae Paraphrasis Graeca
Versionis Heroisis. H. Stubbs. ex Aede^ Christi Oxoniae. 8o. Silver Watchbell,
the sound whereof is able, by Gods grace, to win the most profane worlding and
careless liver, (if but one spark of grace:) With a Treatise of the Sacrament.
8o. Sick man's Salve, wherein all faithful Christians may learn how to behave
themselves christianly and thankfully under Gods hand. 8o. Dr Sclator. An
Exposition of St Paul to the Thessalonians. 4o. * -- A Key to the Scripture, or
an exposition with Notes, on the 1, 2, 3, and 4, of the Romans. 4o. * -- A
brief and plain Commentary with Notes, not more useful than seasonable, upon
the whole Prophecy of Malachy. * -- The two Covenants from Sinai and Sion,
drawn up Catechistically. 8o. -- The Psalms of David in four Languages, and
four Parts, set to the Tunes of our Church. 8o. Mr Sym. Lises Preservative
against self-killing, or a Treatise of life and self-murder; with resolutions
of many cases, useful Observations, and practical Directions. Mr Smith.
Sundry Sermons in one vol. viz. Preparative to marriage: Examination of Usury:
Christians Sacrafice: Trial of Spirits: Wedding Garment: The way to walk in:
Nebuchadnezzar's pride, his fall, his restitution, honor of humility: Young
man's Task: Trial of the Righteous: Christians Practice: Pilgrims wish: Glass
for Drunkards: Heavenly Thrist: Trial of Vanities: Petition of Moses: Humility
of Paul: Banquet of Jobs Children: Caveat for Christians: Poor man's tears:
Memento for Magistrates: Lawyers Question: Christ's Answer: Benefit of
contentation: Lost Sheep found: Gods Arrow against Atheists. In 4o. newly
reprinted. -- David's Repentance, an Expos. of the 51 Psalm. exhorting all men
to repentance ere death come, for after it cannot be had or expected. 12o. --
David's blessed man: or an Exposition of the first Psalm. wherein the estate of
all men is laid down, both for this life, and that which is to come. 12o. --
The great Assize, or day of Jubilee, in which we must make a general account of
all our actions before Almighty God. 12o. -- Moses Prayer, an Expos. on the 19
Psalm. 12o. * Synopsis Purioris Theologiae disputationibus quinquaginta duabus
comprehensa, ac conscripta per I. Polyandrum. A. Rivetum. A. Wallaeum. A.
Thysium. S.S. Theolog. Doct. and Professores, in Achad. Lydensi. 12o. Mr
Struther a Scoth Minister. Christian Observations and Resolutions, or the daily
practice of the renewed man, turning all occurents to spiritual uses, and
those uses to his Union with God. In two Centuries. 12o. Major Skippon. On the
Promises 24o. -- Observations and Christian Resolutions. 24o. -- The true
Treasury, or thirty holy Vows, containing the brief sum that concerns the
Christian Centurians conscionable walking with God. 24o. Mr Spelman. Concilia
decreta, leges, constitutiones de re Ecclesiastium Orbis Brittanici ab initio
Christianae ibidem Religionis cum annotationibus non minus piis. folio. --
Glossiarum eruditissimum, in quo prisci ritus plurimi ennarantur. folio. -- De
non timerandis Ecclesiis, Of the right and respect due unto Churches not to be
violated. 4o. -- Tithes too hot to be touched: certain learned Treatises,
proving Tithes to be due by the Laws of nature, reason, and Scripture, and not
Jewish, Popish, or Inconvenient. 4o. -- Psalterium David is latino saxonicum a
I.S.H.F. e Patris Bibliotheca in lucem, editum ubi ad finem uniuscuiusque
Psalmi preces optimae in animum Psalmi reperiuntur. 4o. Dr Spurstow. The Wells
of salvation opened, discovering the nature, preciousness, usefulness of
Gospel-Promises, and rules for right application of them. 8o. * -- Three
Sermons. 4o. *The Christian man, or the repairation of nature by grace: Writ in
French by that ellegant and pious Author J. F. Sennault. Englished by H.G. of
C.C. Oxon. 4o. *A Discourse of holy Love: Writ in Spanish by C. de Fonseca;
Englished by Sr Geo. Strode Knight. 12o. Mr Scortrech. A warning piece for the
slumbering Virgins, or an Allarum to the Friends of the Bridegroom, in some
awakening Meditations upon Christ's own watchword, Math. 26.41. A sincere
Beliver comforted and encouraged; or a practical discourse of the goodness of
God to a sinful soul in enjoyment of Christ. Smectymnus Redivivus, being an
Answer to a Book entitled an Humble Remonstrance: In which the Original of
Liturgy and Episcopacy is discussed; with Queries concerning both. 1o. The
parity of Bishops and Presb. in Scripture demonstrated. 2o. The occasion of
their imparity in antiquity discovered. 3o. The disparity of the Ancients and
modern Bishops manifested. 4o. The Antiquity of ruleing Elders in the Church
vindicated. 5o. The prelaticall Church bounded. 4o. De juramenti Obligatione,
of the Obligation of promissary Oaths: Seven Lectures read in the Divinity
Schools at Oxford, and translated by his Majesty's appointment. 8o. Twenty
Sermons formerly preached. 16 Ad aulam. 3 Ad Magistratum. 1 Ad populum.
Both by Dr R. Saynderson, Professor Regius in Oxon, and Chaplin in ordinary to
the late King. folio. *Mr Saltmarsh. Dawnings of light, wherein the true
interest of reformation is opened in general, and in particular for the
establishing of weaker Judgments: with some Maxims of reformation 12o. -- Free
grace, or the flowings of Christ's blood freely to sinners; being an experiment
of Jesus Christ, upon one who has been in the bondage of a troubled spirit, at
times for 12 years till now, upon a clearer discovery of Jesus Christ and the
Gospel. 12o. -- Sparcles of Glory, or some Beams of the morning Star: wherein
are many discoveries, as to peace and truth. 12o. -- Sundry pieces of
Controversies in one vol. 4o. Mr Sherlock. A discourse of the holy Spirit of
God, his impressions and workings on the souls of men. 2o. Of Divine
Revelations, mediate and immediate; of error, heresy, and schism, their
natures, kinds, causes, etc. With Directions for avoiding them. 4o. -- The
Principles of holy Christian Religion, or the Catechism of the Church of
England paraphrased. 8o. Adagialia Sacra Novi Testam. selecta and exposita. ab
And. Scotto. 8o. Dr Seaman. The DIATPI proved to be PAPADIATPI: or a
Vindication of the judgment of the reformed Churches, and Protestant Divines,
from mis-interpretations concerning Ordination, and laying on of hands; with an
Answer to the pretenses of E. Chillenden, for the lawfulness of preaching
without Ordination. 4o. -- Solomon's Choice. 4o. -- Head of the Church. 4o. --
Glass for the times. 4o. Mr Sands, on Lamentations. 8o. -- A Parraphrase of the
Psalms of David. 8o. Mr Sedgwick. The Synopsis of Christianity, in a clear
Exposition of the Creed, ten Commandments, and Lords Prayer. 8o. Mr Stalham.
Vinditiae Redemptionis, in the fanning and sifting of Sam. Oats: With a
faithful search after our Lords meaning, in his two Parrables of the Treasure
and the Pearl; in sundry Sermons on Mat. 13.44,45. In the first part Universal
Redemption is discovered to be a peculiar error, and Christ the peculiar
Treasury and Pearl of Gods Elect, is laid as the sole foundation, and the
Christians Faith and Joy in him, and self-denial for him, is raised as a sweet
and sure superstructure. 4o. -- A Conference with Anabaptists, by which the
strength of truth, and weakness of error is discovered. 4o. Reverend Pat. Fr.
Stella. In sacro sanctum Jes. Christi. D. Nostri Evang. secundum lucan
enerationum. 4o. Mr Symonds. An Expos. on the Revelation of St John, 4o.
*Sacra-sancta: Regia Majestas; by the Arch Bp of Tuum. 4o. *Mr Stone. A
Congregationall Church is a Catholic Visible Church, or an examination of Mr
Hudsons Vindication: also satisfaction to Mr Cawdrey in his review of Mr
Hookers Survey. 4o. *Mr Strode. The Anatomy of mortality in Eight Heads,
tending to help to a happy death. 8o. Dr Suarez. Varia Opuscula Theologica. 1.
De concursu motione and auxillio Dei lib. 4. De scientia Dei futurorum
contingentium lib. 2. De Justitia Dei disputatio, etc. 4o. Dr Szegedini.
Analysis, in Psalmos, prophetas Majores, 4 Evangelia, Act a Apostolorum, Omnes
Epistolas and Apocalypsin. 4o. *Mr Samwayes. Devotion digested, Discourses and
Meditations on the Lords most holy Prayer. 12o. * Synopsis, or a Compendium of
the Fathers. 8o. Mr Stint. The young man's Tutor. 8o. -- An Exposition of the
Psalms of Degrees. Mr Styles. Contemplations, Sighs, and Groans of a
Christian. 12o. *Mr Sambrook. Three Sermons on Ephesians. 1.22,23. Showing the
Church to be the proper Subject of the New Covenant, etc. 12o. *Mr Stephen. A
Precept for Infant Baptism, proved from Scripture that there is a command for
it. 4o. A plain and easy Calculation of the Name, Mark, and Number of the Name
of the Beast, humbly presented to the studious observers of Scripture
Prophesies, Gods Works, and the Times: with an Epistle by Mr Calamy. 4o. Mr
Sangar. The word of Faith improved, by a Providentiall concurrence of many
Eminent and Pious Ministers in and about London, in their morning Lectures:
Digested and repeated on the day of Humiliation, at the close of those
Exercises: with Mt Cases Epistle. 12o. A. Scottus Photii. Myriobiblon, sive
Bibliotheca lib. quos Photius Patriarcha Constantinop. legit and censuit. Gr.
edidit. D. Hoeschelius August. and notis illustr. Opus insigne, e quo Theologi,
Medici, Philosophi, Historici, Oratores, and Philologi, Vberrimum fructum and
jucundissimum capere possunt. Dr Swadlins Devotions. 24o. -- Divinity no enemy
to Astrology. In a Sermon before that Society. 4o. Of self-denial. A Treatise
by a concealed Author. 4o. Mr R. Smith. Munition against man's misery. 8o. Mr
Swift. Sion in the house of Mourning, because of sin and suffering; being an
Expos. of the 5. of Lamentations: With practical Observations thereupon. 8o.
Fr. Sales. An Introduction to a devout life. 8o. * I. Fr. Senault. The
Christian man, or the repairation of nature by grace. Translated from the
French. 4o. * -- Man become guilty, or the corruption of nature by sin,
according to St Augustines sense. Translated from the French. 4o. * Nobilliss^
Virginis Annae Mariae A. shurman Opuscula. Haebraea, Graeca, Lattina, Gallica.
8o.
T.
*Mr TOmbs. Antipaedobaptism, or a Treatise against Infant Baptism. 4o. * --
Christ's Commination against Scandalizers. 12o. *Mr Town. V^ndiciae Evangelii,
or a Vindication of the Gospel Truths, from the unjust censure, and undue
assertions of Antinomians, in a modest reply to Mr Ant. Burgess in his
Vindiciae legis; and to Mr Rutherford, etc. 4o. *Mr Trelenie. The undeceiving
the people in point of Tithes; showing that never any Clergy is less chargeable
than now. 2o. That no Subject contributes any thing of his own, etc. 4o. Mr
Topsell. A Commentary of Joel. 4o. -- On Ruth. 4o. Mr Thore. The New Birth, or
the Birth from above. In four Sermons. 4o. *Dr Tho. Tailor. His Works in folio,
Containing Catechisticall Exercises: Jaylors conversion: Famine of the word:
Peter's repentance: The Oracle of the Gospel: The Stranger at home: Green and
dry Tree: Pattern of Peace: A Caveat against offenses: The Nicholaitan Doctrine
hateful: Moderation in things of this life: A President for Preachers: Excuse
of a good Christian: Two contrary Masters: The House of God: Jephthas Vow: New
Map of Rome: Labor in vain: Against following the Multitude: Principles of
practice: Kings Bath. -- On Contentment, leading a Christian with much patience
through all afflicted conditions, by sundry rules of heavenly wisdom: with a
Treatise of improvement of time. 12o. -- On the 32d Psalm. 4o. -- On Tytus. 4o.
-- On the Acts. 4o. -- On the 12 of Revela. 4o. -- Moses and Aaron, or the
Types and Shadows of our Savior in the Old Testament, opened and explained.
4o. -- On the Prrrables, declaring how far hypocrisy may go; Signs of a
good heart, the constant fruit of the good ground. 4o. -- The Saints progress.
4o. -- Kings Bath. 8o. -- On Repentance, and the Meditation of the creatures,
with a New Creature. 12o. -- A Case of flying in time of the Plague. -- Pearl
of the Gospel. 12o. -- Looking-glass for Gentlewomen. 12o. -- Circumspect
walking. 12o. -- Regula vitae, against the Antinomians. 12o. *Dr Jer. Tailor.
The great Exemplar of sanctity and holy life, in the life and death of the ever
Blessed Jesus; with Cuts. folio. * -- A course of Sermons for all the Sundays
of the year, containing Fifty Three Sermons: Dooms-daies Book, or Christ's
advent to Judgment. From 2 Cor. 5.10. The return of Prayers; the conditions of
a prevailing Prayer, Joh. 9.31. Of godly fear, Heb. 12.28,29. The flesh and the
spirit, Mat. 26.41. Of lukewarmness and zeal, Jer. 48.10. House of Feasting, or
Epicures measures, 1 Cor. 15.32. Marriage-Ring, Ephesians. 5.32,33. Apples of Sodom,
Romans 6.21. The good and evil of the Tongue; of slander and flattery, Ephesians. 4.25.
Of the Spirit of Grace, Romans 8.9,10. The descending and entailing Curse cut
off, Exo. 20.5. Invalidity of a late or deathbed Repentance, Jer. 13.16.
Deceitfulness of heart, Jer. 17.9. Faith and Patience of the Saints, 1 Pet.
4.17. The mercy of the Divine Judgments, Romans 2.4. Of growth in grace, 2 Pet.
3.18. Of growth in sin, Jude 22.23. The foolish exchange, Mat. 16.26. The
Serpent and Dove: Of Christian prudence and simplicity, Mat. 10.16. Miracles of
Divine mercy, Psalm. 86.5. To which is added a Discourse of Divine Institution,
necessity, sacredness, and separation of the Office Ministerial. All in one
vol. folio. * -- On the real presence, and spiritual of Christ in the blessed
Sacrament, proved against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 8o. -- The rule
and exercise of holy dying, in which are discribed the means and Instruments of
preparing our selves and others respectively for a blessed death. 12o. -- The
Rules and Exercises of holy living; in which are described the means and
instruments of obtaining every Virtue, with the remedies against every Vice.
12o. -- The golden Grove, or a Mannual of daily Prayers and Lattinies fitted to
the day of the Week, containing a short summary of what is to be believed,
practiced and desired, with Festival Hymmes, etc. 12o. -- Vnum necessarium, or
the Doctrine and practice of repentance, describing the necessities and
measures of a strict, holy, and Christian life. 8o. -- Deus Justificatus, or a
Vindication of the glory of the Divine Attributes, in the Question of Original
sin, against the Presbyterian way of understanding it: With an answer to the
Bp of Rochesters Letter. 12o. -- A Discourse of the nature, offices, and
measures of friendship: with rules of conducting it. 12o. -- A Collection of
Polemical and Moral Discourses. folio. * -- Episcopacy asserted and vindicated.
4o. -- The liberty of prophesieing 4o. -- An Apology for authorized and set
Forms of Liturgy against the pretense of the spirit, for extempore Prayer, and
forms of private composition. 4o. -- A Discourse of Baptism, its institution
and efficacy upon all Believers. 4o. A further explication of the Doctrine of
Original sin. 8o. -- A short Catechism for Instruction of young persons in
the grounds of Religion, with the explication of the Apostles Creed. 12o. Dr
Twiss. The riches of Gods Love unto the vessels of mercy, consistent with his
absolute hatred or reprobation of the vessels of wrath against Hord. With two
Tracts concerning Gods Decrees, definite and indefinite, and about the object
of predestination: Also against Redemption Redeemed, by Mr Goodwin. All in
folio. -- Vindiciae gratia. Lat. folio. * -- The Synod of Dort and Ales. * --
The Scriptures sufficiency to determine all matters of Faith made good against
the Papist. 12o. * -- The Christian Sabbath defended against the crying evil,
in these times of the Antisabitarians of our age; showing that the morality of
the fourth Commandment is still in force, to bind Christians unto the
sanctification of the Sabbath day. 4o. -- Against Cotton. -- On the
Commandments. -- Scientia Media. Lat. folio. -- In Corvini. Lat. folio. *Mr
Tychbourne. A Cluster of Canaan Grapes; being several experimented Truths,
grounded on Scripture, etc. 4o. Mr Trapp. A Commentary on all the twelve minor
Prophets, the Texts explained, Controversies discussed, Cases of conscience
cleared, etc. folio. -- A Commentary on the New Testament: the Text explained,
Controversies discussed, common places handled, and other. Texts that
occasionally occur; with a decad of common places upon Abstinence, Admonition,
Alms, Ambition, Angels, Anger, Apostasy, Arrogance, Arts, Atheism. folio. -- A
Commentary upon the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Canticles; wherein the Text is
explained, and some Controversies discussed. 4o. -- A Clavis to the B^ble, or a
Comment on the Pentatuch. 4o. -- The afflicted man's lesson, on the excellency
and Divinity of holy Scriptures. 12o. -- Theologia, Theologiae, the true
Treasury, or a Treasury of holy Truths; touching Gods Word, and God in the
Word. 12o. *Mr Towers. Against Atheism, rationally confuting the Atheists of
these times. 8o. -- A Sermon against Murder, occasio^ed by the bloody Massacre
of the Protestants in the Dukedom of Savoy. 4o. Mr Fra. Tailor. Gods glory in
man's happiness, with the freeness of his grace in electing us: with many
Arminian objections answered. 8o. -- An Epos. with practical observations upon
the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Chap. of the Prove. Grammatical, Rhetorical,
Logical, and Theological. Two vol. 4o. *Mr Tillinghast. Generation Work, or a
brief and seasonable word to the Saints and people of God in this Generation.
First part. 8o. * -- The second part, wherein is showed what the designs of
God abroad in the world, may in all likelihood be at this present day, and in
the days approaching; being an Exposition of the seven Vials. 8o. * -- The
third part, or an Exposition of the Prophesies of the two Witnesses, with a Key
to unlock the mystical Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations. 8o. -- Eight
Sermons. 1o. The fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ^ 2o. Signs of the times.
3o. Christ the only Foundation. 4o. The Promise of the Father. 5o. The evil of
the times. 6o. Look to your aims and ends: Also added the Idols abolished. 8o.
Mr Teat. A Scripture Map of the Wilderness of sin, and way to Canaan, or the
sinners way to the Saints Rest: Showing the bewild rings of lost sinners and
Saints before, in, and after conversion, and necessity of leaning on Christ
alone for salvation. 4o. *Sir Richard Tempest. An entertainment of
solitariness, or the melting of the soul by Meditations and pouring of it out
by Prayers. 12o. Mr Turnball. An Expos. on James, with the Tables Analysis, and
resolutions both of the whole Epistle and every Chap. etc. 8o. Dr Tuckney of
Camb. Balm of Gillead, for the wounds of England: At a Fast. 12o. -- Death
disarmed, and the Grave swallowed up in Victory: A Sermon at Dr Hills Funeral;
with an account of his life; with two Sermons more on the same Text of 1 Cor.
15.55. 12o. -- None but Christ: A Sermon on Acts 4.12. Preached at Camb. on the
Commencement Sabbath; to which is added, an enquiry after what hope may be had
of the salvation of Heathens, of those of the old world, the Jews, and other
before Christ, and such as die Infants and idiots, etc. under the Gospel. 12o.
-- A good day well improved, or day of the Churches peace and rest, as an
Argument to all Christians to walk in the fear of God, and in the comfort of
the holy Ghost. Five Sermons on the 9th of the Acts; with a Sermon. on
Commencement Sabbath at Camb. 12o. -- A Treatise of Prayer: two Queries
resolved touching forms of Prayer, six Queries relating to the Lords Prayer,
with Dr Owens judgment about Prayer. 4o. Tymson. To receive the Lords Supper,
the actual right and duty of all Church Members of years not excommunicate,
made good against Mr Collings. 8o. *Mr Torshell. A discovery of hypocrisy,
it is discovery and cure; the definition, kinds, subjects, symptoms,
prognostics, causes, and cure; a discourse furnished with experimental and
historical Observations, seasonable for these times, of happy design for
Reformation, two Books. 4o. -- The Saints Humiliation. 4o. * -- The Woman's
glory, asserting the due honor of that Sex: that they are capable of the
highest improvements, in examples of their eminencies in wisdom, policy,
deliberation, secrecy, learning, etc. directing also wherein that honor
consists, viz. in soul-glory, modesty in carriage, language, and attire;
hmility, silence, wisdom, piety. 12o. Mr Tuke. The Souls Turn-key, or a
spiritual file for any Prisoner locked up in the Dungeon and Chain of sin and
Satan: Prepared for Mr Hannam the night before he suffered, now fitted for
public use. 8o. Tertullians Apology, or defense of the Christians against the
accusations of the Gentiles: Englished. 4o. Mr Twisden. An Historical,
Vindication of the Church of England, in point of Schism, as it stands
separated from the Roman, and was reformed in Q. Eliz. Reign. 4o. Mr Teat.
Nathaniel, or an Israelite indeed, for our imitation; his Characteas and
Privileges: A discovery of the sinfulness of Hypocrites and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel. 8o.
V.
Z. VRsinus. The Sum of Christian Religion by way of Carechism, with a sound
and judicious exposition and application, debating the Questions of Divinity
now controverted; in which the orthodoxall Tenets are briefly and solidly
confirmed, and the contrary errors of Papists, Ubiquiraries, Antitrinitaries,
Eutychians, Socinians, and Arminians fully refuted; with Theological
Miscelanies of D. Paraeus. All in English. folio. -- Comment. in Aesaiam. and
refutatione Catechismi Anabaptistici, etc. folio. *Bp Usher. A Body of
Divinity, the sum and substance of Christian Religion, catechistically
propounded and explained; Also added Immanuel, or the mystery of the
Incarnation of the Son of God. folio. -- De Ecclesiarum Christianarum
successione and statu. 4o. * -- Annals veteris Testamenti, a prima mundi
Origin deducti, ura cum rerum assaticarum, and egiptiacarum eronico, a
temporis Historici principio usque ad Maccabaicorum initia producto. folio. *
-- Annalium, pars posterior, in qua preter Maccabaicum, N. Test. Historiam
Imperii Romanarum Caesarum, sub C. Julio and Octaviano Ortus, rerumque in Asia,
and Aegypto gestarum continetur Chronicon, etc. folio. -- De primordiis
Ecclesiarum Brittanicarum. 4o. -- An Answer to Malon the Jesuit. 4o. --
Gottescalci. 4o. * -- De textus Hebraici veteris Testamenti variantibus
lecitonibus ad Lodovicum Capellum Epistola. 4o. * -- De LXX. Interpretum
versione syntagma quo Hebraici textus veritas contra LXX. interpretum versionis
assertores declaratur una cum libro Estherae, etc. ad pristinam antiquitatem
cum obeliscis, Asteriscis, and lev^scis reducto. 4o. -- Epistolarum
Hibernicarum Sylloge. 4o. -- Ignatii Epistolae cum Annotationibus. 4o. -- De
anno solari Macedonum. 8o. -- A Sermon before the Commons, 1618. 4o. -- The
Visibility of the Church: A Sermon. before K. Ja. 4o. -- A Speech at Dublin,
delivered in the Castle-Chamber. 4o. -- The Religion professed by the ancient
Irish and British. 4o. -- Immanuel, or the Incarnation of the Son of God. 4o.
-- A Geographicall description of the lesser Asia. 4o. -- Confessions and
Proofs of Dr Reynolds, and other Protestant Divines, concerning the right of
Episcopacy. 4o. -- The Original of Eps and ArchBps. -- A small Cat. revived.
12o. -- Method for Meditation, or Directions for hearing the Word. 4o. --
Annals of the old and new Testament, with the Sychronismes to Heathen story to
the destruction of Jerusalem. folio. -- A Geographicall and Historical
Disquisition touching the Asia so called, the Lydian Asia, the Proconsule Asia,
and the Asian Diocese. 4o. Mr Vdall. A Commentary upon the Lamentations of
Jeremy; containing, 1o. Method. 2o. Literal interpretation of the Text out of
the Hebrew, with a paraphrasticall Exposition of the sense thereof. 3o. A
Collection of diverse Doctrines and Uses. 4o. Mr Vines. A Treatise of the right
Institution, Administration and receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
In Twenty Sermons. 4o. Sermons preached on public and eminent occasions: 1o.
Caleb's integrity in following the Lord fully: From Numb. 14.24. 2o. The
imposture of seducing Teachers discovered: From Ephesians. 4.14,15. 3o. Magnalia Dei
ab Aquilone: From Isa. 6.8. 4o. The posture of Davia's spirit in a doubtful
condition: From 2 Samuel 15.25,26. 5o. The happiness of Israel: From Deuteronomy. 23.29.
6o. The purifying unclean hearts and hands: From Jam. 4.6. 7o. Earl of Essex
Funeral: From 2 Samuel 3.28. 8o. Nature and danger of Heresies: From 2 Pet. 2.1.
9o. Subject on to Magistrates, both supreme and subordinate: In three Sermons
on 1. Pet. 2.13,14,15,16. 12o. Corruption of the mind described: From 2 Cor.
2.17. 4o. Sr Henry Vane. The retired man's Meditations, or the Mystery and Power
of Godliness, st^ning forth in the living Word, to the unmasking the mystery of
iniquity, in the most refined and purest Forms. 4o. -- A healing Question
propounded. 4o. *Mr Venning. Orthodox Paradoxes Theological and Experimental.
or a Believer clearing up truths by seeming Contradictions. 8o. * -- Triumph of
Assurance over the law, sin, the world, waves, and present enjoyments. 8o. * --
The New Commandment renewed, or love one another; being an endeavor after the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, by several uniting Principles. 8o. *
-- Mysteries and Revelations, or the explication of several extra essential
and borrowed Names, allusions, and Metaphors in the Scripture 8o. * -- A
warning to backsliders, or a discovery for the recovery of fallen ones. 8o. *
-- Milk and Honey, or a Misselanious Colation of many Christian Experiences,
Sayings, Sentences, and several places of Scripture. 8o. * -- Orthodox
Paradoxes: Second part. 8o. * -- Dives and Lazarus, or not now, but hereafter.
8o. * -- Canaans flowing, or the second part of Milk and Honey. * -- The
Heathen improved, or the Gibeonites hewing of wood, and drawing of water for
the Sanctuary. 8o. Mr Vrells excellent Treatise concerning all the Principal
Grounds of Christian Religion. 12o. Mr Vallentine. Private Devotions, in six
Latinies, with Directions and Prayers for each day in the week. Dr Vane. Wisdom
and Innocence, or Prudence and Simplicity, in the examples of the Serpent and
Dove propounded to our imitation. 12o. *A view of some Exceptions which have
been made by a Romanist, to the Ld Vic. Falkland's Discourse of the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome, submitted to censure; with a Discourse of
Infallibility. 4o. *A Vindication of the Answer to Mr Brabourn concerning the
civil Magistrates Power, as to changing Church Government; wherein the Reverend
Mr Perkins, and some Truths of God are vindicated, from the lies and scurrilous
expressions cast upon them. *Decapala in Psalmos, sive Commentarius ex december
linguis, antiqui Patribus, Rab. Historicis and poetis a J. Vicarb. folio. * --
The Schismatic sif^ed. Valdesso. Divine Considerations, treating of those
things which are most profitable, most necessary, and most perfect in our
Christian Profession. 8o.
W.
Dr Fra. WHite. A Reply to Jesuit Fishers answer to certain Questions
propounded to King James, with a conference of R.B. of St David's, with the
same Jesuit. folio. Dr John White. The Orthodox Faith, and way to the Church,
explained and justified; in answer to a popish Treatise entitled, White dyed
Black, wherein the present Controversies between us and the Romanists are fully
cleared. 4o. Dr Williams. The right way to the best Religion, wherein is at
large explained the principal heads of the Gospel. folio. -- The true Church
showed to all men that desire to be Members of the same; in six Books,
containing the whole Body of Divinity. folio. Mr Whately. Prototypes, or the
primary precedent Presidents out of the Book of Genesis, showing the good and
bad things they did and had, practically applied to our Information and
Reformation. folio. -- Bride-bush. 4o. -- New Birth. 4o. -- Husbandry. 4o. --
Carecloth. 4o. Dr Willett. Synopsis Papismi. A gegenerall view of Papistry,
wherein the whole mystery of iniquity, and sum of Antichristian Doctrine is
set down, which is maintained this day by the Synagogue of Rome, against the
Church of Christ; with the Antithesis of the true Christian Faith, and an
Antidotum or Counterpoison out of Scripture, against the Whore of Babylon's
filthy Cup of Abominations: confuted by Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels,
Imperial Constitutions, Pontifical Decrees, their own Writers, and our
Martyrs, and consent of all Christian Churches in the world. Published by his
Majesty's Authority. folio. -- A Commentary on the whole Book of Liviticus.
folio. -- Hexapla in Genesin, a six-fold Commentary on Genesis: wherein six
several Translations, viz. The Septuagint; the Chaldee. Two Latin, viz.
Hierome and Tremelius. Two English, the great Bible, and Geneva Edition are
compared where they differ, with the Original Hebrew; and Pagnine, and
Montanus, Interlinearie Interpretation; with a six-fold Use: A Thousand
Theological Questions are discussed. folio. -- Hexepla in Exodum, etc. wherein
is observed the Argument, the diverse Readings, Controversies handled, etc.
These following Translations compared, viz. Chaldee, Septuagint, Vulgar Latin,
Pagnine, Montanus, Junius, Vatablus, English Bible, Geneva Eddition, and Hebrew
Original; two Thousand Theological Questions handled, and forty Authors
writing on this Book abridged. folio. -- A Commentary of the two Books of
Samuel. folio. -- A Commentary upon Daniel. folio. -- A Commentary upon the
Epistle of Paul to the Romans. folio. *Mr Wilson. A Comentary on the most
Divine Epistle of Paul to the Romans, Containing the degeneration of our nature
by Adams fall, and restoration thereof, by the grace of Christ; with the
perfection of says, and the imbecility of works, in the cause of
Justification of elect sinners before Almighty God: Also the conference and
method, sum and scope, Interpretations and Doctrines, Reasons and Uses of
each Text. Last Edition. folio. -- A complete Christian Dictionary, wherein the
significations and several acceptions of all the words in the Scripture are
fully opened, expressed, and explained. Very many ambiguous speeches, hard and
difficult phrases, are plainly interpreted, cleared and expounded; with a
particular dictio. for the Canticles, Hebrews, and Revelations, tending to the
increase of Christian Knowledge, now enlarged, with above four thousand words,
interpretation of proper Names of Men, Woman, Countries, Cities, and Nature and
Properties of Beasts, Fouls, Trees, Plants, etc. Extracted from the most
approved Authors, especially P. Ravanelli Bibliotheca Sacra; by the diligent
care of Mr Sypmson. folio. -- Saints by calling, or called to be Saints: A
Godly Treatise of our holy calling to Christ by the Gospel, with the several
gifts proper to the called, and their Counterfeits in the Hypocrites, which are
not partakers of this effectual calling. 4o. Mr Ward. Theological Questions,
Dogmaticall Observations, and Evangelicall essays on the whole Gospel of
Matthew; wherein is 2650. necessary questions discussed, 580. special
Doctrines noted, 550. Errors Confuted, with diverse arguments whereby many
truths and true tenets are confirmed. folio. Sermons on Colloss. 3.11. Christ
all in all. The Life of Faith, The Life of Faith in Death. A cole from the
Altar to kindle the holy fire of Zeal, from Rev. 3.19. Balm from Gilead to
recover conscience, Heb. 13.18. Jethro's justice, of a peace offering to God.
Woe to drunkards, happiness of practice. 8o. *Wallaeus. Novi Testamenti Lib.
Histor. Gr. and Latt. perpetuo comentario ex antiquitate Histor. Philologia
illustrata. folio. Wottoni. De reconciliatione peccatoris, in quibus doctrina
ecclesiae anglicana, de justificatione impii explicatur and defenditur, etc.
4o. Mr Wemes Works. 4. Volumes. 4o. Mr Wicken. A complete and perfect
Concordance of the English Bible, Composed after a new and most compendious
Method. 8o. *Mr Whitfield. The light appearing more and more toward perfect
day, or a further discovery of the present state of the Indians in New England,
concerning the progress of the Gospel among them. 4o. Mr Wall. None but
Christ, or a plain and familliar treatise of the knowledge of Christ, exciting
all men to know Jesus Christ, and him crucified; with a particular application
and saving knowledge, on 1 Cor. 2.2. 8o. *Mr Wilkins Ecclesiastes, or a
discourse of the gift of preaching as it falls under the rules of art. 8o. * --
A discourse of the beauty of providence in all the passages of it. 12o. * -- On
Prayer, showing what it is, wherein it consists, and how far attainable, by
industry. 8o. * -- Mathematical Magic. *Mr Watson. The Christians charter,
showing the privileges of true believers in this life, and that which is to
come. 8o. * -- The art of Divine contentment. 8o. * -- The untaught bridegroom,
seeing they are one, that they should be meet helps to one another. 12o. * --
The Anatomy of the heart. 8o. -- The one thing necessary in a Sermon from Phil.
2.12. 8o. *Mr Woolfall. The doctrine and practice of renovation, discovering
what the new Nature, and the new Creature is, its parts, causes, manner and
means to get it. 8o. * -- The doctrine and practice of mortification, the
matter, manner, and means thereof, with the blessed event of it. 8o. Mr Wells.
A prospect of eternity, or man's everlasting condition opened and applied. 8o.
Mr Warwick. Spare minutes, resolved meditations. 12o. Mr Wills. Mount Tabor, or
private exercises for a penitent sinner, serving for a daily practice of the
life of faith, written in time of a voluntary retreat from secular affairs.
12o. Mr Tho. White. A way to the tree of life, discovered in sundry directions,
for the profitable reading of the Scripture; occasionally describing the nature
of a spiritual man: and in a digression, the morallity and perpetuity of the
4th. Command. 8o. -- A method and instructions for the art of divine
meditations, with instances of the several kinds of solemn meditation. 12o. *
-- PANTHEOLOGIA. Or the sum of practical Divinity practiced in the
wilderness, and delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the mount; in
observation on the 4, 5, 6, 7, chap. of Matthew: wherein the perfection and
perspicuity of the Scripture, is vindicated from the calumnies of the
Anabaptists, and Papists. 8o. -- The practice of Christian perfection, wherein
several considerations, cautions and advices, are set down for the perfecting
of the Saints, and completing them in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. 12o. *Mr
Winstanly. The mysteries of God, concerning the whole creation of mankind. 8o.
* -- The breathing of the day of God, or prophesies fulfilled. 8o. * -- The
Saints paradise, or the fathers teaching the only satisfaction to waiting
souls. 8o. * -- The new Law of righteousness, budding forth, in restoring the
whole creation from the bondage of the curse. 8o. Dr Wimbleton. A Sermon
preached before, K. Henry. 4. 8o. Mr Whitaker. Against Champion the Jesuit, in
defense of the faith of the Church of England. 4o. -- Sermons on sundry
subjects. 4o. *Mr Walwin. A plea for the ministry, or one good word for the
Godly Ministers of England, that have so many hard speeches spoken against
them. *Sr Fran. Wortley. Truth asserted by the doctrine and practice of the
Apostles, seconded by the testimony of Synods, fathers, and doctors, from the
Apostles to this day, viz. That Episcopacy is jure divino. 4o. Bp Webb. The
practice of quietness, teaching how to order our steps, to a peaceable living
in this present evil world. 12o. *Mr Wallis. A plea for congregationall
Churches. * -- An explaination of the assemblies Catechism. * -- Translation
of Appolonius. * -- A Philosophical and Theological answer to the Ld Brooks. --
Men's sobria, Expos. Epist. Tytum. Thesis Theolog, etc. 12o. *Mr Workman.
Private men, no Pulpitmen. Mr J White. A commentary on the three first chap. of
Genesis folio. Mr Woodbridg. The method of grace in the justification of sinners,
against Mr Eyres vindiciae justificationis gratuitae; also the apostolic
protestant doctrine of justification, by faith is asserted. 4o. --
Justification by faith, or a confutation of that antinomian error, that
justification is before faith; in a Sermon preached at Saram. 4o. * -- Church
members set in joint, or a discovery of the unwarrantable and disorderly
practice of private Christians, in usurping the peculiar office and work of
Christ's own Pastors, viz. public preaching. 4o. *Mr Wilkinson. Conciones tres
apud Achad. Oxon. and tract. de jure divino diei dominici. 8o. Dr Wollebius.
The abridgment of Christian Divinity, tending to the right reading of the
Scriptures, ordering common places, understanding controversies, clearing
common cases of conscience, with an anatomy of a body of divinity in 14. tables
for help of weak memories, in english. 12o. -- The same in Latin. 12o. *Mr
Wood. A scotch man. A little stone pretended to be cut out of the mountain,
tried and sound to be counterfeit: or an examination, and refutation of Mr
Lockier, concerning the matter of a visible Church, preached at Edenburg; and
after printed with an appendix, for the popular government of single
congregations. 4o. Mr Wright. of Oxon. Five Sermons in five ways of preaching,
1. Bp Andrew's, 2. Bp Hall's, Dr Main's, and Mr Cratwright's; 4. Presbiterian
way, 5. Independent way, never preached with an account of the Authors design
therein. 8o. *Mr Warren. Unbeleevers, no subjects of justification, nor
mystical union, vindicated against Mr Eyre's objections, in his vindiciae
justificationis gratuitae, with a refutation of that antisidian and
antievangelicall error, asserted therein, viz. The justification of a sinner
before, or without faith. 4o. * -- A Fast Sermon preached before the
Parliament. 4o. * -- An assize Sermon. 4o. *Mr Webster. The judgment seat, and
books opened, religion tried, whether of God or men, tending to discover the
blasphemy of those that say they are Apostles, Teachers, etc. but are found
liars, deceivers, etc. in sundry Sermons delivered at Alhallows London. 4o.
Christianae Theologiae, lib. 2. me thodice dispositi, perpetua praeceptorum
succinctorum and perspicuarum omnium controversarium, quae in ecclesiis and
scholas, theologicis hodie agitantur, compendiosa and logica, tractatione, ita
illustrati and temperati, ut and adultoribus, S.S. Theologiae studiosis, and
novellis tironibus commode inserviane. Studio and opera, Mr Friderici
Wendelini. 16o. Mr Hez. Wooodward. A just account in truth and peace by
brethren, lovers of, and fellow helpers to both, why they must open themselves
to view of the world, speaking to them as on the house top, etc. 4o. -- An
appeal to the Churches of Christ, for their righteous judgment in matters of
Christ, the concernments of all his glory, over whom there is a defense,
whether Christ's way be not paved forth in Scripture to be traced by the
footsteps of his near ones. 4o. -- A conference of some Christians in Church
fellowship about the way of Christ with his people, and the result there from,
etc. 4o. -- Infant Baptism, and the first quere thereupon, whether all parents
how notorious soever for wickedness, are privileged upon account of their own
baptism, to present their Infants thereunto, the negative maintained. o4. --
The Lords Table. whether it is to be spread like a table for all comers, the
negative affirmed. 4o. -- A treatise of Prayer, two queries resolved, touching
forms of prayer, and six queries relating especially to the Lords Prayer. 4o.
-- The Ministers duty to reprove sin in the pulpit, as God himself does in his
Word. 4o. -- Four grand enquieries, 1. whether this Nation be a Church as the
Jewish was, 2. whether by privilege of Infant Baptism, all are to be admitted
to Church Communions, e^ omnine, without making a profession of their faith,
etc. 4o. -- Law, Power, or the law of relation, written in the heart of
Ministers and people, by the hand of God, is mighty through him, to prevail
with both, to live as a people separated to their God, especially at the Lords
Table. 4o. -- A Church Covenant, lawful and needful to be entered into, by
all that intend to walk in Churchfellowship, according to Gospel order, in on
vol. 4o. -- Good education of youth, or a child's patrimony, 2. The child's
portion, respecting a child grown up, 3. The Churches thanksgiving to God, her
king, and the Parliament, for rich mercies, years of captivity, for her
deliverance, from 88. to the 9. of Sep. 1640. 4. The Case of all Crucifixes,
Images, etc. made with hands, and for a religious use discussed, 5. The Kings
Chronicle, declaring the acts of the wicked, and good Kings of Judah, with the
order of the Militia, etc. 6. The cause, use, and cure of fear, or strong
consolations in God, to establish the heart to see the salvation of God, all
recommended by Dr Gouge, Mr Calamy, Mr Carryl, Mr Burrouges, etc. in one vol.
4o. Mr Waterhouse. A discourse of the piety and charity of elder Churches, and
Christians: together with those their virtues, paralleled by Christian members
of the Church of England. 8o. Mr Willam. Vicar of Hexn. Six excellent Sermons
on sundry occasions, etc. 4o. Mr Woodcock. The two witnesses discovered in
several Sermons, upon the 11. of Rev. with the great question discussed,
whether the two witnesses are slain or no. 4o. Mr Winnell. Suspension discussed
or church members, divine right to Christ's Table: throne of grace examined and
cleared. Mr Whitfoot. M.A. Deaths allarm, or the presage of approaching death,
in a funeral Sermon, upon the death of the reverend Bp Hall. 8o. Mr Sam. Ward.
The wonders of the loadstone, or the loadstone newly reducted into a divine and
moral use. 8o.
Y
Mr YArrow. Sovereign comforts, for a troubled conscience, discovering the
subtleties of Satan, with objections answered, and further manifested to the
great consolation of distressed minds. 12o. Mr Young Sin stigmatized, or the
art to know savingly, believe rightly, and live righteously; taught both by
similitude and contrariety from a serious scruting or survey of the profound
humanist, cunning politian, cauterized drunkard, and experimental Christian;
the beauties of all Christian graces are illustrated by the blackness of their
opposite vices. 8o. -- The drunkards character; with the complete armor
against evil society, with the skill, will, and industry to lewd ones, in
tempting to sin, and leading to perdition. 8o. -- The cure of Misprision, or
selected notes upon sundry questions in controversy, and of main concernment,
between the word and the world, tending to reconcile men's judgments, and unite
their affections, as being a probable means to cure prejudice, and Misprision
in such as are not past cure, with Mr Tho. Goodwin's, Mr Arrowsmith's, and Mr
Vine's Epistle. 8o. Mr Rob. Young. of Roxwell. A sovereign antidote against all
grief, as also the benefit of affliction, how to husband it, and be supported
under his most miserable exigents with the victory of patience. 8o. -- The
cause and cure of ignorance, error and profaneness, or a more hopeful way to
grace and salvation. 8o. -- The prevention of poverty, and cure of discontent.
8o. -- The peoples impertial and compassionate Monitour, about hearing of
Sermons upon occation of two famous Divines, whose famous transcendent wit,
oratory and elegance, made many at their wits end with admiration. 8o.
HISTORY With other Pieces of Humane Learning Intermixed, Alphabetically
digested.
A
*THe Anatomy of Playing and Gameing; writ by a Gentleman, and dedicated to his
Father, to show his detestation thereof. 8o. Bp Abbott. A brief description of
the whole World, describing all the Monarchies, Empires, and Kingdoms of the
same, with Achademies, several Titles, and Situations. 12o. Ars Memoriae, or
the Art of Memory made plain, so far as it depends in places and Ideas. 12o.
Albions England; a continued History of the same Kingdom, from the originals of
the first Inhabitants, with the chief accidents and alterations in the Reign of
King James. 4o. Arcana Aulica, or Walsinghams Mannuel of prudentiall Maxims for
the Statesman and Courteir. 12o. Antiquity of Thieves. The son of a Rogue, or
the politic Thief; translated from Spanish. Antipathy between the French and
Spaniard; or the two great Lights of the world displaied in lively Characters,
in the Antipathy of their humors and dispositions. 12o. Arreignment of Sr
Walter Raileigh. 12o. Admirable Events, in choice and delightful History. 12o.
America, or an exact description of the West- Indies, more especially those
Provinces which are under the Dominion of the King of Spain. * Anthologia, or
the speech of Birds and Flowers; partly moral, partly mystical. 8o. Alcharon of
Mahomet, from Arabic into French, by Sieur de Ryer Lord of Maleziar, and
Resident for the King of France, and Alexandria; now Englished for public
benefit. 4o. Anatomy, of the English Nunnery at Lysbone, wherein the lewd
practices of those Nunns and Friars are discovered, by one that was seduced to
their ways. 4o. Augustus, or an Essay on those Means and Counsels whereby the
Commonwealth of Rome was altered and reduced to a Monarchy. 12o. Auxilliary
Beauty, or Artificial handsomeness in a point of conscience between two
Ladies. 8o. Art of Memory, a cure for a weak Memory, useful to all persons,
from the Crown to the Clown. 12o. * The Achademy of Eloquence, containing a
complete English Rhetorique exemplified, with common places and forms,
digested into an easy and Methodicall way to speak and write fluently
according to the mode of the present times; with Letters both Amorous, and
Moral, upon emergent occasions. 12o. The Achademy of Complements, wherein
Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers, may accomodate their courtly
practice with gentle Ceremonies; complementall, amorous high expressions, and
forms of speaking and writing of Letters most in fashion, with excellent
similitudes, comparisons, fancies, and devicess; with a Table resolving the
most delightful fictions of Heathen Poets. 8o. *I. H. Alstedii. Thesaurus
Chronologiae, in quo universa temporum and Historiarum series in omni vitae
genere ita ponitur ab oculos, etc. 8o. M. Amiraldi. De successione ab Ecclesia
Romana. 8o.
B.
S. R. BAker. A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the time of the Roman
Government till the Reign of King Charles, containing all passages of Church
and State. folio. R. Barron Esquire Mirza. A Tragedy really acted in Persia. 8o. --
An Apollogy for Paris. 8o. T. Buck Esquire The History of Rich. the Third: His
reign, life and death folio. Sr N. Breut. The History of the Council of Trent;
in which (besides the ordinary acts of the Council) are declared many notable
occurrances which happened in Cristendome, for forty years and more; and
particularly the practices of the Court of Rome, to hinder the reformation of
their errors, and maintain their own greatness: Writ in Italian by Polano, now
Englished. folio. M. Barolay. Icon Annimorum. 12o. Mr Beard. The Theater of
Gods Judgments; wherein is represented the admirable Justice of God against all
notorious sinners, great and small, especially against the most eminent Persons
in the world: Collected out of Sacred, Ecclesiastical, and Pagan Historians,
Incomperably fit for all Scholars, Ministers, and studious Christians. folio.
Card. Bentivoglio. Historical relations of the united Provinces of Flanders;
Englished from Italian, by H. Earl of Monmouth. folio. -- The complete History
of the Wars of Flanders; Englished by H. Earl of Monmouth: the whole Work
illustrated, with many Figures of the chief personages mentioned in the History
folio. Ld Bacon, of the Advancement and proficience of Learning, or the
partitions of Sciences. folio, -- Silva Silvarum, or a Natural History; in ten
Centuries. folio. -- Considerations touching a War with Spain. 4o. -- The
Hist. of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh; with a Table. folio. -- The
Wisdom of the Ancients. 4o. -- Apothegms. 8o. -- Essays or Counsels Civil and
Moral; with a Table of the colors or appearances of good and evil; their
degrees, places of persuasion, and disswasion, their several falaces, and
elenchies of them. 4o. -- A History Natural and Experimental of life and
death, or of prolongation of life. 12o. * -- The Natural and Experimental
History of Winds, for making up of Philosophy; Of the form of heat; Of several
kinds of motion or active virtue, to find out the ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, etc. 12o. -- Resucitatio, or bringing into public light, several Pieces
of the Works, Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological; hitherto
sleeping, of the Ld Bacon, with his Lordships life: By Dr Rawley, Chaplain to
his late Majesty, and his Lordship. folio. Mr Beck. M.A. The Universal
Character, by which all the Nations of the world, may understand one another
conceptions, reading one common writing, their Mother Tongue: an Invention of
the general use, and soon attained. 8o. * M. Z. Boxhornii. Historia Vniversalis
Sacra and profana, a Christo Nato ad annum usque 1650. in qua illustrium
Gentium ad principum origines Res gestae, variae mutationes. In' ecclesia and
Republica, aliaque ex variis, etiam hactenus in editis monumentis traduntur.
4o. Mr Brathwayt Esquire The English Gentleman and Gentlewoman, in one model
por^aited to the living glory of their Sex, the lasting Story of their worth;
Containing, 1o. Sundry Rules, or exquisite Observations, for direction of every
Gentleman of selecter rank and quality, how to demean himself in the manage of
public and private affairs. 2o. Containing what habillaments best attire her,
what Ornaments best adorn her, what Complements best accomplish her. folio. --
Essays on the five Senses, revived by a new supplement, with a pithy one upon
detraction. 12o. -- Achademy for the Gentry, for their accomplishment in
Arguments of discourse, habit, fashion, summed up in a Character of honor. 4o.
-- A Survey of History, or a Nursery for the Gentry, contrived and comprised ^n
an Intermixed discourse upon Historical and Poetical relations; a work
meriting the approbation of the Judicious. 4o. Bellum Tartaricum, or the
conquest of the great and most renowned Empire of China, by the invasion of the
Tartars, who in seven years past, has subdued that vast Empire. 8o. Mr Bacon.
A Historical discourse of the Government of England, until Queen Eliz. With a
Vindication of the ancient way of Parliaments. 4o. Mr Blunt. A Voyage into the
Levant, or a Relation of a Journey from England, by way of Venice into
Dalmatia, Solavonia, Bosna, Hungary, Macedon, Thessaly, Thrace, Rhodes, Egypt,
and so to grand Cairo; with the modern conditions of the Turks, and others
under that Empire. 12o. Brittan's Triumph, or a History of the Wars, and
other State affairs of England, from the death of the King, to the 3d year of
the present Government under the Lord Protector. 8o. A Breviate of the Prelates
intolerable usurpation over the Kings loyal Subjects. 4o. * Banquet of Jeasts
new and old, being a Collection of modern Jeasts, witty Jeers, pleasant Taunts,
etc. by Arche the Kings Jeaster. 12o. A Book of all the Names of all the
Hundreds in the Shires of the Kingdom of England, with the Number of Towns,
Parishes, Villages, and places in every Hundred. 12o. Boethius in English. 8o.
Mr. Breerwood. An inquiry touching diversity of Languages and Religions,
through the chief parts of the World. 4o. The life and death of Freeman Sonds
Esquire by R. Boreman. B.D. The Relation also of Sr Geo. Sonds Narrative of the
Passages on the death of his two Sons. 4o. Mouns. de Balzack. Letters in four
parts, now newly printed in one vol. 8o. -- The Conversion of the Romans and
Maeceuas; in three excellent discourses. 12o. -- The Prince: Englished from the
French by H.G. of C.C. Oxon. 12o. *Dr Brown. Pseudoxia Epidemica; or inquiries
into very many Received Tenants, and commonly presumed Truths; with many
enlargements, with marginal Observations, with a Table. folio. L. Blank. Roma
Triumphans, seu actus inaugurationum and coronationum Pontificum Romanorum, and
in specie Innoc. 10. Pont. Max. brevis descriptio cum omnib. Trimphis and
ceremonis, etc. 12o.
C.
Mr CAmbden. Britain. or a Chorographicall description of the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Islands adjoining; out of the depth of
Antiquity, beautified with the Mapps of several Shires in England. folio. --
The History of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. folio. -- Remains concerning
Britain; the Languages, Names, Sirnames, Allusions, Annagrams, Armories,
Moneys, Empresses, Artilleries, Apparel, wise Speeches, Proverbs, Poesies,
Epitaphs, etc. 4o. *Mr Clark. A general Martyrology; being a Collection of all
the greatest Persecutions which have befallen the Church of Christ, from the
creation till now; with the Lives of sundry Modern Divines, famous in their
Generation for Learning and Piety, and most of them great sufferers in the
cause of Jesus Christ. folio. * -- A general Martyrologie, being the
Persecutions of the Church of England, since the first plantation of the
Gospel; down to Q. Mary's Reign, with the lives of Coligni Admiral of France,
who was murdered; and Jone Q. of Na^arz, who was poisoned: with the lives of
ten English Divines, famous for Learning, Piety, Parts, and Sufferings in the
cause of Christ. folio. -- The Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, being the
lives of 148 Fathers, Schoolmen, first reformers, and modern Divines, who have
flourished in the Church since Christ's time to this age; with the Effigies of
many cut in Copper. 4o. * -- The second part of the Marrow of Ecclesisticall
History, containing the lives of many eminent Christians which lived since the
primative times to this age, containing the lives of Christian Emperors,
Kings, and sovereign Princes, and other Christians of inferior rank. 4o. -- A
Mirror, or Looking-glass for Saints and sinners, wherein is recorded, as Gods
great goodness to one, so his severe Judgment against the other; with the
wondrous works of God in Nature, with the costly and stupendous works of man,
and Curiosities of Ancient and Modern times: In 2000 Examples. 8o. * -- The
life of Tamerlin the great, his Wars against the great Duke of Moso. King of
China, Bajazet, the great Turk, the Sultan of Egypt, the King of Persia, etc.
wherein are rare examples of Heathenish Piety, Mercy, Justice, Humility,
Temperance, etc. 8o. The History of that great and renowned Monarchy of China;
the Provinces described;, their dispositions, Learning, Laws, Religion, etc.
their Traffic and Commodities: also the Histories of the late invasion and
conquest of that flourishing Kingdom by the Tartars: translated from Italian.
folio. Campanella, his discourse concerning the Spanish Monarchy, each
Particular County, Province, Kingdom, and Empire of the world; with ways of
Government by which they may keep in obedience; also the causes, rise, and fall
of each Kingdom and Empire. 4o. Charoon. Three Books of Wisdom, written in
French, now in English. 4o. Caballa. Mysteries of State in Letters of the great
Ministers of King James and King Charles, wherein much of the public manage of
affairs is related. 4o. -- Scrinia Sacra; Secrets of Empire in Letters of
illustrious persons. A supplement of Caballa, in which business of the quality
and grandeur is contained, with many famous passages of the late Reigns of King
Henry 8. Queen Eliz: King James, and King Charles. 4o. * The Court and
Character of King James, with the Court of King Charles; with Observations
continued unto the beginning of the unhappy times. 8o. Civil Wars of France,
during the bloody Reign of Charles the 9th, wherein is showed the sad and
bloody Murders of many thousand Protestants, dying the Rivers and Streets with
blood for 30 days together, whose innocent blood cries to God for vengeance.
By the Author of this Catalogue. 12o. Mr Coddrington. The History of Justin,
taken out of the 44 Books of Trogus Pompeius, containing the affairs of all
Ages, and Countries, both in peace and were, from the beginning of the world
unto the time of the Roman Emperors; with the Epitomy of their lives and
manners, from Octavius Augustus Caesar, to Theodosius. 8o. A Catalogue of the
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, that have compounded for their Estates. 8o. * P.
Cumus. Of the Commonwealth of the Hebrews. 12o. Clamor Sanguinis Martyrum, or
the bloody Inquisition of Spain; wherein is unfolded the prodigious and
unparalleled cruelties of the bloody minded Spaniard against the Protestant. By
the Author of this Catalogue. 12o. *King Charles Case, or an appeal to all
rational men concerning his Trial: with his Trial and Speech on the Scaffold;
with the Bp of Canterburies Speech on the Scaffold. 8o. -- Catholic History,
collected from Scriptures, Counsels, and Ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr Vanes
lost Sheep returned. The familiar Epistles of M. T. Cicero, englished and
conferred with the French Italian, and other translations. 12o. The Civil
Wars of Spain in the reign of Charles the 5. Emperor of Germany, and King of
that Nation, written in Spanish by P. D. Sandonvall, Historiographer Royal to
King Philip the third. Now Englished. folio. * History of the Rites, Customs,
and Manners of the present Jews throughout the present world, written in
Italian by Leo Modena, a Rabbin in Venice; now englished by Mr Chilmead, M.A.
8o. Moral Discourses and Essays on several Subjects; by T.C. Esquire 12o. * I. A.
Commenius. Natural Philosophy reformed by Divine Light; or a Synopsis of
Physics; being a view of the world in general, and the particular creatures
therein, grounded on Scripture Principles; with an Apendix of the Diseases of
the body and the soul. 8o. The Antiquities of Canterbury, or a survey of that
Ancient City, with the Subburbs and Cathedral. 4o. The Royal Game of Chess,
the rules of the play, once the great Recreation of his late Majesty. 12o. I.
Cluverii Historiam Totius mundi Epitome. A prima rerum origin usque ad annum
Christi 1630. 4o.
D
Mr. DAvilla. The History of the civil wars of France, translated from
Italian; by Sr Charles Cottrell Knight, and W. Alsbury Esquire folio. A Dialogue of
Polygamy, translated from Italian, and Dedicated to the Author of Advice to a
Son. 8o. Mr Daniell. The Collection of the History of England. folio. Mr
Dougdale. The History of Warwickshire. * Diodorus siculus, containing all that
is memorable and of greatest Antiquity in the first ages of the world until
the War of Troy. Englished by H. Cogan. folio. *Dr Donn. Paradoxes, Problems,
Essays, Characters, Epigrams; translated by Dr Maine, with Ignatius his
Conclave. 12o. Sr Dudley Diggs. The complete Ambassador, or two Treatises of
the intended marriage of Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, comprised prized
in Letters of Negotiation of Sr Fran. Walsingham, her Resident in France; with
the Answers of the Lord Burleigh Earl of Leicester, Sir Tho. Smith, and others;
wherein, as in a clear Mirror, may may be seen the faces of the two Courts of
England and France, as they then stood; with many remarkable passages of
State, not touched in History. folio. Mr Drummond. The History of Scotland from
the year 1423 till 1542. containing the lives and reigns of James the 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5. with several Memorials of State, during the reigns, of James the ^.
and Charles the 1. folio. Draytons Pollibion. The History of great Britain.
folio. * Drake revived, being a Summary and true relation of four several
Voyages of St Fra. Drake to the West- Indies: The taking number de dios. 2. In
compassing the world. 3. Taking St Jago, Sancto Domingo, Carthagena, and St
Augustine. 4. Last Voyage wherein he died, with the manner of his Burial. 4o.
Ld Digby. The nature of Bodies, and the nature of men's souls, looked into by
way of discovery of the immortality of reasonable souls. 4o. The destruction of
Troy, the first foundation, with the sacking thereof: their rebuilding and
destruction the second and third time. 4o. The daily Proceedings of both
Houses, in the great and happy Parliament, from Novem 1640. to 1641. Descartes,
The Passions of the soul, in three Books: 1o. Passions in general. 2o. Number
and order. 3o. Particular. 12o. A Description of ten Shires about London. 12o.
* Digitus Dei. New discourses to prove that the jews, a Nation or people lost
in the world for the space of 200 years, that they in^abit now in America; how
they came thither, their manners, customs, rites, and ceremonies, the
unparalleld cruelties of the Spaniard, and that the Americans are of that race:
by Mr Thorowgood. B.D. 4o. A Merry Discourse of Meum and Tuum. Two cross
Brothers that make debate and strife wherever they come. 4o. A Dissection of
the significative muscles of the affections of the mind. 8o. D. Diggs fellow of
Ox. The unlawfulness of Subjects taking up of Arms against their Sovereign in
what case soever, with answers to all Objections. Sr Ed. Deering, A Collection
of Speeches in Parliament. 4o. -- A Discourse of common Sacrifice. 4o. A
Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical. 4o. An English Dictionary, or an
Interpreter of hard english words, enableing as well Ladies and Gentlewomen,
young Scholars, Merchants, and others to understand the most hard words, for
the more speedy attaining an ellegancy in speaking and writing. 8o. Mr Davies.
The History of Magic by way of Apology, for all the wise men who have unjustly
been reputed Magicians for the Creation to this age. Englished from Gassendus.
8o.
E.
THe Ancient Ecclesiastical History of the first six hundred years after
Christ; written by three Learned Historiographers, Eusebius Bp of Caesaria,
Socrates of Constantinople, and Evagrius of Antioch; with the lives and ends of
the Prophets, Apostles, and seventy Disciples. folio. Mr Edmond. Most excellent
and judicious Observations on the Commentaries of Julius Caesar, of his Wars
in Gall^a, and the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey; whereunto is added the
eighth Commentary of the wars of Gallia, with Observations thereupon; with
the life of Caesar, and an account of his Meddals, revised, corrected, and
enlarged with sundry Cuts, folio. England, with the principal of Wales exactly
described, with every Shire, and Towns in each Shire; in six Maps: bound
together. 8o. Examen de ingeniis, the examination or trial of men's wits, the
variety of Natures, what profession each one is apt, and how he shall profit
therein: Translated from the Spanish. 4o. * Ephemeris Parlimentarii, or a
faithful Register of the Transactions in Parliament, in the third and fourth
year of our Sovereign Lord King Charles; containing the several Speeches,
Cases, and Arguments of Law, transacted betwixt his Majesty and both Houses;
with the grand Mysteries of the Kingdom then in Agitation. folio. *Mr Earl.
Microcosmography, or a piece of the world characterized in Essays and
Characters. 12o. English Expositer, unfolding the most difficult words in use.
8o. Epicurus's Morals. Collected partly out of his own Greek Text in Diogenes,
Laertius, and Rhapsodies, of M. Anto. Plutarch, Cicero, and Seneca. Englished.
4o. Two Essaies of Love and Marriage in answer to a Letter dissuading from
Love; with a another answer to the same: with other passages of wit. 12o. A
witty Encounter between M. Du. Molin and M. D. Balzack, the two elegant Pens of
that Nation. 12o.
F.
* FLores Solitundinis, certain rare and ellegant pieces of Temperance and
Patience; Of life and death: The world contemned by the Bp of Lions; the life
of Paulinus Bp of Nola, etc. 12o. *Mr J. Ferrand. D.P. A Treatise of Love, or
erotick Melancholy. 8o. Choice Observations of Sr J. Finet Knight, and Master
of the Ceremonies, to the two last Kings, touching the reception and
precedence, treatment, and audience, the Punctillo's and contests of for^ein
Ambassadors in England. 8o. Festem voluptatis, or a Banquet of Jeasts. 8o. *Mr
Fullars Pisgah sight of Palestine, and the confines thereof; with the History
of the Old and new Testament acted thereon. folio. -- The holy and profane
state. folio. -- The History of the holy War. folio. -- The Church History of
Britain, from the Birth of Jesus Christ, until the year 1648. folio. * --
Abell Redivivus, or the dead yet speaking; being the lives and deaths of many
eminent Divines. 4o. -- Andronicus, or the unfortunate Politician. 8o. The
French Achademy; fully discovering, 1o. Institution of Manners, and Calling of
all Estates, 2o. Of the soul and body. 3o. A notable description of the whole
world. 4o. Christian Philosophy. folio. Mr Fox. Acts and Monuments of matters
special and memorial in the Church, with an universal History of the same,
from the primative Age to this present; with the bloody times, horrible
troubles, and great persecutions against the Martyrs of Christ by heathen
Emperors, and Roman Prelates. Three vol. folio. The grand differences between
France, Spain, and the Empire, with their several Titles, Claims, and
pretenses to each others Dominions, disscussed and stated. 8o. Mr Fowler. The
History of the troubles of Sweathland, and Poland, which occasioned the
expulsion of Sigismundus the third King of those Kingdoms, with his Heirs for
ever from the Swethish Crown; with a continuation of those troubles till the
truce An. 1629. with an account of the great Treaty of pacification betwixt the
two Kingdoms; with the life and death of Sr Geo. Duglass Knight, Lord
Ambassador extraordinary from the King of great Britain. folio. Fernand Mendz
Pinto a Portugal: His Voyage and Adventures, during his travel for the space
of 21 years in the Kingdom of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria, Cauchinchina,
Calaminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part of the West- Indies, the
Religious, Laws, Riches, Customs, and Government. folio. Mr Feltham. Resolves.
4o. History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Moscovia; with the
manners and fashions of the people of that Country. By Mr Fletcher Fell. of
Kings C. C. and employed in that Embassy. thither. 12o. Mr Frimston. A general
History of the Netherlands, with the Genealogy and memorable Acts of the Earls
of Holland, Zealand, West- Frizland, etc. folio. -- The general History of
France, from the beginning of that Monarchy. folio. -- The Imperial History
from the Foundation of the Roman Monarchy, from Julius Caesar the first to this
present, containing the lives and actions of all the Roman Emperors, the
original and success of those barbarious Actions, that have invaded and ruined
it by piece-meales. folio. -- The History of Pollibius the Megalopolitan; with
the manner of the Roman encamping. folio. The Rogue, or the life of Gusman de
Alfara^he the witty Spaniard; written in Spanish by M. Aleman of Sivill, and
Servant to his Catholic Majesty. folio. The same Epitomized, in 2 vol. 8o.
Guildas surnamed the wise. A description of the state of great Britain, writ
eleven hundred years since. Guichardin. The History of Italy, the Wars
thereof, continued for many years under sundry Kings and Princes, with the
accidents of the same. folio. Mr Gage. A new Survey of the West- Indies, or the
english American, his travel by Sea and Land, containing a journall of three
thousand and three hundred miles within the main Land of America; his Voyage
from Spain to St John de Vlhua, Xalappa, Tlaxcalla, Angels, and Mexico; with a
description of that great City; from Mexico through the Provinces of Guaxaca,
Chiapa, Vera, Paz, Truxillo, Comaygua, and twelve years abroad in Guatemala and
Mexico, Pinola, etc. his wonderful conversion, his return home: with sundry
other remarkable discoveries of the Spaniards Government, behavior of Priests
and Friars, etc. Reprinted. folio. Count Galliazo. An History of the Wars and
other state affairs of the best part of Christendom, beginning with the King
of Sweadlands entrance into Germany, and continued to the year 1640. englished
from the Italian, by Earl of Monmouth. folio. Mr Godwin. Romanae Historiae. An
exposition in English of the Roman Antiquities; wherein many Roman and English
Officers are paralleled, and diverse obscure phrases explained. 4o. -- Moses and
Aaron, Civil and Ecclesiastical Rites used by the Ancient Hebrews observed,
and at large opened, what Customs the Hebrews borrowed from the heathen
people, etc. 4o. -- The succession of Bishops of England, since the first
planting of Christian Religion in this Island, with their lives and Actions.
4o. Gratiae Ludentes, or Jeasts from the University. 12o. Mr Gregory. An
Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy. 8o. Germanies Lamentations,
Invasions, and Prodigies. 8o. H. Grotius. Politic Maxims and Observations:
translated for the benefit of the English Statseman. -- A Treatise of the
antiquity of the Commonwealth of Batavers; Translated from Latin to Dutch, and
from both to English by T. Wood. Gent. G. Gardner Esquire A true description of the
new World, or America Islands Continent, which places are inhabited, and with
whom, and where desolate: the Bays, Rulers, Capes, Forts, Cities, and their
latitudes; the Seas on their Coasts, the Trades, Wives; North-passage, and
converse of the English Nation, etc. Coll. H. Gage. The Seige of Breda, by the
Arms of Phil. the 4 under the Government of Isabella, atchived by the conduct
of Ambr. Spinola. folio. A brief Description of the future History of Europe,
from 1650 to 1710. treating principally of those grand and famous mutations yet
expected in the, world, as the ruin of the popish Hierarchy, the final
anhilation of the Turkish Empire, the conversion of the Eastern and Western
Jews, and their restoration to their ancient Inheritances in the holy Land,
etc. with princely passages upon every of these, out of that famous Manuscript
of Pa. Grebner, extant in Tr. Coll. lib. Camb. composed on occasion of the
young Kings arrival into Scotland. 4o. Glossographia, or a Dictionary
interpreting all such hard words, wether French, Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Italian,
Spanish, Jentonick, Belgic, British or Saxon, as are now used in our refined
English Tongue; also the terms of Divinity, Law, Physic, Mathematics,
Herauldry, Anatomy, War, Music, Architecture, etc. with Etymologies,
Deffinitions, and Historical Observations on the same. 8o. The Mirror of true
nobility and gentility; being the life of the renowned Nicholas Claudius
Fabricius Lord of Peirest, Senator of the Parliament at Aix: by the learned P.
Gassendus, professor of the Mathematics to the King of France. 8o. *Mr
Gerbrier. Elogium Heroinum, on the praise of Women. 12o. *Mr Gayton. Pleasant
Notes upon Don Quixot. folio. H. Grotius. De Mare libero and P. Merula de
Maribus. 24. * P. Gassendius. Viri ^llustris N.C. Fabricii de pieresk senatoris
aquisextiensis vita. 4o.
H
*Sr H. HOlcroft. The Histo. of the Wars of the Emperor Justinian, with the
Persians, Goths, and Vandals, in 8. Books translated from the Greek. folio. Mr
Hooker. Ecclesiastical policy. folio. Ld Herbert. The life and reign of Hen.
the eight. folio. -- Expeditio in ream insulam. 8o. T. Herbert. Esquire. Some
years travels into Africa and Asia the great, especially describing the famous
Empires of Persia and Industant, as also diverse other Kingdoms in the Oriental
Indies, and isles adjacent. folio. Mr Hall. The holy lives of Gods Prophets
Historically discribed. 8o. *Mr Hobbs. Thucidides the Peloponesian War,
translated out of Greek. folio. * -- Leviathan. The matter, form, and power of
a common Wealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil. folio. -- Philosophical
rudiments, concerning government and civil society, containing the elements of
civil policy, in the agreement which it has both with, Natural and Divine
laws, with the nature, limits, and qualifications, both of regency and
subjection. * -- Of liberty and necessity; against the Bp Bramhal, Bp of London
derry 12o. * -- De corpore politico. 12o. -- Humane nature or the fundamental
ellements of policy, being a discovery of the faculties of the soul of man,
from their original causes, according to such Philosophical principles as are
not commonly known, or asserted. 12o. *The History of Ireland. Collected by
three Learned Authors. Dr Hammen. Mr Champion fellow of S.I. Coll. and Ed
Spencer. Esquire folio. C. Helvici. V.C. Theatrum Historicum and Chronologicum,
Aequalibus denariorum, quinquagenariorum, and centenariorum inter vallis; cum
assignatione imperiorum regnorum dinastiarum regnum, aliorumque virorum
celebrium Prophetarum, Theologorum, Iuris Consultorum, Medicorum,
Philosophorum, Oratorum, Historicorum, Poetarum, Haerecticorum, Rabbinorum,
Concilliorum, Synodorum, Archademiarum, etc. folio. Dr Hylin. Cosmographie in
four Books, containing the Chorography and History of the whole world and all
the principal Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, and Isles, thereof. folio. -- A
survey of France, and some of the adjoining Islands, taken in the description
of the principal cities and chief provinces, with the temper, humor and
affections of the people generally, with the government of the Court, Church,
and state. 4o. -- Extraneus vapulans; against H. L. Strange, in his History of
King Charles. 8o. Historia belgica, nostri potissimum temporis belgii sub
quatuor burgundis and totidem austriacis principibus conjunctionem and
gubernationem breviter. folio. Mr Hume. The Histo. of Douglas and Angus. folio.
Mr Harfleet. The hunting of the fox, or display of flattery. 12o. *Mr Hall
Richmond. Of obedience, and government as they stand directed by Scripture and
reason, in four Books. folio. -- The true Cavalier examined, by his
principles, and found not guilty of Schism or Sedition. 4o. De hibernia, and
antiquitantibus ejus desquisitione, per Ja. Waraeo, ^q. Aurato. 8o. Hermes tres
majestas. 8o. * Hist. of virginia, more especially the south part thereof,
richly and truly vallewed, viz. The fertile Coralana, and no less excellent
Isle of Roanoach: of lattitude from 31. to 37. degrees; discovery of silk
Worms, implanting of Mulberry trees, dressing of vines, for the rich trade of
Wines, the sawmill of great use, etc. 4o. *Mr Hotham. Fell. P.C.C. An
introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
original of the soul. Sr J. Harrington. The Character and History of the Bp in
the Reign of Q Eliz. and King James, as an adadition to Godw. succession of Bp.
4o. * History of all the present Cardinals of Rome. 8o. * Sundry pieces of that
sweet singer of the Temple Mr G. Herbre, Orator of the University of Camb. now
exposed to light. 8o. *Mr T. Hall. An explanation of the 13. Book of O.
Metamorph. containing that Rhetorical contest betwixt Ajax and Ulysses, for
Achilles armor, exhibiting the power of valor and prevalency of eloquence.
8o. * Historical Narrations, of the plotting, beginning, and carrying on of
that execrable rebellion and buchery in Ireland, with the unheard of devilish
cruelties and massacres by the Irish Rebbels, exercised upon the Protestants,
with somewhat about the actions of the late King concerning that rebellion. 4o.
* J. Hall. Esquire Horae vacivae, or Essays, some occationall considerations. 12o.
* -- The hight of eloquence, writ Originally in Greek by Dionisius Longinus,
now Englished. 8o. * History of the Irish Wars. 8o. History of the defenders of
the faith, discoursing of the state of Religion, in England under King Hen. 8.
Edw. the 6. and Q. Mary, and Q. Eliz. 4o. History of France, under the
government of Card. Richlein. folio. *Mr Hall. Vindiciae litterarum, The
schools guarded, or the excellency and usefulness of arts, sciences,
languages, history, and all sorts of humane learning, in subordination to
Divinity, with an Appendix in answer to Mr Webster. 8o. History of the French
Achademy, erected at Paris by the late famous Card. de Richelein, and
consisting of the most refined wits of that Nation: containing its original
and establishments, its statures, days, places and manner of Assemblies, etc.
the names of its members, and Character of their persons, and a Catalogue of
their works, by the Kings Secretary. 8o. *Mr Howell. The German diet, or the
balance of Europe, wherein the power and weakness, glory and reproach,
virtues and vices, plenty and wants, advantages and defects, antiquities and
moderns, of all the Kindoms and States of Christendom, are impartially poysed.
folio. -- Parthenopoeja. Or the History of the most renouned Kingdom of
Naples, with the dominions thereof annexed, and lives of all their Kings, the
first part by Scipio Mazzella, englished by Mr Lennard, the second by J.H. who
besides some supplements to the first part draws on the thread of the story of
these times, 1654. all illustrated with the figures of the Kings, and arms of
all the provinces. -- A survey of the seigniory of Venice, of her admired
policy and method of government. -- The History of Lewis, the 13. King of
France, and of his Card. Richlein. folio. * -- Epistolae hoelianae. Familiar
letters, domestic and foreign, partly Historical, Political, and
Philosophical, in 3. volumes together. 8o. -- Dodonus grove, or the vocal
forest, with Englands tears from the present wars, and preheminences of
Parliaments, 1. part. 12o. * -- Dodonus grove, or the vocal forest, 2. part.
8o. -- Instructions and directions for foreign travel, showing in what course
and compass of time one may take an exact survey of the Kingdoms and States
of Christendom, and arive to the practical knowledge of the languages to good
purpose. 8o. -- Cottoni posthuma, diverse choice pieces of that renouned
antiqary Sr Rob. Cotton, preserved from the injury of time, and exposed to
public light for the benefit of posterity. 8o. -- An exact History of the
late revolution in Naples, and of their monstrous success not to be paralleled
by any ancient or modern Histo. 1. part. 8o. -- History of the Wars of
Jerusalem, Epitomized. 8o. -- Some sober inspections made into the carriages
and consults of the late long Parliament, with an account of former Parl. and
magna charta, with some reflexes in government in general. 8o. * --
Massenello. 2. part. His body taken out of the ditch, and solemny buried; a
continuation of the tumult, Duke of Guise, made Generalissimo, taken by young
Jo. Don. of Austria, with the end of the commotions. 8o. -- Londinopolis. An
Historical discourse, or perlustration of the City of London, the imperial
chamber and chief Emp^rium of great Britain, also of Westminster, with the
Courts of Justice, Antiquities and new Buildings. folio. -- A Dialogue betwixt
the body and the soul. -- St Paul's progress on earth. -- A Venetian looking
glass. -- A winter dream. -- The trance or Mercurius Acheronticus. -- A
Dialogue betwixt Patricius and Peregrin. -- An inquisition after blood. -- The
Instruments of a King. -- Bella Scoto-Anglica, or traverses of war betwixt
England and Scotland. -- Mercurius Hybernicus. -- Progress and pleadings in
the Court of Spain, for the death of Mr Askham. folio. History of the 7. wise
masters of Rome. 8o. History of the ancient and modern estate of the
principallity of Wales, Duchy of Cornwall, and Earldom of Chester, collected
from the Records of the Tower of London. 4o. History of the imperial estate of
the grand Seignours, their habitations, lives, tithes, qualities, exercises,
wars, revenues, habit, descent, ceremonies, magnificence, judgments,
offices, favorites, religion, power, government, and tyranny. 8o. A help to
discourse, or merriment mixed with serious matters, consisting of witty
Philosophical, Grammatical, Physical and Astronomicall Questions, and
Answers. 8o. History of the life and death of that renowned Bp Fisher,
comprising the highest and hidden transactions of state in the reign of K.
Henry the 8. with moral political and historical animadversions on Card.
Woolsey, Sr Tho. Moore, Luther, with a full relation of Q. Catherines divorce.
8o. History of the life and death of Sr Tho. Moore, sometime Ld Chancellor of
England, by J.H. Gent. 8o. History of the life and death of Sr Tho. Overbury.
8o. History of the life and death of Mary Stuart, Q. of Scotland. 8o. History
of the iron age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as it was in the
year, 1500. the causes of all wars and commotions, with a description of the
most memorable battles, sieges, actions and transactions, both in Court and
Camp, till this present year, 1656. illustrated with the lively effigies of
the most renowned person. of this present time, rendered into English, by B.
Harris, Gent. folio. A History of the most unjust, cruel, and barbarous
proceedings against the English at Anboina in the East Indies, by the
Netherlandish governers and council there, with remarks on the whole. 12o.
History of Sejanus, translated into English. 8o. Mr Hall. A help to understand
Engl. History. 8o. Mr Jo. Hayward. The life and reign of K. Edw. the 6. with
the beginning of the R. of Q Eliz. 12o. -- Englands Elizabeth, her life and
troubles from her minority to the Crown. 12o. History of the Anabaptists of
high and low Germany. 4o. Mr Habbington. The History of Edward the 4. folio. --
Observations on History. 12o. *History of new England, from the first planting
thereof, by the English, in the year 1628. to 1653. with the most material
passages happening. 4o. The Roman History of Amianus Marcellinus, translated by
P. Holland, Dr Phes. containing such acts and occurrents as passed under
Constantius, Iulianus, Iovianus, Vallentinianus, and Vallens: Emperors, in 18.
Books; with a brief Chronology, and Annotations, etc. folio. *Mr Hunt. M.A.
New recreations, or rare and exquisite inventions, for exercising of accure
wits, and industrious dispositions, replenished with mysteries, secrets, and
rarities, both Arithmeticall, and Mathematical. 12o. The common wealth of
Oceana, dedicated to his Highness, by Mr Ja. Harrington in folio. *Mr Holland.
The morrals of Plutarch, translated from the Gr. into English. 8o. The History
of the inquisition in Rome; by Father Pa. Servit^a, the Author of the Council
of Trent. 8o. -- An exact History of the life of James Naylor; his Parents,
birth, education, professions, actions, and blasphemies, how he came to be a
Quaker, etc. 4o. The History of the transactions of Affairs in England, from
1653 when the Parliament began, till 1657. 4o. The History of the most
material Parliamentary transactions, from November. 3. 1640 till 1656. by way of
Chronology. 4o.
J.
JOsephus. The History of the Jews. folio. Mr Jackson. Saturni Ephemerides sive
Tabula Historico. Chronologica; containing a Chronologicall Series or
succession of the four Monarchies, with an abridgment of the Annual memorable
passages in them, also a succession of Kings and Rulers, over their world, and
their several stories epitomized. A compendious of the Church of God, from the
Creation, etc. folio. Ireland's Natural History, its situation, greatness,
shape, and nature: of its hills, woods, heaths, boggs, heads of promontories,
harbors, roads, and bays, springs, fountains, metals, minerals; the nature
and temperature of its air and season, etc. by G. Boat Dr of Physic to the
state in Ireland. 8o. Itinerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, or Travels of the
holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Judges, Kings; our Savior Christ and his Apostles,
as they are related in the O. and N. Testament; the descriptions of the Towns
and places to which they traveled, etc. 4o. Instructions for Courteirs, or a
Treatise of the Court; in two Books: by Mounseir denis de Refuges Counsel and
Ambassador to the French King. 8o. The Interest of Princes and States of
Christendom. 12o. The Italian Convert; News from Italy of a second Moses, or
the life of Galliacius Caracciolus, the Noble Marquess of Vic^; his admirable
conversion from popery, and forsaking of a rich Marquessdom for the Gospels
sake; illustrated with sundry Figures and Cuts. 8o. The Jesuit, the Thief, or
the only state Heretic in the world; or the Venetian Quarrel. 4o. The Idol of
Clowns, or Insurrection of Watt the Tyler; with his Priests Baal, and Straw;
with his fellow Kings of the Commons against the English Church, King, Laws,
Nobility, etc. 8o. Italian Proverbs, select and choice, the most significant
newly made to speak English, useful for such as happily not aiming at the
language, yet would see the genius of the Nation. 12o. Instructions describing
what special Observations are to be taken by Travelers in all Nations, States,
and Countries, pleasant and profitable; by the three much admired Rob. E.
Essex, Sr. P. Sidney, and Secretary Weston. 12o. A Description and Explanation
of 268 places in Jerusalem, and the Suburbs thereof, as it flourished in the
time of Jesus Christ, answerable to the most exact description of the Map,
showing the several places of the Acts and Sufferings of Jesus Christ and his
holy Apostles, very useful for clearing many places in the Prophets, Josephus,
and other Histories, especially in the Gospel and Acts: Newly translated by Mr
Jessey. Mr. Johnsons Essays expressed in sundry Exquisite Fancies. J.
Johnstonus. An History of the wonderful things in Nature: Of Heaven: The
Elements, Meteors, Minerals, Plants, Birds, Beasts four-footed: Things wanting
blood; Fishes and of Man. folio. An History of the constancy of nature; that
the world decaies not universally of it self, nor the Heavens Elements, mixed
Bodies, Meteors, Plants, nor man, etc. 8o. Anarchia Anglicana, or History of
Independency; being Relations, and Observations Historical and Political,
upon the Parliament 1640 1o. The Mysteries of the two Juntoes, Presbiterian and
Indepen. with a continuation of the History of Parliament begun Anno 16 Caroli
primi; with the proceeding of the Indep. faction Scotland. 4o.
K.
Mr KNolls. The general History of the Turks, from the first beginning of the
Nation to the rising of the Ottaman Family, with all the notable expeditions of
Christian Princes against them; with the lives and conquests of the Ottaman
Kings and Emperors. folio. Mt Knocks. The History of the Reformation of ^he
Church of Scotland; in five Books: with some Treaties conducing to the History.
folio.
L.
Mr LIgon. A true History of the Island of Barbados, with a Map of it; with
Trees and Plants, with the Ingenio to make Sugar, with the plots of Houses and
Rooms, etc. folio. *P. Lansbergio. Gustavi magni Bellum Germanicum. 12o. Ha.
La Strange. The Reign of King Charles, faithfully and impartially delivered, and
disposed into Annals. folio. Lithgoe, his rare adventures, or 19 years travel
from Scotland to Europe, Asia, and Africa; their Laws, Religions, Policies,
etc. 4o. Lives and memorable Acts of nine the most worthy Women of the world,
three Jews, three Christians, three Heathens. 4o. *The life of the most learned
Father Paul, of the order of the Servy; Counselor of state to the most serene
Republic of Venice, and Author of the History of the Counsel of Trent;
Englished from the Italian by a person of quality. 8o. Mr Lambert. The
perambulation of Kent, containing the description, History, and Customs of
that Shire; their Charters, Laws, Privileges, and Cinque Ports. 8o. Liptius de
constantia Englished; or comfortable Consolations for all that are afflicted in
mind or body. 12o. The life of Alfred the (...) Founder of subordinate
Government. 12o. The life of Paulinus Bp of Nola, collected in his sickness and
retirement, by H. Vaugham S. Evirist. 12o. Of Liberty and Servitude; Englished
from the French. 12o. *The life of Jacob B^ehmen, vulgarly called the German
Prophet. 4o. Life and death of Almansir, the learned and victorious King that
conquered Spain; by To. Ashly out of Oxon. Library. 4o. * Legenda Lignea, with
an answer to Mr Birchleys Moderator; where he pleads for a toleration of
popery: with a Character of some hopeful Saints recalled to the Church of
Rome, as well English as others. 8o. Le Cheminabridge, or a compendious method
for attaining of the Sciences; by Card. Richlew. 8o. *The life and death of W.
Lawde, Arch Bp of Canterbury. 8o. *An Essay upon the first Book of T. Lucretius
Carus, de rerum Natura; Interpreted and made English, by J. Elvin Esquire
illustrated with Historical Annota. 8o. * Life and death of Mistress Brettergh.
8o. The great and famous Battle of Lutzen, fought between the renowned King of
Sweden and Walstein, wherein were left dead on the the place between 5 and 6000
of the Swedish party, and between 10 and and 1200 of the Imperialists; the King
of Sweden unfornately slain; a counterpoise for the death of all the rest:
Pappenheim, Merode, Isolani, and many great Commanders were offered as
Sacrifices on the Swedish altar to the memory of their King; with an abridgment
of the Kings. life, and the King of Bohemia's death. 4o. The History of
Heliodorus; in ten Books: Translated by W. Lisle. 4o. -- Monuments in the Saxon
tongue: written 700 years ago, showing that the Old and New Testament, Lords
Prayer and Creed, were then used in the Mother Tongue. 4o. Lucian,s Dialogues
translated. 4o. The life of Christiana Q. of Sweden, her resignation of the
Crown, Voyage to Brussels, and ^ourney to Rome, with her Character; translated
from the French. 4o. Mr Lawson. An examination of the Political part of Mr
Hobbs Leviathan. 8o. The life of Jean Arman Du Plessis Duke of Richelein, and
Peer of France, etc. 12o.
M.
H. Earl of MOnmouth. The Civil Wars of Eng. between the two Houses of
Lancaster and York, beginning in the reign of Richard the second, to the end of
Henry the seventh: Englished from Italian. -- Pagguagn di Parnassa: or
Advertisements from Parnassus; with the Politic Touchstone. folio. -- Politic
discourses translated from Italian, with the examination of the Authors life.
folio. Marcators Atlas, or History of the World, containing his Cosmographicall
descriptions of the Fabric and Figure of the World, rectified and beautified
with Maps and Tables. folio. Ld Mountaigne. Essaies translated from the French.
folio. Madagasker, or St Lawrences, an Island in Asia, near to the East-
Indies. A description and discovery of that famous Island, the healthfulness,
pleasure, fertility, and wealth thereof: the condition of the Natives, their
Inhabiting, their affability, habit, weapons, manner of living, plenty of food,
flesh, fish foul, etc. Oringes, Lemmons, etc. Also trading from Port to Port,
all India and Asia over, to and from Persia, Moco, China, and to the rich
Eastern Kingdoms, etc. 4o. Moral and Politic Essays. 8o. Modern Policies
taken from Machiavel Borgia, and other choice Authors by an eye witness. 12o.
* T. May Esquire A breviary of the History of the Parliament of England, the
causes, beginnings, progress, of the first and second War. 8o. * -- Lucan
Phrasalia, or the Civil Wars of Rome, between Pompey the Great, and J.
Caesar; with Annotations. 12o. * Marque Malvezi. Considerations upon the lives
of Alcibiades and Coriolanus, two famous Roman Commanders. 12o. * -- Of the
success, and other events of the Monarchy of Spain, in the the year 1649. the
means of their revolt. 12o. * -- Stoa Triumphans, or a Discourse of the praise
of banishment, and dispraise of honors. 12o. * -- The Christian favorite
drawn from some of the late actions of the Lord Duke of St Lucar; with Maxims
of State, and politic Observations on the same story of Count Oliveraz D. of
St Lucar. 12o. -- Romulus and Tarquin. 12o. -- A Discourse on Cornelius
Tacitus; translated from Italian. folio. Mayerus Lusus Serious, A
Philosophical Discourse of the superiority of Creatures. 12o. Sr Tho. Moore.
The History of the pitiful life, and unfortunate death of Edward the fifth,
and the Duke of York his Brother; with the ttoublesome and tyrannical
Government of usurping Richard the third; with his miserable end. 8o. *
Montross Redivivus, or the Portraiture of James, late Marquess of Montross,
Earl of Kincardin, in his actions for Charles the first, in his passions for
Charles the second King of Scotland. 8o. Moral Philosophy, containing the
lives, answers, witty sayings, wise and excellent Counsels, Precepts, Proverbs
and Parrables of Philosophers, Orators, Emperors, and Kings, of what lineage
and what County soever. 8o. W. Martin Esquire The History and lives of the Kings of
England, from W. the Conqueror, to the end of K. Henry the eighth; added also
Ed. 6. Qu. Mary and Queen Elizabeth. folio. A Magical description of the soul,
the nature, Genesis and Exodus of it 8o. W. Montague Esquire The accomplished
Woman. 12o. * Musgrave muszled, or a clear Vindication of Sr Arthur Hasselrig.
4o. The Mirror which flatters not, translated from the French. 8o. *Mr
Mayerius. Lusus Serius, or serious pastime; A Philosophical discourse
concerning the superiority of the Creatures under. 12o. Mazirini his entrance,
or some Memorials of the State of France, between the death of Card. Richelein,
and the beginning of the late Regency. 12o. The Mystery of Jesuitism
discovered, upon occasion the differences at Sorbone, between the Iansenists
and Molinists. displaying the corrupt maxims, and politics of that society,
done by Ld de Montalte, now englished. 8o. Manizi. His most exquisite
Achademicall discourses upon several choice subjects, englished from the
French. 4o. -- The loving husband and prudent wife, represented in the persons
of St Eustachius, and Theopista Martirs, the story confirmed by Baronius, and
Greek and Latin Authors. 12o.
N
NEwfound-land. A discourse thereof, with the situation, temperature, and
commodity of it. 4o. Mr Nesbit. A Scripture Chronology, wherein the principal
periods of time, from the Creation of the world, to the death of Christ are
included, and many questions of importance resolved. *Natural Philosophy, a
description of the world and all therein, of Angels, Heavens, Stars, Planets,
Elements, their order, nature, and government, of mineral, metalls, plants,
stones, with the colors, forms, and virtues. 4o. *Sr R. Naunton. Mr of C.
Wards, Fragmenea Regalica, or observations on the late Q. Eliz. her times and
favorites. 12o. The new star of the north, shining upon the victorious King
of Sweden. 4o.
O
Mt OSborn. Advise to a son, or directions for your better conduct through
the various and most important encounters of this life, under these heads;
study, love and marriage, travel, government, religion. 12o. -- Political
reflections, upon the governments of the Turks; N. Machiavell; the King of
Swedens, descent into Germany; the conspiracy of Piso, and vindex against Nero;
the greatness and corruption of the Church of Rome, the election of Pope Leo,
the 11. the defection from the Church of Rome, and Mr Luther vindicated. 12o.
Sr Tho. Overbury. His Wife with additions of new Characters. 8o. Ortelius
Epitomy. Or a theater of the world, wherein the principal regions of the earth
are discribed in small Mapps. 8o. Observations on Sandersons Histo. of Q. Mary
of Scotland, and King James of England. 4o.
P
* Politic and millitary observations, of the civil and military governments,
the birth, increase, and decay of monarchies, the carriage of Princes,
Majestrates, commanders and favorites, by D.P. Esquire 4o. C. Pline. The History
of the world commonly called the natural History. folio. Mr Puchase. His
pilgrimage, or relations of the world by the religions observed in all ages,
and places, discovered from the Creation in 4. parts; being a Theological and
Geographicall History of Asia, Affica, America and Europe, with the Islands
adjacent, declaring the religions before the flood, and since, the several
Opinions, Idols, Oracles, Temples, Priests, Fasts, Feasts, Sacraments, etc.
with a description of all Countries. folio. Plutarch of Chaeronia, that grave
and learned Philosopher, and Historiographer, his lives of the noble Grecians,
and Romans. folio. Dr Potter. The History of the quarrels of Pope Paul the 5.
with the state of Venice, writ in Italian, by the Author of the counsel of
Trent, now Englished. 4o. Bp Prideaux. An easy and compendious introduction
for reading all sorts of Histories, contrived in a more facile way then
heretofore has been published; to which is added a Synopsis of counsel, etc.
4o. Parradoxis de la selle. 12o. * E. Philalothes. Euphrates or the waters of
the east. 8o. * -- Anthroposophia Theomagia, or a discourse ^f the nature of
man, and his estate after death. 8o. A prospect of the most famous parts of the
world, Asia, Africa, Europe and America, with the Kingdoms contained therein.
8o. Policy unvailed, or maxims and reasons of state by I.M. of Oxon. 4o. Mr
Peacham. The complete Gentleman, fashoning him absolute in the most necessary
and commendable qualities, concerning mind or body, that may be required in a
noble Gentleman. 4o. -- The truth of our times reveaeld, out of one man's
experience, by way of Essay. 12o. Postillion, or Prophetical prognostics of
the wars of Christendom, translated from the high Dutch. 4o. A
Philosophical banquet. 8o. Principles for young Princes, collected from sundry
Authors. 12o. Picturae Lonventes, or pictures drawn forth into Characters. 12o.
A panegyric of the most renowned and serene Princess, Christiana, Q. of
Swedland. Goths, and Vandals. 12o. A president of female perfection, presented
to such as will be subject to the government of virtue, in a Historical
discourse of the most virtuous woman. 12o.
R
Sr W. Rawleigh. The History of the world, 1. from the Creation unto Abraham,
2. from that to the destruction of Solomon's Temple, 3. from thence to Philip of
Macedon, 4. then to the stablishing of that Kingdom, in the race of Antigonus,
5. from the settled rule of Alexanders successors, until the Romans made
conquest of Asia, and Macedon. folio. -- His ghost, or his aparition to an
intimate friend, written against the Atheists and Policitians of this age. 12o.
-- Judicious and select essaies and observations, on the first invention of
shiping, the misery of invasive war, the Navy Royal and sea service, with
his apology for his sea voyage to Guina. 8o. * -- Maxims of state,
instructions to his son and posterity with the dutiful advice of a loving
son to his aged father. 12o. * -- Observations concerning trade and commerce
with the Hollander and other Nations, wherein is showed, that our sea and land
commodities serve to enrich and strengthen other Nations against our own, with
other passages of high importance. 12o. -- Septicks, or speculations and
observations of the magnificency and opulency of cities, his seat of
government, with letters to the King and others of quality, with his demeanor
before his execution. 12o. -- Wars with foreign Princes, dangerous to our
Common Wealth, or reasons for foreign Waers answered, 8o. Lablais. 5. Books of
the lives heroic deeds, and sayings of Gargantua, and his son Pantagruel,
with the Pantagrueline prognostica, the orac. of Bachuc and response of the
bottle in English. 8o. The rich Cabinet of rare inventions. 8o. Mr Rosse. The
continuation of Sr Walter Rawleighs History of the world, wherein the most
remarkable passages of those lives, Ecclesiastical and civil, in the greatest
states, Empires and Kingdoms are represented. folio. -- A view of all religions
in the world, with the several Church governments, from the Creation to these
times, with a discovery of all known Heresies, all ages and places, with the
lives, actions and ends of certain notorious Heretics, with their effigies, in
Copperplate. 8o. -- The new planet, no planet, or the earth no wardering
star, unless in the wandering hearts of Galileans. 4o. -- The epitome of Sr W
Rawleighs History of the world, containing all the passages from the Creation
to the end of the Macedonian war. 12o. -- Rerum judaicarum, or the jewish
affairs in 4. books. -- A Philosophical touchstone. 4o. -- A caveat for
reading the Turkish Alcharon. -- Observations on Sr W. Raleighs History of the
world. 12o. * -- Leviathan drawn out with a hook. 12o. A veiw of the jewish
Religion, containing the manner of life, rites, ceremonies and customs of the
jewish Nation, throughout the world, at this present time, with the articles of
their faith, as now received. 8o. * -- Against Ld Bacon, Dr Harvey, Mr Brown,
etc. as at large in catalogue of physic books, an advertisement to the jury
men of England, and touching witches. 4o. The reply of the most illustrious
Cardinal of Perron, to the answer of the most excellent King of great
Britain. folio. *The regal apology. 4o. *Mr Raymond. An itinerary, containing
a voyage made through Italy, in the year 1646. and 1647. illustrated with
diverse figures of antiquity. 8o. *The reign of Sultan Orchan, second K. of the
Turks, translated out of Hojah Effendi, an eminent Turkish Historian. 8o. *The
royal Charter granted unto Kings. 12o. *The Roylalists defense Printed at
Oxford. 4o. Romish forgyries, or a discovery of the falsities of the Church of
love. 4o. A review of the counsel of Trent, containing the several nullities
thereof, with the many grievances and prejudices done by it to Christian
Princes, translated from French to English. folio. *A relation of the no less
honorable then unfortunate expedition of Colechester. 12o. The right of
dominion, and property of liberty, whether natural, civil or religious,
wherein is comprised the beginning and continuance of dominion, by arms, the
excellency of Monarchy, with the necessity of taxes, with their moderation. 8o.
*The rise and fall of that great statesman, count Oliveras, with other
Histories, concerning the Kingdom of Portugal. 8o. The renowned Sr Tho. Roe,
Ambassador, A discourse concerning the K. of Spains surprising of the Vateline.
4o. *A restitution of decayed intelligence in antiquities concerning the most
noble and renowned English Nation, dedicated to his Majesty. 8o. An excellent
oration of that late famously learned Dr Reynolds, fit for all such as effect
the studies of Logic, and Philosophy, and admire profane Learning. 12o. Mr
Rouse and B^gan. Archaeologiae atricae lib. Septm. 7. Books of the artick
antiquities, containing the description of the cities glory, government,
division of the people and towns within the Athenian territories, the religion,
superstition, sacrifices, account of the year, the customs in marriages,
burials, feastings, divinations, etc.
S
W. SAnerson Esquire A complete History of the lives and reigns of Mary Q of
Scotland, and her Son and successor Ja. the 6. King of England, reconsiling
several opinions in testimony of her, and confuting others in vindication of
him, against two scandalous Authors, the Court of King James, and Wilson's
History of great Brtttain. folio. A survey of London. Containing the original
antiquity, increase of modern estate, and description of that City, etc. 4o.
Speculum mundi. Or a glass, representing the face of the world, that it did
begin, and must also end, the manner how and when largly expressed. 4o. *The
Scots design discovered, relating their dangerous attempts, lately practiced
against the English Nation, with the sad consequences of the same. 4o. *The
state of France, as it stood in the 9th. year of this present Monarch, Lewis
the 14. in. 12o. The Swedish intelligenter, containing the principal passage,
and actions, done in the best part of Christendom. 4o. Mr Scot. A discovery of
witchcraft, proving the common opinion of witches, contracting with Devils,
spirits, or familiars, with their power to kill, torment, and consume the
bodies of men, women, and chidren, their flying in the air, etc. to be but
imaginary, erroneous, conceptions, and novelties, with many other secrets
opened, that have lien hid. 4o. The sovereignty of the British seas. 12o. Mr
Sleyden. The key of History, or methodicall abridgement of the 4. chief monarch
of Babylon, Persia, Greece and Rome, being a Chronology from the flood. 8o.
Eadmeri monachi cantuariensis, Historia novorum, Johannes Seldinis, notis.
folio. Mare clausam, seu domino mare. folio. -- History of great Britain, from
the first peopling thereof, to the reign of K. James, by W.S. illustrated by
I.S. Esquire folio. -- History of tithes in the payment of them, the laws made for
them, and touching the right of them. 4o. Mr Swan. The standerd of time, or the
measuring reed, containing an exact Chronologicall computation of the years of
the world from the Creation thereof, to the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem, by the Romans, relating the various mutations and transactions
happening therein, wherein also the hidden mysteries of Daniels 70. weeks, and
other prophesies, etc. 4o. The Spanish gallant, instructing men in their
carriage to be beloved of the people. 12o. Mr Sydnham of Newcastle. The false
brother, or the map of Scotland, drawn by an english pencill. 4o. -- An
english interpretation of the Scotch declaration. 4o. -- The anatomy of John
Lilburns spirit and pamphlets, or a vindication of the two honorable Patriots,
Oliver Cromwell, Ld governor of Ireland, and Sr A Hesselridg Knight Barronet,
wherein the said Lilb. is demonstratively proved to be a common liar, and
unworthy of civil converse. 4o. Curia politiae, or the appologies of several
princes, justifying to the world, their most eminent actions, by the strength
of reason, and the most exact rules of policy, written in French by the
accurate pen of Mounseir de Scudery, governor of Nosterdam, now englished.
folio. Plinies Panegerick. A speech in the senate, to the emperor Trojan,
englished by Sr Rob. Stapleton. 4o. A seasonable expostulation, with the
Netherlands, declaring their ingratitude to the necessity of their agreement.
4o. The works of L. A. Senaeca, both morrall, and natural, containing, 1. of
Benefits; 2. Epistles; 3. of Providence; 4. Anger; 5. of clemency; 6. of its
blessed life; 7. of the tranquillity of the mind; 8. constancy of a wise man; 9.
of the shortness of life; 10. Consolations to Martia, Helvia, and Polibius.
with his 7. Books of natural questions, all translated by T. Lodge, Dr in
physic. folio. A survey of Tyrranny: or anatomizing of Tyrants, whether they
be Saints or Samaritans, Jews or Gentiles, professors of godliness or profane
persecutors, that the center in one point; Infancy upon their names,
unavoidable ruin upon their own persons and posterity: proved by sundry
examples, both ancient, and modern. 4o. The conspiracy of Catteline against the
government of the Senate of Rome, and the war with Iugurth for many years,
maintained against the state, by C. C. Salustius. 4o. A survey of the King of
Sweden, by a brief description of the provinces of that dominion, their riches,
antiquity, nature and manners, government, power, great offices and revennues
of the Crown, Catalogue of the Kings, for the last 500. years, their acts,
deeds, alliance, issue, and offspring, of Gustavus Adolphus, the 2. his acts
before his coming to the Crown, and before and after his entrance into Germany.
4o. Mr Stanley. The History of Philosophy, containing those on whom the
attribute of Wise was conferred, being the birth, lives, acts, parts, etc.
moral sentences, of Tales, Solon, Chilon, Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus,
Periander, Anacharsis, Myson, Epimenides, Pherecildes, Anaximander, Anaxinenes,
Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Socrates, Xenophon, Aeschines, Crito, Simon, Glaucon,
Simnias and Cebes: The first part illustrated with diverse figures in
Copper Plates. folio. The History of Philosophy, the second part, being the
lives, deaths, etc. of Aristippus, Hegesias, Anniseris, Theodorus, Bion,
Euclid, Eubulides, Alexinus, Euphantus, Appollonius, Chronus, Diodorus,
Ichthias, Clinomachus, Stilpo. Phaedo, Pisthenes, Menedemus, Plato, Speusippus,
Xenocrates, Polemo, Crates, Crantor, Arseilaus, Lacidos, Graneades,
Clitomachus, Philo, Antiochus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Strato, Lyco, Aristo,
Critolaus, Diodorus, Antisthenes, Diogines, Monimus, Onesicritus, Crates,
Metrocles, Hipparchia, Menippus, Menedemus, Zeno, ^leanthes, Chrysippus, Zeno,
Diogenes, Antipater, Panaetius, Posidonius. folio. Mr Stephens. An Essay on
statutes, or the first 5. books of Pub. Papinius. Statius, the baies. Mr
Spring. Englands recovery, or an Historical relation of the wars thereof,
under the command of the Ld Fairfax General. folio. * Manzini. Exquisite
accademicall discourses, upon several subjects, by Mounseir Scuddery,
governor of Nosterdance. Mr Spy. A Treatise of Civil Government. 4o. *
Secritaries study, New familiar Epistles, wherein Laydies Gent. and all that
are ambitious to speak and write elegantly, in a succinct and sacetious strain,
are here furnished. 4o. The Spanish History, or general History of Spain.
folio. Mr Speed. The History of great Britain, under the conquests of the
Roman Saxons, Dane and Romans, the original manners, habits, wars, coins
and seals; with the successions, lives, acts and issues of the English
Monarchies. folio. -- A prospect of the most famous parts of the world, drawn
forth in Mapps and descriptions of Asia, Africa, Europe and America; with the
Kingdoms therein, as Grecia, Roman Empire, Germany, Bohemia, France, Belgia,
Spain, Italy, Hungary, Denmark, Poland, Persia, Turkish Empire, Kingdom of
China, Tartarea, with some islands, as England. etc. Mr Stow. Annals, or a
general Cronologie of England, with an Appendix or Chorolary of the
foundations of the Universities of England, and continued to the year 1631.
folio. Scottish tumults, from their first originalls, with a particular
deduction of the seditious practices of the prime leaders of the Covenants,
collected out of their own soul acts and writings. folio. Mr Simson. Chronicon
Historiam Catholicam complectens, ab exordio, mundi ad nativitatem, D.N. Jesu
Christi, and ex inde ad annum a Chisto nato, 71. ex sacris bibliis caeterisque,
probatae fidei, anctoribus seriem, Historiarum, omnis aevi secundum tempora
digestarum, E. S. S. T. D, etc. Parascent ad chronicun Catholicum accessere, 1.
Tabulae chronologicae, 2. Stemmata quaedam insigniora, 3. Successiones regum,
4. Catalogus olympioni carum. folio. Mr Sandys Travils. Containing a History of
the original and present state of the Turkish Empire, their laws, government,
etc. the Mohammedan Religion; description of Constantinople, Seragleo; with his
manner of living; of Greece and their Religion; of Egypt, the antiquity
Hieroglyphics and Religion, a voyage on the River Nilus, of Armenia, grand
Carre-Rhodes, etc. Holy land of Jerusalem, also Italy described, and the
islands of Cyprias, Crete, Nalla, Sicilia, and Rome, Venice, Zaples, etc. with
50. mapps engraven. folio. -- Speculum Europiae, or a survey of the state of
Religion, the western parts of the world, wherein the Roman Religion and their
policies are notably displayed. 12o. -- Ovid Metamorphosis englished, with
cuts. folio. Bp Spotswood. The History of Scotland, from the year of our Lord,
203. to the end of King James the 6. wherein is described, the progress of
Christianity, persecutions and interruptions of it, the foundation of Churches,
etc. Reformation of Religion, and frequent desturbances of that Nation by wars,
conspiracies, tumults, schisms, etc. by Bp S. privy Counselor to King Charles
the first, that most religious and blessed Prince. folio. * Strada de bello
Belgico. The History of the low Countery wars, englished from (the Latin, by
Sr Robert Stapleton. folio. -- The siege of Antwerp, translated from Latin, by
Mr Lancastle. 8o.
T
THe Theater of honor and Knighthood, being a History of the Christian world,
containing the original of all Monarchies, Kingdoms, and estates, with their
Emperors, Kings, Princes, their beginnings, continuance and successions to
this present, etc. written in French by A. Favine Parisian and advocate to the
Parl. folio. Mr Trussell. A continuation of the collection of Daniels History
of Eng. ending when Vicount St Albans began with H. 7. being a complete History
of the beginning and end of the dissension, betwixt the two houses of York and
Lancaster, with the matches and issue of all the Kings, Princes, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Vicounts of this Nation deceased, during those times.
folio. The trial of L. Coll. John Lilburn at Guildhall London, done with an
even hand, in reference to court and prisoner. 4o. Tears of the Indians, being
an Historical and true account of the cruel massacres and slaughter of above
20. million of innocent people by the Spaniards in Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica,
also in Mexico, Peru, and other places in the West Indies, written in Spa. by
Casans, an eye witness, now in Engl. 8o. Truth it is manifest, or a short and
true relation of diverse main passages of things concerning the Scots, from the
beginning of these troubles to this day. 12o. The Testaments of the 12.
patriarchs, the Sons of Jacob translated from the Greek by the Bp of Lyncolnd.
8o. Mr Terry. Chaplin to Right honorable Sr Tho. Row Ambassador. A voyage to
East India; many things in our passage, with more observations in our abode, is
taken notice of within that rich and spacious Empire of the great Molgo. 8o. A
Trea^ise of the Court, writ in French, by that great Counselor de Refuges, often
Ambassador to the 2 last French Kings now in Eng. 8o. * Teratologia, or a
discovery of Gods wonders, manifest in former and modern times, by bloody rain
and waters. Themis Aurea, The laws of fraternity, of the Rosy Cross, by count
Mayerus, now englished, to inform that honorable society of wise Philosophers.
*Sr J. Temple. The History of the Jrish Rebellion. 4o. Mr Tailor. Wit and
Mirth. 8o. *The Theater of Complements, or art of eloquence, and most refined
way of speaking. 8o. * J. Trades^ane, rarities published by himself. 8o. Truth
brought to light, and discovered by time, or an Historical narration of the
first 14. years of King James' Reign. 4o.
V.
THe vale Royal of England, or Country Pallatine of Chester illustrated;
being a Geographicall or Historical description thereof, its hundreds, seats
of Nobility, Gentry, etc. rivers, towns, castles; all adorned with Mapps, etc.
4o. *A view and defense of reformation of the Church of Engl^nd by K. Edw. and
Q. Eliz. wherein her doctrine discipline, and lythurgy are considered and
preferred before all others. 8o. A voyage as strange as dangerous, by Capt. Tho.
James in his intended discovery of the northwest passages to the south sea,
wherein the miseries endured both going, wintering and returning, with the
rarities observed both Philosophical and Mathematical. 4o. Mr Vicars. A
Chronicle of the late wars in the reign of K. Carles of England. A short view
of the long life and reign of H. 3. K. of Eng. and of Hen. 4. 8o. The Venitian
History or the general description of Venice, it is original, strength, etc.
Letters of affairs, love, and courtship, writ to several persons of honor and
quality by the exquisite pen of Mouseir de Voiture, a member of the famous
French Achademy, established in Paris, by Card. Richlein. 8o. Villare Anglicum,
A Catalogue of all the towns and villages, and in what liberty they stand in
Eng. and Wales.
W.
J. WIlson Esquire The History of great Britiain, being the life and reign of K.
Ja. relating to what passed from his first access to the Crown till his death.
folio. * S. H. Wotton. lath Prove. Eaton. Col. A collection of lives, letters,
and characters of sundry personages, and other incomperable pieces of language
and art. 12o. -- The state of Christendom; or a most exact and curious
discovery of many secret passages and hidden mysteries of the times. folio. Wit
revived. 12o. * De hibernia and antiquitatibus ejus disquisitione; Authore Jac.
Waraeo, E^. Aurat. 8o. Mr Weaver. Ancient Funeral monuments, within the united
Monarchy of great Britain, Ireland, and Islands adjacent, with the dissolved
monuments therein contained, their founders, and what eminent persons have been
interred in the same: also the death and burial of certain of the blood
Royal, the nobility and gentry of those Kingdoms entombed in foreign Nations,
a work reviving the dead memory of the Royal Progeny, nobility, gentry, and
commonality intermixed and illustrated with variety of Historical Observations,
Annotations, and brief notes, extracted out of approved Authors, manuscrips and
juditious antiquities; with the foundation and fall of Religious houses,
orders, of Ecclesiastical state of Eng. etc. folio. Mr Withers. The nature of
man. 12o. -- The modern Statesman. 12o. Mr Whitlock. Essays or observations on
the present manners of the Eng. briefly anatomizing the living by the dead,
with an useful detection of the Mountebanks of both sexes. 8o. Sr Isa. Wake. A
threefold help to political observations, in 3. discourses, 1. On the 13.
Cantons of Switzerland; 2. the state of Italy, in the year 1625. 3. The K. of
Swedens war in Germany. 12o. * ^d. Waterhouse Esquire An humble apology, for
learning and learned men. 8o Mr White. The grounds of obedience and government.
12o. -- The state of future life and present orders to it. 12o. --
Peripateticall institutions, in the way of that eminent person the excellent
Philosopher, Sr Kenelm Digby, the theo^icall part, with a theological index of
the beginning of the worl^ 8o. A World in the Moon, or a discourse tending to
prove that it is probable there maybe another world in that planet. 8o. Wits
recreation for ingenious head pieces, or a pleasant grove for wits to walk in,
of epigrams, 700. epitaphs, 200. fancies a number, fantasticks abundance. 8o.
Wits interpreter. The English Parnassus, or a guide to those admirable
accomplishments that furnish our English Gentry, in the most acceptable
qualifications of discourse, or writings: The mystery of eloquence Theater of
court-ship: Inditer of letters alamode. 8o. Mr Wood. Florus anglicus. Or an
exact History of Eng. from the reign of W. the Conq. to the death of the late
King. 8o.
Y
* YOuths behavior, or decency in conversation amongst men, with a discourse
of powdered hair, patches, and naked breasts. 8o.
BOOKS OF Physic AND Chyrurgery.
A
THe Astrologicall Physician, teaching how to find the cause and nature of any
Disease, according to the secret rules of the Art of Astrology; with Mr Lillies
Epistle to it. 12o. Laday Arrundell, Natura exenterata, or nature unbowelled,
being choice secrets and receipts for the cure of all sorts of infirmities. 8o.
Alexis Secrets. 4o. The Problems of Aristotle, with other Philosophers and
Physicians; containing diverse Questions and answer, touching the state of man's
body. 8o. Theatrum Chymicum Britanicum, containing several pieces of our
famous English Philosophers, which have written the Hermeticall Mysteries in
the ancient Languages; by the truly noble Elias Ashmole Esquire
B.
Dr Brown. Natures Cabinet unlockt, the natural causes, of metals, stones,
precious earths, juyces, humors, and spirits: the nature of plants in
general, their affections, parts and kinds, in particular, etc. 12o. Mr
Brunworth. A new discovery of the French Disease, and running of the Reigns;
their causes, signs, and cures. 12o Enchiridion Medicum; containing the causes,
signs, and cures of all those diseases that do chiefly affect the body of man:
also added, de facultatibus medicamentorum compositorum and Docibus: by Mr
Bayfeild. 8o. Mr Banister's Chyrurgery. Of tumors, wounds, ulcers, fractures,
and luxations; Of all Medicines, of distilling oils, to prepare all minerals, to
draw forth their salts and oils. 4o. -- A Treatise of one hundred and thirteen
Diseases of the eyes and eye lids. 8o. T. Bartholini Casp. F. Anatomia, ex
Caspari Bartho. Parentis Institutionibus omniumque recentiorum and propriis
observationibus tertiam ad sanguinis circulationem reformata, cum Iconibus
novis accuratissimus. 8o. Mr Bruell. Praxis Medicinae, or the Physicians
practice, of all inward Diseases from the head to the foot; the nature of each
disease, with signs and causes, and directions for diet. 4o. Mr Barrow. The
method of Physic, the causes, signs, and cures of inward diseases in man's
body; with directions to make Medicines. Mr Bradwell. Help for sudden
accidents, endangering life, by which those that live far from Physicians and
Chyrurgians may happily preserve the life of a poor friend or neighbor, till
better help may be procured: Collected from the best Authors for the good of
all. 8o. Pharmacopeia, cui, adjecta sunt paraphrasis, and Miscendorum
medicamentorum modus, scripta a Briscio Baudereno, huic accedunt. J. du Bois
Pharmacopeia Parisiensis observationes in Methodum Miscendorum medicamentorum.
jfolio. Observationes Medicae de affectibus omnissis, Authore Arnoldo ^ootio
Med. D. 12o. Mr Board's Breviary of health. 8o. Mr Bruges. The Marrow of
Physic, or a learned discourse of the several parts of man's body; being a
Medicamentary; the way of making and compounding all Oils, unguents, sirrups,
cataplasmes, waters, powders, pills, etc. with little labor, cost, and time;
with some rare receipts for beauties, preserv. candying, etc. with other
secrets. 4o. *A Book of Fruits and Flowers; their nature and use, either for
meat or medicine; as also to preserve, candy, conserve; to make powders,
civit-baggs, to pickell, etc. to makes pyes, biscat, snow, cracknels, etc. all
ointments and waters for wounds, etc. for stopping of sudden bleeding, curing
the piles, ruptures, coughs, consumpti, dissolve the stone, pain in ears and
teeth, etc. 4o.
C.
DE Morbis Capitis, or the chief internal disease of the head; with their
causes, signs, prognostics, and cures. 8o. Mr Crook. The Anatomy of the body
of man, with their controversies thereunto belonging; published by his
Majesty's order. folio. Mr Clowe. A profitable and necessary Book for curing
wounds made with Musket, or any shot or weapon of War, or burned with the
flame of Gunpowder, with the cure of Lues venerea; with other choice receipts in
Chyrurgery. 4o. Closet for Ladies and Gentlewomen, or the Art of preserving,
conserving, and candying; how to make sirrups, with sovereign Medicines and
salves. 12o. Mr Crook, his Anatomy Epitomized. 4o. Mr Cook. Mellificium
Chyrurgiae, or the marrow of many good Authors, wherein is briefly and
faithfully handled, the Art of Chyrurgery; their deffinitions, causes, signs,
prognostics, and cures of diseases; with an addition of several magistrall
receipts, approved and heretofore kept secret. 12o. The Art of Sympleing; An
introduction to the knowledge and gathering of plants, the deffinitions,
divisions, places, descriptions, names, virtues, and uses, temparatures,
signatures of plants; with a discovery of the lesser world: by W. Coals. M.D.
Chimicall Collection. 8o. Lexicon Medicum Graeco-latinum; A Bartho. Castello.
Messanense inchoatum, etc. *A Ternary of Paradoxes, of the Magnetic cure of
wounds; Nativity of Tartar in Wine; Image of God in man: by I. B. Van. Helmout;
now translated, and illustrated by D. Carleton, Physician to King Charles. * --
The Errors of Physicians concerning defluxions. 4o. The Complete Midwifes
Practice, in the most weighty and high concernments of the birth of man;
perfect rules for Midwives, Nurses, for Women in conception, bearing and
nursing of Children, not from the experience of the english only, but Spanish,
French, and Italian Nations; with the instructions of the Midwife to the King
of France (given to her daughter before her death) concerning this Art;
illustrated with brass Cuts, and approved by T.C. I.D. M.S. T.B. Practitioners.
8o. Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants: A description of all english plants,
wild or otherwise, with their signatures applied to the body of man, their
Physical use; that a man may be his own Physian; with a Lattin and English
Table, both of the simples and diseases: by W. Coals Herbalist. folio. *Mr
Culpepper. The Anatomy of the body of man, describing every part thereof
exactly, as is showed in public Anatomies: in Lat. by J. Veslingus, reader to
the public Anatomy at Padua; now englished. folio. -- The Pract. of Physic,
in 17 Books: wherein is plainly set down the nature, cause, differences, and
sorts of signs; with the cure of them: by N.C. A.C. and W.R. Physicians; being
the translation of the Works of that renowned Dr Lazarus Riverius, Counselor
and Physician to the King of France. 15000 of the said Books in Lat. having
been sold in few years. folio. * -- Pharmacopeia Londinensis, or London
dispensatory englished, and further adorned by the studies and collections of
the fellows now living of the said College; containing the virtues,
quallities, properties of each simple, with the use of the compounds, cautions
for all dangerous Medicines; with a key to Gallens Art of Physic. 8o. * -- The
english Physician, being an Astrologo-physicall discourse of the vulgar Herbs
of this Nation, containing a complete Method of Physic, for preserving the
body in in health, or cure himself for 3d charge, only with english herbs: Also
how to make plasters, ointments, pultesses, sirrups, decoctions; time of
gathering, way of keeping and drying what plant governs each Herb and Tree,
etc. 8o. * -- Semiotica Vranica, or an Astrologicall judgment of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged; the way to find out the cause,
change, and end of the disease, whether likely to live or die, with the time
according to the judgment of Hippocrates. A Table of logisticall Logarithmes:
also of Urins. 8o. * -- A new method of Physic, or a short view of Paracelsus,
and Gallens practice; opening the nature of Physic and Alchimy, things are
requisite to both; with a Hermonicall Systeme of Physic; by Si. Partlicius,
Philosopher and Physician in Germany: now in english. 8o. * -- A Directory for
Midwives, or a guide for women in their conception, bearing, and sucking. 8o. *
-- Gallens Arts of Physic; with a large Comment. 8o. * -- A Treatise of
Rickets, being a common Disease to Children, showing the essence, cauess,
signs, and remedies: written in Lat. by Fr. Glisson. G. Bate, and A. Regemorter.
now englished. 8o. -- His last Legacy bequethed to his Wife for the public
good; being the choicest secrets, which while he lived, were locked up in his
breast; and resolved never to be published till after his death; being
admirable experiences in several Sciences, especially in Chyrurgery and
Physic. 8o. -- His Treatise of Aarum potabile, a description of the threefold
world; Elementary, Celestial, Intellectual; containing the knowledge
necessary to the study of Hermetick Philosophy: to which is added his ghost.
8o. -- Medicaments for the poor, or physic for the common people; being
excellent remedies for most diseases common to man's body; made of such things
as are to be had plentifully in every Country in the world, made with little
art and small charge: writ in Lat. by J. Prevotius, professor in Padua: now
englished. 8o. -- Health for the rich and poor by diet without physic. 8o. *
-- Opus Astrologus. 8o. Sure guide to Physic and Chyrurgery: The art to heal
by Medidicine and Mannuall operation, being an Anatomicall description of the
whole body of man, and its parts, demonstrated from the fabric and use of the
said parts: in six Books; by Dr Riolanus to the Queen Mother of France. Now
englished by N.C. and Dr R. folio. Mr Carr. Med. The universal body of
Physic, in five Books: of Diseases, their natures, causes, symptoms, of
preservation of health and cures. Translated from Riverius Praxis. folio.
D.
THe Distiller of London, with the clavis to unlock the deepest secrets in that
mysterious Art; with the most excellent Cordial Waters by the ablest Doctors.
8o. The Doctress, a plain and easy method of curing those Diseases which are
peculiar to women; with physical Paradoxes, or a new discovery of the Aeconomy
of nature in man's body. 12o. The Doctors dispensatory: the whole art of Phis.
restored to pract. the Apotheca. shop, and Chyrurg. closet opened. A survey of
all the best dispensa. and epitomized. Added also a body of Phys. by Jac. a
Brunn of Basil. 8o.
E
ENchridion Physicae Restitutae, or the summary of Physics restored. 12o. Dr
Edwards. The cure of Fevers of all sorts, their deffinitions, kinds, causes,
signs, differences, etc. 4o. -- The Analysis of Chyrurgery, the Theorick and
practick part thereof. 4o. The Expert Midwife. 4o. The Expert Doctors
Dispensatory, etc. Englished.
F.
FR. Feynei Medicina Practica in quatuor libros. 4o. Mr Fletcher. A Treatise of
Judgment of Urin. 8o. The French and English Cook, for exact making all sorts
of pasts, pasties, Florentines, etc. ordering of French, Span. and Ital.
kikshawes, dressing, flesh, foul and fish; with admirable sawces. 12o. *Dr
French. The Art of distillation, treating of the choicest spagericall
preparations, performed by way of distillation; describing also the furnases
and vessels used by Chemists; with the Anatomy of gold and silver. 4o. * -- The
Yorkshire Spaw, or a Treatise of four Medicinal Wels, viz. the Spaw or
Vitrilone Well, the sting or sulpher, the droping or purifying, and St Mugnus
Well in Yorkshire; their causes, virtues, and use. 12o.
G.
Mr GErrard's Herball, or the general History of plants. folio. The Garden of
Health, sundry rare and hidden virtues of all kinds of simples and plants, with
their use for the health of man's body. 4o. *Mr Glawber. A description of new
philosophical Furnases, or the art of distilling, in five parts; of the
tincture of gold, or the true Aurum potabile; with the first part of the
Mineral Work. 4o.
H.
* THe Anatomicall Exercises of Dr W. Harvey Physician to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, concerning the motion of the heart and blood, with Dr de
Back of Rotterdam, his his discourse of the heart. 8o. The same Lat. 12o. * --
Anatomicall exercitations concerning the generation of living creatures, with
particular discourses of Births and conceptions. 8o. * -- Exercitationes, de
generatione animalium, quibus accedunt quaedam de partu; de membranis ac
humoribus uteri and de conceptione. 12o. Dr Hamand. Ourography, or speculations
on the excrements of Urin, with the distinctions, causes, colors, and contents
thereof, and other symptoms observed in nature; with a philosophical discourse
of the colors of Urin; with the art of mixing them according to quantity,
number, and weight. 8o. The Haven of Health. 4o. *An Hermeticall Banquet dressed
by a Spagericall Cook, for the better preservation of the Microcosme. 8o.
K.
THe Lady of Kent; A choice mannuall of rare and select secrets in Physic and
Chyrurgery, with the rare virtues of the Gascoin powder, and Lapis contra
Yarvam, with exquisite ways of preserving, conserving, candying, etc. 24o.
L.
THe Ladies Cabinet enlarged and opened, containing many rare and rich
Ornaments of preserving, conserving, candying, and physic, chyrurgery,
cookery, and huswifry, with waters, oils, etc. by the Lord Ruthen. 12o.
Lessius. Hygiasticon, the right course of preserving life and health, unto
extreme old age, with the soundness and integrity of the senses, judgment, and
memory. 24o. Mr Low Dr to the King of France. A discourse of the whole art of
Chyrurgery, the deffinitions, causes, prognostics, and cures of all diseases.
4o. *The Ladies dispensatory, containing the natures, virtues, of all Herbs and
Simples, useful in Physic. 8o. M. de Lobell. Med. Insulani Sereniss. and
Juvictiss. Ja. Mag. Brik. etc. Botanographi, sive plantarum Historiae Physicae,
tam indigenarum and Britaniae inquinilarum, quam exoticarum Scriptoris
accesserunt auctoria in Antidotaria vulgata sensurae Benevolae, and diluci dae
simplicium, Medicamentorum explicationes. Cum L. Myrei Pharmacopolae Reginei
Paragraphis utiliss. etc. folio. Mr Lewen. M.A. The pathway to health, most
excellent Medicines of great virtue, notable potions and drinks, with the art of
distilling precious waters, oils, etc. with other receipts. 8o.
M.
Dr MVffett. Healths improvement, or rules comprizing, and discoursing the
nature, method, and manner of preparing all sorts of food used in this Nation:
corrected and enlarged by Dr Bennet of London. 4o. Medicina Magia, Tamen
Physica, the method of curing diseases by Sympathy and Antipathy. Alb. Magnus.
De secretis mulierum. Item de virtutibus Herbarum, lapidum, and Animalium. 12o.
P.
Jac. PRimrosii Enchiridion Medicum Practicum, complectens omnium Morborum
communium and particularum naturam, causas, signa and curationum. 12o. --
Enchridion Medicum sive Brevissimum Medicinae Systema. 12o. -- Ars
Pharmaceutica Methous brevissima, de eligendis and componendis Medicinae. 12o.
Mr Perkinson's Herbalist. Theatrum Britanicum, or general History of plants.
folio. -- Paradisi in sole Paradisus Terrestris: or a choice Garden of all
sorts of rare flowers, with their nature, place of birth, time of flowering,
names and virtues to each plant, useful in physic, or admired in beauty; with
a Kitchen Garden furnished with all herbs, roots, and fruits, for meat or
sauce: with the art of planting an Orchard for all fruit trees, and shrubs,
with the nature of grafting, inocculating and pruning of them, and preserving
them and select virtues, all unmentioned in former Herbals. folio. Pharmacopeia
Londinensis Collegarum hodie viventium studiis a Symbolis ornatior. folio. * --
The same. 24o. -- The same. 8o. Pharacelsus his Dispensatory and Chyrurgery,
containing the choicest of his physical Rememedies, with wounds, ulcers and
aposthumes. 12o. -- Of transmutation of Metals, etc. -- Secrets of Alchimy.
8o. Popular Errors in matters of physic. 8o. * Physical Rarities, containing
the most choice receipts of physic and chyrurgery, for cure of all diseases
incident to man's body; with the physical Mathematics of Hermes Trismegistus.
8o. Paraeus, The whole body of Chyrurgery. folio. A Philosophical and
Chymicall Treatise of fire and salt. The Chemists Key to open or shut, or the
true Doctrine of corruption and generation: by H. Nolins, pub. by Eug.
Philalathes. 8o. Mr Pemell. Traciatus de simplicium Medicamentorum
facultatibus: Of the nature and qualities of simples used in Medicines, with
many compound Medicines for the health of man, with an explaination of the
terms of art. 4o -- Of the chief internal diseases of the head, their signs,
prognostics and cures. 8o. -- Help for the poor, sundry Medicines easy to be
had; with letting blood, and helps for Small Pox. 8o. -- De morbis puerorum;
The diseases of Children, their causes, signs, prognostics, and cures. 4o. The
Skillful Physician, being directions for preservation of a healthful
condition, with remedies for all diseases outward or inward, Instructions for
use of all Medicines, to the several constitutions of every patient; with
instructions for perfumes, and preservation of Wines. 8o. A Rich Closet of
Physical secrets, collected by the illaborate pains of four several Students
in Physic; being also some physical experiments presented to Queen Eliz. and
other secrets taken out of a Manuscript found in an old Abbey. 4o. L. Phioravant
Knight and Dr, his rational secrets and Chyrurgery, with excellent experiments
and secrets, collected out of famous Authors of both faculties, with
Paracelsus, 114 experiments: also J. Hollandus secrets of his vegetable and
animal Works. 4o. The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgeon, 300 rare and choice
receipts for cure of all diseases inward and outward, with rules for purging and
opening a vein. 8o. Philologia Brittanica, natales exhibens, Indigenarum
stirpium sponte emergentium. 8o. The Annatomicall Experiments of J. Pequet of
Deipe, by which the hitherto unknown receptacle of the Chyle, and the
transmission from thence to the Subclaviall Veins by the now discovered
lacteall channels of the Thorax is plainly made appear in bruites, with an
Anatomicall dissertation of the motion of the blood and Chyle, and an
Anatomicall History proposed by Dr Burtoline. 12o. A Physical Dictionary, or
an interpretation of such crabbed words and terms of Arts as are derived from
the Greek and Lattin, used in Physic, Anat. Chyrurgery, and Chemistry. 8o.
Q.
THe Queens Closet opened: Incomparable secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery,
preserving, candying, and Cookery, as they were presented to the Queen, by the
most experienced persons of these times, and honored by our own practice:
published by one of her domestic Servants.
R.
Laz. RIverii. Observationes Medicae and curationes Insignes. 8o. -- Praxis
Medica, Integra, Morberum Theoria, and quam plurimis remediis selectissimis
locupletata. Two vol. 8o. Regimen sanitatis Salerni; or the School of Salernes
Regiment of health, being learned and judicious directions for preservation,
guide, and government of man's life, dedicated to the King by the University,
and published by consent of learned Physicians; with a discourse of the use of
fish, with sundry secrets from a noble hand. 4o. *Dr Reynolds. The Birth of
mankind; or a guide for Women in conception, bearing, and sucking their
Children: illustrated with several Figures and Cuts. 4o. *Mr Record. The
Urinall of Physic, with an ingenious Treatise concerning Physicians,
Apothecaries, and Chyrurgeons, with Papius Ahalsossa concerning Apothecaries
consecting the Medicines. 8o. Dr Read. The Mannuall of the Anatomy or dissection
of the body of man, the ennumeration and description of the parts which are
shown in public Annatomicall exercises, illustrated with figures. 12o. --
Most excellent and approved Medicines for the most diseases and Malladies
incident to man's body. 8o. -- Chyrurgicall Lectures of Tumors and Ulcers, the
re-unition of the parts of the body disjoynted, with the Methodicall Doctrine
of wounds. 4o. *Mr Ross. Archana Microcosmi, or the hidden secrets of man's body
discovered, in an Anatomicall Duel between Aristotle and Gallen, concerning
the parts thereof, with a refutation of Dr Brownes vulgar errors, the Lord
Bacon's Natural History, and Dr Harves de generatione annimalium; Commenius,
and others. 8o. Rhenodeus King of Fran. Physician. A Medicinal Dispensatory
con-the whole body of Physic: The natures, propetties, and virtues; Of
vegetables, minerals, and animales; Of compounding Medicaments: Of
philosophical and pharmactuticall institutions: Of physical materials,
Gallenicall and Chymicall: with an absolute Pharmacopeia. Translated by Mr
Johnson of London Apothe. folio. Rich Storehouse, or Treasury for the diseased,
wherein are many approved Medicines for sundry diseases, which have been long
hidden till now, being for the good of poor people. 4o. Mr Rumsey. Organ
salutis; An Instrument to cleanse the Stomach, with diverse new Experiments of
the virtue of Tobacco and Coffee, how much they conduce to humane health. 12o.
S.
THe Complete Practice of Physic. wherein is plainly described the nature,
causes, differences, and signs of all diseases in the body of man, with the
choicest cures for the same: by D. J. Smith, with Dr Ridgley's Epistle to it.
12o. Jac. Holleri Stephani. Medici Parisiensis celeberimi ad libros Gall. de
compositione Medicamentorum, etc. 8o. Dr Sinnertus. Institutiones Medicae, etc.
8o. -- Epitome. 16o. -- The Institutions or Fundamentals of the whole Art, both
of Physic and Chyrurgery, in five Books, plainly discovering all that is to be
known in both, as the subject and end of Physic; the nature of all diseases,
their causes, signs, differences, events, and cures: also the grounds of
Chemistry, and the way of making all sorts of salves, and preparing Medicines
according to Art. Nothing of the like nature having been in English before
this: Englished from the Latin, by N.D.B.P. of Cambridge. 8o. Mr Starkly.
Natures explication and Helmonts vindication, or a short and sure way to a long
and sound life, being a necessary and full Apology for Chymicall Medicaments,
with a vindication of their excellency against the Gallenists. 8o. M. Sadler.
Enchridion Med. 8o.
T.
Mr TVrner. De Morbis Faemineis, Wom. Counselor. modestly treating of such
occult accidents and diseases incident to that Sex, etc. 12o. A Thousand
notable things of sundry sorts, wonderful, strange, pleasant, necessary,
profitable and precious. 8o. The Touchstone of Complections, expedient and
profitable for all such as desire their health, whereby one may know the exact
state, habit, disposition and constitution of his body outwardly, with the
inclinations, affections, motions, and desires of his mind inwardly. Englished
from the Latin. 4o. *Dr Turner. The description of the little World,
dileneating the body of man in all the members, bones, veins, sinues, arteries,
etc. from head to foot; also of wounds, of fractured bones, urin, and baths.
8o. -- The Complete Bonesetter, with the method of curing broken bones and
strains, and dislocated Joints, with ruptures, vulgarly called broken bellies
is fully demonstrated; with the perfect occulist, and mirror of health,
treating of the Pestilence, and other diseases incident to men, women, and
children: with the accute judgment of Urins. Original writ by Friar Moulton of
order of Sr Augustine. 8o. Trautzelius his Transmutation of Diseases. 8o.
V
Dr VEnner. Via recta ad vitam Longam: wherein the right way of living for
attaining to a long and healthful life, is demonstrated and applied to every
age and constitution of body; being a full description of the use of all sorts
of meats, to whom properly each is most fit, and what to be avoided by such and
such constitutions of body: with a Treatise of baths, and Tobacco. 4o. The
English man's Treasury, with the true Anatomy of man's body, by Dr Vicary,
Physician to Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q. Mary and Q. Eliz. with many excellent receipts
annexed: The rare Treasury of English Baths; with a thousand approved waters
for Physic and Chyrurgery; with ointments and plasters. 4o. -- The
Chyrurgeons Directory for young Practitioners in Anatomy wounds and cures, the
excellency of diverse secrets belonging to that noble Art and Mystery. 8o.
Mataeotenicha Medicinae Praxeous; the vanity of the craft of Physic, or a new
dispensatory, wherein is dissected, the errors, ignorance, impostures, and
supinities of the Schools, in their main pillars of purges, blood, issues,
diet, etc. Hermeticall Physic, or the right way to preserve and to restore
health; by that famous Chemist H. Nolius, Englished by H. Vaugham. 12o. The
Vade^ Mecum, or a Companion for a Chyrurgeon, the use of Instruments, virtues
of Medicines, with rules to make them; with the dressing of green wounds. 8o. Dr
Vanderhyden of Gaunt. Speedy help for rich and poor, certain Physical
discourses touching the virtue of Whey in the cure of the griping Flux of the
belly, and of the Dysentery of cold water in the cure of the Gout, and green
wounds: Of wine Vinegar in preservation from and cure of the Plague, etc. 8o.
Medicina Magnetica, or the rare and wonderful Art of curing by sympathy: laid
open in Aphorisms, proved in Conclusions, and digested into an easy method
drawn from both; wherein the connection of the causes, and effects of their
strange operations are more fully discovered then heretofore: all cleared and
confirmed by pithy Reasons, true Experiments, and pleasant Relations. Preserved
and published, as a Masterpiece in this skill: By C. de Iryngio, Chyrurgo.
Medcinae in the Army. 8o. Vestlingij. Syntagma Anatomicum. 4o.
W.
Mr WOodall. The Chyrurgeons Mate. folio. *The General Practice of Physic,
containing all inward and outward parts of the body, with all the accidents and
infirmities thereunto incident, from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, by what means to cure them by the help of God: by Dr Wirtzung German. Now
englished. folio. Reprinted with Additions. A Treatise of the virtues of warm
Beer. 12o. Mr Wood. An Epitomy of excellent secrets of Physic and Chyrurgery,
with the judgment of urins. 8o. Dr Whittaker. The Tree of life, or Blood of the
Grape. 8o. Andenagraphia, sive glandularum totius corporis discriptio Auct.
Tho. Whartono M.D. An Experimental Treatise of Chyrurgery in four parts. 1o.
The abuses of modern Chyrurgeons. 2o. Of the cures of all wounds. 3o. Symptoms
of wounds. 4o. Of Balms Salves, Plasters, Ointments, etc. by F. Wurtz. of
Basell; Translated out of the 28th Copy in high Dutch, now englished; with the
Childrens Books. 4o. Mr Westwood. De variolis and Morbillis: of the small Pox
and Measels; their diffinit. dictinct. causes, differ. signs, prognost. and
cures: with cautions in air and diet, with cordial remedies to preserve us
from them, etc.
BOOKS OF THE Common and Civil LAW.
A
THe Attorneys Achademy; being the manner of proceedings in all his Ma^esties
Court of Record, together with the usual and ordinary sees of Officers and
Ministers of the said Courts, etc. 4o. The attorney of the common pleas, or
directions and instructions, concerning his practice therein, with the fees due
to the judges and officers there, and the Kings Bench. 8o. The arguments of the
learned judges about shipmoney. 4o. A complete Table to the whole common law,
by Tho. Ash, Gent. in 2. Volumes. folio. The arguments of the learned judges of
the upper Bench, upon the writ of Habeas Corpus, with the opinions of the court
thereupon, and Sr J. Elliots case. Wherein diverse ancient and obscure Records
most amply and elaborately debated and cleared. 4o.
B
REports of diverse choice cases in Law, taken by those late and most judicious
Prothonotaries of the common pleas; viz. R. Brownlow; and J. Goldsborough, Esquire
with directions how to proceed in many intricate actions both real and
personal, etc. the first and second part. 4o. -- Declarations, counts and
pleadings in English; being the authentic form of presidents in the court of
common pleas, in actions real, personal, and mixed in the reign of Q Eliz. K.
James, and K. Charles, by R.B. Esquire the second part. The first being pleas,
replications, rejoynders, demurrs, assignments of errors, and the entries of
judgments thereupon affirmed. Mr Bernard. A guide to grand-jury-men. 4o. Sr R.
Brooks. The reading of the statute of limitations. Books of drawing up all
manner of judgments. Book of presidents, with additions of diverse necessary
instruments, fit for such as would learn the manner of evidences, instruments,
etc. 8o. The body of the common Law of England, as it stood in force before it
was altered, by statute or acts of Parliament or state, with a collection of
such statutes as are altered with a summary of the whole Law, profitable to
such students as affect method, by E. Wingate Esquire 4o. H. de Bracton. De legibus
and consuetudinibus. 4o. The elements of the Law by the Ld Bacon. 4o. An
ancient learned book of the Law called Britton. 8o. The report of E. Bulstrode,
of the Inner Temple Esquire Of diverse resolutions and Judgments given with great
advice and mature deliberation, by the grave and Reverend Sages of the Law.
folio.
C.
THe Complete Clark and Scrivenors guide, being exact draughts and presidents
of all manner of Assurances, and Instruments now in use, as they were penned
and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, both Modern and
Ancient; to which is added a Concordance of years, from Rich. the third till
now. 4o. Mr Cowel's Institutes of the Laws of England, digested into the method
of the civil or imperial Institutions; useful for all Gent. who are studious
to know the Customs of this Nation. 8o. * Reports of special cases of the
Liberties of the City of London; by Sr H. Calthrop, sometimes Recorder thereof,
after Attorney Genesis of the Courts of Wards and Liveries, with the ancient
Customs and usages of the said City. 8o. A Mannuall or Analecta, called the
Complete Justice, or an Epitomie of the Statutes. 12o. The Complete Copyholder;
A learned discourse of the antiquity and nature of Mannours and Copyholds, with
present meats, admittances, surrenders, forfeitures, customs, etc. necessary
both for Lord and Tennant: by Sr Edw. Cook. 8o. The Lord Cook. The first part
of the Institutes of the Laws of England, or a Commentary upon Littleton.
folio. -- The second part: an Exposition of many ancient Laws, and other
Statutes of Magna Charta. folio. -- The third part: Pleas of the Crown and
criminal Cases. folio. -- The fourth part: The Jurisdiction of Courts. folio.
-- Reports of the Lord Cook. The 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 parts.
In three vol. folio. -- The 12 Report. Of diverse Resolutions and Judgmens given
upon solemn Arguments, and with great deliberation and conference with the
learned Judges in cases of Law; the most of them very famous, being of the
Kings especial reference from the Council Table; Also the forms and
proceedings of Parliaments both in England and Ireland; With an Exposition of
Poinings Law. folio. Cook's Book of Entries. folio. * Englands Complete
Law-judge and Lawyer, by G. Cook, one of the Judges of the Admiral Court, and
Probate of wills. 4o. Reports of Cases in Chancery, by Sr Geo. Carey, one of
the Masters thereof, out of the Labors of Mr Lambert, with the Kings order and
decree in the Chancery. 12o. L'Athority and Jurisdiction des Courts de la
Majesty de la Roygne: Novellment collect and compose per R. Crompton de Milein
Temple Esquire Apprentice de lex. 4o. A Treatise of Bail and Mamprise: by E.C.
Knight. Now published for a general good to the Nation. 4o. Cases Select and
special, out of the reports and Year-Books of the Common Law, concerning the
persons and Estates of all men whatsoever. 4o. *Mr Cook, Grayse-Inne. A
Vindication of the Law so far as Scripture and reason may judge, and speedy
Justice which exalts a Nation may be advanced. 4o. The Interpreter: or a Book
containing the signification of Words, wherein is set forth the true meaning of
all or the most part of such words and terms as are mentioned in the
Law-Writers, or Statutes of this Kingdom, requiring an Exposition or
Interpretation, fit for such as desire the knowledge of the Laws, Statutes, or
other Antiquities: by J. Cowell, Doctor, and the Kings Professor of the Civil
Law in Camb. 4o. Mr Collin. A brief Summary of the Laws and Statutes in
England. 8o. J. Arn. Corvini. J.C. Posthumus Pacianus; seu deffinitiones, Juris
utriusque viri, C.L. Julii Pacii: a Berigo J.C. posthumae. 16o. -- Juris
prudentia Romana H. Vulteii contracta. 16o. -- Digesta per Aphorismos strictim
explicata. 16o. -- Enchridium, seu Institutiones Imperiales insertis latioribus
materiis, Theorice, and practice digestae and explicatae per erotemata. 6o. *Mr
Clark. The Clerks Vade Mecum, or a collection of modern Presidents, according
to the best forms extant, and such as have not formerly been printed:
containing all sorts of Bargains and Sales, Leases, Mortgages, Grants, etc.
useful for all persons that have relation to the practick part of the Common
Law, or desire to be exquisitely qualified therein. 8o. The Complete Attorney.
S^ Rob. Cotton Knight. An exact abridgment of the Records of the Tower of
London, from Edw. 2. to Rich. 3. of all Parlia. in their Reigns, their acts,
the Names and Titles of all Dukes, Marq. Earls, Visco. Parr. etc. folio.
D
*Mr DAlton. The Country Justice, containing the practices of the Justices of
the Peace, out of the Sessions, gathered for the better help of such Justices
of Peace, as have not been much conversant in the studies of the Laws of the
Realm, enlarged now with many presidents; also all such Acts and Ordinances as
are necessary to be known and put in execuion. folio. -- The Office and
Authority of Sheriffs. 8o. An Exact Abridgment of all the reports of that
Reverend and Learned Sr Ja. Dyer; being the substance of all those Reports at
large. 8o. Sr John Davis. A perfect Abridgment of the eleven Books of the
Reverend and learned Knight Sr Edw. Cook. Translated from the French. 12o. --
Upon the Question of Impositions, tonnage, poundage, prizage, customs, etc.
Synopsis: or an exact abridgment of the Lord Cooks Commentary upon Littleton;
being a brief Explanation of the grounds of the Common Law; Composed by Sr Hen.
Davenport, Lord Chief Barron of the Exchequer. 8o. The Doctor and Student. Sr
J. Dodridge Knight. The English Lawyer, describing a method for the managing of
the Laws of this Land, and expressing the best qualities requisite in the
Student, Practicer, Judges, and Fathers of the same. 4o.
E
CErtain Observations concerning the Office of the Lord Chancellor, composed by
the right Honorable the Lord Ebbesemere. 8o.
F.
THe Filacers Office, or the measure process Filacers make out before
appearance: the nature and forms of their several Writs, and manner of
proceedings: with Fees. 8o. Four Books of the Law, by Sr H. Finch. 8o. Mr
Fidell. A perfect guide for the studious Lawyer: both delightful and
profitable for any Gentleman, being presidents for conveyances, and other
business of the like kind: gathered out of the learned labors of the reverend
and learned Sages of the Law: The Lord Cook, Lord Hobbart, Lord Richardson, Mr
Haughton, Mr Reve, etc. Also diverse Copy-holds, Entries in Court Barons, with
Justice of Peace business. 4o. Judge Fitzherbert. La Grand Abridgment. folio. *
-- The new Natura Brevium of the reverend Judge Mr Ant. Fitzherbert, with the
Authorities of the Law, collected out of the Year-Books; an Abridgment with
Writs, and return of Writs. Now Englished. 8o. -- The same in French. 8o.
G.
REports of the learned and judicious Clark J. Gouldsborough Esquire his Collection
of choice cases, with learned Arguments at the Bar and on the Bench, with the
resolutions and judgments of the chief Justices Anderton and Popham. Published
by W.S. Esquire 4o. Godbolts Reports. Mr Greenwood. Curia comitatus Rediviva, or
practick part of the County Court revived: its antiquity and proceed, from
orig. to execution, and all actions lying therein. 8o.
H
* THe Reports of the reverend and learned Judge the right Honorable Sr H.
Hobart Knight and Barronet, Lord Chief Justice, etc. Enlarged with some new
Cases never before printed: also purged from the numberless and incurable
errors of the former impression. folio. Reports of certain cases arising in the
several Courts of Record at Westminster in the Reigns of Q. Eliz. and K.
Charles, with the resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debates
and solemn Arguments; Collected by good hands, and approved by the learned
Justice Godbolt, now published by W. Hughes Esquire 4o. -- The Parsons Law,
collected out of the body of the Common Law, and some late Reports. 8o. -- A
Commentary on original writs. 8o. Mr J. Hern. The Law of conveyances; the
natures, kinds, and effects of all manner of Assurances, their executions and
operations; directions to sue out and prosecute all Writs of extents, elegit,
and Judicial Writs upon Statutes, Recognizances, Judgments, etc. with a
Concordance of years. Expos. of obscure words, of warrants to summon a Court of
Survey, and the Articles to be given in charge, and enquired of in that Court.
8o. The Learned Judge Hutton his Reports. English. folio. Mr J. Herne. The
Pleader, containing presidents of declar. plead. issues, judgments, and
proceed. in actions real and personal, and mixed with many points of great
Learning, etc. folio. Mr Huges. An Abridgment of Com. Law, with the cases
thereof, drawn out of all old and new Books of Law, reduced into Chapt. Sect
and Divisions, for use of Practicers and Students. 4o. -- An Abridgment of
public Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, made from the year 1640, to 1656.
Also of all diverse Ordin. and publ. Orders of the Ld P. and Council. 4o. Sr T.
Hetly Knight, Serj. at Law. Reports and Cases taken in the 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7
years of K. Cha. as they were argued by most of the Kings Sergeants at the
Common Pleas Bar. folio. J. Jenkins. Facis Consultum. The antiquity, extent,
and practice of several Country corporation Courts especially the Court Leet:
with an abstract of the penal Statutes. 12o.
K.
J. Kitchen Esquire Jurisdictions, or the lawful Authority of Courtleets, Court
Barrons, Court of Marshall seyes, Court of Pyepouder, and ancient demesne, with
learning of tennures and all their incidents; of essoyns, imparlance, views of
all manner of pleadings, of contracts, all sorts of actions, of maintenance,
the Authentic forms of all sorts of Writs. 8o. Relationes Quorund am Casuum ex
lib. R. Keilwex: qui tempor. faelicissiimae memoriae Regis Hen. Sept. and
inclitissimi Reg. Hen. Octavi, emerserunt, and in prioribus impressionibus,
relationum de terminis illorum Regum non exprimuntur: nec non relationes non
nullorum Casuum per. Rever. Judic. Guil. Dalison and Guil. Beudlora servientem
ad legem, etc. folio.
L.
THe Laymans Lawyer, or practick part of the Law, showing the Office of a
Complete Attorney in the full prosecution of any action; real, personal or
mixed, from the original to the execution in all Courts; with exact fees of all
officers, and Ministers of Courts; with Instructions for soliciting any Case in
Chancery or elsewhere. 8o. The Laymans Lawyer revived and enlarged, being a
second part of the practice of the Law, relat^ng to the punishment of offender,
against the public peace; the forms of process, indictments, and proceedings
to judgment in all manner of crimes concerning death, and corporal and
pecuniary punishments; also a discourse of pardons, the office and duty of a
Jailer, Constable, and other assistants for the preservation of the peace. 8o.
Les tennures de Monseir Littleton, etc. French. 8o. The Lawyers Guide. Mr
Leigh. The Philologicall Commentary: Or an illustration of the most Obvious and
useful words in the Law. 8o. Mr Lambert's Archeion, or Comments upon the high
Courts of Justice. Sr Ja. Ley Knight. A learned Treatise of Wards and Liveries.
The Laws and Resolutions of Women's Rights, or the Laws provision for Women. A
methodicall Collection of such Statutes and Customs, with the cases, opinions,
arguments, and points of learning in the Law as do properly concern Women. 4o.
Mr Lane. Attor Genesis to P. Cha. Reports in the Court of Exchequer; from the 3d
year to the 9th year of K. James. folio.
M.
Mr J. MArsh. Some new Cases of the years and time of King Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Q
Mary: written out of the great Abridgment of Sr Rob. Brook. Now Englished. 8o.
-- Actions for slander; the first and second part, with a second part of
Abitrements, with directions and presidents to them: also what defamations are
determinable in Ecclesiastical Courts. 8o. -- Amicus Reipublicae, the
Commonwealths friend, or an exact and speedy way to Justice, for prevention of
Lawsuits. 8o. Sr H. Martin and Mr Glanvills speeches in Parliament touching
the Petition of Right. M. Millitte. Sometimes Chief Justice of the Bench.
folio. Magna Charta. 8o.
N.
W. NOy Esquire Attorney Genesis to his Majesty. The Complete Lawyer: or a Treatise
concerning Tenures and Estates in Lands of Inheritance for life, and for years;
of chattels real and personal, how to be conveyed in a legal form, by fine,
deed, etc. 8o. -- The grounds and maxims of the Laws of England, useful for
all Students and such as desire the knowledge of the Law. 8o. -- Reports and
Cases taken in the time of Q. Eliz. K. Ja. and K. Charles, containing the most
excellent exceptions for all manner of declarations, pleadings, and demurrs,
exactly examined and laid down. folio. A Declaration of Neusance, concerning
dwelling houses, with the resolutions of the Judge of Assize, upon Questions
touching Parishes: the power of Justices, Constables, etc. 4o. The new Natura
Brevium, or the Law returned, from Westminster, and restored to its native,
ancient, and proper habitation, language, power, purity, integrity, and
plainness. 12o.
O.
ALl the Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament for the true payment
of tithes, and other such duties according to the Laws and Customs of this
Realm. 4o. The Orders of a Court Leet, and Court Baron, with the charges
belonging thereunto. 8o. The Office and Duty of Executors, or a Treatise of
wills and Executors, directed to Testators in the choice of their Executors and
Contrivance of their wills, with drections for Executors, Creditors, etc. 8o.
The Reports of Judge Owen, wherein are many choice cases, most of them
thoroughly argued by the learned Sergeants, and after argued and resolved by the
grand Judges of those times, with many cases wherein the differences in the
Year-Books are reconciled and explained. folio. A Collection of all the
Ordinances, Proclamations, Declarations, etc. which have been printed and
published since the government of the Lord Protector, with the several dates
and dependencies. folio. *A Collection of all the Orders for Regulating the
Chancery: with alterations and additions by the Lords Comiss. for the great
Seal. for reform. multiplicity of Suits, Motions, unness. charges, etc. 8o.
P.
A PRofitable Book of Mr J. Perkins, fellow of the Inner Temple, treating of
the Laws of England. 8o. Mr Powel's Search of Records. 4o. Mr Poulton. A
Collection of all the Statutes frequent in use, with Notes on the Margin, and
references to the Book Cases. folio. Reports and Cases by Sr J. Popham: with
remarkable Cases and Reports by other learned Pens since his death. folio. The
Perfect Conveyance, or several select and choice presents as have not been
formerly printed; collected by four Sages of the Law, viz. E. Henden Knight,
one of the Barons of Exchequer: W. Noy Attorney General to his Majesty: R.
Mason, Recorder of London, and H. Fleetwood Reader of Grase-Inne. 4o. Mr
Poultons Abridgment of his Book of Statutes at large. folio. Mr Powdens
Abridgment of all his Reports and Cases in Law. folio. The Practice of the
Sheriffs Court London: the manner of entering Actions, making Attaches, and
Sequestrat. with fees, etc. 12o.
Q.
LOng Quinto of Edw. the fourth. folio.
R.
Sr Tho. RIdley. A view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and and wherein
the practice of them is straightened, and may be relived within this Land. 4o.
Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held before several Judges in that
Circuit, with some presidents useful for Pleaders at the Assizes: Never
Englished before. 8o. Mr Rastall, his Book of Entries. folio. The Reading of
the Satute of Limitation. The Register of Writs. folio. Three learned Readings
made upon three very useful Statutes. 1o. By S^ Ja. Dyer, upon the Statute of
32 ^. 8. Chap. 1. of wills, and 34, ^ 5. H. 8. Chapter 5. for explanation of that
Statute. 2o. By Sr J. Bro^rave upon the Statute of 27. H. 8. Chapter 10. concerning
joyntures. 3o. By T. Ridsden Esquire upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. Chapter 9. of
forcible Entry. 4o.
S.
Mr SWinburne. A brief Treatise of the Testaments and last Wills, fit to to be
understood of all Subjects of England (that desire to know, whether, whereof,
and how they may make their Testaments, and how it may be effected or hindered)
compiled of such Laws, Ecclesiastical and Civil, as are not repugnant to the
Laws, Statutes, and Customs of England, nor derogatory the Prerogative Royal.
4o. Mr Sheapeard. An Epitome of all the Common and Statute Laws of this Nation
now in force, wherein 1500 hardest terms are explained, with the most useful
and profitable heads or titles of the Law are explained by way of common place,
largely, plainly, and methodically handled. folio. -- The faithful Counselor,
or Marrow of the Law, in two parts. First, Showing how any Action may be laid
in the Common Law, etc. The second part, in what causes, and for what injuries
relief is to be had in the High Court of Chancery. 4o. -- The whole Office of
the Country Justice of Peace, setting down all their power and duty, both in
and out of the Quarter Sessions: with the Ordinances and Acts of Parliment
abridged, that any way concern the power. 8o. -- The Touchstone of common
Assurances, opening the learning of the Common assrance or conveyances of the
Kingdom. 4o. -- The young Clarks Guide, or an exact collection of choice
presidents, according to the best form now used for all sorts of Indentures,
Letters of Attorney, Releases, Conditions, Obligations in English, Letters of
license and composition, Assignments, etc. In two parts. 8o. -- The
Court-keepers Guide. A plain and useful Treatise for the help of keeping Law
days, or Court Baron. Showing the Jurisdiction of their Courts, with the
learning of Mannours, Copy-holds, Rents, Harriots, etc. 8o. * -- The Offices of
Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor, Supervisors of Highways,
Treasurers of the County Stock, and other Country Offices plainly set set
forth. In two Books. The first of the High-Constables, Bursholds, Tything-men,
etc. 8o. -- The Justice of Peace, his Clarks Cabinet, or a Book of Presidents
or warrants fitted and made ready to his hand, for every case that may happen
within the compass of his Masters Office, for the ease of the Justice of Peace,
and more speedy dispatch of Justice. 8o. -- The President of Presidents, or one
general President for common assurances by Deeds: being an extract of all the
Readings and Presidents thereof extant, of singular use for all men. 4o. -- The
Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tithes, showing who must pay Tithes, to whom, and
of what, when, and how, also how they may be recovered, and how a man may be
discharged at the payment thereof. * -- A view of all the Laws and Statutes of
this Nation, concerning the service of God or Religion. 12o. -- A Survey of the
County Judicatures, commonly called County Court, Hundred Court, County Court,
and Court Baron. -- Proposals humly presented to his Highness and the
Parliament touching the regulation of the Laws. 8o. Statuta Pacis, or a Table
of all the Statutes now in force, which any way concerned the Office of a
Justice of Peace, the several duties of Sheriffs, head Officers of
Corporations, Stewards in Leets, Constables, etc. 12o. *A Collection of
several Acts of Parliament, published in the years 1648, 1649, 1650, and 1651.
very useful especially for Justices of the Peace, and other Officers in
execution of their duties, and administration of Justice: with some Ordinances
of Parliament of like concernment: Also several Acts of Parliament, made in
the 17 and 18 years Reign of the late King, and Ordinances touching Adventerers
for Ireland: by H. Scobell Esquire folio. Mr Stone. The Reading of the Statute of
the 13th of Queen Eliz. Chap. 7. Learnedly and amply explained. 8o. Duke
Hemiltons Case argued by Lord Chief Baron Steel. 4o. Fleta. An ancient
Manuscript of the Laws of England. published by J. Seldom Esquire 4o. Sr J. Skeene,
Clark of the Kings Registers; Regiam Majestatem, the old Laws and Constitutions
of Scotland, faithfully collected from the Register, and other Authentik Books:
from the days of King Malcolne the second, till King James the first.
Corrected from many Errors committed by ignorant Writers; also added two
Treatises: First, Of the order of process observed, before the Lords of the
Council and Session. Secondly, Of crimes, and Judges in cases criminal.
English. folio. -- The same in Latin. folio. Mr Style. Inner-Temp. Regestum
Practicale, or Practical Register; containing Rules and Orders concern, the
com. Law, and Pract. thereof, chiefly relating to the Upper-Bench. 8o.
T.
Le Terms de la ley, or certain difficult and obscure words and terms of the
common Laws and Statutes of this Realm now in use, expounded and explained,
with a new addition of 250 words. 8o. A general Table to all the several
Books of Reports of the late most Reverend Judge St Ed. Cook. 8o. Mr Tratman.
The Abridgment of the Lord Cook's 11 Reports. 8o.
V.
VIcessimo priveo Jacob, and primo, and tertio Caroli. folio.
W.
J. WIngate Esquire an exact Abridgment of all Statutes in force and use, upon the
4th of January 1642. extracted out of the said Statutes, from the beginng of
Magna Charta to the said time. 8o. Mr Welwood. An abridgment of all sea-Laws,
amonst any people or Nation the coasts of the great Ocean. 8o. A Treatise
collected out of the Statutes concerning the Office and Authorities of Coroners
and Sheriffs, with an easy method for keeping a Court Lee^, Court Baron, and
Hundred Court: by M^ J. Wilkinson: The return of Writs newly added, by Mr J.
Kichin. 8o. Reports of that Reverend and Learned Judge Sr H. Winch Knight,
containing many choice cases, and excellent matter touching declarations,
pleadings, demurrs, judgments, and resolutions, in point of Law, in the last
four years of King James. folio. Presidents, the first and second part: by H.
West. 4o. Mr White. For the sacred Laws of the Land. A learned Book. 8o. De
priscis Anglarum Legibus, the ancient Laws of England. Translated from Saxon
and Latin, out of Mr Lamberts own Manuscript Copy, now with additions of Mr
Weelock of Cambridge. Mr Wiseman Dr of the Civil Law. The Law of Laws, or the
excellency of the Civil Law, above all other humane Laws whatsoever: showing of
how great use and necessity the Law is to this Nation. 4o.
Y.
W. YOung Esquire Vade Mecum; containing the substance of such Statutes, wherein
any one or more Justices of the Peace are enabled to deal in or out of the
Sessions of the Peace. 12o. The Year-Book of Edw. the 4th. folio.
Z.
Mr R. ZOuch Professor of the Civil Law in Oxford. Cases and Qestions resolved
in the Civil Law 8o. -- Juris and Judicii fecialis, sive Juris inter gentes,
and quaestionum de eodem explicato. 4o. -- Specimen quaestionum Juris Civilis,
cum designatione authorum a quibus in utramque partem discuituntur. 4o. -- De
legati delinquentis judice competente dissertatio. in qua H. Grotii, de ea re
sententia explicatur, expenditur and asseritur. 12o.
BOOKS OF THE MATHEMATICS. VIZ. Arithmatick, Geometry, Music, Astronomy,
Astrology, Dialling, measuring of Land and Timber, Gageing Vessels, Navigation,
Architecture, etc. ALSO Of Horsemanship, Faulconry, Merchandise, Limning,
Millitary Discipline, Herauldry, Fireworks, Husbandry, etc.
DEcimall Arithmatick, or the use of Napiers Bones: by W. Barton. 8o. The
Handmaid to Arithmatick, refined by Mr Hunt. 8o. The Idea of Arithmatick. 8o. *
Artificial Arithmatick, the quintessence of the golden rule, with the true
valuation of all Annuities: by Mr Jagar. 8o. The Art of numbering by Rods,
extraction of Roots, Square and Cubick root,: by the Lord Napier. 12o. -- His
Logarithms. Arithmatick made plain to the easiest capacity, in two Books,
natural and decimall, being most useful for all Gent. Merchants and others,
by Mr Wilsford, 8o. *The Jewel of Arithmatick. 12o. Mr Record. Arithmatick, or
the grounds of Arts, teaching the perfect work and practice of Arith. both in
whole numbers and fractions, after an easy and exact form; with enlargements
of the rules of practice, valuation of all coins, extraction of roots, Tables
of board and timber, with Tables of interest, etc. 8o. Mr Hills. The Art of
vulgar Arith. in Intigers and Fractions, also added Musae Mercatorum,
containing all profitable rules for Merchandising. 4o. Mr Johnson. Arithmatick
in two Books. 1o. Of vulgar Arith. with easy rules to work all the four parts
of Arith. in numbers and fractions. 2o. Of Decimall Arith. etc. 8o. Mr Baker.
The Wellspring of Sciences, the perfect work and practice of Arith. in numbers
and fractions, with Tables of measures and weights. 12o. Mr Wingate.
Arithmatick made easy, in two parts. 1o. Of natural Arith. in numbers and
fractions, enlarged with rules, and seven Chapters, by Mr Kersby, Teacher of
the Mathematics. The second containing a perfect method for the true knowledge
and practice of artificial Arith. performed by Logarithmes; resolving all
Arithmeticall Questions, by addition and substraction: with the use of the line
of proportion, exhibiting the Logarithme of any number under 100000. with
equiation of time, interest, etc. 8o. *Mr Moore. Arithmatick in two Books,
discovering the secrets of that art in numbers and species; after a more plain,
exact, and easy way then ever. 1o. By Precept. 2o. By Example. The ordinary
operations in numbers, whole, and broken: the rules of practice by Decimalls:
pract. Logarithmes, Napiers bones; with new propositions touching quantities,
qualities, resultments, and rules of Medicines fitted for Mathematicions. The
second Book of the great rule of Algebra in species, resolving all questions by
suppositions, with Trigonometry, Planiteritry, Steriomitry, and all other parts
of their art military Mr Rawlin. Practical Arithmatick in whole numbers,
fractions, and decimalls, fitted to the most reasonable understanding, and very
useful for Gent. Merchants, or Tradesmen. 8o. Mr Fisher. Arithmeticall
Questions, touching the buying or exchangeing of Annuities, taking of leases
for fines or yearly Rent, purchase of Fee-simples. 8o. Mr Blundevill. Eight
exercises discovering the knowledge of Arithmatick, cosmography, Astronomy,
Navigation, Geography, etc. 4o. Mr Webster. Tables of interest, simple interest
direct. simple interest to rebate, etc. also compound with true valuation of
annuities, leases, fines, with a speedy way for summing up the price of
commodities. 8o. *Mr Gibson. Syntaxis Mathematica, or a construction of the
harder problems of Geometry, with so much of the Conicks as is therefore
requisite, and other more ordinary and useful propositions intermixed. 8o. Mr
Butler. The scale of interest, or Tables and Brevials, showing the forbearances
and discounts of any sums of money for any time. 8o. Mr Howes. Short
Arithmatick, or the old and tedious way of numbering, reduced to a new and
brief method. 12o. Mr Lysbourn. Arithmatick vulgar; decimall, and
isntrumental, etc. 8o. Mr Bridges. Vulgar Arith. explaining the secrets
thereof, etc. 8o. -- The complete Surveyor, containing the whole art of
surveighing land; by the plain Table, Theodolite, circumferentor, and pe^actor;
taking of all heights, etc. folio. * The Purchasers Pattern, showing the true
valuation of any purchase of Land or Houses, by lease or otherwise: with a
Table of interest, and for measureing of Timber. In two Books: with gauging.
12o. Mr Wingate. Two Tables of Logarithmes; contain^ng, 1o. The Logarithme of
any number, from one to 100 thousand, by Mr Row. The second, The Logarithme of
the right signs and tangents, of all the degrees and minutes of the quadrant,
each degree divided into a 100 minutes, and the logarithme of the Kadius or
Semidiamiter, with the admirable use for resolving problmes in Geom. Astron.
Geogra. Navigation, etc. 8o. -- The construction and use of the
Logarithmericall Tables whereby multiplication is performed by addition;
division by substraction, and resolution of Triangles, right lined and
sphericall by addition and substraction. Englished from the French. 8o. -- The
use of the rule of proportion in Arithmatick and Geometry, wherein is incerted
the construction and use of the same rule in questions that concern Astronomy,
Dialing, Geometry, Navigation, Gageing, etc. 8o. -- The construction and use of
the line of proportion, whereby the hardest questions of Arith. and Geom. in
broken and whose numbers are resolved by addition and substraction. 8o. *
Tactometria seu tetagne nometria, or the Geometry of Regulars practically
proposed after an exact and new manner, with rules for gageing vessels. 8o. *
The exact Surveighour of Land, to plot all grounds, to reduce and divide the
same, by the plain Table, Theolodite, and Circumferentar; to find the Area of
Land; to make a Map thereof, and adorn it. 8o. *Mr Foster. Elliptical or
Azimuthall Horologiography, containing several ways of describing Dials: upon
all kinds of superficies, either plain or curved, etc. 4o. -- The use of the
Quadrant, fitted for daily practice, both for the ordinary lines, for the hour
and azimuth, and other things of the same course in reference to the Horizon,
with new lines; also to find the hour of the night by Stars; the description of
usual sorts of Dials, to perform all common things in Mensuratior. 8o.
Shinerii Ars Nova delineandi. 4o. -- Fundamentum opticum. * The Key of the
Mathematics new filed, with the resolutions of Adfected equations, with the
Art of Geometrical Dialling. 8o. *Mr Goodwin. A Table of gageing all manner of
vessels. 8o. Trigonometry, or the doctrine of Triangles: writ in Lat. by B.
Pitiscus in Selesia, now Englished: also added certain nauticall Questions in
the finding of the variation of the compass; all performed by Arithmetic,
without Map, Sphere, Globe, or Astrolobe. 4o. Mr Dary. The description and use
of a universal quadrant. *Mr Scarborough. Trigonometry. 4o. Cor. Agrippa, his
occult Philosophy, of Geomany; Magical elements, of P. de Albano. The nature
of spirits. 4o. Euclid's Elements of Geometry. The first six Books, in a
compendious form contracted and demonstrated, by Cap. T. Rudd. chief Engenier
to hi^ late Majesty; with a Mathematical Preface, by Mr J. Dee. 4o. *Mr Fale.
Horologiographia, or the Art of Dialling, for making all sorts of Dials, and
how to know the hour of the night by Dial. 4o. * The Antiquity and Excellency
of Globes, what the Globe is, and of the Circles, Horizon, Meridian, Pole,
Axes, etc. Tropicks, Zodiacks, etc. 4o. Mr Hewes. Tractatus duo Mathematici,
quorum primus de globis Caelestibus and Terrestribus eorumque usu. Alter
Breviarium totius orbis Terrarum. Pet. Bertii Math. and profess. Regii. 12o.
The same in English. 12o. Mr Carpenter's Geography delineated forth in two
Books, containing the Sphericall and Topicall parts thereof. 4o. The Works of
that famous Mathematician Mr E. Gunter, professor of Astronomy in Gresham
College, newly printed with many Additions and Corrections: by S. Foster late
Professor of the same College. 4o. Vignola. The Complete Architect, the rules
of the five Orders in Architecture, etc. Tuscan, Dornick, Jonick, Corinthian,
and Composite; showing the proportion of all the members, which in a building
have relation to one another. English. 8o. -- The Same Lat. folio. Parralelle
de Architecture. folio. Vitruvii Architectura. folio. Sabastian Shirley's
Architect. folio. Hans Blooms. S. Colloms. folio. Andr. Poladio's Architect.
folio. Albect. Duer's Architect. folio. Ving boon's Architect. folio. *Mr
Gillibrand. The Institution Trigonometricall, explaining the Doct of Dimension,
of plain and sphericall Triangles, done by Tables both of signs, tangents,
secants, and logarithmes; with their application in Quest. of Astron. and
Navigation. 8o. *Dialling proved instrumentally by our Hemispheare in Plane,
first projected by Mr Oughtred: with one and twenty several Diagrams, or
Schemes, demonstrating the ground work of all Dialling: also to know,
distinguish, and set down the hour lines for both faces of all planes at one
working. 4. Vary Architecture D.J. Fr. Fanelli. Florentino scultore, del
Redella grand Britagne. 4o. Mr Dig. Tectonicon: The exact measuring of all
land, squares, timber, stone, steeples, pillars, globes, making, and use of the
Carpenters rule; fit for Surveighors, land meaters, joyners, carpenters,
masons, etc. *Mr Oughtred. Clavis Mathematicae de uno limata sive potens
fabricata: cum aliis quibusdam ejusdem commentationibus qua^ in sequenti pagina
recensentur. 8o. *Circles of proportion. Trigon. or manner of calculating the
sides and Angles of Triangles, by the Mathematical cann. demonstrated.
English, 4o. -- Trigonometria. Hoc est modus computandi triangulorum, latera
and Angulos, ex canone mathematico Traditus and demonstratus. 4o. Lansbergi
Tabulae perpetuae motuum caelestium. 4o. Tabulae Rudolphine. folio. Josephini
Blunchani de sphera mundi. folio. Anguelonii Optica. folio. Tabulae
Mathematicae, containing the natural and artificial signs and Tangents, and
the secants natural of every degree, and hundred part of a degree, with an
institution Mathematical, for the use of the said Tables, in the solution of
all triangles, plain and spericall, with the application thereof, in Astronomy,
Dialling, and Navigation. 8o. Mr Partridg. The art of numbering by Rods,
whereby the operations of Multiplication and division, extraction of roots,
etc. Are performed by addition and substraction, with many examples for
practice of the same. 8o. Mr Brigges. Trigonometria Britanica, seu de Doctrina
triangulorum, lib. duo. 8o. -- Arithmetica logarithma, sive logarithmorum,
chiliades centum pro numeris naturali seriae cresentibus ab unitate ad 100000.
Hynd linij. Mathematica. 4o. Mr. Norwood. The doctrine of Triangles, showing
the mensuration of right lined Triangles, and Sphericall, with grounds and
demonstrations, both by logarithmes, with the application thereof in three
kinds of sailing, with Tables of the Suns declension. 4o. -- Epitome. Or the
application of the Doctrine of Triangels, in certain problems, to the use of
the plain Sea-Chart and Mercators, with a table of artificial signs and
tangents, and complements Arithmeticall of sines, supplying the use of Secants.
8o. Mr Batts. His Waterworks, and Fireworks. 12o. Mr Stirrup. The artificers
plain scale, or the Carpenters new rule. 1. Showing how to measure all
superficies and solids, as timber, stone, etc. Geometrically, 2. To do the same
instrumentally, upon the scale it self, without Arithme^ick, or Geometry, also
to take height, and distances several ways and to draw the plot of a Town or
City. 12o. * -- The universal quadrant. 8o. * Oedipus. The resolver of secrets
in nature. 8o. A Book of Scheemes and Figure. A discourse of artificial
Fireworks, the true grounds of that art, with a treatise of Geometry, by Mr
Brabington, Student in the Mathematics. folio. Mr Blagraves Things of
Mathematics. 8o. Mr Hoptons Things of Mathematics. 8o. Mr Ward. Institutiones
Trigonom. 4o. *Mr Newton. Justitutio Mathem. 12o. -- Help to calculation, or
two Tables of Decimall numbers and Logarithmes, for converting of Sexagenary
Tables into Decimals, and the contrary Tables of Declination, right and oblique
assention, etc. 4o. Mr Shackerle. Tabulae Brittanica; containing Logisticall
Arithmetic, Doctrine of the Sphere, Astronomicall Chronology, Ecclesiastical
account, equation and reduction of time, with Calculation of the motions of the
fixed and wandering stars, etc. 8o. Mathematical Recreations, Or rare and
exquisive inventions for accute wits, and industrious disposions, replenished
with mysteries, secrets, and rarities, both Arithmeticall, and Mathematical.
12o. * Mathematical Magic. 8o. The use of nocturall. by W.P. 8o. Mr Wallis.
Due correction for Mr Hobbs for not saying his lesson right in reference to the
Mathematics, 8o. The use of the quadrant, showing to know the height of
steeples, trees, houses, etc. Of the Sun, Moon and Stars, Sun setting and
rising, etc. 8o. *Mr Hotham. Teutonick Philosophy. *Mr Morgan. Horologiographia
optica, Dialling Universal and particular speculative and practical, in a
threefold precognita, Geometrical, Philosophical, and Astronomicall, in a
threefold pract. Arith. Geom. and isntrumental, with the court of art, for
dyalls, globes, difference of Meridians, and propositions of Astronomy. 4o.
Aurora, Or the day spring, the root or mother of Philosophy, Astrology, and
Theology from the true ground, by J. Behmen. 4o. Dyalling universal, performed
by an easy and speedy way the hour lives, etc. by scales on a portable Ruler.
4o. The Caelestiall Ambassador. 8o. Mr Turner. Astrologicall optics,
representing the face of every sign, the images of each degree in the Zodiach,
etc. The signification of each Planet, etc. Translated from J. Angellus, and J.
Regiomontanus Mathem. at Venice. 8o. Johanes Angelius. An ancient and sober
Treatise of Astrology. Textus de sphera, I. de Sacrobosco, introductoria
(quantum necessarium est,) comentariopue ad villitatem studenteum,
Philosophiae, Parisiensis, Achademiae illustratus, cum compositione annuli,
Astronomici, B^neti, Latensis: and Geometria, Euclidis, Megarensis. folio. *Mr
V. Wing. Harmonicon caeleste, or the Celestial Harmony of the visible world,
containing an entire and absolute piece of Astronomy. folio. * -- An Ephemeris
for the Celestial motion, for 7. years, beginning 1651. ending 1658.
Diligently calculated according to the Doctrine of Harmonicon celeste, and
applied to the Horizon of London; with an Introduction of the use thereof. 4o.
* -- Astronomia Instaurata; or a new and compendious restoration of Astronomy
in Four parts. 1. Logica Astronomica, Astronomicall Arithmetic. 2. The
Doctrine of the Sphere, etc. 3. The Theory of the Caelestiall motions,
representing the face of the visible world, etc. 4. Astronomicall Tables,
exhibiting the true motion of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets and Eclypses
past, present, and to come; also a Catalogue of the Caelestiall motions, that
have been made by T.L. Gasendus Landgrave, of Hessia and others. folio. --
Urania practica, or practical Astronomy in Seven parts, with somewhat
concerning Navigation. 8o. *Mr Warren. Magic Astrology vindicated from
aspersions, their justification, etc. 4o. Mr Ramsey. Astrologia Restaurata, or
Astrology restored, being an introduction to the general and chief part of the
language of the Stars, proving the legallity of Astrology, from Scripture and
reason; with the manner and Characters of Planets, Signs and Revolutions of the
World, Eclypses, Comets, blazing Stars; how to judge of general accidents, of
Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, alterations of Empires, etc. folio. Dariotus
Redivivus, or a brief introduction of the judgment of the Stars, wherein the
whole art of judicial Astrology is made plain. 4o. Mr Hartgill. Astronomicall
Tables, showing the declensions, right assentions, and aspects of 365. of the
most principal fixed Stars, and number of them in their constellations. 4o.
Mr Lilly. Christian Astrology modestly treated of in Three Books. 1. The use
of the Ephemeris, errecting of a scheme of Heaven, etc. With an introduction to
the whole art of Astrology. 2. How to resolve questions in health, riches,
marriages, etc. 3. How to judge on nativities. etc. 4o. -- Monarchy noe
Monarchy, with the prophecies of the white King, and several Hierogliphicks.
4o. -- Annus tenebrosus, or the dark year, showing how to judge of Ecclypses,
etc. 4o. -- Astrologicall predictions, etc. 4o. Mr Culpepper. Catastrophe
magnatum, or the fall of Monarchy; a caveat for Majestrates, deduced for the
Eclypse of the Sun. 4o. -- The mystery of Astronomy made plain to the meanest
capacity, by an Arithmeticall description of the Terrestiall and Celestial
Globe, showing the wonderful Works of God, from the Earth his footstool, to
his Throne the Heaven. 8o. The most excellent profitable, and pleasant Book, of
the famous and expert Astrologian Archandum, to find the fatal destiny,
constellation, complexion, and natural inclination of every Man and Child, by
birth, with an addition of Phisiognomy. 8o. * Magia Adamica. Or the antiquity
of Magic, and the descent thereof from Adam downward proved, The true Caelum
terrae, or Magicians Heavenly Chaos, and first matter of all. 8o * Lumen, de
Lumine. Or a new Magical light discovered and communicated to the world. 8o.
The knowledge of things unknown, showing the effects of the Planets, and other
Astronomicall constellations, with the strange events that befell men, weomen,
and Children born under them. 8o. * Chilmend. Unheard of curiosities,
concerning the talismanicall sculpture of the Persians, the Horoscope of the
Patriarchs, and reading of the Stars, translated from the French. 8o. Mr
Wright. Certain errors in navigation, detected and Corrected, with many
additions. An excellent Tutor for Masons, Carpenters, Joyners, Glasiers,
Bricklayers, Plaisterers, Painters, and all Handicrafts; Certain necessary and
reddy helps of Geometry, which is the first degree of all good art. folio. *A
Tutor to Astronomy and Geography, or an easy and speedy way to understand the
use of both Globes; Caelestiall and Terestiall, translated from Guil. Blian. by
J.M 8o. I. Bambrigii. Astron. Profess. Ox. Quibus accesserunt, Insigniorum
aliquot stellarum longitudines, and latitudines ex Astron. obser, etc. 8o.
Euclidis elementorum, lib. 15. accessit, lib. 16, de solidorum regularum, etc.
Cum clavii notis. 2. Voll. 8o. The spirall line Printed. Mr Eaton. A Treatise
of Months and Years, comprehending a survey of the Solar and Lunar months and
years, of the months and years formerly in use, among the Hebrews, Babilonians,
Persians, Egiptians; etc. with abridgement of the History of the world, with
Mathem. observations. 8o. *Sr Chapter Hyden. An Astrologicall discourse with
Mathematical demonstrations, proving tha influence of the Planets and fixed
Stars upon Ellementary bodies in justification of the verity of Astrology.
12o. *Mr Street. An Ephemeris, Geocentricall and Heliocentricall for, 1653. Ars
notoria. The notory art of Solomon, showing the Cabalisticall key of Magical
operation, liberal sciences, divine revelations, art of memory, with an
Astrologicall Catechism, fully demonstrating the art of juditiall Astrology,
with an excellent invention done by the Magic virtue of the loadstone,
translated from Latin by R. Turner. 12o. Astronomia Britanica. Exhibiting the
Doctrine of sphere, and theory of the Planets, Decimally by Trigonomitry, and
by Tables fitted for the Meridian of London, according to the Copernican
System, as it is illustrated Bullialdus, and the easy way of calculation, by
Dr Ward. I. Newton. M.A. 4o. The secrets of Albertus Magnus, of the virtues of
herbs, stones, and certain beasts; with a short discourse of the Planets,
governing the nativities of Children; also of marvelous things of the world,
etc. 8o. * Chyromancy. Or the art of divining by the lives in the hand in 19.
Geniturus; a discourse of the soul of the word by G. Wharton, Esquire. 8o. *The
Book of Palmistry and Phisiognomy, being a brief introduction both natural,
pleasant and delectable to the art of Chyromancy, or the mannuall divination
and Phisiognomy, with circumstances upon the faces of the signs: also of
natural Astrology, with the nature of Planets. 12o. The Dutch Fortuneteller.
folio. Via Regia ad Geometriam. The way to Geom. being necessary and useful
for Astronomers, Geogra-Land-meaters, Seamen, Engineers, Architecks, Painters,
Carvers, etc. by P. Ranus, englished by Mr Bedwell. 4o. That excellent piece of
Phisiogmony and Chyromancy metoposcopie, the symmetricall proportions and
signal moles of the body, the Subject of Dreams, with the art of memory. by
Mr Saunders, in folio. Erra pater. 8o. * Bosthuma Fosteri. The description of a
ruler, with diverse scales and uses thereof, whereby most propositions in
Astron. Naviga. and dialling are easily performed, also delineating of far
declining dials, and delineating all Horizontall dials. 4o. Mr Cattle. A
perpetual and universal Alminack; with the most necessary propositions in
Astronomy and Cosmography, by tables and Trigonometry. 8o. A description of the
admirable Tables of Logarithems, with a declaration of the most easy and
speedy use thereof in both kinds of Trigonometry, as also in all Mathematical
Calculations, by Ld Napier. traslated by Mr Wright, with an addition of the
istrumentall Table, to find the first part porportionall, by Mr Brigges. 12o.
*Mr Dansie. A Mathematical mannuell, handling Arith. Planimetry, Stereometry,
and embattailing of Armies; measuring of Superficies, solids, the gauging of
Cask, with proportional numbers fitted to gauging of Rods, etc. 12o. A Tutor
to Astrology, or Astrology made easy; an introduction to the whole art; a
Table of the houses, with other Tables, by W E. 12o. *A Table of the Twelve
Astrological Houses of Heaven; carefully composed in a Book of Figures ready
set for every four minutes of time, whereby judgment of a question may be
given without an ephemeris, by V.W. 8o. The Sea-mans Chalender, or an
ephemerides of the Sun, Moon, and certain of the most noble fixed Stars. A
Table of the longitude and latitude of all the most eminent places of the
world, an exact table of the North Star, new Tables of 65. of the principal
fixed Stars, the time of the coming upon the Meridian every day, with a
discovery of a way to find the long hidden secret of longitude, by I. Plat. and
H. Bond. Teacher of Mathematics. 4o. Orthodox all Navigation, or the admirable
and excellent art of Arithmeticall great circle sailing, enlarged and applied
to the places of all situations, with a new and Paradoxal chart. 8o. The
Sea-mans secrets, in two parts saling; Horizontall, Paradoxall, and upon a
great circle, an Horizontall tide Table, with a regiment newly calculated, for
the finding of the declension of the Sun, etc. 4o. The safeguard of Sailers, or
great Rutter. Containing the courses, distances, soundings, floods and ebbs,
with the marks of the entrance, several harbors, of Eng. France, Spain, Irel.
Fland. and the sounds of Denmark; with other necessary rules of common
navigation, by R.N. Hydographer. 4o. The Sea-mans Glass; or a plain scale
whereby all questions, nauticall and propositions Astronomicall, are easily and
demonstratively wrought, by I. Aspley. 4o. The Seamans Practice, containing a
fundamental problem in Navigation, experimentally verified, viz. Touching the
compass of the earth and sea, and the quantity of a degree in our English
measure, also to keep a reckoning at Sea for all sailing, etc. by R. Morwood,
reader of the Mathematics. 4o. The Navigator, showing and explaining all the
chief principals and parts, both Theorick and Practick, that are contained in
the famous art of Navigation, with a new and admirable way of sailing by the
arch of one of the greatest Circles, with the true proportion of all
parrallels, in respect of the Meridian, by Cap. Chapter Saltingstoll. 4o. The
Geometrical Seaman. or the art of Navigation performed by Geometry, showing
how all the three kinds of Sailing, by the plain chart, by Mercators chart, and
by a great circle, may be easily and exactly performed by a plain ruler, and a
pair of compasses; without Arithmeticall Calculation, by H. Phillips. 4o. A
pathway to perfect sailing; showing the fix principal points of Navigation,
by R. Potter, one of the principal Masters of the Navy Royal, with a
nauticall discourse, to prove the way of a ship (upon the superficies of the
Sea) outward and and homeward to be both one, returning by the opposite point
of the Meridian compass, also to prove the East and the West directed by the
Meridian compass, to lead in a magneticall parallel, by H. Bond. 4o. The
Sea-mans Grammar. *A description and plat of the Seacoasts of England from
London to New Castle, so to Edenburg and Scotlaad; also Norway, Denmark sound,
etc. 4o. The Sea-mans Dictionary; or an exposition and demonstration of all the
parts and things belonging to a Ship, with terms and phrases used in the
Practick of Navigation, by Sr H. Manwaring. 4o. Mr Nigh. The art of Gunnery. 8o.
The Pilots Mirour; or Sea-mans looking-glass, setting forth the Northern,
Eastern, and Western Navigation, both of Seas and Coasts, furnished with many
necessary Sea cards, discoveries of lands, with diverse differences in courses
and distances, with a brief introduction to the art of Navigation. folio. M.
Descartes. An excellent compendium of music, with necessary and judicious
animadversions thereupon, by a person of honor illustrated with figures. 4o. A
musical banquet, set forth in three choice varieties of music. 4o. A brief
introduction to skill of Music by song or voyall. 8o. Mr Dock. His little
consort of three parts, containing, Pavans, Airs, Corants, and Sarabrands for
Voyalls or Voyalins, in two varieties, the first 20. for too Trebles and a
Base, the last 20. for Treble, Tenor, and Base, to be performed alone, or with
Theorbo's and Harpsicon. 4o. Mr Child. Choice Music to the Psalms of David,
for three voices with a continual Basse, either for Organ or Theorbo. 8o. A
Book of Dancing, in plain rules for country dances, with tunes to each dance,
with tunes for French corants, with pleasant tunes for Treble-Violin, for
beginners. 8o. Music Recreation, or choice tunes for the lyra voyall. 4o.
Airs and Dialogues, for one two or three voices, by Mr Laws, servant to his
late Majesty in his pub. and private Music. folio. New and choice tunes for
the Cittern, with lessons for Gittern, etc. 4o. Court aires; Or Pavins,
Almains, Corants and Sarabrands of two parts; Treble and Base, for Voials or
Vyolins in consort, to the Theorbo, Lute or Virginals. 4o. Elians Tracticks; or
the art of embatteling of an Army. folio. Animadversions of War; or the
military Magazine, by Mr Ward. folio. Instructions for Musters and Arms. 4o.
Mr Elton. The complete body of the art, military, exactly compiled and
gradually Composed, for the foot in the best refined manner, according to the
practice of the modern times in three Books, or with the duties of Officers and
Soldiers, etc. 4o. Mr Barriffe. Millitary discipline, or the young
artillery-man, showing the postures of Muskut and pike, forms for embatteling,
also Mars his Triumph. 4o. A Tract of Fortifications, with 22. brass cuts. 8o.
The complete Captain. Or an abridgment of Caesar's wars, with observations upon
them, with the order of the militia of the ancients, and a particular treatise
of modern war, written by the D. of Roan, late General. 8o. The art of
War, or military discourse, by Mr J. Crus^. Cotgraue, the French and English
Dictionary, with the animadversions and supplement of J. Howell Esquire folio. The
sure guide to the French Tongue, teaching to pronounce French naturally, read
perfectly, and write truly. 8o. The French Bible. 8o. 12o. The French
Accidence. 4o. The French Grammar. 8o. The French Verbes. 8o. The Marrow of the
French Tongue, containing rules for pronounciation, an exact Grammar of the
nine parts of speech, and Dialogues for Courteirs, Citizens, etc. with phrases,
letters, missives, proverbs, etc. folio. An introduction to the French Tongue,
teaching with much case, facility and delight, how to attain briefly and most
exactly to the true and modern pronounciation thereof, illustrated with elegant
expressions, and choice Dialogues. 8o. Advise concerning Bills of Exchange,
wherein is set forth the nature of Enchange of moneys, and Bills of Exchange,
different languages, manner of proceed in protests, countermane, security,
letters of credit, assignments generally; and the whole practical part and
body of exchang anatomized, with two Tables of new style and old style, by I.
Martius, P. Notary. 8o. Mr Carpenter. Most excellent instructions for keeping
Merchants books of accounts, by way of debtor and creditor, after the Italian
manner. folio. Choice phrases in Italian, rendered into English for the benefit
of Learners, with Italian proverbs. 8o. Lex Mercatoria. Or ancient Law
Merchant, in three parts according to the essential parts of Traffic, fit for
all Statesmen, Judges, Magistrates, Lawyers, Merchants, and all that Negotiate
in any part of the world; added also the Merchants mirror for keeping accounts
by way of debtor and creditor after the Italian manner, etc. folio. Enchiridion
Arithmeticon, A mannuel of millions or accounts ready cast up, to show suddenly
thereby the true valiew of any commodity, at any price whatsoever. 8o. The book
of rates of all the customs payable by Merchants for goods exported and
imported. 8o. The Merchants Avizo, Necessary for their Sons and Servants, when
first sent beyond the Seas. 4o. The Merchants Mapp of Commerce. The Treasure of
Traffic, or a discourse of foreign trade, wherein is showed the benefit and
commodity arising to a common wealth, by the skillful Merchant, by a well
ordered commerce and regular traffic. 4o. The circle Commerce, or balance of
trade, in defense of a free trade, wherein exchanges in general are
considered, and the whole trade of this Kingdom, with foreign Countries,
poised in the balance. 4o. Directions for all Gold current in England. 8o. The
scale of interests, or Tables and and Breviate, showing the forbearance and
discounts of any sums of money for any time, by R. Butler. Accounts of
Merchandise ready computed, Tables for measuring timber, glass, board, land,
etc. 8o. The Tradesman's Companion. 8o. A general treasury of accounts for all
countries in Christendom. 8o. Of a free trade, tending to the benefit of a
right ordered trade, the relative, nature, degrees, are qualifications of
liberty, which is to be enlarged or restrained according to that good which it
relates to. 4o. Most excellent instructions for keeping Merchant's books, by
way of debtor and creditor, after the Italian manner, by I. Carpenter Mer.
folio. Apprentises times entertainer accomptantly, or a methodicall means to
obtain the exquisite art of accountantship, by Mr Dafforn. 4o. Mr Markham. His
Masterpiece containing all knowledge belonging to Smith Farriers, or Horsleach,
for curing all diseases in Horses. 4o. -- The way to get wealth, containing the
natures, ordering, cureing, breeding, choice, use, and feeding all sorts of
Chattell, with the knowledge use and lawdable practice of all recreations fit
for Gent. with the office of a Housewife, Physic, Surgery, Banquets,
Cookery, preserving wine and other secrets, and for enriching all barren
ground, also for Orchards, planting, and grafting. 4o. -- The faithful
Farrier, or secrets in Horsmanship. 8o. -- The Country Farrier, curing all
diseases in Horses, Kine, sheep, Hoggs. 8o. -- A Method or Epitomy for curing
all diseases incident to Horses, which are 300. all cured with 12. medicines,
also for curing all sorts of Beasts and Birds. 8o. -- The Complete Ferrier,
wherein the depths of his skill is laid open in all those principal and
opproved secrets of Horsmanship, never before discovered, but lay in the
Authors breast. 8o. -- The perfect Horsman, or experienced secrets of Markhams
fifty years practice, showing the knowledge of a breeder, seeder, ambler,
rider, keeper, and buyer. 8o. Mr Maskhall. The government of cattle, oxen,
kine, calves, horses, sheep, goats, etc. 4o. T. De, Gray. The complete Horsman,
and expert Ferrier, for breeding choice natures, riding and dieting Horses,
with the cures for all diseases incident. The Garden of Eden, an accurate
description of all flowers, fruits, seeds, herbs, trees, and plants in England,
with rules how to advance their nature and growth, as well in seeds and herbs,
as the secret ordering of trees and plants, by that learned and great observer,
S. H. Plat, with a Philosophical garden, and touch at the vegetable work in
Physic, whose principal fire is the stomach of the Ostrich. 12o. The
Gardiners Labrinth, or a new art of Gardening, or rare secrets in that mystery,
never before published, both for delight and service, with diverse knots for
delight of a garden, with the use of every Physical Herb, with distillation of
waters. 4o. A new Orchard or garden, the best way for planting, grafting, and
also the husbandry of Bees, etc. 4o. Butler on Bees, the art thereof exactly
described. 4o. Bread for the Poor, and advancement of the English Nation,
promised by enclosure of the wastes and common grounds of England. 4o. The
English Improver, or a new survey of Husbandry, discovered to the Kingdom,
that some land both arrable and pasture, may be advanced double or treble,
other land to a five or ten fold, some 20. fold improvement; yea, some not
above 1. or 2. an acre to be worth, 3. or 4. or more, clearly demonstrated from
principles of sound reason, ingenuity, and late, but most certain real
experiences, held forth in six pieces of improvement. 4o. Markham. The whole
art of husbandry, in 4. Books, 1. Of the form of mansion, house, pasture, and
meadew, 2. Gardens, orchards, woods, 3. Breeding and feeding all cattle, 4. Of
poultery, foul, fish, Bees, fighting cocks, angling, etc. 4o. A perfect
platform for a Hopp garden. Austen. A Treatise of fruit trees, the manner of
grafting, seting pruning, and ordering them in all respects, according to the
new and easy rules of experience, gathered in the space of 20. years. 4o.
Hartlib. His legacy of husbandry, bequeathing to Eng. not only Braband, and
Flanders, but many other outlandish experiments, and secrets of plots and
others, useful for universal husbandry, never before published. 4o. Mr
Guillians. Desplay of Herauldry, manifesting a more easy access to the
knowledge thereof then formerly, also explaining the terms of hawking, and
hunting, for delight of the Gentry. folio. Mr York. The union of honor,
containing the Arms, Matches, and Issues, of the Kings, Dukes, Marq. and Earls
of Eng. from the Conquest to 1640. with the Arms of English Vicounts, and
Barons, etc, folio. Mr Carter. Honor Redivivus, or an Analisis of honor and
armory. 8o. The painting of the Ancients. The Cabinet of Jewels, discovering
the nature, virtue, vallew of precious stones, with infallible rules to escape
the deceit of all counterfeit. 8o. Mr Lathams Faulconcy, for training and
ordering hawks, with cures. 4o. Mr Peacham. The Gentleman's exercise, or art of
limning, painting, and blazoning of Coats of Arms. 4o. A book of limning,
drawing, washing, coloring of Mapps, and Prints, with the art of painting,
with names and use of colors used by Limners. folio. Orpheus, or a book of
souls, birds, and flies, upon branches of fruits, and slips lively discribed.
4o. Flora, or a book of flowers, fruits, beasts, birds, and flies exactly drawn
with their lively colors. 4o. The complete Angler, or contemplative man's
recreation, being a book of fish and fishing. 8o. The needless excellency, a
most pleasant book of cutworks. 8o. A book teaching the best way of carving and
serving. 8o. A book of all sorts of fishes. 4o. The mystery of nature and art,
of waterworks, fireworks, drawing, painting, and sundry experiments. 4o. A book
of habits and fancies, of Hollare. 4o. Pictures of vandicks originals, and
copies. 4o. All sorts of books for teaching to write shorthand or Charracters.
All sorts of books for teaching to write all sorts of hands, used in England,
as secretary, Roman, Italian, etc. A book of Beasts, lively drawn. 4o.
Romances Poems AND Plays.
ROMANCES.
ARiania, in two parts. folio. Prince Arthur. 4o. Artamnes, or grand Cirus in
seven parts. folio. Aristippus, or jealous lovers. 12o. Albino and Bellania.
12o. Astrea or loves Mirror. 8o. Advertisements from Parnassus. 8o. The
banished Virgin. follo. Barclay, his Argenis. 4o. Cloria, and Narcissus. 8o.
Chaste and lost lovers in Archadius, and Sephia. 8o. Choice Novels, and amorous
Tables. 8o. Cassandria. 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. parts. folio. Cassandria. The three
first books. 8o. Card of Courtship. 8o. Cleopatria. 8o. Cleriae, and Loria. 8o.
Glelia, by M. d. Scudery, in two volumes folio. Coralbo, in three books. Don
Fenise. 8o. Dorastus, and Favonia. 4o. Don Quixit. folio. Dianea, 1. and 2.
part. 8o. Eupheus, golden legacy. 4o. Elize. or innocence guilty. 12o. Grand
Cirus, King of Persia. folio. Golden Ass, 2. bo. of L. Apulius. 4o. Gerrardo
the unfortunate Spaniard. 8o. Heptameron, the Qu. of Navar. 8o. Hypolite, and
Issabella. 8o. Illustrious Bassa. 4. parts. folio Illstrious Sheperdess.
Innocent Lady, or illustrious Innocence. 8o. Imperious Brother. 8o. Leoline,
and Sydanis. 8o. Lysander, and Calista. 8o. Mock Romance. folio. Natures
Paradoxes. 4o. Nissena. 8o. Nuptial lover. 8o. Ornatus and Artesia. 4o.
Pembrooks Archadia. folio. Pleasant notes on Don Quicksot. folio. Pollixander.
folio. Parismus Prince of Bohemia. 4o. Palmerins of England. 4o. Palmerins de
oliva. 4o. Philoxipes and Pollicrite. 8o. Paris and Viena. 4o. Parthenissa by
Ld Breghall, 4. parts. 4o. Mr Renolds flower of fidelity. 8o. -- Gods revenge
against murder. folio. Seven Champians of Christendom. 4o. Triumphant Arch,
to the glory of the female Sex. 4o. Tragical Hist. of Fortunatus. 8o.
Triumphant lady or Crowned Innocence. 8o. Unfortunate Queen. 4o. Vallentine and
Orson. 4o. Boccales Table, or Quintessence of wit, (...) ^loquence and
Conversati^ 12o.
POEMS.
ALlarm to Poets. 4o. Mrs Bradstreet. The 10. muse, a Poem. 8o. Psyche, or
loves mystery, by J. Beamont. 4o. Mr Barrons Poems. 8o. Mr Cowley, several
love verses. 8o. -- Poems, Misselains, Pindarque deos, and a sacred Poem of the
troubles, of David. folio. Mr Curews Poems, with a masque. 8o. Mr Crashaw.
Steps to the Temple. 12o. Mr Cartwrights Poems, Traged. and Tragicom. 8o. Mr
Cleavelands Poems. 8o. Mr Cotgrave. A collection from the best drammatick
Poems. 8o. Mr Chapman. The crown of all homers work, with the battle of Froggs
and Mice. folio. Bp Corbetts Poems. 4o. Mr Chamberlins Epigrams and Epitaphs.
8o. Mr Colop. Poesis Rediviva. 8o. Mr Denham. The destruction of Troy. --
Coopers Hill. A Poem. 4o. Mr Davenant. Madagasker, with other Poems. --
Gondibert. A Poem. 8o. Dr Done. Poems. 8o. Mr Draytons Poems, Barrons Wars.
8o. -- The battle of agincourt, the mysteries of Q. Margaret. 8o. -- ^p pastor
fido, with other Poems. 4o. Dubartas. folio. Mr Fanshaws Poems. 8o. Mr Flecher.
The purchased Island, being poetical misselanies. 4o. Mr Farloes Emblems. 8o.
Godf. of Bulloin, or recovery of Jerusalem, with his life. folio. Mr Herbert.
Sacred Poems of the Temple. 12o. Mr Heaths Carrestella, Poems, Ellegie^, etc.
8o. Mr Hausted. A Poem in honor of Tobacco. 8o. Mr Harvey. The bucolicks of B.
Mantua. 8o. -- Hist. of Baalam, and Jonab, and J. the Baptist. 8o. Horrace, de
art poeticae, englished by B. Johnson, an execration against Vulcan, a mask of
Gypsies. 12o. Mr Haulcing. Odes of Horrace. 8o. Henry the Seventh. 8o. Mr
Howell. A vote or Poem of royal, presented to his Majesty. 4o. -- Two
Counter-Poems, 1. An clegy on the E. of Dorset, 2. An Epithalamium to the Ld
Mayor of Dorchest. -- Anglicae suspiria and lachrymae. 12o. Mr Harmands Poems.
8o. J. Hall Esquire Poems. 12o. Mt Herrick. Poems, Humane and Divine. 12o. Lyptius
de constantia. 12o. Mr Lawrance. the melancholy Knight. 4o. Mr Milton's Poems
with a mask before the Earl of Bridge water. 12o. Mr Murford, Fragmenta poetica.
12o. Orlando furioso. folio. Cuts. O. Metamorpho. folio. Cuts. O. Epistle. 8o.
Cuts. Mr Oglebie's Virgil. 8o. -- Esop. with cuts. 4o. Ov. De art amandi,
engl. 12o. Ov. De Tristibus. engl. 8o. Orchestra. A Poem of the antiquity and
excellency of dancing. 8o. Poems and fancies by the Lady Marg. Newcastle.
folio. A sacred Panegerick. by S. Marshall. 4o. Mr Quarrels, Poems. 8o. --
Emblems. 8o. -- Divine fancies. 12o. -- Boanerges, and Barnabas. 12o. Fons
Lacrimarum, an ellegy on Sr C. Lucas. 12o. -- Enchridion. 12o. -- Sheperds
Oracles. 4o. -- Solomon's Recantation. 4o. -- Argalus and Parthenia. 4o. Cuts.
-- Rape of Lucretia. 8o. Mr Stanly. Poems and Works. 8o. Mr Shaksper's Poems.
12o. Mr Stapleton. Muses on Hero and Leander. 12o. -- Juvenals, and Satyrs,
with Annotations. 8o. -- Herodian of Alexandria. 4o. Sr J. Sucklings, Fragmenta
aurea. 8o. Mr Shir^s Poems with a mask, the triumph of beauty. 8o. Satyr,
against Hypocrites. 4o. The sinagogues sacred Poems, in imitation of Mr
Herbert. Syon and Parnassus, or divine Epigrams. 12o. Mr Short's Poems. 12o. Mr
Stevenson's Poems. 8o. Mr Sherbon's Poems. 8o. Mr Tatham. Ostolla. A Poem. 12o.
Tenth Muse, or an exact Epitomy of the four monarchies. 8o. The works of J.
Tailor, the water Poet. folio. Mr Vaughams Poems. 8o. -- Silex Scintillans, 2
parts. 8o. Mr Watt's Poems and Epigrams. 8o. Mr Waller's Poems. 8o. Mr
Wither's. Britains Remembrancer. 8o. -- Campo musae. 8o. -- Vox pacifica. 8o.
-- Abuses stripped, and whipped. 8o. -- Emblems quickened with metricall and divine
Illustrations, with lotteries. folio. Mr Washbourn's divine Poems. 12o. Mr
Wincoll's Poems. 12o. Mr Wishhart's Immanuell. 4o. English Parnassus. 8o. Mr
Willan. The Phrigian Fabulist, or Esop. Fab. extracted from the lat. and
moralized. 8o.
PLAYS.
B. IOhnson's Plays. 2. vol. folio. The marriage of the arts. 4o. Michaelmas
Term. 4o. Just General. 4o. Fine Companion. 4o. Phoenix. 4o. Combat, of love
and friendship. A comedy, by Mr Mead. Mr Beamont, and Flecher, Wildgoose chase,
a Tragy-comedy. folio. -- 34. Plays, Comedies, and Tragedies, with a mask.
folio. -- Thiery and Thaeodoret. 4o. -- Mounseir Thomas. 4o. -- Cupids Revenge.
4o. -- Two noble Kinsmen. 4o. Elder Brother. 4o. -- Scornful Lady. 4o. --
Woman Hater. 4o. Mr Denham. The Sophy, a Tragedy. folio. The Country Capt. and
the variety. 4o. Sr J. Suckling. Discontented Collonell. 4o. The deserving
Favorite. 4o. The Sophister. 4o. Mr Chapman. Revenge of dussy de ambois. 4o.
-- Byron's Conspiracy. 4o. -- Byron's Tragedy. 4o. Mr Shirley. Contention for
honor and riches. 4o. -- Triumph of peace. 4o. -- Six Plays, The Brother, the
Sister, the doubtful Heir, the Imposture, the Cardinal, and Court-secretary.
8o. -- The Gamester. 4o. -- Royal Master. 4o. -- Gentleman of Venice. 4o. --
The Pollitian. 4o. Mr Quarel's Virgin Widow. 4o. The Rebellion, a Comedy. 4o.
Mr Stroad. The floating Island. 4o. The grateful Servant, a comedy. Tragedy of
the famous Roman Orator, M. T. Cicero. 4o. Mr Flecher. Rule a wife and have
her. 4o. -- Tragedy of Rollo Duke of Normandi. 4o. -- Faithful Shepardess. 4o.
Mr Shakspear's Plays. folio. -- King Leare, and his three Daughters, with the
unfortunate life of Edgar. 4o. -- The life and death of Rich. the 2o. 4o.
Lingua. A combat of the tongue, and five senses. 8o. The Ball 4o. The Tragedy
of the Chamlet. 4o. The Example. 4o. The Gamester. 4o. Dukes Mistres. 4o. The
old Law. 4o. The merry wines of Windsor. 4o. Mr Flecher. Three new Plays, viz.
The bashful Lover, the guardian, and the very Woman. 4o. It Is pity she is a
whore. 4o. The honest whore, 2. parts. 4o. The Oppertunity. The swaggering
Damsel. 4o. Four Plays in Latin; Lotola, Stoicus, Vapulans, Cancer, and
Pazia, 4o. Perkin Werbeck. 4o. Phillis, of Sciros. 4o. Mr Goff. The courageous
Turk, or Amurath the first. 4o. -- Tragedy of Orestes. -- The Bastard, a
Tragedy. 4o. -- Rageing Turk, or Bajazet. the 2o. 4o. Tragedy of Alphonsus,
Emperor of Germany. 4o. Mr May. Cleopatria, Q of Egypt. 12o. -- Agrippina,
Emperess of Rome. 12o. The Duchess of Malsey. 4o. The Cid. A Tragy-comedy
translated from the French. 4o. Unfortunate mother, a Tragedy. 4o. Edw. the 4.
1, and 2. part. 4o. The Widow, a Comedy, by Mr Johnson, and Mr Fletcher. The
Changling. 4o. Medea. A Tragedy, translated from Latin. 8o. The royal slave,
acted at Oxford. 4o. Tragedy of Mass velto. 12o. Sr W. Davenant. Platonic
lovers. 4o. -- The wits a comedy. 4o. -- Triumphs of Prince de amor. masque.
4o. -- Albovine, K. of Lombardy. 4o. -- Just Italian. 4o. -- Passionate lovers.
4o. -- Crewell Brother. 4o. -- Unfortunate lovers. 4o. -- Love and Honor. 4o.
Mirza. A Tradegy realy acted in Persia. 4o. A Challeng for Beauty. 4o. The
costly whore, by the company of Revells. 4o. The Hectors, or false challeng.
4o. The Scotch figaries, a knot of knaves. 4o. Ram-ally, or merry tricks, a
comedy. 4o. To chose a good wife from a bad, a comedy. 4o. The amorous war, a
Tragy-comedy. 4o. Mr Broom. Five Plays, viz. A mad couple well macht,
Novella, the Court beggar, City wit, Damosella. 8o. -- The Northern Less. 4o.
-- Joviall crew. 4o. Turrence Comedies, Latin and English. 4o. St Patrick, for
Jreland. 4o. Constant maid, a comedy. 4o. Landgartha. A Tragy-Comedy. 4o.
Unfortunate mother, Tragedy. The famous comedy, and masque of Pellus and
Thetis, by J. Howel Esquire 4o. Mr Holloday. Marriage of the arts. 4o. The Martyr.
4o. Horatius. 4o. Wit without money. 4o. Ignoramus comed. coram Regia Majest.
Jac. R. The Ghost, or the woman wears the Breeches. 4o.
Hebrew, GREEK, AND LATIN BOOKS. SUCH As falls not directly under the Heads of
Divinity, Physic, or Law, etc. BUT Are properly useful for Schools and
Scholars.
A
EPitome doctrinae moralis, ex december, lib. Ethic. Arist. 8o. Amyraldi. De
libero hominis arbitrio disputatio. 8o. Aristophinis. Comoediae undecem, Greece
and Lat. 12o. Apthonii. Progymnasmata. 8o. Askamii. Familiar. Epist. lib. 3.
Magna orationis elegantia conscripti. 12o. Anglicism's latinized; or English
properties, rendered into proper Latin, for Scholars, making, writing, and
talking Latin. 8o. Analecta. Poetica Greca Latina, or capping of Verses, Greek
and Latin.
B
BVsbies Gr. Gram. 8o. J. Burdiani. In december libri Arist. pollit. 4o. Bird's
Grounds of Gram. 8o. Bulie's Gram. Or a new English Gram. made easy, for
teacher and Scholar. 8o. C. Bartholini. Enchridion ethicum. 8o. R. Baronii.
Philosophica, Theologiae Ancillans. 12o. -- Metaphisica. 8o. J. Buxtorphii.
Thesaurus Gramat. Linguae, Sanctae, Hebr. Lexicon Hebraicum: Complectens omnes
voces tam primas quam deri vitas, quae in sacris Bibliis, Hebr. and ex part
Caldea Lingua Scriptis extant, in ter pro fide, exemplorum biblicorum copia,
locorum plurimorum difficilium, ex variis Hebraeorum, comment. explic. auctum
and illustratum. 8o. -- Appendix practica ad J. Buxtrophii, Epito. Gram. 8o. --
Mannuale Hebraicum and Caldaicum. 12o. -- Florilegium Hebraicum. 8o. --
Institutio Epistolaris Hebraica. 8o. -- Concordantia. folio. -- Anti. critica
capelli. 4o. -- De punctis. 4o. -- Doctor perplexorum. 4o. -- De divortiis. 4o.
-- De caena domini. and contr. capellum. 4o. -- Dissertationes. 4o. -- Lexicon
Syriacum. 4o. -- De abreviaturis. 8o. -- Synagoga judaica. 8o. -- Gram. Called.
and Syriac. 8o. Brachelii. Historia tempo. ab ann. F. Burgersdici.
Institutionum logicarum. 8o. Bithneri. Lingua eruditorum, five methodica
institutio linguae sanctae, cui addita est introductio ad linguam caldeam
veteris Test. 8o. Idea Philosophiae. Tum moralls, tum naturalis, F.
Bergersdicio. 12o. Bellarmini. Institutiones linguae Hebraicae. 8o.
Bibliotheca, Scolastica instructissima. A treasure of ancient addages, and
sententious proverbs, from the Gr. Lat. Eng. Fr. Ital. and Spanish. 8o.
Butleri. Rhetoricae, lib. duo, quorum prior de tropis, and figuris, posterior,
de voce, and gestu praecip. 12o. Boethii. De consolatione philosophiae. 32o.
Biblia Sacra. sive Test. ve^. ab Im. Tremelio, and Fr. Junio, ex Hebraeo,
Latin reditam, and Test. N. A Theo. Baeza, a Greco in Lat. ver. 12o.
Breerwood. Elementae logicae. 12o. -- Ethica. 12o. Bacon. De sapientia veterum
liber. 12o. -- Histo. Naturalis, and experimentalis, de ventis. 24o. Berchetii.
Elementaria traditio Christianum fidei aut Catech. Gr. Lat. 8o. Brinsley.
Corderius Dialogues, Translated Grammatically. 8o.
C
RHetoricum, M. T. Cicer. ad hererenium. 8o. Castalion. Dialogus sacrorum, lib.
4. 12o. N. Clenardi. Gr. La. Institutiones. 8o. Carminum Proverbialium, totius
humanae vitae statum, breviter delineantium, nec non utilem de moribus
doctrinam jucunde proponentium, loci comunes in gratiam juventutis selecti.
12o. Clavis Gr. Linguae. 1. Vocab. Lat. Greca. 2. Omnes totius linguae gr.
voces primogeniae in vulgari lexico, etc. 8o. Clavis Homerica reserans,
significationes, Etymologias, derivariones, compositiones and dialecticos
omnium vocab, etc. 8o. C.J. Caesaris quae extant ex emendatione, J. Scall, J.
Caesaris filii, ex museo, J. Isa. Pontani. 24o. C. L. Claudianus. Ex optimorum
codicum fide. 24o. Catonis disticha de moribus. 8o. M. Corderii colloq.
Scholasticorum. 8o. Cato Gram. translated. 8o. G. Cartwright. Poemata Gr. and
Lat. 8o. Coock. The art of Logic, unfolding to the meanest capacity, the way
to dispute well, and refute all fallacies whatsoever. 8o. Clark. Formulae
Oratoriae in usum Scholarum concinnatae, cum praxi and usu earundem in
Epistolis, Thematibus, Declamationibus, Contexendis, etc. 8o. -- Phraseologia
puerilis, sive elegantiae Sermonis, Latini pariter, atque anglicani
concinnatae, etc. 8o. -- Dux oratoris. 8o. -- Oratoria sacra sive
Ecclesiastica. 8o. -- Phraseologia Biblica, or Scripture phrases. 8o.
D.
DEs Carts. Meditationes de prima Philosophia, in qua Dei existentia, and
animae immortalitas demonstratur. 8o. -- Meditationes metaphisicae. 8o. A
Dictionary Engl. and Lat. for Children and beginners^, with phrases, sentences,
epigrams, etc. 8o. Drax Calliape^a. A storehouse of proper choice, and elegant
Lat. words and phrases, collected from Tul. voo. 8o. Dux Grammaticus. Tyronem
Scholasticum ad rectam Orthographium, Syntaxin, and prosodiam dirigens, etc.
12o. Selectae demosthenis orationes: quarum titulos versa indicabit pagina.
12o. G. Dugardi. Rhetorices elementa quest. and respon. explicata, quae ita
formantur ut quest. etc. 12o. Institutionum peripateticarum ad mentem summi
viri K. equitis Dygbaei pars Theorica, item Appendix Theologica de origin
mundi. 12o. D. Donn. Fasciculus Poematum and Epigrammatum Miscelaneorum. 12o.
J. Dansii. Paralipomena Orthographiae, Aetymologiae, Prosodiae una cum Scholis
ad canones de genere sustantivorum, de anomalis preterito and supinis verborum,
Syntaxi carminum ratione, and figuris: collecta ex optimis authoribus in Qut.
lib. 4o. G. Dugressij Dialogi Gallico-Anglico. Latini. 8o. Dane. A light to
Lilly, an easy Method for the better teaching of the grounds of the Lat. 8o.
G. Dugard. Graecae Gramatices Rudimenta quae tironibus necnon paralipomena,
quae provectioribus graecae linguae studiosis proponuntur. 8o.
E
D. ERrasm. Rott. Apothegmata. -- Adagiorum, cum Stephani Animadversionibus.
folio. English Gram. or plain Expos. of Lillies Gram. with easy Rules for
parsing and making Lat. 8o. English Accid. or speedy way to attain the Lat. 4o.
Des. Erasm. Rot. Colloquia familiaria cum omnium notis. 8o. and 24o. Aesopi
Phrygis fabulae. 12o. Erasm. de copia verborum. 8o. -- De vanitate Scientiarum.
8o. -- De civilitate morum puerilium. 8o. Aemilii Porti Dictionarium Ionicum,
and Doricum, Gr. Lat. 8o.
F
T. FArnabii. Systema Gram. 8o. -- Ter. comediae sex. ex recentione Heinsiana.
12o. -- Index Rhetoricus and oratorius, Scholis and Institutioni tenerioris
aetatis accomodatus. 12o. -- Phrases Oratoriae Elegantiores. 8o. -- Pub.
Virgili cum notis Farn. 12o. -- Juvenalis and Auli Persii Flacci Satyrae. cum
annota. Farn. 12o. -- F.P.O. Metamorph. cum notis Farn. 12o. -- M. Val.
Martialis Epigrammata. cum notis Farn. 12o. -- M. Ann. Lucani Pharsalia. sive
de bello civili Caesari and Pompei lib. 10. cum notis H. Gross. and annota.
Farn. 12o. Illustrium Poetarum Flores. per Octav. Mirandulam olim collcta. and
in locos communes digesti. 12o. Fundamenta Grecae linguae, quae sunt tanquam
Epitome lexici and Etymologici graeci. 8o. Gram. Grec. Enchyridion. J. Flavell.
8o. -- Tractatus de de nonstratione. J.F. 8o. Gram. puerilis. A Synopsis
containing the Rudiments of the Lat. 8o. Flores Doctorum. 16o.
G
GRegorii Etymologicum Parvum ex magno illo Sylburgii, Eustathio Martinio,
aliusque magni nominis authoribus excerptum, digestum, explicatum. 8o. Gerardi
Meditationes Sacrae. 12o. Grecae Gram. Institut. compendiaria in usum Regiae
Scholae Westmon. H. Grotii. Baptizatorum Puerorum Institutio alternis
interrogationibus and responsionibus. 8o. J.C. Galcateus, seu de morum
honestate, and elegantia. cum notis Na. Chylnae. 8o. Gattaker. De dipthongis,
sive vocabulis. 12o. Gardener. Ex Aede C. Oxon specimen Oratorium. 8o. Gulston.
in Rhetoricam Aristotelis Gr. and Lat. 4o. *Golii lexicon Arabico-Latinum
contextum ex probatioribus Orientis Lexicographis. folio.
H
HEsiodi Asacraei quae extant cum notis Corn. Schrevelii. 8o. A. R. Hues.
Tractatus duo Mathematici, quorum primus de globis Caelesti and Terrestri, que
eorum usu. 12o. Haine. Pax in terra, seu tractatus de pace Ecclesiastica. 8o.
Herodiani Historiae sui temporis lib. 8. E. Graeco, quondam in Linguam Lat.
converse ab Angelo politiano. cum notis D. Parei. 8o. Homeri Ilias, id est de
rebus ad Trojam gestis. 8o. Homeri Ilias and Odyssea, and in easdem Scholia,
sive Interpretatio Didymi, cum Latina versione accuratissima Indiceque Grae.
locupletissimo rerum ac variantium Lection. accurante Corn. Schrevelio. 4o. *
Chapter Hoole.. KAIN DIATHK. Nov. Novum Test. Huic editio omnia difficiliorum
vocab. Themata. quae in Geo. Pass. lex. Gram. resolvuntur, in Margin apposuit.
12o. * -- M. Cord. Colloq. Scolastica Anglo-Latina, in varias clausulas
distributa, etc. 8o. * -- Gram. Lat. in usum Scholarum adornata. Gram.
Lillianae verbis, etc. 8o. * -- Terminationes and exempla declinationum, and
conjugat. in usum Gram. 8o. * -- Pueriles confab. Anglo-Lat.! in varias
clausulas distributae. observe. utriusque linguae idiomate. 8o. * -- Sentent.
pueriles Anglolat. quas ex diversis authoribus olim collegerat Leo. Culman and
in vernaculum Sermonem nuperrime transtulit. 8o. * -- Phraseologiae pueriles
Anglo-Lat. etc. 8o. -- An easy entrance to the Lat. tongue; containing the
grounds of Gram. a Vocab. of common Latin and English words. Examples, ellegant
Express. etc. 8o. -- The Common Rudiments of the Lat. Gram. in the Accidence
examined; propria quae Mar. quae Genus, and As in presenti, Englished and
Explained. 12o. * -- A plain and easy Primmer for Children, both the pictures
of Beasts and Birds for each Letter in the Alphabet for their easy remembrance
and delight in Learning. * -- Catonis Disticha de mor ibus. Dicta insignia
Sept. Sapient. Graec etc. Anglo-latina. 8o. Homeri Odyssea, id est de rebus ab
Ulysse Gestis. Ejusdem Batrachomyomachia, Hymni and Epigrammata. 16o. Q.H.
Orratii Flacci Poemata, Scholiis sive annota. quae brevis commenta. vice esse
possint a I. Bond. 8o. Famill. Colloq. Opera. C. Helvici D. and profess.
Giessensis Olim. 12o. I. Haukins. Particulae Latinae Orat. collectae,
dispositae, and confab. digestae. 8o. -- A brief Introd. to Syntaxis, Collected
from Nebressia his Sanish Copy. 8o. C. Hanboesium Angeli Caninij Hellenismus,
Copiosissime, Gre. Lat, etc. 8o. Hobbs. De corpore politico. 12o. -- De corpore
Elementorum, philosophiae 12o. -- De cive. 12o. T. Horn. EIPAGOGIA sive
manuductio in Aedem Palladis, etc. 12o. -- Rhetoricae compendium anglo Lat. 8o.
Hodges. A special help to Orthography, being of such words which are like in
sound, and not in signification. 4o. Holiday. Philosophia. 4o. Hesiodi Ascraei
quae extant, cum notis, ex probatissimis quibusdam authoribus, breviss.
selectiss. Opera and stud. C. Schervelij. 8o. Biblia Hebraica. 8o. 4o.
I
ISocrates, Orationes and Epistolae, Gr. 8o. Ianua Linguarum, sive metho. and
ratio Compend. and facilis ad Lat. Linguam maxim viam aperiens. 8o. Justini,
Ex Trogi Pompei Hist. externis, lib. 44. His accessit ex sexto Aurelio Victore
de vita and moribus Roman. imperat, Epito. 12o. J. Iuvenalis, Et auli Persii
flacci Satyra, cum Annotat. quae obscurissima quaeque dilucidare possint. 8o.
Isocrat. Ora. 3. ad Demonicum, ad Nicoclem, Nicocles, Item Plutarchi
Chaeronensis, de liberis educandis, libellus. 8o. Judicium Vniversitatis Oxon.
de solemni lege and faedere, juramento negativo, etc. 8o. Jan. ling. reserata
sive omnium scientiarum and linguarum seminarium, J.A. Comenio Authore. 8o.
Introd. to the Art of teaching the Lattin speech. 12o.
K
D. KIckermanni. Oper. omn. quae extant Systema Logica, Phys. Astron. Geogra.
Metaph. folio T. Kempis. De imitatione Christi. 24o. -- Viatoris Christiani
soliloquium animae vallis liliorum de tribus Tabernaculis, etc. 24o.
L
J. LVshingtonij. Logica analytica de principijs regulis and usu rationis
rectae. 8o. M.A. Lucani pharsalia sive de Bello civili Caesaris and Pompeij
lib. 10. additae sunt in sine, H. Grotij, ^otae and F. Farn, etc. 12o. L. An.
Flori. Rerum Romanarum, lib. 4. ex Musaeo J. Isa. Pontani. accedunt e^usdem
notae atque observat. praesertim politicae. 12o. L. Flori. Rerum a Romany
Gestarum, lib. 4. A.I. Stadio cui accesserunt Chronologicae doctis. C L.
Salmaexcerptiones. 12o. Lucani Samosatensis, Dialogorum Selectorum; Grec. Lat.
12o. J. Lypsi. De constantia, lib. 2. qui alloquium praecipue, continent in
publicis malis. 24o. T. Lucretius Carus, De rerum natura. 24o. Lillies Lattin
Grammar. -- Rules construed. Lycosthenes. D. Longini Rhetoris. 8o. -- De
grandiloquentia, Gr. Lat. cum not. 8o.
M
P. MOlinaei, Elementa logica ex ultima autoris recognitione. 8o. N. Machivelli
Florent. Disputationum de republica, quas discursus nuncupavit, lib. 3. Quomodo
in Rebuspub. ad antiquorum Romanorum imitationem actiones omnes been maleve
institunantur. 8o. M. Val. Martialis Epigram. 8o. P.O.N. Metamorpho. seu
fabulae poeticae carumque interpretatio Ethica, Physica, and Historica. 12o.
Marcelli Palingenii Stellati Poetae Doctissimi, Zodiacus vitae; hoc est de
hominis vitae studio, ac moribus optime instituendis, lib. 13. 8o. Phrases
Linguae Lat. a P. Manutio. 8o. Methodus de conscribendis Episto. A.G.
Macropedio secundum veram artis rationem tradita. 8o. Manuale Grae. Lat.
Gnomologicum novum, quo omnia praedictae linguae primitiva integris Sententiis,
etc. 12o. Bap. Mantuani Carmelitae adolescentia, scu bucolica brevibus, J.
Badij coment. illustrata. 8o. P. Manutij Episto. lib. 12o. 16o. Mancinus. In
qua tuor virtutibus. 12o. Epigrammata, T. Mori Angli. 16o. Moriae encomium cum
Ger. Lystrius comm. Manductio, Or leading by the hand to the Latin Tongue.
Biblia Universa and Hebraica quidem cum Latina interpretatione, Xantis Pagnini
Lucensis, Benedicti Ariae Montani, etc. folio. N. Machiavelli. De Republica,
lib. 3. quomodo in rebuspub, ad antiquorum Roma^or. imitationem actiones omnes
been maleve instituantur. 12o. -- Princeps. 12o.
N
*NOmenclatura brevis, Anglo. Lat. Gr. 8o. A. Nowell. Christianae pieratis
prima institutio, ad usum Scholar, Gr. and Lat. 12o. -- Chatech. parvus pueris
primum Lat. qui edicatur, proponendus in Scholis. 8o.
O
P. O. NAss. Opera Dan. Heinsius, textum recensuit, Herod. Episto. amorum, lib.
3. De art amandi, lib. 3. de remedio amoris, lib. 2, etc. 24o. -- Episto. Una
cum Sabini Episto. tribus, ad totidem Ovidianas responsorijs. 8o. -- Metamor.
ex accuratiss. virorum Doctiss. castigationibus. 8o. -- Detristibus, lib. cum
Annotat. 8o.
P
C. V. PAterculi Histo. Romanae ad M. Vinicium Cos. cum notis Ger. voisij, G.F.
12o. G. Passoris. Lexicon, Gr Lat. in N. Test. ubi omnium vocab. tam
appellativ. Themata. quam nominum propriorum Etyma exquisite indicantur, and
Gram. resolvuntur. 8o. Porta Languarum Trilinguis reserata and aperta. hoc est
compend. Lat. Angl. Gallicum, etc. 8o. Poetae minores Gre. Hesiodus,
Theocritus, Theognis, Solon, Orpheus, Moschus, Phocylides, Pythagoras, etc. 8o.
M. Acci Plauti comaediae superst. 2o. ad Doctissimorum virorum, representatae
ex musaeo, J. Isa. Pontani. 24o. Posselij Syntaxis. 8o. Pueriles Consab. 8o.
Pueriles Sententiae, pro primis Lat. linguae. 8o. G. Pasoris. Manuale Gr. vocum
N. Test. Cui accessit Index anomalorum and difficiliorum vocab. item Tract. de
Gr. N. Test. I. Posselii. Famill Colloq. libellus Gr. and Lat. auctus and
recognitus, accessit and utillis Dialog. de ratione studio. rum recte
instituenda It. Ora. de ratione discendae, ac docendae linguae Lat and Gr. 8o.
Posing of the Accidence. 4o. G. Pemble. Enchiridion Orat. 4o. -- De sensibus
Internis. 12o. I. Pridiaux. Tabulae ad Gram. Gr. Introd. 4o. Eryci, Puteani,
Suada Attica, Sive orat select. Syntagma. 8o. -- Historia Insubrica. 12o. C.
Plinij. Caec. Sec. Epist. lib. 9. ejusdem and Trajani imp. Epist. amaebae^e
ejusdem, Item Claudiani Panegirici, adjunctae sunt, Isa. Causaboni notae in
Epist. 120.
Q
M. Fabii, Quintiliani. Institutionum Orato. lib. 12. Summa diligentia ad fidem
vetusissimorum codicum recogniti, ac restituti. 8o. Q. Curtii. De rebus gestis,
Alex. Mag. regis Macedonum. 24o.
R
RAvis. A general Grammar, for ready attaining of the Hebr. Sama. Calde,
Syriac, Arab. and Ethiopic languages; with a pertinent discourse of the
Oriental tongues, with 15 Adoptive Epist. sent out of diverse parts of the
World, for promoting the care of the Oriental Tongues 8o. G. Richell.
Contemplationes metaphysicae. 8o. P. Rami. Mathemat. 4o. -- Arith. and Geom.
4o. * Robertson. Hebrew Text of Psalms and Lamentations, for the help of such
as study the Hebrew. 8o. * -- Key to the Hebrew Bible, unlocking the most
usual words therein, by an Alphabeticall praxis. 8o. * -- Hebrew Lexicon, a
gate or door to the holy Tongue opened in Engl. the chief grounds of the Hebrew
Grammar; A Table of the Roots, with a praxis to it. 8o. H. Robinson. Phrases
Latinae: for use of Grammar Schools. 8o. * Rudiments of the Hebrew tongue,
necessary for all that desire to understand the holy Bible in the Original.
8o. P. Rami. Dialectia variorum and maxim illu strium exemplorum naturali
artis progressu, etc. 8o. A. Rosse^ Virgilii Evangelisantis Chriados, lib. 13.
in quibus omnia quae de Dom. Nostro, J. Ch^. in utroque Test. vel dicta vel
predicta sunt, etc. 8o. D. Reynaldi. Orationes. 12o. N. Reusneri. Symbolorum
imperatoriorum, classis prima, qua Symbola continentur Impp. ac Caes. Romans
Ital. a C.J. Caes. usque ad Constantinum magnum, etc. 12o. Riders Dictionary,
Gr. Lat. Eng, etc. 4o. A. Ruvio. Coment. in uniuersam Aristo. Dialect. 4o. A.
Rossei. Isagoge Gram. in gratiam illorum qui nolunt memoriam multis and longis
regulis gravari, concinnata. 8o. Rivij. Historia Navalis. 8o. A. Rossei.
Enchiridion duplex orat, nempe and poet. verborum copiam, and elegantiam
phrasium Lat Sermonis, etc. 8o.
S
PALAIA DIATHK KATA TOYS 'EDOKONTA, vetus Testamentum Gr. ex versione
Septuaginta interp. 8o. In sacra Biblia Graeca ex versione LXX. Interpretum
Scholia; simul and interp. Caeterorum lectiones variantes. 8o. Idos. Stimpelii.
Parnassus Epithet. singula Ravisij. multaque ^rosodiae Smetij, etc. 12o.
Stanbridgij, Vocab. 4o. Sidelius. A manuell to the Greek Tongue. 8o. Spencer.
Ars Logic. 8o. Smith. Art of Logic. 8o. -- Mystery of Rheto. unvailed, in
which are 130. Tropes and Figures, derived from the Greek into English, with
lively definitions and variety of Lattin, English, and Scripture examples,
pertinent to each apart. 8o. Schicardi. Hebr. Grammat. 8o. Schibleri Topic. 8o.
F. Stradae. De Bello belgico decas prima and secunda ab excessu Caro. 5. Imp.
usque ad initia prae^ecturae Alex. Farnesii Parmae ac Placentiae ducis, 3.
Additis hominum illustrium ad Histo. praecipue spectantium imaginibus ad vivum
expressis. 12o. -- Prolusiones Academicas, sive prolixiones exhibet orat. ac
facultatem oratotiam poeticam Historiamque spectantes, etc. 12o. H. Senecae.
Tum Rheto. tum Philosi. opera omnia, etc. 8o. -- Opera omnia ex ult. I. Lipsij,
and I. F. Gronovij emen dat, 4. Vol. Ludg. Batavo. 12o. I. Stoughtoni.
Felicitas ultimi saeculi Epistola. in qua inter alia, calamitosus aevi
presentis status serio deploratur, etc. 12o. C. Suetonius. Tranquillus cum
Annotat. diversorum. 8o. I. Susenbroto. Epitome troporum ac Schematum and Gram.
and Rheto. 8o. N. Test. D.N.J. Chr. Gr. cum notis R. Stephani, J. Scaligeri,
and Isa. Causaboni. 8o. Aeschinis contra Ctesiphontem, and Demostthenis pro
corona orat. a J. Sturmmio, Illustratae Graece. 8o. D. Sennerti. Epitome
naturalis scientiae. 8o. J. Stockwoodi. Disputatiunoularum Gram. libellus, ad
puerorum. 12o. M. Dan. Sthali. Metaphisicae compendium. 8o. Prosodia H. Smetij,
quae Syllabarum positione and Dipthongis carentium quantitates sola veterum
poetarum autoritate, adductis evemplis, de monstrat. 8o. Silva Synonimorum olim
a Simone. Pelegromo Collecta and Alphab. Flandrico ab eodem authore Illustrata.
8o. L. A. Seneca. Et aliorum tragediae. 8o. -- Id. 24o. C. Salustius Crispus,
cum veterum Historicorum fragmentis 12o. Sodalis discipulus, containing all the
Interpreta. of the Hebrew and Greek Bible: By all Authors: By J. Shirley. 8o.
-- EISAGOG. Sive Introd. Anglo. Lat. Grec. Complectens, colloquia familiaria
Aesopi Fab. and Luciani mortuorum Dialogos. 8o. Dialectica. I. Setoni cant.
Annota. P. Carterii, ut clariss. ita breviss. Explicata. 8o. J. Sleidani, de
quatuor summis Imperiis Babilonico, Persico, Greco, and Romano. lib. 3. 24o.
J.C. Scaligeri. Episto. and Orat. cum J. Th. Freigii Orat. 8. 12o. Dictionar.
Histor. Geogr. Poetic. aucto Car. Stephano, Gentium Hominum, Deorum, Gentilium,
Religionum, Locorum, Civitatum, Equorum, Fluviorum, etc. 8o. J. Stockwood. The
Treatises of the Figures at the end of the Rules of Construction in the Lat.
Gram. construed, every example applied and fitted to his Rule. 8o. *Shinlderi
lexicon. Pentaglotton. Hebraicum, Chaldaicum, Syriacum, Talmudico. Rabbinicum,
and Arabicum, etc. folio. * C. Seidelii. Manuale Graecae Linguae Gnomologicum
novum quo omnia Praedictae Linguae primitiva in integris sententiis, maximam
partem, ex Sacris paginis and aliis probatis autoribus collectis, etc. 8o. *
The Scholars probation, or Rules and Orders for certain set Exercises to be
performed by the Scholars on probation days. 8o.
T
TErentii Dogmata Philosophica item Apothegmata quaedam, Piae, etc. 12o. T.
Thoma. Dict. 8o. -- Id. 4o. L. Trelcatii. Scholastica and Methodica locorum
communium. S. Theologiae Institutio didactice and elentice in Epitome
explicata. 12o. M. T. Cicero. Tusculanarum Questionum seu disputationum. lib.
5. 8o. -- Epist. ad atticum. lib. 16. Ejusd. Episto. ad Q. fratrem. lib. 3.
16o. -- De Officis lib. 3. Item de amicitia. senectute. paradoxa. and de somnio
scipionis. 8o. -- De Senectute. 12o. -- Orationis. Vol. prim. 12o. -- Orat.
Vol. secund. 12o. -- Orat. Vol. tert. 12o. Epith. J.R. Textoris Epitome, ex
Hadr. Junii Medici recognitione accesserunt Ejusd. Ravisii Synonima poetica,
multo quam prius locupletiora. 12o. -- Episto. I. Rav. Texto. 8o. -- J.R.
Texto. Dialogi and Epigrammata. 12o. Pub. Terentii Comediae. 8o. and 24o. --
Ter. Christianus, sive Comediae duae Terentiano stilo conscriptae. 8o. -- Ter.
his Comedies in Latin and English. 4o. Sacrarum profanarumque poeticarum
Thesaurus recens perpoli^us and numerosior factus. 12o. N. Test. D.N.J. Chr.
Interp. T. Beza: in sundry Vol. A. Tallaei Rhetorica. 8o. THEOGNIDOS TOY
EGAPEOS GNOAI. Theognidis Megarensis sententiae, ad usum studiosae Inventutis
seorsim Excusae. 8o. M.T.C. Orationum selectarum in usum Scholarum Hollandiae
and West-Frisiae. 8o.
V
VAlerii Maximi dictorum factorumque memorabilium. lib. 9. 24o. P. Virgilii M.
Opera. variorum aucto-Annota. Illustrat. 12o. -- Gram. translated by Brinsley.
4o. F. Vigero. De praecipuis Graece dictionis Idiotismis. 8o. Vdall Hebr.
Grammat. 8o. Veneta Historia. 4o. M.F. Wendelini Institutionum Politicarum lib.
3. de repub. constit. de repub. administr de rebub. eversione. 12o. -- Logicae
Institutiones, Tyronum a dolescen tum captui ita accommadata and exemplis
exemplorumque aplicatione, nec non saclllimi judicii. 12o. Willis. Vestibulum
Linguae Latinae. A Diction. for Children. 8o. Wallis. Opera Mathematica de
Angulo contactus and semicirculi disquisitio Geom. de sect. Conicis. tractat.
Arthm. infinitorum Ecilipseos ob-servatio. 4o. Gram. Lingue Anglicanae, cui
praefigitur, de loquela, sive sonorum forma^ione tractatus Gram. Phisicus. 8o.
Wicken. Latinum and Lycaeum, Graeca cum Latinis sive Gram. artis in utraque
lingua lucidi^sima. 8o. Walton. Intro ductio ad Lectionem linguarum Hebr.
Chald. Samar. Sir. Arab. Pers. Ethiop. Arm. Copic. consilium de earum studio
faeliciter instituendo, and de Libris quos in hunc finem sibi comparare debent
studiosi, in usum Tyronum qui linguas istas ad discere desiderant, praecipue
eorum qui sumptus ad Biblia polyglotta jam subprelo imprimenda contulerunt.
12o. Wardi. Exercitatio in Hobbii philosophiam. 8o.
Z
ZEnophontis de Cyri Institutione. lib. 8. Gre. mult. quam ante castigatius
editi, cum. Lat. interpr. 8o.
All sorts of School-Books that is Translated, cum multis aliis, but of Books
there is no FINIS.
A SVPPLEMENT OF New Books, Come forth since August the first 1657. till June
the first 1658. Which is intended to be continued from Year to Year. BEGINNING
At June the first, 1658. where this ends.
DIVINITY.
Mrs VEnn. A wise Virgins lamp burning, or Gods sweet Incomes of Love to a
gracious Soul waiting for him, being her experiences found in her Closet
written with her own hand. 8o. T. Haak Esquire The dutch Annotations upon the Bible
according to their own translation by order of the Synod of Dort, now
communicated to the use of Great- Britain, with an account of the work, two vo.
folio. Mr Farrington. 30. Sermon. Preached at S. M. Magd. Milkstreet London. with
Sr G. Whitmores Fun. Sermon. folio. Mr Purnell A Cabinet of Heavenly Treasuries,
in an abridgment of Religion; showing the cause of Salvation, the way, guide,
rule, evidence, seals, etc. 8o. D. Guild. Loves intercourse between the Lamb
and the Bride, Christ and his Church, or a clear Explication and application of
the Song of Solomon. 8o. The examination of Tilenus before the triers, in order
to his intended settlement in the office of a public Preacher, in the
Commonwealth of Vtopia, etc. 8o. D. Jer. Tailor. A collection of offices, or
forms of Prayer in cases, orordinary and extraordinary, taken out of
Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several Churches, especially the
Greek. 8o. M. Pierce. The Divine Philanthropie defended, in answer to M. Barle.
4o. -- The Divine purity defended, in answer to D. Reynolds. 4o. Mr Manton. A
practical Commentary, or expos. with Notes on the Epistle of Jude. 4o. The
judgment of Bp Usher. Of Christ's Death and Satisfaction. Of the Sabbath. Of
ordination in reformed Churches; and of other Subjects. 8o. Mr Stephens.
Vindiciae fundamenti. Or a threefold defense of the Doctr. of Original sin:
and other fundamentals of Salvation: against Mr Everard. against the examiners
of the Assemblies, Confess of Faith, and against Dr Tailors Vnum Necessarium.
4o. M. Holyoke. The doctr. of life, or man's redemption, by the seed of Eve,
Abraham, and David, with Daniels Chronology of 77, calling the Jews, etc. 8o.
M. Gurnell. The Christian in complete Armor, or the Sts war against the Devil.
His policy, power, Seat of Empire, wickedness and chief design he has against
the Saints, etc. 2. part. 4o. M. Watson. The Saints delight; with a Treatise of
Meditation, the necessity and use thereof: Christ's loveliness to draw the
hearts of sinners. The upright man's Character and Crown. 8o. M. Caryl. An
exposition with practical observe. continued upon the 27, 28, and 29, Chapters
of Job, in 26 Lectures in London. 4o. M. Lawrance. Min. of Ipswitch. The use
and practice of faith, it is quickening influence into every kind and degree of
Christian life, the excellent work and reward, converting others to the faith,
by way of close. 4o. Dr Hyde. Christ and his Church, or Christianity explained
under seven heads; Christ in his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
coming of the holy Ghost received, of Christian Communion, with a vindica. of
the Chapter of Engl. in principles and Communion. 4o. D. Goodwin. The state of
glory for spirits of just men upon dissolution demonstrated. 4o. S. Wardi.
Determinationes theologicae, tractatus de justificatione, praelectiones de
peccato Originali. folio. M. Martin. M. Petto. and M. Woodal. The Preacher
sent, or a vindication of the liberty of public preaching by some men not
ordained, in answer to Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, and Mr Collings
Vindiciae Ministerii Evangelici. 8o. M. Warner. Diatriba fidei justificantis
qua justificantis. Or a discourse of the Object and Office of Faith, as
justifying, distinct from other Objects, Acts, and Offices of the same Faith,
as sanctifying. Asserting the Lutheran, and Protestant Doctrine against the
Pontificians, Socinians, Arminians, etc. 8o. Confession of Faith of Assem. with
Scriptures at large, for the benefit of Masters of Families recommended by
several Eminent Divines. 4o. Mr Lukin. The Practice of Godliness, or rules for
ordering a holy conversation. 12o. Mr Gaul. Sapientia justificata, or
vindication of the 5. of Romans in answer to Dr Taylers Deus justificatus. 12o.
Mr Anthony Burges. A Treatise of self-judging in order to the worthy receiving
of the Lords Supper, with a Sermon. of a general day of Judgment. 12o.
Sincerity and Hypocrisy, in their lively colors, standing by one another, by
W.S. Sergeant at Law. 8o. M. Hall. A confutation of the Millenarian opinion,
demonstrating that Christ will not reign on earth with his Saints a thousand
years, either before or after the day of Judgment, against Dr Homes, and the
fifth Monarchy men. 12o. Mr Bennet. A Theological Concordance, of Synonimous
terms in the holy Scriptures, useful for young Students in Divinity, and such
as would search into the hidden treasures of the Scripture, with a collection
of Promises. 8o. M. Watts. A vindication of the Church and Universities of
England, in many Orthodox tenets, and righteous practices. 4o. M. Langly.
Suspension reveiwed, stated, cleared, and settled upon plain Scripture proof,
agreeable to the former and late constitutions of the Protestant Church of
England, and other reformed Churches. 8o. The young Divines apology for his
continuance in the University, with his serious meditation on the sacred
calling of the ministry. 12o. M. Harrison, Topica Sacra. Spiritual Logic,
some brief hints and helps to Faith, Meditation and Prayer, comfort and
holiness communicated at Christ's Church Dublin in Ireland. 8o. M. Hodges. A
Scripture Chatechism toward the confutation of sundry errors, some of them of
the present times. 8o. Dr Owen. Eshcol. A cluster of the fruit of Canaan
brought to the borders, for the encouragement of the Saints traveling
thitherward, with their faces toward Sion; or rules of direction for the
walking of the Saints in fellowship, according to the order of the Gospel, 2.
Ed. 12o. M. Rutherford. A survey of the survey of that Sum of Church
Discipline penned by Mr Hooker. wherein the way of the Churches of New England
is now reexamined, arguments in favor thereof winnowed, the principles of that
way discussed, and the reasons of most seeming strength and nerves removed. 4o.
M. Reyner Considerations concerning Marriage: the honor, duties, benefits,
troubles of it; with directions how they that have wives may be as if they had
none, how to prepare for parting with a dear yoke fellow, by death or
otherwise. 8o. M. Tombs. Anti-Paedobaptism, or the third part, being a full
review of the dispute concerning Infants Baptism, in which the arguments for
Infants Baptism, from the Covenant, and initiall seal, Infants visible
Church Membership, etc. are reselled, and the writings of M. Marshall, M.
Baxter, and others examined, and many points about the Covenants, and Seals,
etc. are handled. 4o. D. Reynolds, A Sermon of humane learning, at the Funeral
of M. Langly. 4o. -- The comfort and crown of great actions. A Sermon to the
East India Company. 4o. M. Cawdry, Independency further proved a Schism,
against D. Owen 8o. M. Norton. The life and death of that famous man of God, Mr
J. Cotton, of new England. 4o. Mr Baxter. A Call to the unconverted to turn and
live, as they expect mercy in the day of their extremity, to be read to the
unconverted. 12o. -- A winding sheet for Popery. 8o. -- A sheet for defense of
the Ministry, against the wicked of all sorts. 8o. -- A second sheet for the
Ministry. 8o. -- A sheet against the Quakers. 8o. -- Of justification, 4
Disputations, amicably defending the truth against the unnecessary oppositions
of diverse learned and reverend Brethren. 4o. Directions and Persuasions to a
sound Conversion. 8o. M. Secker. A Ring fit for the Finger, in a Sermon at a
Wedding. 12o. M. Froystel. The gale of opportunity, a Sermon at the Funeral of
M Walcot of Wal^ot, Esquire 8o. M. Isa. Ambros. Looking unto Jesus, a a view of the
everlasting Gospel, in the souls eyeing Jesus, as carrying on the great work of
Salvation, from first to last. 4o. M. Love. The dejected souls cure, supporting
drooping sinners, with rules, comforts, and cautions, with addition of the
ministry of Angels, Gods Omnipresence, Sinners Legacy. 4o. M. Frost. Sermons,
viz. A Gospel minister, light and darkness of nature, spiritual thrift,
unprofitableness under means, Dei peculium. Worldly man's Portion; Salvation by
Christ; Glass for Magistrates, Scripture search, with 2. positions for
explication and confirmation of these Questions, 1. Tota Christi justitia
credentibus imputatur, 2. Fides justificat sub ratione instrumenti. folio.
Preparation to Conversion, in a rare Epistle, writ by a person of quality
before his death, to his surviving friends. 8o. M. Brooks. A string of Pearls,
in a Sermon at the Funeral of that Triumphant Saint Mrs Blake. 8o. M. Simpson.
Lexicon Anglo Gr. Lat. Novi Test. in 3. Tables, with the significat. etymon.
derivat. and emphasis of each word; with the diverse readings in English, Greek,
and Latin; all tending to the increase of Christian knowledge, and
understanding of the Scripture. folio. M. Ob. Sedgwick. The shephard of Israel,
or Gods Pastoral care over his people, in sundry Sermons upon the whole 23
Psalm, with doctrine of Providence, from Mat. 10.29,30,31. 4o. The mystery of
Jesuitisme with large additions. 8o. M. Fermin. Of Schism. Parochial
congregations in England, and ordina. by impos. of hands; examining Dr Owens
nature of Schism, and Mr Noyes argument against imposition of hands in
ordination. 8o. M Young. Roxwell. A sure way to grace and salvation, a
discourse of the Creation, fall, and restoration; which learned, may keep
millions from Hell that blindly throng thither. 8o.
HISTORY.
P. CLuverius. An Introduction to Geography both ancient and modern, with
several incidentall remarques, newly added. 8o. M. Cambdens, Remains the 6.
Impression, with additions of rare antiquities, by M. Philpot, Summerset
Herald. 4o. M.S. The holy life of Mons. de Renty, late Noble man of France, and
Counselor to Lewis, 13. done into English. 8o. The King of Spains Cabinet
counsel divulged, showing the prevarications of the Spainyards, with all the
Princes and States of Europe, for obtaining the Universal Monarchy. 8o. M.
Harrington, The prerogative of popular government, a Pollitical discourse in 2
Books, containing the Commonwealth of the Hebrew Senate, people and Magistracy,
etc. 4o. M.H. A discourse of the National excellences of England. 8o. The
History of fourfooted Beasts, and serpents, their figures, names, conditions,
virtues, love and hatred to mankind; the wonderful work of God in their
Creation, Preservation and Destruction: with variety of Historical narrations
from Scriptures, Fathers, Philosophers, Physicians and Poets, with diverse
Hieroglyphics and Emblems, collected from C. Gesner, by Mr Topsel: to which is
added A Theater of Insects, as Bees, Flies, Caterpillars, Spiders, Worms, by Dr
Muffet. folio. A compendious History of the Goths Sweeds, and Vandalls, and
other Northern Nations; by Olaus Magnus, Arch Bp of Vpsal, and Metropolitan of
Sweden. folio. M. Nichols. A lapidary, or the History of precious stones. 4o.
Natural Magic by J. Baptista Porta a Neopolitane, in 20 Books, of the causes
of wonderful things, Animals, Plants, Metals, Gold, Loadstone; of strange
cures, of beautifying women, distillation, perfuming, fires, tempering steel,
cookery, fishing, fowling, hunting, invisible writing, strange glasses, statick
experiments, and pneumatick; of the Chaos; setting forth all the riches and
delights of natural sciences. folio. The general History of Women, containing
the lives of the most holy and profane, famous and infamous in all ages, not
only from poetical fictions, but from ancient, modern, and admired Historians,
to this time, by T.H. Gent. 8o. M. Jones. Ovids invective or curse against
Ibis, and the History therein contained, with Natural, Moral, Poetical,
Political, and Theological applications. 8o. M. Purchase. M.A. A theater of
political flying-insects; where especially the nature, worth, work, wonder and
manner of the right ordering of the Be is discoursed and described, with
Theological, Historical, and Moral observa. 4o. Sr Fr. Vere's. Comentaries
of diverse pieces of services, viz. Callis journey, action of Turnholt, battle
of Newport siege, Ostend, etc. published by D. Delingham. folio. The minister
of state, showing the true use of modern policy, by Mons. de Silhon, Secretary
to Card. Richeleiu. folio. The accomplished Courtier, consisting of
institutions and examples, fitting to square our actions in Method. 8o. M.
Sanderson. History of the life and reign of King Charles, from his Cradle to
his Grave. folio. A faithful account of all the receipts, etc. money collected,
for the distressed Protestants in the valleys of Piemont, with their present
condition. folio. M. Dugdale. The History of St Paul's Cathederall in London,
from the foundation till now, extracted out of original Charters, Records,
Leiger books, and other Manuscripts, beautified with sundry prospects of the
Church, figures of Tombs, and Monuments. folio. D. Brown. Vulgar errors, the
third edition enlarged and corrected, with a Table and observations. folio.
Historical memories on the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and K. James. 12o. Bp
Usher. The Annals of the world, deduced from the Origin of time, to Vespasians
reign, and destruction of the Jews and Temple; containing the History of the
old and new Testament, with the Maccabees, with the memorial of affairs in
Asia, Egypt, with the rise of Roman Empire, under C. Julius, and Octavianus.
folio. Hymen's praeludia, or loves Mr Piece. being the 6th part of Cleopatra.
8o. A discourse of the Empire, and of election of a King of the Romans, also
the College of Electors their particular interrests. 8o. Philosophical
Essaies, with brief Adviso's, accommodated to the capacity of Ladies and
Gentlemen, sometimes Student in the English Acad. lately of London. 12o. Cloria
and Narcissus, the 3d and 4th part. 8o.
PHYSIC and CHYRVRGERY.
THe expert Physician, learnedly treating of agues and fevers, as well simple
as compound, by D. Bauderon, made English by B.W. of Oxford. 8o. Sr Theod.
Mayern. Excellent and approved receipts, and experiments in Cookery, Preserving,
Sugarworks, the French and English Mode, collected from a choice Manuscript of
his. 12o. M. Culpepper. Four Books of D. Laz. Riverius, containing 513 obser.
of rare cures, most his own, the rest by 24 famous Physicians, and Chirurgians,
with a 5th Book of select Medicinal counsels, of J. Fernelius, chief Physician
to the King. -- The Idea of practical Physic, in 12 Books, art of health, art
of healing, signs of diseases, medicaments, cures, fevers, diseases of head,
belly, of Children, containing the marrow of Synnertus and Fernelius, and
twenty five Doctors, being read by Doctors to their Scholars, as the best
extants in their kind, writ by I. Johnson professor of Physic in Francfort,
now englished. folio. A Treatise of Phlebotomy, the necessity, time, with use
of cupping-glasses and Leeches, with a tract of the Crisis, by D^de plumy
campirurgian. now englished. 12o. L. Lemnius. The secret miracles of nature,
learnedly treating of the generation, the soul, and its immortality, of plants,
creatures, diseases, with prudent rules to live in health of body and mind,
with many rarities. folio. A physical discourse of the nature and effects of
the courageous passions. 8o. A discourse of the principles of Chiromancy, by
Mounseir de la Chamber. 8o.
LAW.
D. PAge. Jus fratrum, the power of parents to dispose of their estates, the
prerogative of the eldest and rights of younger. 12o. W. Fleetwood Esquire The
office of a Justice of Peace, with instructions how and in what manner Statutes
should be expounded, with the la^e Acts and Ordinances abridged. 12o. Reports
of Sr Edw. Cook. Lord chief Justice of diverse Resolutions and Judgments given
upon solemn Arguments, with great deliberation and conference of the most
reverend Judges, of cases in Law, etc. fully Englished. folio. Reports of Sr G.
Croke. Late one of the Justices of the K. Bench, and common Bench, of such
select cases as were adjudged in the said Courts, rendered into English from the
French, by Sr Harb. Grimstone Baronet, one of the Benchers of Lincoln's Inn.
folio. M. Leynard. Reoprts and Cases in Law, argued and adjudged at Westmin.
from the 18, to the 33, year of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, published by M. Huglid.
folio. H. Scobel Esquire A Collect. of Acts and Ordin. of Parliament, begun 3d
November. 1640. till the Adjournment of the Parliament, Sep. 17th 1656. all done
at large with notes, being a continuation of that work from the end of M.
Pultons Collection in two parts, with Tables, exam. by the Original Records,
and now published by order of Parl. folio. Sr T.F. The pract. of the Exchequer
Court, its Offices and Officers, their duties, with rules and orders of
proceedings by English Bil. 8o. An exact book of entries, of the most judicial
Writs in the Common Law, translated from the Original Manuscript collected by
R. Moyle Esquire by J.H. Gent. The exact Lawgiver, faithfully communicating to the
skillful, the firm Basis and Axioms of their profession, to the ignorant their
ancient and undoubted rights, being a light as well to Counselors, as
Attorneys, Clarks, etc. 8o.
POEMS.
CLeavelands. With additions never before Printed. 12o. Mr Harrington. An Essay
upon two of Virg. Eclogues, and two of his Aeneis toward translat. of the
whole. 8o. Mr Teate. Ter Tria, or the Doctrine of the Three Sacred Persons,
Father, Son, and Spirit, Principal Graces, etc. 12o. M.E. Divine Poetry, with
a short description of Christian magnanimity. 12o.
FINIS.

