A Lamentation FOR THE Reigning Abomination of Pride in the Congregations.
THE Reformation which Pendarvis wrought,
Is by the Gathered Churches much forgot;
How then were needless things thrown all aside.
But now the Churches wallow much in Pride:
The Gifts and Graces of Saints then did flourish,
But now Religion likely is to perish:
A worldly spirit has the most beset,
And all to the end that they fine Clothes may get:
Oh foolish people, and unwise, delight
In toys and bawbles, but your glory slight:
It was your Honor once to separate,
From sinful Persons, and their folly hate?
What is the Reason you so much decline
Sobriety, which once did make you shine
In the eyes of God, of Saints, and of the World,
Without your tawdry Dresses, or Locks Curled:
Must you, like Dinah now, view Hamor's Land,
And with their Daughters in their Manners stand:
Is this for to be godly, or like God;
For shame amend, or else expect the Rod.
Is this a time to wear Earrings and Laces?
Your Newfound ^angles, Veils like spotted Faces,
Your Magpide Arms, and Faggoted up-sleeves
Show of Pride you are guilty, Pinacled like Thieves.
Each Kitchin-Drudge almost has got the Ail
Of Pride, with silken Garments at her Tail.
Pride's now grown Rampant, and it leads the Van
Of other sins in every foolish One:
I could say much more on this subject, but I fear
My Labor's lost, there is few will lend an Ear:
The Country, City, yea, the Churches too
Do much exceed excess, will all undo:
Prove. 12.1. Jer. 13.16, 17. Hos. 4.15. Some Reasons why mean and low Persons
(especially Professors of Religion, ought not to wear Rich, Fantastical or Gay
Clothing.
FIRST, because (as the Learned Caryl has observed,) that all Mankind are not
of one Rank, the Holy Scriptures giving us an Account of at least twelve
degrees of Persons, mentioning their Robes, Garments, or Attire, (I want room
to produce proof.)

2. Reas. Because Persons going beyond their Quality and degree, break that Law
of God, 1 Pet 2.13, 14. which enjoins obedience to Magistrates, the Law of this
Land being such, That all Persons should be known by their habit, to prevent
fraud and deceit. See Stat. made 24. of King Hen. 8.

3. Reas. Because it tends much to the Nations impoverishing, especially the
Poor in it, although it employs many.

4. Reas. Because it much unfits mean Persons to fall in with mean employments.

5. Because it provokes children and servants to be stubborn and rebellious to
their Parents and Masters, especially if they are poor; daily Experience
declares it.

6. Reas. Because it exposes Females to hazard their Reputation and Chastity.

7. Reas. Because it tends much to the scandal and reproach of Religion, giving
just cause to vicious persons to ^rand all for the sakes of such Gairish
Professors, by crying out they are as proud and fantastical as any.

8. Reas. Because it greatly grieves the Sincere in the ^ongregations, and
weakens the affections of Christians ^owards each other.

9. Reas. Because it stumbles many, and thereby hinders the increase of the
Churches, and has caused many to fall in with the Quakers, and leave the
Churches.

10. Reas. Because it ties up the Hearts and Hands of most from doing Acts of
Charity, where necessity calls for it.

11. Reas. Because much deceit and cheating is carried on by worthless persons,
under a garb of Gentility, as experience often proves.

These Reasons being seriously Considered, may put the Congregations upon using
their utmost endeavors, for Prevention of the many Evils that do, or may accrue
by the suffering of extravagant Attire amongst them. Consider of it, take
advice, and speak your minds, Judges 19.30. But some may say, there is no
Reason why this should be Published, seeing that there are larger things in
Print already of this Nature.

There is two Reasons why this should be Published,

First, because many Persons will not buy Books already Printed, that strike at
their Darling-si^. But many will have this for Reading. Secondly, because many
are so greedy of the World, to maintain their Pride, that they will not give
themselves time to read a large Book, though lent them: This will expend but
little time to read it, and they may consider it; as they labor, or are
attiring themselves.

Published with the Consent and Desire of sober Persons both in City and
Country.

FINIS.

